UNIVERSITA ' DEGLI STUDI DI PAVIA Istituto di Genetica Molecolare Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - IGM - CNR The splicing program of SRSF1 transcripts is finely tuned by cell metabolism Antonina Di Maio Supervised by Prof . Alessandra Montecucco Prof . Giuseppe Biamonti Dottorato di Ricerca in Genetica , Biologia Molecolare e Cellulare Ciclo XXX – A . A . 2014 - 2017 2 Abstract One of the best - studied splicing regulator is SRSF1 ( formerly known as SF2 / ASF , Manley et al . , 2010 ) , a prototypical SR protein involved in both constitutive and alternative splicing . SRSF1 promotes exon definition and the use of proximal alternative 5’ splice sites or 3’ splice sites in a concentration - dependent manner , in part through recognition of ESE sequence elements in the pre - mRNA targets . SRSF1 regulates other aspects of RNA metabolism , including mRNA stability ( Lemaire et al . , 2002 ) , nuclear export ( Huang et al . , 2003 ) , nonsense - mediated mRNA decay ( Zhang et al . , 2004 ) , translation , and miRNA processing ( Wu et al . , 2010 ) . It has been shown that the SRSF1 gene , located on Chromosome 17q23 , is amplified in some tumors ( Sinclair et al . , 2003 ) and that increased SRSF1 expression is associated with the redistribution of β - catenin , reorganization of actin cytoskeleton , and downregulation of the epithelial marker E - cadherin , a tumor and invasion suppressor in human carcinomas . These morphological and molecular changes represent the hallmarks of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) , a process occurring during embryonic development but also required for cell invasiveness and metastatic properties of carcinomas in vivo ( Thiery J . P . 2002 ) . To avoid these deleterious effects on cells and organisms , the SRSF1 gene expression is tightly regulated through mechanisms operating at different levels , from transcription to translation . SRSF1 is able to recognize splicing regulatory sequence elements on its own transcripts , leading to alternative splicing . Alternative splicing plays a role in this regulation leading to the production of six different transcripts . Isoform I , encodes the full - length protein , and is characterized by a long 3′UTR ( Ge H et al . , 1991 , Krainer et al . , 1991 ) . Isoforms II and III retain the third intron 3 ( the last in the coding part of the gene ) . Moreover , Isoforms III and IV undergo splicing of intron 5 in the 3’ - UTR . Isoform II , III , and IV are retained in the nucleus . Hence , these molecules can not be translated ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) and can be considered as long non - coding RNAs . Isoform IV can undergo further splicing of intron 4 in the 3’ - UTR leading to the production of Isoform V , which is exported in the cytoplasm and degraded by the NMD pathway . Similarly , through skipping of exon 4 , Isoform III can be matured into Isoform VI , which is exported in the cytoplasm and subjected to NMD ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) . During the three years of my Ph . D . program , my research activity concerned on the analysis of signals and factors that control the complex SRSF1 splicing program and the function of lncRNAs products , the signals and the mechanisms underlying the choice between the production of the protein coding Isoform I and the expression of the lncRNAs the mechanism and signal controlling alternative splicing of SRSF1 transcripts . 4 Contents - Abstract - 2 - 1 . Review of the literature - 6 - 1 . 1Splicing and regulation gene expression - 6 - 1 . 2 The spliceosome - 9 - 1 . 3Alternative Splicing - 12 - 1 . 3 . 1 Cis - Acting elements - 15 - 1 . 3 . 2 Trans - acting splicing factors - 17 - 1 . 4 SR Proteins - 22 - 1 . 5 SRSF1 - 26 - 1 . 5 . 1 SRSF1 structure - 28 - 1 . 5 . 2 Post translational modifications of the SRSF1 preotein - 29 - 1 . 5 . 3 SRSF1 Regulation - 32 - 1 . 5 . 4 SRSF1 and cancer - 35 - 1 . 6 EMT - 37 - 1 . 7 Metabolism and cancer - 43 - 1 . 7 . 1 Role of glutamine - 45 - 1 . 7 . 2 HIF - 47 - 1 . 7 . 3 Succinate - 50 - 2 . Aim of the research - 54 - 3 . Material and Methods - 55 - 3 . 1 Cell Culture - 55 - 3 . 2 RNA extraction using RNeasy Mini Kit ( quiagen ) - 57 - 3 . 3 DNAse Treatment - 58 - 3 . 4 RNA retro - transcription - 58 - 3 . 5 PCR - 59 - 3 . 5 . 1 Primers used for PCR - 61 - 3 . 6 Eletrophoresis - 61 - 3 . 7 Quantitative PCR - 62 - 3 . 8 Protein extraction - 64 - 3 . 9 Western Blot - 65 - 3 . 10 Nucleus / cytoplasm fractionation - 67 - 3 . 11 ATP - concentration Assay - 68 - 5 3 . 12 RNA interference - 70 - 3 . 13 Conditional medium with glucose or glutamine - 71 - 3 . 14 Dimethyl succinate treatment - 72 -  - ketoglutarate treatment - 72 - 4 . Results - 73 - 4 . 1 A complex splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts - 73 - 4 . 2 Splicing of SRSF1 transcripts is modulated by cell density - 76 - 4 . 3 Regulation of alternative splicing of SRSF1 transcripts is part of a conserved response to cell density - 79 - 4 . 4 Reversible splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in response to cell density - 81 - 4 . 5 Specific gene expression pathways are affected by cell density - 84 - 4 . 6 The splicing program of SRSF1 transcripts is modulated by cell metabolism - 89 - 4 . 7 Role of the TCA cycle intermediary metabolite in the hypoxia pathway - 93 - 4 . 8 Complex II inhibition - 99 - 4 . 9JMJD6 : a new regulator for srsf1 splicing ? - 101 - 5 Discussion - 107 - 6Bibliography - 116 - 6 I . Review of the literature 1 . 1 Splicing and regulation gene expression Eukaryotic gene expression is a complex process that involves several biochemical reactions from transcription of the pre - mRNA in the nucleus to protein translation in the cytoplasm . The pre - mRNA molecule must undergo a number of processing events ( 5’ - end capping , splicing and 3’ - end cleavage / polyadenylation ) before being exported to the cytoplasm as a mature mRNA for translation . Moreover , the mRNA is subject to quality controls , which affect its stability and translability . All of these events are tightly controlled and coordinated in a tissue - specific and temporal manner , in order to determine the proper protein profile of the cell ( Das & Krainer . , 2014 ) . Most genes in higher eukaryotes are composed of exons ( coding sequences ) separated by introns ( non - coding sequences ) . Both exonic and intronc sequences are transcribed into a pre - mRNA molecules . The removal of introns and the precise joining of exons is called splicing and gives rise to a mRNA molecule consisting of the protein - coding open reading frame and the 5 ' and 3 ' untranslated regions ( UTRs ) , ( Wahl , M . C . et al . 2009 ) ( Figure . 1 ) . 7 Figure . 1 Phases of maturing a messenger RNA . ( THE CELL , 4° Edition ) . The removal of intronic sequences occurs with the accuracy and precision of the single nucleotide through two successive transesterification reactions , each involving a nucleophilic attack on terminal phosphodiester bonds of the intron ( Black DL . , 2003 ) . This reactions are directed by particular sequence elements : the 5 ' and 3 ' splice sites , also called donor splice site and acceptor splice sites at the intron / exon junctions and the branch point sequence ( BPS ) , which is typically located within 30 – 50 nucleotides upstream of the 3 ' splice site . All these elements coform to consensus sequences . The majority of splice sites include invariant dinucleotides at each end of the intron : GU at the 5’ end , and AG at the 3’ end . At the 3’ end of the intron there are two additional conserved sequence elements . One is the polypyrimidine tract , a 15 - 20 nucleotide region , rich of pyrimidines immediately upstream of the terminal AG ( Berglund JA et al . , 1997 ) . The second one is the branch point ( consensus sequence YNCURAY ) , where Y represents any pyrimidine , R any purine and N any nucleotide . These sequences contain the information 8 required for precise exon joining ( Lim & Burge . , 2001 ) and are recognized through RNA - RNA and RNA - protein interactions with components of the spliceosome ( Figure . 2 ) . Figure . 2 In the picture are shown consenus sequences for the splice site at 5 ' , brach point and splice site at 3 ' ( McManus & Graveley , 2011 ) . During splicing , the 2’OH of the Adenosine at the branch point attacks the 5’ phosphate of the first nucleotide of the intron . The 3’OH end of the upstream intron then initiates a second nucleophilic attack on the 3’ acceptor splice site , releasing the intron in the form of a lariat structure and covalently combining the two exons . 9 1 . 2 The spliceosome The splicing reaction is carried out by a complex molecular machinary , the spliceosome , which is composed of 5 small nuclear RNAs ( snRNAs ) ( U1 , U2 , U4 / U6 , and U5 ) assembled in small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complexes ( snRNPs ) and numerous ( more than 100 ) protein factors ( Brody & Abelson 1985 ; Butcher & Brow 2005 ) . These protein factors include RNA - binding proteins ( RBPs ) and enzymes ( helicases / RNPases , kinases and phosphatases , etc . ) . These modulate the structure and the orderly stepwise assembly of the spliceosome , facilitate the splicing reaction , proofreading , and substrate release ( Nilsen . , 2003 ; Staley & Guthrie . , 1998 ; Will & Luhrmann . , 2001 ; Hoskins AA & Moore MJ . , 2012 ) . An exhestensive biochemical characterization allowed the identification of different steps in the splicing reactuion . The first step is the ATP - independent assembly of the E complex , which involves the recognition of the 5’ splice site by snRNP U1 and the binding of splicing factor 1 ( SF1 ) to the branch point . This is followed by the recruitment of the U2 auxiliary factor ( U2AF ) to the polypyrimidine tract and 3’ terminal AG ( Kent et al . , 2005 ) . The E complex is then switched to the pre - spliceosomal A complex in an ATP - dependent step that involves the replacement of SF1 with U2 snRNP at the branch point ( Zamore PD & Green MR . , 1989 ) . Thereafter the U4 / U5 / U6 tri - snRNP joins the A complex to form the B complex . Rearrangement of this structure with the displacement of U4 and U1 snRNPs produces the C complex : the catalitically active spliceosome ( Figure . 3 ) . Metazoan genes also contain a minor class of introns with non - canonical consensus sequences that accont for less than 0 , 5 % of all introns and are excised by a distinct splicing machinery ( Jackson , I . J 1991 ; Hall & Padgett . , 10 1994 ; Turunen et al . , 2013 ) . Frequently , these introns initiate with AT and end with AC , from which the name of ATAC introns . Splicing of minor group of introns is determined by longer and more tightly constrained consensus sequences at the 5′ splice site and branch site , as well as by the lack of a polypyrimidine tract upstream of the 3′ splice site ( Burge et al . , 1998 ; Dietrich et al . , 1997 ) . They are processed by a specific U12 - dependent spliceosome , which is similar to , but distinct from , the major spliceosome . U12 - type introns are spliced somewhat less efficiently than the major introns , and it is believed that this limits the expression of the genes containing such introns ( Dietrich et al . , 1997 ) . The low - abundance spliceosome that is responsible for the excision of these introns includes four snRNPs ( U11 , U12 , U4atac and U6atac ) that are different from , but functionally analogous to , the well - characterized U1 , U2 , U4 and U6 snRNPs , respectively ( Tarn & Steitz 1996 ) . The U5 snRNP is shared by both spliceosomes . Because the excision of these minor - class introns is dependent on the U12 snRNP , they are referred to as U12 - type introns , whereas the canonical , major - class introns that require the analogous U2 snRNP are referred to as U2 - type introns ( Tarn & Steitz 1996 ) . Although U12 - type are less abundant than U2 introns , their persistence throughout virtually all of metazoan species indicates that they have an ancient origin and an important cellular function ( Patel AA & Steitz JA . , 2003 ) . 11 Figure . 3 ( A ) Principal steps of reactions catalyzed by the U2 - type sliceosome . Exons are represented as rectangles and introns as lines . The conserved sequences that enable recognition of the RNA by the spliceosome are : the 5’ splice site ( GU ) , the 3’ splice site ( AG ) , the Adenosine ( A ) of the branch point ( BP ) and the polypyrimidine tract B ) During the first step of spliceosome assembly ( E complex ) , U1 base - pairs with the 5’ - splice site , whereas U2 base - pairs with the branch - point . Then , the tri - snRNP complex U4 , U5 and U6 associates with the forming spliceosome ( now called B complex ) . However , this multi - megadalton complex still has no catalytically active site . The subsequent catalytic activation of the spliceosome involves dramatic structural rearrangements that lead to changes in the conformations and biochemical composition . During this process , a complex network of RNA – RNA interactions is formed between the pre mRNA and the snRNAs U2 , U5 and U6 . U4 is ejected and this allows U6 to replace U1 at the 5’ splice site ( C complex ) and leads to a U6 – U2 interaction that gets close together to the 5’ - splice site and the branch point , allowing for a transesterification step . At the end , U5 brings near the two exons and allows for the second step of splicing , joining the two exons ( Lee & Rio , 2015 ) . 12 1 . 3 Alternative Splicing Before to the completion of the human genome project , the human genome was thought to have a greater number of genes as it seemed structurally and functionally more complex than other simpler organisms . Indeed , it was estimated that humans express more than 90 , 000 different types of proteins , hence it was assumed that a corresponding number of genes would be present in the human genome ( Valdivia HH . , 2007 ) . It was also reasoned that since the human genome is structurally and functionally more complex than that of simpler organisms , it would contain a higher number of genes . However , it came as a surprise to discover that humans had fewer than 25 , 000 genes while a much simpler organism such as corn ( Zea mays ) contains approximately 40 , 000 genes ( Valdivia HH . , 2007 ) . This mismatch in the ratio of gene to protein formation is explained through the mechanisms of alternative splicing ( AS ) which challenges the ‘one gene - one protein’ paradigm . In 1977 , Phillip Sharp and Richard Roberts almost simultaneously discovered the concept of “split genes” in the Adenovirus ( Berget SM . , 1995 ; Berget et al . , 1977 ) . After the discovery of exons and introns , Walter Gilbert proposed that different combinations of exons could be spliced together ( ‘alternative splicing’ ) to produce different mRNA Isoforms ( Gilbert W . , 1978 ; Modrek B & Lee C . , 2002 ) . Alternative splicing is a ubiquitous regulatory mechanism of gene expression that allows generation of more than one mRNA species from a single gene . Initially it was postulated that AS occurred only in about 5 % of all genes ( Sharp PA . , 1994 ) . Thanks to high - throughput sequencing studies it is now clear that at least 90 % of human genes are transcribed in pre - mRNA undergoing alternative splicing ( Merkin et al . 2012 , Barbosa - Morais et al . , 2017 ) . 13 One function of alternative splicing is to expand the human proteome ( Nilsen & Graveley 2010 ) . Alternative splicing can impact several biological processes , from sex determination and diversity of neuronal wiring in the fruit fly to determination of the physiological function of membrane - bound receptors in the mammalian nervous system ( Kelemen et al . , 2013 ) . Alterantive splicing infleunces a number of protein features such as subcellular distribution , protein intearctions or catalytic activity ( Stamm et al . , 2005 ) . It can also impact mRNA stability . This happens when a premature stop codons is introduced beacuse of an alternative splicing event and the mRNA is degraded by the non - sense mediated RNA decay ( NMD ) pathway . AS has been found to play important roles in human diseases such as Mediterranean anemia ( Radmilovic et al . , 2010 ) , type II diabetes ( Wen et al . , 2010 ) , Alzheimer’s disease ( Donev et al . , 2007 ) , Duchenne – Aran disease ( Malcovati et al . , 2015 ) , retinitis pigmentosa ( Singh RK & Cooper TA . 2012 ) , and cancer ( Lokody I . , 2014 ; Tazo et al . , 2014 ; ) . Many studies have associated AS with the occurrence , development , and metastasis of multiple cancer types . This suggests that AS could be a useful target for cancer diagnosis , treatment , and prognosis prediction ( Zhao et al . , 2015 ) . Five major alternative splicing events are distinguished ( Figure . 4 ) : - Exon skipping ( cassette exon ) : an exon that can be included or excluded from the mature mRNA . This is the most frequent alternative splicing event in mammalian cells ( Sharp PA 2005 ; Gupta et al . , 2004 ; Kan et al . , 2002 ) . - Intron retention : the intron is retained in mature mRNA and it can encode amino acids in frame with the neighboring exons , or it can generate stop codon or a shift in the reading frame causing the protein to be non - functional . This is the less frequent type of AS eevent in mammals . 14 - Mutually exclusive : two or more adjacent cassette exons are spliced such that only one exon in the group is included at a time . - Alternative acceptor and / or donor sites : this will result in a slightly modified mRNA sequence ( Sharp , 2005 ; Gupta et al . , 2004a ; Kan et al . , 2002 ) . - Alternative splicing can also be associated with alternative polyadenylation or alternative promoter , thanks to alternative splice sites , in upstream alternative 3’ terminal exons . These events can modify the sequence of the 3’ UTR and bring differential regulation by mRNA stability or translation factors ( Warzecha CC & Carstens RP . , 2012 ) . In some cases , as in the neurexin and CD44 loci , a gene portion consists of a number of exons that can undergo complex AS programs to produce several proteins encoded by a single locus ( Missler M & Südhof T . , 1998 ) . Another striking example , the Drosophila gene encoding the Dscam axon guidance receptor can potentially generate 38 , 016 different protein Isoforms . The Dscam gene has 24 exons , with 12 alternative versions of exon 4 , 48 versions of exon 6 , 33 versions of exon 9 , and two versions of exon 17 . Only one version of a particular exon is chosen , with the exclusion of all the others , so that by the combinatorial use of alternative exons ( Schmucker et al . , 2000 ) . Often several splicing patterns are combined in processing a single pre - mRNA and occur in the same cell ; the ratio between the different splice forms is usually characteristic for a certain cell type or tissue . 15 Figure . 4 The five types of alternative splicing : exon skipping ( or cassette exon ) , intron retention , mutually exclusive exons , alternative 5’ splice sites and alternative 3’ splice sites ( Biamonti et al . , 2012 ) . 1 . 3 . 1 Cis - acting elements Despite the large potential for errors , the splicing process appears to occur with very high fidelity , implying the widespread involvement of splice signals in splice site selection . It is now clear that the presence of well - defined cis elements , namely the 5’ and 3’ splice sites , the branch point and the poly - pyrimidine tract , are necessary but not sufficient to define intron - exon boundaries ( Lim , L . P . & Burge , C . B . , 2001 ) . In vertebrates exons are usually short . They may be flanked either by short or long introns that can be even many kilobases in length . It has been proposed that two different splicing strategies operate in the case of short or long introns . Short introns are the rule in lower eukaryotes and their splicing involves an intron recognition 16 mechanism . On the contrary , in the case long introns , which are more frequent in mammals , splicing involves an exon definition model . The concerted recognition of multiple weak elements located within exons as well as in intronic regions is nowadays thought to provide the necessary splicing information ( cis - acting elements ) . Sequences having a role in splicing regulation are generally referred to as either enhances or silencers , depending on the effect they exert . Cis - acting elements include enhancers and silencers of splicing , which can be classified in four categories : exonic splicing enhancers ( ESEs ) and intronic splicing enhancers ( ISE ) , exonic splicing silencers ( ESSs ) and intronic splicing silencers ( ISSs ) . Enhancers act by recruiting trans - acting factors , such as SR proteins ( serine / arginine - rich family of nuclear phosphoproteins ) , that promote the recognition of a splice siste by the spliceosome , whereas silencers are bound by negative acting factors , such as heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( hnRNPs ) ( Black DL . , 2003 ; Castle JC , et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure . 5 ) . Splicing is usually controlled by combinatorial or competitive effects of both activators and inhibitors . The decision whether an exon is included is determined by the concentration of the regulator or by its activity which is modulated by a number of post - translational modifications . 17 Figure 5 . Alternative splicing is regulated by Cis and Trans factors . Motif sequences ESE ( Exonic splicing enhancer ) and ISE ( intronic splicing enhancer ) are bound by specific RNA binding proteins ( RBPs ) that promotes the inclusion of the alternative exon , whereas binding of given factor to motif sequences in ISS ( intronic splicing silencer ) or ESS ( exonic splicing silencer ) inibits the spicing of alternative exon . ( Gallego‑Paez et al . , 2017 ) 1 . 3 . 2 Trans - acting splicing factors Trans - agent acting splicing factors , which bind enhancer and silencers sequences elements , function in a combinated manner to create the distribution of alternatively spliced products in a given cell type . As each cell type expresses a distinct array of splicing regulators , the interpretation of regulatory information on a given RNA target is exceedingly dependent on the cell type ( Busch & Hertel , 2012 ) . The best characterized families of splicing regulators , such as SR factros and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( hnRNPs ) , are ubiquitously expressed , although their relative abundances can change in different tissues . 18 Other factors such as NOVA , nPTB ( also known as PTBP2 ) ( Polydorides et al . , 2000 ; Markovtsov et al . , 2000 ) , FOX1 and FOX2 ( also known as A2BP1 and A2BP2 ) ( Underwood et al . , 2005 ) ESRP1 and ESRP2 ( Warzecha et al . , 2009 ) , and nSR100 ( also known as SRRM4 ) , all expressed in a tissue - specific manner ( tab 1 ) . Tab . 1 Type and examples of splicing regulatory protein ( Nilsen & Graveley . , 2010 ) SR factors exert a positive affect on splicing through protein interactions involving the C - terminal domain rich in arginine and serine ( RS ) dipeptides , from which they get their name . Indeed , the SR domain establishes protein - protein interactions with other proteins containing an SR domain including components of the spliceosome ( Fredericks et al . , 2015 Chenc & Manley 2009 ) . By contrast , hnRNPs , which are also RNA - binding proteins , are generally thought to repress splicing by interfering with the ability of the core splicing machinery to engage splice sites ( Martinez - Contreras et al . , 2007 ) . The existence of ' antagonistic ' classes of splicing regulatory factors , and the 19 evidence that these factors are involved in a large number of splicing decisions , has led to the elaboration of a model of alternative splicing ( Fu XD . , 2004 ) . In this model , splice - site usage is determined by the number of positively acting sites ( splicing enhancers that are bound by SR proteins ) and negatively acting sites ( splicing silencers bound by hnRNPs ) . When positive sites outnumber negative sites , splicing occurs ; when negative sites predominate , splicing is inhibited ( Zhang et al . , 2009 ; Blanchette et al . , 2009 ) . Inhibition of splice site recognition can be achieved in many ways . When splicing silencers are located close to splice sites or to splicing enhancers , inhibition can occur by sterically blocking the access of snRNPs or of positive regulatory factors . An example is the modulation of alternative splicing of gene transcripts by tha polypyrimidine tract binding protein ( PTB ) . PTB , indeed , promotes exon skipping by binding to an exonic splicing silencer and inhibiting the association of U2AF and U2 snRNP with the upstream 3 ' splice site ( Izquierdo et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , tissue - specific splicing factors FOX1 and FOX2 inhibit the formation of the E complex by binding to an intronic sequence and preventing SF1 from binding to the branch site of CAlCA ( calcitonin - related polypeptide - α ) pre - mRNA ( Zhou HL & Lou H . , 2008 ) . Some silencers can be over 100 – 200 bp away from enhancers , and a simple ‘bind and block’ model thus cannot explain their inhibitory effect . One explanation for the activity of such splicing inhibitors is that they function by masking splice site recognition through multimerization along the RNA ( Spellman R , & Smith CW . , 2006 ) . Another model proposes that the alternative exon might be ‘looped out’ in a process involving protein – protein interactions between RNA - binding proteins bound at sites spanning the alternative exon ( Spellman R & Smith 20 CW . , 2006 ; Sharma et al . , 2006 ) and that this loop formation may sterically interfere with further spliceosome assembly , even though splice site recognition may not be inhibited ( Nasim et al . , 2002 ) . As mentioned above , splicing is usually controlled by combinatorial or competitive effects of both activators and inhibitors . In particular it was shown that the ratio between SRSF1 and hnRNP A1 regulates splicing outcomes . A model that explains these observations is that under limiting concentrations of SRSF1 , U1 snRNP binds only to functionally stronger splice sites . Thus , a weak 5’ splice site might not be selected , despite its proximity to the 3’ splice site . Higher levels of SRSF1 promote full occupancy of all 5’ splice sites by U1 snRNP , and under these conditions the 5’ splice site closest to the 3’ splice site is selected ( Chabot , B . 1996 ; Cáceres & Krainer . , 1997 ) . By contrast , hnRNP A1 antagonizes this activity of SR proteins , causing a shift toward distal 5’ splice sites . The molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of hnRNP A1 are less well understood . Access to the proximal site by SRSF1 could be blocked by hnRNP A1 . Indeed , binding of hnRNP A1 to certain exon splicing silencers ( ESS ) inhibits the use of adjacent 3’ splice sites ( Del Gatto - Konczak et al . , 1999 ; Caputi et al . , 1999 ) . In conclusion , the ratio of SRSF1 to hnRNP A1 regulates alternative splicing through the antagonistic effects of these proteins on splice site selection ( Mayeda & Krainer 1993 ) . Sometimes , the position of the cis - active elements , relatively to regulated exons affects the splicing outcome . Location - dependent activity reflects the flexibility of splicing regulatory factors in their interactions with core splicing machinery . Many proteins can act as either repressors or activators depending on the location of their binding site . A possible explanation of this phenomenon is that these proteins promote exon inclusion when , upon binding to the regulatory sequence they favour the recognition of the splice sites of the alternative exon by changing the local RNA structure . On the other 21 hand , when bound to silencers they may compete with components of the splicing machinery or may change the structure of the RNA to prevent splice site recognition ( Chen M & Manley JL . , 2009 ) . The protein NOVA1 has been shown to act as either repressor or activator depending on the location of its binding site . Thus , it can regulate alternative splicing of the GABA A receptor γ2 ( GABRG2 ) by binding to an ISE in GABRG2 pre - mRNA and promoting inclusion of exon 9 , but it is also able to regulate alternative splicing of its own transcript by binding to the ESS in the alternative exon 4 of its pre - mRNA and preventing exon 4 from being included . As shown in Figure 6 , NOVA1 can bind to a high - affinity site within an alternative exon , thus repressing exon inclusion . In contrast NOVA 1 can also bind within the intron downstream of an alternative exon , thus enhancing exon inclusion ( Dredge et al . , 2005 ) . Similarly to NOVA1 , hnRNP l can activate or repress upstream alternative exons , and this probably depends on the location of its binding site relative to the regulated 5′ splice site ( Hui et al . , 2005 ) . hnRNP H promotes the formation of ATP - dependent spliceosomal complexes when it binds to G - rich sequences ( G runs ) downstream of the 5′ splice site ( Schaub et al . , 2007 ) , but it inhibits splicing when the G - rich sequences are located in exons ( Caputi M & Zahler AM 2001 ) . There are usually patterns and rules that summarize this location - dependent activity . 22 Figure . 6 Position dipendent action of NOVA 1 on alternative splicing ( Dredge BK et al . , 2005 ) . 1 . 4 SR Proteins The SR protein family comprises a number of phylogenetically conserved and structurally related proteins . SR proteins exist in all metazoan species ( Zahler et al . , 1992 ) as well as in some lower eukaryotes . The SR proteins were first discovered as splicing factors in the early 90s ( Zahler et al . , 1992 ) . A protein domain rich in arginine and serine dipeptides , termed the RS domain , was originally observed in three Drosophila splicing regulators , SWAP ( suppressor - of - white - apricot ) ( Chou et al . , 1987 ) , Tra ( transformer ) ( Boggs et al . , 1987 ) and Tra - 2 ( transformer - 2 ) ( Amrein et al . , 1988 ) . Subsequent identification of SRSF1 ( splicing factor 2 / alternative splicing factor ) ( Ge H et al . , 1991 ) and SC35 ( spliceosomal component 35 ) ( Fu & Maniatis . , 1990 ) revealed that these proteins contained an RS domain , which is also present in the U1 snRNP - associated protein , U1 - 70K ( Spritz et al . , 1987 ; Theissen et al . , 1986 ) . 23 In humans , 12 SR proteins , called Serine / Arginine - rich Splicing Factors ( SRSF 1 to 12 ) have been identified ( Busch & Hertel , 2012 ) ( Figure . 7 ) . Figure . 7 The human SR protein family . The structural organization of the 12 human SR proteins is shown . Alternative names are in parentheses . RRM : RNA recognition motif ; RRMH : RRM homology ; Zn : zinc - knuckle ; RS : arginine / serine - rich domain . 6 SR proteins ( red letters ) are reported to shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm , whereas the others ( black letters ) are exclusively nuclear ( Sunjoo Jeong . , 2017 ) 24 All SR proteins share two main structural features : the RS domain at the C - terminal that acts to promote protein - protein interactions to facilitate recruitment of the spliceosome and at least one RRM ( RNA recognition motif ) at the N - terminus that provides RNA - binding specificity . For the majority of SR proteins with two RNA - binding domains , the second is a poor match to the RRM consensus and is referred to as an RRM homolog ( RRMH ) . The RS domains of SR proteins participate in protein interactions with a number of other RS - domain - containing splicing factors ( Wu JY , & Maniatis T 1993 ; Kohtz et al . , 1994 ) . These include other SR proteins , SR - related proteins ( Blencowe et al . , 1999 ) , and components of the general splicing machinery ( Teigelkamp et al 1997 ; Cáceres et al . , 1997 ) . The RS domain can also contact the pre - mRNA directly via the BP and the 5′ ss , suggesting an alternative way to promote spliceosome assembly ( Shen H et al . , 2008 ; Shen H & Green M . R . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , the RS domain acts as an NLS ( nuclear localization signal ) , affecting the subcellular localization of SR proteins by mediating the interaction with the SR protein nuclear import receptor , transportin - SR ( Caceres et al . , 1997 ; Lai et al . , 2000 ) . SR proteins exhibit dual functionality in constitutive and alternative splicing . One function of SR proteins is to promote the binding of U1 snRNP to 5′ splice sites ( Eperon et al . 1993 ; Kohtz et al . 1994 ) ; this appears to require protein – protein interactions between SR proteins bound at or near a 5′ splice site , and U1 - 70K , a protein of snRNP U1 . It has also been reported that SR proteins play a role in the association of the U4 / U6·U5 tri - snRNP with the pre - spliceosome ( Roscigno & Garcia - Blanco . , 1995 ) . Finally , SR proteins may also aid in the correct pairing of 5′ and 3′ splice sites by simultaneously interacting with U1 - 70K and U2AF35 ( Wu & Maniatis 1993 ) , which are bound near the 5′ and 3′ splice sites , respectively . 25 SR proteins also play important roles in establishing exon - intron boundaries in large metazoan genes . The process of “exon definition” is hypothesized to solve a significant problem related to finding relatively short exons within the context of long intronic sequences ( Berget SM . , 1995 ) . Two main models have been proposed to explain the mechanism by which SR proteins regulate exon inclusion . The ‘recruitment model’ focuses on the ability of ESE - bound SR proteins to recruit and stabilize interactions between the U1 snRNP at the 5′ ss and U2AF65 at the 3′ ss ( Graveley et al . , 2001 ; Robberson et al , 1990 ) . In the ‘inhibitor model’ , ESE - bound SR proteins may act by antagonizing the negative activity of hnRNP proteins recognizing ESSs ( Zhu et al . , 2001 ) . SR proteins also contribute to intron - definition through a series of protein - protein interactions , mediated by the RS domain linking U1 snRNP at the 5′ss to U2AF35 at the 3′ss ( Wu JY & Maniatis . , 1993 ) . In contrast to the robust splicing enhancing effect in constitutive splicing , the role of SR factors in alternative splicing regulation is more complex and subtle . Alternative exons generally hold shorter length and weaker 5′ spliced sites , so SR proteins induce their inclusion by increasing the recognition of weak splice sites by splicing machinery . Since the regulatory roles of RBPs in alternative splicing are position - and context - dependent , locations of SR - RNA interaction influence splicing outcome . For example , exon - bound SR proteins act as enhancers , but intron - bound SR proteins may function as suppressors ( Shen & Mattox , 2012 ) . So the location of SR - RNA interactions affect spliceosome assembly and splice site selection ( Erkelenz et al . , 2013 ) . In addition , SR proteins can act as activators or repressors in a context - dependent manner with other RBPs ( Fu & Ares , 2014 ; Han et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , SR proteins can have long - range effects on regulation of alternative exons . Indeed , they can associate with constitutive exons adjacent to alternative exons ( Howard JM & Sanford JR . , 2015 ) . In this way they can 26 modulate the strength between 3’splice site in adjacent exons that compete for a common upstream 5’splice site . 1 . 5 SRSF1 Serine / Arginine Splicing Factor 1 ( SRSF1 ) is the founding member of the SR protein family . It has been originally isolated thanks to two of its activities : it promotes spliceosome assembly and constitutive pre - mRNA splicing in a S100 HeLa cell extract ( SF2 : splicing factor 2 ) ( Krainer AR et al . , 1990 ) and regulates alternative splicing of the SV40 early pre - mRNA in vitro ( ASF : Alternative Splicing Factor ) ( Ge H & Manley JL . , 1991 ; Wang et al . , 2005 ) . Later , SRSF1 has been found to regulate different other aspects of RNA metabolism in addition to splicing : mRNA export to the cytoplasm , translation , mRNA stability , nonsense - mediated decay ( NMD ) . Moreover , SRSF1 is involved in mRNA - independent processes , such as protein sumoylation , miRNA processing , and the nucleolar stress response . Not surprisingly , SRSF1 can act as an oncoprotein , emphasising the importance of alternative splicing in tumorigenesis ( Karni et al . , 2007 ; Anczuków et al . , 2007 ; Das et al . , 2014 ) ( Figure . 8 ) . 27 Figure . 8 A schmatic representation of the different SRSF1 ' s functions . ( Das & Krainer 2014 ) . 28 1 . 5 . 1 SRSF1 Structure SRSF1 is a protein with an apparent molecular mass on SDS - PAGE of approximaltely 33 kDA . The human SFRS1 gene spans 6424 bases on the minus strand of the long arm of chromosome 17 ( q 22 ) and encodes for 248 aminoacids . Similarly to other SR proteins , SRSF1 contains two functional modules ( Figure . 9 ) : - an arginine - serine rich region ( RS domain ) at C - terminus that it is shorter than in most of SR factors and where the bulk of SRSF1 adjustment takes place ; in addition the RS domain is also required for nuclear - cytoplasmic shuttling of SRSF1 and regulates its sub - nuclear localization and its interaction with other splicing factors ( Mayeda et al . , 1999 ) ; - two RNA recognition motifs ( RRMs ) , through which SRSF1 interacts with RNA and other splicing factors . The first RRM is located at N - terminus and is followed by a pseudo - RRM , which has a dominant role in dictating substrate specificity in vivo ( Caceres et al . , 1997 , Mayeda et al . , 1999 ) . The consensus sequence 5′ - ACGCGCA - 3′ was determined by SELEX in the presence of the N - terminal canonical RRM alone ( RRM1 ) , whereas more recent NMR structural analysis showed that RRM2 specifically binds a GGA motif . The RRM2 domain either activates or inhibits splicing by competing with binding of the splicing repressor hnRNP A1 ( Mayeda A & Krainer AR . , 1993 ; Eperon et al . , 2000 ) to a 5′ - AGGA - 3′ motif , which contains overlapping binding sites for both proteins ( 5′ - AGG - 3′ and 5′ - GGA - 3′ for hnRNP A1 and SRSF1 pseudo - RRM , respectively ) . 29 Figure . 9 Scheme of the SRSF1 structure . The two RRM domains ( blue ) are separated by a glycine - rich hinge ( dark grey ) , where three arginine residues ( white dots ) can be dimethylated . The sequence of the RS domain ( purple ) is also indicated . ( Blanco & Bernabéu . , 2012 ) 1 . 5 . 2 Posttranslational modifications of the SRSF1 protein RS domain of SRSF1 is heavily phosphorylatied and its phosphorylation status influences the interaction with other proteins , the subcellular distribution and the RNA binding properties of SRSF1 ( Misteli et al . , 1998 ; Xiang et al . , 2013 ) . The SR domain is target of many kinases , including members of the Clk / Sty family , in the nucleus , and SRPKs , in the cytoplasm ( Colwill et al . , 1996 ; Nayler et al . , 1997 ; Gui et al . , 1994 ; ) . SRPK1 was shown to phosphorylate approximately 12 Ser residues in the N - terminal portion of the RS domain ( Colwill et al . , 1996 ) . This promotes nuclear import of SRSF1 through the association with transportin - SR2 . The imported protein localizes into nuclears splicing speckles , namely the highly dynamic nuclear subcompartmets that act as depots for a number of splicing factors ( Ngo J . C et al . , 2005 ) . 30 Once in the nuclear speckles SRSF1 is further phosphoryled on the C - terminal portion of the RS domain by Clk / Sty to generate a hyperphosphorylated form of the protein . Hyperphosphorylated SRSF1 leaves the nuclear speckles and is recruited to active sites of transcription , where it promotes the splicing reaction . During splicing , SRSF1 becomes dephosphorylated and this is the prerequisite for its export to the cytoplasm bound to spliced mRNA . Other protein kinases have been reported to phosphorylate SRSF1 ( Figure . 10 ) . Figure . 10 SRSF1 protein is phosphorylated by the cytosolic protein kinase SRPK . This phosphorylation step is required for nuclear import of SRSF1 and accumulation in nuclear speckles . Futher phosphorylation by Clk / Sty is necessary for the recruitment to the splicing complex . SRSF1 dephosphorylation induces its nuclear to cytoplasmic translocation ( Gonçalves & Jordan . , 2015 ) . 31 Another SRSF1 kinase is Topoisomerase I ( TopoI ) . Human DNA topoisomerase I plays a dual role in transcription , by controlling DNA supercoiling and by acting as a specific kinase for the SR - protein family of splicing factors . Human DNA topoisomerase I has also been described to phosphorylate SRSF1 ( Rossi et al . , 1996 ; Labourier et al . , 1998 ) . The formation of R - loops is promoted by an excessive negative supercoiling generated behind the transcription complex during elongation which results in partial strand separation and in the annealing of the nascent RNA molecule to the template ( Aguilera A & García - Muse T . , 2012 ) . This torsional stress is relieved by Topo I in collaboration with SRSF1 ( Tuduri et al . , 2009 ) and the activity of the PAR - Polymerase ( Rossi et al . , 1996 ) . The formation of a complex between PAR and SRSF1 promotes Topo I to switch from its protein kinase to DNA relaxation activity ( Malanga et al . , 2008 ) . Protein kinase A ( PKA ) can phosphorylate SRSF1 on serine 119 in vitro and modulate its activity as a splicing factor ( Shi et al . , 2011 ; Aksaas et al . , 2011 ) . This phosphorylation occurs in the so - called pseudo - RNA recognition motif ( RRM ) and was described to change the RNA - binding properties of SRSF1 and reduce its capacity to activate splicing . In addition , SRSF1 is also methylated at three Arg residues in the inter - RRM linker region ( Sinha et al . , 2010 ) . It has be shown that differential methylation modulates SRSF1 nuclear - cytoplasmic shuttling and protein functions . 32 1 . 5 . 3 SRSF1 Regulation SRSF1 levels vary widely among cell types ( Blencowe BJ . , 2000 ) and tight control of its expression is important for normal cell and organismal physiology . The SRSF1 gene is essential , and protein depletion , by gene knock - out triggers genomic instability , cell - cycle arrest , and apoptosis ( Xu et al . , 2005 ; Li X & Manley JL . , 2005 ) , while moderate ( 2 - 3 fold ) SRSF1 overexpression is sufficient to transform immortal rodent fibroblasts , which acquire the ability to form sarcomas in nude mice . Therefore , in order to prevent destructive consequences caused by its misregulation , the level of SRSF1 is tightly controlled by mechanisms that operate at transcriptional , post - transcriptional and translational levels . Interestingly , SRSF1 can negatively autoregulates its own expression through various post - transcriptional and translational mechanisms ( Sun et al . , 2010 ; Wu et al . , 2010 ) in order , to maintain its homeostatic levels . Through alternative splicing SRSF1 pre - mRNA can generate 6 different molecules only one of which is protein coding ( Figure . 11 ) . The remaining splicing products are either nuclear or are subject to NMD in the cytoplasm . This regulation involves 2 introns in the 3’ - UTR where also 2 ultra - coserved elements are located . The molecular mechansims underlying this regulation are still poorly defined . The major Isoform , I , encodes the full - length protein , and has a long 3′UTR ( Krainer et al . , 1991 ) . Isoforms II and III retain the third intron ( the last in the coding part of the gene ) . Moreover , Isoforms III and IV undergo splicing of intron 5 in the 3’ - UTR . Isoform II , III , and IV are retained in the nucleus and hence are not translated ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) . Isoform IV can undergo further splicing of intron 4 in the 33 3’ - UTR leading to the production of Isoform V , which is exported in the cytoplasm and degraded by the NMD pathway . Similarly , through skipping of exon 4 Isoform III can be maturated into Isoform VI , which is exported in the cytoplasm and subjected to NMD ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) . Figure . 11 . Alternative splicing Isoforms of SRSF1 transcripts . Protein - coding regions are represented in gray , while UTRs are in black . The two short bars below the genomic scale denote the position of ultra - conserved elements ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) . AS can affect the RNA stability by inclusion of premature translation termination codons ( PTCs ) that activate the nonsense - mediated mRNA decay ( NMD ) pathway ( Isken & Maquat . , 2008 ) . In mammals , a termination codon is recognized as premature when located > 50 – 55 nt upstream of the exon – exon junction marked by the exon junction complex ( EJC ) . EJCs downstream of PTCs recruit essential NMD factors , including Upf1 / Rent1 , that in turn 34 promote mRNA degradation ( Isken & Maquat , 2008 ) . Initially , NMD was considered a mechanism for disposing of aberrant mRNAs arising from nonsense codon – containing alleles . It is now evident that NMD is involved in quantitative posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression through specific AS events in a processed calle Alternative splicing coupled to NMD or AS - NMD ( Hillman et al . , 2004 ) . Recently , it has been found that AS - NMD regulates the expression of all SR splicing factors and several other RNA - binding proteins ( Lareau et al . , 2007 ; Ni et al . , 2007 ; Saltzman et al . , 2008 ) . In particular , this mecanism operates on splicing products V and VI of the SRSF1 gene ( Lareau et al . , 2007 ) . This mechanism serves both as a negative feedback loop , in which increased SR protein levels promote an increase in unproductive splice variants , and as a target for regulation . A mechanism that can contribute to SRSF1 regulation involves miRNAs , which regulate gene expression by controlling the translation or stability of target mRNAs . Micro - RNAs ( miRNAs ) are processed from longer precursors called pri - miRNAs , transcribed by RNA Pol II ( He L & Hannon . , 2004 ) . With few exceptions ( Vasudevan et al . , 2007 ) , miRNAs typically bind to the 3′ untranslated regions ( UTRs ) of mRNAs producing translational repression and / or target mRNA degradation . Alterations in miRNA expression often lead to severe pathological consequences and are frequently observed in human diseases ( Esquela - Kerscher & Slack , 2006 ; Lee & Dutta , 2009 ; He et al . , 2007 ) . miRNAs regolator of SRSF1 translation have been identified , including miR - 28 , miR - 505 , miR - 10a , and miR - 10b ( Meseguere et al . , 2010 ) . A recent publication described the increased complexity of SFRS1 gene expression regulation by unveiling a negative feedback loop in which SRSF1 promotes miR - 7 processing and mature miR - 7 could bind to the 3′ - UTR of 35 SRSF1 to repress its translation ( Wu et al . , 2010 ) . Other miRNAs , including miR - 221 and miR - 222 , may also be regulated by SRSF1 expression through a similar mechanism . These results underscore a function of SRSF1 in pri - miRNA processing and highlight the potential coordination between splicing control and miRNA - mediated gene repression in gene regulatory networks . 1 . 5 . 4 SRSF1 and Cancer SRSF1 is a potent prooncogene ( Karni et al . , 2007 ; Anczuków et al . , 2012 ) . Despite the above - mentioned regulatory mechanisms designed to maintain constant SRSF1 levels , the protein is overexpressed in many different cancer types , such as colon , thyroid , small intestine , kidney , lung , liver , pancreas , and breast ( Xu et al . , 2005 ) . The SRSF1 dysregulation can be due to several alternative mechanisms . First ( Karni et al . , 2007 ) , SRSF1 is overexpressed in some breast cancers due to amplification of the SRSF1 gene at Chr . 17q23 , a chromosomal rearrangement associated with breast malignancies with poor prognosis ( Sinclair et al . , 2003 ) . Second , the SRSF1 gene is a target of MYC ( c - Myc ) , an important oncoprotein and transcription factor overexpressed in many different tumor types ( Tansey W . P . 2014 ) . MYC binds directly to the SRSF1 gene promoter and activates transcription ( Mao et al . , 2003 ) . The resulting increase in SRSF1 protein is sufficient to modulate alternative splicing of a subset of transcripts , such as the signaling kinase MKNK2 and the transcription factor TEAD1 . 36 In addition , it has been showed that SRSF1 promotes phosphorylation of eIF4E , and this factor is known to enhance MYC’s translation ( Lin et al . , 2008 ) . MYC and eIF4E cooperate to induce tumorigenesis : eIF4E antagonizes MYC - induced apoptosis , whereas MYC overrides eIF4E - induced senescence ( Ruggero et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , SRSF1regulates AS of BIN1 ( Karni et al . , 2007 ) , a tumor suppressor that interacts with MYC and inhibits its ability to induce proliferation ( Elliott et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , SRSF1 , being frequently overexpressed in breast tumors , may play an important role in regulating BIN1 and promoting the expression of Isoforms that fail to interact with MYC ( Ge et al . , 1999 ; Karni et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore SRSF1 can be considered a MYC target that contributes to its oncogenic capability by enabling MYC to regulate the expression of specific protein Isoforms through alternative splicing ( Das et al . , 2014 ) . Third , SRSF1 expression is also regulated at the level of splicing , by splicing factor Sam68 ( Valacca C . et al . , 2005 ) . Phosphorylated Sam68 inibits the production of the NMD sensitive RNA Isoforms and promotes the formation of protein coding transcripts , thus leading to increased SRSF1 protein levels ( Valacca et al . , 2010 ) . Sam68 phosphorylation depends on ERK / MAP kinase activity , which is frequently augmented in human tumors . Thus , Sam68 appears to link SRSF1 gene expression to proliferation signals . Both MYC - and SAM68 - mediated increased expression of SRSF1 is associated with the acquisition of oncogenic features , such as a higher rate of cell proliferation , cell motility and invasion , and epithelial to mesenchimal transition ( Das et al . , 2012 ; Valacca et al . , 2010 ) . In addition , SRSF1 enhances translation of  - catenin through mTOR activation , leading to activation of the Wnt signaling pathway ( Fu Y et al . , 2013 ) ( Figure 12 ) . 37 Figure . 12 . SRSF1 and oncogenic signaling pathways . On the left : SRSF1 activates the MEK - ERK kinases . Phosphorylation of Sam68 by ERK controls the expression levels of SRSF1 . Center : SRSF1 phosphorylation by Akt and SRSPK kinases has opposite effects in the regulation of AS events relevant to cancer progression . On the right . The SRSF1 gene is a transcriptional target of the c - myc . The expression level of SRSF1 modulates the activity of mTOR kinase ( Biamonti et al . , 2014 ) 1 . 6 EMT The epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition is a biological process in which epithelial cells undergo a profound reorganization that converts them into 38 mesenchymal cells , with enhanced migratory capacities , invasiveness , and resistance to apoptosis ( Kalluri R & Neilson EG 2003 ) . Epithelial and mesenchymal cells represent two main cell types in mammals . Epithelial cells are characterized by : - cohesive interactions among cells ; - three membrane domains : apical , lateral and basal ; - presence of tight junctions between lateral domains ; - apicobasal polarized distribution of the various organelles and cytoskeleton components ; - lack of mobility of individual epithelial cells with respect to their local environment . Instead , mesenchymal cells have : - loose or no interactions among cells , so that no continuous cell layer is formed ; - no apico - basal polarized distribution of organelles and cytoskeleton components ; - motile and invasive properties . Moreover epithelial cells express high level of E - caderin that sequester β - catenin in the cytoplasm , while mesenchymal cells express N - cadherin , fibronectin and vimentin and β - catenin is nuclear ( Nieto MA 2013 ) . Under certain conditions epithelial and mesenchymal cell phenotypes are reversible and epithelial cells can switch to a mesenchymal status by means of a tightly regulated process defined as the EMT ( epithelial to mesenchumal transition ) , which is associated with a number of cellular and molecular events . In some cases , EMT is reversible and cells undergo the reciprocal mesenchymal to epithelial transition ( MET ) ( Larue & Bellacosa 2005 ) . 39 There are different types of Epithelial - Mesenchymal Transition classified on the basis of the biological context where they occur ( figure . 13 ) : Type 1 EMTs occurs during embryo implantation , embryo formation , and organ development to generate cells with common mesenchymal phenotypes . For example , during gastrulation , cells of the invaginating epithelium undergo EMT and migrate inward to form the primary mesenchyme . Mesenchymal cells can subsequently undergo the reverse process - MET - to form epithelial structures , a process that has been well documented in formation of the renal tubular epithelium during renal organogenesis ( Dressler GR . , 2006 ) . Type 2 EMTs occur during wound healing , tissue regeneration , and organ fibrosis . In particular , the process ends up with the generation of fibroblasts and other related cells in order to reconstruct damaged tissues ( Arnoux et al . , 2008 ) . Finally , cancer cells undergo a type of EMT ( type 3 ) after an initial clonal expansion of the primary tumor ( Thiery JP , 2008 ) . Through EMT cancer cells may acquire invasive features that are necessary to produce metastases . Figure . 13 Three types of EMT are recognized . Type 1 EMT occurs early during embryonic development . Type 2 EMT occurs during persistent injury . Type 3 EMT is part of the metastatic process , whereby epithelial tumor cells leave a primary tumor nodule , migrate to a new tissue site , and reform as a secondary tumor nodule ( Punnya V Angadi & Alka D Kale . , 2015 ) 40 An important aspect of cancer cell biology is cell communication with the surrounding stroma . The vast majority of the signaling pathways known to trigger EMT converge on specific aspects ( Voulgari A & Pintzas A . , 2009 ; Zavadil & Bottinger EP . , 2005 ) . First , cell – cell adhesion disintegrates with the loss of epithelial markers such as E - cadherin and the gain of mesenchymal markers such as vimentin . Next , there is a loss of baso - apical polarization and the acquisition of front - rear polarization . Finally , cell - matrix adhesion is altered , with activation of proteolytic enzymes such as matrix metalloproteases . Note that the process of metastasis formation also consists of multiple steps ( Chambers et al . , 2002 ; Woodhouse et al . , 1997 ) . Initially , cells detach from the primary tumor and invade the surrounding tumor stroma . They subsequently enter into the circulation and reach new metastatic sites . Finally they have to revert to an epithelial phenotype to give rise to the mastastasis . At the cellular level , pathological EMTs are very similar to physiological EMTs in that they are governed by similar signaling pathways , regulators , and effector molecules . EMT is associated with the enhanced expression and redistribution of β - catenin due to mTOR activation . This in turn leads to activation of the Wnt signaling pathway , an important contributor to oncogenesis , and down - regulation of the epithelial marker E - cadherin , a component of adherens junctions , which inhibits invasion and tyhe formation of metastasis . Down - regulation of E - cadherin is accompanied by increased expression of N - cadherin and vimentin and by the nuclear accumulation of β - catenin . In the nucleus β - catenin acts as a transcription factor with members of the lymphoid 41 enhancer factor ( Lef ) / T - cell factor family and promotes the expression of transcription factors , such as Snail and Slug , that inhibit E - cadherin production ( Polyak & Weinberg , 2009 ) . EMT is also frequently marked by increased expression and / or activity of SRSF1 , which regulates splicing of transcripts encoding the tyrosine kinase receptor Ron . High SRSF1 levels inhibit inclusion of exon 11 , thereby promoting expression of the consistitutively active ΔRon Isoform that induces EMT ( Ghigna et al . , 2005 ; Dow et al 2007 ) ( Figure . 14 ) . A very important aspect for the growth of tumors is the abilty of the cells to gain access to nutrient supply via blood vessels . Thus , cancer cells release angiogenic signals , as for instance the vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF , that activate endothelial cells . SRSF1 is involved in promoting proximal splice site selection in C - terminal exon 8 of VEGF transcripts , resulting in the generation of pro - angiogenic Isoforms ( Kalsotra & Cooper . , 2011 ) . Figure . 14 SRSF1 controls alternative splicing of Ron proto - oncogene by repressing exon 11 inclusion . This results in the production of the Delta - RON , a constitutively 42 active Isoform . This splicing event ultimately influences EMT by promoting cell motility and invasion , typical features of mesenchymal cells ( Kalsotra & Cooper . , 2011 ) . 1 . 7 Metabolism and Cancer To support the high rate of cell growth and proliferation cancer cells require precursors for the biosynthesis of macromolecules that normal cells . This is obtained by reprogramming glucose metabolism , a process first recognized by Otto Warburg nearly a century ago and now recognized as a hallmark of cancer cells . Warburg observed that cancer tissues have high rates of glycolysis even in the presence of oxygen and “aerobic glycolysis” , is often referred to as the Warburg Effect ( Warburg Otto . , 1956 . , Frezza & Gottlieb . , 2009 ) ( Figure 15 ) . 43 Figure . 15 Differences between oxidative phosphorylation , anaerobic glycolysis , and aerobic glycolysis ( Warburg effect ) . In the presence of oxygen , differentiated tissues metabolize glucose into pyruvate through glycolysis and then completely oxidize most of that pyruvate in the mitochondria to CO2 during oxidative phosphorylation . Oxigen is essential to completely oxidize glucose because it is the final electron acceptor . Cells grown under low oxygen tension or hypoxia stop using pyruvate in oxidative phosphorylation and generate lactate ( anaerobic glycolysis ) . This allows glycolysis to continue ( by cycling NADH back to NAD + ) , but results in minimal ATP production when compared with oxidative phosphorylation . Warburg observed that cancer cells convert most glucose to lactate regardless of whether oxygen is present ( aerobic glycolysis ) ( Matthew et al . , 2009 ) . The oxidation of glucose in the glycolytic pathway generates pyruvate , which is preferentially transformed to lactate by lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) in the cytosol than oxidized through the TCA cycle ( Vander Heiden et al . , 2009 ; Warburg Otto . , 1956 ; ) . 44 Figure . 16 Scheme illustrating the production of ATP by normal and malignant cells under different conditions of oxygenation ( Teicher et al . , 2012 ) . In addition , glycolysis , as opposed to complete metabolism of glucose to water and CO 2 during the TCA cycle , provides carbon sources to other key metabolic pathways required for nucleotide , lipid , and mino acid synthesis , building blocks that are essential for the anabolic pathway in highly proliferative cells ( Figure . 17 ) . 45 Figure 17 . Representation of self - sufficiency of cancer cells . Accelerated glycolysis in the cancer cells depletes NAD + . The reduction of pyruvate to lactate replenishes cytosolic levels of NAD + and regulates the NADH / NAD + balance that is necessary to sustain glycolysis . Lactate can enter mitochondria to be oxidized to pyruvate and then acetyl CoA ( A - CoA ) ( San - Millán I & Brooks GA . , 2017 ) . 1 . 7 . 1 Role of glutamine The seemingly wasteful metabolism of glucose in cancer cells is mirrored by a similarly inefficient metabolism of glutamine ( DeBerardinis & Cheng . , 2009 ) . Cancer cells do not survive in the absence of exogenous glutamine , and exhibit what is known as “glutamine addiction” ( Eagle H . , 1955 ) . The 46 switch of glutamine from a nonessential to an essential amino acid ( EAA ) as an artifact of in vitro culture . Glutamine serves as a source of carbon to replenish the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle . Glutamine is first converted to glutamate by glutaminase and then deaminated to produce α - ketoglutarate ( α - KG ) to enter the TCA , to generate ATP through production of NADH and FADH2 ( Figure 18 ) . Figure 18 . Glucose and glutamine ( gln ) provide the growing cell with a large pool of carbon and nitrogen for the biosynthesis of the nonessential amino acids . Carbon precursors derived from glycolysis ( 3 - phosphoglycerate , 2 - phosphoglycerate , pyruvate ) and glutaminolysis ( oxaloacetate , glutamic acid γ - semialdehyde ) serve as the carbon substrate for amino acid biosynthesis ( Wise & Thompon . , 2010 ) 47 Glutamic acid is the primary nitrogen donor for the synthesis of non - essential aminoacid - NEAAs ( Young & Ajami . , 2001 ) . Transaminases transfer the amine group from glutamic acid to α - ketoacids . The α - ketoacids used to generate NEAAs are the carbon catabolites of glucose or glutamine : pyruvate , 3 - phosphoglycerate , oxaloacetate , and glutamic acid gamma - semialdehyde . In addition , glutamine serves as an activator of mTOR1 , which is a central cell growth controller ( Crespo JL , et al . , 2002 ) . As such , mTOR activity must be tightly controlled to prevent inappropriate cell growth , and glutamine and aminoacid availabiblity have a direct role in this regulation . Arginine and leucine are two amino acids that can together almost fully stimulate mTOR complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) ( Sancak Y et al . , 2008 ; Kim et al . , 2013 ) . Glutamine can contribute to mTORC1 activation by being exchanged for essential amino acids , including leucine , through the large neutral amino acid transporter 1 ( LAT1 ; a heterodimer of SLC7A5 and SLC3A2 ) antiporter ( Nicklin et al . , 2009 ) . Glutamine promotes mTOR localization to the lysosome and thus activity through the RAS family member ADP ribosylation factor 1 ( ARF1 ) in a poorly understood mechanism ( Jewell et al . 2015 ; Kim , S . G . et al . 2013 ) . In addition , glutamine contributes directly to the availability of cysteine and glycine for production of glutathione , an endogenous antioxidant , to maintain the cellular redox homeostasis . The MYC oncogene , the third most commonly amplified gene in human cancer , has been associated with upregulated glutamine metabolism ( Zack , T . I . et al . 2013 ) . The discovery that Myc - induced metabolic reprogramming triggers cellular dependency on exogenous glutamine as a source of carbon and macromolecular synthesis increased the interest in glutamine metabolism ( Yuneva et al . , 2007 ; DeBerardinis et al . , 2007 ) . Glutamine depletion of Myc - transformed cells leads to a profound reduction in the levels of TCA cycle 48 metabolites despite abundant extracellular availability of glucose , supporting the importance of glutamine in the maintenance of mitochondrial anaplerosis ( Yuneva M , et al . 2007 ) . These findings suggest Myc transformation might also suppress the ability of tumor cells to use glucose as an anapleurotic substrate perhaps through upregulation of LDH - A . 1 . 7 . 2 HIF One key mediator of the Warburg effect is transcription factor Hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 ( HIF1 ) . HIF1 is a heterodimeric transcription factor with HIF1α or HIF2α ( also known as ePAS1 ) as the O2 responsive subunit , and HIF1β ( also known as ARnT ) as the constitutively expressed subunit ( Jiang et al . , 1996 ) ( Figure 19 ) . The HIF1α subunit was first identified as a protein that respond to a decreases oxygen availability or hypoxia . HIF1α is not only controlled by low O2 tension but also by other factors such as oncogene activation or loss of tumour suppressors , and pseudo - hypoxia ( Bardos JI . & Ashcroft M . , 2004 ; Costa et al . , 2014 ) . Figure 19 HIF1α domain structure . Sites of proline hydroxylation are indicated in the O2 . ( Denko NC . , 2008 ) 49 Under normal oxygen tension , HIF1α protein is degraded by the proteasome due to ubiquitination by a pathway involving von Hippel−Lindau protein ( pVHL ) , a tumor suppressor protein and one of the recognized components of an E3 ubiquitin protein ligase ( Stickle et al . , 2004 ) . Two proline residues ( P402 / P564 ) of HIF1α are substrates of prolyl - 4 - hydroxylases ( PHDs ) ( Bruick et al . , 2001 ; Jaakkola et al . , 2001 ) . These are 2 - oxoglutarate ( 2 - OG ) - dependent dioxygenases that require oxygen for their hydroxylation action , in addition to other co - factors such as iron and ascorbate . PHDs catalyse the conversion of a prolyl residue , molecular oxygen and α - ketoglutarate to hydroxyprolyl , carbon dioxide and succinate in a reaction dependent on ferrous iron and ascorbate as cofactors . Hence , hydroxylation of proline residues by PHDs occurs only in the presence of sufficient oxygen ( Maxwell . et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover , another residue of HIF - 1a , lysine K532 , is acetylated by an enzyme called arrest - defective - 1 ( ARD - 1 ) , an acetyl transferase enzyme . Modified HIF - 1α with hydroxylated and acetylated moieties is preferably recognized by pVHL and is tagged for proteasomal degradation . Since both the hydroxylation action from PHDs and ARD - 1 expression require the presence of oxygen , under hypoxic condition , neither hydroxylation nor acetylation of HIF - 1α occurs , resulting in HIF - 1α stabilization ( Jeong JW et al . , 2002 ) . Pseudohypoxic stabilization of HIFα refers to conditions in which PHD is inhibited not by a lack of O2 , but rather by a low level of 2 - oxoglutarate , by the chelation of iron or by high levels of succinate . Low levels of exogenous ROS can also inhibit PHD during normoxia , presumably by oxidizing ferrous iron to the ferric state ( Guzy et al . , 2005 ) . An excess of succinate , a TCA cycle intermediate with structural similarities to 2 - oxoglutarate and a product of the reaction catalyzed by PHDs , can also inhibit PHD ( Selak et al . , 2005 ) . All of these mechanisms determine an accumulation of the α subunit and 50 promote the formation of the HIF1 heterodimer . The active heterodimer translocates to the nucleus and binds , with co - activators p300 and CBP , to hypoxia - responsive elements ( HREs ) located in promoters hypoxia - inducible genes resulting in their transcriptional activation . The long list of genes controlled by HIF1 include genes involved in glucose metabolism and angiogenesis which are required for survival to hypoxia in normal and malignant tissues ( Bertout et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure 20 ) . Figure 20 . The classical O2 sensing pathway is through O2 dependent enzymatic hydroxylation at Pro 402 and / or Pro 564 on HIF - 1α . This modification mediates recognition of the HIF1α by vHL and hence HIF1α targeting for proteasomal degradation . Oncogenic activation , associated with activation of the RAS – RAF – MAPK , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase , PTEN or Akt pathways , can also cause HIF1α accumulation through unknown mediators . Tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates such as succinate and fumarate , or perhaps mitochondrial reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , can inhibit the activity of PHDs , also stabilizing HIF1α . Stabilized HIF1α associates with HIF1β , and the HIF1 heterodimer binds to cognate hypoxia - responsive elements ( HREs ) in target genes ( Denko . , 2008 ) . 51 1 . 7 . 3 Succinate The phenomenon of enhanced glycolysis in tumours has been acknowledged for decades , but biochemical evidence to explain it is just beginning to emerge . In the last decade , the discovery that inherited and acquired alterations in some enzymes of tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle have a causal role in carcinogenesis indicate that the altered metabolism as the underlying hallmark of neoplastic transformation ( Oermann et al . , 2012 ) . Recently , mutations in the gene encoding succinate dehydrogenase ( SDH ) ( also known as complex II ) have been implicated in several cancers , and SDH is now regarded as a tumor suppressor ( Wu , W . & Zhao , S . , 2013 ) . The SDH complex resides in the inner mitochondrial membrane where it acts as a core component of both the Krebs cycle and of the electron transport chain that couples the conversion of succinate to fumarate with the reduction of ubiquinone . SDH is composed of four core subunits , SDHA , SDHB , SDHC , and SDHD and two assembly factors , SDHAF1 and SDHAF2 , all of which are encoded by the nuclear genome . Mutations in SDHA , SDHB , SDHC , as well as the assembly factor SDHAF2 can also drive different types of tumors by destabilizing the complex and causing loss of enzymatic activity ( Korpershoek et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 21 ) . 52 Figure 21 . Shematic view of the respiratory chain ( Brière et al . , 2005 ) In particular , dominant mutations in the SDH subunits SDHB , SDHC and SDHD predispose carriers to carotid body paragangliomas and adrenal gland pheochromocytomas ( Baysal BE , et al . 2000 ; Baysal et al 2002 ) . Dominant defects in SDH5 were also found to predispose individuals to paragangliomas ( Hao et al . , 2009 ) . A germline SDHA mutation has also been found in a patient presenting with paraganglioma ( Burnichon et al . , 2010 ) . Finally , mutations in SDHB are associated with renal cell carcinoma and T - cell acute leukemia ( Vanharanta et al . , 2004 ; Baysal BE . , 2007 ) , and mutations in SDHB , SDHC and SDHD are associated with gastrointestinal stromal tumors ( Stratakis CA & Carney JA . , 2009 ) . The observation that many tumors arousing from mutations in SDH genes show pseudo - hypoxia has suggested that the activation of the HIF - 1α could play a supportive role in the tumorigenic processes induced by TCA cycle dysfunctions . The link between the loss of mitochondria tumour suppressors 53 and pseudo - hypoxia is indicated by several studies . Initial studies by Gimenez - Roqueplo et al . ( 2003 ) proved that in some tumours with SDH mutations , the HIF pathway and consequently the angiogenic response are activated . More recently , an extensive gene expression analysis of 76 phaeochromocytomas with different genetic lesions revealed a ‘HIF signature’ pattern of gene expression in a cluster of phaeochromocytomas with SDHB , SDHD or VHL mutations ( Dahia et al . , 2005 ) . The causal link between TCA cycle dysfunction and HIF - 1α activation was initially suggested by Selak and coworkers demonstrating that the loss of SDH activity leads to accumulation of its substrate , succinate , which causes the inhibition of PHDs . Succinate accumulated in mitochondria of SDH - deficient or SDH - inactive cells leaks out in the cytosol . As mentioned above , prolyl hydroxylation of HIF - 1 α by PHD is the ﬁrst step in tagging HIF - 1 α for degradation , enabling its interaction with pVHL . PHDs are a - ketoglutarate dependent dioxygenases which couple the hydroxylation of the substrates with the oxidation of α - KG to succinate in reactions that are dependent on O2 and Fe2 + ( Ozer A & Bruick RK . , 2007 ) . For that reason , increase levels of succinate in SDH deficient cells impairs PHDs activity and leads to HIF - 1α stabilization under normoxic conditions ( Kim , W . Y . , & W . G . Kaelin . , 2004 ) . Thus , succinate is not only a substrate for SDH in the mitochondria , but also a product of PHDs in the cytosol . The accumulation of succinate in the cancer tissues as well as the PHD inhibition and pseudohypoxia was confirmed both in HLRCC leiomyomas and PGL tissues by Pollard et collegues ( Pollard et al . , 2005 ) . Accumulation of α - KG , on the other hand , may have an opposite effect leading to the constitutive destabilization of HIF - 1α . Accordingly , Gottlieb and his group have shown that the increase in α - KG alone is sufficient to oppose succinate and hypoxia - mediated activation of HIF1α . This resulted in 54 the reversal of enhanced glycolysis and cell death ( Frezza C . & Gottlieb E . , 2009 ) . Hence , the levels of α - KG , even in hypoxia , may be sufficient to foster PHD activity and prevent the hypoxic response . Recently , biochemical studies showed that PHD activity is competitively inhibited by succinate and , therefore , the ratio between α - ketoglutarate and succinate rather than the absolute concentrations of these metabolites dictates PHD activity ( MacKenzie et al . , 2007 ) . 55 2 Aims of the research Previous studies in our laboratory have established that the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts is modulated by cell density . When cells are grown at low density a protein coding transcript ( Isoform I ) is generated with modest levels of other RNAs . At high cell density , however , several alternative splicing events occur leading to the preferential expression of five long non - coding RNAs ( lncRNAs ) called Isoform II to VI . The production of these molecules involves splicing of two introns in the 3’ - UTR portion of the gene ( introns 4 and 5 ) , retention of intron 3 ( the last one in the protein coding portion of the gene ) and skipping of exon 4 ( containing the natural stop codon ) . Isoform II , III and IV are exclusively nuclear while Isoforms V and VI are exported to the cytoplasm and degraded by the non - sense mediated RNA decay ( NMD ) pathway . Retention of intron 3 distinguishes the proteincoding Isoform I from Isoform II . The latter is the precursor of nuclear Isoform III ( generated through splicing of intron 5 ) that is the main Isoform detectable in high - density cells . Isoform III is then processed to Isoform IV via a splicing event between the donor splice site of intron 3 and the acceptor site in intron 4 , which results in skipping of exon 4 . My thesis focuses on the analysis of signals and factors that control this complex splicing program prompts questions about the function of these lncRNAs , the signals and the mechanisms underlying the choice between the production of the protein coding Isoform I and the expression of the lncRNAs the mechanism and signal controlling alternative splicing of SRSF1 transcripts , which is the main subject of my thesis . 56 3 Materials and methods 3 . 1 Cell culture Cells are grown under sterile conditions in a humidified 37°C incubator with 5 % CO 2 Medium is changed three times a week . Cell line used are : - SW480 ( ATCC® CCL228™ ) cell line ; - Clone 2 : a clone of SW480 cells , in which the 3’splice site of intron 3 of the SRSF1 gene ( Q07955 ) has been deleted by Vezzoni’s group by means of the CRISPR - Cas9 technology . Medium : RPMI ( RPMI Medium , Sigma - Aldrich ) 10 % FBS ( Fetal Bovine Serum , Euroclone ) 2mM L - Glutamine ( Euroclone ) 25mM Hepes Gentamycin 1X Our experimental model consists of two different growth conditions : Low and High density . To obtain Low density ( LD ) cells were seeded at 500 cells / mm 2 while for High density ( HD ) 8000 cells / mm 2 . 57 3 . 2 RNA purification using the RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen ) Cells grown in Petri dish are washed with PBS and treated for one minute with 1X Trypsin . After that cells are collected in complete medium 10 % FBS to inhibit Trypsin activity and transferred to an Eppendorf tube , centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1400 rpm at 4°C washed in PBS ( Phosphate Buffered Saline ) and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1400 rpm at 4°C . The cellular pellet is now processed with the RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen ) for RNA extraction . - Resuspend each pellet in the proper volume of RTL buffer by vortexing . - Add 1 volume of 70 % ethanol and , after mixing gently , transfer the content of the Eppendorf to an RNeasy spin column , inside a 2ml collection tube . Samples are centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 15 seconds at 4°C and discard the flow through . - Add 700 µl of RW1 buffer to the RNeasy spin column and centrifuge for 15 seconds at 13000 rpm at 4°C . - Add 500 µl of RPE buffer to the RNeasy spin column and centrifuge at 13000 rpm for 15 seconds . Add another 500 µl aliquot of RPE and centrifuge at 13000 rpm for 15 seconds . After discarding the flow through , the Eppendorf tube is centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 2 minutes , in order to clean the filter inside the RNeasy spin column . - Transfer the column to a new 1 . 5ml collection tube and add 30 - 40 µl of free - RNase water directly at the centre of the membrane . - After waiting for 1 minute at room temperature , the column is centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 1 minute and the RNA is now eluted . 58 - RNA is then treated with DNase , using TURBO DNA - free kit ( Life Technologies ) to remove traces of DNA . 3 . 3 DNase treatment DNase treatment is performed using the TURBO DNA - free kit ( Life Technologies ) . - Add 0 . 1 volume of DNase Reaction Buffer 10X to the RNA preparation , together with 1 µl of DNase . - Samples are incubated at 37°C for 20 minutes . - Stop the reaction by adding 0 . 1 Volume of Inactivation Reagent and incubate for further at 5 minutes at room temperature . - Samples are then centrifuged for 2 minutes at 13000 rpm to pellet the Inactivation Reagent . The supernatant containing the RNA is then removed and transferred to a new Eppendorf tube . 3 . 4 RNA reverse transcription The concentration of the purified RNA is determined by means of a NanoPhotometer ( Implen ) . Then , the RNA is used as template in a retrotranscription reaction with a Superscript IV 1st strand kit ( Life Technologies ) . 59 1 st reaction : Annealing stock solution conc . H2O RNase free Up to 13 µl Oligo dT 50 µM 1 µl dNTPs 10 mM 1 µl RNA 1 - 2 µg 5’65°C 2 nd reaction : cDNA synthesis stock solution conc . RT Buffer 5x 4 µl DTT 0 . 1 M 1 µl RNase OUT 40u / µl 1 µl RT 200u / µl 1 µl 10’ at 50°C , then 10’ at 80°C . Add 1 µl RNase H ( 2u / µl ) and incubate 20’ at 37°C 3 . 5 PCR In order to perform the Polymerase Chain Reaction ( PCR ) , the GoTaq G2 Flexi DNA Kit ( Promega ) is used together with specific primers . 60 Reagent Final concentration The reaction is carried out in a thermal cycler using specific programs with different temperatures and cycles according to the primers set sequence . For SRSF1 we used an annealing temperature ( AT ) of 60 . 5°C and 25 cycles , while for GAPDH the annealing temperature is 60°C and cycles are 16 . GoTaq Flexi Buffer 1X MgCl2 2 . 5 mM PCR Nucleotide Mix 0 . 2 mM Primer Forward 0 . 2 µM Primer Reverse 0 . 2 µM cDNA 1 µl GoTaq G2 Flexi DNA 1 . 5 u H2O to 25 µl Step Time Temperature Cycle Denaturation 2’ 95°C 1 Denaturation 30’’ - 1 . 5’ 95°C Annealing 30’’ - 1 . 5’ Specific A . T . n cycles Extension 30’’ - 1 . 5’ 72°C Final extension 5’ 72°C 1 61 3 . 5 . 1 Primers used for PCR : - SRSF1 Fw : CACTGGTGTCGTGGAGTTTGTACGG Rw : GGGCAGGAATCCACTCCTATG - GAPDH Fw : ACCACAGTCCATGCCATCAC Rw : TCCACCACCCTGTTGCTGTA - SRSF1 ( intron 2 ) Fw : ATAAACGAGGATTGCTGC Rw : CACGTTAAGCTGGTAAGG 3 . 6 Electrophoresis PCR amplified products are analyzed by agarose gel . Agarose concentration depends on the size of the band to be detected . Agarose ( Sigma - Aldrich ) is melted in TBE 1X , which is also the running buffer in the electrophoretic chamber . TBE 10X ( pH 8 . 0 ) Tris base 0 . 89 M Boric acid 0 . 89 M EDTA 0 . 02 M 62 DNA bands are visualized by staining with to Ethidium Bromide at the final concentration of 0 . 5 µg / ml . Samples are made 1X Green Go Taq Flaxi Buffer ( Promega ) to the PCR products in order to increase the density of the samples . The dimension of the amplified PCR products is determined by comparison with the Ready load 1kb plus DNA ladder ( Invitrogen ) , used as size marker . At the end of the electrophoresis bands are visualized with Gel Doc EZ Imager ( Biorad ) , which visualizes PCR products under UV light . The image is then analyzed by the software Image Lab TM ( Bio - Rad ) . 3 . 7 Quantitative PCR We determined the relative expression of a gene of interest in different samples , by means of the QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit ( Qiagen ) using the Light Cycler 480 ( Roche ) apparatus . The reaction mix contains : QuantiTect SYBR Green Master Mix 2X 10 µl Primer Forward ( 100 µM ) 0 . 1 µl Primer Reverse ( 100 µM ) 0 . 1 µl cDNA 1 µl H 2 O to 20 µl 63 PCR conditions : Annealing temperature used to analyze SRSF1 , GINS2 , VEGFA , and E - cadherin gene transcripts is 60°C with 50 cycles . Primers sets : - SRSF1 Fw : TTGGTGTACATGTGGGTACAGGGT Rw : ACGCTCTATCAGTCACACAGAGGA - GINS2 ( DNA replication protein ) Fw : TAACCCTGGTTTACCCGTGGAAGT Rw : TTCCATGTAGTAAGGGCTGGGCAT Step Time Temperature Denaturation 15’ 90°C Denaturation 15’’ 90°C Annealing 20’’ Specific A . T n cycles Extension 30’’ 72°C Melting curve 40°C 90°C 40°C 64 - VEGFA ( Vascular endothelial growth factor A ) Fw : TCGGGCCTCCGAAACCATGAACTTT Rw : TTCGTGATGATTCTGCCCTCCTCCT - E - cadherin Fw : CTGGGACTCCACCTACAGAAAGTT Rw : GAGGAGTTGGGAAATGTGAGCA 3 . 8 Protein extraction Lysis buffer for protein extraction is composed of 1X sample buffer , 1X phosphatase inhibitors “PhosSTOP” ( Roche ) , and 1X protease inhibitors cocktail “Complete - EDTA free” ( Roche ) . Sample buffer 4x composition final concentration - glycerol 40 % - SDS 8 % - Tris HCl pH 6 . 8 240 mM - Bromophenol Blue 0 . 04 % - β - MercaptoEthanol 5 % 65 Proteins samples are kept on ice during the entire extraction procedure . Protein extraction is carried out by resuspending the cell pellet in 4 - 5 volumes of 1X lysis buffer and pipetting till the suspension becomes fluid . Then the sample is sonicated twice ( Bioruptor plus , Diagenode ) at 20 - 60 kHz . Each round of sonication is set on “low intensity” and involves 3 cycles each of 45’’ pulses separated by a 45’’ pause . If still viscous , the solution can be passed through 21Gx1 / 2’’gauge needle . 3 . 9 Western blot ( WB ) Cell extracts are heated at 100°C for 10’ , spinned and then analyzed through SDS - PAGE . We routinely use either 4 - 20 % or 4 - 15 % acrylamide pre - cast gels depending on the molecular weight of the protein we want to analyze ( Biorad Mini - protean TGX - stain free ) . The acrylamide gel is put in the electrophoretic chamber , which is appropriately filled with a Running solution ( 25mM Tris , 190 mM glycine , 0 . 1 % SDS ) . Precision Plus dual color marker from Biorad is used for molecular size evaluation . A current of 15 mA and 40 V for 10’ is applied allowing the samples to migrate through the stacking gel , afterwards the potential is raised to 100 mV and run is continued for 1 . 5 h . At the end of electrophoretic separation , proteins are transferred from the gel onto a nitrocellulose membrane by means of a Mini Trans - Blot® Cell ( Bio - Rad ) by applying a constant current of 1 . 3A up to 25 V for 10 min . In order to verify protein transfer and to compare the amount of proteins in the different lanes the membrane is stained with a Ponceau solution ( 0 . 1 % Ponceau S w / v , 5 % acetic acid v / v ) . The filter is then washed in TBST buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ) to remove excess 66 of dye . The membrane is incubated for 1 hr at room temperature in a blocking solution composed of Milk powder ( SigmaAldrich ) dissolved in TBST buffer at a final concentration of 5 % . This step is designed to prevent aspecific binding of the antibody . Therafter , the membrane is hybridized to a primary antibody directed against the protein of interest and used at the proper dilution in TBST made 5 % skimmed milk . We used the following primary antibodies : - Anti - SRSF1 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) ( diluted 1 : 2000 , incubated for 16 - 18h at 4°C ) , - Anti - β - actin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) ( diluted 1 : 2000 , incubated for 1h at RT ) - Anti - GAPDH ( Thermo scientific ) ( diluited 1 : 10000 , incubated for 1h at RT ) - Anti - Jmjd6 ( Abcam ) ( diluited 1 : 1000 , incubated for 1 h at RT ) - Anti α - tubulin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) ( diluited 1 : 5000 , incubated for 1h at RT ) - Anti HIF1  Thermo Scientific ) ( diluited 1 : 500 , incubated fot 16 - 18h at 4°C ) The nitrocellulose filter is then washed 3 times for 6 - 7 minutes each with TBST buffer and incubated with the secondary antibody ; secondary antibodies are conjugated to with HRP ( horseradish peroxidase ) and are directed against the primary antibody . The following secondary antibodies were used : Anti - mouse , 1 : 30 . 000 ( SantaCruz Biotechnology ) used to detect antibodies against GAPDH , β - actin , α - tubulin and SRSF1 . Anti - rabbit , 1 : 10 . 000 ( Cell Signaling Technology ) used for Jmjd6 primary antibody . 67 The membrane is incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody diluted in 5 % skimmed milk TBST buffer for 1 hr at room temperature The membrane is then washed 3 times for 6 - 7 minutes each in TBST buffer . The filter is then incubated with a chemiluminescent substrate . To visualize SRSF1 and HIF1  proteins the filter was incubated with Ultra solution ( Cyanagen ) , while for β - actin , GAPDH and α - tubulin Pico solution ( Thermo - Scientific ) was used . The membrane is then placed in a cassette in contact with an X - Ray film which is then developed to get an image of the intensity of band which is a measure of the protein content . 3 . 10 Subecllular fractionation Cells are pelleted by centrifugation for 5 min at 1200 rpm at 4°C . The cell pellet is then resuspended in Lysis buffer ( 10 mM Hepes pH 7 . 4 , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 10mM NaCl , 0 . 4 U / ml RNase OUT ) . After 5 min on ice , nuclei are observed under a phase contrast microscope to verify the release of intact nuclei free of cytoplasm . Then , samples are vortexed for 15’’ , passed through a 21Gx1 / 2’’ gauge needle and spinned for 10 min at 5000 rpm at 4°C . The supernatant ( cytosol ) is transferred to a new tube . The nuclear pellet containing nuclei is washed in lysis buffer , and incubated 5 min on ice . Afterwards the samples are spinned at 13000 rpm 5’ 4°C and nuclear pellet is used for RNAs and proteins extraction . 68 3 . 11 ATP - CONCENTRATION ASSAY To determine levels of ATP released from a suspension of viable somatic cells , the Adenosine 5’triphosphate ( ATP ) bioluminescent somatic cell assay kit ( Sigma Aldrich ) was used . The method evaluates the average ATP concentration per cell . Viable somatic cell ATP is determined as follows : Somatic cell ATP Releasing Reagent 1 ) Intracellular ATP Free ATP Firefly Luciferase 2 ) ATP + Luciferin Adenyl - luciferin + PPi Mg2 + 3 ) Adenyl - luciferin + O 2 → Oxyluciferin + AMP + CO 2 + light When ATP is the limiting reagent , the light emitted is proportional to the ATP present , which is in turn proportional to the number of somatic cells in the sample . The assay uses several solutions . - ATP Assay Mix Dilution Buffer is made dissolving the content of the ATP Assay Mix Dilution Buffer already present in the kit , in 50ml of ultrapure water . - ATP Assay Mix Stock Solution is prepared dissolving the contents of the ATP Assay Mix vial provided with the kit , in 5ml of ultrapure 69 water to generate a stock solution with pH 7 . 8 . This solution must be kept on ice for at least 1 hour before use . - ATP Assay Mix Working Solution is a 25 - fold dilution of ATP Assay Mix Stock solution in 10 ml of ultrapure water . - ATP Standard Stock Solution is prepared by dissolving the ATP Standard vial in 10ml of ultrapure water . - ATP Standard Working Solutions is obtained using serial dilutions of the ATP Standard Stock Solution with ultrapure water . - Somatic Cell ATP Releasing Reagent comes from a 10 - fold dilution in ultrapure water of the Somatic Cell ATP Releasing Reagent present in the kit . Cell samples ( 2 * 10 5 ) are taken for assay directly from a cell culture . To dissolve the solid sample 0 . 2 ml filtered ultrapure water is used . It is important to keep pH at 7 . 8 . 0 . 1 ml of ATP Assay Mix Working Solution is added to a reaction vial and is then vortexed and kept at room temperature for 3 minutes . Here , the endogenous ATP will be hydrolyzed , decreasing the background . To a separate vial containing 0 . 1 ml of Somatic Cell ATP Releasing Reagent , 0 . 05 ml of ultrapure water are added . Then 0 . 05 ml of the cell sample to be assayed are added and , after a quick swirl , 0 . 1 ml are transferred to the reaction vial . The amount of light emitted [ L ( SAM ) ] is immediately measured with a luminometer . The amount of ATP released is determined by running an internal standard . 0 . 1 ml of ATP Assay Mix Working Solution is added to a reaction vial and allowed to stand at room temperature for 3 minutes . To a separate vial containing 0 . 1 ml of Somatic Cell ATP Releasing Reagent , 0 . 05 ml of an appropriate ATP Standard is added together with 0 . 05 ml of cell sample . After a quick swirl , 0 . 1 ml are transferred to the reaction vial and the amount of light emitted [ L ( SAM + IS ) ] 70 is measured with a luminometer . The amount of ATP in the cell sample is calculated by the following equation : ATP ( SAM ) = ( ATP ( IS ) * L ( SAM ) ) / ( L ( SAM + IS ) - L ( SAM ) ) Where ATP ( SAM ) are moles of ATP in the cell sample , ATP ( IS ) are moles ATP in the added internal standard , L ( SAM ) is the light emitted by the cell sample and L ( SAM + IS ) is the light emitted by the cell sample plus the internal standard . 3 . 12 RNA interference Knockdown of JMJD6 was performed using the following protocol : Cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes in Opti - MEM ( Life Technologies ) reduced serum medium ( 10 % FBS ) without antibiotic . 24 hours later , when cells are 60 - 80 % confluent , the cells are washed with 5 - ml 1x PBS ( phosphate buffer solution , Lonza ) and after 10 ml of medium with distinctive composition was added to the cells . In the first sample ( control with no siRNA ) was added the initial medium ( Opti - MEM - 10 % FBS ) . For each sample targeted for transfection either with scrambled or specific siRNAs , the following steps were applied . 50 µl of the lipofectamine RNAi MAX ( Life Technologies ) was dissolved in 1 . 5 ml of Opti - MEM medium . In a separate tube siRNA ( 500 pmol ) was added to 1 . 5 ml of Optimem medium , and after 5 minute added to the tube containing lipofectamine to a final volume of 3 ml . After 5’ the solution is 71 added drop by drop to cells . After 24h from the first transfection , a second round was performed . - After 5h , the cells were seeded at different cell densities and 18 h later cells were harvested for RNA and protein extraction . The efficiency of the silencing procedure is assessed by quantitative real time PCR ( qPCR ) and Western blotting . siRNAs used in my thesis ( commercial ) : Target sequence for Jmjd6 ( Gene ID : 23210 ) supplied by Dharmacon : J - 010363 - 10 : 5’ - GGAGAGCACUCGAGAUGAU - 3’ J - 010363 - 11 : 5’ - GGACCCGGCACAACUACUA - 3’ J - 010363 - 12 : 5’ - GGUAUAGGAUUUUGAAGCA - 3’ J - 010363 - 13 : 5’ - GGAUAACGAUGGCUACUCA - 3’ Non - targeting control siRNA ( Dharmacon ) : 5’ - UGGUUUACAUGUCGACUAA - 3’ 5’ - UGGUUUACAUGUUGUGUGA - 3’ 5’ - UGGUUUACAUGUUUUCUGA - 3’ 5’ - UGGUUUACAUGUUUUCCUA - 3’ 3 . 13 Conditional medium with glucose or glutamine Low density SW480 cells ( 2x10 4 cells / cm 2 ) were seeded in 10 cm dishes in pre - conditioned medium ( CM ) from High Density cells . When required CM was supplemented with glucose ( 2g / l ) , glutamine ( 2mM ) or both . CM derives 72 from high density SW480 cultures in RPMI and 10 % FBS . Medium was taken after 24 h and centrifuged to discard cell debris . 3 . 14 Dimethyl succinate treatment SW480 cells ( 2 , 5 * 10 6 ) were seeded in 10 cm dishes . After 24h cell culture was made 60mM Dimethyl succinate ( Sigma - Aldrick ) . 24h later cells were harvested for RNA and protein extraction . 3 . 15 α - ketoglutarate treatment Cells ( 7 , 5 * 10 6 ) were seeded in 3 cm dishes in medium made 0 , 6mM α - ketoglutarate ( Cayman Chemical ) . After 18h cells were harvested for RNA and protein extraction . 73 4 Results 4 . 1 A complex splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts . SRSF1 is a highly conserved RNA - binding protein with an oncogenic potential and its expression needs to be tightly controlled for normal cell physiology . Post - transcriptional regulation of splicing factors occurs at multiple levels , one of these being alternative splicing . Krainer’s group identified six alternatively spliced SRSF1 transcript Isoforms in HeLa cells , using primers positioned at the end of the first and last exon ( Figure 22A , ref Sun et al . , 2010 ) . The canonical Isoform , Isoform I , being by far the most abundant , encodes the full - length protein , and has a long 3′UTR ( Ge et al . , 1991 ; Krainer et al . , 1991 ) . Isoform II retains the third intron ( Krainer et al . , 1991 ) . A third Isoform differs from Isoform II for a splicing event that removes a large intron ( intron 5 ) in the 5’UTR . Isoforms IV and VI are not listed in the UCSC or ENSEMBL browsers . Isoform IV , is identical to Isoform I except for the splicing of intron 5 . Further processing of Isoform IV with splicing of intron 4 in the 3’ - UTR , results in the production of Isoform V . Isoform III can mature into Isoform VI through skipping of exon 4 ( Figure . 22B , ref Sun et al . , 2010 ) . 74 Figure 22 A ) Scheme of the SRSF1 ( SF2 / ASF ) gene structure . Primers used in RT - PCR analysis are indicated . B ) Six alternative splicing Isoforms were identified by RT - PCR with primers A and B . Their structure , as determined by sequencing , is shown on the right . Spliced introns are indicated by a line . Black rectangles indicated non coding regions while grey rectangles indicate protein coding sequences . We have previously shown that in cultured adenocarcinoma SW480 cells undergo morphological and gene expression changes typical of EMT in response to cell density ( Valacca et al . , 2010 ) . Indeed , low density ( LD ; 2x10 4 cells / cm 2 ) cells display a morphology and express markers typical of mesenchymal cells thus resembling the invasive front of the tumor . On the A B 75 contrary high density cells ( HD ; 5x10 5 cells / cm 2 ) exhibit an epithelial - like phenotype and some features similar to cells in the central part of the tumor ( Valacca et al . , 2010 ; Brabletz et al . , 2001 ) . Under these conditions , the level of SRSF1 appears to be controlled through alternative splicing events in the 3’ - UTR of SRSF1 transcripts that promote the production of a mRNA molecule target of the NMD pathway ( Valacca et al . , 2010 ) . Alternative splicing in the 3’UTR region has been previously visualized in our laboratory by RT - PCR by means of a primer set flanking intron 5 ( Figure 23A and ref Valacca ) . By this approach it was possible to show that LD cells express mainly the Isoforms in which intron 5 is retained , whereas splicing of this intron , resulting in the production of NMD + sensitive transcripts , is predominant in HD cells . 76 Figure 23 A ) Schematic representation of AS in the 3′ UTR of SRSF1 transcripts . The relative position of RT - PCR primers is indicated . B ) Splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in HD and LD cells with primers A and B flanking the intron 5 . 4 . 2 Splicing of SRSF1 transcripts is modulated by cell density As previously mentioned , Sun and colleagues described the existence of six alternative SRSF1 transcripts ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 22 ) . We observed that this program can be modulated by cell density . As shown in Figure 23 A ) LD SW480 cells preferentially express the protein - coding Isoform I , while the remaining splicing products are barely detectable . When seeded at high A B 77 density , a drastic reduction of Isoform I is detectable accompanied by increased expression of the remaining splicing products , with a prevalence of Isoform III . Although slight variations among experiments can occur concerning the relative abundance of the 6 bands , this trend is usually observed . Interestingly , this drastic reprogramming of splicing is not accompanied by a comparable change in SRSF1 protein level indicating that additional control mechanisms operate to maintain the homeostatic level of the protein . At the same time this discrepancy raises a question about the meaning of this complex splicing program and about the function of Isoform III . Figure 24 RT - PCR analysis of the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in SW480 cells . Sw480 cells grown at Low density ( LD ) mainly express Isoform I , while alternative splicing Isoforms , particularly Isoform III , become more abundant at high density ( HD ) . Western Blot analysis on SW480 cells grown at low and high density . Anti - β - ACTIN Anti - SRSF1 I III IV V VI 78 Low density cells display higher SRSF1 ( 33 kDa ) protein levels . β - actin ( 40 kDa ) was used as a loading control . In agreement with Sun et al , cell fractionation experiments indicate that Isoform III is exclusively nuclear while splicing products IV , V and VI , although mainly nuclear , are detectable also in the cytoplasm . Isoforms V and VI ( Figure 25 ) ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) . Krainer and colleagues previously demonstrated that NMD pathway is involved in regulation of SRSF1 . Indeed , when they inhibited NMD with the inhibitor of protein synthesis cycloheximide ( CHX ) , the level of Isoforms V and VI increased substantially ( Sun e t al . , 2010 ) . This data is in agreement with data obtained by Biamonti and colleagues , that showed that CHX increases the level of NMD + transcripts in SW480 cells in LD and HD ( Valacca et al . , 2010 ) . 79 Figure 25 . Cell fractionation was performed to separate nucleus ( Nu ) and cytoplasm ( Cyt ) . RT - PCR was performed on total RNAs and on RNA purified from nuclear and cytosplasmic fractions . RT - PCR for SRSF1 intron 2 and GAPDH was used as control for the nucleus / cytoplasmic fractionation . 4 . 3 Regulation of alternative splicing of SRSF1 transcripts is part of a conserved response to cell density In order to understand whether this modulation of the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts was specific of SW480 cells or could be part of a general response to cell density , we verified its occurrence in different cell types : 1 ) colon adenocarcinoma SW620 cells deriving from a metastatic lymph node GAPD H SRSF1 intron 2 LD HD LD HD LD HD TOT NU CYT SW480 SRSF1 II I III IV V VI 80 in the same patient from whom primary adenocarcinoma SW480 cells were obtained 2 ) epithelial colon adenocarcinoma HT - 29 cells , 3 ) HEK - 293 cells , 4 ) normal human diploid WI - 38 fibroblasts and 5 ) mouse NIH - 3T3 cells . As shown in Figure 26 , in all these lines , cell density induces a drop in the level of Isoform I accompanied by the accumulation of transcripts III to VI . These results point to the existence of a similar regulation of the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in response to cell density in different cells type . Figure 26 . Splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in different cell lines . HT29 LD HD HEK293 HD WI38 HD NIH3T3 HD LD LD LD LD HD SW620 I III IV V VI I III IV V VI 81 4 . 4 Reversible splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in response to cell density So far we have compared two extreme conditions , LD vs HD cells . We decided to investigate whether the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts could be modulated even in response to small differences of cell density and we seeded the cells at progressively higher concentrations . As shown in Figure 27 A , as cell density grows from 0 , 2 to 5 x 10 6 cells / cm 2 a progressive reduction in the abundance of the protein - coding Isoform I takes place which is accompanied by an increase of the other splicing products , with Isoforms III and IV being approximately equimolar . At higher cell densities Isoform III becomes prevalent in parallel with the appearance of Isoform II . Our data indicate that splicing of intron 5 in the 3’UTR is already activated at 1 . 5 x 10 5 cells / cm 2 while retention of intron 3 , which generates Isoforms II and III , becomes more important when density exceeds 2 x 10 6 cells / cm 2 . Activation of the 3’ - ss of intron 4 , to generate Isoforms V ( splicing with the 5’ - ss of intron 4 ) and VI ( splicing with the 5’ - ss of intron 3 and skipping of exon 4 ) , represents the last obligate step to produce transcripts exported to the cytoplasm and eventually degraded by the NMD pathway . Notably , it occurs only after splicing of intron 5 . Thus , generation of Isoforms V and VI involves initial production of splicing products ( Isoforms II , III and IV ) that accumulate in the cell nucleus and characterized by detained introns . To verify if the effect of high density on the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts is reversible SW480 cells were grown at high density for 18 hours , and then diluted at low density and harvested at different time points ( 1 , 6 , 12 and 24 hours ) for RNA analysis . RT - PCR analysis reveals a very rapid change 82 of the splicing profile already one hour after dilution . In particular it is detectable an immediate drop in the intensity of band III with a concomitant appearance of band VI indicating the removal of the detained intron , suggesting that activation of the 3’ss of intron 4 could be one of the first events occurring upon dilution ( figure 27 B ) . At 12 hours the splicing profile typical of low density cells is re - established . Figure 27 Effect of cell density on alternative splicing of SRSF1 transcripts . A ) RT - PCR analysis shows a progressive change of the splicing profile as cell density increases from 0 , 2 to 5 x 10 6 cells / cm 2 . B ) RT - PCR analysis shows the time course modulation in the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts after diluting HD cells to low density . hrs from dilution HD 1 6 12 24 B II I III IV V VI 0 . 2 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 5 x10 6 cells A II I III IV V VI 83 Since Isoforms II , III and IV are exclusively nuclear one can propose a that the production of the six Isoforms derives from two independent splicing programs . One program produces Isoforms I , IV and V while the other gives rise to the remaining Isoforms . The discrimination between the two pathways is the initial retention of intron 3 . Figure 28 The scheme shows the six Isoforms produced through alternative splicing of the SRSF1 pre - mRNA Interestingly , the change in the splicing program of SRSF1 transcripts in response to cell density is accompanied by a progressive reduction in the proliferation rate of SW480 cells . The histogram in Figure 29 indicates that the fraction of replicating cells , identified by BrdU incorporation , drops from more than 70 % at 0 , 2 x 10 5 cells to about 20 % at 2 x 10 5 cells / cm 2 . No further reduction , nor induction of apoptosis , is observed at higher concentrations . SRSF1 pre - mRNA transcript 84 Figure 29 . Histogram BrdU incorporation . 4 . 5 Specific gene expression pathways are affected by cell density In order to gain further insight into this cell system , Biamonti and colleagues performed a gene expression array with total RNAs from LD and HD cells . A total of 1279 and 1432 genes were respectively DOWN - and UP - regulated ( | LogFC | > + 1 ) in HD cells . Bioinformatics analysis performed with the Ingenuity program , of gene differentially expressed in LD and HD cells suggested that biosynthetic pathways are inhibited in HD cells . In agreement with the reduction in the fraction of replicating cells ( figure 29 ) , genes for proteins involved in DNA synthesis , as for instance GINS2 , and cell cycle progression are down - regulated in HD cells , while negative regulators , such as cyclin - G , are up - regulated . Concerning genes for factors involved in pre - mRNA processing , 42 genes ( 35 DOWN and 7 UP ) out of 50 considered by Ingenuity , are affected by cell 85 density . In particular , the expression of the hnRNP A1 gene , which antagonizes the activity of SRSF1 in controlling the splicing profile of the Ron proto - oncogene transcripts , increases ( LogFC = 1 . 5 ) while the level of SRSF1 mRNA is reduced in HD cells ( LogFC = - 1 . 35 ) . Bioinformatics analysis of among genes differentially expressed in LD and HD cells identified by the array analysis , there is the whole set of genes regulated by transcription factor HIF1 ( hypoxia inducible factor ) that includes genes for proteins involved in the uptake of carbon sources ( glucose and glutamine ) and extrusion of catabolites such as lactic acid . Up regulation of these genes in response to high density suggests that HD cells experience an energy stress . Altogether changes in gene expression profiles are compatible with the idea that HD cells , similarly to cells in the central mass of the tumor , are exposed to a stressing inhibitory environment that affects their proliferation and anabolic pathways . This is suggested also by the up - regulation of genes required for the cell adaptation to hypoxia whose activation depends on the hypoxia inducible factor 1 ( HIF1 ) ( Table 1 ) . HIF1 is a heterodimeric transcription factor with HIF1α as the O 2 responsive subunit , and HIF1β ( also known as ARnT ) as the constitutively expressed subunit . HIF1 recognizes similar hypoxia - responsive elements ( HRes ) in the promoters of target genes . Among genes regulated by HIF , there is the gene encoding the vascular endothelial growth factor A ( VEGF - A ) , which stimulates the formation of blood vessels and whose expression increases of about 10 fold in HD cells . 86 Table 1 . Hypoxia is one of the most altered biological process in response to cell density . 87 In order to understand if the activation of the HIF1 pathway in HD cells can be relevant for the switch in the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts , I down - regulated the expression of the ARnT gene , which encodes the constitutive β - subunit of the HIF1 complex ( Figure 30A ) . As expected , ARNT down - regulation reduces the activation of the VEGF - A . Remarkably , it also affects the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in HD cells by reducing the relative abundance of Isoforms III and IV with the contemporary increase in Isoforms I and II . Altogether these experiments indicate that HD cells do suffer a sort of hypoxia even though they are grown in normal oxygen tension . At the same time they suggest a link between the activation of the HIF1 and the splicing program of SRSF1 transcript . In particular , the result in Figure 30 suggests the involvement of the HIF1 pathway in triggering efficient splicing of intron 5 in HD cells . Indeed , the Isoform III and IV that are produced by splicing of intron 5 are reduced after ARNT down - regulation , while the abundance of Isoform I and II , that retain the intron , increases . 88 Figure 30 . A ) Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions from Low and High - density SW480 cells were analyzed in Western blotting with antibodies against HIF1α and A Low High HIF1α αTubulin Low High Nu Cyt hnRNP C1 siHIF1β LD HD LD HD II I III IV V VI siCTR B 89 α - tubulin and hnRNP C1 ( as cells fractionation control ) . B ) RT - PCR and qPCR analysis of total RNAs extracted from cells transfected with siRNAs against HIF1β ( siHIF1β ) or with a control oligo ( siCTR ) . HIF1β downregulation inhibits splicing of intron 5 in the 3’UTR of SRSF1 transcripts and prevents VEGFA induction driven by cell density . 4 . 6 The splicing program of SRSF1 transcripts is modulated by cell metabolism Both tumor hypoxia and dysregulated metabolism are classical features of cancer . Recent analyses have revealed interconnections between oncogenic activation , hypoxia signaling systems and metabolic pathways that are dysregulated in cancer . These studies have demonstrated that metabolic and hypoxia signaling pathways are also directly connected to oncogenic signaling mechanisms at many points . The major regulator of the hypoxia response is the transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor ( HIF ) ( Selak et al . , 2005 ) . Overall these studies have defined multiple means by which HIF is up - regulated in cancer and multiple effects of HIF activation on metabolism in cancer ( Masson & Ratcliffe . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , HIF acts ( directly or indirectly ) on genes encoding a wide range of enzymes that contribute to metabolic dysregulation in cancer . The relationships between hypoxia , the TCA cycle and tumor formation are complex . Bioinformatics analysis of genes differentially expressed in LD and HD cells , has identify that a large set of genes that encode for proteins involved in the uptake of carbon sources ( glucose and glutamine ) and extrusion of catabolites such as lactic acid are up - regulated in HD cell . 90 Indeed , it is plausible that the higher expression of genes involved in the uptake of nutrients and extrusion of toxic catabolites reflects the strategy used by the cells to cope with the decreased content of glucose and glutamine in the medium . In order to prove that this is indeed the case I determined levels of glucose and glutamine and lactic acid in the medium of LD and HD cells after an overnight incubation ( Figure 31 A , B ) . Figure 31 . Concentrations of A ) glucose , B ) glutamine and C ) lactic acid in fresh medium and after 18h of cell growth at Low ( LD ) or high ( HD ) density . LD HD 3 Fresh medium 2 1 0 Glutamine ( mM ) B C LD HD Fresh medium 15 10 5 0 Lactic acid ( mmol / l ) LD HD Fresh medium 200 150 100 50 0 Glucose ( mg / dl ) A 91 Otto Warburg was the first to observe , more than 80 years ago , that tumor cells consume glucose at a surprisingly high rate compared with normal cells , and accumulate a significant amount of lactate rather than oxidizing glucose ( Warburg Otto . , 1956 . , Frezza & Gottlieb . , 2009 ) . Indeed , cancer cells decrease dependence on aerobic respiration and cell metabolism is shifted toward glycolysis even in the presence of oxygen . Glycolysis , as opposed to complete metabolism of glucose during the TCA cycle , provides carbon sources to other key metabolic pathways required for nucleotide , lipid , and amino acid synthesis , building blocks that are essential for the anabolic pathway in highly proliferative cells . This metabolic difference is a distinctive marker of tumor cells that has been exploited in tumor diagnosis . In addition to glucose , increased glutamine uptake is another tumor - specific metabolic alteration ( Vander Heiden et al . , 2009 ; Wise & Thompson . , 2010 ) . Indeed , it was reported that glutamine could fully sustain the oxidative TCA cycle for energy production , even in the absence of glucose ( Le et al . , 2012 ) . The high demand of proliferating tumor cells for glutamine was first described by the American physiologist Harry Eagle in 1950s , who demonstrated that the optimal growth of cultured HeLa cells requires a 10 - to a 100 - fold molar excess of glutamine in culture medium relative to other amino acids ( Eagle , 1955 ) . Glutamine is first converted to glutamate by glutaminase and then deaminated to produce α - KG to enter the TCA . Glutamine also serves as an activator of mTOR1 , which is a central cell growth controller , to promote cell growth . A consequence of switched between aerobic respiration to glycolysis is the drop in the ATP level . Aerobic respiration produces far more ATP molecules , 32 per molecule of glucose , than anaerobic respiration , which produces a mere two . To verify the hypothesis that HD cells prefer glycolysis to aerobic respiration we assessed the ATP concentration in HD and LD cells by means of the bioluminescent ATP - concentration assay . In agreement with 92 our prediction , a 4 . 4 fold drop in the ATP level was detectable in HD ( 1 . 6 * 10 - 15 mol / cell ) vs LD ( 7 * 10 - 15 mol / cell ) . To sum up , HD cells suffer a deprivation of carbon sources that produces a drop in the level of cellular ATP . I wondered whether these aspects could be related to the switch in the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts . To explore this possibility I took advantage of a previous observation made in our laboratory concerning the effect of pre - conditioned medium ( CM ) from HD cells ( Valacca ) . Indeed when LD cells are grown for 18 h in the presence of CM the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts becomes similar to that observed at medium density ( Figure 32 ) with a drop in the level of Isoform I and an increase in other splicing products but without a prevalence of Isoform III . In other word CM activates splicing of intron 5 but fails to induce retention of intron 3 , which is the hallmark of HD cells . We have previously suggested that growth factors in the CM can direct the partial reprogramming in the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts . It is plausible that LD cells fail to acquire a complete HD profile simply because they have no enough carbon sources ( and hence ATP ) . To explore this possibility , I analyzed RNAs from LD cells grown in CM , supplemented with either glucose or glutamine . Surprisingly we noticed a complete different effect of glucose and glutamine . As shown in Figure 32 , glucose partially reverts the effect of CM and promotes the production of Isoform I . On the contrary glutamine induces the massive production of Isoform III . This result points to critical role of glutamine metabolism in this splicing switch . 93 Figure 32 . RT - PCR analysis of total RNAs extracted from LD SW480 cells untreated or grown in pre - conditioned medium ( CM ) from High - density SW480 cells , supplemented with glucose 2g / L A ) or glutamine 2mM B ) . 4 . 7 Role of the TCA cycle intermediary metabolite in the hypoxia pathway The essential role of glutamine for the splicing profile switch from LD to HD cells , prompted us to investigate the connection between glutamine , the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle and HIF1 activation . Indeed , through anaplerotic reactions glutamine is converted first to glutamate by glutaminase and then deaminated to produce α - ketoglutarate ( α - KG , also called oxo - glutarate ) , an intermediate of the TCA cycle ( Figure 33 ) . A LD CM Glucose + + + - - - LD CM Glutamine + + + - - - II I III IV V VI I III IV V VI B 94 Figure 33 Role of the TCA cycle intermediary metabolite α - ketoglutarate and succinate in the hypoxia inducible pathway . Glutamine is converted into α – ketoglutarate . Succinate inhibits the activity of HIF - prolyl hydoxylase enzyme ( PHD ) , which tags HIF - 1a for degradation by VHL and the ubiquitin pathway . Accumulated HIF - 1 α dimerizes with HIF - 1  and translocates to the nucleus to upregulate hypoxia - responsive genes . This may induce Hif1 - alpha stabilization through a process known as pseudo - hypoxia . The level of HIF - 1α is controlled at the post - translational level via hydroxylation and successive ubiquitination that direct protein degradation by the proteasome pathway . Crucial for this process is a group of enzymes called prolyl - 4 - hydroxylases ( PHDs ) or HIF - 1 prolyl hydroxylases ( HPH ) , which belong to a large family of 2 - oxoglutarate - dependent dioxygenases ( 2 - OGDDs ) . These enzymes share the same basic reaction mechanism , in which the substrate is hydroxylated by molecular oxygen in the presence of a 95 divalent metal cofactor ( most commonly Fe 2 ) . In this reaction the α - KG co - substrate is decarboxylated to succinate and CO 2 ( Chowdhury et al . 2011 ; Xu et al . 2011 ) . Succinate has been shown to inhibit several 2 - OGDDs competitively with respect to α - KG . Thus , a higher succinate / α - KG ratio stabilizes the HIF α - subunit leading to pseudo - hypoxia . ( O’Flaherty et al . , 2010 ; Selak et al . , 2005 ) . While these observations clearly place the TCA cycle upstream of the hypoxia response , it is worth underlying that one of the consequences of the hypoxia / pseudo - hypoxia response is a decreased supply of pyruvate flow to the TCA cycle and an increase in glutamine catabolism that feeds the α - ketoglutarate pool ( Vander Heiden et al . , 2009 ) . The TCA cycle and the hypoxia response therefore form a complex regulatory network in which each of the pathways reciprocally affects the other . To understand whether the splicing profile of SRSF 1 transcripts could be modulated through a similar mechanism , we treated HD cells with the α - KG for 18 hr . As shown in the Figure 34 , α KG promotes a splicing profile comparable to that observed in LD cells . In agreement with the fact that α - KG activates OGDD enzymes , including PHD , we observed a functional inhibition of HIF1 activity measured as VEGF - A down - regulation , a HIF1 target whose expression increases in response to cell density . Interestingly , α - KG treatment also inhibits E - cadherin expression , which is normally up - regulated in HD cells . Although the mechanism through which the expression of the E - cadherin gene is controlled by cell density is still poorly understood , collectively these results indicate that in the presence of α - KG HD cells become more similar to cells grown at low density 96 Figure 34 . To understand whether α KG is involved in modulating the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts , HD cells were treated with 0 , 6 mM α KG . A ) RT - PCR and B ) qPCR analysis of total RNAs indicate that α KG treatment promotes a switch in the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts , decreases VEGFA and E - cadherin expression to level similar to those observed in LD cells . To verify whether the α - KG effect is mediated by OGDD activities we performed the reciprocal experiment in which LD cells were grown in the presence of succinate , which is both a substrate for SDH in the mitochondria and a product of PHDs in the cytosol . High levels of succinate antagonize α - I II I I V  KG + - HD A 0 2 4 6 VEGFA F o l d c h a n g e LD HD +  KG HD 0 2 4 6 8 E - CADHERIN HD L D HD +  KG F o l d c h a n g e B 97 KG , inhibit OGDDs including PHD and lead to HIF α stabilization and activation of the HIF complex . We use a dimethyl - succinate that thanks its methyl - groups is cell membrane permeable and is then converted to succinate within the cell through a still poorly defined mechanism . As a preliminary experiment , we treated cells with increasing concentrations of succinate . 24 hours after seeding the cells at low density , succinate was added to the medium and cells were collected 18 hours later . We investigated by RT - PCR the effect of this treatment on the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts ( Figure 35 ) . Figure 35 SRSF1 splicing profile in LD SW480 cells treated with increasing concentrations of dimethyl succinate . As shown in Figure 35 , the splicing profile of treated cells progressively changed toward a pattern similar to that observed in HD cells in which the level of Isoform I declines while with abundance of Isoforms III and VI increases . This observation indicates the ability of succinate to drive a switch typical of high density cells . LD 2mM 5mM 10mM 20mM 40mM 60mM DMS 98 Moreover , DMS up - regulates VEGF - A and E - cadherin genes expression in LD cells ( Figure 36 ) . Thus , DMS and α - KG have opposite effects on cell behavior . While treatment of HD cells with α - KG induces a behavior similar to that observed in LD cells , DMS promotes the acquisition of HD features by LD cells . Figure 36 . Succinate is one intermediate of the Krebs cycle that promotes stabilization of HIF - 1  . To understand whether this compound modulates the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts LD were treated or not with 60 mM dimethyl succinate ( DMS ) for 18h ) . A ) RT - PCR analysis of total RNAs indicate that DMS treatment promotes a splicing profile similar to that detected in HD cells , B ) q - PCR B A I III IV V VI DMS + - LD F o l d c h a n g e VEGF - A LD LD + DMS HD 0 2 4 6 0 2 4 6 F o l d c h a n g e E - CADHERIN HD LD LD + DMS 99 analysis indicates that DMS treatment increases VEGF - A and E - cadherin expression to a level comparable to that observed in HD cells . 4 . 8 Complex II inhibition In the hypothesis that Succinate can modulate the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts one should expect to observe the same effect upon inhibition of the succinate dehydrogenase ( Sdh ) complex or respiratory Complex II that catalyzes the oxidation of succinate to fumarate with the reduction of ubiquinone to ubiquinol . Indeed , Complex II dysfunction leading to accumulation of succinate has been proved to cause HIF - 1α stabilization ( Majmundar et al . , 2010 ) . Decreased Sdh activity should cause an accumulation of succinate that can transit to the cytosol through the dicarboxylate carrier . In the cytoplasm , succinate potentially can inhibit PHD and cause HIF - α stabilization in a process known as a pseudo - hypoxia ( Pollard et al . , 2005 ) . To verify this prediction I treated the cells with the Complex II inhibitor Thenoyltrifluoroacetone ( TTFA ) . As shown in the Figure 37 , upon treatment with TTFA the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in LD cells becomes similar to that of LD cells incubated in the presence of DMS . 100 Figure 37 . A ) RT - PCR analysis of total RNAs indicate that TTFA treatment promotes a switch in the splicing profile similar to cell density B ) q - PCR analysis indicates an increase in VEGF - A and E - cadherin expression similiar to that produced by cell density or by DMS . VEGF - A LD HD LD + DMS LD + TTFA 0 2 4 6 F o l d c h a n g e 0 2 4 6 LD HD LD + DMS LD + TTFA E - CADHERIN F o l d c h a n g e LD LD HD - + I III IV V VI TTFA + - DMS A B 101 4 . 9 JMJD6 : a new regulator for srsf1 splicing ? Our data indicate that succinate promotes the production of Isoform III . At the same time succinate it is known to stabilize HIF1  via pseudo - hypoxia . On the other hand , HIF - 1  down - regulation impacts splicing of intron 5 without affecting the production of Isoform III , i . e . retention of intron 3 . Thus , we wondered whether the effect of high density and succinate on the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts could be mediated by some other factor . The family of OGDDs controlled by α - KG and succinate includes Jmjd6 , an enzyme recently shown to control RNA metabolism , RNA processing and RNA splicing . The expression profile of JMJD6 has been investigated by several groups in different types of cancers ( Poulard et al . , 2016 ) . Using tissue microarrays , Wang and colleagues found that JMJD6 is upregulated in all types of carcinoma including breast , liver , lung , renal , pancreatic , colon , esophageal , rectal and gastric cancers ( Wang et al . , 2014 ) . However , the highest expression was recorded in colon adenocarcinoma , and a negative correlation exists between the level of JMJD6 expression and survival time ( Wang et al . , 2014 ) . Jmjd6 , a jumonji C ( JmjC ) domain - containing protein demethylase and hydroxylase , can catalyze protein demethylation through an oxidative mechanism requiring Fe ( II ) and 2 - oxoglutarate ( 2OG ) as cofactors . A bioinformatics analysis of jmjd6 protein in Hydra vulgaris led to the identification of three nuclear localization signals ( NLS ) , a JmjC domain and a DNA binding domain ( AT - hook domain ) ( Figure 38A ) . In silico analysis also uncovered a high level of homology with FIH - 1 protein ( factor inhibiting HIF ) , which possesses a 2OG - and Fe ( II ) - dependent oxygenase activity ( Cikala et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting that jmjd6 could display a similar oxidative 102 enzymatic activity ( Figure 38B ) and a function in the cellular response to hypoxia . In addition , it has been shown that jmjd6 interacts with and hydroxylates multiple serine / arginine - rich ( SR ) proteins and SR related proteins , all of which are known to function in splicing regulation . Different groups then reported the role of jmjd6 in the regulation of RNA splicing ( Boeckel et al . , 2011 , Heim et al . , 2014 , Palmer et al . , 2016 ) . Jmjd6 protein has been recently shown to interact with splicing factor U2AF65 ; however , very few splicing events in a limited number of genes were attributable to JMJD6 expression ( Webby et al . , 2009 ) . In endothelial cells , alternative splicing of VEGF receptor ( Flt1 ) by U2AF65 promoted endothelial cell migration , and siRNA - mediated knockdown of JMJD6 in endothelial cells led to decreased migration ( Boeckel et al . , 2011 ) . Based on X - ray crystallographic data , it was predicted and shown that apart from its enzymatic activity , jmjd6 protein can bind single - stranded RNA ( Hong et al . , 2010 ) . These diverse findings predict a range of versatile functions for jmjd6 , at the transcriptional , splicing , post - transcriptional , and biochemical levels , impacting embryonic development ( Bose et al . , 2004 ; , Kunisaki et al . , 2004 , Lee et al . , 2012 ) , cell cycle progression ( Wang et al . , 2014 ) , cellular proliferation and motility ( Lee et al . , 2012 ; Chen et al . , 2014 ) and development of various types of cancers . However , very little is known about the role of JMJD6 in cancer and the molecular pathways that may impinge on disease initiation and prognosis . 103 Figure 38 . A ) Schematic representation of jmjd6 structure highlighting the different functional domains of the protein . NLS : Nuclear localization signal , AT - hook domain : DNA binding domain . B ) . Pre - mRNA splicing regulation . Lysine hydroxylation of U2AF65 ( K15 , K276 ) and SR - like proteins ( SR - P ) by jmjd6 regulates alternative splicing . For example , VEGR receptor gene splicing is regulated by U2AF65 hydroxylation ( Poulard et al . , 2016 ) . We decided to test whether jmjd6 could have a role in controlling the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts . To this , we knocked down JMJD6 by small interference RNA ( siRNA ) . JMJD6 down - regulation drastically impacts the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts leading to a reduction in the level of the protein - coding Isoform I with the concomitant an increase in Isoform VI produced through skipping of the last coding exon ( exon 4 ) . Unexpectedly , silencing of JMJD6 also leads to the appearance of an extra band ( Figure 104 39A ) . Sequence analysis proved that this band corresponds to a transcript that retains intron 5 and lacks the fourth exon . As shown in the scheme this molecule could be a precursor of Isoform VI , thus accounting for the higher level of this Isoform upon JMJD6 down - regulation ( figure 39B ) . This result clearly indicates an involvement of jmjd6 in regulating the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts , specifically by preventing skipping of exon 4 and inhibiting splicing of intron 4 . Figure 39 . A ) Silencing JMJD6 and the effect on the splicing profile SRSF1 transcripts . RT - PCR analysis of SRSF1 transcripts . B ) Western blotting analysis of jmjd6 protein in LD cells , in cells transfected with a control siRNA or with siRNA C V VI LD siJMJD6 - siCTR + + - - I * III IV - A JMJD6 LD LD + siCTR LD + siJMJD6 GAPDH B 105 specific for JMJD6 . GAPDH was used as a loading control C ) The star Isoform ( * ) corresponds to a molecule obtained through skipping of exon 4 but still containing intron 5 . Through splicing of intron 5 Isoform star generates Isoform VI . In order to characterize more in detail the property of Isoform III and understand if it may contribute to cell physiology we decided to force its production . In collaboration with Vezzoni’s group , we applied the CRISPR - Cas9 approach to edit the splicing acceptor site of intron 3 of the SRSF1 gene . Vezzoni’s group targeted a genomic sequence within intron 3 of the SRSF1 locus with the following target sequence : 5’GAAAGTTCTGTCTATCCAATAGG - 3’ where the underlined AG is the 3’ - ss of the intron . They selected a clone , called Clone2 , which harbors a 32 bp deletion at the 3’ end of intron 3 , which also removes the 3’ splice site of this intron . Notably , Clone 2 cells have 3 copies of the SRSF1 gene , only one of which mutated . None out of 20 analyzed clones had more than one mutated copy of the gene , as if this condition were not compatible with cell proliferation . On the other hand , because of this arrangement ( two gene copies wild type and 1 mutated ) we expected to observe only a partial modification of the SRSF1 splicing profile . Indeed , the overall picture appears similar to that of wild type cells and Clone 2 cells conserve the splicing switch driven by cell density ( Figure 40 ) , with Isoform I being the main products in LD cells and Isoform III prevalent in HD cells . However , a new Isoform ( Isoform * ) is detectable in Clone 2 . The relative abundance of Isoforms I and * in LD cells is likely to reflect the fact that only one gene out of three is mutated . Sequence analysis showed that Isoform * in Clone 2 is identical to Isoform * detectable after JMJD6 down - regulation , i . e . a molecule produced through skipping of exon 4 and maintaining intron 5 ( see Figure 40 ) . Thus , 106 mutation of the 3’splice site of intron 3 and down - regulation of JMJD6 have the same effect on splicing of SRSF1 transcripts . This result is compatible with a model whereby jmjd6 may have a major role in controlling the usage of the 3 ' splice site of the intron 3 . Figure 40 . RT - PCR analysis of the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts in Clone 2 cells at low and high density LD HD cl . 2 II I * III IV V VI 107 5 Discussion The early steps in carcinoma metastases involves a highly conserved developmental program called epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . Crucial to the metastatic process is the reversibility of EMT , namely the mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition ( MET ) that occurs at the ﬁnal metastatic sites ( Thiery JP 2002 ) . Tumor microenvironment appears to have a crucial role in altering tumor cell behavior by affecting gene expression programs . In particular , a role for post - transcriptional regulation of EMT is increasingly evident ( Brown et al . , 2011 ; Ghigna et al . , 2008 ) . We have used cell density as a model to mimic the EMT process . Colon adenocarcinoma SW480 cells are seeded at Low density ( LD ) to mimic the mesenchymal cells at the metastasizing front of the carcinoma , with protruding lamellipodia and low level of E - cadherin accompanied by nuclear accumulation of ß - catenin , and at High density ( HD ) to simulate the epithelial cells at the center of the tumoral mass , a condition associated with upregulation and a membranous localization of E - cadherin . The general notion is that cells at the core of solid tumors experience hypoxia and nutrient end energetic stress ( Majmundar et al . , 2010 ) Crucial for the ability of cancer cells to mount an adaptive response to hypoxic stress is transcription factor HIF1 . HIF1 is a heterodimeric transcription factor with HIF1α as the O 2 responsive subunit , and HIF1β ( also known as ARnT ) being constitutively expressed . Previous bioinformatics analysis performed in our laboratory revealed that the whole set of genes regulated by HIF1 is activated in response to high density , indicating that HD cells actually suffer a sort of hypoxia although growing under normal oxygen tension . 108 Bioinformatics analysis also suggests that biosynthetic pathways are inhibited by high cell density . This is consistent , for instance , with the observation that the fraction of replicating cells drops in parallel with cell density , even though replicating SW480 cells can be detected even at the highest tested density . Collectively , changes in gene expression profiles are compatible with the idea that HD cells , similarly to cells in the central mass of the tumor , are exposed to a stressing inhibitory environment that affects their proliferation and anabolic pathways . High glucose uptake benefits the cancer cells both in bioenergetics and biosynthesis . In addition to glucose , increased glutamine uptake is another tumor - specific metabolic feature . A consequence of the switch from aerobic respiration to glycolysis is the drop in the ATP level . This is in agreement with the drop ( 4 , 4 fold ) in the ATP level in HD cells vs LD cells . Interestingly , metabolic stress produced by cell density is accompanied by a change in the splicing program of SRSF1 transcripts ( Figure 23B ) . Whereas the protein - coding Isoform I prevails in highly proliferating cells , the abundance of the remaining non - coding and NMD sensitive isoforms progressively increases with cell density and nuclear Isoform III becomes the most abundant SRSF1 transcript in HD cells . Three major questions stem from this splicing reprogramming . The first one concerns the function of this alternative splicing program by which a protein - coding gene produces long non - coding RNAs ( lncRNAs ) . The SRSF1 protein is encoded by Isoform I that is mainly cytoplasmic and contains the entire 3’UTR . Two splicing events in the 3’UTR generate Isoform IV and V : Isoform IV is produced through splicing of intron 5 , the last of the gene , while splicing of introns 4 and 5 is required to produce Isoform V . Both molecules , particularly Isoform IV , are mainly nuclear . 109 Since the 5’ ss of intron 4 is immediately upstream of the natural stop codon , Isoform V can potentially encode a protein that differs from SRSF1 for the last amino acids . However , this RNA molecule is a target of the NMD pathway due to the fact that its STOP codon falls in the penultimate exon . The remaining three Isoforms ( II , III and VI ) are generated through alternative splicing events that involve the last intron in the protein - coding part of the gene , i . e . intron 3 . Isoforms II and III are exclusively nuclear and differ from Isoforms I and IV for retention of intron 3 . Isoform VI is produced through skipping of exon 4 , is exported to the cytoplasm and , similarly to isoform V , is degraded by the NMD pathway . This isoform can potentially encode a protein lacking the entire SR domain , coded by exon 4 , which is involved in protein - protein interaction . However , there are no evidences so far about the expression of this form of SRSF1 protein deleted of the SR domain . Based on a number of considerations we propose that the production of the six molecules involves two independent splicing programs , as schematically depicted in Figure 28 . The first one determines the production of Isoforms I , IV and V while the other generates Isoforms II , III and VI . The discrimination between the two programs is splicing of intron 3 . The observation that this complex program is conserved in evolution from mouse ( NIH - 3T3 cells ) to human seems to suggest a function for all these non - coding RNAs . However , only hypothesis can be presently raised . For instance , one can speculate about a role of nuclear SRSF1 lncRNAs . They may sequester RNA binding proteins in this way modulating alternative splicing of other genes . Alternatively , retention of intron 4 and 3 may be required to establish a pool of nuclear molecules maturated to Isoform V and VI on demand . However , the last two molecules appear to be degraded by the NMD pathway and their coding capacity is questionable . Whatever their 110 function , these splicing products are detectable in all human tissues , although their relative abundance shows tissue specific differences . The second main question concerns the reason why this splicing program is modulated . This may be linked to the possible function of the five non - coding molecules that , as stated above is still hypothetical . Another possibility is that this complex splicing program is only a mechanism to control the level of protein - coding Isoform I . As a matter of fact , SRSF1 protein has been suggested to modulate splicing of its own gene transcripts by producing a sort of feedback control mechanism in which high levels of SRSF1 protein induce the expression of SRSF1 lncRNAs ( Gonzalez et al . , 2015 ) . Moreover , phosphorylation of Sam68 by ERK appear to control splicing of intron 5 and hence the level of Isoforms III to VI ( Valacca et al . , 2010 ) . However , the observation that the reduction of isoform I with the concomitant production of alternative splicing products only modestly influences SRSF1 protein level ( Valacca et al . , 2010 ) seems to argue against this possibility . Interestingly , we have observed that the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts is modulated in response to cell density . Protein - coding Isoform I prevails in sparse low density cells with a mesenchymal morphology and gene expression profile , while nuclear Isoform III is the most abundant species in epithelial - like high density cells . Whether or not this nuclear transcript has a function of its own or simply represents a reservoir for the ensuing production of Isoform VI is still matter of investigation . According to a recent work by Phil Sharp ( Boutz PL et al . , 2015 ) , detained intron , as for instance intron 3 , would identify stable nuclear RNAs , as Isoform III , that are processed on demand to meet the cell needs . Interestingly enough , when HD cells are 111 diluted back to LD the level of Isoform III very rapidly drops with the appearance of isoform VI . The third question concerns the mechanisms and signals controlling alternative splicing of SRSF1 transcripts , which is the main subject of my thesis . As stated above the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts is modulated in response to cell density . Interestingly HD cells suffer metabolic and energetic stress due to exhaustion of carbon sources ( glucose and glutamine ) and activate the hypoxic response as indicated by the stabilization of HIF1  and the up - regulated expression of the whole set of genes controlled by HIF1 ( Table 1 ) . Numerous data in my thesis indicate that this stressing condition directly impacts the SRSF1 splicing program at several levels . First of all , I have found that down - regulation of HIF1  is accompanied by a reduction in the relative abundance of isoforms III and IV with the contemporary increase in isoforms I and II ( Figure 30 ) . Although the molecular details are still to be clarified , the experiment in Figure 30 suggests that HIF1 activity in HD cells is required to promote splicing of intron 5 . The most relevant part of my work concerns the effect of glutamine metabolism and pseudo - hypoxia on splicing of intron 3 and thus in the production of isoforms III and VI . When LD cells are grown in pre - conditioned medium ( CM ) a partial reprogramming of the splicing profile is detectable . However , when CM is supplemented with glutamine , but not with glucose , as carbon source a complete switch occurs with the massive production of Isoform III Glutamine appears to be a crucial player in our experimental system . In addition to affect the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts it is also connected to the tricarboxylic acid cycle and to HIF1 activation . 112 Indeed , through anaplerotic reactions glutamine is converted in α - ketoglutarate ( α - KG , also called oxo - glutarate ) , an intermediate of the TCA cycle . This may induce HIF1 - alpha stabilization through a process known as pseudo - hypoxia . HIF - 1α protein is controlled at the post - translational level via hydroxylation and successive ubiquitination that direct its degradation by the proteasome pathway . Crucial for this process is a group of enzymes called prolyl - 4 - hydroxylases ( PHDs ) or HIF - 1 prolyl hydroxylases ( HPH ) , which belong to a large family of 2 - oxoglutarate - dependent dioxygenases ( 2 - OGDDs ) . These enzymes share the same basic reaction mechanism , in which the substrate is hydroxylated by molecular oxygen in the presence of a divalent metal cofactor ( most commonly Fe + + ) . In this reaction the α - KG co - substrate is decarboxylated to succinate and CO 2 ( Chowdhury et al . 2011 ; Xu et al . 2011 ) . The product of this reaction , namely the succinate molecule , has been shown to inhibit several 2 - OGDDs competitively with respect to α - KG . Thus , a high succinate / α - KG ratio stabilizes the HIF α - subunit leading to pseudo - hypoxia . ( O’Flaherty et al . , 2010 ; Selak et al . , 2005 ) . The family of OGDDs controlled by α - KG and succinate includes JMJD6 , an enzyme recently shown to control RNA metabolism , RNA processing and RNA splicing . My hypothesis that ODGGs play a role in controlling splicing of intron 3 is supported by several experimental data : 1 ) treatment of HD cells with α - KG , by promoting the activity of OGDDs , induces a splicing profile more similar to that observed in LD cells . Moreover this treatment reduces the expression of VEGF - A , a HIF1 target whose activity increases in response to cell density . Interestingly , α - KG treatment also inhibits E - cadherin expression , which is normally up - regulated in HD cells ( Figure 34 ) . 113 2 ) treatment of LD cells with succinate inhibits PHD leading to HIF α stabilization and VEGF - A expression . Moreover , it produces a splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts similar to that observed in HD cells characterized by a drop in the level of Isoform I and by an increase of Isoforms III and VI . This observation indicates the ability of succinate to drive a splicing program typical of high density cells . Finally , succinate induces the up - regulation of the E - cadherin gene ( Figure 36 ) . 3 ) Inhibition of mitochondrial SDH activity by the complex II inhibitor Thenoyltrifluoroacetone ( TTFA ) in LD cells promotes a splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts similar to that observed in HD cells . Inhibition of SDH activity is known to result in succinate accumulation that can transit from mitochondria to the cytosol through the dicarboxylate carrier SLC25A10 . Treatment of LD cells with TTFA makes the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts similar to that of LD cells incubated in the presence of succinate and produces the increased expression of VEGF - A and E - cadherin genes ( Figure 37 ) . The activation of the hypoxia response is a common feature of tumors . OGDD activities appear to have a pivotal role in this phenomenon . The ODGG family includes several members that share the same basic reaction mechanism , in which the substrate is hydroxylated by molecular oxygen in the presence of a divalent metal cofactor ( most commonly Fe + ) and the 2 - oxoglutarate ( 2 - OG ) co - substrate is decarboxylated to succinate and CO2 . These enzymes control gene expression by modulating CpG and histone demethylation . Interestingly , one member of this family is JMJD6 protein Lysil - Arginine demethylase and Lysyl hydroxylase . JMJD6 is homologous to the hypoxia - inducible factor ( HIF ) asparaginyl - hydroxylase , suggesting a function in cellular response to hypoxia . In addition , it has been shown that JMJD6 interacts with and hydroxylates multiple serine / arginine - rich ( SR ) 114 proteins and SR related proteins , including U2AF65 , all of which are known to function in alternative splicing regulation . However , whether JMJD6 is widely involved in alternative splicing and the molecular mechanism underlying JMJD6 - regulated alternative splicing events are still incompletely understood . ( Boeckel et al . , 2011 , Heim et al . , 2014 , Palmer et al . , 2016 ) . I found that JMJD6 down - regulation deeply affects splicing of SRSF1 transcripts in LD cells by promoting skipping of exon 4 and the appearance of a new splicing product ( Isoform * ) that lacks exon 4 and retains intron 5 . Although this result clearly implicates , JMJD6 in the regulation of intron 3 splicing in sparse low - density cells , the splicing profile after JMJD6 down - regulation is different from that observed when JMJD6 activity in LD cells is inhibited by the cell membrane permeable Dimethyl - succinate ( DMS ) . This difference can have several explanations . DMS is known to affect the whole family of 2 - OGDD activities , and other members may contribute to splicing regulation of SRSF1 transcripts . Another possibility is that JMJD6 is part of a multi protein complex that controls splicing of intron 3 . In this scenario , when JMJD6 is active ( low succinate / α - KG ratio ) the complex efficiently recognizes the 3’ss of intron 3 and promotes inclusion of exon 4 . Notably , the list of JMJD6 targets includes a number of RNA binding proteins involved in recognition of 3’ splice sites . When JMJD6 is depleted by siRNAs the complex does not form and the 3’ss is no longer recognized . The outcome is skipping of exon 4 . On the contrary , when cells are treated with DMS ( high succinate / α - KG ratio ) , JMJD6 is inhibited . Under this condition , an inactive complex is formed that stalls the splicing reaction . According to the model in Figure 28 , the 3’ss of intron 3 would have a major role in controlling the choice between inclusion vs skipping of intron 3 and thus in the production of Isoforms II , III and VI . Interestingly , bioinformatic analysis of the SRSF1 gene sequence with the Max Entropy Scan ( MES ) program indicates that this 115 splice site is extremely weak , a condition frequently associated with regulated splice sites . Moreover , deletion of this splice site by the CRISPR - Cas9 approach ( performed in collaboration with Vezzoni ' s group ) results in the production of the same Isoform * detectable upon silencing of JMJD6 . Interestingly , Isoform * is a possible precursor of Isoform VI , whose level actually increases both after JMJD6 down - regulation and after mutation of the 3’splice site . We are presently testing by RNA - Ip experiment whether JMJD6 does interact with SRSF1 transcripts . Altogether my analysis has unveiled an unexpected impact of intermediates of the Krebs cycle on the splicing profile of SRSF1 transcripts , opening a new perspective to analysis of splicing programs . Understanding the effects played by metabolites such as succinate or α - KG on gene expression regulatory networks , including splicing , could provide exciting perspectives for future therapeutic intervention . 116 6 Bibliography  Aguilera A , García - Muse T . R loops : from transcription byproducts to threats to genome stability . Mol Cell . 2012 Apr 27 ; 46 ( 2 ) : 115 - 24 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2012 . 04 . 009 .  Aksaas AK , Eikvar S , Akusjärvi G , Skålhegg BS , Kvissel AK . ( 2011 ) Protein kinase a - dependent phosphorylation of serine 119 in the proto - oncogenic serine / arginine - rich splicing factor 1 modulates its activity as a splicing enhancer protein . Genes Cancer 2 ( 8 ) : 841 - 51 ;  Amrein H , Gorman M , Nothiger R . The sex - determining gene tra - 2 of Drosophila encodes a putative RNA binding protein . Cell . 1988 ; 55 : 1025 – 1035 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 88 ) 90247 - 4 .  Anczuków O , Rosenberg AZ , Akerman M , Das S , Zhan L , Karni R , et al . The splicing - factor SRSF1 regulates apoptosis and proliferation to promote mammary epithelial cell transformation . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 2012 ; 19 : 220 – 28  Arnoux , V . , Nassour , M . , L ' Helgoualc ' h , A . , Hipskind , R . A . , and Savagner , P Erk5 controls slug expression and keratinocyte activation during wound healing . . Mol . Biol . Cell . 2008 ; 19 : 4738 – 4749  Aubol B . E . , Plocinik R . M . , Hagopian J . C . , et al . Partitioning RS domain phosphorylation in an SR protein through the CLK and SRPK protein kinases . Journal of Molecular Biology . 2013 ; 425 ( 16 ) : 2894 – 2909 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2013 . 05 . 013 .  Bardos JI . , Ashcroft M . ( 2002 ) . Hypoxia - inducible factor - 1 and oncogenic signalling . BioEssays 26 : 262 – 269 ;  Baysal BE ( 2007 ) . A recurrent stop - codon mutation in succinate dehydrogenase subunit B gene in normal peripheral blood and childhood T - cell acute leukemia . PLoS One . 2 ( 5 ) : e436 ; 117  Baysal BE , Ferrell RE , Willett - Brozick JE , Lawrence EC , Myssiorek D , Bosch A , van der Mey A , Taschner PE , Rubinstein WS , Myers EN , Richard CW 3rd , Cornelisse CJ , Devilee P , Devlin B . ( 2000 ) Mutations in SDHD , a mitochondrial complex II gene , in hereditary paraganglioma . Science . 287 ( 5454 ) : 848 - 51 ;  Baysal BE , Willett - Brozick JE , Lawrence EC , Drovdlic CM , Savul SA , McLeod DR , Yee HA , Brackmann DE , Slattery WH 3rd , Myers EN , Ferrell RE , Rubinstein WS . ( 2002 ) . Prevalence of SDHB , SDHC , and SDHD germline mutations in clinic patients with head and neck paragangliomas . J Med Genet . 39 ( 3 ) : 178 - 83 ;  Berget SM , C . Moore , P . A . Sharp Spliced segments at the 5′ terminus of adenovirus 2 late mRNA Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 74 ( 1977 ) , pp . 3171 – 3175  Berget SM . Exon recognition in vertebrate splicing . J Biol Chem . 1995 ; 270 : 2411 – 2414 .  Berglund JA , Chua K , Abovich N , Reed R , Rosbash M ( 1997 ) . The Splicing Factor BBP Interacts Specifically with the Pre - mRNA Branchpoint Sequence UACUAAC . Cell 89 ( 5 ) : 781 - 787 ;  Bertout JA , Patel SA , Simon MC . ( 2008 ) . The impact of O2 availability on human cancer . Nature Reviews Cancer . 8 ( 12 ) : 967 – 975 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc2540 ;  Biamonti G , Bonomi S , Gallo S , Ghigna C ( 2012 ) . Making alternative splicing decisions during epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 69 ( 15 ) : 2515 - 26 ;  Biamonti G , Catillo M , Pignataro D , Montecucco A , Ghigna C . ( 2014 ) . The alternative splicing side of cancer . Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology . 32 : 30 - 6 ;  Black DL ( 2003 ) . Mechanisms of alternative pre - messenger RNA splicing . Annual review of biochemistry 72 : 291 - 336 ; 118  Blanchette M 1 , Green RE , MacArthur S , Brooks AN , Brenner SE , Eisen MB , Rio DC . Genome - wide analysis of alternative pre - mRNA splicing and RNA - binding specificities of the Drosophila hnRNP A / B family members . Mol Cell . 2009 Feb 27 ; 33 ( 4 ) : 438 - 49 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 01 . 022 .  Blanco Fj , Bernabéu C . ( 2012 ) . The Splicing factor SRSF1 as a Marcker for Endothelial Senescence . Frontiers in Physiology 3 : 54 ;  Blencowe BJ , Bowman JA , McCracken S , Rosonina E . SR - related proteins and the processing of messenger RNA precursors . Biochem Cell Biol . 1999 ; 77 : 277 – 291 . doi : 10 . 1139 / bcb - 77 - 4 - 277 .  Blencowe BJ . ( 2000 ) . Exonic splicing enhancers : mechanism of action , diversity and role in human genetic diseases . Trends Biochem Sci . 25 : 106 – 10 ;  Boeckel JN , Guarani V , Koyanagi M , Roexe T , Lengeling A , Schermuly RT , Gellert P , Braun T , Zeiher A , Dimmeler S . ( 2011 ) . Jumonji domain - containing protein 6 ( Jmjd6 ) is required for angiogenic sprouting and regulates splicing of VEGF - receptor 1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 108 ( 8 ) : 3276 – 3281 ;  Boggs RT , Gregor P , Idriss S , Belote JM , McKeown M . Regulation of sexual differentiation in D . melanogaster via alternative splicing of RNA from the transformer gene . Cell . 1987 ; 50 : 739 – 747 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 87 ) 90332 - 1 .  Bose J . , Gruber A . D . , Helming L . , Schiebe S . , Wegener I . , Hafner M . , Beales M . , Kontgen F . , Lengeling ( 2004 ) A . The phosphatidylserine receptor has essential functions during embryogenesis but not in apoptotic cell removal . J . Biol . 2004 ; 3 : 15  Bourgeois CF , Lejeune F , Stevenin J . Broad specificity of SR ( serine / arginine ) proteins in the regulation of alternative splicing of pre - messenger RNA . Prog . Nucleic Acid Res . Mol . Biol . 2004 ; 78 : 37 – 88 . 119  Boutz PL , Bhutkar A , Sharp PA . Detained introns are a novel , widespread class of post - transcriptionally spliced introns . Genes Dev . 2015 Jan 1 ; 29 ( 1 ) : 63 - 80 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 247361 . 114  Braunschweig U , Gueroussov S , Plocik AM , Graveley BR , Blencowe BJ . 2013 . Dynamic integration of splicing within gene regulatory pathways . Cell152 : 1252 – 69  Brière JJ 1 , Favier J , El Ghouzzi V , Djouadi F , Bénit P , Gimenez AP , Rustin P . Succinate dehydrogenase deficiency in human . Cell Mol Life Sci . 2005 Oct ; 62 ( 19 - 20 ) : 2317 - 24  Brody E , Abelson J ( 1985 ) The “spliceosome” : yeast pre - messenger RNA associates with a 40S complex in a splicing - dependent reaction . Science 228 : 963 – 967  Brown RL , Reinke LM , Damerow MS , Perez D , Chodosh LA , Yang J , Cheng C ( 2011 ) CD44 splice Isoform switching in human and mouse epithelium is essential for epithelial - mesenchymal transition and breast cancer progression . J Clin Invest 121 : 1064 – 1074  Bruick RK , McKnight SL . A conserved family of prolyl - 4 - hydroxylases that modify HIF . Science . 2001 ; 294 : 1337 – 1340 .  Burge , C . B . , Padgett , R . A . & Sharp , P . A . Evolutionary fates and origins of U12 - type introns . Mol . Cell 2 , 773 – 785 ( 1998 ) . A genomic database analysis identified 56 different genes containing U12 - type introns in various eukaryotic taxa and detected switching of AT - AC to GT - AG termini in U12 - type introns , as well as conversion of U12 - type to U2 - type introns in homologous genes . A fission / fusion model for the evolutionary origin of the two different splicing systems was proposed .  Burnichon N 1 , Brière JJ , Libé R , Vescovo L , Rivière J , Tissier F , Jouanno E , Jeunemaitre X , Bénit P , Tzagoloff A , Rustin P , Bertherat J , Favier J , Gimenez - Roqueplo AP . SDHA is a tumor suppressor gene causing 120 paraganglioma . Hum Mol Genet . 2010 Aug 1 ; 19 ( 15 ) : 3011 - 20 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddq206 .  Busch A , Hertel KJ . ( 2012 ) . Evolution of SR protein and hnRNP splicing regulatory factors . Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA . ( 1 ) : 1 - 12  Butcher SE , Brow DA ( 2005 ) Towards understanding the catalytic core structure of the spliceosome . Biochem Soc Trans 33 : 447 – 449  Caceres J . F . , Misteli T . , Screaton G . R . , Spector D . L . , Krainer A . R . ( 1997 ) Role of the modular domains of SR proteins in subnuclear localization and alternative splicing specificity . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 225 – 238 .  Cáceres , J . F . and Krainer , A . R . ( 1997 ) Mammalian premRNA splicing factors . In Eukaryotic mRNA Processing ( Krainer , A . R . , ed . ) , pp . 174 – 212 , Oxford University Press  Caputi M , Zahler AM . Determination of the RNA binding specificity of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein ( hnRNP ) H / H′ / F / 2H9 family . J Biol Chem . 2001 ; 276 : 43850 – 43859 .  Castle JC , Zhang C , Shah JK , Kulkarni AV , Kalsotra A , Cooper TA , Johnson JM . ( 2008 ) Expression of 24 , 426 human alternative splicing events and predicted cis regulation in 48 tissues and cell lines . Nature genetics 40 ( 12 ) : 1416 - 25  Chabot , B . ( 1996 ) Directing alternative splicing : cast and scenarios . Trends Genet . 12 , 472 – 478  Chambers AF , Groom AC , MacDonald IC . Dissemination and growth of cancer cells in metastatic sites . Nat Rev Cancer 2002 ; 2 : 563 – 72 .  Chen CF , Feng X , Liao HY , Jin WJ , Zhang J , Wang Y , Gong LL , Liu JJ , Yuan XH , Zhao BB , Zhang D , Chen GF , Wan Y , Guo J , Yan HP , He YW . Regulation of T cell proliferation by JMJD6 and PDGF - BB during chronic hepatitis B infection Scientific Report 4 : 6359 .  Chen M , Manley JL . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation : insights from molecular and genomics approaches . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 ( 11 ) : 741 – 754 121  Chou T . B . , Zachar Z . , Bingham P . M . ( 1987 ) Developmental expression of a regulatory gene is programmed at the level of splicing . EMBO J . 6 : 4095 – 4104 .  Cikala M , Alexandrova O , David CN , Pröschel M , Stiening B , Cramer P , Böttger A . ( 2004 ) The phosphatidylserine receptor from Hydra is a nuclear protein with potential Fe ( II ) dependent oxygenase activity . BMC Cell Biol . 11 ; 5 : 26 .  Colwill K 1 , Pawson T , Andrews B , Prasad J , Manley JL , Bell JC , Duncan PI . ( 1996 ) . The Clk / Sty protein kinase phosphorylates SR splicing factors and regulates their intranuclear distribution . EMBO J . 15 : 265 – 75 .  Costa A , Scholer - Dahirel A , and Mechta - Grigoriou F . The role of reactive oxygen species and metabolism on cancer cells and their microenvironment . Semin Cancer Biol 25 : 23 – 32 , 2014  Crespo JL 1 , Powers T , Fowler B , Hall MN . ( 2002 ) . The TOR - controlled transcription activators GLN3 , RTG1 , and RTG3 are regulated in response to intracellular levels of glutamine . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2002 ; 99 : 6784 – 6789  Dahia PL 1 , Ross KN , Wright ME , Hayashida CY , Santagata S , Barontini M , Kung AL , Sanso G , Powers JF , Tischler AS , Hodin R , Heitritter S , Moore F , Dluhy R , Sosa JA , Ocal IT , Benn DE , Marsh DJ , Robinson BG , Schneider K , Garber J , Arum SM , Korbonits M , Grossman A , Pigny P , Toledo SP , Nosé V , Li C , Stiles CD . A HIF1alpha regulatory loop links hypoxia and mitochondrial signals in ph eochromocytomas . PLoS Genet . 2005 Jul ; 1 ( 1 ) : 72 - 80 . Epub 2005 Jul 25 .  Das & Krainer ( 2014 ) . Emerging functions of SRSF1 , splicing factor and oncoprotein , in RNA metabolism and cancer . Mol Cancer Res 12 ( 9 ) : 1195 – 1204 ;  Das S , Anczukow O , Akerman M , Krainer AR : Oncogenic splicing factor SRSF1 is a critical transcriptional target of MYC . Cell reports 2012 , 1 ( 2 ) : 110 - 117 . 122  De Conti L , Baralle M , Buratti E . Exon and intron definition in pre - mRNA splicing . Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA . 2013 ; 4 : 49 – 60  DeBerardinis RJ , Cheng T . Q’s next : the diverse functions of glutamine in metabolism , cell biology and cancer . Oncogene . 2009 ; 29 : 313 .  Del Gatto - Konczak F 1 , Olive M , Gesnel MC , Breathnach R . Mol Cell Biol . 1999 Jan ; 19 ( 1 ) : 251 - 60 . hnRNP A1 recruited to an exon in vivo can function as an exon splicing silencer .  Denko NC . ( 2008 ) Hypoxia , HIF1 and glucose metabolism in the solid tumour . Nature Reviews Cancer 8 , 705 - 713  Dietrich , R . C . , Incorvaia , R . & Padgett , R . A . Terminal intron dinucleotide sequences do not distinguish between U2 - and U12 - dependent introns . Mol . Cell 1 , 151 – 160 ( 1997 ) .  Donald Voet JGV . Biochemistry . John Wiley & Sons , Inc ; 1995 .  Donev R 1 , Newall A , Thome J , Sheer D . A role for SC35 and hnRNPA1 in the determination of amyloid precursor protein Isoforms . Mol Psychiatry . 2007 Jul ; 12 ( 7 ) : 681 - 90 . Epub 2007 Mar 13  Dow LE , Kauffman JS , Caddy J , Zarbalis K , Peterson AS , Jane SM , Russell SM , Humbert PO . The tumour - suppressor Scribble dictates cell polarity during directed epithelial migration : regulation of Rho GTPase recruitment to the leading edge . Oncogene . 2007 ; 26 : 2272 – 82  Dredge BK , Stefani G , Engelhard CC , Darnell RB : Nova autoregulation reveals dual functions in neuronal splicing . The EMBO journal 2005 , 24 ( 8 ) : 1608 - 1620 .  Dressler GR . The cellular basis of kidney development . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 2006 ; 22 : 509 – 29 . [ PubMed : 16822174  Eagle H . Nutrition needs of mammalian cells in tissue culture . Science . 1955 ; 122 : 501 – 514 123  Eagle H . The minimum vitamin requirements of the L and HeLa cells in tissue culture , the production of specific vitamin deficiencies , and their cure . J Exp Med . 1955 ; 102 : 595 – 600 .  Elliott K 1 , Sakamuro D , Basu A , Du W , Wunner W , Staller P , Gaubatz S , Zhang H , Prochownik E , Eilers M , Prendergast GC . Bin1 functionally interacts with Myc and inhibits cell proliferation via multiple mechanisms . Oncogene . 1999 Jun 17 ; 18 ( 24 ) : 3564 - 73 .  Eperon IC 1 , Makarova OV , Mayeda A , Munroe SH , Cáceres JF , Hayward DG , Krainer AR . Selection of alternative 5 ' splice sites : role of U1 snRNP and models for the antagonistic effects of SF2 / ASF and hnRNP A1 . Mol Cell Biol . 2000 Nov ; 20 ( 22 ) : 8303 - 18 .  Erkelenz S , Mueller WF , Evans MS , Busch A , Schoneweis K , Hertel KJ , Schaal H . ( 2013 ) . Position dependent splicing activation and repression by SR and hnRNP proteins rely on common mechanisms . RNA 19 : 96 – 102  Esquela - Kerscher A , Slack FJ . Oncomirs—microRNAs with a role in cancer . Nat Rev Cancer . 2006 ; 6 : 259 – 269  Fredericks A M , , Cygan K J , Brown A M , Fairbrother W G ( 2015 ) RNA - Binding Proteins : Splicing Factors and Disease . Biomolecules 5 , 893 – 909 ;  Frezza C , Gottlieb E . Mitochondria in cancer : not just innocent bystanders . Semin Cancer Biol . 2009 ; 19 : 4 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcancer . 2008 . 11 . 008 .  Fu X . D . , Ares M . , Jr Context - dependent control of alternative splicing by RNA - binding proteins . Nat Rev Genet . 2014 ; 15 : 689 – 701 .  Fu XD . Towards a splicing code . Cell . 2004 ; 119 : 736 – 738 .  Fu Y , Huang B , Shi Z , Han J , Wang Y , Huangfu J , Wu W . SRSF1 and SRSF9 RNA binding proteins promote Wnt signalling - mediated tumorigenesis by enhancing β - catenin biosynthesis . EMBO Mol Med . 2013 ; 5 : 737 – 50 . 124  Fu X . D . ( 1995 ) The superfamily of arginine / serine - rich splicing factors . RNA 1 : 663 – 680 .  Fu X . D . , Maniatis T . ( 1990 ) Factor required for mammalian spliceosome assembly is localized to discrete regions in the nucleus . Nature 343 : 437 – 441 .  Gallego‑Paez L . M . , Bordone M . C . , Leote A . C . , Saraiva‑Agostinho N . , Ascensão‑Ferreira M . , Barbosa‑Morais N . L . ( 2017 ) . Alternative splicing : the pledge , the turn , and the prestige . Human Genetics pp 1 – 28  Ge H , Manley JL ( 1990 ) . A protein factor , ASF , controls cell - specific alternative splicing of SV40 early pre - mRNA in vitro . Cell , 62 ( 1 ) : 25 - 34  Ge K 1 , DuHadaway J , Du W , Herlyn M , Rodeck U , Prendergast GC . Mechanism for elimination of a tumor suppressor : aberrant splicing of a brain - specific exon causes loss of function of Bin1 in melanoma . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1999 Aug 17 ; 96 ( 17 ) : 9689 - 94 .  Ge H . , Zuo P . , Manley J . L . ( 1991 ) Primary structure of the human splicing factor ASF reveals similarities withDrosophila regulators . Cell 66 : 373 – 382  Ghigna C , Valacca C , Biamonti G ( 2008 ) Alternative splicing and tumor progression . Curr Genomics 9 : 556 – 570  Ghigna C 1 , Giordano S , Shen H , Benvenuto F , Castiglioni F , Comoglio PM , Green MR , Riva S , Biamonti G . Cell motility is controlled by SF2 / ASF through alternative splicing of the Ron protooncogene . Mol Cell . 2005 ; 20 : 881 – 90 .  Gilbert Walter ( 1978 ) . Why genes in pieces ? Nature 271 : 501 .  Gonçalves V , Jordan P . ( 2015 ) Posttranscriptional regulation of splicing factor SRSF1 and its role in cancer cell biology . BioMed Research International 2015 : 287048  Gonçalves V 1 , Jordan P 1 . Posttranscriptional Regulation of Splicing Factor SRSF1 and Its Role in Cancer Cell Biology . Biomed Res Int . 2015 ; 2015 : 287048 . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2015 / 287048 . Epub 2015 Jul 26 . 125  Gonzalez I , Munita R , Agirre E , Dittmer T . A , Gysling K , Misteli T , Luco RF . ( 2015 ) A lncRNA regulates alternative splicing via establishment of a splicing - specific chromatin signature . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 22 , 370 – 376 PMID : 25849144 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 3005  Graveley B . R . , Hertel K . J . , Maniatis T . ( 2001 ) The role of U2AF35 and U2AF65 in enhancer - dependent splicing . RNA 7 : 806 – 818 .  Gui JF , Lane WS , Fu XD . ( 1994 ) A serine kinase regulates intracellular localization of splicing factors in the cell cycle . Nature . 369 : 678 – 82 .  Gupta , S . et al . ( 2004a ) Genome wide identification and classification of alternative splicing based on EST data . Bioinformatics , 20 , 2579 - 2585 .  Guzy RD , et al . Mitochondrial complex III is required for hypoxia - induced ROS production and cellular oxygen sensing . Cell Metab . 2005 ; 1 : 401 – 408 . This study demonstrated the importance of mitochondrial complex III in hypoxia - induced ROS generation that controls HIF1α stability .  Guzy RD 1 , Sharma B , Bell E , Chandel NS , Schumacker PT . Loss of the SdhB , but Not the SdhA , subunit of complex II triggers reactive oxygen species - dependent hypoxia - inducible factor activation and tumorigenesis . Mol Cell Biol . 2008 Jan ; 28 ( 2 ) : 718 - 31 . Epub 2007 Oct 29 .  Hall , S . L . & Padgett , R . A . Conserved sequences in a class of rare eukaryotic nuclear introns with non - consensus splice sites . J . Mol . Biol . 239 , 357 – 365 ( 1994 ) . The first proposal that a distinct spliceosome might excise a variant class of pre - mRNA introns , the splice - site sequences of which diverge from the established consensus . The participation of low - abundance snRNAs U11 and U12 was suggested on the basis of their complementarity to common sequences at the 5′ end and putative branch point of four of the new introns .  Han J . , Ding J . H . , Byeon C . W . , Kim J . H . , Hertel K . J . , Jeong S . , Fu X . D . SR proteins induce alternative exon skipping through their activities on the flanking constitutive exons . Mol Cell Biol . 2011a ; 31 : 793 – 802 126  Hao HX , Khalimonchuk O , Schraders M , Dephoure N , Bayley JP , Kunst H , Devilee P , Cremers CW , Schiffman JD , Bentz BG , Gygi SP , Winge DR , Kremer H , Rutter J . SDH5 , a gene required for flavination of succinate dehydrogenase , is mutated in paraganglioma . Science . 2009 Aug 28 ; 325 ( 5944 ) : 1139 - 42 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1175689  He L , Hannon GJ . MicroRNAs : small RNAs with a big role in gene regulation . Nat Rev Genet . 2004 ; 5 : 522 – 31 .  He L , He X , Lim LP , de Stanchina E , Xuan Z , Liang Y , Xue W , Zender L , Magnus J , Ridzon D , et al . A microRNA component of the p53 tumour suppressor network . Nature . 2007 ; 447 : 1130 – 1134 .  Heim A , Grimm C , Müller U , Häußler S , Mackeen MM , Merl J , Hauck SM , Kessler BM , Schofield CJ , Wolf A , Böttger A . Jumonji domain containing protein 6 ( Jmjd6 ) modulates splicing and specifically interacts with arginine - serine - rich ( RS ) domains of SR - and SR - like proteins . Nucleic Acids Res . 2014 ; 42 ( 12 ) : 7833 – 7850 .  Hewitson KS , Lienard BM , McDonough MA , Clifton IJ , Butler D , Soares AS , Oldham NJ , McNeill LA , Schofield CJ . Structural and mechanistic studies on the inhibition of the hypoxia - inducible transcription factor hydroxylases by tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates . J Biol Chem . 2007 ; 282 : 3293 – 3301 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M608337200 .  Hillman R . T . , Green R . E . , Brenner S . E . 2004 . An unappreciated role for RNA surveillance . Genome Biol . 5 : R8 10 . 1186 / gb - 2004 - 5 - 2 - r8  Hong X , Zang J , White J , Wang C , Pan CH , Zhao R , Murphy RC , Dai S , Henson P , Kappler JW , Hagman J , Zhang G . Interaction of JMJD6 with single - stranded RNA . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2010 ; 107 : 14568 – 14572 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1008832107 .  Hoskins AA and Moore MJ : The spliceosome : a flexible , reversible macromolecular machine . Trends Biochem Sci 37 : 179 - 188 , 2012 . 127  Howard JM , Sanford JR : The RNAissance family : SR proteins as multifaceted regulators of gene expression . Wiley interdisciplinary reviews RNA 2015 , 6 ( 1 ) : 93 - 110 .  Hui J 1 , Hung LH , Heiner M , Schreiner S , Neumüller N , Reither G , Haas SA , Bindereif A . Intronic CA - repeat and CA - rich elements : a new class of regulators of mammalian alternative splicing . EMBO J . 2005 Jun 1 ; 24 ( 11 ) : 1988 - 98 . Epub 2005 May 12 .  Hunt TK , Aslam RS , Beckert S , Wagner S , Ghani QP , Hussain MZ , Roy S , Sen CK . Aerobically derived lactate stimulates revascularization and tissue repair via redox mechanisms . Antioxid Redox Signal . 2007 ; 9 : 1115 – 1124 . doi : 10 . 1089 / ars . 2007 . 1674 .  Isken O . , Maquat L . E . 2008 . The multiple lives of NMD factors : balancing roles in gene and genome regulation . Nat . Rev . Genet . 9 : 699 – 712 10 . 1038 / nrg2402  Izquierdo JM , Majos N , Bonnal S , Martinez C , Castelo R , Guigo R , Bilbao D , Valcarcel J : Regulation of Fas alternative splicing by antagonistic effects of TIA - 1 and PTB on exon definition . Molecular cell 2005 , 19 ( 4 ) : 475 - 484 .  Jaakkola P , Mole DR , Tian YM , Wilson MI , Gielbert J , Gaskell SJ , von Kriegsheim A , Hebestreit HF , Mukherji M , Schofield CJ , Maxwell PH , Pugh CW , Ratcliffe PJ . Targeting of HIF - alpha to the von Hippel - Lindau ubiquitylation complex by O2 - regulated prolyl hydroxylation . Science . 2001 ; 292 : 468 – 472  Jackson , I . J . A reappraisal of non - consensus mRNA splice sites . Nucleic Acids Res . 19 , 3795 – 3798 ( 1991 )  Jeong JW 1 , Bae MK , Ahn MY , Kim SH , Sohn TK , Bae MH , Yoo MA , Song EJ , Lee KJ , Kim KW . ( 2002 ) . Regulation and destabilization of HIF - 1alpha by ARD1 - mediated acetylation . Cell 111 ( 5 ) : 709 - 20 . 128  Jiang , B . H . , Semenza , G . L . , Bauer , C . & Marti , H . H . Hypoxia - inducible factor 1 levels vary exponentially over a physiologically relevant range of O2 tension . Am . J . Physiol . 271 , C1172 – C1180 ( 1996 )  Kalluri R , Neilson EG : Epithelial - mesenchymal transition and its implications for fibrosis . J Clin Invest 2003 , 112 ( 12 ) : 1776 - 1784 .  Kan , Z . , States , D . and Gish , W . ( 2002 ) Selecting for functional alternative splices in ESTs . Genome Res . , 12 , 1837 - 1845 .  Karni R , de Stanchina E , Lowe SW , Sinha R , Mu D , Krainer AR . The gene encoding the splicing factor SF2 / ASF is a proto - oncogene . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 2007 ; 14 : 185 – 93 .  Kent OA , Ritchie DB , Macmillan AM : Characterization of a U2AF - independent commitment complex ( E ' ) in the mammalian spliceosome assembly pathway . Molecular and cellular biology 2005 , 25 ( 1 ) : 233 - 240 .  Kim SG 1 , Hoffman GR , Poulogiannis G , Buel GR , Jang YJ , Lee KW , Kim BY , Erikson RL , Cantley LC , Choo AY , Blenis J . Metabolic stress controls mTORC1 lysosomal localization and dimerization by regulating the TTT - RUVBL1 / 2 complex . Mol . Cell 49 , 172 – 185 ( 2013 ) .  Kim , W . Y . , and W . G . Kaelin . 2004 . Role of VHL gene mutation in human cancer . J . Clin . Oncol . 22 : 4991 – 5004  Kohtz JD 1 , Jamison SF , Will CL , Zuo P , Lührmann R , Garcia - Blanco MA , Manley JL . ( 1994 ) . Protein - protein interactions and 5 ' - splice - site recognition in mammalian mRNA precursors . Nature 368 ( 6467 ) : 119 - 24  Koivunen P , Hirsila M , Remes AM , Hassinen IE , Kivirikko KI , Myllyharju J . Inhibition of hypoxia - inducible factor ( HIF ) hydroxylases by citric acid cycle intermediates : possible links between cell metabolism and stabilization of HIF . J Biol Chem . 2007 ; 282 : 4524 – 4532 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M610415200 .  Korpershoek E 1 , Favier J , Gaal J , Burnichon N , van Gessel B , Oudijk L , Badoual C , Gadessaud N , Venisse A , Bayley JP , van Dooren MF , de Herder WW , Tissier F , Plouin PF , van Nederveen FH , Dinjens 129 WN , Gimenez - Roqueplo AP , de Krijger RR . SDHA immunohistochemistry detects germline SDHA gene mutations in apparently sporadic paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas . J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2011 Sep ; 96 ( 9 ) : E1472 - 6 . doi : 10 . 1210 / jc . 2011 - 1043  Kovacević Z . ( 1971 ) . The pathway of glutamine and glutamate oxidation in isolated mitochondria from mammalian cells . Biochem J . 1971 ; 125 : 757 – 763  Krainer AR , Conway GC , Kozak D . Purification and characterization of pre - mRNA splicing factor SF2 from HeLa cells . Genes Dev . 1990 ; 4 : 1158 – 71  Krainer AR , Mayeda A , Kozak D , Binns G ( 1991 ) . Functional expression of cloned human splicing factor SF2 : homology to RNA - binding proteins , U1 70K , and Drosophila splicing regulators . Cell . 66 : 383 – 94  Kunisaki Y . , Masuko S . , Noda M . , Inayoshi A . , Sanui T . , Harada M . , Sasazuki T . , Fukui Y . Defective fetal liver erythropoiesis and T lymphopoiesis in mice lacking the phosphatidylserine receptor . Blood . 2004 ; 103 : 3362 – 3364 .  Labourier E 1 , Rossi F , Gallouzi IE , Allemand E , Divita G , Tazi J . Interaction between the N - terminal domain of human DNA topoisomerase I and the arginine - serine domain of its substrate determines phosphorylation of SF2 / ASF splicing factor . Nucleic Acids Res . 1998 Jun 15 ; 26 ( 12 ) : 2955 - 62 .  Lai M . C . , Lin R . I . , Huang S . Y . , Tsai C . W . , Tarn W . Y . ( 2000 ) A human importin - β family protein , transportin - SR2 , interacts with the phosphorylated RS domain of SR proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 7950 – 7957 .  Lareau L . F . , Inada M . , Green R . E . , Wengrod J . C . , Brenner S . E . 2007 . Unproductive splicing of SR genes associated with highly conserved and ultraconserved DNA elements . Nature . 446 : 926 – 929 10 . 1038 / nature05676  Lee Y , Rio DC . ( 2015 ) . Mechanisms and Regulation of Alternative Pre - mRNA Splicing . Annual Review of Biochemistry 84 : 291 - 323 130  Lee Y . F . , Miller L . D . , Chan X . B . , Black M . A . , Pang B . , Ong C . W . , Salto - Tellez M . , Liu E . T . , Desai K . V . JMJD6 is a driver of cellular proliferation and motility and a marker of poor prognosis in breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res : BCR . 2012 ; 14 : R85  Lee YS , Dutta A . MicroRNAs in cancer . Annu Rev Pathol . 2009 ; 4 : 199 – 227 .  Li X , Manley JL . Inactivation of the SR protein splicing factor ASF / SF2 results in genomic instability . Cell . 2005 ; 122 : 365 – 78  Li Y 1 , Yuan Y 2 . Alternative RNA splicing and gastric cancer . Mutat Res . 2017 Jul ; 773 : 263 - 273 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mrrev . 2016 . 07 . 011 . Epub 2016 Jul 2  Lim , L . P . , and Burge , C . B . ( 2001 ) . A computational analysis of sequence features involved in recognition of short introns . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 11193 – 11198 .  Lin C , McGough R , Aswad B , Block JA , Terek R : Hypoxia induces HIF - 1alpha and VEGF expression in chondrosarcoma cells and chondrocytes . Journal of orthopaedic research : official publication of the Orthopaedic Research Society 2004 , 22 ( 6 ) : 1175 - 1181  Lin , C . J . , Cencic , R . , Mills , J . R . , Robert , F . & Pelletier , J . c - Myc and eIF4F are components of a feedforward loop that links transcription and translation . Cancer Res . 68 , 5326 – 5334 ( 2008 ) .  Lionel Larue 1 and Alfonso Bellacosa . Epithelial – mesenchymal transition in development and cancer : role of phosphatidylinositol 3 ' kinase / AKT pathways  Lokody I ( 2014 ) . Alternative splicing : aberrant splicing promotes colon tumour growth Nat . Rev . Cancer , 14 ( 2014 ) , pp . 382 – 383 machine in the cell ? Bioessays25 , 1147 – 1149 .  Majmundar AJ , Wong WJ , Simon MC . Hypoxia - inducible factors and the response to hypoxic stress . Mol Cell . 2010 ; 40 ( 2 ) : 294 – 309 . 131  Makarova OV , Makarov EM , Lührmann R . ( 2001 ) . The 65 and 110 kDa SR - related proteins of the U4 / U6 . U5 tri - snRNP are essential for the assembly of mature spliceosomes . EMBO journal 20 ( 10 ) : 2553 - 63  Malanga M 1 , Czubaty A , Girstun A , Staron K , Althaus FR . Poly ( ADP - ribose ) binds to the splicing factor ASF / SF2 and regulates its phosphorylation by DNA topoisomerase I . J Biol Chem . 2008 Jul 18 ; 283 ( 29 ) : 19991 - 8 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M709495200 . Epub 2008 May 21 .  Mao DY , Watson JD , Yan PS , Barsyte - Lovejoy D , Khosravi F , Wong WW , Farnham PJ , Huang TH , Penn LZ . Analysis of Myc bound loci identified by CpG island arrays shows that Max is essential for Myc - dependent repression . Curr . Biol . 2003 ; 13 : 882 – 886  Markovtsov V 1 , Nikolic JM , Goldman JA , Turck CW , Chou MY , Black DL . Cooperative assembly of an hnRNP complex induced by a tissue - specific homolog of polypyrimidine tract binding protein . Mol Cell Biol . 2000 Oct ; 20 ( 20 ) : 7463 - 79 .  Martinez - Contreras R 1 , Cloutier P , Shkreta L , Fisette JF , Revil T , Chabot B . hnRNP proteins and splicing control . Adv Exp Med Biol . 2007 ; 623 : 123 - 47  Masson N . , Ratcliffe P . J . ( 2014 ) . Hypoxia signaling pathways in cancer metabolism : the importance of co - selecting interconnected physiological pathways . Cancer & Metabolism 2 ( 1 ) : 3 .  Matera AG , Wang Z ( 2014 ) A day in the life of the spliceosome . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 108 – 121 .  Matthew G . Vander Heiden , Lewis C . Cantley , * , Craig B . Thompson , ( 2009 ) Understanding the Warburg Effect : The Metabolic Requirements of Cell Proliferation . Science Vol . 324 , Issue 5930 , pp . 1029 - 1033  Maxwell PH 1 , Wiesener MS , Chang GW , Clifford SC , Vaux EC , Cockman ME , Wykoff CC , Pugh CW , Maher ER , Ratcliffe PJ . ( 1999 ) . The tumour suppressor protein VHL targets hypoxia - inducible factors for oxygen - dependentproteolysis . Nature 399 ( 6733 ) : 271 - 5 132  Mayeda A , Screaton GR , Chandler SD , Fu XD , Krainer AR . Substrate specificities of SR proteins in constitutive splicing are determined by their RNA recognition motifs and composite pre - mRNA exonic elements . Mol Cell Biol . 1999 ; 19 : 1853 – 63 .  Mayeda A 1 , Krainer AR . Regulation of alternative pre - mRNA splicing by hnRNP A1 and splicing factor SF2 . Cell . 1992 Jan 24 ; 68 ( 2 ) : 365 - 75 .  McManus CJ , Graveley BR . ( 2011 ) . RNA structure and the mechanisms of alternative splicing . Current Opinion in Genetics & Development , Volume 21 , Issue 4 , Pages 373 - 379  Merkin J , Russell C , Chen P , Burge CB . 2012 . Evolutionary dynamics of gene and Isoform regulation in mammalian tissues . Science 338 : 1593 – 99  Meseguer S 1 , Mudduluru G , Escamilla JM , Allgayer H , Barettino D . MicroRNAs - 10a and - 10b contribute to retinoic acidinduced differentiation of neuroblastomacell s and target the alternative splicing regulatory factor SFRS1 ( SF2 / ASF ) . J Biol Chem . 2011 Feb 11 ; 286 ( 6 ) : 4150 - 64 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 167817 . Epub 2010 Nov 30 .  Missler M 1 , Südhof TC . Neurexins : three genes and 1001 products . Trends Genet . 1998 Jan ; 14 ( 1 ) : 20 - 6 .  Misteli T , Cáceres JF , Clement JQ , Krainer AR , Wilkinson MF , Spector DL . Serine phosphorylation of SR proteins is required for their recruitment to sites of transcription in vivo . J Cell Biol . 1998 ; 143 : 297 – 307 .  Modrek , B . and Lee , C . ( 2002 ) A genomic view of alternative splicing . Nat . Genet . , 30 , 13 - 19 .  motors , clocks , springs , and things . Cell92 , 315 – 326 .  Naftelberg S , Schor IE , Ast G , Kornblihtt AR ( 2005 ) . Regulation of alternative splicing through coupling with transcription and chromatin structure . Annual Review of biochemistry ; 84 : 165 - 98 133  Nasim FU , Hutchison S , Cordeau M , Chabot B . High - affinity hnRNP A1 binding sites and duplex - forming inverted repeats have similar effects on 5′ splice site selection in support of a common looping out and repression mechanism . RNA . 2002 ; 8 : 1078 – 1089  Nayler O , Stamm S , Ullrich A . ( 1997 ) . Characterization and comparison of four serine - and arginine - rich ( SR ) protein kinases . Biochem J . 326 : 693 – 700 .  Nederveen FH 1 , Gaal J , Favier J , Korpershoek E , Oldenburg RA , de Bruyn EM , Sleddens HF , Derkx P , Rivière J , Dannenberg H , Petri BJ , Komminoth P , Pacak K , Hop WC , Pollard PJ , Mannelli M , Bayley JP , Perren A , Niemann S , Verhofstad AA , de Bruïne AP , Maher ER , Tissier F , Méatchi T , Badoual C , Bertherat J , Amar L , Alataki D , Van Marck E , Ferrau F , François J , de Herder WW , Peeters MP , van Linge A , Lenders JW , Gimenez - Roqueplo AP , de Krijger RR , Dinjens WN . An immunohistochemical procedure to detect patients with paraganglioma and phaeochromocytoma with germline SDHB , SDHC , or SDHD gene mutations : a retrospective and prospective analysis . Lancet Oncol . 2009 Aug ; 10 ( 8 ) : 764 - 71 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1470 - 2045 ( 09 ) 70164 - 0 .  Ngo J . C . ; Chakrabarti S . ; Ding J . H . ; Velazquez - Dones A . ; Nolen B . ; Aubol B . E . ; Adams J . A . ; Fu X . D . ; Ghosh G . ( 2005 ) Interplay between SRPK and Clk / Sty kinases in phosphorylation of the splicing factor ASF / SF2 is regulated by a docking motif in ASF / SF2 . Mol . Cell 20 , 77 – 89 .  Ni J . Z . , Grate L . , Donohue J . P . , Preston C . , Nobida N . , O’Brien G . , Shiue L . , Clark T . A . , Blume J . E . , Ares M . , Jr 2007 . Ultraconserved elements are associated with homeostatic control of splicing regulators by alternative splicing and nonsense - mediated decay . Genes Dev . 21 : 708 – 718 10 . 1101 / gad . 1525507  Nieto MA : Epithelial plasticity : a common theme in embryonic and cancer cells . Science ( New York , NY ) 2013 , 342 ( 6159 ) : 1234850 134  Nilsen TW , Graveley BR . 2010 . Expansion of the eukaryotic proteome by alternative splicing . Nature 463 : 457 – 63  Nilsen , T . W . ( 2003 ) . The spliceosome : the most complex macromolecular  O’Flaherty L , Adam J , Heather LC , Zhdanov AV , Chung YL , Miranda MX , Croft J , Olpin S , Clarke K , Pugh CW , Griffiths J , Papkovsky D , Ashrafian H , Ratcliffe PJ , Pollard PJ . Dysregulation of hypoxia pathways in fumarate hydratase - deficient cells is independent of defective mitochondrial metabolism . Hum Mol Genet . 2010 ; 19 : 3844 – 3851 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddq305 .  Oermann EK , Wu J , Guan KL , Xiong Y . Alterations of metabolic genes and metabolites in cancer . Semin Cell Develop Biol . 2012 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2012 . 013  O ' Flaherty L 1 , Adam J , Heather LC , Zhdanov AV , Chung YL , Miranda MX , Croft J , Olpin S , Clarke K , Pugh CW , Griffiths J , Papkovsky D , Ashrafian H , Ratcliffe PJ , Pollard PJ . ( 2010 ) . Dysregulation of hypoxia pathways in fumarate hydratase - deficient cells is independent of defective mitochondrial metabolism . Human molecular Genetics 19 ( 19 ) : 3844 – 3851  Olyak K . , Weinberg R . A . 2009 . Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states : acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 9 : 265 – 273 10 . 1038 / nrc2620  Ozer A , Bruick RK . Non - heme dioxygenases : cellular sensors and regulators jelly rolled into one ? Nature Chemical Biology . 2007 ; 3 ( 3 ) : 144 – 153 .  Padgett , R . A . , Grabowski , P . J . , Konarska , M . M . , Seiler , S . and Sharp , P . A . ( 1986 ) Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 5 5 , 1119 - 1150 .  Palmer KR , Tong S , Tuohey L , Cannon P , Ye L , Hannan NJ , Brownfoot FC , Illanes SE , Kaitu ' u - Lino TJ . Jumonji Domain Containing Protein 6 Is Decreased in Human Preeclamptic Placentas and Regulates sFLT - 1 Splice Variant Production . Biol Reprod . 2016 135  Pollard PJ 1 , Brière JJ , Alam NA , Barwell J , Barclay E , Wortham NC , Hunt T , Mitchell M , Olpin S , Moat SJ , Hargreaves IP , Heales SJ , Chung YL , Griffiths JR , Dalgleish A , McGrath JA , Gleeson MJ , Hodgson SV , Poulsom R , Rustin P , Tomlinson IP . Accumulation of Krebs cycle intermediates and over - expression of HIF1alpha in tumours which result from germline FH and SDH mutations . Hum Mol Genet . 2005 Aug 1 ; 14 ( 15 ) : 2231 - 9 . Epub 2005 Jun 29 .  Polyak K . , Weinberg R . A . 2009 . Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states : acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 9 : 265 – 273 10 . 1038 / nrc2620  Polydorides AD 1 , Okano HJ , Yang YY , Stefani G , Darnell RB . A brain - enriched polypyrimidine tract - binding protein antagonizes the ability of Nova to regulate neuron - specific alternative splicing . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2000 Jun 6 ; 97 ( 12 ) : 6350 - 5 .  Poulard C , Corbo L , Le Romancer M , ( 2016 ) . Protein arginine methylation / demethylation and cancer . 7 ( 41 ) : 67532 – 67550 .  Punnya V Angadi , Alka D Kale Epithelial - mesenchymal transition - A fundamental mechanism in cancer progression : An overview Indian Journal of Health Sciences Jul 1 , 2015  Radmilovic M , Zukic B , Stankovic B , Karan - Djurasevic T , Stojiljkovic M , Spasovski V , Tosic N , Dokmanovic L , Janic D , Pavlovic S . Thalassemia syndromes in Serbia : an update . Hemoglobin . 2010 ; 34 ( 5 ) : 477 - 85 . doi : 10 . 3109 / 03630269 . 2010 . 513637 .  Robberson B . L . , Cote G . J . , Berget S . M . ( 1990 ) Exon definition may facilitate splice site selection in RNAs with multiple exons . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 : 84 – 94  Roscigno RF , Garcia - Blanco MA . SR proteins escort the U4 / U6 . U5 tri - snRNP to the spliceosome . RNA . 1995 ; 1 : 692 – 706 . 136  Rossi F 1 , Labourier E , Forné T , Divita G , Derancourt J , Riou JF , Antoine E , Cathala G , Brunel C , Tazi J . Specific phosphorylation of SR proteins by mammalian DNA topoisomerase I . Nature . 1996 May 2 ; 381 ( 6577 ) : 80 - 2 .  Ruggero D 1 , Montanaro L , Ma L , Xu W , Londei P , Cordon - Cardo C , Pandolfi PP . The translation factor eIF - 4E promotes tumor formation and cooperates with c - Myc in lymphomagenesis . Nat Med . 2004 May ; 10 ( 5 ) : 484 - 6 . Epub 2004 Apr 18 .  Saltzman A . L . , Kim Y . K . , Pan Q . , Fagnani M . M . , Maquat L . E . , Blencowe B . J . 2008 . Regulation of multiple core spliceosomal proteins by alternative splicing - coupled nonsense - mediated mRNA decay . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 : 4320 – 4330 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00361 - 08  Sancak Y 1 , Peterson TR , Shaul YD , Lindquist RA , Thoreen CC , Bar - Peled L , Sabatini DM . ( 2008 ) The Rag GTPases bind raptor and mediate amino acid signaling to mTORC1 . Science 320 , 1496 – 1501  Sanford J . R . , Wang X . , Mort M . , et al . Splicing factor SFRS1 recognizes a functionally diverse landscape of RNA transcripts . Genome Research . 2009 ; 19 ( 3 ) : 381 – 394 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gr . 082503 . 108 .  San - Millán I , Brooks GA ( 2017 ) . Reexamining cancer metabolism : lactate production for carcinogenesis could be the purpose and explanation of the Warburg Effect . Carcinogenesis 1 ; 38 ( 2 ) : 119 - 133 .  Schaub MC , Lopez SR , Caputi M . Members of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H family activate splicing of an HIV - 1 splicing substrate by promoting formation of ATP - dependent spliceosomal complexes . J Biol Chem . 2007 ; 282 : 13617 – 13626 .  Schmucker D 1 , Clemens JC , Shu H , Worby CA , Xiao J , Muda M , Dixon JE , Zipursky SL . Drosophila Dscam is an axon guidance receptor exhibiting extraordinary molecular diversity . Cell . 2000 Jun 9 ; 101 ( 6 ) : 671 - 84 .  Selak MA 1 , Armour SM , MacKenzie ED , Boulahbel H , Watson DG , Mansfield KD , Pan Y , Simon MC , Thompson CB , Gottlieb E . ( 2005 ) 137 Succinate links TCA cycle dysfunction to oncogenesis by inhibiting HIF - alpha prolyl hydroxylase . Cancer cell 7 ( 1 ) : 77 - 85  Sharma S , Falick AM , Black DL . Polypyrimidine tract binding protein blocks the 5′ splice site - dependent assembly of U2AF and the prespliceosomal E complex . Mol Cell . 2005 ; 19 : 485 – 496  Sharp PA . Split genes and RNA splicing . Cell . 1994 ; 77 : 805 – 815 .  Sharp , P . A . ( 2005 ) The discovery of split genes and RNA splicing . Trends Biochem . Sci . , 30 , 279 - 281 .  Shaw SD , Chakrabarti S , Ghosh G , Krainer AR . Deletion of the N - terminus of SF2 / ASF permits RS - domain - independent pre - mRNA splicing . PLoS One . 2007 ; 2 : e854 .  Shen M . , Mattox W . Activation and repression functions of an SR splicing regulator depend on exonic versus intronic - binding position . Nucleic Acids Res . 2012 ; 40 : 428 – 437 .  Shen H . , Green M . R . ( 2004 ) A pathway of sequential arginine - serine - rich domain - splicing signal interactions during mammalian spliceosome assembly . Mol . Cell 16 : 363 – 373 .  Shen H . , Kan J . L . , Green M . R . ( 2004 ) Arginine - serine - rich domains bound at splicing enhancers contact the branchpoint to promote prespliceosome assembly . Mol . Cell 13 : 367 – 376 .  Shi J 1 , Qian W , Yin X , Iqbal K , Grundke - Iqbal I , Gu X , Ding F , Gong CX , Liu F . Cyclic AMP - dependent protein kinase regulates the alternative splicing of tau exon 10 : a mechanism involved in tau pathology of Alzheimer disease . J Biol Chem . 2011 Apr 22 ; 286 ( 16 ) : 14639 - 48 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 204453 . Epub 2011 Mar 2 .  Sinclair CS , Rowley M , Naderi A , Couch FJ . The 17q23 amplicon and breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat . 2003 ; 78 : 313 – 22  Smith P . J . , Zhang C . , Wang J . , Chew S . L . , Zhang M . Q . , Krainer A . R . An increased specificity score matrix for the prediction of SF2 / ASF - specific 138 exonic splicing enhancers . Human Molecular Genetics . 2006 ; 15 ( 16 ) : 2490 – 2508 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddl171  Sonveaux P , Copetti T , De Saedeleer CJ , Végran F , Verrax J , Kennedy KM , Moon EJ , Dhup S , Danhier P , Frérart F , Gallez B , Ribeiro A , Michiels C , Dewhirst MW , Feron O . Targeting the lactate transporter MCT1 in endothelial cells inhibits lactate - induced HIF - 1 activation and tumor angiogenesis . PLoS One . 2012 ; 7 : e33418 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0033418 .  Spellman R , Smith CW . Novel modes of splicing repression by PTB . Trends Biochem Sci . 2006 ; 31 : 73 – 76 .  Spritz R . A . , Strunk K . , Surowy C . S . , Hoch S . O . , Barton D . E . , Francke U . ( 1987 ) The human U1 - 70K snRNP protein : cDNA cloning , chromosomal localization , expression , alternative splicing and RNA - binding . Nucleic Acids Res . 15 : 10373 – 10391  Staley , J . P . , and Guthrie , C . ( 1998 ) . Mechanical devices of the spliceosome :  Stamm S , Ben - Ari I , Rafalska I , Tang Y , Zhang Z , Toiber D , Thanaraj T . A . , Soreq H . , ( 2005 ) . Function of alternative splicing . Gene 344C 1 – 20 .  Stickle , N . H . et al . pVHL modification by NEDD8 is required for fibronectin matrix assembly and suppression of tumor development . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 3251 – 3261 ( 2004 ) .  Sun S . , Zhang Z . , Sinha R . , Karni R . , Krainer AR . ( 2010 ) . SF2 / ASF autoregulation involves layers of post - transcriptional and translational control . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 : 306 – 312 ;  Sunjoo Jeong ( 2017 ) . SR Proteins : Binders , Regulators , and Connectors of RNA . Molecules and cells 40 ( 1 ) : 1 – 9  Tansey W . P . Mammalian MYC proteins and cancer . New Journal of Science . 2014 ; 2014 : 27 . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2014 / 757534 . 757534  Teicher BA , Linehan WM , Helman LJ . ( 2012 ) . Targeting cancer metabolism . Clin Cancer Res ; 18 ( 20 ) : 5537 - 45 . 139  Teigelkamp S , Mundt C , Achsel T , Will CL , Luhrmann R . The human U5 snRNP - specific 100 - kD protein is an RS domain - containing , putative RNA helicase with significant homology to the yeast splicing factor Prp28p . RNA . 1997 ; 3 : 1313 – 1326 .  Theissen H . , Etzerodt M . , Reuter R . , Schneider C . , Lottspeich F . , Argos P . , Luhrmann R . , Philipson L . ( 1986 ) Cloning of the human cDNA for the U1 RNA - associated 70K protein . EMBO J . 5 : 3209 – 3217 .  Thiery J . P . , Sleeman J . P . 2006 . Complex networks orchestrate epithelial - mesenchymal transitions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 131 – 142 10 . 1038 / nrm1835  Thiery JP . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in tumour progression . Nat Rev Cancer 2002 ; 2 : 442 – 54 .  Tuduri S 1 , Crabbé L , Conti C , Tourrière H , Holtgreve - Grez H , Jauch A , Pantesco V , De Vos J , Thomas A , Theillet C , Pommier Y , Tazi J , Coquelle A , Pasero P . Topoisomerase I suppresses genomic instability by preventing interference between replication and transcription . Nat Cell Biol . 2009 Nov ; 11 ( 11 ) : 1315 - 24 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1984 . Epub 2009 Oct 18 .  Turunen J . J , Niemelä E H , Verma B , and Frilander MJ ( 2013 ) . The significant other : splicing by the minor spliceosome . Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA 4 ( 1 ) : 61 – 76 .  Valacca C , Bonomi S , Buratti E , Pedrotti S , Baralle FE , Sette C , Ghigna C , Biamonti G . Sam68 regulates EMT through alternative splicing - activated nonsense - mediated mRNA decay of the SF2 / ASF proto - oncogene . The Journal of Cell Biology . 2010 ; 191 ( 1 ) : 87 – 99 .  Valdivia HH . ( 2007 ) . One gene , many proteins : alternative splicing of the ryanodine receptor gene adds novel functions to an already complex channel protein . Circulation Research . 100 : 761 - 763  Vander Heiden M G , Cantley L C , Thompson C B . Understanding the warburg effect : The metabolic requirements of cell proliferation . Sci Signal , 2009 , 324 : 1029 140  Vanharanta S , Buchta M , McWhinney SR , Virta SK , Peçzkowska M , Morrison CD , Lehtonen R , Januszewicz A , Järvinen H , Juhola M , Mecklin JP , Pukkala E , Herva R , Kiuru M , Nupponen NN , Aaltonen LA , Neumann HP , Eng C . Early - onset renal cell carcinoma as a novel extraparaganglial component of SDHB - associated heritable paraganglioma . Am J Hum Genet . 2004 Jan ; 74 ( 1 ) : 153 - 9 . Epub 2003 Dec 18 .  Vasudevan S , Tong Y , Steitz JA . Switching from repression to activation : microRNAs can up - regulate translation . Science . 2007 ; 318 : 1931 – 1934 .  Verduci L . , Simili M . , Rizzo M . , et al . MicroRNA ( miRNA ) - mediated interaction between leukemia / lymphoma - related factor ( LRF ) and alternative splicing factor / splicing factor 2 ( ASF / SF2 ) affects mouse embryonic fibroblast senescence and apoptosis . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 2010 ; 285 ( 50 ) : 39551 – 39563 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 114736  Wahl , M . C . et al . ( 2009 ) The spliceosome : design principles of a dynamic RNP machine . Cell 136 , 701 – 718  Wang F , He L , Huangyang P , Liang J , Si W , Yan R , Han X , Liu S , Gui B , Li W , Miao D , Jing C , Liu Z , Pei F , Sun L , Shang Y . ( 2014 ) . JMJD6 promotes colon carcinogenesis through negative regulation of p53 by hydroxylation . PLoS Biol . 2014 Mar 25 ; 12 ( 3 ) : e1001819 .  Wang J , Smith PJ , Krainer AR , Zhang MQ . Distribution of SR protein exonic splicing enhancer motifs in human protein - coding genes . Nucleic Acids Res . 2005 ; 33 : 5053 – 62  Wang Y , Wysocka J , Sayegh J , Lee YH , Perlin JR , Leonelli L , Sonbuchner LS , McDonald CH , Cook RG , Dou Y , Roeder RG , Clarke S , Stallcup MR , Allis CD , Coonrod SA . ( 2004 ) . Human PAD4 regulates histone arginine methylation levels via demethylimination . Science . 306 ( 5694 ) : 279 - 83 .  Warburg O . On the origin of cancer cells . Science . 1956 ; 123 : 309 – 314 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 123 . 3191 . 309 141  Warzecha CC , Carstens RP : Complex changes in alternative pre - mRNA splicing play a central role in the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . Seminars in cancer biology 2012 , 22 ( 5 - 6 ) : 417 - 427  Webby CJ 1 , Wolf A , Gromak N , Dreger M , Kramer H , Kessler B , Nielsen ML , Schmitz C , Butler DS , Yates JR 3rd , Delahunty CM , Hahn P , Lengeling A , Mann M , Proudfoot NJ , Schofield CJ , Böttger A . Jmjd6 catalyses lysyl - hydroxylation of U2AF65 , a protein associated with RNA splicing . Science . 2009 Jul 3 ; 325 ( 5936 ) : 90 - 3 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1175865 .  Wen J , Rönn T , Olsson A , Yang Z , Lu B , Du Y , Groop L , Ling C , Hu R . Investigation of type 2 diabetes risk alleles support CDKN2A / B , CDKAL1 , and TCF7L2 as susceptibility genes in a Han Chinese cohort . PLoS One . 2010 Feb 10 ; 5 ( 2 ) : e9153 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0009153 .  Will , C . L . and Luhrmann , R . ( 2006 ) Spliceosome structure andfunction , In The RNA World ( 3rd edn ) ( Gestland , R . F . et al . , eds ) , pp . 369 – 400 , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press  Will , C . L . , and Luhrmann , R . ( 2001 ) . Spliceosomal UsnRNP biogenesis , structure and function . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 290 – 301 .  Wise DR 1 , Thompson CB . ( 2010 ) . Glutamine addiction : a new therapeutic target in cancer . Trends Biochem Sci . 35 ( 8 ) : 427 – 433 .  Woodhouse EC , Chuaqui RF , Liotta LA . General mechanisms of metastasis . Cancer 1997 ; 80 : 1529 – 37 .  Wu H . , Sun S . , Tu K . , Gao Y . , Xie B . , Krainer A . R . , Zhu J . , ( 2010 ) . A splicing - independent function of SF2 / ASF in microRNA processing . Mol . Cell . 38 : 67 – 77 ;  Wu JY & Maniatis T . ( 1993 ) Specific interactions between proteins implicated in splice site selection and regulated alternative splicing . Cell 17 ; 75 ( 6 ) : 1061 - 70  Wu , W . and Zhao , S . ( 2013 ) Metabolic changes in cancer : beyond the Warburg effect . Acta Biochim . Biophys . Sin . 45 , 18 – 26 142  Xiang S , Gapsy V , Kim HY , Bessonov S , Hsiao HH , Mohlmann S , et al . Phosphorylation drives a dynamic switch in serine / arginine rich proteins . Structure . 2013 ; 21 : 2162 – 74 .  Xu X 1 , Yang D , Ding JH , Wang W , Chu PH , Dalton ND , Wang HY , Bermingham JR Jr , Ye Z , Liu F , Rosenfeld MG , Manley JL , Ross J Jr , Chen J , Xiao RP , Cheng H , Fu XD . ASF / SF2 regulated CaMKIIdelta alternative splicing temporally reprograms excitation - contraction coupling in cardiac muscle . Cell . 2005 ; 120 : 59 – 72 .  Y . Atlasi , S . J . Mowla , S . A . Ziaee Differential expression of survivin and its splice variants survivin - DeltaEx3 and survivin - 2B , in bladder cancer Cancer Detect . Prev . , 32 ( 2009 ) , pp . 308 – 313  Y . Tazo , A . Hara , T . Onda , M . Saegusa Bifunctional roles of survivin - DeltaEx3 and survivin - 2B for susceptibility to apoptosis in endometrial carcinomas J . Cancer Res . Clin . Oncol . , 14 ( 2014 ) , pp . 2027 – 2037  Young VR , Ajami AM . Glutamine : The Emperor or His Clothes ? J Nutr . 2001 ; 131 : 2449S – 2459  Yuneva M 1 , Zamboni N , Oefner P , Sachidanandam R , Lazebnik Y . ( 2007 ) Deficiency in glutamine but not glucose induces MYC - dependent apoptosis in human cells . . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 93 – 105  Zahler AM , Lane WS , Stolk JA , Roth MB . SR proteins : a conserved family of pre - mRNA splicing factors . Genes Dev . 1992 ; 6 : 837 – 847 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 6 . 5 . 837  Zavadil J , Bottinger EP . TGF - beta and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions . Oncogene 2005 ; 24 : 5764 – 74 . Voulgari A , Pintzas A . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition in cancer metastasis : mechanisms , markers and strategies to overcome drug resistance in the clinic . Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 ; 1796 : 75 – 90 .  Zerbe LK , Pino I , Pio R , Cosper PF , Dwyer - Nield LD , Meyer AM , Port JD , Montuenga LM , Malkinson AM . Relative amounts of antagonistic splicing 143 factors , hnRNP A1 and ASF / SF2 , change during neoplastic lung growth : implications for pre - mRNA processing . Mol Carcinog . 2004 ; 41 : 187 – 196 .  Zhang XH , Arias MA , Ke S , Chasin LA . Splicing of designer exons reveals unexpected complexity in pre - mRNA splicing . RNA . 2009 ; 15 : 367 – 376 .  Zhao YJ 1 , Han HZ 1 , Liang Y 1 , Shi CZ 1 , Zhu QC 1 , Yang J 1 . Alternative splicing of VEGFA , APP and NUMB genes in colorectal cancer . World J Gastroenterol . 2015 Jun 7 ; 21 ( 21 ) : 6550 - 60 . doi : 10 . 3748 / wjg . v21 . i21 . 6550 .  Zhou HL , Lou H . Repression of prespliceosome complex formation at two distinct steps by Fox - 1 / Fox - 2 proteins . Mol Cell Biol . 2008 ; 28 : 5507 – 5516 .  Zhu J , Krainer AR . Pre - mRNA splicing in the absence of an SR protein RS domain . Genes Dev . 2000 ; 14 : 3166 – 3178  Zhu J . , Mayeda A . , Krainer A . R . ( 2001 ) Exon identity established through differential antagonism between exonic splicing silencer - bound hnRNP A1 and enhancer - bound SR proteins . Mol . Cell 8 : 1351 – 1361 .