A Comparison of Online Hate on Reddit and 4chan : A Case Study of the 2020 US Election Fatima Zahrah Department of Computer Science , University of Oxford Oxford , UK fatima . zahrah @ cs . ox . ac . uk Jason R . C . Nurse School of Computing , University of Kent Canterbury , UK j . r . c . nurse @ kent . ac . uk Michael Goldsmith Department of Computer Science , University of Oxford Oxford , UK michael . goldsmith @ cs . ox . ac . uk ABSTRACT The rapid integration of the Internet into our daily lives has led to many benefits but also to a number of new , wide - spread threats such as online hate , trolling , bullying , and generally aggressive behaviours . While research has traditionally explored online hate , in particular , on one platform , the reality is that such hate is a phenomenon that often makes use of multiple online networks . In this article , we seek to advance the discussion into online hate by harnessing a comparative approach , where we make use of various Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) techniques to computationally analyse hateful content from Reddit and 4chan relating to the 2020 US Presidential Elections . Our findings show how content and posting activity can differ depending on the platform being used . Through this , we provide initial comparison into the platform - specific behaviours of online hate , and how different platforms can serve specific purposes . We further provide several avenues for future research utilising a cross - platform approach so as to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the global hate ecosystem . CCS CONCEPTS • Information systems → Social networking sites ; • Comput - ing methodologies → Lexical semantics ; • Social and profes - sional topics → Hate speech ; KEYWORDS Online hate , Online behaviour , Social Network Analysis , Natural Language Processing , Cross - platform analysis , US Elections 1 INTRODUCTION The past few decades have demonstrated how the Internet is play - ing an ever - increasing role in daily life and has become an integral part of society . In particular , various digital technologies and online platforms for communication have been rapidly adopted into the home and workplace alike . However , this has also introduced sev - eral cyber social challenges as digital platforms have provided an effective medium for spreading hateful content , and thus bring new difficulties for agencies responsible for ensuring the boundaries of acceptable and legal behaviour are not crossed [ 5 ] . The UK govern - ment specifically outlined hateful content as one of the primary forms of illegal content online in their Online Harms Paper [ 4 ] . Nevertheless , the concept of online hate is still considered a complex phenomenon , with its definition evolving across several To appear in 2022 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing ( SAC’22 ) , , 2022 . ACM ISBN xxx . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / xx . xxx / xxx _ x theoretical paradigms , disciplines and spanning multiple forms of victimisation [ 10 ] . Due to this complexity , research into online hate is fragmented throughout numerous disciplines . Despite all these extensive approaches and methods proposed to analyse online hate [ 1 , 12 ] , limited research has investigated how hateful behaviours and content compare and relate across different online platforms [ 8 ] . It has only recently been recognised within academic literature that online hate is not simply an issue for a select few platforms , rather networks of hate are often linked across these platforms , forming a global ‘network of networks’ dynamic [ 6 ] . Our study applies various computational methods , including topic modelling and sentiment analysis , to explore the type of content that is promoted on Reddit and 4chan to provide unique insight into how various platforms are used within online hate . In particular , this research will make use of data collected over the course of the 2020 US presidential election to investigate how hateful content and narratives compare across both platforms . We use the 2020 election as a case study as previous research has shown that political elections often “trigger” hateful discourse online [ 11 ] . Through this , we aim to gain an understanding on how online platforms are used for the different functionalities they offer . With our work , this paper : • Examines how the posting behaviour of hateful communities of Reddit and 4chan changes over the course of the 2020 US election and its aftermath . • Identifies the main topics of discussion on both platforms to show how different types of content and narratives are promoted on each platform . • Uses linguistic analysis tools to compare the types of senti - ment and levels of emotion used on both platforms . • Analyses the usage of URL domains in posts from both plat - forms to investigate if any common information sharing takes place and gain a deeper insight into how different platforms are used in distinct ways in online hate . The remainder of the paper will be structured as follows . Sec - tion 2 will describe our analysis approach , including the datasets and data - analysis tools that were used . Preliminary results from our findings will be discussed in Section 3 . We then present our conclusions and outline avenues for future work in Section 4 . 2 METHODOLOGY Our comparative analysis of online hate during the 2020 US election on Reddit and 4chan was largely focused on content from white - supremacist ideologies , and was carried out with particular regard to the following research questions : a r X i v : 2202 . 01302v1 [ c s . C L ] 2 F e b 2022 To appear in 2022 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing ( SAC’22 ) , , Fatima Zahrah , Jason R . C . Nurse , and Michael Goldsmith Figure 1 : Graphs showing the frequency of posts across each dataset : Reddit ( left ) and 4chan ( right ) . • RQ1 : How do the participation and posting trends compare across both platforms over the course of the election and their aftermath ? • RQ2 : What are the main topics of discussion for hateful users on each of the platforms ? • RQ3 : Are there any differences in the general sentiment of the posts from both platforms ? • RQ4 : How do domain - sharing practices compare across both platforms ? Our approach therefore comprises three stages : ( 1 ) collecting the data from both platforms and observing the posting behaviours , ( 2 ) conducting topic modelling on each corpus of posts , and ( 3 ) analysing the sentiment of the collected posts to examine their structural properties . We first carry out an empirical analysis using various compu - tational methods to examine data associated with each respective dataset , including the frequency of posts over time , the most dis - cussed topics as well as keywords , and the different URL domains shared within the posts . The results from this are compared across both datasets to identify any similarities or differences in the com - position of their content . This analysis is carried out using the Pandas 1 data analysis library and the ‘Natural Language Toolkit’ ( NLTK ) 2 provided by the Python programming language . To iden - tify the main topics of discussion , we conducted topic modelling using the Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) topic detection model with 5 topics , which we found to work better overall than other models , like Non - Negative Matrix Factorization ( NMF ) . We then investigate the sentiment of each set of posts further by using the programmatically coded dictionary from the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count ( LIWC ) linguistic analysis tool , which summarises the emotional , cognitive , and structural components in a given text sample [ 7 ] , and thus provides additional avenues for comparison . The results from these are detailed in the subsequent sections . 2 . 1 Data Collection We chose to analyse Reddit and 4chan within our study as they both represent distinct types of social - media platforms . Reddit is a more mainstream platform that carries out some content modera - tion , where hateful communities are often cultivated on particular subreddits , but such subreddits have also been removed from the platform if they are increasingly linked to hateful events , such as 1 https : / / pandas . pydata . org / 2 https : / / www . nltk . org / the subreddits r / fatpeoplehate and r / CoonTown [ 2 ] . 4chan , on the other hand , is an anonymous imageboard platform with no content moderation that represents a fringe community with a more spe - cific audience . Both of these online platforms therefore provide a distinct set of functionalities and audiences . We aim to understand the extent to which these platforms can play individual roles and serve different purposes within the wider ecosystem of online hate . The Reddit dataset was gathered from r / donaldtrump , which has been linked far - right groups and spreading online hate over the past year and was banned earlier this year as a result [ 9 ] . The 4chan dataset was collected from the Politically Incorrect ( / pol / ) board , which has also been associated with spreading online hate , and has even been linked to violent acts of extremism including the 2015 Christchurch shooting [ 6 ] . Both datasets from Reddit and 4chan were collected over the same time period relevant to the timeline of the US elections ; we collected data from 1 October 2020 – 31 January 2021 ( so as to include content over the course of the presidential debates , the actual election as well as the presidential certification ) . We further filtered both datasets using specific terms and keywords in order to collect content specifically related to the election , for instance “maga” ( Make America Great Again ) and “trump” . The sizes of the two datasets are as follows : Reddit dataset : 112 , 981 posts and 4chan dataset : 1 , 086 , 053 posts . 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 3 . 1 Participation Trends With each dataset , we first explore the frequency of content being posted over the course of the collection period during the US elec - tion , in answer to RQ1 . In Figure 1 , we can immediately see that the amount of content posted on 4chan is considerably greater than the content posted on Reddit . Somewhat similar trends in the amount of participation can still be seen , though , across all platforms over the course of the election time frame , where post frequency was measured weekly . Notably , a significant peak in the number of posts can be seen in the weeks during the election ( in the week beginning November 2nd ) , and again in the first week of January following Joe Biden’s presidential certification and the resulting Capitol riots [ 3 ] . The r / donaldtrump subreddit was banned as a result of the part it played during these events ( hence the abrupt end to the graph points in Figure 1 ) . A Comparison of Online Hate on Reddit and 4chan To appear in 2022 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing ( SAC’22 ) , , Figure 2 : Word clouds of the most commonly used words across both datasets : Reddit ( above ) and 4chan ( below ) . 3 . 2 Keywords and Topic Analysis To answer RQ2 , we next determine which words and topics were discussed the most in each dataset . In both the Reddit and 4chan datasets , the most common words were , unsurprisingly , election , Trump and Biden . Though , it’s worth noting that 4chan posts often refer to groups of “others” , such as jew , and often use offensive and hateful names for them . This suggests hate is more explicit on 4chan than Reddit . Contrastingly , Reddit mentions fraud , media and evidence more frequently . A topic model also provided further insight into the most dis - cussed subjects within each dataset , with the top five identified topics and the percentage of posts containing them being listed in Table 1 ; to get this percentage , the dominant topic out of the five topics was extracted in each post , and a cumulative total of the number of posts for each topic was calculated and represented as a percentage of the total posts in the dataset . When comparing the topics from all the datasets , we can see that similar topics are generally discussed or mentioned . The topic model shows that both sets of posts mention election and voter fraud , though this seems to be discussed more heavily in the Reddit posts . “MAGA 2020” and “MAGA forever” are also mentioned in both datasets . Most notably though , the Reddit posts also discuss “election defense” and make mention of a “Trump march” , likely referring to the logistical planning of the January capitol riots . Similar to what was shown in the word clouds , the 4chan posts evidently make use of more explicit and derogatory language than any of the other datasets of posts . The topic model shows that such terms seem to especially Table 1 : A topic model of the most discussed topics and the percentage of posts containing them . Reddit 4chan Topic # 1 donald trump , support , register , vote , state vote ( 20 % ) MAGA , awoo , awoo , MAGA hat , MAGA forever , MAGA 2020 ( 25 % ) Topic # 2 make , report voter , trump cam - paign , fraud , voter fraud ( 15 % ) still , supporter , vote , lost , lose , go - ing , trump , f * * * , n * * * * * * ( 21 % ) Topic # 3 trump 2020 , MAGA , liber tears , MAGA 2020 , breaks ( 17 % ) vote , count , case , state , election fraud , votes , voting , election day ( 23 % ) Topic # 4 election defense , contact state , trump march , stop washington ( 23 % ) lost , trump lost , lost election , lol , lost biden , white ( 19 % ) Topic # 5 vote , ballot , trump , president , elec - tion , voter , people , state ( 25 % ) watch , president , video , MAGA , youtube , ballot , border , capitol , trump ( 11 % ) be used to discuss Trump losing the presidential election ( Topic # 2 ) , suggesting such language is used more when voicing frustration . 3 . 3 Sentiment Analysis using LIWC In addition to identifying the main topics of discussion on each platform , we were also interested in examining and comparing the sentiment of the posts . To gain insight into this , we make use of the LIWC linguistic analysis tool to highlight any key differences between each dataset , the findings from which aim to answer RQ3 . The results from this analysis are summarised in Table 2 , where the mean percentage of all words within each set of posts that fall into a particular LIWC category is shown . Example words of each category can be found in [ 7 ] . We measured the overall sentiments of each platform by using all the LIWC sentiment categories positive emotion , negative emotion , anger and anxiety . The results from our LIWC analysis show that both platforms generally used more positive emotion than negative emotion , with posts from Reddit using positive emotion the most . To gain further understanding of the context in which positive emotion was used , we manually examined a sample of posts as well . From this , we were able to find that Reddit posts encouraging users to vote and “support” Trump seemed to use more positive emotion . Since we saw in the topic modelling in Section 3 . 2 that these were the most prominent topics identified in the Reddit dataset , it is clear how positive emotion is much more present than negative emotion on this platform . Table 2 : Results from the linguistic analysis using LIWC . LIWC Category Reddit 4chan Positive Emotion 3 . 25 3 . 05 Negative Emotion 1 . 76 3 . 01 Anxiety 0 . 17 0 . 25 Anger 0 . 81 1 . 61 On the other hand , we can also clearly note from the LIWC analysis that negative emotion was used significantly more in the 4chan posts than any other dataset . From assessing a sample of the posts using negative sentiment , we find that this emotion was mainly used when expressing frustration over Trump’s loss in the election . The topic modelling we conducted also showed that dis - cussing Trump’s loss was a prominent topic of discussion on this platform . Additionally , we can see similar results when looking at To appear in 2022 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing ( SAC’22 ) , , Fatima Zahrah , Jason R . C . Nurse , and Michael Goldsmith the level of anger in each dataset from the LIWC results , where 4chan posts made use of such language much more than any of the other platforms . 3 . 4 URL Analysis To answer our final research question , RQ4 , we explored which domains were posted most frequently , where the 10 most popular domains in both datasets have been listed in Table 3 . The difference in the number of URLs used within the Reddit and 4chan posts is quite significant . The 4chan dataset contained 226 , 394 URLs in total , where 40 , 256 of these were unique URLs and 21 % of all the posts con - taining a URL . The posts mostly link to Trump - supporting domains or storage sites such as Pastebin and Flickr . The Reddit dataset also predominantly consists of various links to Trump - supporting domains , including fundraising initiatives as well as voter infor - mation and redirection . However , it makes use of a considerably larger amount of URLs . More specifically , 202 , 445 URLs were used , with 7601 unique URLs , meaning 175 % of these posts used a URL , where posts likely contained multiple URLs , or certain posts would mass - post URLs . This suggests that Reddit users were much more ‘evidence - based’ in their efforts to support Trump . Table 3 : The most posted URL domains and their frequency across both datasets . Reddit 4chan www . reddit . com : 34 , 786 pastebin . com : 7120 discord . gg : 24 , 973 www . promiseskept . com : 3601 secure . winred . com : 19 , 139 www . donaldjtrump . com : 3590 www . armyfortrump . com : 9518 www . magapill . com : 3588 vote . donaldjtrump . com : 9515 www . whitehouse . gov : 3584 vote . gov : 9513 www . flickr . com : 3376 www . usa . gov : 9513 www . cbp . gov : 3371 trumpvictory . com : 9513 www . armyfortrump . com : 1861 share . djt . app : 9513 trumpvictory . com : 1856 shop . donaldjtrump . com : 9513 publicpool . kinja . com : 1678 4 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK Recent events and academic literature have noted that online hate is a phenomenon that incorporates multiple platforms , though lit - tle work has been done to understand how these platforms are used strategically . Ultimately , our paper provides some initial com - parison across hate - specific online environments on two different platforms ( Reddit and 4chan ) within the context of the 2020 US pres - idential elections . Through conducting various computational and linguistic analysis , we observed how the frequency of online par - ticipation changes over the time frame of social events relating to real - time offline developments . We also found how content - posting behaviours can change across platforms , particularly in terms of posting URLs from specific domains . The insights we gained from our findings show how different online platforms can serve distinct purposes and play specific roles in the wider ecosystem of online hate . For instance , this paper shows how more mainstream plat - forms , like Reddit , can be used to encourage their audience to take specific actions , like voting for Trump . We can therefore propose that counter - hate initiatives must be tailored to specific platforms to work effectively . However , further work is needed to build on these observations . Namely , extended analysis of multiple other platforms is needed to truly understand and validate whether online content is often specific to the platform is was posted on . It would also be impor - tant to gain insight into whether multiple platforms are used in conjunction to achieve some goal or further the reach of hateful content . In this sense , analysing how networks of hate map across several different platforms would provide a more comprehensive and novel perspective of cross - platform online hate . Finally , our findings are only representative of one case study ( the US election ) , therefore future work should compare these across other case stud - ies or events to gain a more comprehensive understanding of how these platforms are used in distinct ways . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Emmi Bevensee , Maxwell Aliapoulios , Quinn Dougherty , Jason Baumgartner , Damon Mccoy , and Jeremy Blackburn . 2020 . SMAT : The Social Media Analysis Toolkit . ProceedingsoftheInternationalAAAIConferenceonWebandSocialMedia Workshops 14 ( 2020 ) . [ 2 ] EshwarChandrasekharan , UmashanthiPavalanathan , AnirudhSrinivasan , Adam Glynn , JacobEisenstein , andEricGilbert . 2017 . YouCan’tStayHere : TheEfficacy of Reddit’s 2015 Ban Examined Through Hate Speech . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 1 ( 2017 ) , 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134666 [ 3 ] Dhaval M Dave , Drew McNichols , and Joseph J Sabia . 2021 . Political Violence , Risk Aversion , and Non - Localized Disease Spread : Evidence from the U . S . Capitol Riot . Working Paper 28410 . National Bureau of Economic Research . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3386 / w28410 [ 4 ] Department for Digital Culture Media and Sport ( UK ) . 2019 . Online Harms White Paper . https : / / www . gov . uk / government / consultations / online - harms - white - paper [ 5 ] William Housley , Helena Webb , Adam Edwards , Rob Procter , and Marina Jirotka . 2017 . Membership categorisation and antagonistic Twitter formula - tions . Discourse & Communication 11 , 6 ( 2017 ) , 567 – 590 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1750481317726932 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1750481317726932 [ 6 ] N . F . Johnson , R Leahy , N Johnson Restrepo , N Velasquez , M Zheng , P Manrique , P Devkota , and S Wuchty . 2019 . Hidden Resilience and Adaptive Dynamics of the Global Online Hate Ecology . Nature 573 , 7773 ( 2019 ) , 261 – 265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 019 - 1494 - 7 [ 7 ] James Pennebaker , Ryan Boyd , Kayla Jordan , and Kate Blackburn . 2015 . The De - velopment and Psychometric Properties of LIWC2015 . Technical Report . University of Texas , Austin . [ 8 ] Shruti Phadke and Tanushree Mitra . 2020 . Many Faced Hate : A Cross Platform Study of Content Framing and Information Sharing by Online Hate Groups . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376456 [ 9 ] Nicholas Reimann . 2021 . Reddit Bans ‘r / donaldtrump’ Subred - dit . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / nicholasreimann / 2021 / 01 / 08 / reddit - bans - rdonaldtrump - subreddit / ? sh = 5980347038b3 [ 10 ] Anna Schmidt and Michael Wiegand . 2017 . A Survey on Hate Speech Detection usingNaturalLanguageProcessing . In ProceedingsoftheFifthInternationalWork - shop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics , Valencia , Spain , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18653 / v1 / W17 - 1101 [ 11 ] RyanScrivens , GeorgeW . Burruss , ThomasJ . Holt , StevenM . Chermak , JoshuaD . Freilich , and Richard Frank . 2020 . Triggered by Defeat or Victory ? Assessing the Impact of Presidential Election Results on Extreme Right - Wing Mobilization Online . Deviant Behavior 0 , 0 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01639625 . 2020 . 1807298 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01639625 . 2020 . 1807298 [ 12 ] Savvas Zannettou , Joel Finkelstein , Barry Bradlyn , and Jeremy Blackburn . 2020 . A Quantitative Approach to Understanding Online Antisemitism . Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 14 , 1 ( May 2020 ) , 786 – 797 . https : / / ojs . aaai . org / index . php / ICWSM / article / view / 7343