micromachines Review Nanoindentation of Soft Biological Materials Long Qian and Hongwei Zhao * School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Jilin University , Changchun 130025 , China ; qianlong17 @ mails . jlu . edu . cn * Correspondence : hwzhao @ jlu . edu . cn ; Tel . : + 86 - 0431 - 85095757 Received : 29 October 2018 ; Accepted : 5 December 2018 ; Published : 11 December 2018 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) Abstract : Nanoindentation techniques , with high spatial resolution and force sensitivity , have recently been moved into the center of the spotlight for measuring the mechanical properties of biomaterials , especially bridging the scales from the molecular via the cellular and tissue all the way to the organ level , whereas characterizing soft biomaterials , especially down to biomolecules , is fraught with more pitfalls compared with the hard biomaterials . In this review we detail the constitutive behavior of soft biomaterials under nanoindentation ( including AFM ) and present the characteristics of experimental aspects in detail , such as the adaption of instrumentation and indentation response of soft biomaterials . We further show some applications , and discuss the challenges and perspectives related to nanoindentation of soft biomaterials , a technique that can pinpoint the mechanical properties of soft biomaterials for the scale - span is far - reaching for understanding biomechanics and mechanobiology . Keywords : nanoindentation ; mechanical properties ; soft biomaterials ; viscoelasticity ; atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) 1 . Introduction Mechanical behavior of biological materials has come to the front stage recently , not only since its importance from the mechanical and load - bearing viewpoints , but also in the way that it inﬂuences other bio - functionalities [ 1 ] . Recent studies have directly linked major biological performances , mechanisms , and diseases to the mechanical response from the biomolecular up to the organ level [ 2 – 7 ] . In addition to the many medical applications , mechanical characterization of biological materials has also fueled the recent growth of materials science and engineering applications—bionics [ 8 ] , whereas the mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials , especially down to biomolecules , is more difﬁcult and fraught with more pitfalls compared with the hard biomaterials . At present , aiming at characterizing soft biomaterials , a variety of testing techniques have been developed and utilized widespread from bulk scale to the micro / nano - scale [ 9 – 14 ] . While every technique has its pros and cons , nanoindentation ( including AFM ) is considered as a powerful tool to conduct mechanical analyses , especially down to micro / nano - scale with nanometer depth and sub - nanonewton force resolution [ 15 ] . Firstly , and the most attractively , its micro / nano - mechanical contact methodology allow for region - speciﬁc mapping of biomaterials inhomogeneity [ 16 , 17 ] , and studying of cell mechanics [ 18 ] . Secondly , its unrestriction of tissue morphology avoids special preparation of material samples , which can be taken advantage of in the ﬁeld of in vivo testing [ 19 , 20 ] . Thirdly , its capacity of coupling with other optical techniques provides a new horizon for mechanical characterization [ 21 , 22 ] . Fourthly , compared with traditional testing methods with a single - measurement mode , indentation can provide an ideal loading modality whose stress and strain ﬁelds comprise tension , compression , and shear loading modes [ 23 ] . Further , as a non / micro - invasive method , nanoindentation can also be utilized for some valuable samples , such as fossils that are millions of years old [ 24 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / mi9120654 www . mdpi . com / journal / micromachines Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 2 of 24 In regard to nanoindentation of soft biological materials , current measurements lack a standardized testing routine owing to several challenges we are facing : 1 . Soft biomaterials are signiﬁcantly less stiff than typical engineering materials , which may be to some extent in conﬂict with the range / resolution of some commercial instruments . 2 . Most nanoindentation instrumentations are designed based on “dry state” testing , lacking environmentally - controlled components to build physiological environment ( such as ﬂuid submersion and thermal control ) . 3 . For most commercial instruments with the optical microscopes , the interference between the indenter / microscope and the sample surface may exist in the switch ( movement ) of indenter / microscope owing to non - ideal surface . This may lead to a considerable challenge , particularly in in vitro and in vivo testing . 4 . There is a paucity of consensus on the appropriate data analysis to mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials . In addition to the above factors , some features of soft biomaterials , such as viscoelasticity and adhesion , may also make some deviations when testing . These challenges have limited the development and utilization of nanoindentation technique which , in turn , slow the footsteps of characterization of soft biomaterials . In this review , we will discuss the above factors , and conclude with the perspectives and opportunities of nanoindentation of soft biomaterials . 2 . Soft Biomaterials For most people , soft materials are materials where the deformation can be felt by hand or seen with the naked eye without applying an excessive force [ 25 ] , which reﬂects the feature in a straightforward manner : it is much more compliant than many engineering materials . In fact , the words “soft” and “hard” do not indicate anything in regard to hardness or plastic deformation exactly , and soft biomaterials only imply non - mineralised in their healthy state [ 26 ] . Soft biomaterials , such as globular proteins [ 27 ] , cancer cells [ 28 ] , arteries [ 29 ] , cartilage [ 30 ] , and the brain [ 31 ] , vary in multiple length scales from the molecular via the cellular and tissue all the way to the organ level , and the above complex hierarchical structures make characterization within wide physiologically - relevant timescales and the elastic modulus range ( Figure 1 ) . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 24 In regard to nanoindentation of soft biological materials , current measurements lack a standardized testing routine owing to several challenges we are facing : 1 . Soft biomaterials are significantly less stiff than typical engineering materials , which may be to some extent in conflict with the range / resolution of some commercial instruments . 2 . Most nanoindentation instrumentations are designed based on “dry state” testing , lacking environmentally - controlled components to build physiological environment ( such as fluid submersion and thermal control ) . 3 . For most commercial instruments with the optical microscopes , the interference between the indenter / microscope and the sample surface may exist in the switch ( movement ) of indenter / microscope owing to non - ideal surface . This may lead to a considerable challenge , particularly in in vitro and in vivo testing . 4 . There is a paucity of consensus on the appropriate data analysis to mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials . In addition to the above factors , some features of soft biomaterials , such as viscoelasticity and adhesion , may also make some deviations when testing . These challenges have limited the development and utilization of nanoindentation technique which , in turn , slow the footsteps of characterization of soft biomaterials . In this review , we will discuss the above factors , and conclude with the perspectives and opportunities of nanoindentation of soft biomaterials . 2 . Soft Biomaterials For most people , soft materials are materials where the deformation can be felt by hand or seen with the naked eye without applying an excessive force [ 25 ] , which reflects the feature in a straightforward manner : it is much more compliant than many engineering materials . In fact , the words “soft” and “hard” do not indicate anything in regard to hardness or plastic deformation exactly , and soft biomaterials only imply non - mineralised in their healthy state [ 26 ] . Soft biomaterials , such as globular proteins [ 27 ] , cancer cells [ 28 ] , arteries [ 29 ] , cartilage [ 30 ] , and the brain [ 31 ] , vary in multiple length scales from the molecular via the cellular and tissue all the way to the organ level , and the above complex hierarchical structures make characterization within wide physiologically - relevant timescales and the elastic modulus range ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Multiple scales of soft biomaterials . ( a ) Length scales from the molecular to the organ level ; ( b ) timescales of different physiological processes ; and ( c ) comparisons of the elastic modulus among different typical materials . Reproduced with permission from [ 32 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 3 of 24 A number of constitutive models , such as linear elastic , hyperelastic , viscoelastic , and poroelastic models , have been widely used to mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials . In fact , these models can fall into different aspects of the constitutive response , in particular that distinguish them from typical engineering materials . First , many soft biomaterials exhibit nonlinear stress – strain ( σ − ε ) behavior , with an increasing stiffness as the strain increases . Nonetheless , the stress can be considered proportional to the strain under small deformations ( Figure 2a ) , in which the relationship between stress and strain is governed by a constant elastic modulus E ( just as the elastic stage of typical engineering materials ) , and can be ﬁtted to linear elastic model ( σ = E ε ) —the simplest type of material response . The threshold of the linear range varies from different biomaterials and testing methods [ 33 ] , and further discussion of the linear level can be seen in Section 4 . 3 . Another strategy of simpliﬁcation of nonlinear behavior with the linear elastic model is to divide the stress proﬁle into several portions . At each portion , the mechanical behavior can be considered linear and characterized with the linear elastic model [ 34 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 24 Figure 1 . Multiple scales of soft biomaterials . ( a ) Length scales from the molecular to the organ level ; ( b ) timescales of different physiological processes ; and ( c ) comparisons of the elastic modulus among different typical materials . Reproduced with permission from [ 32 ] . A number of constitutive models , such as linear elastic , hyperelastic , viscoelastic , and poroelastic models , have been widely used to mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials . In fact , these models can fall into different aspects of the constitutive response , in particular that distinguish them from typical engineering materials . First , many soft biomaterials exhibit nonlinear stress – strain ( σ − ε ) behavior , with an increasing stiffness as the strain increases . Nonetheless , the stress can be considered proportional to the strain under small deformations ( Figure 2a ) , in which the relationship between stress and strain is governed by a constant elastic modulus E ( just as the elastic stage of typical engineering materials ) , and can be fitted to linear elastic model ( σ = Eε ) —the simplest type of material response . The threshold of the linear range varies from different biomaterials and testing methods [ 33 ] , and further discussion of the linear level can be seen in Section 4 . 3 . Another strategy of simplification of nonlinear behavior with the linear elastic model is to divide the stress profile into several portions . At each portion , the mechanical behavior can be considered linear and characterized with the linear elastic model [ 34 ] . Linear Nonlinear Strain ε σ S t re ss Time t S t r a i n Time t σ S t re ss σ 0 ε t 0 σ ( t ) ε 0 Time t S t re ss Time t σ S t r a i n σ 0 ε t 0 ε ( t ) ε 0 ( a ) ( b ) Relaxation Creep Figure 2 . Constitutive responses of soft biomaterials . ( a ) Nonlinear stress – strain ( σ − ε ) behavior , in which the stress profile can be considered linear under small strain ; and ( b ) time - dependent mechanical behavior : stress - relaxation ( left ) and creep ( right ) . To acquire more accurate constitutive data , hyperelasticity provides a means of modeling the nonlinear stress – strain behavior of soft biomaterials . Many different kinds of hyperelastic models could be used to characterize mechanical behavior , such as Neo – Hookean , Mooney – Rivlin , Ogden , and Yeoh models [ 35 , 36 ] . As far as the above models are concerned , the Ogden model is classically used for finite element simulations , and Neo – Hookean , Mooney – Rivlin , and Yeoh models are best used at low , moderate , and high strain levels , respectively [ 37 ] . More details about different hyperelastic models and their parameters determined from indentation can be found in the literature [ 37 , 38 ] . The second aspect of soft biomaterials is the time - dependent mechanical behavior , i . e . , viscosity . Viscoelastic model , displaying a combination of both elastic and time - dependent responses . A viscoelastic material stores and dissipates mechanical energy simultaneously undergoing imposed mechanical excitation , with the response of stress - relaxation or creep over time , as shown in Figure 2b . Typically , the model formulated by a Prony series approximation can be used to describe viscoelastic response : / ( ) j t j j G t G G e τ − ∞ = + ⋅ ∑ ( 1 ) where G ∞ is the equilibrium shear modulus , τ j is the time constant for each exponential term , and G j is the associated magnitude of shear modulus . The initial shear modulus can be calculated by Figure 2 . Constitutive responses of soft biomaterials . ( a ) Nonlinear stress – strain ( σ − ε ) behavior , in which the stress proﬁle can be considered linear under small strain ; and ( b ) time - dependent mechanical behavior : stress - relaxation ( left ) and creep ( right ) . To acquire more accurate constitutive data , hyperelasticity provides a means of modeling the nonlinear stress – strain behavior of soft biomaterials . Many different kinds of hyperelastic models could be used to characterize mechanical behavior , such as Neo – Hookean , Mooney – Rivlin , Ogden , and Yeoh models [ 35 , 36 ] . As far as the above models are concerned , the Ogden model is classically used for ﬁnite element simulations , and Neo – Hookean , Mooney – Rivlin , and Yeoh models are best used at low , moderate , and high strain levels , respectively [ 37 ] . More details about different hyperelastic models and their parameters determined from indentation can be found in the literature [ 37 , 38 ] . The second aspect of soft biomaterials is the time - dependent mechanical behavior , i . e . , viscosity . Viscoelastic model , displaying a combination of both elastic and time - dependent responses . A viscoelastic material stores and dissipates mechanical energy simultaneously undergoing imposed mechanical excitation , with the response of stress - relaxation or creep over time , as shown in Figure 2b . Typically , the model formulated by a Prony series approximation can be used to describe viscoelastic response : G ( t ) = G ∞ + ∑ j G j · e − t / τ j ( 1 ) where G ∞ is the equilibrium shear modulus , τ j is the time constant for each exponential term , and G j is the associated magnitude of shear modulus . The initial shear modulus can be calculated by summing G ∞ and G j . The above parameters can be predicted using a minimization algorithm [ 39 ] . Additionally , nonlinear viscoelasticity can also been modeled during indentation [ 40 ] . As for most soft biomaterials , they are also hydrated , and a poroelastic ( also called biphasic ) model can also be used to describe time - dependent behavior under physiological condition : the ﬂow of a ﬂuid through a porous elastic solid [ 41 ] . In addition to the shear modulus G and the ( drained ) Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 4 of 24 Poisson’s ratio υ used to characterize the elastic behavior of the porous skeleton , Darcy ( hydraulic ) permeability κ , formulated between the ﬂuid viscosity η and the intrinsic permeability k ( k = κη ) , is an important parameter to indicate the ﬂuid – solid coupling and the ﬂuid ﬂow [ 42 ] . More details about poroelasticity during nanoindentation of soft biomaterials will be discussed in the Section 4 . 5 . Another aspect of soft biomaterials is the anisotropy and the heterogeneity . Some soft biomaterials exhibit direction - dependent and region - speciﬁc behavior based on their structural complexities at multiple length scales [ 17 , 43 , 44 ] . Apart from inherent complexities of materials , some external conditions may also lead to the above behavior [ 45 , 46 ] . It is imperative to characterize this structure - mechanical behavior with some speciﬁc analysis methods and models [ 46 – 48 ] . 3 . Methods Two kinds of commercial instruments have been developed and utilized widespread for indentation testing , especially down to micro / nano - scale : dedicated instrumented indentation instruments ( nanoindenter ) and the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) . In this section , we will introduce the working principles of two different instruments , and discuss the analysis of experimental data based on the force - indentation curves . 3 . 1 . Nanoindenter Nanoindentation , a form of depth - sensing indentation ( DSI ) testing technique , involves the application of a controlled load / depth to the surface to induce local surface deformation ( Figure 3 ) . During a typical testing , Load P , indentation depth h and time t are monitored as the indenter is actuated into the test material’s surface . The response of P − h − t trace is ﬁtted to a range of different constitutive models to identify mechanical properties of the sample . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 24 summing G ∞ and G j . The above parameters can be predicted using a minimization algorithm [ 39 ] . Additionally , nonlinear viscoelasticity can also been modeled during indentation [ 40 ] . As for most soft biomaterials , they are also hydrated , and a poroelastic ( also called biphasic ) model can also be used to describe time - dependent behavior under physiological condition : the flow of a fluid through a porous elastic solid [ 41 ] . In addition to the shear modulus G and the ( drained ) Poisson’s ratio υ used to characterize the elastic behavior of the porous skeleton , Darcy ( hydraulic ) permeability κ , formulated between the fluid viscosity η and the intrinsic permeability k ( k = κη ) , is an important parameter to indicate the fluid – solid coupling and the fluid flow [ 42 ] . More details about poroelasticity during nanoindentation of soft biomaterials will be discussed in the Section 4 . 5 . Another aspect of soft biomaterials is the anisotropy and the heterogeneity . Some soft biomaterials exhibit direction - dependent and region - specific behavior based on their structural complexities at multiple length scales [ 17 , 43 , 44 ] . Apart from inherent complexities of materials , some external conditions may also lead to the above behavior [ 45 , 46 ] . It is imperative to characterize this structure - mechanical behavior with some specific analysis methods and models [ 46 – 48 ] . 3 . Methods Two kinds of commercial instruments have been developed and utilized widespread for indentation testing , especially down to micro / nano - scale : dedicated instrumented indentation instruments ( nanoindenter ) and the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) . In this section , we will introduce the working principles of two different instruments , and discuss the analysis of experimental data based on the force - indentation curves . 3 . 1 . Nanoindenter Nanoindentation , a form of depth - sensing indentation ( DSI ) testing technique , involves the application of a controlled load / depth to the surface to induce local surface deformation ( Figure 3 ) . During a typical testing , Load P , indentation depth h and time t are monitored as the indenter is actuated into the test material’s surface . The response of P − h − t trace is fitted to a range of different constitutive models to identify mechanical properties of the sample . Loading Unit Springs Detecting Unit Indenter Tip Sample Sample Stage Load Frame Figure 3 . Schematic diagram of a nanoindenter instrument . Usually , a nanoindenter consists of several essential components : • Loading unit : typically actuated by the expansion of the piezoelectric element , magnetic coils , or electrostatically [ 49 ] . • Detecting unit : sensors ( capacitance or inductance ) to record the displacement of the indenter . In fact , whether the strategy applying force and measuring displacement through separate means , or using the same transducer , the data of raw force and displacement are always coupled due to the leaf springs [ 50 ] . • Indenter tip : for soft biomaterials , typically using dull indenters ( such as spherical and flat - ended ) , rather than sharp indenters ( such as Berkovich and Vickers ) to avoid penetration of the sample . Figure 3 . Schematic diagram of a nanoindenter instrument . Usually , a nanoindenter consists of several essential components : • Loading unit : typically actuated by the expansion of the piezoelectric element , magnetic coils , or electrostatically [ 49 ] . • Detecting unit : sensors ( capacitance or inductance ) to record the displacement of the indenter . In fact , whether the strategy applying force and measuring displacement through separate means , or using the same transducer , the data of raw force and displacement are always coupled due to the leaf springs [ 50 ] . • Indenter tip : for soft biomaterials , typically using dull indenters ( such as spherical and ﬂat - ended ) , rather than sharp indenters ( such as Berkovich and Vickers ) to avoid penetration of the sample . • Sample stage : a two - or three - coordinate stage ( x , y , or z ) to move the sample . • Microscopes : to observe and choose the point of the sample during testing . • Control system : the computer with the software to operate instrument , analyze results , and save data . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 5 of 24 • Other additive components : such as custom irrigation system [ 51 ] and ﬂuid cell [ 52 ] for biomaterials . Deﬁnitely , the design of instruments may be not identical to the above components , especially for the custom instruments , but part of them and similar working principles are , at least , included [ 31 , 53 ] . 3 . 2 . Atomic Force Microscopy ( AFM ) Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , a part of the scanning probe microscopy branch , operates based on the interaction between the sample surface and the small tip located on the end of a sensitive cantilever . Apart from the basic goal of imaging surface morphology , AFM can also act as a powerful instrument to conduct micro / nano - mechanical analysis . In particular , the mode of mechanical characterization combined with high resolution imaging technique , allows a more targeted investigation of biomaterials features , especially down to nanoscale . The setup and the measurement of AFM have been covered in a number of works [ 54 – 56 ] , and a brief introduction is given here . During typical testing , the tip or the sample is moved to each other with a piezoelectric , until the tip - sample contact occurs and the cantilever deﬂects ( Figure 4 ) . The indentation force P can be described by Hooke’s law : P = k c ∆ d ( 2 ) where k c denotes the spring constant of the cantilever , and ∆ d is the corresponding deﬂection of the cantilever . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 24 • Sample stage : a two - or three - coordinate stage ( x , y , or z ) to move the sample . • Microscopes : to observe and choose the point of the sample during testing . • Control system : the computer with the software to operate instrument , analyze results , and save data . • Other additive components : such as custom irrigation system [ 51 ] and fluid cell [ 52 ] for biomaterials . Definitely , the design of instruments may be not identical to the above components , especially for the custom instruments , but part of them and similar working principles are , at least , included [ 31 , 53 ] . 3 . 2 . Atomic Force Microscopy ( AFM ) Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , a part of the scanning probe microscopy branch , operates based on the interaction between the sample surface and the small tip located on the end of a sensitive cantilever . Apart from the basic goal of imaging surface morphology , AFM can also act as a powerful instrument to conduct micro / nano - mechanical analysis . In particular , the mode of mechanical characterization combined with high resolution imaging technique , allows a more targeted investigation of biomaterials features , especially down to nanoscale . The setup and the measurement of AFM have been covered in a number of works [ 54 – 56 ] , and a brief introduction is given here . During typical testing , the tip or the sample is moved to each other with a piezoelectric , until the tip - sample contact occurs and the cantilever deflects ( Figure 4 ) . The indentation force P can be described by Hooke’s law : c P k d = ∆ ( 2 ) where k c denotes the spring constant of the cantilever , and ∆ d is the corresponding deflection of the cantilever . Laser Piezo Photodiode Cantilever Tip Sample xyz drive Stage z Support Figure 4 . Schematic diagram of an AFM instrument . For stiff samples , which are several orders of magnitude stiffer than the tip , the displacement of the piezo ∆ z is equal to corresponding deflection of the cantilever ∆ d ( ∆ z = ∆ d ) , since the indentation depth h is zero ( h = 0 ) . However , for many samples ( e . g . , soft biomaterials ) , the displacement of the piezo ∆ z is larger than the corresponding deflection of the cantilever ∆ d owing to the indentation , and the indentation depth h can be expressed as following : h z d = ∆ − ∆ ( 3 ) So far , the “deflection – displacement curve” of AFM indentation can be developed to typical “force - indentation ( P − h ) curve” in nanoindentation , and analyzed likewise by different constitutive models . 3 . 3 . Force – Indentation ( P − h ) Curves 3 . 3 . 1 . Oliver – Pharr Model Figure 4 . Schematic diagram of an AFM instrument . For stiff samples , which are several orders of magnitude stiffer than the tip , the displacement of the piezo ∆ z is equal to corresponding deﬂection of the cantilever ∆ d ( ∆ z = ∆ d ) , since the indentation depth h is zero ( h = 0 ) . However , for many samples ( e . g . , soft biomaterials ) , the displacement of the piezo ∆ z is larger than the corresponding deﬂection of the cantilever ∆ d owing to the indentation , and the indentation depth h can be expressed as following : h = ∆ z − ∆ d ( 3 ) So far , the “deﬂection – displacement curve” of AFM indentation can be developed to typical “force - indentation ( P − h ) curve” in nanoindentation , and analyzed likewise by different constitutive models . 3 . 3 . Force – Indentation ( P − h ) Curves 3 . 3 . 1 . Oliver – Pharr Model The analysis of force – indentation ( P − h ) curves of commercial nanoindnetation system is often based on the work by Doerner and Nix [ 57 ] and Oliver and Pharr [ 58 ] . It is assumed that only the elastic recovery occurs in the initial portion of the unloading , while the loading is an elastic – plastic Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 6 of 24 contact mode . The relationship formulated between indentation force P and depth h during unloading can be expressed a power law relation : P = α ( h − h f ) m ( 4 ) where h f is the ﬁnal residual indent of depth , α and m are power law ﬁtting constants related to the indenter geometry . The stiffness S , deﬁned as the resistance in response to an applied force , can be calculated by the slope of the upper portion of the unloading curve : S = dP dh ( 5 ) Further , the reduced elastic modulus E r ( the combined modulus of the tip and the sample ) can be determined in the terms of the unloading the contact area A : E r = √ π 2 S √ A ( 6 ) and the sample elastic modulus E s can be determined by decoupling the deformations of both indenter and the sample as given by : 1 E r = ( 1 − v s 2 ) E s + ( 1 − v i 2 ) E i ( 7 ) where v is the Poisson’s ratio , subscript s and i refer to the sample and indenter material respectively . The above approach works very well for typical engineering materials and some hard biomaterials ( e . g . , bone [ 59 ] ) , but for the materials with time - independent mechanical responses ( i . e . , soft biomaterials here ) , Oliver – Pharr method is invalidated due to the creep to overwhelm the elastic recovery [ 60 ] , resulting in a near - vertical or even negative slope in the initial unloading region . For this reason , some “corrections” have been adopted based on Oliver – Pharr analysis , such as high unloading rates [ 61 ] , long hold periods [ 62 ] and the data analysis based on the measured creep rate [ 63 – 65 ] . Another limitation of Oliver – Pharr method is that the results necessarily rely on the contact area ( tip area function ) , which may lead to signiﬁcant errors in the cases of the “tip radius“ effect [ 66 , 67 ] and the pile - up ( or sink - in ) effect [ 68 ] . Accordingly , some correction factors [ 69 , 70 ] or new approaches [ 71 ] may be also taken into account to evaluate the actual properties of the material . 3 . 3 . 2 . Hertz Contact Model Hertz model , the most well - known and applied theory in mechanical characterization of materials , was proposed by Hertz to solve the problem of contact between two smooth , ellipsoidal bodies [ 72 ] . Some assumptions employed for validity are required : • Small contact area and small deformations . • Isotropic and homogenous materials . • Adhesionless and frictionless surfaces . Following the above assumptions , Sneddon made a signiﬁcant contribution to the theoretical framework to formulate the relationship between force and depth for a punch of arbitrary proﬁle penetrated [ 73 ] . Initially , Sneddon’s solution was developed for elastic contact of hard materials , and it has been proved applicable to extend to determine the initial shear modulus and even hyperelastic parameters of non - linear soft materials [ 74 ] . For the indentation by a ﬂat - ended cylindrical indenter , the indentation force P and depth h can be directly related through the following equation : P cylinder = 4 R 1 − ν Gh ( 8 ) Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 7 of 24 where R is the cylinder radius , and G and υ are the shear modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the soft biomaterial , respectively . For a spherical indenter ( Figure 5 ) , the indentation force is : P sphere = 8 √ R 3 ( 1 − ν ) Gh 3 / 2 ( 9 ) where R is the sphere radius , and for a conical indenter : P cone = 4 tan α π ( 1 − ν ) Gh 2 ( 10 ) where α is the cone half angle . Sometimes , the above equations may need to be modiﬁed owing to the non - ideal effects while mechanical characterization [ 31 , 75 ] , such as the correction factor of size effect [ 76 , 77 ] and the compensating factor for the tip [ 78 , 79 ] . When it comes to micro / nano - scale ( such as cell indentation ) , the above effect may be much more signiﬁcant considering that the indentation depth is comparable to the cell dimension . The Hertz contact model may become invalid owing to large deformation or thin - layer effect , in which case some correction factors or new models need to be taken into account [ 80 – 82 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 24 cylinder 4 1 R P Gh ν = − ( 8 ) where R is the cylinder radius , and G and υ are the shear modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the soft biomaterial , respectively . For a spherical indenter ( Figure 5 ) , the indentation force is : 3 / 2 sphere 8 3 ( 1 ) R P Gh ν = − ( 9 ) where R is the sphere radius , and for a conical indenter : 2 cone 4 tan ( 1 ) P Gh α π ν = − ( 10 ) where α is the cone half angle . Sometimes , the above equations may need to be modified owing to the non - ideal effects while mechanical characterization [ 31 , 75 ] , such as the correction factor of size effect [ 76 , 77 ] and the compensating factor for the tip [ 78 , 79 ] . When it comes to micro / nano - scale ( such as cell indentation ) , the above effect may be much more significant considering that the indentation depth is comparable to the cell dimension . The Hertz contact model may become invalid owing to large deformation or thin - layer effect , in which case some correction factors or new models need to be taken into account [ 80 – 82 ] . Figure 5 . Typical force – indentation ( P − h ) curve for spherical indenter , in which the Oliver – Pharr model can be used in elastic unloading portion , and Hertz contact model can be used in elastic loading portion . Reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 49 ] . For the characterization of time - dependent behavior , a Boltzmann hereditary integral , based on associated solution for a linearly elastic material , was proposed to capture the time - dependent stresses and deformations along the total temporal scale [ 83 ] . For the flat - ended cylindrical indenter with a radius R , applying the hereditary integral in Equation ( 8 ) , the time - dependent indentation force P ( t ) and depth h relation is represented by : cylinder 0 4 d ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 d t R h P t G t d τ τ ν τ = − − ∫ ( 11 ) Similarly , for the spherical indenter with a radius R : 3 / 2 sphere 0 8 d ( ) ( ) ( ) 3 ( 1 ) d t R h P t G t d τ τ ν τ = − − ∫ ( 12 ) and for the conical indenter with a cone half angle α : Figure 5 . Typical force – indentation ( P − h ) curve for spherical indenter , in which the Oliver – Pharr model can be used in elastic unloading portion , and Hertz contact model can be used in elastic loading portion . Reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 49 ] . For the characterization of time - dependent behavior , a Boltzmann hereditary integral , based on associated solution for a linearly elastic material , was proposed to capture the time - dependent stresses and deformations along the total temporal scale [ 83 ] . For the ﬂat - ended cylindrical indenter with a radius R , applying the hereditary integral in Equation ( 8 ) , the time - dependent indentation force P ( t ) and depth h relation is represented by : P cylinder ( t ) = 4 R 1 − ν (cid:90) t 0 G ( t − τ ) ( d h d τ ) d τ ( 11 ) Similarly , for the spherical indenter with a radius R : P sphere ( t ) = 8 √ R 3 ( 1 − ν ) (cid:90) t 0 G ( t − τ ) ( d h 3 / 2 d τ ) d τ ( 12 ) and for the conical indenter with a cone half angle α : P cone ( t ) = 4 tan α π ( 1 − ν ) (cid:90) t 0 G ( t − τ ) ( d h 2 d τ ) d τ ( 13 ) Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 8 of 24 In Equations ( 11 ) – ( 13 ) , the time - dependent shear modulus G ( t ) can be expressed by a linear viscoelastic model ( see Equations ( 1 ) ) to characterize time - dependent mechanical properties [ 84 , 85 ] . Overall , compared with the Oliver – Pharr model based on elastic – plastic deformation ( or the “correction” based on viscous - elastic – plastic deformation ) , the Hertz and Sneddon models , based on elastic contact , may dominate the literature for soft biomaterials due to their simplicity and widespread application [ 86 ] . The comparisons between the Oliver – Pharr method and Hertz contact model are summarized in Table 1 , in which some aspects , such as tip selection and control mode , will be further discussed in the next section . The reader is also encouraged to review more analytical approaches in / beyond the Hertzian regime provided in the literature [ 87 ] . Table 1 . Comparisons between the Oliver – Pharr method and Hertz contact model . Oliver – Pharr Model Hertz Contact Model Application Typical engineering materials and hard biomaterials Soft biomaterials Tip Selection Typically using sharp indenters ( e . g . , Berkovich and Vickers ) Typically using dull indenters ( e . g . , spherical and ﬂat - ended ) Control Mode Typically using load - control Typically using displacement - control Data Analyzed Unloading Loading ( include holding when characterizing viscoelasticity ) Method for Time - Dependence “Correfcted” Oliver – Pharr analysis Boltzmann hereditary integral ( Equations ( 11 ) – ( 13 ) ) 4 . Test Protocols Compared with the typical engineering materials and hard biomaterials , soft biomaterials are much more compliant , with the elastic modulus values down to MPa or even kPa range . Considering the inherent complexities of soft biomaterials , great care and consideration are required to characterize mechanical behavior at multiple scales , especially when utilizing commercial instrumentation . In this section , some limitations as to data collection and analysis are considered , and a set of guidelines are presented . 4 . 1 . Tip Selection 4 . 1 . 1 . Tip Material As is well - known , the materials of indenter tip are relatively stiff compared with the sample , to ensure that the compliance of tip is tiny and can be ignored . Owing to the low modulus of soft biomaterials , tip materials can be changed from the diamond or sapphire , which is widely used in typical nanoindentaion , to steel [ 88 ] , aluminum [ 33 ] , or even silica [ 89 ] and silicon [ 31 ] . 4 . 1 . 2 . Tip Geometry For indenting soft biomaterials , whose force – indentation regime is opposite to stiff materials , small forces arise at relatively large displacements compared with large forces at relatively small displacements [ 90 ] . Thus , a dull tip ( spherical [ 43 ] and ﬂat - ended [ 33 ] ) is commonly used instead of a sharp tip ( Berkovich [ 91 ] , Vickers [ 92 ] , conical [ 93 ] , and cube corner [ 94 ] ) . Some advantages of a dull tip are as follows : • A dull tip can achieve a larger contact area and therefore a higher force level compared with a sharp indenter at the same indentation depth , which allows for the testing within range / resolution of the instrument . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 9 of 24 • The high plastic deformations and stress concentrations induced by a sharp tip could lead to sample damage ( from tissue penetration to cell membrane rupture ) and excess of linear elastic limit . • Considering heterogeneity and complexity of soft biomaterials inherently , a sharp tip may lead to signiﬁcant differences among repetitive tests owing to too small tip - sample contact area . Thus , one measurement with a dull tip can be considered as the average of many measurements with the sharp probe , and consequently , less time to obtain robust statistics . In spite of the wide application of spherical and ﬂat - ended tips for characterizing soft biomaterials , each one has its own advantages and drawbacks , and may be more applicable to speciﬁc conditions , as shown in Table 2 . The reader is also encouraged to review more details about different tips in the literature [ 82 , 95 ] . Table 2 . Comparison between sphere and ﬂat - ended tip for characterization of soft biomaterials Sphere Tip Flat - Ended Tip Advantages • Can offer the stress without high stress concentration at the contact perimeter . • Can simplify data analysis within a constant contact area during indentation . • Can achieve more force value compared with sphere tip at the same depth , which is crucial to the instruments with low signal - to - noise ratios . 4 . 1 . 3 . Tip Dimension By virtue of different tip dimensions , indentation instruments can provide the versatility of functioning across the length spectrum ranging from bulk scale to the micro / nano - scale , and even large - scale indentation ( with millimeter - sized or larger tips ) has also been widely used for characterization of some extremely soft biomaterials ( e . g . , brain tissue [ 33 ] ) . Anyway , to avoid complicating the interpretation of the data , a criterion is suggested here to be exercised while indentation : the size of tip R < < current length scale level of the measured sample L current level , and tip size R > > the lower length scale level L lower level . For example , if the goal is to characterize the mechanical behavior at tissue - level , the tip size need to be much small compared with the tissue , to adapt to the Hertz assumption of inﬁnite half space ( R < < L tissue level ) , as well as larger than the diameter of an individual cell or ﬁber ( R > > L cell level ) . 4 . 2 . Control Mode For most commercial nanoindenters , a load - controlled mode is utilized by default . However , for soft biomaterials which are extremely compliant , adhesive and time - dependent , this mode can be difﬁculties with the contact detection and data analysis , in which case displacement - control is extremely useful . Firstly , displacement - control can overcome unambiguous tip - sample contact detection . Whether the contact is ascertained by a small force change or a small apparent stiffness change in the mode of load - control , the characteristics of low modulus and time - dependence of soft biomaterials would play against the change of force and stiffness respectively . Accordingly , tests starting below the sample surface detection may happen , leading to signiﬁcant overestimations of the elastic modulus of soft materials via indentation [ 96 ] . On the contrary , the test can be initiated prior to tip – sample contact in the displacement - controlled mode , when the probe is slightly above the sample , and some correction of the contact point can be applied post - hoc . Additionally , displacement - control can simplify data analysis of time - dependent behavior . For most soft biomaterials , they are viscoelastic materials whose properties depend on the strain rate . In the mode of load - control , the strain rate is not a constant during indentation due to displacement creeping , which complicates the mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 10 of 24 4 . 3 . Transition from Linear to Nonlinear Behavior In general , the assumption of small strain need to be satisﬁed when characterizing soft biomaterials based on Hertz contact model , so it is not trivial to establish criteria for linear behavior threshold . Albeit some plausible criterions have been proposed empirically , such as a threshold of 10 % indentation strain [ 97 ] , it remains vague and unclear for the transition from linear to nonlinear stress – strain behavior [ 15 ] . Actually , the ranges of linearity differ from different materials and even testing methods . For example , some studies limit the strain values below 1 % to guarantee the linear behavior for brain tissue via dynamic shearing testing [ 48 , 98 ] . As for indentation of brain tissue , this level is increased up to 10 % strain by Elkin et al . [ 99 , 100 ] , or even 45 % strain adopted by MacManus et al . [ 31 ] . More recently , Budday et al . concluded different linear ranges of brain tissue in one study , in which the threshold was limited to 10 % strain in compression or tension , and 20 % in shear [ 101 ] . The situations are equally complicated when it comes to microscale . Leipzig and Athanasiou characterize elastic behavior of chondrocytes at ~ 30 % strain via compression [ 102 ] , and a lower level ( 15 % strain ) is suggested to be applicable in AFM indentation according to Darling et al . [ 103 ] . More strictly , this value is limited to 5 % by Chen and Lu [ 80 ] . Hence , some criteria of linear behavior threshold should be referred cautiously , especially for some high levels , and be explored speciﬁcally depending on different materials and testing methods . Additionally , some correction factors or new models , extending beyond the Hertzian and linear elastic models , can be developed and utilized to minimize the above issues [ 80 ] . 4 . 4 . Adhesion and Point of Contact ( POC ) Adhesion , the most prevalent form of tip – sample interaction in the indentation of soft biomaterials , may omit the true point of contact erroneously , which in turn interferes the measurements of mechanical characterization ( Figure 6 ) . It is suggested that the adhesion between the tip and the sample is a signiﬁcantly important parameter and needs to be taken into account for mechanical characterization , whether for a dedicated nanoindenter or AFM indentation [ 104 , 105 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 24 4 . 3 . Transition from Linear to Nonlinear Behavior In general , the assumption of small strain need to be satisfied when characterizing soft biomaterials based on Hertz contact model , so it is not trivial to establish criteria for linear behavior threshold . Albeit some plausible criterions have been proposed empirically , such as a threshold of 10 % indentation strain [ 97 ] , it remains vague and unclear for the transition from linear to nonlinear stress – strain behavior [ 15 ] . Actually , the ranges of linearity differ from different materials and even testing methods . For example , some studies limit the strain values below 1 % to guarantee the linear behavior for brain tissue via dynamic shearing testing [ 48 , 98 ] . As for indentation of brain tissue , this level is increased up to 10 % strain by Elkin et al . [ 99 , 100 ] , or even 45 % strain adopted by MacManus et al . [ 31 ] . More recently , Budday et al . concluded different linear ranges of brain tissue in one study , in which the threshold was limited to 10 % strain in compression or tension , and 20 % in shear [ 101 ] . The situations are equally complicated when it comes to microscale . Leipzig and Athanasiou characterize elastic behavior of chondrocytes at ~ 30 % strain via compression [ 102 ] , and a lower level ( 15 % strain ) is suggested to be applicable in AFM indentation according to Darling et al . [ 103 ] . More strictly , this value is limited to 5 % by Chen and Lu [ 80 ] . Hence , some criteria of linear behavior threshold should be referred cautiously , especially for some high levels , and be explored specifically depending on different materials and testing methods . Additionally , some correction factors or new models , extending beyond the Hertzian and linear elastic models , can be developed and utilized to minimize the above issues [ 80 ] . 4 . 4 . Adhesion and Point of Contact ( POC ) Adhesion , the most prevalent form of tip – sample interaction in the indentation of soft biomaterials , may omit the true point of contact erroneously , which in turn interferes the measurements of mechanical characterization ( Figure 6 ) . It is suggested that the adhesion between the tip and the sample is a significantly important parameter and needs to be taken into account for mechanical characterization , whether for a dedicated nanoindenter or AFM indentation [ 104 , 105 ] . Figure 6 . Schematic diagram of the adhesion in AFM nanoindentation , in which the red line is the approach and the blue line is the retract curve . Reproduced with permission from [ 86 ] . When adhesion is present , some non - interactive contact models , such as the aforementioned Oliver – Pharr and Hertz contact models , may need to be modified to make the modulus values more accurate [ 106 ] . This was pioneered by JKR ( Johnson – Kendall – Roberts ) theory [ 107 ] , which introduces an apparent Hertz load or the equivalent load . Subsequently , a seemingly contradictory theory , DMT ( Derjaguin – Muller – Toporov ) theory [ 108 ] , was proposed , which is assumed to follow the Hertz model . Actually , The above two theories were identified in terms of sample compliance adhesive force range , in which JKR theory describes the case of relatively compliant materials with large contact size and adhesive force , and DMT theory stands the opposite with stiff materials , small contact size , and adhesive force [ 109 ] . Further , the adhesive contact mechanics was developed by Maugis – Dugdale ( MD ) theory , which is an intermediate case spanning the JKR and DMT limits [ 110 , 111 ] . Aside from the theories based on adhesive contact , some methods for non - adhesive contact have been employed for POC determination , and summed up in the literature [ 86 , 87 ] . These include , but Figure 6 . Schematic diagram of the adhesion in AFM nanoindentation , in which the red line is the approach and the blue line is the retract curve . Reproduced with permission from [ 86 ] . When adhesion is present , some non - interactive contact models , such as the aforementioned Oliver – Pharr and Hertz contact models , may need to be modiﬁed to make the modulus values more accurate [ 106 ] . This was pioneered by JKR ( Johnson – Kendall – Roberts ) theory [ 107 ] , which introduces an apparent Hertz load or the equivalent load . Subsequently , a seemingly contradictory theory , DMT ( Derjaguin – Muller – Toporov ) theory [ 108 ] , was proposed , which is assumed to follow the Hertz model . Actually , The above two theories were identiﬁed in terms of sample compliance adhesive force range , in which JKR theory describes the case of relatively compliant materials with large contact size and adhesive force , and DMT theory stands the opposite with stiff materials , small contact size , and adhesive force [ 109 ] . Further , the adhesive contact mechanics was developed by Maugis – Dugdale ( MD ) theory , which is an intermediate case spanning the JKR and DMT limits [ 110 , 111 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 11 of 24 Aside from the theories based on adhesive contact , some methods for non - adhesive contact have been employed for POC determination , and summed up in the literature [ 86 , 87 ] . These include , but are not limited to , visual inspection [ 112 ] , model ﬁtting [ 105 ] , extrapolation [ 112 , 113 ] , and Bayesian analysis [ 114 ] . Additionally , another strategy has been considered to characterize mechanical behavior without needing to determine the POC . A method was initially proposed by A - Hassan et al . to compare a known reference sample [ 115 ] . Later a protocol of data processing to linearize the Hertz and Sneddon equations for different tips has been developed and used widely [ 33 , 116 ] . According to Equations ( 8 ) – ( 10 ) , shear modulus G can be determined by measuring the slope of indentation force for differen tips P cylinder , ( P sphere ) 2 / 3 and ( P cone ) 1 / 2 versus indentation depth h : G cylinder = 1 4slope1 − ν R ( 14 ) G sphere = 3 8slope 3 / 2 1 − ν √ R ( 15 ) G cone = π 4 slope 2 1 − ν tan α ( 16 ) In this way , the shear modulus , deﬁned in terms of remaining constant parameters of tip geometric and Poisson’s ratio , can be calculated without POC . 4 . 5 . Viscoelasticity and Poroelasticity It is known that almost all soft biomaterials exhibit time - dependent behavior . Apart from some aforementioned typical indentation methods to characterize time - dependent behavior , dynamic testing , where a sinusoidal load rather than a trapezoidal load is applied to measure storage and loss modulus directly as a function of loading frequency , is also widely used [ 117 , 118 ] . Consider that many soft biomaterials exhibit time - dependent behavior under speciﬁc physiological conditions , some explicit analysis connected with physiological conditions are more likely to be central to future studies of soft biomaterials , rather than considering water solely as a solvent or an adaptive component . Compared with linear viscoelasticity , poroelasticity can clearly model the multiphase nature of soft biomaterials . Additionally , different from the empirical ﬁtting of linear viscoelastic model , poroelastic model is mechanistic and can relate the rheological properties to structural or biological parameters , which in turn can predict the changes in rheology due to microstructural changes [ 32 ] . It also need to be mentioned that these two effects ( viscoelasticity and poroelasticity ) act relatively independently and can be separated uniquely with exhibiting both behaviors simultaneously [ 119 ] . This independence makes sense since one mechanism is dictated by tissue dissipation and the other by ﬂuid ﬂow [ 26 ] . In the case of some complicated constitutive response , such as a nonlinear viscoelastic or a poroelastic model , there may be no closed - form analytical expression of the indentation issue , and some approaches of ﬁnite element analysis ( FEA ) are proved to be useful [ 90 ] : inverse optimization FEA model [ 120 ] , approximation of forward FEA simulations [ 121 ] , and a ﬁtted database [ 122 ] . In fact , no matter what constitutive model is used to characterize time - dependent behavior , most data analysis are performed “off - line” from the instrument software , which impedes development of commercial instruments , especially in the ﬁeld of biomaterials characterization . More details about the comparisons between viscoelastic model and poroelastic model can be seen in [ 82 ] . 4 . 6 . Sample Hydration and Environmental Control Another critical factor for mechanical characterization of most soft biomaterials is the hydration state of the sample . Owing to the difﬁculties respect to instrument setup , data acquisition and analysis in handling the hydration state of the sample , there have been to date , relatively few studies under a hydrated state . However , a number of studies have concluded lower elastic modulus Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 12 of 24 values for hydrated soft biomaterials with as much as an order of magnitude than that of the dried counterpart [ 123 , 124 ] . There are two different basic strategies for hydrated testing of samples : “off - line” and “on - line” . Samples can be hydrated in ﬂuid prior to testing , and just removed from the ﬂuid while indentation within a short time period before the ﬂuid evaporates [ 88 , 118 ] . This is the simplest hydration method , but may be problematic in a way considering the susceptibility of biomaterials to ambient conversion . Alternatively , samples can also be tested in a hydrated or submerged ﬂuid environment , including partially / fully submerged in ﬂuid [ 33 , 42 ] , surrounded by hydrating foam layer [ 29 ] , hydrated by specialized irrigation system [ 51 ] , and covered by physiological saline - coated gauze [ 30 ] . Even if the samples have been hydrated , it is still unmet for environmentally - controlled nanoindentation under the truly physiological state . First is the types of ﬂuid environments . Sometimes , water is used for sample hydration instead of physiological saline or other special solution ( such as artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid for brain tissue ) to minimize the risk of ﬂuid damage to the instrument , especially for commercial instruments , but such substitution may lead to alteration of mechanical response [ 125 ] . Further , most studies are performed at room temperature rather than body temperature , and even current models for mechanical characterization perform poorly when ﬁtting such experimental data . Thus , some control of experimental design and better models are needed to characterize soft biomaterials under a truly physiological state . Consequently , considering the complexity of physiological activity , it may be better to some extent to achieve environmentally controlled nanoindentation based on “biology” instead of “mechanics” , i . e . , it is more intriguing for in vivo testing , compared with in situ or in vitro testing . 5 . Applications 5 . 1 . AFM Indentation By virtue of its high spatial and force resolutions , AFM has long been a critical technique for characterizing biological systems , from biomolecules to complexes , which , in turn , has been a driving force for the expansion of the repertoire of novel applications [ 126 – 128 ] . Today , AFM has become increasingly sophisticated , especially combined with surface morphology and topography at the micro / nano - scale [ 128 – 130 ] . 5 . 1 . 1 . Biomolecular Level Mechanical characterization at the biomolecular level can provide the insight into how properties and functions at more intricate biomolecular complexes ( single cells and tissues , and organelles ) arise from a myriad of single biomolecules . For example , intermediate ﬁlaments offer mechanical stability to cells when exposed to mechanical stress , and act as a support when the other cytoskeletal ﬁlaments cannot keep the structural integrity of the cells [ 131 ] . AFM can also be applied for the mapping of target RNA distribution using probe DNA - immobilized AFM tips [ 132 ] , which is fundamentally important to understand the regulatory mechanisms underlying cellular and tissue differentiation [ 133 ] . In addition to the single biomolecules , interactions of molecules ( Figure 7 ) are also able to produce signiﬁcant effects on the functionality of larger - scale biomolecular complexes and tissues . DNA - protein interactions , which play important roles in numerous fundamental biological processes such as DNA replication , packing , recombination , DNA repair , RNA transport , and translation , can also be explored by AFM [ 134 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 13 of 24 Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 24 Figure 7 . ( a ) Scheme of the tip functionalization and dendrimer adsorption on mica . ( b ) Main steps of a force curve depicting a molecular recognition ( specific ) event . ① . Tip far from the surface . ② . Initial tip – surface contact ( approaching ) . ③ . Tip – surface repulsive region . ④ . Molecular recognition unbinding force . Reproduced with permission from [ 135 ] . Further , characterization of biomolecules can also provide the potential to supplement the field of biomaterials with new resources for the design of novel materials and nanocomposites [ 136 ] . 5 . 1 . 2 . Cellular Level Cell mechanics , one of the most important biophysical properties , can provide new perspectives on pathologies and classic biological research questions [ 32 ] . AFM has been recognized as a powerful technique to understand cellular processes in the applications of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering [ 137 ] . Further , AFM indentation can offer various functionalities , starting from surface imaging to detection of interaction forces , delivering quantitative mechanical behavior that can describe changes characteristic in diagnosis of many pathological conditions , such as cancer [ 138 ] . Together with surface topography , AFM can also offer accurate constitutive data about surface physico - chemical properties , such as elasticity [ 139 ] , friction [ 140 ] , adhesion [ 141 ] , and even nanoscale surgeries on live cells ( Figure 8 ) [ 20 ] . Figure 8 . Nanoscale operation of a living cell using AFM . ( a ) Schematic representation of a nanoneedle on the AFM tip over a living cell . ( b ) Force - distance curves during approach and retraction from a melanocyte . ( c ) Cross - section images for green and red emission processed from confocal slices . Reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 20 ] . Figure 7 . ( a ) Scheme of the tip functionalization and dendrimer adsorption on mica . ( b ) Main steps of a force curve depicting a molecular recognition ( speciﬁc ) event . 1 (cid:13) . Tip far from the surface . 2 (cid:13) . Initial tip – surface contact ( approaching ) . 3 (cid:13) . Tip – surface repulsive region . 4 (cid:13) . Molecular recognition unbinding force . Reproduced with permission from [ 135 ] . Further , characterization of biomolecules can also provide the potential to supplement the ﬁeld of biomaterials with new resources for the design of novel materials and nanocomposites [ 136 ] . 5 . 1 . 2 . Cellular Level Cell mechanics , one of the most important biophysical properties , can provide new perspectives on pathologies and classic biological research questions [ 32 ] . AFM has been recognized as a powerful technique to understand cellular processes in the applications of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering [ 137 ] . Further , AFM indentation can offer various functionalities , starting from surface imaging to detection of interaction forces , delivering quantitative mechanical behavior that can describe changes characteristic in diagnosis of many pathological conditions , such as cancer [ 138 ] . Together with surface topography , AFM can also offer accurate constitutive data about surface physico - chemical properties , such as elasticity [ 139 ] , friction [ 140 ] , adhesion [ 141 ] , and even nanoscale surgeries on live cells ( Figure 8 ) [ 20 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 24 Figure 7 . ( a ) Scheme of the tip functionalization and dendrimer adsorption on mica . ( b ) Main steps of a force curve depicting a molecular recognition ( specific ) event . ① . Tip far from the surface . ② . Initial tip – surface contact ( approaching ) . ③ . Tip – surface repulsive region . ④ . Molecular recognition unbinding force . Reproduced with permission from [ 135 ] . Further , characterization of biomolecules can also provide the potential to supplement the field of biomaterials with new resources for the design of novel materials and nanocomposites [ 136 ] . 5 . 1 . 2 . Cellular Level Cell mechanics , one of the most important biophysical properties , can provide new perspectives on pathologies and classic biological research questions [ 32 ] . AFM has been recognized as a powerful technique to understand cellular processes in the applications of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering [ 137 ] . Further , AFM indentation can offer various functionalities , starting from surface imaging to detection of interaction forces , delivering quantitative mechanical behavior that can describe changes characteristic in diagnosis of many pathological conditions , such as cancer [ 138 ] . Together with surface topography , AFM can also offer accurate constitutive data about surface physico - chemical properties , such as elasticity [ 139 ] , friction [ 140 ] , adhesion [ 141 ] , and even nanoscale surgeries on live cells ( Figure 8 ) [ 20 ] . Figure 8 . Nanoscale operation of a living cell using AFM . ( a ) Schematic representation of a nanoneedle on the AFM tip over a living cell . ( b ) Force - distance curves during approach and retraction from a melanocyte . ( c ) Cross - section images for green and red emission processed from confocal slices . Reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 20 ] . Figure 8 . Nanoscale operation of a living cell using AFM . ( a ) Schematic representation of a nanoneedle on the AFM tip over a living cell . ( b ) Force - distance curves during approach and retraction from a melanocyte . ( c ) Cross - section images for green and red emission processed from confocal slices . Reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 20 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 14 of 24 In addition to the cell itself , the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and the cell membrane involved in communications between cells and surrounding matrix also has a critical role in regulating cell properties and behavior . AFM can provide important insights on our current understanding of the mechanics of cells , ECM , and cell - ECM bidirectional interactions [ 142 – 145 ] . The reader interested in more details of speciﬁc cells can refer to a number of AFM indentation publications including : cardiomyocytes [ 146 ] , liver cells [ 147 ] , chondrocytes [ 148 ] , neurons [ 149 ] , ﬁbroblasts [ 150 ] , and mesenchymal stem cells [ 151 ] . 5 . 2 . Dedicated Instrumented Indentation Owing to the indirect loading and the compliance of cantilever combined with adhesive effects of AFM indentation [ 90 ] , more robust data may be provided via dedicated instrumented indentation , especially at the tissue level ( Figure 9 ) . For example , in the ﬁeld of traumatic brain injury ( TBI ) , detailed anatomically correct geometry and accurate constitutive data of brain tissue are required to construct accurate brain models [ 31 ] . Brain models of TBI play an important role in the process of evaluating and understanding the complex physiologic , behavioral , and histopathologic changes associated with TBI , which , in turn , is necessary to establish numerical predictions and new therapeutic strategies in brain injury [ 152 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 24 In addition to the cell itself , the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and the cell membrane involved in communications between cells and surrounding matrix also has a critical role in regulating cell properties and behavior . AFM can provide important insights on our current understanding of the mechanics of cells , ECM , and cell - ECM bidirectional interactions [ 142 – 145 ] . The reader interested in more details of specific cells can refer to a number of AFM indentation publications including : cardiomyocytes [ 146 ] , liver cells [ 147 ] , chondrocytes [ 148 ] , neurons [ 149 ] , fibroblasts [ 150 ] , and mesenchymal stem cells [ 151 ] . 5 . 2 . Dedicated Instrumented Indentation Owing to the indirect loading and the compliance of cantilever combined with adhesive effects of AFM indentation [ 90 ] , more robust data may be provided via dedicated instrumented indentation , especially at the tissue level ( Figure 9 ) . For example , in the field of traumatic brain injury ( TBI ) , detailed anatomically correct geometry and accurate constitutive data of brain tissue are required to construct accurate brain models [ 31 ] . Brain models of TBI play an important role in the process of evaluating and understanding the complex physiologic , behavioral , and histopathologic changes associated with TBI , which , in turn , is necessary to establish numerical predictions and new therapeutic strategies in brain injury [ 152 ] . Figure 9 . ( a ) Major components of the custom built micro - indentation experimental apparatus , and ( b ) a close - up of the force sensing probe and mouse brain specimen prior to indentation . Reproduced with permission from [ 153 ] . Indentation technique can also be utilized in the fields of tissue replacement and repair . It is shown that nanoindentation can be utilized for functional evaluation of cartilage repair tissue [ 30 ] . Owing to the in situ testing and nondestructive nature , indentation technique allows for subsequent histological or biochemical analysis of the same tissue , which offers a more complete description of repair tissue . Other applications involved in indentation to soft tissue include , but are not limited to , poroelastic properties of articular cartilage [ 154 ] , viscoelastic properties of liver tissues [ 155 ] , remineralization of demineralized dentin [ 156 ] , and in vivo tests of skin [ 157 ] . Figure 9 . ( a ) Major components of the custom built micro - indentation experimental apparatus , and ( b ) a close - up of the force sensing probe and mouse brain specimen prior to indentation . Reproduced with permission from [ 153 ] . Indentation technique can also be utilized in the ﬁelds of tissue replacement and repair . It is shown that nanoindentation can be utilized for functional evaluation of cartilage repair tissue [ 30 ] . Owing to the in situ testing and nondestructive nature , indentation technique allows for subsequent histological or biochemical analysis of the same tissue , which offers a more complete description of repair tissue . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 15 of 24 Other applications involved in indentation to soft tissue include , but are not limited to , poroelastic properties of articular cartilage [ 154 ] , viscoelastic properties of liver tissues [ 155 ] , remineralization of demineralized dentin [ 156 ] , and in vivo tests of skin [ 157 ] . 6 . Challenges and Perspectives 6 . 1 . Open Questions and Challenges Nanoindentation techniques have emerged as indispensable tools for mechanical characterization , with the development of the versatility . However , apart from some inherent characteristics we have mentioned above , there are still a number of challenges which are particularly signiﬁcant in soft biomaterials . Firstly , and the most importantly , there is a paucity of consensus on the appropriate data analysis to mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials . This issue can be illustrated by twofold factors : • Deviations among individual measurements in one research , owing to diversities in tissue architecture and structural heterogeneity ( Figure 10 ) . • Very large disparities in the results reported in different studies , essentially linked with variations in the protocols [ 158 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 24 6 . Challenges and Perspectives 6 . 1 . Open Questions and Challenges Nanoindentation techniques have emerged as indispensable tools for mechanical characterization , with the development of the versatility . However , apart from some inherent characteristics we have mentioned above , there are still a number of challenges which are particularly significant in soft biomaterials . Firstly , and the most importantly , there is a paucity of consensus on the appropriate data analysis to mechanical characterization of soft biomaterials . This issue can be illustrated by twofold factors : • Deviations among individual measurements in one research , owing to diversities in tissue architecture and structural heterogeneity ( Figure 10 ) . • Very large disparities in the results reported in different studies , essentially linked with variations in the protocols [ 158 ] . Figure 10 . Example of deviations among individual measurements in the literature . n = 116 indentation tests of cerebral white matter within six brains ( B1 – B6 ) . Individual measurements are indicated as dots ; means and standard deviations are shown as bar graphs . Reproduced with permission from [ 17 ] . As such , it remains difficult to characterize and model soft biomaterials accurately , even though there is a very large amount of information regarding mechanical characterization . The influence of the first factor which is attributed to inherent complexities of soft biomaterials , can be reduced to a certain extent by some repetitive experiments . In this regard , it seems to be more urgent to build a standardized routine from sample preparation to test execution , hence , properly dealing with the large disparities reported in different studies . Secondly , the surface of some soft biomaterial is not flat and smooth ideally that comes in the form of numerous asperities ( Figure 11 ) . It may invalidate the underlying assumption of some of analytical theories , as well as bring some difficulties to test operation and data analysis , especially for a dull indenter [ 72 ] . In this case , a relative large indentation depth may be applicable to some extent [ 159 , 160 ] . It need to be mentioned that although some additional processing and preparation methods ( e . g . , cryomicrotoming ) can be adopted to reduce surface roughness , the mechanical properties of the sample may be affected by the preparation or processing mechanism . Further , it seems to be more fascinating for biomaterials to interpret the mechanical behavior thereof with original morphology , i . e . , in situ and in vivo tests . Figure 10 . Example of deviations among individual measurements in the literature . n = 116 indentation tests of cerebral white matter within six brains ( B1 – B6 ) . Individual measurements are indicated as dots ; means and standard deviations are shown as bar graphs . Reproduced with permission from [ 17 ] . As such , it remains difﬁcult to characterize and model soft biomaterials accurately , even though there is a very large amount of information regarding mechanical characterization . The inﬂuence of the ﬁrst factor which is attributed to inherent complexities of soft biomaterials , can be reduced to a certain extent by some repetitive experiments . In this regard , it seems to be more urgent to build a standardized routine from sample preparation to test execution , hence , properly dealing with the large disparities reported in different studies . Secondly , the surface of some soft biomaterial is not ﬂat and smooth ideally that comes in the form of numerous asperities ( Figure 11 ) . It may invalidate the underlying assumption of some of analytical theories , as well as bring some difﬁculties to test operation and data analysis , especially for a dull indenter [ 72 ] . In this case , a relative large indentation depth may be applicable to some extent [ 159 , 160 ] . It need to be mentioned that although some additional processing and preparation methods ( e . g . , cryomicrotoming ) can be adopted to reduce surface roughness , the mechanical properties of the sample may be affected by the preparation or processing mechanism . Further , it seems to be more fascinating for biomaterials to interpret the mechanical behavior thereof with original morphology , i . e . , in situ and in vivo tests . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 16 of 24 Micromachines 2018 , 9 FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 24 ( a ) 10μm Figure 11 . Examples of the non - ideal surface of soft biomaterials in the form of numerous asperities . ( a ) Macroscale : the surface of porcine brain tissue with sulci and gyri , reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 161 ] ; and ( b ) microscale : the surface of human cervical epithelial cells with brush , reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 162 ] . Thirdly , some assumptions of analytical relationships , such as isotropy and homogeneity , are poor descriptions and are never perfectly met in practice . The application of above analytical models may lead to certain degree of error herein . Since these aspects are directly related to the microstructural features and variations thereof , an analytical model that could simultaneously account for all involved complexities of soft biomaterials , such as nonlinear behavior , time - dependence , anisotropy , and heterogeneity , may be far - reaching , but also be daunting due to the very large workload and specialized knowledge . 6 . 2 . Perspectives and Opportunities Despite significant progress based on current research - driven user base , there is a general agreement that a more detailed understanding of mechanics involved in accurate constitutive data and anatomical distribution is required , thereby offering more opportunities for medical field such as pathology and biochemistry . For many soft biomaterials , mechanical characterization under in vivo environment may have more important consequences in understanding the physical biology . Compared with the test ex vivo , some alterations in mechanical properties may exist due to perfusion pressure , tissue degradation , and boundary condition effects [ 158 ] . More recent study indicates that the mechanical properties change drastically within only several minutes post mortem [ 163 ] . Accordingly , in vivo testing may be a better ( even the only ) strategy to provide insight into mechanical behavior of some soft biomaterials . The investigation of the testing under real service conditions and even some extreme environment conditions is another critical step for future research . In fact , most soft biomaterials operate at multiple and complicated loading conditions , and thus some measurements under ideal experiment condition may overlook many potential details . In particular , some results derived under one loading - boundary mode does not necessarily conform to the material response under another mode [ 161 ] . In addition , the biomaterials under some extreme environment conditions , such as high electric field , high magnetic fields , intense radiation , and extreme low / high temperature , may have some novel behavior [ 164 ] , which , in turn , provide a better understanding for the application in some fields , such as medical research and space exploration . Compared with most researches focused on the mechanical characterization , naoindentation can also be developed as a powerful tool in the field of mechanobiology [ 165 ] . Recent findings have directly linked development , cell differentiation , physiology , and disease to mechanical response both at the cellular and tissue levels [ 166 ] . Insights into the mechanical signal transmission from the macroscale to the nanoscale would allow us to better understand composition – structure – properties relationships in biomaterials . Elastographic techniques ( e . g . , magnetic resonance and ultrasound elastography ) , also acting as noninvasive tools , can quantify the mechanical behavior of soft biomaterials in vivo as well [ 163 ] . Figure 11 . Examples of the non - ideal surface of soft biomaterials in the form of numerous asperities . ( a ) Macroscale : the surface of porcine brain tissue with sulci and gyri , reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 161 ] ; and ( b ) microscale : the surface of human cervical epithelial cells with brush , reproduced and adapted with permission from [ 162 ] . Thirdly , some assumptions of analytical relationships , such as isotropy and homogeneity , are poor descriptions and are never perfectly met in practice . The application of above analytical models may lead to certain degree of error herein . Since these aspects are directly related to the microstructural features and variations thereof , an analytical model that could simultaneously account for all involved complexities of soft biomaterials , such as nonlinear behavior , time - dependence , anisotropy , and heterogeneity , may be far - reaching , but also be daunting due to the very large workload and specialized knowledge . 6 . 2 . Perspectives and Opportunities Despite signiﬁcant progress based on current research - driven user base , there is a general agreement that a more detailed understanding of mechanics involved in accurate constitutive data and anatomical distribution is required , thereby offering more opportunities for medical ﬁeld such as pathology and biochemistry . For many soft biomaterials , mechanical characterization under in vivo environment may have more important consequences in understanding the physical biology . Compared with the test ex vivo , some alterations in mechanical properties may exist due to perfusion pressure , tissue degradation , and boundary condition effects [ 158 ] . More recent study indicates that the mechanical properties change drastically within only several minutes post mortem [ 163 ] . Accordingly , in vivo testing may be a better ( even the only ) strategy to provide insight into mechanical behavior of some soft biomaterials . The investigation of the testing under real service conditions and even some extreme environment conditions is another critical step for future research . In fact , most soft biomaterials operate at multiple and complicated loading conditions , and thus some measurements under ideal experiment condition may overlook many potential details . In particular , some results derived under one loading - boundary mode does not necessarily conform to the material response under another mode [ 161 ] . In addition , the biomaterials under some extreme environment conditions , such as high electric ﬁeld , high magnetic ﬁelds , intense radiation , and extreme low / high temperature , may have some novel behavior [ 164 ] , which , in turn , provide a better understanding for the application in some ﬁelds , such as medical research and space exploration . Compared with most researches focused on the mechanical characterization , naoindentation can also be developed as a powerful tool in the ﬁeld of mechanobiology [ 165 ] . Recent ﬁndings have directly linked development , cell differentiation , physiology , and disease to mechanical response both at the cellular and tissue levels [ 166 ] . Insights into the mechanical signal transmission from the macroscale to the nanoscale would allow us to better understand composition – structure – properties relationships in biomaterials . Elastographic techniques ( e . g . , magnetic resonance and ultrasound elastography ) , also acting as noninvasive tools , can quantify the mechanical behavior of soft biomaterials in vivo as well [ 163 ] . Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 17 of 24 Despite the infancy of these techniques , lacking a thorough veriﬁcation and validation [ 167 ] , it is expected that broad application prospects will arise in the ﬁelds of various pathologies if connected with nanoindentation techniques . 7 . Conclusions In this review , we have discussed the topic of nanoindentation of soft biological materials . Owing to some characteristics of soft biomaterials , including nonlinearity , time - dependence , anisotropy , and heterogeneity , some test protocols regarding constitutive model and data analysis are different from typical engineering materials . Although a standardized routine for nanoindentation of biomaterials remains to be built , nanoindentation techniques have emerged as indispensable tools for investigation of both biomechanics and mechanobiology . The applications of nanoindentation have contributed far more than simply characterizing mechanical behavior from bulk scale to the micro / nano - scale . There will be more opportunities for their use in other ﬁelds , such as physiology and pathologies . Author Contributions : H . Z . conceived and developed the ideal of this work ; L . Q . drifted the paper and revised the manuscript ; all authors have given approval to the ﬁnal version of the manuscript . Funding : This research was funded by the National Key R and D Program of China ( 2018YFF01012400 ) , the National Science and Technology Innovation Leading Academic ( Ten Thousand Talent Program ) , the Fund Guiding on Strategic Adjustment of Jilin Provincial Economic Structure Project ( 2014Z045 ) , Major project of Jilin Province Science and Technology development plan ( 20150203014GX ) , the Special Fund Project of Jilin Provincial Industrial Innovation ( 2016C030 ) , the Jilin Provincial Middle and Young Scientiﬁc and Technological Innovation Talent and Team Project ( 20170519001JH ) , and the Program for JLU Science and Technology Innovative Research Team ( 2017TD—04 ) . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . References 1 . Zadpoor , A . A . Mechanics of Biological Tissues and Biomaterials : Current Trends . Materials 2015 , 8 , 4505 – 4511 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 2 . Garcia - Manyes , S . ; Domenech , O . ; Sanz , F . ; Montero , M . T . ; Hernandez - Borrell , J . Atomic force microscopy and force spectroscopy study of Langmuir - Blodgett ﬁlms formed by heteroacid phospholipids of biological interest . Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 2007 , 1768 , 1190 – 1198 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 3 . Huang , S . ; Ingber , D . E . Cell tension , matrix mechanics , and cancer development . Cancer Cell 2005 , 8 , 175 – 176 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 4 . Discher , D . E . ; Janmey , P . ; Wang , Y . L . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 2005 , 310 , 1139 – 1143 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 5 . Engler , A . J . ; Sen , S . ; Sweeney , H . L . ; Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage speciﬁcation . Cell 2006 , 126 , 677 – 689 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 6 . Stolz , M . ; Gottardi , R . ; Raiteri , R . ; Miot , S . ; Martin , I . ; Imer , R . ; Staufer , U . ; Raducanu , A . ; Duggelin , M . ; Baschong , W . ; et al . Early detection of aging cartilage and osteoarthritis in mice and patient samples using atomic force microscopy . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2009 , 4 , 186 – 192 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 7 . Cloots , R . J . H . ; van Dommelen , J . A . W . ; Kleiven , S . ; Geers , M . G . D . Multi - scale mechanics of traumatic brain injury : Predicting axonal strains from head loads . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 2013 , 12 , 137 – 150 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 8 . Oyen , M . L . The materials science of bone : Lessons from nature for biomimetic materials synthesis . MRS Bull . 2008 , 33 , 49 – 55 . [ CrossRef ] 9 . Rashid , B . ; Destrade , M . ; Gilchrist , M . D . Mechanical characterization of brain tissue in tension at dynamic strain rates . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2014 , 33 , 43 – 54 . [ CrossRef ] 10 . Buckley , M . R . ; Gleghorn , J . P . ; Bonassar , L . J . ; Cohen , I . Mapping the depth dependence of shear properties in articular cartilage . J . Biomech . 2008 , 41 , 2430 – 2437 . [ CrossRef ] 11 . Li , Y . H . ; Hong , Y . ; Xu , G . K . ; Liu , S . B . ; Shi , Q . ; Tang , D . D . ; Yang , H . ; Genin , G . M . ; Lu , T . J . ; Xu , F . Non - contact tensile viscoelastic characterization of microscale biological materials . Acta Mech . Sin . 2018 , 34 , 589 – 599 . [ CrossRef ] Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 18 of 24 12 . MacManus , D . B . ; Gilchrist , M . D . ; Murphy , J . G . An empirical measure of nonlinear strain for soft tissue indentation . R . Soc . Open Sci . 2017 , 4 , 170894 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 13 . Cuvelier , D . ; Derenyi , I . ; Bassereau , P . ; Nassoy , P . Coalescence of membrane tethers : Experiments , theory , and applications . Biophys . J . 2005 , 88 , 2714 – 2726 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 14 . Hayashi , K . ; Iwata , M . Stiffness of cancer cells measured with an AFM indentation method . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2015 , 49 , 105 – 111 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 15 . Kurland , N . E . ; Drira , Z . ; Yadavalli , V . K . Measurement of nanomechanical properties of biomolecules using atomic force microscopy . Micron 2012 , 43 , 116 – 128 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 16 . Bouchonville , N . ; Meyer , M . ; Gaude , C . ; Gay , E . ; Ratel , D . ; Nicolas , A . AFM mapping of the elastic properties of brain tissue reveals kPa mu m ( - 1 ) gradients of rigidity . Soft Matter 2016 , 12 , 6232 – 6239 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 17 . Weickenmeier , J . ; de Rooij , R . ; Budday , S . ; Steinmann , P . ; Ovaert , T . C . ; Kuhl , E . Brain stiffness increases with myelin content . Acta Biomater . 2016 , 42 , 265 – 272 . [ CrossRef ] 18 . Stewart , M . P . ; Helenius , J . ; Toyoda , Y . ; Ramanathan , S . P . ; Muller , D . J . ; Hyman , A . A . Hydrostatic pressure and the actomyosin cortex drive mitotic cell rounding . Nature 2011 , 469 , 226 – 230 . [ CrossRef ] 19 . Prevost , T . P . ; Jin , G . ; de Moya , M . A . ; Alam , H . B . ; Suresh , S . ; Socrate , S . Dynamic mechanical response of brain tissue in indentation in vivo , in situ and in vitro . Acta Biomater . 2011 , 7 , 4090 – 4101 . [ CrossRef ] 20 . Obataya , I . ; Nakamura , C . ; Han , S . ; Nakamura , N . ; Miyake , J . Nanoscale operation of a living cell using an atomic force microscope with a nanoneedle . Nano Lett . 2005 , 5 , 27 – 30 . [ CrossRef ] 21 . Chaudhuri , O . ; Parekh , S . H . ; Lam , W . A . ; Fletcher , D . A . Combined atomic force microscopy and side - view optical imaging for mechanical studies of cells . Nat . Methods 2009 , 6 , 383 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 22 . Friedrichs , J . ; Legate , K . R . ; Schubert , R . ; Bharadwaj , M . ; Werner , C . ; Mullner , D . J . ; Benoit , M . A practical guide to quantify cell adhesion using single - cell force spectroscopy . Methods 2013 , 60 , 169 – 178 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 23 . Lin , D . C . ; Shreiber , D . I . ; Dimitriadis , E . K . ; Horkay , F . Spherical indentation of soft matter beyond the Hertzian regime : Numerical and experimental validation of hyperelastic models . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 2009 , 8 , 345 – 358 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 24 . Olesiak , S . E . ; Sponheimer , M . ; Eberle , J . J . ; Oyen , M . L . ; Ferguson , V . L . Nanomechanical properties of modern and fossil bone . Palaeogeogr . Palaeocl . 2010 , 289 , 25 – 32 . [ CrossRef ] 25 . Creton , C . ; Ciccotti , M . Fracture and adhesion of soft materials : A review . Rep . Prog . Phys . 2016 , 79 , 046601 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 26 . Oyen , M . L . Nanoindentation of hydrated materials and tissues . Curr . Opin . Solid State Mater . Sci . 2015 , 19 , 317 – 323 . [ CrossRef ] 27 . Parra , A . ; Casero , E . ; Lorenzo , E . ; Pariente , F . ; Vazquez , L . Nanomechanical properties of globular proteins : Lactate oxidase . Langmuir 2007 , 23 , 2747 – 2754 . [ CrossRef ] 28 . Li , Q . S . ; Lee , G . Y . H . ; Ong , C . N . ; Lim , C . T . AFM indentation study of breast cancer cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 2008 , 374 , 609 – 613 . [ CrossRef ] 29 . Ebenstein , D . M . ; Pruitt , L . A . Nanoindentation of soft hydrated materials for application to vascular tissues . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . A 2004 , 69 , 222 – 232 . [ CrossRef ] 30 . Ebenstein , D . M . ; Kuo , A . ; Rodrigo , J . J . ; Reddi , A . H . ; Ries , M . ; Pruitt , L . A nanoindentation technique for functional evaluation of cartilage repair tissue . J . Mater . Res . 2004 , 19 , 273 – 281 . [ CrossRef ] 31 . MacManus , D . B . ; Pierrat , B . ; Murphy , J . G . ; Gilchrist , M . D . Dynamic mechanical properties of murine brain tissue using micro - indentation . J . Biomech . 2015 , 48 , 3213 – 3218 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 32 . Moeendarbary , E . ; Harris , A . R . Cell mechanics : Principles , practices , and prospects . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . Syst . Biol . Med . 2014 , 6 , 371 – 388 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 33 . Qian , L . ; Zhao , H . W . ; Guo , Y . ; Li , Y . S . ; Zhou , M . X . ; Yang , L . G . ; Wang , Z . W . ; Sun , Y . F . Inﬂuence of strain rate on indentation response of porcine brain . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2018 , 82 , 210 – 217 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 34 . Falland - Cheung , L . ; Scholze , M . ; Hammer , N . ; Waddell , J . N . ; Tong , D . C . ; Brunton , P . A . Elastic behavior of brain simulants in comparison to porcine brain at different loading velocities . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2018 , 77 , 609 – 615 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 35 . Jia , F . ; Ben Amar , M . ; Billoud , B . ; Charrier , B . Morphoelasticity in the development of brown alga Ectocarpus siliculosus : From cell rounding to branching . J . R . Soc . Interface 2017 , 14 , 20160596 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 19 of 24 36 . MacManus , D . B . ; Pierrat , B . ; Murphy , J . G . ; Gilchrist , M . D . Mechanical characterization of the P56 mouse brain under large - deformation dynamic indentation . Sci . Rep . 2016 , 6 , 21569 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 37 . Marckmann , G . ; Verron , E . Comparison of hyperelastic models for rubber - like materials . Rubber Chem . Technol . 2006 , 79 , 835 – 858 . [ CrossRef ] 38 . Pan , Y . H . ; Zhan , Y . X . ; Ji , H . Y . ; Niu , X . R . ; Zhong , Z . Can hyperelastic material parameters be uniquely determined from indentation experiments ? RSC Adv . 2016 , 6 , 81958 – 81964 . [ CrossRef ] 39 . Crichton , M . L . ; Chen , X . F . ; Huang , H . ; Kendall , M . A . F . Elastic modulus and viscoelastic properties of full thickness skin characterised at micro scales . Biomaterials 2013 , 34 , 2087 – 2097 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 40 . Oyen , M . L . Indentation of nonlinearly viscoelastic solids . Fundam . Nanoindent . Nanotribol . 2008 , 1049 , 99 – 104 . [ CrossRef ] 41 . Wang , H . F . Theory of Linear Poroelasticity with Applications to Geomechanics and Hydrogeology ; Princeton University Press : Princeton , NJ , USA , 2017 . 42 . Oyen , M . L . ; Shean , T . A . V . ; Strange , D . G . T . ; Galli , M . Size effects in indentation of hydrated biological tissues . J . Mater . Res . 2012 , 27 , 245 – 255 . [ CrossRef ] 43 . Li , Q . ; Qu , F . N . ; Han , B . ; Wang , C . ; Li , H . ; Mauck , R . L . ; Han , L . Micromechanical anisotropy and heterogeneity of the meniscus extracellular matrix . Acta Biomater . 2017 , 54 , 356 – 366 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 44 . Anderson , A . T . ; Van Houten , E . E . W . ; McGarry , M . D . J . ; Paulsen , K . D . ; Holtrop , J . L . ; Sutton , B . P . ; Georgiadis , J . G . ; Johnson , C . L . Observation of direction - dependent mechanical properties in the human brain with multi - excitation MR elastography . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2016 , 59 , 538 – 546 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 45 . Duan , P . F . ; Chen , J . J . Nanomechanical and microstructure analysis of extracellular matrix layer of immortalized cell line Y201 from human mesenchymal stem cells . Surf . Coat . Technol . 2015 , 284 , 417 – 421 . [ CrossRef ] 46 . Duan , P . F . ; Toumpaniari , R . ; Partridge , S . ; Birch , M . A . ; Genever , P . G . ; Bull , S . J . ; Dalgarno , K . W . ; McCaskie , A . W . ; Chen , J . J . How cell culture conditions affect the microstructure and nanomechanical properties of extracellular matrix formed by immortalized human mesenchymal stem cells : An experimental and modelling study . Mater . Sci . Eng . C 2018 , 89 , 149 – 159 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 47 . Bonilla , M . R . ; Stokes , J . R . ; Gidley , M . J . ; Yakubov , G . E . Interpreting atomic force microscopy nanoindentation of hierarchical biological materials using multi - regime analysis . Soft Matter 2015 , 11 , 1281 – 1292 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 48 . Feng , Y . ; Okamoto , R . J . ; Namani , R . ; Genin , G . M . ; Bayly , P . V . Measurements of mechanical anisotropy in brain tissue and implications for transversely isotropic material models of white matter . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . Mater . 2013 , 23 , 117 – 132 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 49 . Fischer - Cripps , A . Nanoindentation ; Springer : New York , NY , USA , 2004 . 50 . VanLandingham , M . R . Review of instrumented indentation . J . Res . Natl . Inst . Stand . Technol . 2003 , 108 , 249 – 265 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 51 . Hofﬂer , C . E . ; Moore , K . E . ; Kozloff , K . ; Zysset , P . K . ; Brown , M . B . ; Goldstein , S . A . Heterogeneity of bone lamellar - level elastic moduli . Bone 2000 , 26 , 603 – 609 . [ CrossRef ] 52 . Bushby , A . J . ; Ferguson , V . L . ; Boyde , A . Nanoindentation of bone : Comparison of specimens tested in liquid and embedded in polymethylmethacrylate . J . Mater . Res . 2004 , 19 , 249 – 259 . [ CrossRef ] 53 . Wang , S . B . ; Liu , H . ; Xu , L . X . ; Du , X . C . ; Zhao , D . ; Zhu , B . ; Yu , M . ; Zhao , H . W . Investigations of Phase Transformation in Monocrystalline Silicon at Low Temperatures via Nanoindentation . Sci . Rep . 2017 , 7 , 8682 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 54 . Cappella , B . ; Dietler , G . Force - distance curves by atomic force microscopy . Surf . Sci . Rep . 1999 , 34 , 1 – 104 . [ CrossRef ] 55 . Butt , H . J . ; Cappella , B . ; Kappl , M . Force measurements with the atomic force microscope : Technique , interpretation and applications . Surf . Sci . Rep . 2005 , 59 , 1 – 152 . [ CrossRef ] 56 . Gautier , H . O . B . ; Thompson , A . J . ; Achouri , S . ; Koser , D . E . ; Holtzmann , K . ; Moeendarbary , E . ; Franze , K . Atomic force microscopy - based force measurements on animal cells and tissues . Method Cell Biol . 2015 , 125 , 211 – 235 . [ CrossRef ] 57 . Doerner , M . F . ; Nix , W . D . A Method for Interpreting the Data form Depth - Sensing Indentation Instruments . J . Mater . Res . 1986 , 1 , 601 – 609 . [ CrossRef ] 58 . Oliver , W . C . ; Pharr , G . M . J . An Improved Technique for Determining Hardness and Elastic Modulus Using Load and Displacement Sensing Indentation . J . Mater . Res . 1992 , 7 , 1564 – 1583 . [ CrossRef ] Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 20 of 24 59 . Sun , X . D . ; Zhao , H . W . ; Yu , Y . ; Zhang , S . Z . ; Ma , Z . C . ; Li , N . ; Yu , M . ; Hou , P . L . Variations of mechanical property of out circumferential lamellae in cortical bone along the radial by nanoindentation . AIP Adv . 2016 , 6 , 115116 . [ CrossRef ] 60 . Tranchida , D . ; Piccarolo , S . On the use of the nanoindentation unloading curve to measure the Young’s modulus of polymers on a nanometer scale . Macromol . Rapid Commun . 2005 , 26 , 1800 – 1804 . [ CrossRef ] 61 . Cheng , Y . T . ; Cheng , C . M . Relationships between initial unloading slope , contact depth , and mechanical properties for conical indentation in linear viscoelastic solids . J . Mater . Res . 2005 , 20 , 1046 – 1053 . [ CrossRef ] 62 . Briscoe , B . J . ; Fiori , L . ; Pelillo , E . Nano - indentation of polymeric surfaces . J . Phys . D Appl . Phys . 1998 , 31 , 2395 – 2405 . [ CrossRef ] 63 . Feng , G . ; Ngan , A . H . W . Effects of creep and thermal drift on modulus measurement using depth - sensing indentation . J . Mater . Res . 2002 , 17 , 660 – 668 . [ CrossRef ] 64 . Tang , B . ; Ngan , A . H . W . Accurate measurement of tip - sample contact size during nanoindentation of viscoelastic materials . J . Mater . Res . 2003 , 18 , 1141 – 1148 . [ CrossRef ] 65 . Ngan , A . H . W . ; Wang , H . T . ; Tang , B . ; Sze , K . Y . Correcting power - law viscoelastic effects in elastic modulus measurement using depth - sensing indentation . Int . J . Solids Struct . 2005 , 42 , 1831 – 1846 . [ CrossRef ] 66 . Shih , C . W . ; Yang , M . ; Li , J . C . M . Effect of tip radius on nanoindentation . J . Mater . Res . 1991 , 6 , 2623 – 2628 . [ CrossRef ] 67 . Chen , W . M . ; Li , M . ; Zhang , T . ; Cheng , Y . T . ; Cheng , C . M . Inﬂuence of indenter tip roundness on hardness behavior in nanoindentation . Mater . Sci . Eng . A Struct . 2007 , 445 , 323 – 327 . [ CrossRef ] 68 . Bolshakov , A . ; Pharr , G . M . Inﬂuences of pileup on the measurement of mechanical properties by load and depth sensing indentation techniques . J . Mater . Res . 1998 , 13 , 1049 – 1058 . [ CrossRef ] 69 . McElhaney , K . W . ; Vlassak , J . J . ; Nix , W . D . Determination of indenter tip geometry and indentation contact area for depth - sensing indentation experiments . J . Mater . Res . 1998 , 13 , 1300 – 1306 . [ CrossRef ] 70 . Calabri , L . ; Pugno , N . ; Menozzi , C . ; Valeri , S . AFM nanoindentation : Tip shape and tip radius of curvature effect on the hardness measurement . J . Phys . Condens . Matter 2008 , 20 , 474208 . [ CrossRef ] 71 . Chen , J . ; Bull , S . J . Relation between the ratio of elastic work to the total work of indentation and the ratio of hardness to Young’s modulus for a perfect conical tip . J . Mater . Res . 2009 , 24 , 590 – 598 . [ CrossRef ] 72 . Johnson , K . Contact Mechanics ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , UK , 1987 . 73 . Sneddon , I . N . The relation between load and penetration in the axisymmetric Boussinesq problem for a punch of arbitrary proﬁle . Int . J . Eng . Sci . 1965 , 3 , 47 – 57 . [ CrossRef ] 74 . Zhang , M . G . ; Chen , J . J . ; Feng , X . Q . ; Cao , Y . P . On the Applicability of Sneddon’s Solution for Interpreting the Indentation of Nonlinear Elastic Biopolymers . J . Appl . Mech . 2014 , 81 , 091011 . [ CrossRef ] 75 . Li , Y . ; Deng , J . X . ; Zhou , J . ; Li , X . E . Elastic and viscoelastic mechanical properties of brain tissues on the implanting trajectory of sub - thalamic nucleus stimulation . J . Mater . Sci . Mater . Med . 2016 , 27 , 163 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 76 . Hayes , W . C . ; Keer , L . M . ; Herrmann , G . ; Mockros , L . F . A mathematical analysis for indentation tests of articular cartilage . J . Biomech . 1972 , 5 , 541 – 551 . [ CrossRef ] 77 . Finan , J . D . ; Fox , P . M . ; Morrison , B . Non - ideal effects in indentation testing of soft tissues . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 2014 , 13 , 573 – 584 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 78 . King , R . B . Elastic analysis of some punch problems for a layered medium . Int . J . Solids Struct . 1987 , 23 , 1657 – 1664 . [ CrossRef ] 79 . Fabrikant , V . Flat punch of arbitrary shape on an elastic half - space . Int . J . Eng . Sci . 1986 , 24 , 1731 – 1740 . [ CrossRef ] 80 . Chen , J . J . ; Lu , G . X . Finite element modelling of nanoindentation based methods for mechanical properties of cells . J . Biomech . 2012 , 45 , 2810 – 2816 . [ CrossRef ] 81 . Darling , E . M . ; Zauscher , S . ; Block , J . A . ; Guilak , F . A thin - layer model for viscoelastic , stress - relaxation testing of cells using atomic force microscopy : Do cell properties reﬂect metastatic potential ? Biophys . J . 2007 , 92 , 1784 – 1791 . [ CrossRef ] 82 . Chen , J . J . Nanobiomechanics of living cells : A review . Interface Focus 2014 , 4 , 20130055 . [ CrossRef ] 83 . Lee , E . H . ; Radok , J . R . M . The Contact Problem for Viscoelastic Bodies . J . Appl . Mech . 1960 , 33 , 395 – 401 . [ CrossRef ] 84 . Qiu , S . H . ; Zhao , X . F . ; Chen , J . Y . ; Zeng , J . F . ; Chen , S . Q . ; Chen , L . ; Meng , Y . ; Liu , B . ; Shan , H . ; Gao , M . Y . ; et al . Characterizing viscoelastic properties of breast cancer tissue in a mouse model using indentation . J . Biomech . 2018 , 69 , 81 – 89 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 85 . Mattice , J . M . ; Lau , A . G . ; Oyen , M . L . ; Kent , R . W . Spherical indentation load - relaxation of soft biological tissues . J . Mater . Res . 2006 , 21 , 2003 – 2010 . [ CrossRef ] Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 21 of 24 86 . Kilpatrick , J . I . ; Revenko , I . ; Rodriguez , B . J . Nanomechanics of Cells and Biomaterials Studied by Atomic Force Microscopy . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 2015 , 4 , 2456 – 2474 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 87 . Lin , D . C . ; Horkay , F . Nanomechanics of polymer gels and biological tissues : A critical review of analytical approaches in the Hertzian regime and beyond . Soft Matter 2008 , 4 , 669 – 682 . [ CrossRef ] 88 . Budday , S . ; Nay , R . ; de Rooij , R . ; Steinmann , P . ; Wyrobek , T . ; Ovaert , T . C . ; Kuhl , E . Mechanical properties of gray and white matter brain tissue by indentation . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2015 , 46 , 318 – 330 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 89 . Berdyyeva , T . K . ; Woodworth , C . D . ; Sokolov , I . Human epithelial cells increase their rigidity with ageing in vitro : Direct measurements . Phys . Med . Biol . 2005 , 50 , 81 – 92 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 90 . Oyen , M . L . Nanoindentation of Biological and Biomimetic Materials . Exp . Tech . 2013 , 37 , 73 – 87 . [ CrossRef ] 91 . Chudoba , T . ; Schwaller , P . ; Rabe , R . ; Breguet , J . M . ; Michler , J . Comparison of nanoindentation results obtained with Berkovich and cube - corner indenters . Philos . Mag . 2006 , 86 , 5265 – 5283 . [ CrossRef ] 92 . Kruzic , J . J . ; Kim , D . K . ; Koester , K . J . ; Ritchie , R . O . Indentation techniques for evaluating the fracture toughness of biomaterials and hard tissues . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2009 , 2 , 384 – 395 . [ CrossRef ] 93 . Duan , P . F . ; Bull , S . ; Chen , J . J . Modeling the nanomechanical responses of biopolymer composites during the nanoindentation . Thin Solid Films 2015 , 596 , 277 – 281 . [ CrossRef ] 94 . Chen , J . J . On the determination of coating toughness during nanoindentation . Surf . Coat . Technol . 2012 , 206 , 3064 – 3068 . [ CrossRef ] 95 . Ozkan , A . D . ; Topal , A . E . ; Dikecoglu , F . B . ; Guler , M . O . ; Dana , A . ; Tekinay , A . B . Probe microscopy methods and applications in imaging of biological materials . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 153 – 164 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 96 . Kaufman , J . D . ; Klapperich , C . M . Surface detection errors cause overestimation of the modulus in nanoindentation on soft materials . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . Mater . 2009 , 2 , 312 – 317 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 97 . Dimitriadis , E . K . ; Horkay , F . ; Maresca , J . ; Kachar , B . ; Chadwick , R . S . Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft material using the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 2002 , 82 , 2798 . [ CrossRef ] 98 . Nicolle , S . ; Lounis , M . ; Willinger , R . Shear Properties of Brain Tissue over a Frequency Range Relevant for Automotive Impact Situations : New Experimental Results . Stapp . Car Crash J . 2004 , 48 , 239 – 258 . [ PubMed ] 99 . Elkin , B . S . ; Ilankova , A . ; Morrison , B . Dynamic , regional mechanical properties of the porcine brain : Indentation in the coronal plane . J . Biomech . Eng . 2011 , 133 , 071009 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 100 . Elkin , B . S . ; Ilankovan , A . ; Morrison , B . , 3rd . Age - dependent regional mechanical properties of the rat hippocampus and cortex . J . Biomech . Eng . 2010 , 132 , 011010 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 101 . Budday , S . ; Sommer , G . ; Birkl , C . ; Langkammer , C . ; Haybaeck , J . ; Kohnert , J . ; Bauer , M . ; Paulsen , F . ; Steinmann , P . ; Kuhl , E . ; et al . Mechanical characterization of human brain tissue . Acta Biomater . 2017 , 48 , 319 – 340 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 102 . Leipzig , N . D . ; Athanasiou , K . A . Unconﬁned creep compression of chondrocytes . J . Biomech . 2005 , 38 , 77 – 85 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 103 . Darling , E . M . ; Zauscher , S . ; Guilak , F . Viscoelastic properties of zonal articular chondrocytes measured by atomic force microscopy . Osteoarthr . Cartilage 2006 , 14 , 571 – 579 . [ CrossRef ] 104 . Gupta , S . ; Carrillo , F . ; Li , C . ; Pruitt , L . ; Puttlitz , C . Adhesive forces signiﬁcantly affect elastic modulus determination of soft polymeric materials in nanoindentation . Mater . Lett . 2007 , 61 , 448 – 451 . [ CrossRef ] 105 . Crick , S . L . ; Yin , F . C . Assessing micromechanical properties of cells with atomic force microscopy : Importance of the contact point . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 2007 , 6 , 199 – 210 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 106 . Carrillo , F . ; Gupta , S . ; Balooch , M . ; Marshall , S . J . ; Marshall , G . W . ; Pruitt , L . ; Puttlitz , C . M . Nanoindentation of polydimethylsiloxane elastomers : Effect of crosslinking , work of adhesion , and ﬂuid environment on elastic modulus . J . Mater . Res . 2005 , 20 , 2820 – 2830 . [ CrossRef ] 107 . Johnson , K . L . ; Kendall , K . ; Roberts , A . D . Surface Energy and the Contact of Elastic Solids . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . A 1971 , 324 , 301 – 313 . [ CrossRef ] 108 . Derjaguin , B . V . ; Muller , V . M . ; Toporov , Y . P . Effect of contact deformations on the adhesion of particles . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1975 , 53 , 314 – 326 . [ CrossRef ] 109 . Tabor , D . Surface forces and surface interactions . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1977 , 58 , 2 – 13 . [ CrossRef ] 110 . Maugis , D . Adhesion of spheres : The JKR - DMT transition using a dugdale model . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 1992 , 150 , 243 – 269 . [ CrossRef ] 111 . Dugdale , D . S . Yielding of steel sheets containing slits . J . Mech . Phys . Solids 1960 , 8 , 100 – 104 . [ CrossRef ] Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 22 of 24 112 . Lin , D . C . ; Dimitriadis , E . K . ; Horkay , F . Robust strategies for automated AFM force curve analysis—I . Non - adhesive indentation of soft , inhomogeneous materials . J . Biomech . Eng . 2007 , 129 , 430 – 440 . [ CrossRef ] 113 . Jaasma , M . J . ; Jackson , W . M . ; Keaveny , T . M . Measurement and characterization of whole - cell mechanical behavior . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 2006 , 34 , 748 – 758 . [ CrossRef ] 114 . Rudoy , D . ; Yuen , S . G . ; Howe , R . D . ; Wolfe , P . J . Bayesian change - point analysis for atomic force microscopy and soft material indentation . J . R . Stat . Soc . 2010 , 59 , 573 – 593 . [ CrossRef ] 115 . E , A . H . ; Heinz , W . F . ; Antonik , M . D . ; D’Costa , N . P . ; Nageswaran , S . ; Schoenenberger , C . A . ; Hoh , J . H . Relative microelastic mapping of living cells by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 1998 , 74 , 1564 – 1578 . [ CrossRef ] 116 . Carl , P . ; Schillers , H . Elasticity measurement of living cells with an atomic force microscope : Data acquisition and processing . Pﬂugers Arch . 2008 , 457 , 551 – 559 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 117 . Jeng , Y . R . ; Mao , C . P . ; Wu , K . T . Instrumented Indentation Investigation on the Viscoelastic Properties of Porcine Cartilage . J . Bionic Eng . 2013 , 10 , 522 – 531 . [ CrossRef ] 118 . Yuan , Y . ; Verma , R . Measuring microelastic properties of stratum corneum . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 2006 , 48 , 6 – 12 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 119 . Strange , D . G . T . ; Fletcher , T . L . ; Tonsomboon , K . ; Brawn , H . Separating poroviscoelastic deformation mechanisms in hydrogels . Appl . Phys . Lett . 2013 , 102 , 16 – 72 . [ CrossRef ] 120 . Galli , M . ; Comley , K . S . C . ; Shean , T . A . V . ; Oyen , M . L . Viscoelastic and poroelastic mechanical characterization of hydrated gels . J . Mater . Res . 2009 , 24 , 973 – 979 . [ CrossRef ] 121 . Hu , Y . ; Zhao , X . ; Vlassak , J . J . ; Suo , Z . Using indentation to characterize the poroelasticity of gels . Appl . Phys . Lett . 2010 , 96 , 121904 . [ CrossRef ] 122 . Gupta , S . ; Lin , J . ; Ashby , P . ; Pruitt , L . A ﬁber reinforced poroelastic model of nanoindentation of porcine costal cartilage : A combined experimental and ﬁnite element approach . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2009 , 2 , 326 – 338 . [ CrossRef ] 123 . Balooch , M . ; Wu - Magidi , I . C . ; Balazs , A . ; Lundkvist , A . S . ; Marshall , S . J . ; Marshall , G . W . ; Siekhaus , W . J . ; Kinney , J . H . Viscoelastic properties of demineralized human dentin measured in water with atomic force microscope ( AFM ) - based indentation . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 1998 , 40 , 539 – 544 . [ CrossRef ] 124 . Grant , C . A . ; Brockwell , D . J . ; Radford , S . E . ; Thomson , N . H . Effects of hydration on the mechanical response of individual collagen ﬁbrils . Appl . Phys . Lett . 2008 , 92 , 233902 . [ CrossRef ] 125 . Bembey , A . K . ; Bushby , A . J . ; Boyde , A . ; Ferguson , V . L . ; Oyen , M . L . Hydration effects on the micro - mechanical properties of bone . J . Mater . Res . 2006 , 21 , 1962 – 1968 . [ CrossRef ] 126 . Binnig , G . ; Quate , C . F . ; Gerber , C . Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 1986 , 56 , 930 – 933 . [ CrossRef ] 127 . Dufrene , Y . F . Using nanotechniques to explore microbial surfaces . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 2004 , 2 , 451 – 460 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 128 . Hinterdorfer , P . ; Dufrene , Y . F . Detection and localization of single molecular recognition events using atomic force microscopy . Nat . Methods 2006 , 3 , 347 – 355 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 129 . Garcia , R . ; Perez , R . Dynamic atomic force microscopy methods . Surf . Sci . Rep . 2002 , 47 , 197 – 301 . [ CrossRef ] 130 . Jalili , N . ; Laxminarayana , K . A review of atomic force microscopy imaging systems : Application to molecular metrology and biological sciences . Mechatronics 2004 , 14 , 907 – 945 . [ CrossRef ] 131 . Guzman , C . ; Jeney , S . ; Kreplak , L . ; Kasas , S . ; Kulik , A . J . ; Aebi , U . ; Forro , L . Exploring the mechanical properties of single vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments by atomic force microscopy . J . Mol . Biol . 2006 , 360 , 623 – 630 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 132 . Kim , J . S . ; Park , Y . S . ; Nam , H . G . ; Park , J . W . Imaging a speciﬁc mRNA in pollen with atomic force microscopy . RSC Adv . 2015 , 5 , 18858 – 18865 . [ CrossRef ] 133 . Schon , P . Atomic force microscopy of RNA : State of the art and recent advancements . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 209 – 219 . [ CrossRef ] 134 . Kasas , S . ; Dietler , G . DNA - protein interactions explored by atomic force microscopy . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 231 – 239 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 135 . Dumitru , A . C . ; Herruzo , E . T . ; Rausell , E . ; Cena , V . ; Garcia , R . Unbinding forces and energies between a siRNA molecule and a dendrimer measured by force spectroscopy . Nanoscale 2015 , 7 , 20267 – 20276 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 136 . Willner , I . ; Willner , B . Biomolecule - Based Nanomaterials and Nanostructures . Nano Lett . 2010 , 10 , 3805 – 3815 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 23 of 24 137 . Shieh , A . C . ; Athanasiou , K . A . Principles of cell mechanics for cartilage tissue engineering . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 2003 , 31 , 1 – 11 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 138 . Zemla , J . ; Danilkiewicz , J . ; Orzechowska , B . ; Pabijan , J . ; Seweryn , S . ; Lekka , M . Atomic force microscopy as a tool for assessing the cellular elasticity and adhesiveness to identify cancer cells and tissues . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 115 – 124 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 139 . Guo , Q . Q . ; Xia , Y . ; Sandig , M . ; Yang , J . Characterization of cell elasticity correlated with cell morphology by atomic force microscope . J . Biomech . 2012 , 45 , 304 – 309 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 140 . Smith , J . R . ; Tsibouklis , J . ; Nevell , T . G . ; Breakspear , S . AFM friction and adhesion mapping of the substructures of human hair cuticles . Appl . Surf . Sci . 2013 , 285 , 638 – 644 . [ CrossRef ] 141 . Benoit , M . ; Gabriel , D . ; Gerisch , G . ; Gaub , H . E . Discrete interactions in cell adhesion measured by single - molecule force spectroscopy . Nat . Cell Biol . 2000 , 2 , 313 – 317 . [ CrossRef ] 142 . Rianna , C . ; Kumar , P . ; Radmacher , M . The role of the microenvironment in the biophysics of cancer . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 107 – 114 . [ CrossRef ] 143 . Alcaraz , J . ; Otero , J . ; Jorba , I . ; Navajas , D . Bidirectional mechanobiology between cells and their local extracellular matrix probed by atomic force microscopy . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 71 – 81 . [ CrossRef ] 144 . Shi , Y . ; Cai , M . J . ; Zhou , L . L . ; Wang , H . D . The structure and function of cell membranes studied by atomic force microscopy . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 31 – 44 . [ CrossRef ] 145 . Bitler , A . ; Dover , R . S . ; Shai , Y . Fractal properties of cell surface structures : A view from AFM . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 64 – 70 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 146 . Borin , D . ; Pecorari , I . ; Pena , B . ; Sbaizero , O . Novel insights into cardiomyocytes provided by atomic force microscopy . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 4 – 12 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 147 . Braet , F . ; Taatjes , D . J . ; Wisse , E . Probing the unseen structure and function of liver cells through atomic force microscopy . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 2018 , 73 , 13 – 30 . [ CrossRef ] 148 . Jin , H . ; Liang , Q . ; Chen , T . S . ; Wang , X . P . Resveratrol Protects Chondrocytes from Apoptosis via Altering the Ultrastructural and Biomechanical Properties : An AFM Study . PLoS ONE 2014 , 9 , e91611 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 149 . Elkin , B . S . ; Azeloglu , E . U . ; Costa , K . D . ; Morrison , B . Mechanical heterogeneity of the rat hippocampus measured by atomic force microscope indentation . J . Neurotraum . 2007 , 24 , 812 – 822 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 150 . Braunsmann , C . ; Seifert , J . ; Rheinlaender , J . ; Schaffer , T . E . High - speed force mapping on living cells with a small cantilever atomic force microscope . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 2014 , 85 , 073703 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 151 . Maloney , J . M . ; Nikova , D . ; Lautenschlager , F . ; Clarke , E . ; Langer , R . ; Guck , J . ; Van Vliet , K . J . Mesenchymal Stem Cell Mechanics from the Attached to the Suspended State . Biophys . J . 2010 , 99 , 2479 – 2487 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 152 . O’Connor , W . T . ; Smyth , A . ; Gilchrist , M . D . Animal models of traumatic brain injury : A critical evaluation . Pharmacol . Ther . 2011 , 130 , 106 – 113 . [ CrossRef ] 153 . MacManus , D . B . ; Murphy , J . G . ; Gilchrist , M . D . Mechanical characterisation of brain tissue up to 35 % strain at 1 , 10 , and 100 / s using a custom - built micro - indentation apparatus . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2018 , 87 , 256 – 266 . [ CrossRef ] 154 . Wahlquist , J . A . ; DelRio , F . W . ; Randolph , M . A . ; Aziz , A . H . ; Heveran , C . M . ; Bryant , S . J . ; Neu , C . P . ; Ferguson , V . L . Indentation mapping revealed poroelastic , but not viscoelastic , properties spanning native zonal articular cartilage . Acta Biomater . 2017 , 64 , 41 – 49 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 155 . Liu , D . ; Li , G . Y . ; Su , C . ; Zheng , Y . ; Jiang , Y . X . ; Qian , L . X . ; Cao , Y . P . Effect of ligation on the viscoelastic properties of liver tissues . J . Biomech . 2018 , 76 , 235 – 240 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 156 . Liang , K . N . ; Xiao , S . M . ; Shi , W . Y . ; Li , J . S . ; Yang , X . ; Gao , Y . ; Gou , Y . P . ; Hao , L . Y . ; He , L . B . ; Cheng , L . ; et al . 8DSS - promoted remineralization of demineralized dentin in vitro . J . Mater . Chem . B 2015 , 3 , 6763 – 6772 . [ CrossRef ] 157 . Boyer , G . ; Laquieze , L . ; Le Bot , A . ; Laquieze , S . ; Zahouani , H . Dynamic indentation on human skin in vivo : Ageing effects . Skin Res . Technol . 2009 , 15 , 55 – 67 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 158 . Chatelin , S . ; Constantinesco , A . ; Willinger , R . Fifty years of brain tissue mechanical testing : From in vitro to in vivo investigations . Biorheology 2010 , 47 , 255 – 276 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 159 . Donnelly , E . ; Baker , S . P . ; Boskey , A . L . ; van der Meulen , M . C . H . Effects of surface roughness and maximum load on the mechanical properties of cancellous bone measured by nanoindentation . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . A 2006 , 77 , 426 – 435 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Micromachines 2018 , 9 , 654 24 of 24 160 . Chen , J . J . ; Birch , M . A . ; Bull , S . J . Nanomechanical characterization of tissue engineered bone grown on titanium alloy in vitro . J . Mater . Sci . Mater . Med . 2010 , 21 , 277 – 282 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 161 . Goriely , A . ; Geers , M . G . D . ; Holzapfel , G . A . ; Jayamohan , J . ; Jerusalem , A . ; Sivaloganathan , S . ; Squier , W . ; van Dommelen , J . A . W . ; Waters , S . ; Kuhl , E . Mechanics of the brain : Perspectives , challenges , and opportunities . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 2015 , 14 , 931 – 965 . [ CrossRef ] 162 . Sokolov , I . ; Dokukin , M . E . ; Guz , N . V . Method for quantitative measurements of the elastic modulus of biological cells in AFM indentation experiments . Methods 2013 , 60 , 202 – 213 . [ CrossRef ] 163 . Weickenmeier , J . ; Kurt , M . ; Ozkaya , E . ; de Rooij , R . ; Ovaert , T . C . ; Ehman , R . L . ; Pauly , K . B . ; Kuhl , E . Brain stiffens post mortem . J . Mech . Behav . Biomed . 2018 , 84 , 88 – 98 . [ CrossRef ] 164 . Qian , L . ; Sun , Y . F . ; Tian , J . Y . ; Ren , Z . ; Zhao , H . W . Indentation response of porcine brain under electric ﬁelds . Soft Matter 2018 , under review . 165 . Azeloglu , E . U . ; Costa , K . D . Atomic force microscopy in mechanobiology : Measuring microelastic heterogeneity of living cells . Methods Mol . Biol . 2011 , 736 , 303 – 329 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 166 . Jacobs , C . ; Huang , H . ; Kwon , R . Y . Introduction to Cell Mechanics and Mechanobiology ; Garland Science : New York , NY , USA , 2012 . 167 . Oudry , J . ; Lynch , T . ; Vappou , J . ; Sandrin , L . ; Miette , V . Comparison of four different techniques to evaluate the elastic properties of phantom in elastography : Is there a gold standard ? Phys . Med . Biol . 2014 , 59 , 5775 – 5793 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] © 2018 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .