88 April 1998 / Vol . 41 , No . 4 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Libraries(cid:213) New Role in Electronic Scholarly Publishing Andrew E . Treloar ANY DIGITAL LIBRARY PROJECTS INVOLVE LIBRARIES SERVING AS ACCESS POINTS for materials provided by others , usually publishers . Here , I discuss some results from a research survey that considered how university libraries might take active roles in the publishing process . The five projects selected ( see Table 1 ) differ with regard to a range of measures : organizational struc - ture , geographic location ( still important in this increasingly wired world ) , and type of pub - lished product . ( Project home pages can be reached via links at www . deakin . edu . au / ~ aet / Research / Projects / LibEpub . html . ) Five high - profile projects show how it(cid:213)s working and ( sometimes ) making money , too . The new technologies of high - performance desk - top computing and ubiquitous networking have the potential to transform professional practices and publishing products within the scholarly publishing ecology . These projects display a variety of responses to their common challenges . The range of organizational structures adopted by the libraries studied is quite varied . None have created entirely separate publishing compa - nies , although Highwire Press at Stanford Uni - versity comes close . However , there seems to be no universally successful model ; local factors , including university culture and library environ - ment , seem to be important influences . Funding is an ongoing issue for many digital library projects . Doing things successfully while the initial seed funding is available is one thing ; coming up with a sustainable model for continued funding after the grant runs out is another . Some projects quickly reach the break - even point . Highwire Press and Project Muse are already in cost recovery . Both projects have invested in sophisticated systems to automate the production process and reduce costs . Both also deal with materials for which there is sig - nificant demand throughout the worldwide acade - mic community . S u p p o r t i n g T e c h n o l o g i e s COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM April 1998 / Vol . 41 , No . 4 89 An important challenge for electronic publishing projects is how to pay ongoing costs after publica - tion ( to maintain servers and links ) . For example , Project EDUCATE ( End - user Courses in Informa - tion Access through Communication Technology ) uses license fees to fund its own maintenance costs while seeking new funds for development work . However , because of the special nature of its materi - als , the Internet Library of Early Journals in the U . K . is finding it difficult to identify a source of ongoing revenue . Electronic publishing allows digital libraries to fulfill their aims in important new ways . Common themes in my research interviews were a desire to improve access to materials , to do much more than is possible in print , and to reduce costs to users ( including other libraries ) . The five projects offer a foretaste of what digital libraries in the next century might become . Andrew E . Treloar ( andrew . treloar @ deakin . edu . au ) is a senior lecturer in the School of Computing and Mathematics in Deakin University in Melbourne , Australia . The funding for this study was provided by the Victorian Association for Library Automation in Melbourne , Victoria , Australia . © ACM 0002 - 0782 / 98 / 0400 $ 3 . 50 c Web front - end , with search interface , display of articles in PDF or HTML , automatic creation of hyperlinks to MEDLINE citations , bidirec - tional links between citing articles and cited references Web front - end providing access to scanned page images ; searchable “dirty” OCR using normal and fuzzy matching indexing Web front - end to multilevel hierarchical courseware structure with rich internal and external hyperlinking ; anno - tated online bibliography of the highest - quality resoures in each discipline Web front - end to full text ; rich internal hypertext linking ; Boolean searches of full text or citation keywords ; subject indexing using LCSH ; larger illustrations , many in color Web front - end to mix of HTML and PDF material ( plus JPEG for image collec - tions ) ; some searching capa - bilities ; some use of SGML Stanford University , U . S . Oxford , Manchester , Birmingham , and Leeds Universities , U . K . University libraries in Ireland , France , Spain , Sweden , and U . K . Johns Hopkins University , U . S . Virginia Polytechnic and State University , U . S . Separate cost center within library ; currently recovering costs Cooperative dis - tributed initiative between university libraries ; funded under eLib program Cooperative dis - tributed initiative development costs covered via grants or outside funding ; license fees cover maintenance costs Joint initiative between library and university press ; grant funding through 1997 ; project now commerciallysustainable Service area within library ; funding for most activities pro - vided within library budget ; some outside funding for special activities 24 mainly biomedical journals published in partnership with scholarly societies ; another 60 – 70 journals online by the end of 1998 At least 20 consecu - tive years of three 18th century and 19th century journals ; aims for 120 , 000 page images total Series of self - paced user education courses in selection and use of information tools and resources in science disciplines 40 + journals published by Johns Hopkins Press ; 3 or 4 ( mostly print ) non - Press journals will be added each year 12 ejournals : Virginia Tech newsletter and magazines ; some digital image collec - tions ; electronic theses and dissertations ; regional and interna - tional news ; electronic reserve system • Develop innovative network tools for capture , publishing , retrieval , reading , and presentation• Influence economics of providing scholarly information to researchers • Nondestructive digitization from paper and microfilm • Issues associated with making older materials available • Cost reduction in provision of entire service • Providing effective end - user education materials in an online environment • Reduce cost of publication to users • Forge different approach to intellectual property and copyright• Test new economic models within scholarly communication environment • Assist faculty who are editors of professional journals to publish via the Internet • Assist traditional academic publishers to adapt their publications to the Internet • Work with various units within the university to extend access to their clients Highwire Press Internet Library of Early Journals Project EDUCATE Project MUSE Scholarly Communications Project Location ( s ) of Project Activity Organizational / Funding Model Products Interface Features Project Foci Table 1 . Some of the projects’ salient dimensions