Absolute Identification by Relative Judgment Neil Stewart , Gordon D . A . Brown , and Nick Chater University of Warwick In unidimensional absolute identification tasks , participants identify stimuli that vary along a single dimension . Performance is surprisingly poor compared with discrimination of the same stimuli . Existing models assume that identification is achieved using long - term representations of absolute magnitudes . The authors propose an alternative relative judgment model ( RJM ) in which the elemental perceptual units are representations of the differences between current and previous stimuli . These differences are used , together with the previous feedback , to respond . Without using long - term representations of absolute magnitudes , the RJM accounts for ( a ) information transmission limits , ( b ) bowed serial position effects , and ( c ) sequential effects , where responses are biased toward immediately preceding stimuli but away from more distant stimuli ( assimilation and contrast ) . Keywords : absolute identification , relative judgment Miller ( 1956 ) drew attention to a curious phenomenon . People have great difficulty identifying stimuli from a set that varies along a single psychological continuum , even though their ability to discriminate pairs of stimuli from the set suggests that they should be very good at the identification task . This phenomenon can be seen across a wide range of stimulus attributes—the frequency and loudness of tones , the strength of tastes and smells , the magnitude of lengths and areas , the hue and brightness of colors , and the intensity and numerousness of cutaneous stimulation—which sug - gests some common and fundamental source of the limitation . In an absolute identification task , participants are required to identify , with a unique label , stimuli drawn from a set of items that vary along only a single continuum . Typically , stimuli are evenly psychologically spaced . A stimulus’s label is normally its ordinal position within the set . Three key phenomena , which we review in more detail below , are observed . First , there is a severe limit in the information transmitted from stimulus to response ( i . e . , the size of the set for which members can be identified perfectly ) even when adjacent stimuli are perfectly discriminable . Second , a bow effect is observed when identification accuracy is plotted against stimu - lus , with an advantage for the smallest and largest stimuli . Third , there are strong sequential effects , whereby the stimuli on previous trials exert a strong bias on the response to the current stimulus . Many theoretical accounts have been offered for one or more of these phenomena . Nearly all of these models have in common the assumption that in an absolute identification task a representation of the absolute magnitude of the current stimulus is compared with some long - term representations of the absolute magnitudes of either other stimuli from the set , particular anchor values , or particular criterial values . However , in a review for the centenary issue of Psychological Review , Shiffrin and Nosofsky ( 1994 ) con - cluded that , since Miller’s ( 1956 ) classic article , “a fully unified account of the numerous range , edge , and sequential effects has not been achieved” ( p . 359 ) . Here , in contrast to existing models ( excepting Laming , 1984 ) , we offer a relative judgment model ( RJM ) of absolute identifica - tion . The RJM does not use long - term representations of absolute magnitudes . Instead , it uses the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus , in conjunction with the feed - back from the previous trial , to generate a response . Thus , the magnitude of the current stimulus is judged relative to the magni - tude of only the immediately preceding stimulus ( hence the name RJM ) . In this article , we review existing models of absolute identification and show that none offers a complete account of the phenomena described above . We then show that the RJM offers a unified account of these phenomena and present new experimental evidence that supports the model . We begin with a review of the key empirical results . Empirical Results in Absolute Identification Information Transmission Limit If one uses multivariate information transmission as a dependent variable ( McGill , 1954 ) , it is possible to measure the information transmitted 1 in an absolute identification task . If performance in an absolute identification task were perfect , the information transmitted 1 Information transmitted is a measure of the amount of association between the input ( stimulus ) and the output ( response ) of a channel ( the participant ) . The amount of information transmitted does not describe the nature of the association , and the analysis makes no assumptions about the form of the association . Miller ( 1956 ) began with a motivation for using this measure . Neil Stewart , Gordon D . A . Brown , and Nick Chater , Department of Psychology , University of Warwick , Coventry , England . This research was supported by Economic and Social Research Council Grants R000239351 and RES - 000 - 22 - 0918 as well as European Commis - sion Grant RTN - HPRN - CT - 1999 - 00065 . We thank Gregory R . Lockhead , Robert M . Nosofsky , and two anonymous reviewers for their detailed and constructive reviews . We also thank Stian Reimers for much helpful discussion and Petko Kusev for his help running Experiment 2 . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Neil Stewart , Department of Psychology , University of Warwick , Coventry CV4 7AL , United Kingdom . E - mail : neil . stewart @ warwick . ac . uk Psychological Review Copyright 2005 by the American Psychological Association 2005 , Vol . 112 , No . 4 , 881 – 911 0033 - 295X / 05 / $ 12 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 112 . 4 . 881 881 would grow as the number of stimuli was increased . For example , perfect identification of two equally probable stimuli carries one bit of information , identification of four stimuli carries two bits , identifica - tion of eight stimuli carries three bits , and so on . However , the information transmitted from stimulus to response ( sometimes , chan - nel capacity ) in an absolute identification task seems to be limited to very few bits ( see Table 1 ) , corresponding to perfect identification of very few stimuli across a very wide range of stimulus attributes ( see Garner , 1962 ; Laming , 1984 ; Miller , 1956 , for reviews ) . Figure 1 shows information transmitted as a function of the number of stimuli in the set ( with range of the stimuli held constant ) for data from Garner ( 1953 ) and Pollack ( 1952 ) . ( In all figures that present data , data are collapsed across participants . ) With a small number of stim - uli , obviously less information must be transmitted , but as the number of stimuli increases , the information transmitted from stimulus to response does not continue to increase . Although an increase in the range of stimuli ( number held constant ) , and hence the separation of the stimuli , produces an initial increase in information transmitted , the increase is a negatively accelerated function of range and quickly reaches an asymptote once adjacent stimuli are discriminable ( Alluisi & Sidorsky , 1958 ; Braida & Durlach , 1972 ; Eriksen & Hake , 1955a ; Pollack , 1952 ) . Bow or Edge Effects in the Serial Position Curve When accuracy is plotted as a function of the rank of the stimulus within the stimulus set , a characteristic bow is observed in the resulting serial position curve ( e . g . , Kent & Lamberts , 2005 ; Lacouture & Marley , 2004 ; Murdock , 1960 ; W . Siegel , 1972 ) . Performance on stimuli at the ends of the range is better than performance on midrange stimuli even though , when presented in isolation , any two adjacent stimuli may be perfectly discriminable . As for information transmission , once stimuli are pairwise per - fectly discriminable , increased spacing of items leads , at best , to only slight improvements in accuracy ( Braida & Durlach , 1972 ; Brown , Neath , & Chater , 2002 ; Gravetter & Lockhead , 1973 ; Hartman , 1954 ; Lacouture , 1997 ; Luce , Green , & Weber , 1976 ; Pollack , 1952 ) . Figure 2 shows the very similar stimulus – response Figure 1 . Information transmitted from stimulus to response as a function of stimulus set size . The solid line is the maximum possible amount of information transmitted given perfect performance . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . Data are taken from Garner ( 1953 ) and Pollack ( 1952 ) . Table 1 The Limit in Information Transmitted for a Variety of Stimulus Attributes Attribute Source Limit / bits Frequency of a tone Hartman ( 1954 ) 2 . 3 Pollack ( 1952 ) 2 . 3 W . Siegel ( 1972 ) 1 . 6 Intensity of a tone Garner ( 1953 ) 2 . 2 Norwich , Wong , and Sagi ( 1998 ) 2 . 2 Braida and Durlach ( 1972 ; from calculations by Marley and Cook , 1984 ) 1 . 9 Saltiness of a solution Beebe - Center , Rogers , and O’Connell ( 1955 ) 1 . 7 Sweetness of a solution Beebe - Center , Rogers , and O’Connell ( 1955 ) 1 . 7 Intensity of odor Engen and Pfaffmann ( 1959 ) 1 . 5 Bisection of a scale Hake and Garner ( 1951 ) 3 . 2 Coonan and Klemmer ( as reported in Miller , 1956 ) 3 . 2 / 3 . 9 Line length Baird , Romer , and Stein ( 1970 ) 2 . 4 Pollack ( as cited in Miller , 1956 ) 2 . 6 / 3 . 0 Angle of inclination Muller , Sidorsky , Slivinske , Alluisi , and Fitts ( 1955 ; as cited in Garner , 1962 , and Laming , 1984 ) 4 . 5 Pollack ( as cited in Miller , 1956 ) 2 . 8 / 3 . 3 Area Pollack ( as cited in Miller , 1956 ) 2 . 6 / 2 . 7 Area of a circle Alluisi and Sidorsky ( 1958 ) 2 . 7 Area of a square Eriksen and Hake ( 1955a ) 2 . 0 Eriksen and Hake ( 1955b ) 2 . 8 Area of complex figure Baird , Romer , and Stein ( 1970 ) 2 . 1 Hue Chapanis and Halsey ( 1956 ) 3 . 1 Eriksen and Hake ( 1955b ) 3 . 3 Conover ( 1959 ; as cited in Garner , 1962 ) 3 . 5 Brightness Eriksen and Hake ( 1955b ) 2 . 3 Cutaneous electrical intensity Hawkes and Warm ( 1960 ) 1 . 7 Note . Limits separated by a slash denote limits for short and long duration stimulus exposure . 882 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER confusion matrices obtained by Brown et al . ( 2002 ) for absolute identification of tones varying in their frequency . Tones were geometrically spaced , with each tone a constant ratio higher in frequency than the immediately lower tone . ( Following Weber’s law , geometric spacing is typically used to produce stimuli that are presumed to be equally psychologically spaced . ) Each confusion matrix is for a different stimulus spacing ( from 420 – 563 Hz in the narrow spacing condition to 363 – 652 Hz in the wide spacing condition ) . As Figure 2 shows , increasing the stimulus spacing had almost no effect on performance . Increasing the number of stimuli in an absolute identification task increases the size of the bow effect ( Alluisi & Sidorsky , 1958 ; Durlach & Braida , 1969 ; Lacouture & Marley , 1995 ; Pollack , 1953 ; W . Siegel , 1972 ; Weber , Green , & Luce , 1977 ) . Figure 3 shows the serial position curves obtained by Lacouture and Marley ( 1995 ; see also Kent & Lamberts , 2005 ; Lacouture , Li , & Marley , 1998 ) for different stimulus set sizes , with a larger bow effect for larger set sizes . Note that although Stimuli 5 and 6 can be nearly perfectly discriminated when they constitute the entire stimulus set , performance on these same stimuli drops considerably when they are identified within a larger stimulus set . Simply shifting all the stimuli along the dimension , so that each stimulus increases in value by a constant multiplicative factor , has no effect on the accuracy against stimulus magnitude curve ( Lacouture , 1997 ) . The bow effect remains even after extensive practice , although small improvements in accuracy are observed ( Alluisi & Sidorsky , 1958 ; Hartman , 1954 ; Weber et al . , 1977 ; but see Rouder , Morey , Cowan , & Pfaltz , 2004 , for a larger practice effect ) . The bow effect is greatly reduced by correction for the asymmetry of errors on extreme versus interior stimuli ( Weber et al . , 1977 ) , which sug - gests that the restricted opportunity to make errors at the ends of the range is a major factor underlying the bow effect ( see also Eriksen & Hake , 1957 ) . The bow effect is not due to response bias ( at least , not response bias alone ) . In data in which end responses are not used more frequently than central responses , the effect is still observed ( W . Siegel , 1972 ) . In our data from Experiment 1 , the bow is observed although there is a bias against responding with extreme categories . Sequential Effects We know of no absolute identification experiment in which strong sequence effects ( where the response to the current stimulus was shown to depend on previous stimuli and responses ) were not found . Of course , when performance in an absolute identification task is perfect , there are no sequential dependencies . Thus , the existence of sequential dependencies is likely to provide a useful insight into processing in an absolute identification task . The most salient sequential effect is that the response given to the current stimulus is shown to be assimilated to the immediately preceding stimulus ( Garner , 1953 ; Holland & Lockhead , 1968 ; Hu , 1997 ; Lacouture , 1997 ; Lockhead , 1984 ; Long , 1937 ; Luce , Nosofsky , Green , & Smith , 1982 ; Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ; Purks , Callahan , Braida , & Durlach , 1980 ; Rouder et al . , 2004 ; Staddon , King , & Lockhead , 1980 ; Stewart , 2001 ; Ward & Lock - head , 1970 , 1971 ) . In other words , participants are systematically Figure 3 . Accuracy ( top ) and d (cid:1) ( bottom ) against stimulus rank for five different set sizes ( spacing between adjacent stimuli held constant ) . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . Data are from Lacouture and Marley ( 1995 ) . d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) measure of the confusibility of Stimulus i and Stimulus i (cid:2) 1 . Figure 2 . Confusion matrices for three different stimulus spacings ( ratios 1 . 037 , 1 . 050 , and 1 . 076 ) obtained by Brown , Neath , and Chater ( 2002 ) . Each curve represents the proportion of responses in each response cate - gory for a given stimulus : Together , the curves show the stimulus – response confusion matrix . The accuracy against stimulus magnitude serial position curve is obtained when the apexes of each curve are joined . The best fit is to data averaged across all three stimulus spacings . 883 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL biased to respond as if the current stimulus is nearer to the previous stimulus than it actually is . Figure 4 shows data from the feedback condition of Ward and Lockhead’s ( 1970 ) absolute identification experiment . Stimuli were tones varying in loudness . The average error in responding on the current trial is plotted for each stimulus as a function of the stimulus on the previous trial . When the current stimulus was greater than the previous stimulus , the error was negative ( i . e . , the stimulus is underestimated ) ; when the current stimulus was less than the previous stimulus , the error was posi - tive . The five lines are approximately parallel , with positive slopes , demonstrating that assimilation took place for all combinations of current and previous stimuli ( Lockhead , 1984 ) . Assimilation to preceding items is also observed in magnitude estimation tasks ( e . g . , Jesteadt , Luce , & Green , 1977 ) , in matching tasks ( Stevens , 1975 , p . 275 ) , and in relative intensity judgment tasks ( Lockhead & King , 1983 ) . The effect of stimuli further back in the sequence on the current response is the opposite—that is , there is a contrast effect ( Holland & Lockhead , 1968 ; Lacouture , 1997 ; Ward & Lockhead , 1970 , 1971 ) . Assimilation to the previous trial and contrast to trials further back have been demonstrated within the same experiments , for the same participants . Figure 5 shows the average error on the current trial ( averaged across all possible stimuli on the current trial ) as a function of the stim - ulus k trials ago for data from Holland and Lockhead ( 1968 ) , Lacouture ( 1997 ) , and Ward and Lockhead ( 1970 ) . As de - scribed above , assimilation was shown to the stimulus on the immediately preceding trial ( k (cid:3) 1 ) . Stimuli on less recent trials ( k (cid:4) 1 ) exhibited contrast , as shown by the reversal in the sign of the error . The contrast effect was smaller than the assimila - tion , and the error dependency reduced to zero with increased numbers of intervening trials . In the experiments on sequence effects discussed so far , stimu - lus , response , and feedback were all highly correlated . Which of these is the basis for assimilation ( and contrast ) ? We focus on this question for the remainder of this section . The sequence effects observed are dependent on the quality of stimulus presentation . Ward and Lockhead ( 1971 ) examined per - formance in a standard absolute identification experiment using line length . When they increased task difficulty by reducing the luminance and duration of line length presentations , they observed more assimilation . In the difficult condition , accuracy was low , and therefore the correlation between stimuli and responses was reduced . Assimilation was demonstrated only to the previous stim - ulus and not the previous response . This suggests that assimilation to the previous response is only normally observed because the response is correlated with the previous stimulus ( see also Garner , 1953 ; McGill , 1957 ; Mori , 1998 ) . Ward and Lockhead ( 1971 ) also observed assimilation to the pre - vious trial’s feedback but not to the previous response in a guessing task ( although there was slight evidence of a small contrast effect to responses further back in the sequence ) . The guessing task was identical to an absolute identification experiment , except that the stimuli were omitted and therefore could not have been the cause of the assimilation observed . As the task was guessing , there was no correlation between the feedback and the responses . Thus , the obser - vation of sequential effects only for the previous feedback but not the previous response in a task in which the two were not correlated also suggests that previous responses are not the locus of sequential effects . Manipulating the Sequence in an Absolute Identification Task Manipulating the relative frequencies of the size of the differ - ences between consecutive trials affects identification accuracy . In Figure 4 . Average E n ( error in responding on trial n ) for each S n ( rank of the stimulus presented on trial n ) as a function of S n (cid:5) 1 . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . Data have been collapsed across pairs of stimuli . Data are from Ward and Lockhead ( 1970 ) . Figure 5 . Average E n ( across all S n ) as a function of the lag , k , for each possible S n (cid:5) k . Data have been collapsed across pairs of stimuli . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . The three data sets are from Holland and Lockhead ( 1968 ) , Lacouture ( 1997 ) , and Ward and Lockhead ( 1970 ) . E n (cid:3) error in responding on trial n ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . 884 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER an absolute identification task , Luce et al . ( 1982 ) used four differ - ently constrained sequences . In one condition , the sequence of trials was constrained so that the current stimulus was either identical to , one step softer than , or one step louder than the previous stimulus . This condition was called the small step ( 3 ) condition , because the current stimulus was chosen from one of three stimuli centered on the previous stimulus . In the small step ( 5 ) condition , the current stimulus was selected from five adjacent intensities centered on the previous stimulus . In the random con - dition , the sequence was random . In the large step condition , the current stimulus was at least four stimuli different from the pre - vious stimulus . For all four sequence types , each intensity was equally frequent over the course of the whole experiment . From the identification confusion matrix , a measure of the confusibility , d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 , of each loudness i with the adjacent loudness , i (cid:2) 1 , was obtained . This method of analysis allows comparison of identifi - cation performance free from contamination by constraints im - posed by the control of the sequences in each condition . 2 ( The procedure for calculating d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 is given in the Appendix . ) When d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 is plotted against stimulus magnitude , each condition shows a characteristic bow , with poorer performance for the middle of the range of signals ( see the bottom panel in Figure 6 ) . The key result is that the curves lie one above the other , such that tones are more confusable in the conditions in which the step size is larger : In order of decreasing identification performance , the curves are small step ( 3 ) , small step ( 5 ) , random step , and large step . Smaller transitions seem to lead to higher accuracy ( see also Hu , 1997 , and Petzold & Haubensak , 2001 , for similar findings ) . ( The top panel of Figure 6 shows the corresponding bows in the accuracy serial position curves . Here , the ordering of the large step and random conditions is reversed , with better performance in the large step condition because of the restricted possibility of making mistakes imposed by the restricted set of possible responses on each trial . ) Further work ( Nosofsky , 1983b ) , testing alternative hypotheses , is consistent with the idea that smaller transitions lead to greater accuracy . Existing Models of Absolute Identification There are many existing accounts of some of the phenomena seen in absolute identification data . The extant models can be divided into four main classes : ( a ) models in which memories of recent stimuli are assimilated ( Holland & Lockhead , 1968 ; Lock - head & King , 1983 ) , ( b ) modified Thurstonian models ( Braida et al . , 1984 ; Durlach & Braida , 1969 ; Luce et al . , 1976 ; Purks et al . , 1980 ; Treisman , 1985 ) , ( c ) limited response or processing capacity models ( Lacouture & Marley , 1991 , 1995 , 2004 ; Laming , 1984 , 1997 ; Marley & Cook , 1984 , 1986 ) , and ( d ) exemplar models ( Brown et al . , 2002 ; Kent & Lamberts , 2005 ; Nosofsky , 1997 ; Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ) . Below , we briefly review each of these models and consider which of the phenomena outlined ( limit in information transmitted , bow effects , and assimilation and con - trast ) are and are not accounted for by each model . Table 2 gives an overview of the scope of these models . Two themes emerge from this review . First , there are two different types of explanation as to why increasing the range of stimuli does not increase infor - mation transmitted . Some models assume a perceptual locus , and others assume the limit lies in the response process . The second theme is that current models that assume that long - term represen - tations of absolute magnitudes are the basis for absolute identifi - cation do not provide a full account of sequential effects . Assimilation Models Holland and Lockhead ( 1968 ) . In Holland and Lockhead’s ( 1968 ) model , participants are assumed to generate a response by adding the judged distance between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus to the feedback from the previous trial . Assim - ilation and contrast are accounted for in terms of the contamination of the representations of the absolute magnitudes of stimuli . Spe - cifically , the memory of the previous stimulus is assumed to be contaminated by the memories of earlier stimuli . Of the phenomena outlined above , Holland and Lockhead’s ( 1968 ) model accounts for assimilation and contrast , but only on average . For example , consider a low - magnitude stimulus on the previous trial . The stimuli on preceding trials are likely to have been larger in magnitude , and , thus , when the previous stimulus is confused with them , the representation of its magnitude is an overestimate . This causes the difference between the current and previous stimuli to be underestimated on average ( as the current stimulus is also likely to be larger than the previous stimulus ) and leads to the current response being biased toward the previous 2 It is not clear whether the responses offered to participants were constrained for Luce et al . ’s ( 1982 ) Experiment 1 . This was the case for their Experiment 2 . Figure 6 . Data showing the bow in proportion correct ( top ) and d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 ( bottom ) serial position curves for the four conditions used by Luce , Nosofsky , Green , and Smith ( 1982 ) . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) measure of the confusibility of Stimulus i and Stimulus i (cid:2) 1 . 885 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL stimulus ( i . e . , assimilation ) . Contrast also follows : On average , the current response is biased away from stimuli two or more trials ago because these stimuli are , on average , greater in magnitude than the ( low - magnitude ) stimulus on the immediately preceding trial . However , a detailed examination reveals this account to be unsat - isfactory . Typically , assimilation is observed for all combinations of current and previous stimuli ( e . g . , Ward & Lockhead , 1970 ; our Experiment 1 ) . Holland and Lockhead’s model predicts contrast in some cases . For example , consider the case of absolute identifica - tion of 10 stimuli , with Stimulus 3 on the preceding trial followed by Stimulus 2 on the current trial . The confused representation of Stimulus 3 will be an overestimate ( as earlier stimuli are likely to have been larger ) , and , thus , the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus will be overestimated . This produces a contrast effect in which assimilation is observed . In addition to this difficulty for the model , Holland and Lockhead gave no account of the other phenomena listed in Table 2 . Lockhead and King ( 1983 ) . In Lockhead and King’s ( 1983 ; see also Lockhead , 1984 ) model , two assumptions are made : ( a ) that successive stimuli assimilate in memory , and ( b ) that people compare each new stimulus with a collection of stimulus memories to determine a response . No psychological mechanism is chosen to motivate these assumptions ; “the focus here is on a simple equa - tion to fit the data” ( Lockhead , 1984 , p . 44 ) . The equation is R n (cid:1) S n (cid:2) a 1 (cid:6) S n (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:7) (cid:2) a 2 (cid:6) S n (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 2 (cid:7) (cid:2) a 3 (cid:6) S n (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 3 (cid:7) (cid:2) . . . (cid:2) (cid:4) , where R n is the response on trial n , S n is the stimulus on trial n , a 1 (cid:8) 0 for assimilation to S n (cid:5) 1 , a 2 (cid:4) a 3 (cid:4) . . . (cid:4) 0 for decreasing contrast to less recent stimuli , and (cid:4) is a noise term . Although such a model can inevitably describe assim - ilation and contrast , no consideration is given to other absolute identification phenomena . In our application of Lockhead and King’s model , we have found that such a model does not offer an account of the limit in information transmitted or the bow effect . Modified Thurstonian Models In a Thurstonian account , presentation of a stimulus results in perception of an absolute magnitude , represented as a noisy value on an internal sensory scale . Criteria , or bounds , divide this scale into response categories . The criteria provide a long - term frame of reference for absolute magnitudes . There are important multidi - mensional extensions of this idea ( e . g . , Ashby & Townsend , 1986 ) . The source of variability in responding in the standard Thurstonian model is the noise in the representation of the stimulus on the internal sensory scale . A simple Thurstonian model can offer some account of the limit in information transmitted as the number of stimuli is increased with the range held constant ( the “Range constant” columns in Table 2 ) : As the number of stimuli is increased , the bounds become closer together , and the fixed magnitude noise on the sensory scale means that a stimulus is more likely to be classified incorrectly . The bow effect can also be explained because there is a limited ability to make mistakes for stimuli at the edges of the range . For example , if the smallest magnitude stimulus is greatly underestimated , then it will still be correctly classified into the first category . The invariance of these phenomena as range is increased ( the “ N constant” columns in Table 2 ) and an account of sequential effects require further modification of the model . We evaluate three modifications below . Durlach and Braida ( 1969 ) . Durlach and Braida ( 1969 ) mod - ified the simple Thurstonian decision model outlined above to include an internal noise model . Durlach and Braida proposed that Table 2 A Comparison of Absolute Identification Models Model Type Information transmission limit Bow Sequenceeffects Rangeconstant N constant Basiceffect Rangeconstant N constant RT Assimilation Contrast Manipulation Holland and Lockhead ( 1968 ) Regression No No No No No No Partly a Partly a No Lockhead and King ( 1983 ) Regression No No No No No No Yes Yes No Durlach and Braida ( 1969 ) Modified Thurstonian Yes Yes Yes b Yes Yes No No No No Treisman ( 1985 ) Modified Thurstonian Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Partly c Partly c No Luce , Green , and Weber ( 1976 ) Modified Thurstonian Yes Yes Yes d Yes Yes No No No Yes Marley and Cook ( 1984 , 1986 ) Restricted capacity Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No Lacouture and Marley ( 1991 ) Restricted capacity Yes Yes No No No No No No No Lacouture and Marley ( 1995 , 2004 ) Restricted capacity Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Laming ( 1984 , 1997 ) Relative judgment Yes Yes No No No No No No Yes Brown , Neath , and Chater ( 2002 ) Exemplar No No Yes Yes Yes e No No No No Nosofsky ( 1997 ) Exemplar No No Yes f Yes No Yes No No No Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 ) Exemplar Possibly Possibly Yes Possibly Possibly No Partly g No Possibly Kent and Lamberts ( 2005 ) Exemplar Possibly No Yes Yes h No Yes No No No Relative judgment model Relative judgment Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Note . Yes indicates the effect is captured . No indicates the effect cannot be captured . Partly indicates that some aspect of the effect is captured but that there is a significant shortcoming . N (cid:3) set size ; RT (cid:3) response time ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . a Captures the effect only on average . b With the additional assumption of an anchor at each end of the range . c Incorrectly predicts that assimilation will decrease as S n (cid:5) S n (cid:5) 1 increases . d With the additional assumption that the attention band dwells at the edges of the range . e With the additional assumption that discriminability is reduced as stimulus range increases . f An account of the bow effect is built into the model’s response bias parameters . g Predicts response repetition but not increasing assimilation as S n (cid:5) S n (cid:5) 1 increases . h Kent and Lamberts held stimulus spacing rather than stimulus range constant . 886 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER memory can operate in one of two modes . Here we discuss only the context - coding mode , which applies to absolute identification . In the context - coding mode , the presented stimulus is compared with the general context of recent stimulus presentations . The context - coding mode adds an additional source of variability in responding ( beyond the perceptual noise in the simple Thurstonian model ) that results from “the inability of the subject to determine the context precisely and his inability to determine or represent the relation of the sensation to this context precisely” ( p . 374 ) . The standard deviation of the context - coding noise is assumed to be proportional to the range of the stimuli , though no psychological motivation is given for this assumption . The inclusion of a source of variability that grows with the stimulus range allows Durlach and Braida’s ( 1969 ) preliminary theory of intensity resolution to account for the invariance of the absolute identification phenom - ena as range is increased ( either through an increase in the number of stimuli with the spacing held constant or through an increase in the spacing ) . To account for bow effects , Braida et al . ( 1984 ) suggested that the general context is set by two anchors at either end of the range . The participant compares a stimulus with the general context by counting steps ( which are some proportion of the distance between the anchors ) using a noisy measurement unit . Thus , there is less variability for stimuli near one of the anchors , as the number of steps is small , and thus the cumulative error is small . 3 No mechanism is offered to account for sequential effects . However , Purks et al . ( 1980 ) suggested that the distributions that represent signals are unaffected by the location of the previous signal but that the category boundaries are . By partitioning their data by the previous signal and fitting a Thurstonian decision - bound model to each partition , Purks et al . demonstrated that the separation between signal distributions was unaffected but that the locations of decision boundaries were , being shifted away from the previous signal . The next modification of the simple Thurstonian model extends this idea . Treisman ( 1985 ) . Treisman ( 1985 ) used criterion - setting the - ory ( Treisman & Williams , 1984 ) to maintain response criteria in a simple Thurstonian model . Two opposing short - term mecha - nisms act on the criteria on a trial - by - trial basis . A tracking mechanism , motivated by the assumption that objects in the real world tend to persist , moves criteria away from the currently perceived sensory effect , increasing the probability of a repetition of the previous response . A stabilizing mechanism acts to locate criteria nearer to the prevailing flux of sensory inputs , motivated by the assumption that criteria will be adjusted to maximize information transmitted . Tracking shifts are larger in magnitude than stabilizing shifts but decay more quickly . Thus , Treisman’s model predicts assimilation to the immediately preceding stimulus when tracking shifts dominate but predicts contrast to less recent stimuli when stabilizing shifts dominate . However , this account does not fully explain the sequential biases . Treisman ( 1985 , p . 192 ) stated that the magnitude of criteria movement decreases with the distance of the criteria from the stimulus . Therefore , the model would be expected to predict greater assimilation where previous and current stimuli are similar . However , assimilation is greater where stimuli differ more rather than less ( see , e . g . , Figure 4 ) . For the same reason , Treisman’s model predicts that the error in responding should be greater if the previous and current stimuli are similar : Luce et al . ( 1982 ) , Nosfosky ( 1983b ) , Hu ( 1997 ) , and Rouder et al . ( 2004 ) found the opposite result . The magnitude of the stabilizing shift is , unlike tracking shifts , not fixed but instead proportional to the distance between the sensory input and the nearest criterion . The magnitude of stabili - zation is thus proportional to the intercriterion distance and there - fore also proportional to the range . This allows Treisman’s ( 1985 ) model to explain why increasing the range of stimuli does not increase information transmitted . However , it also means that as the range is increased , stabilization should come to dominate , and it predicts a change in the pattern of assimilation and contrast that is not observed ( e . g . , Experiment 1 below ) . Treisman’s ( 1985 ) model does not predict the gradual and smooth U - shaped pattern of the bow effect ( instead , accuracy is approximately equal for all but the two most extreme stimuli ) . However , if criteria in the central region are more closely spaced , bow effects will be more U shaped . Such a spacing would also lead to a response bias for extreme stimuli , but the opposite pattern—a central tendency in responding—is typically observed ( see Exper - iment 1 ) . Luce et al . ( 1976 ) . Luce et al . ( 1976 ) proposed a modified Thurstonian model in which an attention band roves over the stimulus range . Items falling in the band result in a less variable Thurstonian representation than those that do not . As the stimulus range is increased , the probability of stimuli falling inside the fixed - width band is reduced , causing a reduction in identification performance . This allows the model to predict a limit in perfor - mance as stimulus range is increased . With the additional assump - tion that the attention band dwells at the edges of the range of stimuli , bow or edge effects are accounted for , although no moti - vation for this assumption is given . The further assumption that attention tends to dwell on the location of the last stimulus explains the finding that there is typically reduced variation in responding when the previous stimulus is similar to the current stimulus ( e . g . , Luce et al . , 1982 ) . However , the attention band model does not offer an account of the systematic bias in responding to the current stimulus by preceding stimuli ( i . e . , assimilation and contrast ) . Restricted Capacity Models Cook , Lacouture , and Marley ( Lacouture & Marley , 1991 , 1995 , 2004 ; Marley & Cook , 1984 , 1986 ) have presented three models of absolute identification that account for limits on information trans - mitted and bow effects by assuming a limited capacity process in either memory or response processes ( not perceptual processes ) . These models can account for limits in performance as stimulus range is increased because they do not assume that the limit in information transmitted is perceptual . Marley and Cook ( 1984 , 1986 ) and Karpiuk , Lacouture , and Marley ( 1997 ) . In Marley and Cook’s ( 1984 , 1986 ) models , perception is assumed to be absolute , with the location of the 3 Gravetter and Lockhead ( 1973 ) proposed a similar model , except that in their model noise is assumed to be proportional to the criterial range ( i . e . , the distance between the two most extreme category boundaries ) rather than the distance between the two most extreme stimuli . Though these two distances are highly correlated in most situations , if the lowest and highest stimuli are placed more extremely , criterial range is found to be more appropriate . 887 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL stimulus represented accurately on a Thurstonian continuum . The exact location on the continuum is unavailable to the response process and must be deduced through comparison of the stimulus with the context in which it is presented . Marley and Cook as - sumed that the context , which comprises a set of elements , must be rehearsed . Each element’s activation is incremented each time a pulse arrives from a Poisson pulse process , before its activation continues to decay exponentially . There is a fixed total rehearsal capacity , which they modeled by limiting the pulse rate across all elements . The location of the stimulus within the continuum of elements is the sum of the activation of the elements between the stimulus and known anchors ( cf . Braida et al . , 1984 ) . The anchors are assumed to be at or outside the location of the extreme stimuli . Marley and Cook ( 1984 ) showed that , under these assumptions , the variability of the total activity of elements to one side of the stimulus increases with the number of elements . Marley and Cook ( 1984 ) demonstrated that the model can account for ( a ) the asymptote in information transmission as stim - ulus range increases , with the number of stimuli held constant , or as the number of stimuli increases , with the spacing held constant , and ( b ) the bow effect . Karpiuk et al . ( 1997 ) extended the model to predict reaction time distributions . Marley and Cook provided no account of the sequential effects observed . Marley and Cook also pointed out that , if one were to extend their model to provide the necessary account by assuming that the range of the rehearsal is determined by the immediately preceding context , it is not clear how the model could explain assimilation and contrast without a further addition to the model . Lacouture and Marley ( 1991 ) . Lacouture and Marley ( 1991 ) demonstrated that a simple network model could provide a rea - sonable account of the limit in information transmitted . The model is a three - layer feed - forward network that learns by mean - variance back - propagation of error . Input vectors of adjacent stimuli over - lap . For example , if Stimulus 5 is presented , Input Unit 5 will be activated and neighboring Input Units 4 and 6 will also be acti - vated to a lesser extent . The model predicts the limit in information transmitted when the number of hidden units is one , although the observed characteristic shape of the information transmitted against set size ( see our Figure 1 ) is not well reproduced . The model does , however , produce a good fit to Braida and Durlach’s ( 1972 ) data , in which information transmitted was measured as stimulus range was varied ( with set size held constant ) . Modeling of bow and sequence effects is not described . The model cannot provide an account of sequence effects without substantial modi - fication because , once learning has reached asymptote , the repre - sentation and processing of a stimulus are independent of imme - diately preceding stimuli . Lacouture and Marley ( 1995 , 2004 ) . Lacouture and Marley’s ( 1995 , 2004 ) mapping model is a feed - forward network with one single input unit , one single hidden unit , and an output unit for each response . The activation of the input unit represents the magnitude of the stimulus . Perception is assumed to be noisy , and repeated presentation of the same stimulus does not always lead to the same activation . The hidden unit normalizes this activation via a lower and an upper anchor value , so that the resulting activation falls within the range 0 to 1 . Fixed magnitude noise that represents a noisy mapping process is then added , resulting in a limited channel capacity . With a large number of stimuli , the resulting set of possible mean hidden unit activations is closer together than for a smaller set , and , thus , the fixed magnitude noise has a greater effect on performance for larger sets . The mapping of the hidden unit activation onto output units acts to partition the unit interval into response categories . For each output unit , activation is accu - mulated over the course of the trial , with the corresponding re - sponse being emitted once the accumulator reaches a given thresh - old ( Lacouture & Marley , 1995 ) . The assumption of repeated intratrial sampling of the output units allows the model to predict response times as well as accuracy , providing an extension over previous models . Lacouture and Marley ( 2004 ) replaced the accu - mulator and threshold with a leaky , competing accumulator ( Usher & McClelland , 2001 ) to capture full correct response time distributions . The mapping model provides an account of the limit on infor - mation transmitted and of the bow effect for different set sizes . By incorporating the ( unmotivated ) assumption that , after a response is made , there will be less variation in the output of that unit and those immediately adjacent to it on the next trial , the model also accounts for the data from the sequence manipulation experiments ( Luce et al . , 1982 ) . However , this model suffers the same difficulty as the attention band model described above in accounting for sequence effects . Lacouture and Marley ( 2004 ) suggested three modifications to the model that might allow a future version of the model to account for sequential effects : ( a ) Instead of normalizing hidden unit activation through the use of two anchor values , previous stimulus values could be used . ( b ) Hidden unit activations may be contaminated with hidden unit activations from previous stimulus presentations . ( c ) The leaky competing accumulators may begin each trial with some residual activation carried over from previous trials . Laming’s ( 1984 , 1997 ) RJM Laming ( 1984 ) described a model that accounts for the limit in information transmission and the effects of constraining possible jump sizes between successive stimuli ( i . e . , Luce et al . , 1982 ) . The crucial assumption in Laming’s model is that all judgments are relative to the immediately preceding context ( i . e . , that the differ - ences between successive stimuli are used , not the absolute mag - nitudes of the stimuli ) . Further , Laming proposed that such relative judgments are limited . In particular , Laming suggested that the current stimulus can be judged as “much less than , ” “less than , ” “equal to , ” “more than , ” or “much more than” the previous stim - ulus . This judgment limit provides a limit in the information transmitted . Numerical estimates of the stimulus magnitudes are assigned such that they follow the same pattern . If the difference between stimuli is judged as “less than , ” for example , then the number assigned to the estimate of the magnitude of the current stimulus is less than the estimate of the magnitude of the previous stimulus . The ordering of Luce et al . ’s ( 1982 ) conditions is also explained by Laming’s model . Laming showed that the variability in responding depends mainly on the mean squared jump sizes in the sequence , and , as jump size predicts perfectly the ordering of performance in Luce et al . ’s conditions , so does Laming’s model . Laming ( 1984 ) did not offer an account of the bow in the serial position curve or of assimilation and contrast . Indeed , Laming stated that an additional principle is required to provide an account of the sequential effects observed in magnitude estimation and absolute identification . He suggested that researchers take into 888 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER account the prior expectations of the distribution of stimulus magnitudes as a candidate principle . Exemplar Models Exemplar models ( Medin & Schaffer , 1978 ; Nosofsky , 1986 ) assume a long - term memory for each stimulus’s magnitude , to - gether with the label associated with that stimulus . On presentation of a stimulus , the probability of a given response is given by the similarity of the presented stimulus to the memory of the stimulus associated with that response divided by the summed similarity of the presented stimulus to each stimulus memory . Brown et al . ( 2002 ) . Brown et al . ’s ( 2002 ) model of scale - invariant memory , perception , and learning has been applied to absolute identification data ( as well as free , serial , and probed recall memory tasks ) . The model is an exemplar model of absolute identification and is equivalent to the generalized context model ( GCM ; Nosofsky , 1986 ) in its application to absolute identification . Exemplar models of absolute identification provide a reasonable account of bow effects . Bow effects are accounted for because items at the end of the range have fewer similar neighbors to be confused with . However , exemplar models do not predict the gradual bowing that is typically observed : Instead , all items tend to show almost identical levels of performance , except for superior performance on the very edge items . It is possible to provide a better fit by biasing the responses associated with more extreme stimuli . However , this bias for extreme responses is at odds with the central tendency in responding that is typically observed . Further , as described above , the bow effect is still observed in data in which each response is used equally often ( W . Siegel , 1972 ) or in which middle responses are used more often ( see Experiment 1 ) . Exemplar models face a further problem . Recall that increasing the spacing of stimuli does not remove the bow effect and leads only to a slight improvement in accuracy . Exemplar models , however , predict a large improvement in accuracy , as items be - come more discriminable . Brown et al . ( 2002 ) introduced the assumption that discriminability is inversely related to stimulus range and showed that , with this additional assumption , the bow effects are invariant under stimulus range . Exemplar models do not predict any curves in d (cid:1) without further assumptions . In their simplest form , exemplar models offer no account of sequence effects . When adapted to predict sequence effects , typi - cally by the assumption that more recent exemplars are more available in memory and / or weighted more heavily in the subse - quent decision process ( e . g . , Nosofsky & Palmeri , 1997 ; see also Elliott & Anderson , 1995 ) , the models do not correctly predict sequence effects observed in classification ( Stewart & Brown , 2004 ; Stewart , Brown , & Chater , 2002 ) . Increased weighting of more recent items makes a prediction similar to assimilation , as repetition of the previous response is more likely . However , the criticism applied to the Thurstonian models applies : An increased probability of repetition is not equivalent to assimilation . Further , this modification provides no account of contrast . Nosofsky ( 1997 ) . Nosofsky ( 1997 ) applied Nosofsky and Palmeri’s ( 1997 ) exemplar - based random walk model , which is an extension of the GCM ( Nosofsky , 1986 ) , to predict responses and reaction times in absolute identification . Stimuli are represented by normal distributions on a psychological continuum , with stimuli at the edges of the range assumed to be less variable . In this way , an account of bow or edge effects is built into the model . On presen - tation of a test item , the model assumes memories race to be retrieved . The probability of a memory being retrieved at a given time is a function of the exemplar’s similarity to the test item and the exemplar’s strength in memory . Once an item is retrieved , a counter for the associated category label is incremented , and all others are decremented . The remaining items then race again . When any counter falls too low , the response associated with the counter leaves the race . When a counter reaches a given threshold , the response associated with that counter is emitted , with the reaction time being a function of the sum of the times for each retrieval . No mechanism is outlined for prediction of sequence effects , and no explanation is offered on the invariance of the bow in serial position when stimulus range is altered . Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 ) . Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 ) presented a scaling model ( ANCHOR ) based on the ACT - R ar - chitecture ( Anderson , 1990 ; Anderson & Lebie ` re , 1998 ) that they applied to absolute identification and category rating . The percep - tion of the absolute magnitude of a stimulus is compared with anchors or exemplars stored in memory . Perception is assumed to be stochastic . The selection of exemplars is also stochastic and depends on the similarity between the exemplars and the target stimulus and also on the frequency and recency with which each exemplar was previously used . Exemplars compete for selection . One exemplar is selected , and the associated response is retrieved . If there is a discrepancy between the exemplar magnitude and the percept magnitude , then an adjustment is applied to the response to correct it either up or down . The system is adaptive , and , after feedback , the location of the associated exemplar is assimilated toward the percept . Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 ) fitted the model to their own data from an absolute identification of nine stimuli . The model was able to fit simultaneously the information transmitted , central tendency in responding , assimilation ( on average ) , and a small practice effect . The model did not predict bows in d (cid:1) but was able to predict an accuracy advantage for end stimuli because of the limited opportunity for errors at the ends of the range . Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 ) did not model the effect of increas - ing the number of stimuli ( with the range held constant ) or the range of the stimuli ( with the number held constant ) , and , thus , it is uncertain whether the model can account for the effects of these variables . However , the model does include noisy components that are independent of the spacing of the stimuli , so it may well be able to account for the effects without modification . Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 ) did not examine assimilation in detail . In Figure 7 , we show the predictions of ANCHOR ( a ) for the effect on the current response of the previous stimulus and current stimulus ( top panel ) and ( b ) for the effect of the stimulus at different lags ( bottom panel ) . We used the parameters that Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 , pp . 406 , 416 ) reported as best fitting their data and ran 200 simulations of 450 trials . Although AN - CHOR does predict assimilation on average , it does not predict the detailed pattern that is normally observed ( e . g . , Figure 4 and Experiment 1 ) , in which assimilation increases as the difference between the previous and the current stimuli increases . In AN - CHOR , sequential effects are caused by exemplars being weighted by their recency of use . Thus , ANCHOR fails to predict the more detailed pattern of assimilation for the same reason as Treisman’s 889 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL ( 1985 ) and Luce et al . ’s ( 1976 ) models fail : Predicting that the response associated with the previous stimulus is more likely to be repeated is not the same as predicting that the current response will be biased toward the previous stimulus . Further , the model does not predict contrast to stimuli at lags of two or greater and instead predicts assimilation to stimuli at these lags . Kent and Lamberts ( 2005 ) . Kent and Lamberts ( 2005 ) pre - sented an application of Lamberts’s ( 2000 ) extended GCM ( EGCM ) to absolute identification . The EGCM differs from the GCM in assuming that the amount of information about a stimulus magnitude increases over the time course of the stimulus presen - tation as stimulus elements are sampled . The probability that sampling will be halted and a response given increases as more elements are sampled . The EGCM was able to predict bow in accuracy and mean correct reaction times as well as the complete reaction time distributions for individual stimuli . By allowing more generalization for larger set sizes and less sampling for larger set sizes , the EGCM could also predict changes in accuracy and reaction time as set size varied . An alternative , more parsimonious modification , in which the information contributed by each addi - tional sample was a decreasing function of the number of samples , also allowed the model to account for set - size effects . Kent and Lamberts did not model the effect of changing the stimulus spac - ing . However , without altering the discriminability ( cf . Brown et al . , 2002 ) , the EGCM predicts that performance will increase greatly with increased spacing ( limits in information transmitted also have not been modeled ) . The model does not predict any sequential effects . Motivation of the RJM Having reviewed the key empirical phenomena and the existing models of absolute identification , we next lay out the motivation for the RJM . We have made two main choices in developing the RJM . First , we assume that the locus of the limit in performance is not perceptual but judgmental . Second , we assume that judgment is relative and not absolute . We give our motivation for these assumptions below . The Locus of the Effects Is Not Perceptual As we have reviewed above , as the range of the stimuli is increased , performance quickly reaches asymptote ( Braida & Durlach , 1972 ; Brown et al . , 2002 ; Eriksen & Hake , 1955a ; Gravetter & Lockhead , 1973 ; Hartman , 1954 ; Luce et al . , 1976 ; Pollack , 1952 ) . Further , stimuli that can be identified perfectly when presented in isolation are poorly identified when presented within a larger set ( Lacouture & Marley , 1995 ; see also Nosofsky , 1983b ; Pollack , 1953 ) . Typically , the variability in magnitude estimates is approximately two orders of magnitude greater than variability in threshold discriminations of the same stimuli ( Lam - ing , 1997 ; see also Miller , 1956 ; Shiffrin & Nosofsky , 1994 ) . Theorists have taken two different approaches in accounting for these effects . One approach is to assume that the locus of the limit in performance is perceptual and that when the range of stimuli is increased , there is a large increase in perceptual noise that keeps the information transmitted at the same level . For example , Luce et al . ( 1982 ) assumed that perceptual noise increases with stimulus range because of a limit in the range over which attention can be focused . Braida and Durlach ( 1972 ) and Gravetter and Lockhead ( 1973 ) assumed that the noise in the location of the criteria in a Thurstonian model increases with stimulus range . ( Although Braida and Durlach’s and Gravetter and Lockhead’s assumption concerns noise in the location of criteria rather than percepts , it is still noise on a perceptual scale with perceptual units . ) Instead , in the RJM , we assume that what limits performance is noise in the processes of mapping a continuous valued estimate of the response onto response categories . Lacouture and Marley’s ( 1995 , 2004 ) mapping model makes the same assumption . They assumed that stimulus magnitudes are scaled onto a hidden unit activation that ranges over the unit interval and that constant variance noise ( completely independent of the stimulus range ) is responsible for the limit in capacity . In the RJM , in assuming that mapping rather than perceptual noise is responsible for the limit in capacity , we do not require any additional assumptions to explain the lack of an improvement in performance when stimulus range is increased . One reason for this approach is parsimony . As described above , the limit in information transmitted is approximately constant across a wide range of stimulus types ( see Table 1 ; Garner , 1962 ; Laming , 1984 ; Miller , 1956 ) . The differences in the exact amount Figure 7 . Sequential effects predicted by the ANCHOR model ( Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ) . A : E n ( error in responding on trial n ) as a function of S n – 1 parameterized for different S n ( rank of the stimulus presented on trial n ) . B : E n as a function of lag k parameterized for different S n – k . Perceptual noise ( k p ) (cid:3) 0 . 04 ; learning rate ( (cid:5) ) (cid:3) . 3 ; memory noise ( k m ) (cid:3) 0 . 058 , softmax temperature ( T ) (cid:3) 0 . 050 , history weight ( H ) (cid:3) 0 . 071 , and cutoff ( c ) (cid:3) 0 . 036 . 890 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER of information that can be transferred are perhaps less important than the fact that the limit in channel capacity seems to be gener - ally so low . Miller ( 1956 ) concluded , “There seems to be some limit built into us either by learning or by the design of our nervous system , a limit that keeps our channel capacities in this general range” ( p . 86 ) . The fact that similarly low limits in channel capacity are found across such a wide range of stimulus attributes suggests that there is a common cause of this limitation , especially as the same bow and sequential effects are observed across the same wide range . Of course , it could be that this cause is dupli - cated across the different sensory apparatuses used in each task . However , a more parsimonious explanation is that the cause re - sides not in the perceptual system but in the judgment system responsible for producing responses . Relative Rather Than Absolute Judgment A limitation in all of the above models ( excepting Lockhead and King’s , 1983 , descriptive model ) is the difficulty in predicting the ubiquitous pattern of assimilation and contrast ( see , e . g . , Figure 5 and Experiment 1 ) . For example , a variety of modifications of the Thurstonian model have not proved adequate : Allowing the loca - tion of the criteria to be updated from trial to trial ( Treisman , 1985 ) and allowing a resolution - improving attention band to shadow stimuli ( Luce et al . , 1976 ) have both failed . Similarly , an adequate account of sequential effects has also eluded exemplar models , in which the weighting of recent exemplars and the updating of their locations from trial to trial have also failed ( Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ) . Here , we propose that these models find accommodating sequential effects difficult because they are based on the assump - tion that long - term absolute magnitude information is the basis for absolute identification performance . In the Thurstonian models , the position of the criteria provides long - term absolute magnitude information . In Lacouture and Marley’s ( 1991 , 1995 , 2004 ) con - nectionist model , long - term absolute magnitude information about the most extreme stimuli is used in rescaling each stimulus mag - nitude . In the exemplar models , the memory for the magnitude of each exemplar provides long - term absolute magnitude informa - tion . It may be that some future modification of these models will allow them to fully predict the pattern of sequential effects , but in the RJM we show how these sequential effects follow naturally from a relative judgment account . J . A . Siegel and Siegel ( 1972 ) reviewed evidence that long - term representation of attributes such as pitch and loudness may be very poor : Memory for pitch , as measured in a same – different judg - ment task , decays very rapidly with the duration of tone or unfilled interval between the standard and comparison tones ( Bachem , 1954 ; Harris , 1952 ; Kinchla & Smyzer , 1967 ; Koester , 1945 , as cited in Massaro , 1970 , and Wickelgren , 1966 ; Ko¨nig , 1957 ; Tanner , 1961 ; Wickelgren , 1966 , 1969 ; Wolfe , 1886 , as cited in Massaro , 1970 , and Wickelgren , 1966 ) . Massaro ( 1970 ) found that , if the intervening tone was similar to the standard , this disrupted judgment further . In their review article , J . A . Siegel and Siegel concluded that the limit in absolute identification perfor - mance “is not limited by stimulus information , but rather by subjects’ inability to maintain multiple representations of sensory stimuli in memory” ( p . 313 ) . If a long - term representation of the absolute magnitude of a stimulus cannot be maintained success - fully across only a single intervening stimulus or even an unfilled interval in a trial of a same – different judgment task ( in which the intervening stimulus can be ignored ) , then it is very unlikely that long - term representations of absolute magnitude can be main - tained across the ( on average ) larger number of intervening trials in an absolute identification experiment . In the RJM , we instead suggest that , in the absence of stable and accurate long - term representations of the absolute magnitudes of stimuli , participants instead rely on a relative comparison of the current stimulus with the previous stimulus . This relative differ - ence is then used in conjunction with the feedback from the previous trial to generate a response ( cf . Holland & Lockhead , 1968 ) . Our intuition , which we test below , was that a model in which responding on the current trial depends on information from the preceding trial might offer a simple account of sequential effects . We are not the first to suggest that psychophysical judg - ment might be relative . In reviews of the psychophysical literature , Helson ( 1964 ) and Laming ( 1997 ) both suggested that psycho - physical judgment is relative . Lockhead ( 1992 , 2004 ) also reached this conclusion , although he suggested that , because single at - tributes cannot be abstracted from the object in which they occur , entire objects , rather than their constituent attributes , are judged relative to one another . In absolute identification , in which objects ( stimuli ) vary on only a single attribute , these alternatives are equivalent . Stewart and Brown ( 2004 ) have found evidence in perceptual categorization that supports the idea that participants generate the response on the current trial by comparing the current stimulus with the preceding stimulus . They examined sequential effects in a binary categorization of tones varying in frequency , where low - frequency tones belonged to one category and high - frequency tones belonged to the other . If participants could maintain even a single long - term absolute magnitude ( the category boundary ) , then this categorization task should have been trivial , as stimuli could simply be compared with this reference point and categorized accordingly . Instead , Stewart and Brown found strong sequential effects , consistent with participants making an ordinal comparison between the current stimulus and the preceding stimulus . Accuracy was only high when comparison with an immediately preceding stimulus determined the categorization . For example , if a stimulus was lower in magnitude than the preceding stimulus and the preceding stimulus was from the low category , then the current stimulus was correctly categorized as a member of the low cate - gory . These data are consistent with the idea that the categorization of the previous stimulus together with a judgment of the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus inform the current categorization decision . Other data are difficult to explain with an absolute account . If judgment is absolute , then the effect of the previous stimulus on the current response should be viewed as a biasing of absolute judgment . Attenuation of sequential effects should therefore lead to an improvement in identification performance . Stewart and Chater ( 2003 ) found that a manipulation that attenuated sequential effects instead reduced identification accuracy . Stewart and Chater had participants perform an absolute identification of eight loud - nesses . However , each loudness was randomly presented as either a pure , sinusoidal tone or a white noise hiss . When consecutive stimuli were of different types ( a hiss followed by a tone or a tone followed by a hiss ) , there was a significantly smaller correlation between the previous stimulus and the current response compared 891 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL with when stimuli were of the same type ( two consecutive hisses or two consecutive tones ) . Accuracy was also significantly lower when consecutive stimuli were of different types compared with when consecutive stimuli were of the same type . This result is the opposite of what would be expected if absolute judgments were being made : Reducing the biasing caused by the previous stimulus should have increased accuracy . However , this result is expected if the loudness of the current stimulus is judged relative to the previous stimulus : A switch in the stimulus type will make the comparison of loudnesses more difficult , reducing the accuracy on the current trial . The idea that long - term representations of absolute magnitudes are not available may well be too strong . There are some data that are problematic for this view . Ward and Lockhead ( 1970 ) and Ward ( 1987 ) ran several psychophysical tasks requiring either absolute or relative judgment ( absolute identification , category judgment , estimation of the ratio of successive magnitudes , abso - lute magnitude estimation , and cross - modality matching ) . On dif - ferent days , they varied the loudness of the entire stimulus set . Whether participants were performing relative or absolute judg - ment tasks , the judgments on each day were systematically biased toward the stimulus – response mapping from the previous day . This suggests that some representation of the absolute magnitudes of stimuli persists over an interval of at least 1 day . Thus , it may be that long - term absolute magnitude information is available in absolute identification but that its representation is rather poor or “fuzzy” ( Ward , 1987 , p . 226 ) and not sufficient to support absolute identification . Alternatively , the information may be available but ( for some unknown reason ) not used . Consistent with this possi - bility , long - term absolute magnitude information seems to be weighted more heavily when instructions suggest the use of a long - term frame of reference ( DeCarlo , 1994 ; DeCarlo & Cross , 1990 ) or when intertrial intervals are large ( DeCarlo , 1992 ) . ( Stew - art & Brown , 2004 , gave a more detailed discussion of these data ) . Our core claim—that absolute identification is achieved by relative judgment—is consistent with both the possibility that long - term representations of absolute magnitudes are poor and the possibility that the long - term representations are ( for some unknown reason ) unused . Summary In summary , two shortcomings of existing models have moti - vated the RJM . Models that assume that the locus of the limit in information transmitted is perceptual fail to predict ( or require modification to predict ) that channel capacity will remain severely limited even for very large stimulus spacings . In the RJM , the limit in channel capacity is not perceptual . Models that use long - term representations of absolute magnitudes do not capture the sequen - tial effects adequately . In the RJM , as the name suggests , judgment is instead relative to the immediately preceding stimulus . Next , we give a detailed specification of the RJM . Mathematical Specification of the RJM In what follows , we refer to the current trial in an experiment as trial n , the previous trials as trial n (cid:5) 1 , and the k th most recent trial as trial n (cid:5) k . The physical magnitude of the stimulus on trial n is denoted X n , the rank of the stimulus within the set is S n , the response is R n , the feedback is F n , and the error in responding is E n (cid:3) R n (cid:5) S n . The elemental unit admitted to the decision process is assumed to be the difference between S n and S n (cid:5) 1 . In other words , what is admitted to the decision process on trial n is not some represen - tation of the magnitude of S n but a representation of the difference between S n and S n (cid:5) 1 . This difference , D n , n (cid:5) 1 , is given by the logarithm of the ratio of the physical magnitudes , D n , n (cid:5) 1 (cid:1) A ln (cid:1) X n X n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) , ( 1 ) where A is a constant that depends on the sensory dimension . The use of the ratio follows from Weber’s law . A rearrangement of Equation 1 gives D n , n (cid:5) 1 (cid:1) A ln (cid:6) X n (cid:7) (cid:3) A ln (cid:6) X n (cid:5) 1 (cid:7) . If Fechner’s logarithmic law relating physical magnitude to the subjective , psychological percept holds , then D n , n (cid:5) 1 is the arithmetic differ - ence between psychological magnitudes . If stimuli are geometri - cally spaced with spacing r ( i . e . , each stimulus is a constant ratio r larger in physical magnitude than the next highest in magnitude ) , as is nearly always the case in absolute identification experiments , then D n , n (cid:5) 1 (cid:1) A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7)(cid:6) S n (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:7) . ( 2 ) This difference D n , n (cid:5) 1 is assumed to be contaminated by resid - ual representations of earlier differences D n (cid:5) 1 , n (cid:5) 2 , D n (cid:5) 2 , n (cid:5) 3 , and so forth . Alternatively , elements of the representation of D n , n (cid:5) 1 are assumed to be confused with elements of the representations of D n (cid:5) 1 , n (cid:5) 2 , D n (cid:5) 2 , n (cid:5) 3 , and so forth ( cf . Estes , 1950 ) . The result of this confusion or contamination is labeled D n , n (cid:5) 1 C . D n , n (cid:5) 1 C (cid:1) (cid:3) i (cid:3) 0 n (cid:5) 2 (cid:5) i D n (cid:5) i , n (cid:5) i (cid:5) 1 . ( 3 ) The (cid:5) coefficients are constrained to be in the range 0 (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:6) 1 . The coefficient for the current difference (cid:5) 0 is fixed at 1 . Further , the coefficients are constrained to be monotonically decreasing ( i . e . , (cid:5) i (cid:4) (cid:5) i (cid:2) 1 ) , so that more recent differences are more likely to be confused with the current difference . The idea that representa - tions may be confused is quite ubiquitous in psychology . What is unique in the RJM is the assumption that stimulus differences rather than stimulus absolute magnitudes are confused , and this follows from our initial assumption that stimulus differences , rather than absolute magnitudes , are elemental . That is , D n , n (cid:5) 1 C can be considered the result of a confusion of stimulus differences in exactly the same way as any other representations might be confused . To produce a response , one converts the difference D n , n (cid:5) 1 C to a difference on the response scale by dividing by a constant (cid:7) . ( (cid:7) represents the subjective size of the difference that corresponds to a single unit on the response scale ; see Luce & Green , 1974 , and Marley , 1976 , for a similar approach in magnitude estimation . ) The result is then added to the feedback from the previous trial ( cf . Holland & Lockhead , 1968 ) . It is at this point that we assume that there is a limit in channel capacity . Next , we outline the form that this limit takes in the RJM . The limit in the channel capacity in the RJM is assumed to arise from noise in mapping the stimulus difference onto the response scale . Lacouture and Marley ( 1995 , 2004 ) , Marley and Cook 892 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER ( 1984 , 1986 ) , and Petrov and Anderson ( 2005 ) also assumed that the limit in channel capacity is ( at least partly ) a result of noisy mapping . These authors gave detailed mechanistic accounts of the mapping process : in terms of a limited capacity rehearsal of the context in a Thurstonian model ( Marley & Cook , 1984 , 1986 ) , in terms of noisy activation of a single connectionist unit ( Lacouture & Marley , 1995 , 2004 ) , or in terms of exemplars competing for selection ( Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ) . Here , we do not choose among these accounts or offer our own mechanistic account . Instead , we borrow a general principle from all of these accounts . In each account , as the number of response categories is increased , fixed magnitude noise in the mapping process leads to greater confusion among response categories . For example , in Lacouture and Marley’s mapping model , stimulus magnitudes are represented by the activation of a hidden unit in a connectionist network . The activation of the hidden unit varies between 0 and 1 . Fixed mag - nitude noise is added to the activation of the hidden unit . In experimental blocks in which the set size is larger and , thus , the spacing of stimuli on the hidden unit’s unit interval is closer , the fixed magnitude noise causes greater confusion among response categories . In the RJM , we make the additional assumption that , on a given trial , some responses can be ruled out because of knowledge of F n (cid:5) 1 and the sign of D n , n (cid:5) 1 C . The limited capacity is then used to represent only the remaining responses . For example , if S n is per - ceived as being less than S n (cid:5) 1 , then only those responses less than F n (cid:5) 1 are represented . If S n is greater than S n (cid:5) 1 , then only those responses greater than F n (cid:5) 1 are represented . This assumption follows directly from the initial assumption that judgment is relative . We assume that the noise in the mapping process is normally distributed with variance (cid:8) 2 and that this variance is constant from trial to trial ( and also from experiment to experiment ) . However , as we outlined above , the effect of this noise on responding is not constant from trial to trial , because the number of candidate responses varies from trial to trial . Consider the example illustrated in Figure 8A for the absolute identification of 10 stimuli . If S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 4 and S n (cid:3) 8 , then because D n , n (cid:5) 1 C / (cid:7) (cid:9) 8 (cid:5) 4 (cid:3) 4 is positive , R n must be higher than F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 4 . The response scale must now be partitioned into six responses ( i . e . , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , and 10 ) . Compare this case with the case illustrated in Figure 8B . Now , S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 6 , and , as before , R n must be higher than F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 6 . Now , however , the same limited capacity can be used to represent only four candidate responses ( i . e . , 7 , 8 , 9 , and 10 ) . In this latter condition , the same variance noise in mapping translates into less confusion among responses , because the limited capacity is partitioned into fewer response categories . Two pieces of empirical evidence support this assumption . First , there is almost never a problem deciding whether S n is higher or lower than S n (cid:5) 1 . In only 1 . 2 % of the responses in Experiment 1 was the sign of the differences between consecutive stimuli mistaken ( i . e . , partic - ipants responded with a higher number than F n (cid:5) 1 when S n was lower in frequency than S n (cid:5) 1 , or vice versa ) . We describe the second piece of evidence in Experiment 2 , which provides a direct test of the assumption that F n (cid:5) 1 is used together with D n , n (cid:5) 1 C in generating R n . Equation 4 implements the conversion of D n , n (cid:5) 1 C into a difference on the response scale and then the subsequent addition to F n (cid:5) 1 within a fixed limited capacity that is used to represent the range of possible responses . R n (cid:1) F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) D n , n (cid:5) 1 C (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:9) Z , ( 4 ) where Z is a normally distributed random variable that represents the noise in the mapping process with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of (cid:8) and (cid:9) represents the range of possible responses ( given the sign of D n , n (cid:5) 1 C and F n (cid:5) 1 ) and scales the fixed noise within the limited capacity onto the response scale . Thus , R n is a normally distributed random variable . (cid:9) is specified exactly in Equation 5 . (cid:9)(cid:1) (cid:4) N (cid:3) F n (cid:5) 1 if D n , n (cid:5) 1 C (cid:10) (cid:2) (cid:11) 1 if (cid:3) (cid:11)(cid:6) D n , n (cid:5) 1 C (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:11) F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 1 if D n , n (cid:5) 1 C (cid:12) (cid:3) (cid:11) (cid:5) , ( 5 ) where N is the number of stimuli and (cid:11) is a criterion whose magnitude D n , n (cid:5) 1 C must exceed for S n and S n (cid:5) 1 to be assumed to be different . (cid:11) is assumed to be fixed at half of the stimulus spacing throughout this article . It is important to acknowledge here that Equations 4 and 5 do not represent a detailed mechanistic account of how the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus is com - bined with the feedback from the previous trial to produce a response . We simply intend Equations 4 and 5 to represent the assumption that a fixed magnitude noise in the mapping process has a greater effect on trials in which there are more candidate responses . As we described above , the prediction that noise in the mapping process will increase as the set size increases emerges from many accounts of absolute identification in which the map - ping process is specified in detail ( e . g . , Lacouture & Marley , 1995 , 2004 ; Marley & Cook , 1984 , 1986 ; Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ) . In the RJM , we assume that the noise varies not only from block to block in an experiment as the set size is manipulated but also from trial to trial as the number of available responses varies ( con - strained by F n (cid:5) 1 and D n , n (cid:5) 1 C ) . In Equations 4 and 5 , we assume that the noise in responding will grow linearly with the number of available responses . We return to this issue later in this article and suggest that this simple assumption may need to be modified . We assume that the location of the N (cid:5) 1 criteria , labeled x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x N (cid:5) 1 , that partition the response scale is such that accuracy is Figure 8 . An illustration of how the limited capacity is used . A : S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 4 , S n (cid:3) 8 . B : S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 6 , S n (cid:3) 8 . In each case , the same limited capacity is used to represent the range of possible responses , given the sign of D n , n (cid:5) 1 C . Noise of the same variance is present in each case . However , because responses are more compressed in A compared with B , the variability in responding will be greater in A . S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n ; D n , n (cid:5) 1 C is the perception of the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus after it has been confused with elements of or contaminated by perceptions of earlier differences . 893 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL maximized . The probability of a given response r is given by the total density of R n within the range x r (cid:5) 1 (cid:12) R n (cid:12) x r , ( 6 ) with the lower and upper bounds replaced by (cid:5)(cid:10) and (cid:10) for the lowest and highest responses , respectively . Figure 9 shows the placement of criteria that maximizes the proportion of correct responses for the parameters that best fit the data from Experiment 1 . The dashed lines are drawn at 1 . 5 , 2 . 5 , . . . , 9 . 5 . Notice that the optimal placement for criteria is more extreme than criteria half - way between integer values on the scale . This displacement is approximately a linear function of the distance of the criteria x r from the center of the scale . ( When the model predicts the dis - placement of x r from r (cid:2) 1 / 2 as a linear function of r , 99 . 96 % of the variance is accounted for . ) This outward displacement of optimal criteria happens because of a mathematical fact proved by James and Stein ( 1961 ) . James and Stein demonstrated that when one predicts three or more population means from three or more observations ( one from each population ) , the best estimate of each mean is not given by each observation . Instead , estimates derived by shrinking each obser - vation toward the grand mean of all the observations are better . 4 Efron and Morris ( 1977 ) provided an accessible introduction to James – Stein estimators and gave the example of baseball players : The best estimate of a player’s batting average in the next season is not given by his or her score in the previous season . A better estimate is derived if the player’s score is shrunk toward the grand mean of all baseball players’ scores . Here , we are trying to esti - mate the correct response from a single noisy estimate ( i . e . , a single sample from R n ) . James and Stein’s result tells us that the single sample from R n will be too extreme compared with the mean response . Thus , it is optimal to place the criteria at more extreme locations . Equation 7 gives the location of each criterion . x r (cid:1) (cid:1) R (cid:2) r (cid:2) 1 2 (cid:3) (cid:1) R 1 (cid:3) c , ( 7 ) where (cid:1) R is the mean of the response scale ( i . e . , [ N (cid:2) 1 ] / 2 ) and 0 (cid:8) c (cid:8) 1 is a James – Stein estimator . As c becomes larger , criteria are more outwardly displaced . Fitting the RJM to Existing Data In this section , we describe the mechanics of fitting the RJM to the data reviewed above . The RJM has a set of (cid:5) parameters that describe the confusion of the representations of the differences among stimuli ; a (cid:7) parameter that scales between differences and response scale units ; a noise parameter , (cid:8) ; and a James – Stein estimator , c . For simplicity , the quantity 1 / ( A ln ( r ) ) is absorbed into the (cid:7) parameter . Thus , when (cid:7) (cid:3) 1 , the size of the difference between stimuli that corresponds to a single unit on the response scale is perfectly estimated . (cid:7) (cid:8) 1 represents an underestimation of the stimulus spacing , and (cid:7) (cid:4) 1 represents an overestimation . Except where specified otherwise , the data modeled in this section were collected from experiments in which a random sequence of stimuli was used . In modeling these data , we used the RJM to generate predictions of the probabilities of each response for every possible combination of the preceding and current stimuli . We then calculated the relevant descriptive statistics as in the original experi - ments . For fits to these existing data sets , we minimized the MSE between each data point and the predicted value . We found the best fitting parameter values using both a downhill simplex procedure and Brent’s method ( Press , Flannery , Teukolsky , & Vetterling , 1992 ) . Fits were repeated with a large set of random starting values . Best fitting parameters for each model are given in Table 3 . Some data sets did not adequately constrain all of the parameters . For example , in fitting the pattern of assimilation and contrast in Figure 5 , we observed a wide range of sigma parameters in the fits . When this happened , we chose a fit from the subset of fits with an MSE within 1 % of the best fit MSE that had values for the unconstrained parameters similar to those we found in fitting other data sets . The RJM Account of the Bow Effect In Figure 2 , a single fit is presented for all three stimulus spacing conditions in Brown et al . ’s ( 2002 ) experiment . The data did not constrain the (cid:5) parameters for less recent stimuli , so a restricted version of the RJM with (cid:5) 3 (cid:3) (cid:5) 4 (cid:3) (cid:5) 5 (cid:3) 0 was fitted . The RJM provides an excellent fit to the characteristic bow . The primary explanation for the bow effect is that there is a limited opportunity to make errors at the end of the stimulus range . For example , Stimulus 1 can only be mistaken for larger stimuli , but Stimulus 5 can be mistaken for smaller or larger stimuli . However , given that the error observed is normally only one or maybe sometimes two response units ( see , e . g . , the confusion matrices in Figure 2 ) , the restricted opportunity to make mistakes can really only account for the peaks at each end of the accuracy against stimulus magnitude curve and does not offer an account of the gradual , smooth curve over the entire stimulus range . The gradual bowing is accounted for because the effect of the limited decision capacity is greatest for the central stimuli . When 4 The James – Stein estimator was not proved to be the best estimator , just a better estimator than the single observation . In the absence of a best estimator , the James – Stein estimator is used as that which best approxi - mates optimality . Figure 9 . The optimal location for response scale criteria for relative judgment model parameters that best fit data from Experiment 1 . Dashed lines represent criteria halfway between integer values on the response scale . Solid lines are the optimal criteria . R n (cid:3) response on trial n . 894 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER S n lies in the center of the range , averaging over all possible S n (cid:5) 1 , the range of possible R n constrained by F n (cid:5) 1 and D n , n (cid:5) 1 is , on average , larger than when S n lies at an extreme . For example , Table 4 shows the range of possible responses for two cases , S n (cid:3) 1 and S n (cid:3) 5 . Averaged over all possible S n (cid:5) 1 , the range of possible responses is smaller for the extreme stimulus . Thus , the differences leading to extreme stimuli can , on average , be trans - lated more accurately than differences leading to central stimuli within the limited capacity . Optimal use of a limited capacity decision scale , then , acts to reduce accuracy in the center of the range more than it reduces accuracy at the edge of the range . Together with the limited opportunity for errors at the edge of the range , the effects produce the characteristic smooth bow . We used a single set of parameters across all of the set sizes in fitting the bow effects in accuracy in Lacouture and Marley’s ( 1995 ) data ( see Figure 3 ) . With only the set size differing among fits , the RJM is able to provide a good account of the bows . A key observation is that the limited capacity for repre - senting the range of possible responses can represent two pos - sible alternatives nearly perfectly , but not many more . For this reason , the decision process does not add noise in a task in which two stimuli are identified but does add noise when there are more than two stimuli . The RJM is able to account for the dependency of the bow effect on set size because , as the set size increases , the average magnitude of both the differences be - tween stimuli and the range of possible responses on any given trial increases . Both of these increases lead to more variability in responding . A shortcoming of the RJM in its present instantiation is that it does not make predictions about reaction times . Reaction times are faster for extreme stimuli ( e . g . , Kent & Lamberts , 2005 ; Lacouture & Marley , 1995 ) . As described above , some models can predict this effect ( e . g . , Lacouture & Marley , 1995 ; Nosofsky , 1997 ) , and other models go further and predict reaction time distributions for each stimulus ( Karpiuk et al . , 1997 ; Kent & Lamberts , 2005 ; Lacouture & Marley , 2004 ) . Though we have not addressed this issue in this article , it may be possible to extend the RJM to predict response time distributions . In its present form , noise is added to the quantity F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) D n , n (cid:5) 1 C / (cid:7) ( see Equation 4 ) , and the result R n is partitioned into response categories ( see Equation 6 ) via fixed criteria . Instead of assuming that response probabilities are given directly by the integrals of the probability density among relevant criteria , we could use a set of leaky competing accumulators ( Usher & McClelland , 2001 ; following Lacouture & Marley , 2004 ) . By using F n (cid:5) 1 and the sign of D n , n (cid:5) 1 C to restrict which accumulators from the full set ( one for each response category ) enter into the competition on each trial , we could predict full response time distributions that are conditional on the current stimulus and previous stimuli . Although it would be hard to test the fully conditional distribution predictions because of the large num - ber of data required ( e . g . , for absolute identification of 10 stimuli and sequence effects up to a lag of five trials , there would be 10 6 possible sequences , each requiring on the order of 100 repetitions Table 3 Best Fitting Parameter Values of the Relative Judgment Model Data Figure (cid:5) 1 (cid:5) 2 (cid:5) 3 (cid:5) 4 (cid:5) 5 c (cid:8) (cid:7) r 2 Garner ( 1953 ) 1 . 161 . 017 . 205 0 . 078 0 . 800 . 20 a Pollack ( 1952 ) 1 . 161 . 034 . 162 0 . 064 0 . 833 1 . 00 Brown , Neath , and Chater ( 2002 ) 2 . 308 . 187 . 235 0 . 297 0 . 816 . 98 Lacouture and Marley ( 1995 ) 3 . 171 . 138 . 155 0 . 133 0 . 808 . 95 b Ward and Lockhead ( 1970 ) c 4 . 187 . 152 . 104 . 049 . 000 . 188 0 . 069 0 . 962 . 89 Holland and Lockhead ( 1968 ) 5 . 223 . 174 . 125 . 088 . 058 . 083 0 . 113 0 . 885 . 98 Lacouture ( 1997 ) 5 . 125 . 111 . 079 . 054 . 033 . 159 0 . 104 0 . 930 . 92 Ward and Lockhead ( 1970 ) c 5 . 187 . 152 . 104 . 049 . 000 . 188 0 . 069 0 . 962 . 93 Luce , Nosofsky , Green , and Smith ( 1982 ) 6 . 069 . 050 . 103 0 . 211 0 . 860 . 92 d Experiment 1 e 20 – 24 . 112 . 101 . 076 . 054 . 035 . 111 0 . 216 0 . 961 f W . Siegel ( 1972 ) 25 . 160 . 200 . 141 0 . 144 0 . 883 . 93 a This r 2 is low because there is almost no variation in the data to be explained . b Fit to accuracy data only ; r 2 (cid:3) . 60 for d (cid:1) data . c These data were fitted simultaneously . d Fit to accuracy data only ; r 2 (cid:3) . 63 for d (cid:1) data . e Best fitting parameters to data averaged across participants . f r 2 values for response biases , confusion matrices , assimilation plots , assimilation and contrast plots , and d (cid:1) were . 98 , . 98 , . 89 , . 94 , and . 88 , respectively . Table 4 The Range of Possible Responses Available in an Absolute Identification of 10 Stimuli S n (cid:5) 1 S n (cid:3) 1 S n (cid:3) 5 Set of possible responses Range , (cid:9) Set of possible responses Range , (cid:9) 1 1 { 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 } 9 2 { 1 } 1 { 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 } 8 3 { 1 , 2 } 2 { 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 } 7 4 { 1 , 2 , 3 } 3 { 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 } 6 5 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } 4 1 6 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 } 5 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 } 5 7 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 } 6 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 } 6 8 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 } 7 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 } 7 9 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 } 8 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 } 8 10 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 } 9 { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 } 9 Note . For simplicity in calculating (cid:9) , we assume D n , n (cid:5) 1 C (cid:3) D n , n (cid:5) 1 in this table , where D n , n (cid:5) 1 C is the perception of the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus after it has been confused with elements of or contaminated by perceptions of earlier differences and D n , n (cid:5) 1 is the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus . S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . 895 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL to construct full reaction time distributions ) , we could test this extension of the RJM with data conditional on , for instance , just the current stimulus . The RJM Account of the Limit in Information Transmission In modeling the limit in information transmitted ( see Figure 1 ) , we used a single set of best fitting parameters across all set sizes . Again , the data did not constrain the (cid:5) parameters for less recent stimuli , so we fitted a restricted version of the RJM with (cid:5) 3 (cid:3) (cid:5) 4 (cid:3) (cid:5) 5 (cid:3) 0 . Dashed lines represent the fits to the Pollack ( 1952 ) and Garner ( 1953 ) data . Information transmitted is completely defined by the confusion matrix . Thus , the RJM’s account of the limit in information transmitted as the number of stimuli is in - creased is the same as that given above for the confusion matrix . The RJM Account of the Restricted Sequence Designs Fits of the RJM to Luce et al . ’s ( 1982 ) proportion correct data are shown in Figure 6 , with a single set of parameters used for all conditions . In fitting these data , we restricted responses that the RJM could generate on each trial to be those available to partici - pants . There were 10 criteria dividing the response scale into 11 categories positioned according to Equation 7 . However , in the small step ( 3 ) condition , for example , when each stimulus was either one smaller than , the same as , or one larger than the previous stimulus , we used only the relevant 2 of these 10 criteria that divided the response scale into the categories F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:5) 1 , F n (cid:5) 1 and F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) 1 . As before , the data did not constrain the (cid:5) parameters for less recent stimuli , so we fitted a restricted version of the RJM with (cid:5) 3 (cid:3) (cid:5) 4 (cid:3) (cid:5) 5 (cid:3) 0 . The RJM fits the bow effect in mean proportion correctly and orders the sequences correctly . Within the RJM , the advantage for conditions with smaller transitions results from the cumulative effect of the smaller transitions , in agreement with Nosofsky’s ( 1983b ) and Luce et al . ’s ( 1982 ) conclusions . With smaller transitions , because the range of previous stimuli is smaller , D n , n (cid:5) 1 C is less variable ( Equation 3 ) . Together with reduced noise in the mapping process when a stimulus is repeated ( Equa - tions 4 and 5 ) , which is more likely with smaller transitions , these two properties of the RJM give higher accuracy for sequences with smaller transitions . ( As we noted in the initial presentation of Luce et al . ’s data , accuracy is higher in the large step condition than the random condition , because the responses available on each trial are restricted in the large step condition . However , performance mea - sured by d (cid:1) is higher for the random step condition than for the large step condition . Immediately below , we show that the RJM predicts this . ) The RJM Account of Bows in Discriminability Using the parameter set from fitting the accuracy data ( above ) , we also generated predictions for d (cid:1) for Brown et al . ’s ( 2002 ; see our Figure 10 ) data , Lacouture and Marley’s ( 1995 ; our Figure 3 ) data , and Luce et al . ’s ( 1982 ; our Figure 6 ) data . We used param - eters from the accuracy fits because the optimization algorithm performed very poorly when we fitted d (cid:1) directly . The RJM does predict bows in d (cid:1) because the effect of the limited decision capacity is greatest for central stimuli , as described above . How - ever , the size of this effect is systematically underestimated . The RJM predicts that the confusion between the lowest two stimuli and also between the highest two stimuli will be larger than is actually observed . Below , we consider two modifications that should allow the RJM to predict better the bows in d (cid:1) . In the RJM , we assume that the limit in channel capacity is caused by fixed variability noise in mapping between stimulus differences and the response scale . In Equation 4 , we make the perhaps overly simple assumption that the effect of this fixed mapping noise (cid:8) on the variability in responding on a given trial is a linear function of the number of available responses (cid:9) ( see Equation 5 ) . If one assumes a different relationship ( i . e . , a convex relationship when the effect on the response scale is plotted against the range of possible responses ) , then greater bows in d (cid:1) can be predicted . Motivating the functional form of this relationship re - quires more detailed assumptions about the procedural nature of the mapping from stimulus differences to the response scale . Lacouture and Marley ( 1995 , 2004 ) assumed that the limit results from the range of stimulus magnitudes being represented by the activation of a single noisy unit in a connectionist network . Marley and Cook ( 1984 , 1986 ) assumed that the limit in mapping arises because of a limited rehearsal capacity in maintaining the context against which a stimulus is judged . Either one of these assumptions could be incorporated into the RJM . An alternative modification is to assume that the edge stimuli are somehow privileged , as other authors have ( e . g . , Braida et al . , 1984 ; Marley & Cook , 1984 , 1986 ; Nosofsky , 1997 ) . For example , participants may use representations of the magnitude of the ex - treme stimuli if the stimuli occurred two or three trials ago that they do not use for interior stimuli . Alternatively , maybe a limited number of long - term representations of absolute magnitudes can be maintained , and the extreme stimuli are preferentially selected . Though these assumptions would complicate the RJM , they may prove to be necessary in a fuller account of the d (cid:1) data . The RJM Account of Assimilation and Contrast Fits of the RJM to the sequential effects of Holland and Lockhead ( 1968 ) , Lacouture ( 1997 ) , and Ward and Lockhead ( 1970 ) are shown in Figures 4 and 5 . In the RJM , sequence effects result from the Figure 10 . d (cid:1) from Brown , Neath , and Chater ( 2002 ) . The relative judgment model fit is to data averaged across the three spacings . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) measure of the confusibility of Stimulus i and Stimulus i (cid:2) 1 . 896 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER confusion of the representation of the current difference with the representation of other differences . The complex pattern of first as - similation and then contrast emerges naturally from the RJM , as a consequence of the assumption that more recent differences are more likely to be confused or contaminated with the current difference than less recent differences are . Equations 2 and 3 may be substituted into Equation 4 to give R n (cid:1) F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:11) (cid:5) 0 (cid:6) S n (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:5) 1 (cid:6) S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 2 (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:5) 2 (cid:6) S n (cid:5) 2 (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 3 (cid:7) (cid:2) . . . (cid:12) (cid:2) (cid:9) Z . If we recall that , when feedback is provided , F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 1 , rearranging by collecting together S n (cid:5) i terms gives R n (cid:1) A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:5) 0 S n (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) (cid:5) 0 (cid:7) S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:13) (cid:6) (cid:5) 2 (cid:3) (cid:5) 1 (cid:7) S n (cid:5) 2 (cid:2) A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:5) 3 (cid:3) (cid:5) 2 (cid:7) S n (cid:5) 3 (cid:2) . . . (cid:2) (cid:9) Z ( 8 ) For assimilation of R n to S n (cid:5) 1 to occur , 1 (cid:2) A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) (cid:5) 0 (cid:7) (cid:10) 0 . Given an approximately correct estimate of the stimulus differ - ence corresponding to a single unit on the response scale , that is , (cid:7) (cid:3) A ln ( r ) , and if we recall that the availability of the current difference was set at (cid:5) 0 (cid:3) 1 , then this inequality reduces to (cid:5) 1 (cid:4) 0 . (cid:5) 1 , which represents the extent to which D n (cid:5) 1 , n (cid:5) 2 is confused with D n , n (cid:5) 1 , is positive , so assimilation is predicted . Assimilation is still predicted if (cid:7) (cid:13) A ln ( r ) unless (cid:7) is greatly overestimated . For contrast of R n to S n (cid:5) 2 to occur , A ln (cid:6) r (cid:7) (cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:5) 2 (cid:3) (cid:5) 1 (cid:7) (cid:12) 0 ( with similar expressions for less recent stimuli ) . Given that A ln ( r ) and (cid:7) are both positive and that (cid:5) 1 (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 ( reflecting a greater confusion of D n , n (cid:5) 1 with D n (cid:5) 1 , n (cid:5) 2 than with D n (cid:5) 2 , n (cid:5) 3 ) , contrast is always predicted . In summary , in the RJM , the awkward pattern of assimilation and then contrast follows in a straightforward way from the as - sumption that the current difference is confused more with more recent differences . To capture this pattern in a model in which absolute stimulus magnitudes are used would be difficult , because one would need to motivate a switch in the sign of the coefficient for S n (cid:5) 1 compared with S n (cid:5) 2 , S n (cid:5) 3 , . . . . The RJM Account of the Response Scale Shrinkage The data in Figure 4 show that , irrespective of S n (cid:5) 1 , if S n is small it is overestimated ( i . e . , E n (cid:4) 0 ) and if S n is larger it is underestimated ( E n (cid:8) 0 ) . The RJM model accounts for this pattern because optimally located response criteria x r are spread outward from the center of the scale . Extensions of the RJM The Effect of Range Thus far , we have accounted for the key phenomena in absolute identification by assuming that the locus of these effects lies purely in the response process . We have assumed that the effects are not perceptual , because all of the effects are seen with very widely spaced stimuli . When stimuli are already widely spaced , increasing their spacing does little to improve performance ( e . g . , Brown et al . , 2002 ) . However , if stimuli are closely spaced , then increasing their spacing does improve performance ( e . g . , Braida & Durlach , 1972 ; see our Figure 11 ) , up to an asymptotic limit . So , at least for closely spaced stimuli , stimulus noise does play some role in limiting performance in absolute identification . The version of the RJM presented above cannot account for this result , because the RJM predicts no effect of increasing the range of the stimuli . Because of the ratio in Equation 1 , the RJM is scale free ( Chater & Brown , 1999 ) . That is , the magnitude of all of the stimuli could be increased by any factor , and the same predictions would be made ( see Lacouture , 1997 , for an empirical demonstration ) . How - ever , it is straightforward to extend the model to include a stimulus noise component by replacing Equation 1 with D n , n (cid:5) 1 (cid:1) A ln (cid:1) X n X n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) , ( 9 ) where stimulus magnitudes are now random variables . Substituting Equation 9 into Equation 3 gives D n , n (cid:5) 1 C (cid:1) (cid:5) 0 A ln X n (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) (cid:5) 0 (cid:7) A ln X n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) (cid:6) (cid:5) 2 (cid:3) (cid:5) 1 (cid:7) (cid:13) A ln X n (cid:5) 2 (cid:2) . . . . Thus , D n , n (cid:5) 1 C is also a random variable , which we assume to be normally distributed ( which follows from the assumption that the distribution of the logarithm of stimulus magnitudes is normal ) with standard deviation (cid:8) s . This version of the model can account for the data in Figure 11 using a single parameter set for all stimulus ranges ( (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) . 271 , (cid:5) 2 (cid:3) . 253 , c (cid:3) . 109 , (cid:8) (cid:3) 0 . 025 , (cid:7) (cid:3) 0 . 892 , and (cid:8) s (cid:3) 0 . 129 ) . Even with this modification , there are still some data that are problematic for the RJM . Nosofsky ( 1983a ) investigated whether stimulus noise or criterial noise was increased when the stimulus range was increased in absolute judgment of the intensity of tones . By fitting a simple Thurstonian model , Nosofsky found evidence that both stimulus and criterial noise increased with range . In its present form , the RJM does not predict an increase in stimulus noise and would require a further assumption , such as a limit in the width of an attention band ( cf . Luce et al . , 1976 ) . Designs With Uneven Stimulus Spacing Stimuli are not always evenly spaced in absolute identification designs . For example , Lockhead and Hinson ( 1986 ) investigated Figure 11 . Information transmitted in absolute identification of 10 stim - uli as a function of stimulus range . Data ( indicated by plus signs ) are from Braida and Durlach ( 1972 ) . 897 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL performance in an absolute identification of three tones differing in intensity . They used three different stimulus sets . In the even - spread condition , stimuli were evenly spaced at 58 , 60 , and 62 dBA . In the low - spread condition , the lowest stimulus was 4 dB less intense ( i . e . , a set of 54 , 60 , and 62 dBA intensities ) . In the high - spread condition , the highest stimulus was 4 dB more intense ( i . e . , a set of 58 , 60 , and 66 dBA intensities ) . Figure 12 gives the confusion matrices for each condition . When we compare the low - and even - spread conditions , we see that identification performance of the common stimuli ( Stimuli 2 and 3 ) is affected by the location of Stimulus 1 . Stimuli 2 and 3 are more likely to be confused when Stimulus 1 is lower . We see a similar ( mirror image ) pattern when we compare the high - and even - spread conditions . The RJM can capture this pattern . Because stimuli are no longer evenly spaced , we have not used Equation 7 to place criteria . Instead , we have left the criteria as free parameters . In the even condition , we introduced the constraint x 2 (cid:3) 4 (cid:5) x 1 to ensure that x 2 is displaced away from the center of the scale in exactly the same way as x 1 . ( Although parameterized slightly differently , this model is exactly equivalent to the RJM described in the Mathe - matical Specification of the RJM section . ) In the low - and high - spread conditions , x 1 and x 2 were allowed to vary freely , with the constraint that there was symmetry between the low - and high - spread conditions ( i . e . , x 1 , low (cid:3) 6 (cid:5) x 1 , high and x 2 , low (cid:3) 6 (cid:5) x 2 , high ) . Figure 12 shows the best fits that minimize MSE between the data points and the model predictions ( (cid:5) (cid:3) . 073 , (cid:7) (cid:3) 0 . 373 , (cid:8) (cid:3) 0 . 285 , x 1 , even (cid:3) 0 . 578 , x 1 , low (cid:3) 1 . 047 , x 2 , low (cid:3) 5 . 886 ) . The model fits the data reasonably well ( r 2 (cid:3) . 98 ) . Comparing the low - spread and even conditions , the model correctly predicts that Stimuli 2 and 3 are more likely to be confused when Stimulus 1 is low . Comparing the high - spread and even conditions , the model correctly predicts that Stimuli 1 and 2 are more likely to be confused when Stimulus 3 is high . ( Deviations of the data from model predictions are mainly caused by a lack of symmetry in the data ; e . g . , in the data for the even condition , Stimulus 2 was responded to with Stimulus 3 more often than Stimulus 1 , which suggests that stimuli were not exactly evenly spaced psychologically . ) The Effect of Omitting Feedback The RJM relies on the previous feedback in generating a re - sponse ( see Equation 4 ) . Here we extend the RJM to situations in which feedback is omitted . Omitting feedback also alters the sequential effects in absolute identification . When feedback is omitted , information transmitted from the previous response in - creases , and information transmitted from the previous stimulus is reduced ( Mori & Ward , 1995 ) . Note that , in this task , Mori and Ward held accuracy constant across the feedback and no - feedback conditions . The change in sequential effects is thus not due to an overall change in accuracy or task difficulty . In addition to the change in the pattern of information transmission , assimilation , rather than contrast , is observed to stimuli further back in the sequence , and the effect of previous responses is greater than the effects of previous stimuli ( see Lockhead , 1984 , for a review ) . In the RJM , an estimate of the difference between the current and previous trials is used together with the feedback from the previous trial to generate a response ( see Equation 4 ) . In the absence of feedback , we assume that participants use their re - sponse from the previous trial as the best estimate of the correct answer on the previous trial ( i . e . , F n (cid:5) 1 is replaced with R n (cid:5) 1 in Equation 4 ) . To test this assumption , we ran 100 , 000 simulated trials of an absolute identification of 10 stimuli using the RJM with the best fitting parameter values for the data from Experiment 1 . Following Mori and Ward’s ( 1995 ) design , we alternated the presence of feedback every 20 trials ( i . e . , 20 trials with feedback followed by 20 trials without feedback ) . We then calculated the amount of information transmitted from the previous stimulus and from the previous response to the current response separately for feedback and no - feedback trials ( see Table 5 ) . Consistent with Mori and Ward’s finding , when feedback was omitted , the amount of information transmitted from the previous response was in - creased and the amount of information transmitted from the pre - vious stimulus was reduced . We also examined sequential effects separately for feedback and no - feedback trials ( see Figure 13 ) . Again , consistent with experimental results ( Lockhead , 1984 ) , we found that assimilation at larger lags , instead of contrast , was observed when feedback was omitted . In summary , the assumption that participants use their previous response as the best estimate of the correct answer in the absence of feedback and then proceed with a relative judgment strategy correctly predicts the effects of omitting feedback . Figure 12 . Confusion matrices for the three different stimulus spacings from Lockhead and Hinson’s ( 1986 ) Experiment 2 . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . R n (cid:3) response on trial n ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . 898 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER Experiment 1 Although the RJM is able to provide an account of all of the main phenomena described above , there are no raw data available that allow these effects to be simultaneously observed and mod - eled . It is possible , therefore , that although the RJM can provide an account of each effect in isolation , the relative sizes of the effects are such that they cannot be simultaneously modeled . For this reason , we ran a standard absolute identification of frequency experiment to provide the raw data necessary to rule out this possibility . We crossed two stimulus spacings with three set sizes to produce six conditions . Method Participants . One hundred twenty University of Warwick undergrad - uates participated in this 45 - min experiment for course credit or payment of £5 ( approximately $ 8 ) . Participants had , at most , one previous experi - ence of an absolute identification of frequency experiment . 5 Stimuli . Stimuli were two sets of 10 tones varying in frequency . In the wide - spacing condition , the lowest tone had a frequency of 600 . 00 Hz , with each subsequent tone increasing in frequency by 12 % . Thus , the wide tones had a total range of 1063 . 85 Hz . In the narrow - spacing condition , the lowest tone had a frequency of 768 . 70 Hz , with each subsequent tone increasing in frequency by 6 % . Thus , the total range in the narrow condi - tion was 530 . 00 Hz . Because , in both conditions , frequency increased by a constant percentage , tones were equally spaced in log space and were intended to be approximately evenly spaced psychologically . The center of the range of the wide - spacing condition coincided with the center of the range of the narrow condition in log space ( i . e . , in each condition , the tones had the same geometric mean ) . In the set - size - 8 conditions , only the middle 8 tones were used . Similarly , in the set - size - 6 conditions , only the middle 6 tones were used . Each tone was 500 ms in duration , with the beginning 50 ms ramped linearly from silence to maximum amplitude and the end 50 ms ramped linearly from maximum amplitude to silence . Design . Two factors were varied between participants : ( a ) The spacing of the tones was narrow or wide , and ( b ) the set size was 6 , 8 , or 10 stimuli . These two factors were crossed , which produced six conditions . Partici - pants were assigned to each condition at random , with the constraint that there were an equal number of participants in each condition . Procedure . Participants were tested individually in a quiet room . Par - ticipants experienced seven blocks of 120 tones , with each tone occurring equally often in each block . The ordering of the tones within a block was random . The breaks between blocks were self - timed by participants . Tones were delivered to participants through Sennheiser ( Wedemark , Hanover , Germany ) eH2270 headphones . The headphones were of high quality to ensure that tones sounded approximately equally loud over the entire frequency range . At the same time as the tone was played , a “ ? ” prompt appeared on the screen until participants responded . Participants were free to respond from the onset of each tone using the number keys along the top of a standard keyboard . Other key presses were ignored . For half of the participants in each cell , tones were numbered from lowest to highest , and for the other half of the participants , this mapping was reversed . Participants were told that each tone was 1 of a set of 6 , 8 , or 10 varying in frequency and were also told the ordering of the responses ( either low numbers for low stimuli and high numbers for high stimuli or vice versa ) . Immediately after their response , the prompt was removed and the correct answer was displayed on the screen for 750 ms . There was a silent pause and blank screen for a duration of 500 ms before the next trial began automatically . Results As sequence effects in absolute identification are of concern here , data from the first 10 trials in every block are excluded from analysis , so that only data in which participants were some way into the sequences are considered . The descriptive statistics pre - sented were calculated for each participant and then averaged across participants . Average accuracy . For each of the six cells in the design ( three set sizes (cid:14) two stimulus spacings ) , the proportion of correct responses made by each participant was calculated . Participants whose proportion was more than two interquartile ranges above the upper quartile or below the lower quartile were to be excluded as outliers . In fact , only 1 participant in the narrow - spacing set - size - 6 cell was eliminated from subsequent analysis ( the partici - pant’s accuracy was too low ) . To test our intention that stimuli would be evenly psychologi - cally spaced , we compared average accuracy on the lower pitched half of the stimuli with average accuracy on the higher pitched half of the stimuli . There was a significant , t ( 118 ) (cid:3) 5 . 07 , p (cid:8) . 0001 , but small ( 3 % ) accuracy advantage for higher pitched stimuli . This suggests that stimuli were not quite psychologically evenly spaced but that higher pitched stimuli were more widely spaced . To remove this asymmetry from the data in the following analyses , we 5 This previous experience is unlikely to matter , as there are only very small practice effects in absolute identification ( Alluisi & Sidorsky , 1958 ; Hartman , 1954 ; Weber et al . , 1977 ; but see Rouder et al . , 2004 ) . Figure 13 . Sequential effects predicted by the relative judgment model for absolute identification of 10 stimuli with and without feedback . For clarity , lines for Stimuli 2 – 9 have been omitted . E n (cid:3) error in responding on trial n ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . Table 5 Information Transmitted Predictions From the Relative Judgment Model for Absolute Identification With and Without Feedback Feedback U ( R n ) U ( R n : S n ) U ( R n : S n (cid:5) 1 | S n ) U ( R n : R n (cid:5) 1 | S n , S n (cid:5) 1 ) Yes 3 . 321 1 . 229 0 . 158 0 . 054 No 3 . 310 0 . 729 0 . 025 0 . 821 Note . U ( X : Y | Z ) is information transmitted from Y to X after the effect of Z is removed . See Mori and Ward’s ( 1995 ) appendix for details of the calculation of these terms . R n (cid:3) response on trial n ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . 899 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL collapsed data across mapping ( so that Stimulus 1 was the lowest pitched for half of participants and the highest pitched for the other half ) . Figure 14 shows how the proportion of correct responses varied through the experiment for each cell of the design . Accuracy was higher for the smaller set sizes and for the wider stimulus spacings . Accuracy also improved slightly over blocks . This description of results was confirmed by a three - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) , with three levels of set size ( 6 , 8 , and 10 ) , two levels of stimulus spacing ( narrow and wide ) , and seven levels of block . All of the main effects were significant : set size , F ( 2 , 113 ) (cid:3) 45 . 98 , p (cid:8) . 0001 ; stimulus spacing , F ( 1 , 113 ) (cid:3) 11 . 13 , p (cid:3) . 0012 ; and block , F ( 6 , 678 ) (cid:3) 26 . 47 , p (cid:8) . 0001 . None of the interactions was significant . In the remainder of this analysis , only data from the last five blocks were used , where performance was approximately at as - ymptote . Using data from all blocks gives a very similar pattern of results . Information transmitted . Table 6 shows the average informa - tion transmitted from stimulus to response . Information transmit - ted was approximately constant across set sizes and increased with spacing . This pattern was confirmed by a two - way ANOVA with spacing and set size as factors . There was no main effect of set size , F ( 2 , 113 ) (cid:3) 0 . 49 , p (cid:3) . 61 . There was a significant effect of spacing , F ( 1 , 113 ) (cid:3) 7 . 87 , p (cid:3) . 0059 . There was no significant interaction , F ( 2 , 113 ) (cid:3) 0 . 39 , p (cid:3) . 68 . Central tendency in responding . There was a significant cen - tral tendency in responding . Figure 15 shows the proportion of times each response was used for each stimulus spacing and set size . We determined the significance by fitting a quadratic to the proportions for each participant . The coefficient of the squared term was , on average , significantly below zero , t ( 118 ) (cid:3) 6 . 77 , p (cid:8) . 0001 . In addition to the central tendency in responding , there was a tendency for people to press the keys on the right of the keyboard more than those on the left . However , as the assignment of re - sponse numbers to keys was counterbalanced across participants , this tendency is not seen in the averaged data . Bow in the serial position curve . The proportion of correct responses is plotted against stimulus for each stimulus spacing and set size in the top panel of Figure 16 . Separate two - way ANOVAs ( Stimulus (cid:14) Spacing ) were run for each set size . For set size 10 , there was a main effect of stimulus , F ( 9 , 342 ) (cid:3) 59 . 19 , p (cid:8) . 0001 ( Huynh – Feldt (cid:4) (cid:3) . 86 ) ; no main effect of spacing , F ( 1 , 38 ) (cid:3) 1 . 72 , p (cid:3) . 19 ; and a significant Stimulus (cid:14) Spacing interaction , F ( 9 , 342 ) (cid:3) 2 . 67 , p (cid:3) . 0052 . For set size 8 , there was a main effect of stimulus , F ( 7 , 266 ) (cid:3) 93 . 34 , p (cid:8) . 0001 ( Huynh – Feldt (cid:4) (cid:3) . 93 ) ; no main effect of spacing , F ( 1 , 38 ) (cid:3) 1 . 30 , p (cid:3) . 26 ; and no significant Stimulus (cid:14) Spacing interaction , F ( 7 , 266 ) (cid:3) 1 . 44 , p (cid:3) . 20 . For set size 6 , there was a main effect of stimulus , F ( 5 , 185 ) (cid:3) 43 . 16 , p (cid:8) . 0001 ( Huynh – Feldt (cid:4) (cid:3) . 94 ) ; a main effect of spacing , F ( 1 , 37 ) (cid:3) 7 . 81 , p (cid:3) . 0082 ; and no significant Stimulus (cid:14) Spacing interaction , F ( 5 , 185 ) (cid:3) 0 . 92 , p (cid:3) . 47 . Although the effect of spacing was only significant for set size 6 , we have already seen that there was a significant main effect of spacing on accuracy ( see the Average accuracy section ) . The bottom panel in Figure 16 plots bows in d (cid:1) . Again , separate two - way ANOVAs were run for each set size . Each of these revealed a main effect of spacing , smallest F ( 8 , 304 ) (cid:3) 3 . 88 , p (cid:8) . 0001 . There was a marginal main effect of spacing for set size 6 , F ( 1 , 37 ) (cid:3) 1 . 85 , p (cid:3) . 06 . The effect was not significant for set sizes 8 and 10 , larger F ( 1 , 38 ) (cid:3) 1 . 85 , p (cid:3) . 18 . There was a significant interaction between stimulus and spacing for set size 10 , with smaller edge effects in the larger set size , F ( 8 , 304 ) (cid:3) 3 . 89 , p (cid:3) . 0002 . The interaction was not significant for set sizes 6 or 8 , larger F ( 6 , 288 ) (cid:3) 1 . 48 , p (cid:3) . 18 . Figure 17 plots the confusion matrices for each of the six cells in the design ( 3 set sizes (cid:14) 2 spacings ) . Assimilation and contrast . Figure 18 plots E n as a function of the S n (cid:5) 1 for different S n . There was a tendency for the responses to small stimuli to be too large and for the responses to large stimuli to be too small , as shown by the spacing of the lines . The positive slope of the lines indicates that the response given to S n was biased toward S n (cid:5) 1 ( i . e . , assimilation ) . We ran six ANOVAs Figure 14 . Mean proportion of correct responses by block for each condition in Experiment 1 . Figure 15 . The response biases for each condition in Experiment 1 . Table 6 Average Information Transmitted ( in Bits ) for Each Condition of the Absolute Identification Experiment Spacing Set size 6 8 10 Narrow 1 . 26 1 . 26 1 . 26 Wide 1 . 52 1 . 39 1 . 41 900 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER to confirm this description , one for each cell in the design ( 3 set sizes (cid:14) 2 stimulus spacings ) . In every ANOVA , there was a significant main effect of S n , a significant main effect of S n (cid:5) 1 , and no significant interaction . Figure 19 plots E n ( averaged over all possible stimuli ) against the lag k for different S n (cid:5) k . When S n (cid:5) 1 ( k (cid:3) 1 ) was large , a positive error was made , and when S n (cid:5) 1 was small , a negative error was made ( i . e . , assimilation ) . For trials further back , the opposite pattern was seen ( i . e . , contrast ) . When k (cid:3) 2 , the error dependency was small , which shows that the stimulus two trials ago had little effect on responding . We ran six ANOVAs to confirm this description , one for each cell in the design ( 3 set sizes (cid:14) 2 stimulus spacings ) . Apart from the two set - size - 8 con - ditions , there was no main effect of S n (cid:5) k . Apart from the two set - size - 6 conditions , there was no main effect of lag , k . It is important to note that in every ANOVA there was a significant interaction . Discussion Experiment 1 has replicated the standard findings described in the introduction , demonstrating that all of the effects can occur simultaneously . As set size increased , information transmitted remained constant . This limit is below the limit for absolute identification of pitch observed by Hartman ( 1954 ) and Pollack ( 1952 ) but approximately the same as that observed by W . Siegel ( 1972 ) . ( Hartman used very large intertrial intervals , and Pollack played white noise between trials . ) We found a significant ten - dency for participants to give responses in the center of the scale ( see also Balakrishnan , 1997 ) . The bow in the serial position curve Figure 16 . The proportion of correct responses ( A ) and d (cid:1) ( B ) against stimulus for each condition in Experiment 1 . d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) measure of the confusibility of Stimulus i and Stimulus i (cid:2) 1 . Figure 17 . The confusion matrices for the conditions in Experiment 1 . Figure 18 . Average E n ( error in responding on trial n ) for each S n ( rank of the stimulus presented on trial n ) as a function of S n (cid:5) 1 for Experiment 1 . Data have been collapsed across pairs of stimuli . 901 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL was shown in every condition . With larger set sizes , the bow effect was larger ( replicating the findings of Alluisi & Sidorsky , 1958 ; Durlach & Braida , 1969 ; Lacouture & Marley , 1995 ; Pollack , 1953 ; and Weber et al . , 1977 ) , and doubling the spacing of the stimuli had only a slight effect on accuracy ( replicating the find - ings of Braida & Durlach , 1972 ; Brown et al . , 2002 ; Lacouture , 1997 ; Luce et al . , 1976 ; and Pollack , 1952 ) . For the larger two set sizes ( 8 and 10 stimuli ) , increasing the spacing did not improve accuracy significantly , and the actual magnitude of the improve - ment was slight , if there was any . This is consistent with Brown et al . ’s ( 2002 ) findings . The bow effect was evident in every condi - tion , even in the last block of this experiment , consistent with previous findings where the bow remained even after extensive practice ( Rouder et al . , 2004 ; Weber et al . , 1977 ) . The standard sequential effects were also evident in these data . The current stimulus was assimilated toward the preceding stim - ulus ( replicating the findings of Garner , 1953 ; Holland & Lock - head , 1968 ; Hu , 1997 ; Lacouture , 1997 ; Lockhead , 1984 ; Long , 1937 ; Luce et al . , 1982 ; Purks et al . , 1980 ; Rouder et al . , 2004 ; Staddon et al . , 1980 ; Stewart , 2001 ; and Ward & Lockhead , 1970 , 1971 ) . R n was also contrasted away from earlier stimuli ( replicat - ing the findings of Holland & Lockhead , 1968 ; Lacouture , 1997 ; and Ward & Lockhead , 1970 , 1971 ) . Though Holland and Lock - head found the contrast effect to be biggest for S n (cid:5) 2 , these data show the greatest contrast for stimuli three or four trials back . This pattern is more consistent with Lacouture’s data , though perhaps slightly more extreme . Unpublished data from our laboratory sug - gest that the spacing between trials is likely to be an important factor in accounting for this difference . In summary , each of the three main types of phenomenon reviewed in the introduction—the limit in information transmitted , bow in the serial position curve , and sequential effects—has been demonstrated simultaneously in this experiment . Modeling A single fit to average data . As a proof of concept , we fitted the RJM to the average data presented above . The purpose of the modeling described below is to demonstrate that the RJM can fit the main phenomena accurately for a single set of parameter values . We took the slightly ad hoc strategy of minimizing the sum squared error ( SSE ) among the data points presented in Figures 15 , 17 , 18 , and 19 and the RJM’s fits to these data points . The choice of how the SSEs from each figure are combined is necessarily quite arbitrary , as the SSEs for different figures are the SSEs of quite different things ( probabilities and errors on the response scale ) . However , the exact weightings ( 1 . 0 , 1 . 0 , 0 . 1 , and 0 . 5 for Figures 15 , 17 , 18 , and 19 , respectively ) are not important , as very similar best fits are obtained for different weightings . The RJM does not predict an effect of changing the spacing of the stimuli in the set . In Experiment 1 , there was a significant effect of spacing for only the smallest set size . For this reason , the RJM was fitted to data for each set size averaged across the two different stimulus spacings . We present one fit ( see Table 3 for parameter values ) as the dashed lines in Figures 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , and 24 . r 2 values for response biases , confusion matrices , assimilation plots , and assimilation and contrast plots were . 98 , . 98 , . 89 , and . 94 , respectively . Fits to d (cid:1) data were poorer ( r 2 (cid:3) . 88 ) , and the RJM systematically underpredicts the bow in the d (cid:1) data , as described above . Fits to individual participants’ data . The purpose of Experi - ment 1 was to demonstrate that the main phenomena occur simul - taneously . This was observed above in the data averaged across participants . Of the 119 participants , 100 showed bows in the proportion of correct responses plotted against stimulus rank ( as defined by greater average accuracy on edge stimuli compared with internal stimuli ) and assimilation to the previous stimulus and contrast to those further back ( as defined by the coefficients of the simple regression model R n (cid:3) a 0 S n (cid:2) a 1 S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) a 2 S n (cid:5) 2 (cid:2) . . . ) simultaneously . To fit the RJM to the data from a single participant , we maxi - mized the likelihood of the model generating the data produced by Figure 19 . Average E n ( across all S n ) as a function of the lag k for each possible S n (cid:5) k for Experiment 1 . Data have been collapsed across pairs of stimuli . E n (cid:3) error in responding on trial n ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . Figure 20 . The relative judgment model’s fits to the response bias for each set size ( collapsed across spacing ) in Experiment 1 . The solid lines are data from Experiment 1 . The dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . 902 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER the participant . The best fitting RJM predicts a bow in accuracy , assimilation to the previous stimulus , and contrast to stimuli at greater lags for every participant . When the predictions for the RJM are generated for each participant and then averaged across the participants in each condition , plots are obtained that are almost identical to those obtained from fitting the averaged data . The median best fitting parameter values across participants are given in Table 7 , together with the upper and lower quartiles . These values are very similar to those obtained above in fitting the averaged data ( see Table 3 ) . In summary , the average data fit and the individual participant fits provide an existence proof , demon - strating that the RJM is able to provide a good account of all of the main phenomena simultaneously . A Discrepancy : Conditional Accuracy and d (cid:1) There is a discrepancy in the literature that we have deferred discussion of until after we have presented Experiment 1 . W . Siegel ( 1972 ) found that accuracy was much higher when the current stimulus was a repetition of the previous stimulus ( see also Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ; Rouder et al . , 2004 ) . In the panels of Figure 21 . The relative judgment model’s fits to the confusion matrices for each set size ( collapsed across spacing ) in Experiment 1 . The solid lines are data from Experiment 1 . The dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . Figure 22 . The relative judgment model’s fits to d (cid:1) data from Experiment 1 ( collapsed across stimulus spacing ) . Dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) measure of the confusibility of Stimulus i and Stimulus i (cid:2) 1 . Figure 23 . The relative judgment model’s fits to the effects of S n (cid:5) 1 and S n ( the rank of the stimulus within the set ) on E n ( error in responding on trial n ) for each set size ( collapsed across spacing ) in Experiment 1 . The solid lines are data from Experiment 1 . The dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . 903 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL Figure 25 , we plot the bow effect for three different set sizes . The effect is parameterized by the number of stimuli that intervened since the current stimulus was last repeated . When a stimulus was repeated immediately , accuracy was practically perfect . With one intervening stimulus , performance dropped considerably , and fur - ther intervening stimuli led to a smaller further drop . This pattern can be fit by the RJM . When a stimulus is repeated , D n , n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 0 , and , according to Equations 3 and 4 , only the confusion of differ - ences makes a small contribution to E n . However , when S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:8)(cid:4) S n , then D n , n (cid:5) 1 (cid:8)(cid:4) 0 , and the limited decision capacity adds error to R n . ( The RJM fails to fit the difference between one and more than one trial intervening between repetitions . This is be - cause , as a first approximation , we have assumed no memory for magnitudes other than S n (cid:5) 1 . Modifying the model to allow for some memory of S n (cid:5) 2 allows the model to predict the effect . Stewart & Brown , 2004 , found this modification necessary for modeling unidimensional categorization data . ) In contrast , Purks et al . ( 1980 ) , Luce et al . ( 1982 ) , and Nosofsky ( 1983b ) found that there was only a small ( though significant ) increase in d (cid:1) when , in a random sequence of stimuli , the current stimulus was within one stimulus of the previous stimulus . There are obvious explanations . First , the experiments used different stimuli . W . Siegel ( 1972 ) used tones varying in frequency , and Luce et al . and Purks et al . used tones varying in intensity . Second , the performance measure was different . W . Siegel reported accu - racy , and Purks et al . , Luce et al . , and Nosofsky reported d (cid:1) . Third , the partitioning of the data was different . W . Siegel used repetition trials ( i . e . , S n (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 1 ) , Purks et al . examined data for every combination of S n and S n (cid:5) 1 , and Luce et al . and Nosofsky had stimuli that differed by no more than 1 ( | S n (cid:5) S n (cid:5) 1 | (cid:6) 1 ) . We have examined our own data from the narrow and wide set - size - 10 conditions of Experiment 1 . Consistent with W . Sie - gel’s ( 1972 ) data , we found very high accuracy ( more than 98 % correct for every stimulus ) on trials when the stimulus was re - Figure 24 . The relative judgment model’s fits to the effects of S n (cid:5) k ( k (cid:3) 1 to 6 ) on E n for each set size ( collapsed across spacing ) in Experiment 1 . The solid lines are data from Experiment 1 . The dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . E n (cid:3) error in responding on trial n ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . Table 7 Summary Statistics for the Best Fitting Parameter Values for Individual Participant Data From Experiment 1 Statistic (cid:5) 1 (cid:5) 2 (cid:5) 3 (cid:5) 4 c (cid:8) (cid:7) Median . 107 . 080 . 051 . 026 . 109 0 . 227 0 . 959 LQ . 088 . 062 . 036 . 011 . 077 0 . 192 0 . 920 UQ . 124 . 100 . 066 . 037 . 130 0 . 280 1 . 003 Note . LQ (cid:3) lower quartile ; UQ (cid:3) upper quartile . Figure 25 . Accuracy against stimulus rank for three different set sizes ( spacing between adjacent stimuli held constant ) . Lines are for different numbers of intervening stimuli between S n ( rank of the stimulus presented on trial n ) and the last time that stimulus occurred . The solid lines are data from W . Siegel ( 1972 ) . The dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . 904 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER peated from the previous trial . We also followed Luce et al . ’s ( 1982 ) analysis and calculated accuracy and d (cid:1) separately for trials in the random sequence that were preceded by a stimulus no more than one different from the current stimulus ( near transitions ) and trials that were more than one different from the preceding stim - ulus ( far transitions ) . Figure 26 shows our results . Unlike Purks et al . ( 1980 ) , Luce et al . ( 1982 ) , and Nosofsky ( 1983b ) , we found a large advantage in accuracy and d (cid:1) when the current and previous stimuli were similar . This finding enables us to rule out the accuracy versus d (cid:1) difference and the repetition versus similar stimuli difference as explanations of the differences among the experimental results and suggest that the difference in findings is due to the use of different stimuli ( or other procedural differences ) . The finding of a d (cid:1) advantage in the Experiment 1 data also enables us to rule out a response bias account of our accuracy data ( and W . Siegel’s data ) , whereby the advantage for repeated stimuli comes from a strong tendency to repeat the previous response . Instead , we think that the reduction in accuracy and d (cid:1) found when the previous and current stimuli differ occurs because stable , long - term magnitudes to which the current stimulus can be com - pared are not available , and thus the current stimulus must be compared with only the previous stimulus . In Figure 26 , we have shown the accuracy and d (cid:1) predictions of the RJM using the parameters from Table 3 for the Experiment 1 data . ( Note that these parameters were not chosen to best fit this pattern specifically . ) The RJM predicts that accuracy and d (cid:1) will be higher when S n and S n (cid:5) 1 are similar , because we assume that there is less noise in the mapping process in this case ( rho is small when S n (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 1 ; see Equation 5 ) . At present , the RJM incorrectly predicts a difference in accuracy and d (cid:1) for the Luce et al . ( 1982 ) random data ( as we describe above for the Experiment 1 data ) . The RJM could possibly be modified in two ways to correctly predict only a very small difference between accuracy and d (cid:1) . First , if the (cid:11) parameter ( which repre - sents the magnitude below which D n , n (cid:5) 1 C is so small that the S n is considered a repetition of S n (cid:5) 1 ) were smaller , reflecting a greater uncertainty in establishing whether a stimulus was a repetition , then accuracy and d (cid:1) would differ much less between the near and far conditions because the low noise mapping for stimulus repeti - tions would occur less often . Alternatively , the preliminary form of Equation 5 could be altered . Further experimental work is required to constrain these possible extensions . One question remains . If Luce et al . ( 1982 ) did not find an increase in d (cid:1) or accuracy when S n was similar to S n (cid:5) 1 in their random condition , why was performance best in the small - step conditions that we described earlier ? Nosofsky ( 1983b ) found evidence that the advantage comes from the cumulative effect of a series of small transitions between consecutive stimuli ( rather than just a single small transition between S n (cid:5) 1 and S n ) . Nosofsky took the trials in which S n was no more than one stimulus different from S n (cid:5) 1 and partitioned the data further , depending on whether S n (cid:5) 2 was no more than one stimulus different from S n (cid:5) 1 . Accuracy on trial n was higher when S n (cid:5) 2 was more similar to S n (cid:5) 1 . The RJM can account for this qualitative pattern , because of the assumption that consecutive differences are confused ( see Equation 3 ) . When S n (cid:5) 2 is more similar to S n (cid:5) 1 , then D n , n (cid:5) 1 C varies less , and thus responding is also less variable . Experiment 2 An important question is whether the RJM is falsifiable . We address this issue directly in Experiment 2 , which pits the predic - tions of absolute magnitude models ( i . e . , the Thurstonian models , the restricted capacity models , and the exemplar models ) and the RJM against each other directly . The models make different pre - dictions regarding the effect of misleading feedback . In the RJM , the feedback from the preceding trial is used together with a judgment of the difference between the preceding and current stimuli to produce a response . If participants are given misleading feedback on the previous trial , then , according to Equation 4 , their response on the current trial should reflect this directly . In contrast , the absolute - magnitude - based models described above do not use the feedback from the previous trial in generating the response on the current trial and so predict no effect of misleading feedback . Below , we consider how , if the misleading feedback is attended to at all , the absolute - magnitude - based models might use the feed - back to adjust the mapping between the stimulus scale and the response scale . Even with this adjustment , these models still make different predictions from the RJM . The experiment was designed such that performance on the final trial of eight critical triplets of trials ( defined by S n (cid:5) 2 , S n (cid:5) 1 , R n (cid:5) 1 , F n (cid:5) 1 , and S n ) could be compared in the analysis . The triplets differed from one another in two ways . First , F n (cid:5) 1 could be either correct or Figure 26 . Accuracy ( top ) and d (cid:1) ( bottom ) against S n conditional on S n (cid:5) 1 being either near to S n ( i . e . , | S n (cid:5) S n (cid:5) 1 | (cid:6) 1 ) or far from S n ( i . e . , | S n (cid:5) S n (cid:5) 1 | (cid:4) 1 ) for data from the set - size - 10 condition of Experiment 1 ( collapsed across spacing ) . The d (cid:1) 9 , 10 point for the near data is not plotted because discrimination was perfect ( i . e . , d (cid:1) 9 , 10 (cid:3) (cid:10) ) . The solid lines are data from Experiment 1 . The dashed lines are the best fits of the relative judgment model . S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n . d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) measure of the confusibility of Stimulus i and Stimulus i (cid:2) 1 . 905 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL misleading . Second , R n (cid:5) 1 could be either correct or incorrect . Four of the triplets are listed in Table 8 . The remaining four triplets are the mirror image of the four listed in Table 8 ( one can generate the values of S n (cid:5) 2 , S n (cid:5) 1 , R n (cid:5) 1 , F n (cid:5) 1 , and S n for these mirror image triplets by subtracting the values in Table 8 from 11 , and one can generate (cid:15) E n predictions by swapping the sign of the value in Table 8 ) . In the remainder of this article , for simplicity of exposition , we discuss the triplets in terms of those listed in Table 8 . In each triplet , S n (cid:5) 2 was far from S n (cid:5) 1 , so that if F n (cid:5) 1 were misleading , the deception would not be obvious . When F n was too great by one , according to the RJM ( see Equation 4 ) , E n should also have been too great by one ( see the RJM (cid:15) E n column of Table 8 ) . We can test this prediction by comparing the first two triplets in Table 8 : E n when F n (cid:5) 1 was misleading and E n when F n (cid:5) 1 was not misleading ( to provide a baseline measure of the bias due to assimilation and contrast ) . However , under the alternative assumption that judgment is absolute , there is an alternative explanation of an increased error when F n (cid:5) 1 is misleading . Suppose that , on being told that his or her response was incorrect , the participant adjusted his or her mapping of stimuli to responses . If the response was too small by one , then responses should be remapped onto stimuli so that each stimulus is now mapped onto the response that previously be - longed to the next highest stimulus . For example , in a Thurstonian model ( e . g . , Durlach & Braida , 1969 ; Luce et al . , 1976 ; Treisman , 1985 ) , all of the criteria should be shifted down the perceptual scale by one stimulus spacing . In an exemplar model ( e . g . , Brown et al . , 2002 ; Kent & Lamberts , 2005 ; Nosofsky , 1997 ; Petrov & Anderson , 2005 ) , each exemplar should be remapped so that it is associated with the label that was originally associated with the immediately higher exemplar . Thus , after the misleading feedback that is too large by one , each stimulus will now be associated with a response that is also one too large ( see the Mapping (cid:15) E n column of Table 8 ) . Though the RJM and the mapping alternative make the same predictions when R n (cid:5) 1 is correct , they make different predictions when R n (cid:5) 1 is incorrect ( see the last two triplets listed in Table 8 ) . Take , for example , the case illustrated in the third row of Table 8 . Within a Thurstonian framework , if the perception of S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 4 is noisy so that the percept falls below the criteria between Response Categories 3 and 4 , then R n (cid:5) 1 will be incorrectly underestimated as 3 . Truthful feedback ( i . e . , F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 4 ) will indicate that an error has been made , and the participant might adjust the criteria in response by shifting them one unit down the response scale . Now , when S n (cid:3) 6 is presented , R n will be an overestimate . The same argument can be made for an exemplar framework . If perception of S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 4 is noisy so that the percept is more similar to the exemplar for Category 3 than for Category 4 , then R n (cid:5) 1 will be incorrectly underestimated as 3 . Truthful feedback ( i . e . , F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 4 ) will indicate that an error has been made , and the mapping between exemplars and category labels should be adjusted so that each exemplar is now mapped to the label previously belonging to the next highest exemplar . Now , when S n (cid:3) 6 is presented , R n will be an overestimate . When F n (cid:5) 1 is misleading and confirms a mis - taken R n (cid:5) 1 ( see the fourth row of Table 8 ) , the match between response and feedback should mean that the participant thinks no error has been made and does not adjust his or her mapping . Thus , no error is predicted in the identification of S n . In summary , the RJM predicts an effect of misleading feedback . Absolute magnitude models predict the same effect if one aug - ments them with the ability to adjust the mapping between stimuli and responses in response to an error . However , the RJM and these augmented mapping models make different predictions in the case when the previous response is wrong but misleading feedback suggests that it was correct . Method Participants . Twelve female and 7 male students from the University of Warwick , aged between 19 and 32 years , participated for payment of £6 ( approximately $ 10 ) . Stimuli . Ten stimuli were generated . The first was 200 . 00 Hz , with a between - stimuli spacing of 25 % , giving a last stimulus of 1490 . 00 Hz . This spacing is just over twice the spacing of the stimuli used in the wide condition of Experiment 1 . The amplitude envelope applied to the stimuli was the same as that used in Experiment 1 . Design and procedure . The procedure closely follows that of Experi - ment 1 . There were 20 blocks of 40 stimuli . Two of the eight critical triplets differed from another two only in R n (cid:5) 1 . Thus , there were only six unique critical triplets ( if we ignore R n (cid:5) 1 , which , obviously , was under the participants’ control ) . In each block , these were randomly assigned to begin on Trials 3 , 10 , 17 , 24 , 31 , and 38 . On the remaining trials , the stimulus was selected at random , with the constraint that all stimuli appeared equally often in each block . Feedback was always correct , apart from on the middle trial of two of the six triplets , and thus feedback was only misleading on 5 % of trials . Results Figure 27 shows E n as a function of whether F n (cid:5) 1 was correct or misleading , parameterized by the accuracy of R n (cid:5) 1 ( see Table 8 for a full description of the conditions ) . E n with F n (cid:5) 1 and R n (cid:5) 1 correct ( as in a standard absolute identification experiment ) was negative , which shows that R n was assimilated toward S n (cid:5) 1 and Table 8 Critical Triplets of Trials Used in Experiment 2 R n (cid:5) 1 accuracy F n (cid:5) 1 accuracy S n (cid:5) 2 S n (cid:5) 1 R n (cid:5) 1 F n (cid:5) 1 S n RJM (cid:15) E n Mapping (cid:15) E n Correct Correct 9 3 3 3 5 0 0 Correct Misleading 9 3 3 4 5 1 1 Incorrect Correct 9 4 3 4 6 0 1 Incorrect Misleading 9 3 4 4 5 1 0 Note . Four additional critical triplets were included , which one can generate by subtracting values of S n (cid:5) 2 , S n (cid:5) 1 , R n (cid:5) 1 , F n (cid:5) 1 , and S n from 11 and reversing the sign of (cid:15) E n . RJM (cid:3) relative judgment model ; R n (cid:3) response on trial n ; F n (cid:3) feedback given on trial n ; S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n ; E n (cid:3) error in responding on trial n . 906 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER contrasted away from S n (cid:5) 2 . When F n (cid:5) 1 was misleading ( F n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) 1 ) , E n was increased , as predicted by the RJM ( and the mapping hypothesis ) . The same pattern was seen when R n (cid:5) 1 was incorrect , as predicted by the RJM ( the opposite of the prediction of the mapping model ) . A two - way ANOVA ( F n (cid:5) 1 correct or misleading (cid:14) R n (cid:5) 1 correct or incorrect ) revealed a significant main effect of the accuracy of F n (cid:5) 1 , F ( 1 , 18 ) (cid:3) 20 . 84 , p (cid:3) . 0002 , no significant main effect of the accuracy of R n (cid:5) 1 , F ( 1 , 18 ) (cid:3) 0 . 31 , p (cid:3) . 59 , and no significant interaction , F ( 1 , 18 ) (cid:3) 2 . 95 , p (cid:3) . 10 . Though the interaction approached significance , it was in the opposite direction predicted by the mapping hypothesis . The increase in E n when F n (cid:5) 1 was too large by one was only . 57 ( averaged across the accuracy of R n ) . The RJM predicts that all of the increase in F n (cid:5) 1 should carry over to R n . However , we have already seen evidence that there may still be some residual mem - ory for the absolute magnitude not just of the preceding stimulus but also of the stimulus before that ( e . g . , Massaro , 1970 ; W . Siegel , 1972 ; Stewart & Brown , 2004 ; Wickelgren , 1966 ) . If S n (cid:5) 2 were also used as an anchor against which to judge S n , then one would expect a smaller effect of F n (cid:5) 1 on E n . The information transmitted in Experiment 1 was lower than the estimates obtained by Pollack ( 1952 ) and Hartman ( 1954 ) for absolute identification of pure tones varying in frequency . In Experiment 2 , the spacing of the stimuli was greatly increased compared with Experiment 1 , but average information transmitted was 1 . 41 bits—approximately the same as in Experiment 1 and in W . Siegel ( 1972 ) . Discussion According to the RJM , the difference between the current stim - ulus and the previous stimulus is added to the feedback from the previous trial to generate the current response ( see Equation 4 ) . Thus , the RJM makes the strong prediction that , if the previous feedback was inaccurate , this error will be transmitted to the current response . In Experiment 2 , we found this to be the case . When participants were misled and the previous feedback was one too large , then the current response was significantly increased compared with when the previous feedback was accurate . Of all of the existing models of absolute identification , only Hol - land and Lockhead’s ( 1968 ) model , which makes the same assump - tion about the use of the previous feedback as does the RJM , can predict this effect . All of the other models fail to predict the effect in their current forms , because they do not use the previous feedback in generating the current response . Reasonable assumptions can be made to allow the models to adapt the mapping between stimulus magni - tudes and response categories after feedback indicates an error has been made ( e . g . , shifting criteria in a Thurstonian model or relabeling exemplars in an exemplar model ) . In this way , the models can predict that there will be an error on the current trial when feedback on the previous trial is erroneous , because it will appear that an error has been made on the previous trial , and the model can alter the mapping between stimuli and responses to compensate . However , the models then incorrectly predict that there will be no effect of misleading feedback on the previous trial when the previous response was incor - rect but the ( misleading ) feedback indicates that it was correct . In this case , it will appear as if no error has been made , so no remapping should take place . There is an alternative way that the absolute - magnitude - based models might be able to account for the Experiment 2 data . Instead of perceptual noise being the cause of an incorrect R n (cid:5) 1 , R n (cid:5) 1 might be incorrect because the mapping between stimuli and responses is , for some reason , already incorrect . For example , in the case illustrated in the last two rows of Table 8 , R n (cid:5) 1 might be underestimated either because Thurstonian criteria are too far up a sensory scale or because each exemplar is mapped onto a label that is too low . Now , if F n (cid:5) 1 is accurate and indicates an error , the adjustment of the mapping will correct the initial mismapping . If F n (cid:5) 1 is misleading and indicates no error when one has been made , then no adjustment will be made . These predictions are now the same as those of the RJM . However , by adopting this expla - nation , one incorporates the idea of relative judgment . In assuming that the mapping between stimuli and responses is adjusted after each piece of feedback and , thus , varies from trial to trial , one is abandoning a stable long - term association between particular mag - nitudes and response categories . There seems to be little difference between , on the one hand , hearing a stimulus two higher than the previous stimulus and so responding with a response two higher than the previous feedback and , on the other hand , hearing a stimulus and aligning a response scale with it on the basis of the feedback and then hearing another stimulus two higher and thus responding with a response two units up the response scale . In allowing the continual adjustment of the mapping between the stimulus and the response scales , one abandons the stable long - term mapping between absolute stimulus magnitudes and response categories , and these models become models of relative judgment that are really rather similar to the RJM proposed here . Extending RJMs In this article , our core claim is that a model of relative judgment can provide an account of many phenomena in the absolute iden - tification literature . Our model differs from existing models in assuming that long - term representations of absolute magnitudes either are unavailable or , for some reason , are unused in absolute identification . In the present section , we outline three ways this relative judgment idea might be extended . The first way is to test more directly the longevity of absolute magnitude representations . Above , we cited 10 reports of same – different judgment tasks in which the memory for the standard de - Figure 27 . E n (cid:2) 1 as a function of the accuracy of F n ( feedback given on trial n ) for correct and incorrect R n ( response on trial n ) for Experiment 2 . Error bars are standard errors of the means . E n (cid:3) error in responding on trial n . 907 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL cayed rapidly as the interval between the standard and comparison items is increased in duration or filled with intervening items . How - ever , in these experiments , the stimulus chosen as the standard varied from trial to trial . With only one standard , there was little forgetting across intervening tones ( D . A . Anderson , 1914 , as cited in Massaro , 1970 , and Wickelgren , 1966 ; Irwin , 1937 ; Magnussen , Greenlee , Aslaken , & Kildebo , 2003 ) . We think an important step is to identify the conditions under which long - term representations of absolute magnitudes can and cannot be maintained . Researchers could also adapt the misleading - feedback methodology from Experiment 2 to measure the longevity of absolute magnitude representations by remapping stimuli and responses partway through an absolute iden - tification experiment ( e . g . , by increasing the feedback by one for the rest of the experiment ) and measuring for how long the initial stimulus – response mapping persists . The effect of shifting the entire stimulus set between experimental sessions ( e . g . , Ward , 1987 ; Ward & Lockhead , 1970 ) should also be investigated for other stimulus continuums . A second way the idea of relative judgment could be developed is to extend relative judgment approaches to other psychophysical tasks . We have already had some success in modeling empirical results in unidimensional binary categorization ( Stewart & Brown , 2004 ; Stew - art et al . , 2002 ) that cannot be fit by existing absolute - magnitude - based categorization models ( e . g . , the GCM ; Nosofsky , 1986 ) . Lam - ing ( 1984 , 1997 ) has been able to account for some key results in magnitude estimation and cross - modality matching using his RJM . Our final suggestion is that absolute judgment models and RJMs might be integrated into a single theoretical framework . Obvi - ously , at some level , in absolute - magnitude - based models judg - ment is relative , because the information from previous stimulus – response pairings provides the basis for generating each response . Also , at some level , RJMs do assume that a ( perhaps peripheral ) representation of a stimulus’s absolute magnitude can be main - tained in the very short term because , without such a representation over the interstimulus interval , the following stimulus could not be compared with the previous stimulus . We have already shown that our RJM of unidimensional binary categorization and an absolute - magnitude - based exemplar model ( Nosofsky , 1986 ) are special cases of a more general model ( Stewart & Brown , in press ) . That is , the RJM can be thought of as occupying one end of a contin - uum , where absolute magnitude representations are very short lived , with the exemplar model occupying the other end , where absolute magnitude representations are long lived . Conclusion We have presented the RJM , in which , in the assumed absence of stable , long - term absolute magnitudes , the representation of the difference between the stimulus on the current trial and the stim - ulus on the preceding trial is used in conjunction with the feedback from the previous trial to produce a response . We have demon - strated that a broad class of absolute identification data can be fit by this model . Assuming relative judgment allows an account of the ubiquitous sequential effects observed in absolute identifica - tion . By assuming only that the representation of the difference between the current stimulus and the previous stimulus is confused with the representations of earlier differences , the RJM predicts assimilation to the previous stimulus and contrast to those stimuli further back . These effects have been problematic for those exist - ing models that assume that absolute identification is achieved through long - term representations of absolute magnitudes of stim - ulus values ( as either exemplars , anchors , or criteria ) . Using dif - ference information optimally within a limited capacity provides an account of the bow effect and of the limit in information transmitted . We conclude , therefore , that absolute identification may in fact be achieved by relative judgment . References Alluisi , E . A . , & Sidorsky , R . C . ( 1958 ) . The empirical validity of equal discriminability scaling . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 55 , 86 – 95 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1990 ) . The adaptive character of thought . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Anderson , J . R . , & Lebie ` re , C . ( 1998 ) . The atomic components of thought . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Ashby , F . G . , & Townsend , J . T . ( 1986 ) . Varieties of perceptual indepen - dence . Psychological Review , 93 , 154 – 179 . Bachem , A . ( 1954 ) . Time factors in relative and absolute pitch determi - nation . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 26 , 751 – 753 . Baird , J . C . , Romer , D . , & Stein , T . ( 1970 ) . Test of a cognitive theory of psychophysics : Size discrimination . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 30 , 495 – 501 . Balakrishnan , J . D . ( 1997 ) . Form and objective of the decision rule in absolute identification . Perception & Psychophysics , 59 , 1049 – 1058 . Beebe - Center , J . G . , Rogers , M . S . , & O’Connell , D . N . ( 1955 ) . Transmis - sion of information about sucrose and saline solutions through the sense of taste . Journal of Psychology , 39 , 157 – 160 . Braida , L . D . , & Durlach , N . I . ( 1972 ) . Intensity perception . II . Resolution in one - interval paradigms . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 51 , 483 – 502 . Braida , L . D . , Lim , J . S . , Berliner , J . E . , Durlach , N . I . , Rabinowitz , W . M . , & Purks , S . R . ( 1984 ) . Intensity perception : XIII . Perceptual anchor model of context - coding . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 76 , 722 – 731 . Brown , G . D . A . , Neath , I . , & Chater , N . ( 2002 ) . A ratio model of scale - invariant memory and identification . Manuscript submitted for publication . Chapanis , A . , & Halsey , R . M . ( 1956 ) . Absolute judgments of spectrum colors . Journal of Psychology , 42 , 99 – 103 . Chater , N . , & Brown , G . D . A . ( 1999 ) . Scale - invariance as a unifying psychological principle . Cognition , 69 , b17 – b24 . DeCarlo , L . T . ( 1992 ) . Intertrial interval and sequential effects in magni - tude scaling . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 18 , 1080 – 1088 . DeCarlo , L . T . ( 1994 ) . A dynamic theory of proportional judgment : Con - text and judgment of length , heaviness , and roughness . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 20 , 372 – 381 . DeCarlo , L . T . , & Cross , D . V . ( 1990 ) . Sequential effects in magnitude scaling : Models and theory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Gen - eral , 119 , 375 – 396 . Durlach , N . I . , & Braida , L . D . ( 1969 ) . Intensity perception . I . Preliminary theory of intensity resolution . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 46 , 372 – 383 . Efron , B . , & Morris , C . ( 1977 ) . Stein’s paradox in statistics . Scientific American , 236 , 119 – 127 . Elliott , S . W . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1995 ) . Effect of memory decay on predictions from changing categories . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 21 , 815 – 836 . Engen , T . , & Pfaffmann , C . ( 1959 ) . Absolute judgments of odor intensity . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 58 , 23 – 26 . Eriksen , C . W . , & Hake , H . W . ( 1955a ) . Absolute judgments as a function 908 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER of stimulus range and the number of stimulus and response categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 49 , 323 – 332 . Eriksen , C . W . , & Hake , H . W . ( 1955b ) . Multidimensional stimulus dif - ferences and accuracy of discrimination . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 50 , 153 – 160 . Eriksen , C . W . , & Hake , H . W . ( 1957 ) . Anchor effects in absolute judg - ment . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 53 , 132 – 138 . Estes , W . K . ( 1950 ) . Towards a statistical theory of learning . Psychological Review , 57 , 94 – 107 . Garner , W . R . ( 1953 ) . An informational analysis of absolute judgments of loudness . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 46 , 373 – 380 . Garner , W . R . ( 1962 ) . Uncertainty and structure and psychological con - cepts . New York : Wiley . Gravetter , F . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1973 ) . Criterial range as a frame of reference for stimulus judgment . Psychological Review , 80 , 203 – 216 . Green , D . M . , & Swets , J . A . ( 1966 ) . Signal detection theory and psycho - physics . New York : Wiley . Hake , H . W . , & Garner , W . R . ( 1951 ) . The effect of presenting various numbers of discrete steps on scale reading accuracy . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology , 42 , 358 – 366 . Harris , J . D . ( 1952 ) . The decline of pitch discrimination with time . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 43 , 96 – 99 . Hartman , E . B . ( 1954 ) . The influence of practice and pitch - distance be - tween tones on the absolute identification of pitch . American Journal of Psychology , 67 , 1 – 14 . Hawkes , G . R . , & Warm , J . S . ( 1960 ) . Maximum I t for absolute identifi - cation of cutaneous electrical intensity level . Journal of Psychology , 49 , 279 – 288 . Helson , H . ( 1964 ) . Adaptation - level theory . New York : Harper & Row . Holland , M . K . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1968 ) . Sequential effects in absolute judgments of loudness . Perception & Psychophysics , 3 , 409 – 414 . Hu , G . ( 1997 ) . Why is it difficult to learn absolute judgment tasks ? Perceptual and Motor Skills , 84 , 323 – 335 . Irwin , C . C . ( 1937 ) . A study of differential pitch sensitivity relative to auditory theory . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 21 , 642 – 652 . James , W . , & Stein , C . ( 1961 ) . Estimation with quadratic loss . In J . Neyman ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the fourth Berkeley Symposium in Math - ematical Statistics and Probability ( Vol . 1 , pp . 361 – 379 ) . Berkeley : University of California Press . Jesteadt , W . , Luce , R . D . , & Green , D . M . ( 1977 ) . Sequential effects of the judgments of loudness . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 3 , 92 – 104 . Karpiuk , P . , Lacouture , Y . , & Marley , A . A . J . ( 1997 ) . A limited capacity , wave equality , random walk model of absolute identification . In A . A . J . Marley ( Ed . ) , Choice , decision and measurement : Essays in honor of R . Duncan Luce ( pp . 279 – 299 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Kent , C . , & Lamberts , L . ( 2005 ) . An exemplar account of the bow and set - size effects in absolute identification . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 31 , 289 – 305 . Kinchla , R . A . , & Smyzer , F . ( 1967 ) . A diffusion model of perceptual memory . Perception & Psychophysics , 2 , 219 – 229 . Ko¨nig , E . ( 1957 ) . Effect of time on pitch discrimination thresholds under several psychophysical procedures : Comparison with intensity discrim - ination thresholds . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 29 , 606 – 612 . Lacouture , Y . ( 1997 ) . Bow , range , and sequential effects in absolute identification : A response - time analysis . Psychological Research , 60 , 121 – 133 . Lacouture , Y . , Li , S . C . , & Marley , A . A . J . ( 1998 ) . The roles of stimulus and response set size in the identification and categorisation of unidi - mensional stimuli . Australian Journal of Psychology , 50 , 165 – 174 . Lacouture , Y . , & Marley , A . A . J . ( 1991 ) . A connectionist model of choice and reaction time in absolute identification . Connection Science , 3 , 401 – 433 . Lacouture , Y . , & Marley , A . A . J . ( 1995 ) . A mapping model of bow effects in absolute identification . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 39 , 383 – 395 . Lacouture , Y . , & Marley , A . A . J . ( 2004 ) . Choice and response time processes in the identification and categorization of unidimensional stimuli . Perception & Psychophysics , 66 , 1206 – 1226 . Lamberts , K . ( 2000 ) . Information - accumulation theory of speeded classi - fication . Psychological Review , 107 , 227 – 260 . Laming , D . R . J . ( 1984 ) . The relativity of “absolute” judgements . British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology , 37 , 152 – 183 . Laming , D . R . J . ( 1997 ) . The measurement of sensation . London : Oxford University Press . Lockhead , G . R . ( 1984 ) . Sequential predictors of choice in psychophysical tasks . In S . Kornblum & J . Requin ( Eds . ) , Preparatory states and processes ( pp . 27 – 47 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Lockhead , G . R . ( 1992 ) . Psychophysical scaling : Judgments of attributes or objects ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 15 , 543 – 601 . Lockhead , G . R . ( 2004 ) . Absolute judgments are relative : A reinterpreta - tion of some psychophysical ideas . Review of General Psychology , 8 , 265 – 272 . Lockhead , G . R . , & Hinson , J . ( 1986 ) . Range and sequence effects in judgment . Perception & Psychophysics , 40 , 53 – 61 . Lockhead , G . R . , & King , M . C . ( 1983 ) . A memory model of sequential effects in scaling tasks . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 9 , 461 – 473 . Long , L . ( 1937 ) . A study of the effect of preceding stimuli upon the judgment of auditory intensities . Archives of Psychology ( New York ) , 30 , 209 . Luce , R . D . , & Green , D . M . ( 1974 ) . The response ratio hypothesis for magnitude estimation . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 11 , 1 – 14 . Luce , R . D . , Green , D . M . , & Weber , D . L . ( 1976 ) . Attention bands in absolute identification . Perception & Psychophysics , 20 , 49 – 54 . Luce , R . D . , Nosofsky , R . M . , Green , D . M . , & Smith , A . F . ( 1982 ) . The bow and sequential effects in absolute identification . Perception & Psychophysics , 32 , 397 – 408 . Magnussen , S . , Greenlee , M . W . , Aslaken , P . M . , & Kildebo , O . O . ( 2003 ) . High - fidelity perceptual long - term memory revisited—and confirmed . Psychological Science , 14 , 74 – 76 . Marley , A . A . J . ( 1976 ) . A revision of the response ratio hypothesis for magnitude estimation . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 14 , 252 – 254 . Marley , A . A . J . , & Cook , V . T . ( 1984 ) . A fixed rehearsal capacity interpretation of limits on absolute identification performance . British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology , 37 , 136 – 151 . Marley , A . A . J . , & Cook , V . T . ( 1986 ) . A limited capacity rehearsal model for psychological judgments applied to magnitude estimation . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 30 , 339 – 390 . Massaro , D . W . ( 1970 ) . Retroactive interference in short - term memory for pitch . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 83 , 32 – 39 . McGill , W . J . ( 1954 ) . Multivariate information transmission . Psy - chometrika , 19 , 97 – 116 . McGill , W . J . ( 1957 ) . Serial effects in auditory threshold judgments . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 53 , 297 – 303 . Medin , D . L . , & Schaffer , M . M . ( 1978 ) . Context theory of classification learning . Psychological Review , 85 , 207 – 238 . Miller , G . A . ( 1956 ) . The magical number seven , plus or minus two : Some limits on our capacity for information processing . Psychological Review , 63 , 81 – 97 . Mori , S . ( 1998 ) . Effects of stimulus information and number of stimuli on the sequential dependencies in absolute identification . Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology , 52 , 72 – 83 . Mori , S . , & Ward , L . M . ( 1995 ) . Pure feedback effects in absolute iden - tification . Perception & Psychophysics , 57 , 1065 – 1079 . Murdock , B . B . ( 1960 ) . The distinctiveness of stimuli . Psychological Review , 67 , 16 – 31 . Norwich , K . H . , Wong , W . , & Sagi , E . ( 1998 ) . Range as a factor in 909 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL determining the information of loudness judgments : Overcoming small sample bias . Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology , 52 , 63 – 70 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1983a ) . Information integration and the identification of stimulus noise and criterial noise in absolute judgment . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 9 , 299 – 309 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1983b ) . Shifts of attention in the identification and discrimination of intensity . Perception & Psychophysics , 33 , 103 – 112 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1986 ) . Attention , similarity , and the identification - categorization relationship . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Gen - eral , 115 , 39 – 57 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1997 ) . An exemplar - based random - walk model of speeded categorization and absolute judgment . In A . A . J . Marley ( Ed . ) , Choice , decision , and measurement ( pp . 347 – 365 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Nosofsky , R . M . , & Palmeri , T . J . ( 1997 ) . An exemplar - based random walk model of speeded classification . Psychological Review , 104 , 266 – 300 . Petrov , A . A . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 2005 ) . The dynamics of scaling : A memory - based anchor model of category rating and absolute identifica - tion . Psychological Review , 112 , 383 – 416 . Petzold , P . , & Haubensak , G . ( 2001 ) . Higher order sequential effects in psychophysical judgments . Perception & Psychophysics , 63 , 969 – 978 . Pollack , I . ( 1952 ) . The information of elementary auditory displays . Jour - nal of the Acoustical Society of America , 24 , 745 – 749 . Pollack , I . ( 1953 ) . The information of elementary auditory displays : II . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 25 , 765 – 769 . Press , W . H . , Flannery , B . P . , Teukolsky , S . A . , & Vetterling , W . T . ( 1992 ) . Numerical recipes in C : The art of scientific computing . New York : Cambridge University Press . Purks , S . R . , Callahan , D . J . , Braida , L . D . , & Durlach , N . I . ( 1980 ) . Intensity perception . X . Effect of preceding stimulus on identification performance . Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 67 , 634 – 637 . Rouder , J . N . , Morey , R . D . , Cowan , N . , & Pfaltz , M . ( 2004 ) . Learning in a unidimensional absolute identification task . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 11 , 938 – 944 . Shiffrin , R . M . , & Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1994 ) . Seven plus or minus two : A commentary on capacity limitations . Psychological Review , 101 , 357 – 361 . Siegel , J . A . , & Siegel , W . ( 1972 ) . Absolute judgment and paired - associate learning : Kissing cousins or identical twins ? Psychological Review , 79 , 300 – 316 . Siegel , W . ( 1972 ) . Memory effects in the method of absolute judgment . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 94 , 121 – 131 . Staddon , J . E . R . , King , M . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1980 ) . On sequential effects in absolute judgment experiments . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Human Perception and Performance , 6 , 290 – 301 . Stevens , S . S . ( 1975 ) . Psychophysics . New York : Wiley . Stewart , N . ( 2001 ) . Perceptual categorization . Unpublished doctoral dis - sertation , University of Warwick , Coventry , England . Stewart , N . , & Brown , G . D . A . ( 2004 ) . Sequence effects in categorizing tones varying in frequency . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learn - ing , Memory , and Cognition , 30 , 416 – 430 . Stewart , N . , & Brown , G . D . A . ( in press ) . Similarity and dissimilarity as evidence in perceptual categorization . Journal of Mathematical Psychology . Stewart , N . , Brown , G . D . A . , & Chater , N . ( 2002 ) . Sequence effects in categorization of simple perceptual stimuli . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 28 , 3 – 11 . Stewart , N . , & Chater , N . ( 2003 ) . No unified scales for perceptual mag - nitudes : Evidence from loudness . In R . Alterman & D . Kirsh ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the twenty - fifth annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Retrieved August 2005 , from http : / / www . warwick . ac . uk / staff / Neil . Stewart / papers / Stewart _ Chater _ 2003 . pdf Tanner , W . P . , Jr . ( 1961 ) . Physiological implications of psychological data . Annals of the New York Academy of Science , 89 , 752 – 765 . Treisman , M . ( 1985 ) . The magical number seven and some other features of category scaling : Properties for a model of absolute judgment . Jour - nal of Mathematical Psychology , 29 , 175 – 230 . Treisman , M . , & Williams , T . C . ( 1984 ) . A theory of criterion setting with an application to sequential dependencies . Psychological Review , 91 , 68 – 111 . Usher , M . , & McClelland , J . L . ( 2001 ) . The time course of perceptual choice : The leaky , competing accumulator model . Psychological Re - view , 108 , 550 – 592 . Ward , L . M . ( 1987 ) . Remembrance of sounds past : Memory and psycho - physical scaling . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Percep - tion and Performance , 13 , 216 – 227 . Ward , L . M . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1970 ) . Sequential effect and memory in category judgment . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 84 , 27 – 34 . Ward , L . M . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1971 ) . Response system processes in absolute judgment . Perception & Psychophysics , 9 , 73 – 78 . Weber , D . L . , Green , D . M . , & Luce , R . D . ( 1977 ) . Effect of practice and distribution of auditory signals on absolute identification . Perception & Psychophysics , 22 , 223 – 231 . Wickelgren , W . A . ( 1966 ) . Consolidation and retroactive interference in short - term recognition memory for pitch . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 72 , 250 – 259 . Wickelgren , W . A . ( 1969 ) . Associative strength theory of recognition memory for pitch . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 6 , 13 – 61 . 910 STEWART , BROWN , AND CHATER Appendix Calculation of Conditional d (cid:1) d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 is calculated as follows . Conditional stimulus – response ma - trices are drawn up for each possible S n (cid:5) 1 . A response of i (cid:2) 1 or greater to Stimulus i (cid:2) 1 is considered a hit . If a participant makes any of the same responses to Stimulus i ( i . e . , one stimulus smaller ) , this is considered a false alarm . One then calculates a value of d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 in the normal way ( see Green & Swets , 1966 ) for each condi - tional matrix . One forms an overall average d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 by averaging a subset of the d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 from each conditional matrix . One then selects the subset by choosing only those matrices in which S n (cid:5) 1 was such that both response i and response i (cid:2) 1 were available on trial n . In this way , the resulting d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 is controlled so that it is not artificially raised by the restricted opportunity to make responses in nonrandom sequences . Figure A1 illustrates the calculation for hypothetical data from an absolute identification of five stimuli with a small step ( 3 ) sequence from Luce et al . ( 1982 ) . Recall that in a small step ( 3 ) sequence , S n is constrained to be S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:5) 1 , S n (cid:5) 1 , or S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) 1 . The first column shows five conditional stimulus – response confusion matrices , with the top matrix representing the confusions when S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 1 , the next matrix down when S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 2 , and so on . Closed circles represent responses considered hits , and closed squares represent false alarms , for the calculation of d (cid:1) 1 , 2 . Only the conditional confusion matrices when S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 1 or 2 are used to calculate d (cid:1) 1 , 2 , as it is only when S n (cid:5) 1 (cid:3) 1 or 2 that the Responses 1 or 2 are available on the trial n . As d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 is a function of the difference between the proportion of hits and the proportion of false alarms after each has been trans - formed by the cumulative normal distribution function , then d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 will be larger to the degree that the heights of the circles are above the heights of the squares in Figure A1 in each matrix . Compare the left column with the right column , where hits and false alarms are illus - trated for d (cid:1) 2 , 3 . As the curves in Figure A1 are steeper at the edges of the range , the differences are larger , and therefore d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 will be larger for extreme stimuli . Received June 30 , 2004 Revision received March 15 , 2005 Accepted March 28 , 2005 (cid:1) Figure A1 . Theproportionofresponsesdefinedashits ( circles ) andfalsealarms ( squares ) usedincalculatingtheconfusion d (cid:1) i , i (cid:2) 1 betweenStimulus i andStimulus i (cid:2) 1 for hypothetical data from a small step ( 3 ) absolute identification task with five stimuli . The pairs of conditional confusion matrices on each row are identical . The matrices are conditional on S n (cid:5) 1 , and there is a row for each S n (cid:5) 1 . The left column shows the hits and false alarms for d (cid:1) 1 , 2 , and the right column shows them for d (cid:1) 2 , 3 . S n (cid:3) rank of the stimulus presented on trial n ; R n (cid:3) response on trial n . 911 RELATIVE JUDGMENT MODEL