334 The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment SONG MI LEE , School of Information , University of Michigan , USA ANDREA K . THOMER , School of Information , University of Michigan , USA CLIFF LAMPE , School of Information , University of Michigan , USA Online retributive harassment refers to a range of abusive online behaviors targeted at offenders with the intent of sanctioning norm violations . Online retributive harassment is common in online interactions , can be devastating in its effect , and is hard to moderate . We examined the role that negative interface cues ( i . e . , Dislikes , flags ) might have in changing people’s harassment perceptions to mitigate this activity . We conducted a 4 × 2 between - subjects experiment ( 𝑁 = 242 ) to test the effects of interface cues ( control with Likes only vs . Dislikes outnumbering Likes vs . Likes outnumbering Dislikes vs . a flag with Likes ) and harassment severity ( low vs . high ) on how people perceive retributive harassment . We hypothesized that Dislikes and flags , despite the presence of Likes , signal social disapproval and descriptive norms against harassment and thus reduce bystanders’ belief that retributive harassment is appropriate , deserved , or justified . We found that Dislikes can be effective when they outnumber Likes in high - severity harassment but backfire when outnumbered by Likes . A flag , contrary to popular practice , does not have a significant mitigating effect on perceptions of retributive harassment . We demonstrate the potential of negative interface cues to signal anti - harassment norms to bystanders and discuss alternatives to social media platforms’ one - size - fits - all content moderation approach . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and social com - puting . Additional Key Words and Phrases : online harassment ; social media ; bystander ; interface design ACM Reference Format : Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe . 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 6 , CSCW2 , Article 334 ( November 2022 ) , 23 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555226 1 INTRODUCTION Some people think online harassment is more justified and deserved when the target has committed an offense [ 6 , 48 ] . Such beliefs can lead to online retributive harassment , which refers to personal attacks made against another online participant with the intent to punish a violation of norms [ 6 ] . Klonick [ 42 ] described it as a type of public shaming intended to harm people as a form of punishment rather than to enforce social norms . Marwick [ 48 ] used the term morally motivated net - worked harassment to describe when a norm - violating individual is being harassed by a networked community of people . This type of harassment can be a pervasive problem in online interactions . Authors’ addresses : Song Mi Lee , songmil @ umich . edu , School of Information , University of Michigan , 105 South State St . , Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA , 48109 - 1285 ; Andrea K . Thomer , athomer @ umich . edu , School of Information , University of Michigan , 105 South State St . , Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA , 48109 - 1285 ; Cliff Lampe , cacl @ umich . edu , School of Information , University of Michigan , 105 South State St . , Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA , 48109 - 1285 . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2022 / 11 - ART334 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555226 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 2 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe In an early example , a huge online mob directed insults , rape threats , and death threats at Justine Sacco ( then a public relations executive ) for her racist jokes on Twitter . Sacco was fired by her employer , moved to another country , and changed occupations , all of which were noted and ridiculed online [ 55 ] . In another example , South Korean social media users across multiple platforms doxxed ( i . e . , spread personally identifiable information online to direct harassment ) middle school bullies who brutalized and nearly killed their classmate but only received a light penalty [ 44 ] . With the sharp increase of online shaming [ 34 ] , online vigilantism [ 63 ] , online whistle - blowing [ 45 ] , and cancel culture [ 8 ] in the last decade across many countries , retributive harassment is a fast - growing concern . Previous work has shown widespread approval of retributive harassment [ 6 ] . This study extends that work by examining how interface cues might disrupt perceptions of retributive harassment . Retributive harassment mitigation is uniquely challenged by bystanders’ ambivalence around harassment . The targets of retributive harassment have often violated some broadly held social norms , and bystanders might be unwilling to empathize with someone they perceive as a wrongdoer . Retributive harassment might be perceived as morally justified depending on ( 1 ) the severity of harassment [ 43 , 46 ] ; ( 2 ) bystanders’ own punitive justice beliefs [ 6 ] ; and ( 3 ) how others have positively or negatively reacted to the harassment , reflected in helpful or hurtful comments [ 6 ] , or valenced interface cues ( e . g . , Likes , Dislikes , a flag ) . Here , the term interface cue is used to refer to user interface elements that signal reactions from other users or the system . Positive interface cues such as Likes and shares can encourage bystanders to favor cyberbullying or vigilantism [ 31 , 54 ] , but there is little research on any mitigating effect of negative interface cues . Negative interface cues can signal social norms against harassment and change bystanders’ perceptions accordingly , but such a possibility has not been examined . According to the theory of negativity effect [ 40 ] , negative cues have greater informational value than positive ones , even when smaller in number , and thus form negative impressions of the object . Dislikes or a flag might be able to outweigh Likes and mitigate bystander perceptions in favor of retributive harassment—but conditionally so , considering different levels of harassment severity and bystanders’ punishment orientation at play . To examine these questions , we conducted a 4 × 2 between - subjects online experiment with hypothetical retributive harassment on social media , varying the interface cues ( control with only Likes vs . Dislikes outnumbering Likes vs . Likes outnumbering Dislikes vs . a flag with Likes ) and harassment severity ( low vs . high ) . We randomly assigned participants ( 𝑁 = 242 ) across the eight conditions . We measured participants’ perceived appropriateness , deservedness , and justifiability of retributive harassment [ 6 ] and their likelihood to intervene via Liking , Disliking , flagging , and commenting . Our mixed results suggest that a Dislike function is perhaps too quickly dismissed out of fear of abuse [ 75 ] without full consideration of its potential against harassment , while a flag might be overly trusted in its ability to signal users what not to do . We suggest that making public resistance to harassment more visible might deter the normalization of harassment in online spaces and that understanding people’s psychosocial characteristics is important for harassment mitigation . Against a fast - growing breadth of harassment tactics , social media platforms need to be better equipped with both theoretically and empirically tested nudges and warnings [ 66 ] . This paper has three contributions : First , it describes a test of Dislikes and flags grounded in the theory of negativity effect and discusses relevant theories to solidify theoretical frameworks of cues for social norms and harassment . Second , it extends the work of interface design for bystander intervention by adding empirical evidence of retributive harassment and negative interface cues . Third , it suggests design implications around Dislikes and flags and highlights the importance of understanding individuals’ Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 3 psychosocial characteristics in mitigating online harassment , thus proposing alternatives to social media platforms’ one - size - fits - all content moderation approach . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Online Retributive Harassment Is Hard to Moderate Online retributive harassment is difficult to moderate for two primary reasons : ( 1 ) the highly retributive disposition of the individuals engaging in this type of harassment , and ( 2 ) the ways that social media affordances aggregate and escalate individual retributive actions . Morality theories indicate that when people see two wrongs ( i . e . , the target’s original violation and retributive harassment ) , they tend to take sides with the perceived “lesser evil” rather than to reject both [ 20 , 21 , 61 ] . Individuals who do engage in retributive harassment might not see themselves as harassers . Instead , they might think they are achieving justice through “an eye for an eye” type of counterattack out of a sense of self - respect [ 33 , 37 , 53 , 74 ] or collective sympathy for the victim of the original violation [ 62 ] . For instance , many adolescent girls respond to cyberbullying through cyberbullying back and receiving help from their online peers in that effort [ 9 ] . Because of such seemingly empathetic motives , retributive harassment sometimes receives ambivalent framing by the media as irrational yet understandable [ 52 , 68 ] . Blackwell et al . [ 6 ] found that bystanders , like harassers , are individuals with their own punish - ment orientation and propensity for retributive justice . In their online experiment , bystanders who favored retributive justice perceived online harassment targeted at an offender as not appropriate , but still justified and deserved . They were also more likely to publicly call out the harassment target’s behavior rather than the harasser’s . Such findings underscore that online harassment is not restricted to a few bad actors but is something many online participants engage in [ 14 ] . It is erroneous to presume bystanders will assist harassment targets irrespective of their psychosocial tendencies and the context of harassment . The ability of the Internet to aggregate individual actions can easily escalate retributive harass - ment and turn it into devastating mob justice [ 42 ] . Klonick [ 42 ] identified anonymity , ubiquitous access , and the endless memory of the Internet as aggravating factors . Social media features that afford association building , such as Friends , Following , Likes , shares , feeds , comments , replies , direct mentions , hashtags , and up / downvotes [ 67 ] , can also accumulate not only social capital but also antagonistic attention . With these features , individuals who make independent decisions to sanction a norm violation can quickly become a harassment brigade . Marwick [ 48 ] specifically described morally motivated networked harassment ( MMNH ) as a situation in which a norm - violating individual is harassed by a community of people connected by social media . Crucial to the MMNH model is the role of amplifiers often taken by social media accounts with many followers . Amplifiers , knowingly or not , can deliver and boost harassment to their large audience even with a simple retweet [ 36 , 48 ] . The responsibility for the consequent network - wide harassment by the audience is obscure . This challenges the current platform or legal regulations that center on one - to - one harassment [ 48 ] and automatically detect and ban certain abusive content or actors [ 13 , 36 ] . Furthermore , the primary impulse to punish wrongdoing occurs rapidly before conscious rea - soning [ 10 ] . Thus , policy - based moderation and community guidelines that demand deliberate cognitive efforts to practice might be ineffective in preventing retributive harassment . When policy - based and automated moderation mechanisms fail to address the fact that online retributive harassment is socially justified and promoted [ 6 , 48 ] and often done without much contemplation [ 10 ] , the target suffers massively adverse consequences that are outsized from their initial violation . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 4 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe 2 . 2 Interface Cues Can Signal Normative Behavior to Bystanders As bystanders’ pile - on brings the perpetuation and escalation of retributive harassment , it is crucial to mitigate bystanders’ retributive intentions so that the chance of their benevolent intervention increases . Interface - based moderation approaches might achieve this goal through the use of unobtrusive nudges and signals . Interface elements can add priming or design friction [ 50 ] , which allows people to slow down and be more conscious of their behavior . For instance , Seering et al . [ 60 ] employed CAPTCHAs in the comment section to prime positivity and analytical thinking . Interface elements can also nudge bystanders’ sense of personal responsibility and empathy toward the harassment target [ 22 , 65 ] . DiFranzo et al . [ 22 ] identified a large audience size indicator and view notifications ( i . e . , the poster is notified of who has read a harassing comment to their post ) , making personal accountability against harassment more noticeable . These combined actions increased perceptions of public surveillance and elicited indirect bystander intervention via flagging . Taylor et al . [ 65 ] used empathy nudges in the comment prompt that invited bystanders to think about the harassment target’s feelings along with a view notification . While the empathy nudge underperformed in a scaled - up simulated platform , the view notification eventually led to an increase in perceived accountability for bystanders’ behavior . Moreover , interface elements can publicly signal how the audience or community is responding to harassment , which informs bystanders of normative behavior . The cues - filtered - out perspective says that , in cue - sparse mediated environments , people are more likely to misinterpret intention and have a harder time detecting what norms they should follow [ 71 ] . Interface cues that aggregate other users’ reactions ( e . g . , Likes , Dislikes , ratings , and up / downvotes ) or show the system’s response to user requests ( e . g . , flagged content ) reflect what other people are doing and what they prefer [ 72 ] —in other words , the descriptive social norm [ 16 ] . Because these aggregations are the byproduct of users’ natural online behaviors [ 72 ] , they are deemed hard to fake and thus more trustworthy than user - editable content ( e . g . , postings ) [ 23 , 71 ] . Therefore , interface cues might be more influential than individual bystanders’ postings or comments in signaling normative behavior . Theoretically , negative interface cues that aggregate negative responses to harassment could signal anti - harassment norms . However , we do not have empirical evidence that they influence bystanders’ perceptions , especially when contested by positive interface cues . On many popular social media platforms , positive interface cues in postings such as Likes and shares are default or markedly visible—though ambiguous in nature [ 32 ] —whereas negative interface cues are less common . This indicates that harassment and the endorsement thereof can be more visible , but public resistance to that harassment is not [ 7 ] . One might choose to ignore harassment and not take any actions , but that can also be interpreted as a silent acceptance of the situation [ 64 ] . Such skewed representation of responses can favor the escalation of harassment , especially the retributive type that depends on social justification . In this paper , we experimented to learn whether , and under what circumstances , negative interface cues—Dislikes and flags—can mitigate online retributive harassment in the presence of positive interface cues . This work advances our theoretical and empirical knowledge of negative interface cues as an interface - based moderation tool . It also contributes to online bystander research by observing bystanders who might be predisposed to be antagonistic toward the harassment target . 2 . 3 Dislikes and Flags as Negative Interface Cues Dislikes publicly show the unmediated aggregate number of negative or disapproving responses social media users assign to content . In most cases , a single - click Disliking action gets immediately Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 5 reflected in the Dislike count shown on the interface . Dislikes do not give room for negotiation or justification between the poster and raters [ 38 ] or for the platform’s interference . On the other hand , flags are embedded reporting tools for users to alert platforms of abuse or policy violations . As Crawford and Gillespie [ 18 ] described , flagging is “merely the first step in a process of content regulation” that requires the platform to assess the violation and come back with its moderation decision . However , the decision is often obscured through the opaque process of content regulation and complex negotiation between users and platforms as well as between social norms and regulatory policies [ 18 ] . Users can conceptually distinguish between Disliking and flagging [ 38 ] , but flagged content is more likely to be Disliked than non - flagged content [ 14 ] . Also , when Disliking is unavailable , users tend to flag posts to show their disapproval [ 29 ] . While much attention has been paid to Disliking and flagging as indirect bystander actions against harassment or incivility , the resulting Dislikes and flags as received signals for other bystanders remain understudied and unclear [ 18 , 38 ] . Flags are often speculated to be a stronger warning against abuse than Dislikes because they forcefully indicate the intervention and potential enforcement by platforms [ 38 ] , but empirical evidence is scarce . Our study serves to fill this gap . Bhandari et al . [ 4 ] , implicitly based on the assumption that seeing a flag can induce bystander intervention , tested the effect of revealing who flagged the content—unspecified vs . other users vs . artificial intelligence ( AI ) . Contrary to their expectation , bystanders who saw an unspecified flag were more likely to flag additional harassment . They reasoned that seeing others’ or AI’s moderation could lead bystanders to feel their actions would be dispensable or futile . However , bystanders did perceive higher personal accountability and greater helpful norms when other users flagged the content . These findings allude that Dislikes and flags might set the social context for bystanders’ negative sense - making of harassment , though not all of them take direct action against it . It should be noted that Dislike and its variants have been predominantly framed as a potential harassment tool . They can be used for trolling [ 14 ] or more tactically abused via mass downvoting or vote brigading to spread toxicity against women and marginalized populations [ 49 ] . Lutz and Schneider [ 47 ] showed that receiving Dislikes can be seen as social rejection and is more hurtful to one’s sense of belonging and self - esteem than receiving no response . However , examining Dislikes’ benign use against harassment would help us have a balanced view and leverage diverse social disincentives for online violence . Harassers , including inadvertent or latent ones , might feel bad seeing Dislikes , and such emotional consequences are what disincentivizes divergence from social norms [ 19 ] . 2 . 4 The Negativity Effect Predicts That Negative Cues Outweigh Positive Cues When assessing negative interface cues , it is necessary to consider that positive interface cues such as Likes are a more prevalent and established default of social media [ 32 ] . This ( hypothetical ) juxtaposition raises the question of which cues have a relatively greater influence on perceivers . Kellermann [ 40 ] defined the negativity effect as the tendency of people to attach greater weight to negative information than positive information [ 72 ] . For instance , negative product reviews or evaluations of a person , despite often being smaller in number than positive ones , tend to draw more attention from online consumers and social media users . One explanation is that producing negative information is essentially regarded as a non - normative behavior . Flattering and commenting about positive aspects are very common because they are often assumed to be normative . Positive remarks are also easily influenced by situational factors such as social relations and societal expectations . Therefore , the informativeness of positive information is likely to be discounted in people’s perceptions . Conversely , negative information is less frequent and thus is more salient , easily noticeable , and readily processed . Further , because of the perceived Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 6 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe social risk of publishing , negative information is deemed to be more diagnostic and to reveal more about the true aspects of the subject . Studies also found that the more individuals strive for accuracy , the more they support a new piece of negative information [ 1 ] . Analogous to this perspective is the negativity bias , or the propensity to respond more quickly to and learn more from negative stimuli than positive stimuli , which has been observed by many studies of cognitive , affective , and social behavior ( e . g . , [ 12 , 69 ] ) . Yet advertising scholarship on two - sided signals has maintained that the influence of negative information on people’s perceptions is contingent on many variables , including how much negative information is included , where it is placed , and the perceived correlation between positive and negative attributes [ 59 ] . Thus , the negativity effect needs to be tested in a specific context—in our case , that of online retributive harassment and bystander perceptions . Promisingly , consistent with the theory of negativity effect , Blackwell et al . [ 6 ] found that one disagreeing comment , despite being outnumbered by five other conforming comments , significantly reduced the perceived deservedness and justifiability of retributive harassment . Therefore , we tested whether a similar result could be drawn with negative interface cues when they are strongly or weakly contested by positive interface cues in retributive harassment . 3 METHOD 3 . 1 Hypotheses Our study tested whether the negativity effect of Dislikes or flags would lower users’ perception of how appropriate , deserved , and justified retributive harassment is . We examined three variables : high Dislikes , where Dislikes outnumber Likes ; low Dislikes , where Likes outnumber Dislikes ; a flag , a flag with Likes . Despite the numerical differences , the theory of negativity effect guided us to hypothesize that not only high Dislikes ( H1 ) but also low Dislikes ( H2 ) and a flag ( H3 ) form negative impressions of retributive harassment . While we focused on the effect of the interface cues on perceptions of retributive harassment , the severity of harassment itself [ 26 , 43 , 46 ] is a significant factor in bystander behavior . Online bystander literature has noted that the more severely insulting the harassment is , the more willing people are to intervene and support the harassment target [ 43 , 46 ] . In particular , Koehler et al . [ 43 ] found that if bystanders perceive the harassment as not so severe , they are more prone to blaming the harassment target . That is , the negative cues’ desirable effect can be dampened if the harassment severity is low . Thus , we hypothesized that the negative cues’ effect of mitigating bystanders’ harassment perceptions is more prominent in more severe harassment . In addition , bystanders’ own punitive dispositions might come into play [ 6 ] ( H4 ) . The findings from Blackwell et al . [ 6 ] indicate that while bystanders’ punishment orientation is not easily influenced by external factors , it is a significant determinant of bystanders’ perceptions of retributive harassment . We expected to see a three - way interaction effect in which punishment orientation was a moderating variable . In sum , we hypothesized and asked : • H1 . High Dislikes decreases bystanders’ perceived ( a ) appropriateness , ( b ) deservedness , and ( c ) justifiability of retributive harassment , especially in cases of more severe harassment . • H2 . Low Dislikes decreases bystanders’ belief that online retributive harassment is ( a ) appro - priate , ( b ) deserved , and ( c ) justified , especially in cases of more severe harassment . • H3 . A flag decreases bystanders’ belief that online retributive harassment is ( a ) appropriate , ( b ) deserved , and ( c ) justified , especially in cases of more severe harassment . • H4 . Bystanders’ punishment orientation moderates the interaction effect of the interface cues and harassment severity . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 7 Low Severity High Severity Control ( 689 Likes ) X1 ( 𝑛 = 31 ) X5 ( 𝑛 = 32 ) High Dislikes ( 689 Likes , 5 , 902 Dislikes ) X2 ( 𝑛 = 34 ) X6 ( 𝑛 = 27 ) Low Dislikes ( 5 , 902 Likes , 689 Dislikes ) X3 ( 𝑛 = 32 ) X7 ( 𝑛 = 35 ) Flag ( 689 Likes , Flag ) X4 ( 𝑛 = 27 ) X8 ( 𝑛 = 24 ) Table 1 . Experiment treatment matrix : 4 ( control with only Likes vs . high Dislikes vs . low Dislikes vs . a flag ) × 2 ( low vs . high harassment severity ) ( 𝑁 = 242 ) . • RQ1 . What subjective factors ( perceptions , intentions , emotions ) influence bystanders’ likeli - hood to intervene in retributive harassment ? To test our hypotheses , we conducted an online experiment with a hypothetical scenario of retributive harassment while controlling for confounding external variables . A 4 × 2 between - subjects experiment tested the effects of interface cues ( only Likes as a control condition vs . high Dislikes vs . low Dislikes vs . a flag ) and harassment severity ( low vs . high ) on participants’ perceptions of online retributive harassment . Our university institutional review board approved this study . We recruited a total of 255 participants via Prolific ( prolific . co ) , an online research subject pool that enables the sampling of diverse populations for experimental studies . Participants were current U . S . residents ages 18 or older and received $ 1 . 27 as compensation for their time based on a $ 9 . 52 hourly minimum wage as was recommended by Prolific . No demographic information such as gender , race , or age was collected as part of the research because our focus was on a psychological characteristic ( i . e . , punishment orientation ) that is not necessarily tied to demographics [ 11 ] . Thirteen participants either chose the same option for the majority of questions or did not give permission to use their data for research purposes . Thus , we had a final sample size of 242 . 3 . 2 Stimuli We developed a total of eight treatments with the stimulus combinations of interface cues ( only Likes as a control condition vs . high Dislikes vs . low Dislikes vs . a flag ) and harassment severity ( low vs . high ) . Participants were randomly assigned to one of the treatments by Qualtrics . Table 1 shows the number of participants assigned to each treatment . Participants observed a hypothetical case of retributive harassment in which a social media user ( Sarah ) , who committed a drunk driving homicide , was being “flamed” ( harassed and insulted ) by another user ( Amy ) . Participants were repeatedly reminded of the following in the experiment : Amy learns that Sarah was found guilty of killing an elderly man in a drunk driving hit - and - run incident . We chose a case of drunk driving homicide because it is an egregious crime yet controversial in that one could still maintain empathy for the offender . In some parts of the United States , killing someone while driving under the influence is legally and socially deemed an unintentional crime [ 3 ] . We chose names that tend to be read as white and female for both the harasser ( Amy ) and the target ( Sarah ) because prior research has shown that this helps control for the confounding effects of racism and sexism [ 6 ] . The harassment post was designed to resemble a Twitter posting where the harasser directly mentioned the offender regardless of their personal relationship . However , we did not specify the social media platform as Twitter in the experiment instruction so as to incorporate newly designed Dislikes and flags while leaving out the share or follow button . We used commonly found phrases in Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 8 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe ( a ) Treatment X1 : Control × Low Severity ( b ) Treatment X2 : High Dislikes × Low Severity ( c ) Treatment X7 : Low Dislikes × High Severity ( d ) Treatment X8 : Flag × High Severity Fig . 1 . Hypothetical retributive harassment with different combinations of interface cues and harassment severity shown as stimuli to experiment participants ( four example treatments out of eight total ) . tweets related to social issues and political news for low - severity harassment for ecological validity [ 56 ] and directly adopted language used by Blackwell et al . [ 6 ] for high - severity harassment . To test the contrasting effect of the number of Likes and Dislikes , we used 1 : 8 ratios between Likes and Dislikes ( and vice versa ) to produce a “credible and serious sense of group contradiction” [ 2 ] . The flag specifically stated that the social media post has been reported for harassment to reduce ambiguity , as Bhandari et al . [ 4 ] did in their experiment with flagged posts ( Figure 1 ) . We did not add icons or colors to Likes and Dislikes to avoid their potential confounding effects . 3 . 3 Procedure This experiment was administered online via Qualtrics and consisted of two sections : ( 1 ) personal characteristics regarding social media engagement and punishment orientation and ( 2 ) response to the retributive harassment stimuli in the randomly assigned treatment . Participants were shown a content warning about the offensive language prior to the experiment . They were asked to give consent to participate and to permit the recording of their responses after being debriefed . The 75 % quartile respondent completed the experiment in 7 . 35 minutes . 3 . 4 Measurements 3 . 4 . 1 Dependent Variables : Harassment Perceptions and Likelihood to Intervene . Participants rated how appropriate , deserved , and justified the retributive harassment ( phrased in the items as “what Amy [ the poster ] said to Sarah” ) was on separate 7 - point ordered response scales ( e . g . , 1 = absolutely inappropriate , 7 = absolutely appropriate ) . They additionally rated how much they agreed with the harasser and how happy and offended they were to see the harassment . Participants further gauged whether they were likely to Like , Dislike , flag , or comment on the harassment ( 1 = very unlikely , 7 = very likely ) and , optionally , what the comment would be . We also measured the participants’ perceived likelihood of calling out either the harasser ( Amy ) or the target ( Sarah ) on social media . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 9 Of course , intention to do something in the future is not the same as actual future behavior , but these measures do act as a proxy for attitudes if not a direct measure of actual future activity . 3 . 4 . 2 Moderating Variable : Punishment Orientation ( PO ) . Participants responded to questions gauging their subjective beliefs about punishment and retributive justice . This measurement preceded the interaction with the experiment stimuli . Previous research found that general beliefs about justice and punishment and judgments about individual cases are distinct [ 11 ] , which suggests little priming effect in either order . Following Blackwell et al . [ 6 ] , we used the Harsh Retributivism Subscale ( HRS ) of Punishment Orientation Questionnaire devised by Yamamoto [ 76 ] . The HRS is an 8 - item questionnaire that measures agreement to statements such as : “Criminals deserve to be publicly identified and shamed” and “Criminals are bad people and deserve punishment . ” The responses were recorded on a 7 - point ordered response scale ( 1 = strongly disagree , 7 = strongly agree ) . We used the mean score of the responses on the HRS scale , ranging from 1 ( low PO ) to 7 ( high PO ) , in the data analysis . 3 . 4 . 3 Social Media Engagement . The survey also asked participants about their general tendencies to Like , Dislike , flag , and comment on social media ; how their feelings are affected by Likes , Dislikes , and comments by other people ; and how they typically respond if witnessing someone else being harassed on social media . The first two sets of questions are comparable to social media participation and consumption , respectively , and we considered the aggregate of both to measure general social media engagement [ 41 ] . 3 . 5 Data Analysis We employed the R statistical packages for analysis , using the significance level of . 05 for all statistical tests . To test H1 – H3 , we employed weighted least squares regression models to adjust for non - constant variances between our experimental conditions , and 𝐹 tests and Tukey post hoc comparisons to report the result . We used the analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) test because we wanted to make comparisons between categorical variables ( our conditions ) using the variance in our dependent measures , which were aggregated scales . Tukey post hoc comparisons then allowed us to look at the specific differences between each of those groups and to compare means and variances between our conditions . The independent variables were interface cues and harassment severity , and the dependent variables were bystanders’ perceived appropriateness , deservedness , and justifiability of retributive harassment . H4 tested PO as a moderating variable by introducing three two - way interaction terms ( cue × severity , cue × PO , severity × PO ) and one three - way interaction term ( cue × severity × PO ) in the regression model . To answer RQ1 , we used a separate linear regression modeling with Akaike’s Information Criteria ( AIC ) to identify which of our measurements effectively predicted the likelihood to intervene in retributive harassment . We found no evidence of multicollinearity in our models ( all variance inflation factors [ VIF ] were < 3 ) . 4 RESULTS Section 4 . 1 describes the participant characteristics . Section 4 . 2 discusses the findings regarding the effects of interface cues and harassment severity on perceived appropriateness , deservedness , and justifiability of retributive harassment ( H1 , H2 , H3 ) . We found some potentially mitigating effects of high Dislikes but aggravating effects of low Dislikes and no significant effects of a flag . Section 4 . 3 reports significant moderating effects of bystanders’ PO on retributive harassment perceptions ( H4 ) . In Section 4 . 4 , we identify what subjective factors motivate participants to intervene in retributive harassment ( RQ1 ) . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 10 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe 4 . 1 Participant Characteristics 4 . 1 . 1 Ambivalent Reaction to the Experiment Stimuli . In the manipulation check , all 242 participants confirmed seeing the interface cues , and more than 71 % accurately recalled the cues ( the number of Likes and Dislikes , a flag ) they were shown . An inaccurate recollection by the remainder is plausible given that users in a real social media context might not pay full attention to the details of a post [ 39 ] . Regarding the original violation ( Sarah’s drunk - driving homicide ) that triggered retributive harassment , 49 % of participants found it unforgivable , 33 % forgivable , and 18 % neutral ( 𝑀 = 3 . 67 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1 . 58 ) . With regard to the retributive harassment ( Amy’s social media post , either in low severity or high severity ) , 78 % regarded it as harassment , 39 % as punishment , and 8 % as both harassment and punishment . These reactions aligned with our experimental design , which established both the original violation and retributive harassment as controversial to observe whether cues are determining factors of harassment perceptions . 4 . 1 . 2 Moderate Social Media Engagement . In general , participants reported that they were likely to click the Like button ( 𝑀 = 4 . 83 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1 . 62 ) and be affected by other users’ comments ( 𝑀 = 4 . 20 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1 . 71 ) . Disliking ( 𝑀 = 3 . 07 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1 . 68 ) and flagging ( 𝑀 = 3 . 11 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1 . 68 ) were less common , which could be more from the lack of Dislike options in many social media platforms rather than personal preference . The most common response when witnessing online harassment was ignoring ( 29 . 3 % ) followed by flagging ( 28 . 5 % ) , writing a comment ( 15 . 3 % ) , and Liking or Disliking ( 14 . 0 % ) . A small minority ( 2 . 1 % ) said they would share the post to draw others’ attention to it . Some participants ( 10 . 7 % ) said they had not witnessed someone being harassed online . 4 . 1 . 3 Retributive Punishment Orientation . The majority of participants preferred moderate or retributive responses to wrongs , which matches the general population’s retributive propensity [ 10 ] . Participants’ mean PO was 4 . 48 , which demonstrated a negatively skewed distribution ( median [ 𝐼𝑄𝑅 ] = 4 . 62 [ 3 . 88 – 5 . 25 ] ) . Overall , our dataset did not have abnormal trends in terms of social media engagement or justice beliefs . 4 . 2 Interactions of Interface Cues and Harassment Severity ( H1 , H2 , H3 ) We found significant interaction between interface cues and harassment severity on bystanders’ perceptions of retributive harassment : perceived appropriateness ( 𝐹 [ 3 , 234 ] = 3 . 135 , 𝑝 = . 026 ) ; deservedness ( 𝐹 [ 3 , 234 ] = 13 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 000 ) ; justifiability ( 𝐹 [ 3 , 234 ] = 9 . 232 , 𝑝 = . 000 ) . This supports our interaction effect assumptions ( i . e . , more significant effects in higher - severity harassment ) in H1 – H3 . Accordingly , we interpreted the effect of interface cues at each level of harassment severity . Table 2 summarizes the 𝐹 statistics for the regression model with the interface cues and harassment Appropriate Deserved Justified 𝑑𝑓 𝐹 𝜂 2 𝐹 𝜂 2 𝐹 𝜂 2 Cue 3 41 . 489 * * * . 160 . 405 . 004 15 . 070 * * * . 120 Severity 1 411 . 264 * * * . 528 16 . 541 * * * . 057 70 . 175 * * * . 186 Cue × Severity 3 3 . 135 * . 012 13 . 000 * * * . 134 9 . 232 * * * . 073 Residuals 234 * * * 𝑝 < . 001 * * 𝑝 < . 01 * 𝑝 < . 05 Table 2 . 𝐹 statistics show significant interaction effects among interface cues and harassment severity on retributive harassment perceptions . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 11 Low Severity 𝑑𝑓 Appropriate Deserved Justified High Dislikes − Control 234 − . 013 ( . 070 ) . 004 ( . 049 ) . 088 ( . 155 ) Low Dislikes − Control 234 . 122 ( . 128 ) . 733 * * * ( . 131 ) . 273 ( . 180 ) Flag − Control 234 − . 034 ( . 082 ) . 193 ( . 124 ) . 077 ( . 178 ) High Severity 𝑑𝑓 Appropriate Deserved Justified High Dislikes − Control 234 − . 179 ( . 093 ) − . 835 * * * ( . 209 ) − . 544 * * ( . 176 ) Low Dislikes − Control 234 . 493 * * * ( . 131 ) . 000 ( . 058 ) . 504 * * ( . 182 ) Flag − Control 234 . 048 ( . 125 ) − . 296 ( . 171 ) . 261 ( . 222 ) Mitigating Effect * * * 𝑝 < . 001 * * 𝑝 < . 01 * 𝑝 < . 05 Aggravating Effect Table 3 . Tukey post hoc comparisons show estimates and standard errors ( in parentheses ) revealing significant effects of negative interface cues on retributive harassment perceptions in both low - and high - severity harassment conditions , though some increased the approval of harassment . The control condition only showed Likes . Mitigating effects reduced approval of the harassment , and aggravating effects increased approval of the harassment . severity as independent variables . The coefficients and standard errors of the regression models are included in Appendix A1 . To test our hypotheses , we used Tukey post hoc comparisons to show what differences Dislikes and a flag made from the baseline control condition showing only Likes ( Table 3 ) . 4 . 2 . 1 High Dislikes Reduces Perceived Deservedness and Justifiability ( H1 Partially Supported ) . We hypothesized that high Dislikes reduces perceived appropriateness ( H1a ) , deservedness ( H1b ) , and justifiability ( H1c ) of retributive harassment . H1b and H1c were supported only in the high - severity harassment condition . As shown in Table 3 , when highly severe retributive harassment had more Dislikes than Likes , participants perceived it to be less deserved ( − . 835 point , 𝑆𝐸 = . 209 , 𝑝 = . 000 ) and less justified ( − . 544 point , 𝑆𝐸 = . 176 , 𝑝 = . 002 ) compared to when the post had Likes only . Perceived appropriateness seemed to decrease ( − . 179 point , 𝑆𝐸 = . 093 ) but not significantly ( 𝑝 = . 057 ) . 4 . 2 . 2 Low Dislikes Potentially Exacerbates Retributive Harassment Perceptions ( H2 Unsupported ) . We hypothesized that low Dislikes reduces perceived appropriateness ( H2a ) , deservedness ( H2b ) , and justifiability ( H2c ) of retributive harassment . H2 was rejected at both harassment severity levels . Participants found highly severe harassment more appropriate ( . 493 point , 𝑆𝐸 = . 131 , 𝑝 = . 000 ) and more justified ( . 504 point , 𝑆𝐸 = . 176 , 𝑝 = . 006 ) and mildly severe harassment more deserved ( . 733 point , 𝑆𝐸 = . 131 , 𝑝 = . 000 ) when seeing less Dislikes than Likes compared to only seeing Likes ( Table 3 ) . This result contradicts the negativity effect in that a smaller number of Dislikes than Likes failed to form negative impressions of the accompanying harassment . The presence of many Likes seems to have signaled that retributive harassment is socially acceptable , which can potentially lead to increased support and escalation of the harassment . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 12 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe Appropriate Deserved Justified 𝑑𝑓 𝐹 𝜂 2 𝐹 𝜂 2 𝐹 𝜂 2 Cue 3 247 . 333 * * * . 333 272 . 397 * * * . 445 2460 . 047 * * * . 659 Severity 1 384 . 168 * * * . 173 . 096 . 000 923 . 422 * * * . 082 PO 1 766 . 602 * * * . 344 504 . 264 * * * . 274 2347 . 068 * * * . 209 Cue × Severity 3 6 . 194 * * * . 008 17 . 941 * * * . 029 23 . 835 * * * . 006 Cue × PO 3 13 . 442 * * * . 018 41 . 923 * * * . 068 53 . 348 * * * . 014 Severity × PO 1 . 146 . 000 18 . 271 * * * . 010 20 . 254 * * * . 002 Cue × Severity × PO 3 15 . 963 * * * . 022 30 . 896 * * * . 050 26 . 141 * * * . 007 Residuals 226 * * * 𝑝 < . 001 * * 𝑝 < . 01 * 𝑝 < . 05 Table 4 . Significant three - way interaction effects among interface cues , harassment severity , and punishment orientation on retributive harassment perceptions . 4 . 2 . 3 A Flag Has No Effect on Retributive Harassment Perceptions ( H3 Unsupported ) . We hypothe - sized that a flag reduces perceived appropriateness ( H3a ) , deservedness ( H3b ) , and justifiability ( H3c ) of retributive harassment . H3 was rejected at both harassment severity levels . In fact , the flag did not yield any statistically significant effect across all treatments ( Table 3 ) . 4 . 3 Punishment Orientation Moderates Retributive Harassment Perceptions ( H4 Supported ) We hypothesized that bystanders’ punishment orientation moderates the interaction effects of interface cues and harassment severity ( H4 ) . H4 was supported . The coefficients and standard errors of the regression models are included in Appendix A2 . Overall , adding the PO variable significantly increased the explanatory power of the regression models predicting perceived appropriateness ( Δ 𝑅 2 adjusted = . 201 ) , deservedness ( Δ 𝑅 2 adjusted = . 698 ) , and justifiability ( Δ 𝑅 2 adjusted = . 617 ) of retributive harassment . PO’s significant influence was evident when comparing the effect sizes of the variables ( Table 4 ) . Perceived appropriateness was mostly determined by PO ( 𝜂 2 = . 344 ) and interface cues ( 𝜂 2 = . 333 ) , followed by harassment severity ( 𝜂 2 = . 173 ) . For deservedness , interface cues had the largest effect size ( 𝜂 2 = . 445 ) , followed by PO ( 𝜂 2 = . 274 ) . Similarly , for justifiability , interface cues had the largest effect size ( 𝜂 2 = . 659 ) , followed by PO ( 𝜂 2 = . 209 ) . Participants’ mean PO was 4 . 48 within the range from 1 ( low ) to 7 ( high ) on the HRS scale . Participants who fell below that average were categorized as low PO and those above as high PO . We conducted Tukey post hoc comparisons of interface cues and harassment severity at each level of PO . Table 5 containing the result shows that the effects of interface cues differed across severity levels and across different PO levels . Overall , high Dislikes had significant mitigating effects for low - PO participants at both severity levels . High Dislikes also tended to decrease high - PO participants’ perceived appropriateness , deservedness , and justifiability , but not statistically significantly , which requires further investigation . The presence of low Dislikes was effective for low - PO participants only in high - severity harassment but backfired significantly for high - PO participants . A flag showed more mixed results . For low - PO participants , a flag had some mitigating effects in high - severity harassment but not in low - severity harassment and vice versa for high - PO participants . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 13 Low PO High PO Appropriate Deserved Justified Appropriate Deserved Justified High Dislikes − Control LowSeverity − . 917 * * * ( . 103 ) . 008 ( . 140 ) . 040 ( . 264 ) − . 302 ( . 438 ) − . 209 ( . 351 ) − . 737 ( . 590 ) Low Dislikes − Control LowSeverity − . 040 ( . 110 ) . 307 ( . 262 ) 1 . 090 * * * ( . 226 ) . 292 ( . 334 ) . 722 * ( . 362 ) − . 369 ( . 887 ) Flag − Control LowSeverity . 004 ( . 243 ) . 152 ( . 282 ) 1 . 908 * * * ( . 269 ) − 1 . 027 * * * ( . 350 ) − . 053 ( . 423 ) − 1 . 663 * ( . 748 ) High Dislikes − Control HighSeverity − . 930 * * * ( . 198 ) − 1 . 901 * * * ( . 454 ) − 1 . 368 * * * ( . 383 ) . 004 ( . 118 ) − . 627 ( . 366 ) − . 477 ( . 555 ) Low Dislikes − Control HighSeverity − . 730 * * * ( . 119 ) − . 367 ( . 198 ) − 1 . 410 * * * ( . 396 ) 1 . 128 * * * ( . 156 ) 1 . 013 * * * ( . 052 ) 1 . 477 * * * ( . 559 ) Flag − Control High Severity − . 006 ( . 105 ) − 1 . 062 * * * ( . 295 ) − . 594 ( . 756 ) . 729 * * * ( . 182 ) . 015 ( . 133 ) . 532 ( . 547 ) Mitigating Effect * * * 𝑝 < . 001 * * 𝑝 < . 01 * 𝑝 < . 05 Aggravating Effect Table 5 . Tukey post hoc comparisons at low - punishment - orientation ( PO ) and high - PO levels based on a mean of 4 . 48 ( 𝑑𝑓 = 226 ) . Mitigating effects reduced approval of the harassment , and aggravating effects increased approval of the harassment . 4 . 4 Likelihood to Intervene in Retributive Harassment ( RQ1 ) We investigated subjective factors ( perceptions , intentions , emotions ) that could influence people’s likelihood to intervene in online retributive harassment by Liking , Disliking , flagging , or com - menting on the harassment post ( RQ1 ) . Using all measurements obtained from the experiment as independent variables , we fitted a new series of linear regression models modeling the perceived likelihood of intervention as the dependent variable . We then excluded independent variables that did not improve the model fit using AIC . Table 6 shows the resulting models . Perceived justifiability was a significant predictor for all models of potential bystander inter - vention . Because perceived justifiability was more determined by interface cues than harassment severity and PO , this result underscores the importance of cues in potential bystander intervention . The likelihood to Like retributive harassment indicates bystanders’ potential support for the harassment . Participants tended to Like the harassment when they saw it as appropriate and justified , and were happy but also somewhat offended to see the harassment . Feeling offended can be caused by the harsh language used in the harassment but it does not seem to necessarily stop people from approving of the harassment . General social media engagement ( participation via Liking , Disliking , flagging , and commenting plus caring about others’ reactions ) and an intention to call out the target ( Sarah ) also increased the likelihood to Like the harassment . Potential benign bystander interventions were captured by the likelihood to Dislike and flag the harassment , both of which showed similar patterns . People who saw the harassment as less justified , felt more offended , and had the intention to call out the harasser ( Amy ) were more likely to Dislike or flag the harassment . Social media participation ( general social media engagement minus caring about others’ reactions ) also increased the likelihood to Dislike the harassment . The likelihood of participants commenting on the harassment was influenced by both the intention to call out the harasser ( Amy ) and to call out the target ( Sarah ) . Among a total of 25 comments submitted by participants , 15 comments ( 60 % ) were negative toward the harassment and included hostile backlashes ( e . g . , “You [ the harasser ] are ugly on the inside” ) . Some replicated the derogatory language even when the overall intention was to deter harassment ( e . g . , “I would Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 14 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe Likely to Like Likely to Dislike Likely to Flag Likely to Comment Intercept − 1 . 698 * * * 1 . 293 * 1 . 365 * * . 779 * * ( . 329 ) ( . 508 ) ( . 504 ) ( . 237 ) Appropriate . 182 * * * - - . 108 ( . 054 ) ( . 071 ) Justified . 147 * * − . 247 * * * − . 267 * * * − . 165 * ( . 050 ) ( . 066 ) ( . 060 ) ( . 066 ) Happy . 225 * * * − . 162 * - - ( . 047 ) ( . 072 ) Offended . 094 * . 216 * * * . 378 * * * - ( . 039 ) ( . 065 ) ( . 064 ) General Engagement . 237 * * * - - - ( . 065 ) General Participation - . 362 * * * . 140 - ( . 091 ) ( . 091 ) Call Out Harasser - . 399 * * * . 353 * * * . 279 * * * ( . 066 ) ( . 065 ) ( . 057 ) Call Out Target . 243 * * * - - . 380 * * * ( . 044 ) ( . 062 ) 𝐴𝐼𝐶 − 22 . 78 208 . 86 209 . 76 135 . 56 𝑅 2 / 𝑅 2 adjusted . 576 / . 565 . 447 / . 435 . 436 / . 426 . 367 / . 356 All models significant at 𝑝 = . 000 . * * * 𝑝 < . 001 * * 𝑝 < . 01 * 𝑝 < . 05 Table 6 . Coefficients , standard errors , and significance of the perceived likelihood to intervene in retributive harassment models . say that Sarah [ the target ] is a cunt because she was driving drunk . . . But I think telling her that she should kill herself is kind of a harsh statement” ) . 5 DISCUSSION In this study , we examined whether negative interface cues that signal social norms against retributive harassment tend to change bystanders’ perceptions accordingly . Table 7 summarizes our results . In sum , Dislikes that outnumbered Likes were effective against highly severe retributive harassment . However , when outnumbered by Likes , Dislikes backfired and made low - severity harassment look more deserved and high - severity harassment more appropriate and justified . This tendency was particularly notable for highly punitive people . A flag had no overall significant impact on harassment perceptions , likely because it had confounding effects on people with different punishment orientations in different levels of harassment severity . For less punitive people , a flag was aggravating in low - severity harassment but mitigating in high - severity harassment . For more punitive people , it was mitigating in low - severity harassment but aggravating in high - severity harassment . 5 . 1 Alternative Theories Might Explain Limitations of Negative Interface Cues We found that the negativity effect alone does not explain bystanders’ reactions to online retributive harassment . Rather , our results showed that the negativity effect is substantially limited by the interactive effects of harassment severity and individuals’ punishment orientation . Our results Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 15 Hypothesis / research question Supported ? H1 High Dislikes decreases the perceived . . . Appropriateness No Deservedness Yes , in high - severity harassment Justifiability Yes , in high - severity harassment H2 Low Dislikes decreases the perceived . . . Appropriateness No , increase in high - severity harassment Deservedness No , increase in low - severity harassment Justifiability No , increase in high - severity harassment H3 A flag decreases the perceived . . . Appropriateness No Deservedness No Justifiability No H4 Punishment orientation moderates the Appropriateness Yes interaction effects of interface cues and Deservedness Yes harassment severity on the perceived . . . Justifiability Yes RQ1 What subjective factors influence the Like harassment appropriateness ( + ) , justifiability ( + ) , happy likelihood to . . . ( + ) , offended ( + ) , social media engagement ( + ) , call out target ( + ) Dislike justifiability ( - ) , happy ( - ) , offended ( + ) , harassment social media participation ( + ) , call out harasser ( + ) Flag harassment justifiability ( - ) , offended ( + ) , call out harasser ( + ) Comment on justifiability ( - ) , call out harasser ( + ) , harassment call out target ( + ) Table 7 . Summary of results : bystanders’ perceptions of online retributive harassment . might demonstrate the blemishing effect [ 24 ] rather than the negativity effect and provide support for warranting theory [ 71 , 73 ] . Ein - Gar , Shiv , and Tormala [ 24 ] argued that the negativity effect can be moderated by presenta - tion order ( i . e . , primacy effect ) and information processing effort . They introduced the concept of blemishing effect , whereby additional weak negative information can paradoxically bolster initial favorable impressions formed by positive information . In their theory , encountering minor con - flicting negative information ( e . g . , low Dislikes , a flag ) makes one pause and revisit the positive information they first saw ( e . g . , Likes ) . This refocus on earlier positive information might enhance its salience and appeal . When people’s cognitive capacity to process more information and change their attitude is low ( e . g . , punishment orientation ) , such enhanced positive information leads to more favorable impressions ( e . g . , more appropriate , more deserved , more justified ) than when they see positive information alone . This might not be the case when the additional negative information is stronger or greater than positive information ( e . g . , high Dislikes ) . Our findings , which show the potential of high Dislikes and the limited effects of low Dislikes and a flag in reducing favorable impressions of retributive harassment , seem to provide supportive evidence of the blemishing effect . Warranting theory [ 71 , 73 ] might also help contextualize our results . The warranting theory describes impression formation in the mediated online environment . It proposes that one’s percep - tions about a person rely more heavily on hard - to - manipulate cues ( e . g . , others’ appraisals , system information ) than cues that can be manipulated by the person ( e . g . , self - descriptions ) . The former holds greater warranting value than the latter . While warranting theory has been mostly associated with identity cues , our study suggests it can be further applied to explaining different cues for social Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 16 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe norms . In this case , the cues were not being used to form an interpersonal impression but rather to assess the appropriateness of content . In both cases , cues help navigate ambiguous situations where channel limitations can add to confusion . In our experimental treatment , we presented both Likes and a flag together in retributive harass - ment posts . Interpreted through the lens of warranting theory , we posit that Likes have a higher warranting value than a flag . This is because Likes represent unmediated counts of people who clicked on the Like button presumably to show approval of the harassment , whereas a flag is much more opaque in terms of how or by whom it is generated [ 18 ] . A flag could have been generated by one or more other users , a human moderator , AI [ 4 ] , or even the target of retributive harassment . The target could have flagged the content as harassment ( self - description ) , but the target has no control over the number of Likes ( others’ appraisal ) . Such unresolved uncertainty might result in a flag having less warranting value than Likes as a cue for descriptive norms , even in the case of detrimental retributive harassment . 5 . 2 Harassment Mitigation Needs to Diversify Current moderation practices that heavily rely on automated natural language processing [ 7 ] lack consideration for the psychosocial characteristics of both the harasser and bystanders , which can bring unintended ramifications . Some might think retributive harassment can be banned and shut off like other types of harassment or trolling . However , given the strong moral outrage and justice beliefs behind it , a simplistic ban of retributive harassment could be perceived as an injustice or a platform’s failure to see its legitimacy [ 28 ] and aggravate public frustration . Moreover , such a ban would leave little room for open public discourse about justice and social norms , especially for counterpublics consisting of marginalized groups [ 25 , 57 , 70 ] . Social media has newly opened a public sphere where people are empowered to participate in debates around injustice , justice beliefs , and norms [ 30 ] . Public disputes about what is acceptable or not are inevitable but essential , because searching for conflict resolution fosters new perspectives within a community [ 5 , 28 ] . Social media platforms , as “keepers of the public discourse” [ 18 ] , should be cautious about how they might obscure the articulation of concerns and controversies around justice and norms . Therefore , moderating retributive harassment that is pertinent to perceived norms and norm violations demands extra deliberation . 5 . 2 . 1 Dislikes Might Reduce Approval of Retributive Harassment . Our findings show that a high number of Dislikes can overshadow Likes and reduce perceived deservedness and justifiability of severe retributive harassment , especially for less punitive people . Considering that less perceived justifiability led to more likelihood to intervene in harassment via Disliking or flagging , we suggest that a Dislike feature is a potential “simple and indirect intervention” [ 6 ] against harassment . Social media users and researchers have debated the value of Dislike features for years , but not many major platforms have implemented them [ 75 ] because they can be abused for harassment . For instance , in 2014 , Facebook’s chief executive officer , Mark Zuckerberg , said he “didn’t want a Dislike button to become a way for users to shame others on the site” [ 17 ] . Others have argued that social media platforms might be against a Dislike feature largely because it is unattractive to advertisers , whose brand might be publicly Disliked [ 27 ] . Amid the controversies , our study suggests that a Dislike feature could be used to counter harassment . As Blackwell et al . [ 7 ] maintained , “where harassment is visible—and any sanctioning of that harassment is not—then the descriptive norm could easily become that harassment is an appropriate activity . ” Dislikes might serve as publicly visible sanctions of harassment by social media users . However , in our experiment , low Dislikes ( 5 , 902 Likes versus 689 Dislikes ; roughly an 8 : 1 ratio ) did not achieve a desirable effect on bystander perceptions . When can Dislikes be outnumbered Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 17 by Likes , as in many real - world cases , but still have a desirable effect ? Cheng et al . [ 15 ] hinted that users are most influenced by the proportion of upvotes or downvotes out of the total number of votes . Future research is needed to test more varied numerical proportions such as an equal number or smaller differences as in 2 : 1 or 3 : 1 to find out the critical threshold of Dislikes . While Dislikes might be useful signals , other research has shown that it can be hard to elicit Dislikes [ 65 ] . One solution might be to highlight the Dislike button or the number of Dislikes on many Liked yet abusive social media posts , with a message stating the possibility of retributive harassment . Such nudging toward Disliking has a prosocial goal of decreasing online toxicity . Also , transparency around how the platform views harassment would be more helpful than not [ 35 ] . Recently , Twitter’s product lead announced its exploration of adding a Dislike feature [ 51 ] . In support of Twitter’s investigation , we argue that such platforms move beyond the presumptive binary of “prosocial” Likes and “antisocial” Dislikes and look for possibilities to leverage the Dislike feature for prosocial purposes . 5 . 2 . 2 A Flag’s Mixed Effect Highlights the Importance of Individuals’ Psychosocial Characteristics . Flags have been proposed as an effective measure to deter harassment because they indicate the platform’s intervention and policy enforcement [ 38 ] . Our findings , however , did not show that flags were an effective signal . Overall , in the presence of Likes , a flag did not significantly decrease the perceived appropriateness , deservedness , or justifiability of retributive harassment . When presented with Likes , a flag was effective for less punitive people in high - severity harassment and for more punitive people in low - severity harassment . In contrast , it backfired for less punitive people in low - severity harassment and for more punitive people in high - severity harassment . In other words , individuals’ psychosocial characteristics such as punishment orientation confounded the effects of a flag . This finding casts doubt on social media platforms’ ( over ) reliance on flags , which often involves ambiguous and opaque decisions of content removal [ 18 ] . Crawford and Gillespie [ 18 ] suggested that platforms offer a space of “multiple constituencies honoring different moral sources” where people with different perspectives and preferences can make objections and counter - objections around controversial content . We further caution against platforms’ one - size - fits - all content moderation approach . Schoenebeck , Haimson , and Nakamura [ 58 ] found that harassment targets’ preferences for a platform’s response to harassment ( e . g . , apology , offender list , payment ) differ based on their characteristics such as gender , political orientation , age , and justice beliefs . In line with their work , we underscore the importance of understanding bystanders’ heterogeneous psychosocial characteristics to elicit benign bystander interventions . In - depth research is needed to explicate how people’s diverse psychosocial characteristics interactively shape perceptions of interface cues and harassment . 5 . 3 Limitations and Future Work As with any experimental work , there are limitations imposed by the method . In particular , ex - perimental work is affected by the validity of the different operationalizations in its composition . A scenario study using screenshots might have limited external validity because it cannot mimic the actual social media context . For instance , the stimuli do not account for users who scroll through many posts , have live interactions with the posts , or have personal relationships with the harasser , target , or other bystanders [ 39 , 65 ] . Personal networks of people are different from stranger networks , and this can drastically change how norms are experienced . However , our scenarios highlighted particular facets of online retributive harassment ( the target’s violation , harassment , and interface cues ) and avoided the complexities of the real accounts that lead to many uncontrolled inferences [ 11 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 18 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe Additionally , the different interface cues we introduced could have issues of validity that would affect our findings . How the Dislikes were displayed , how the wording was chosen , the visibility of the flagged content and its Likes , and every other design choice could affect the validity of the experiment . For instance , we assigned a large number of Likes and Dislikes to retributive harassment , but leaving aside the rarity of Dislikes on social media platforms , it is possible that social media users do not often see such big numbers with outright harassment . Highly severe retributive harassment might be removed by platform moderators early on before reaching a wider audience . Future work could iterate on ecologically valid prompts . Future work could further test the hypotheses with different types of violations including misdemeanors ( e . g . , animal neglect or vandalism ) , felonies ( e . g . , kidnapping or sexual assault ) , and social wrongdoings ( e . g . , racism , sexism , or classism ) as well as different types of harassment ( e . g . , doxxing or sexual harassment ) . Such extension might also require or benefit from public surveys of violations and online harassment types in terms of perceived severity . In addition , this study did not account for participants’ demographic characteristics , depending instead on random assignment . Considering that harassment can be more oppressive and damaging for marginalized populations including women , LGBTQ communities , people of color , and racial minority groups [ 6 , 36 ] and that women are more likely to notice and intervene in harassment incidents [ 4 ] , future research should examine the influence of demographic factors in the approval of retributive harassment . 6 CONCLUSION This research describes how interface cues can be used to signal norms of online retributive harassment . We showed that bystanders make judgments depending on the severity of harassment , descriptive norms indicated by interface cues , and their own punishment orientation . A high number of Dislikes might reduce favorable perceptions of retributive harassment , whereas a flag has mixed results . This research contributes to theories of online harassment and interface cues by adding empirical evidence of retributive harassment and bridging the theoretical frameworks of the negativity effect , blemishing effect , and warranting theory . It also suggests practical implications for design intervention that consider people’s psychosocial variations in responding to harassment . Nudging through interface cues and addressing users’ psychosocial needs are promising directions for mitigating harassment that are both responsive and work at scale . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Shriya Hardikar for her assistance with survey design and administration . We also thank Dr . Sarita Schoenebeck for her helpful discussion and feedback on the early iteration of this work . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 19 APPENDIX Appropriate Deserved Justified Predictors Estimates std . Error Estimates std . Error Estimates std . Error ( Intercept ) 2 . 50 * * * . 04 4 . 00 * * * . 03 3 . 66 * * * . 10 Cue [ High Dislikes ] − . 10 . 06 − . 42 * * * . 11 − . 23 . 12 Cue [ Low Dislikes ] . 31 * * * . 09 . 37 * * * . 07 . 39 * * . 13 Cue [ Flag ] . 01 . 07 − . 05 . 11 . 17 . 14 Severity [ linear ] − . 71 * * * . 06 − . 00 . 04 − . 30 * . 15 Cue [ High Dislike ] × Severity [ linear ] − . 12 . 08 − . 59 * * * . 15 − . 45 * * . 17 Cue [ Low Dislike ] × Severity [ linear ] . 26 * . 13 − . 52 * * * . 10 . 16 . 18 Cue [ Flag ] × Severity [ linear ] . 06 . 11 − . 35 * . 15 . 13 . 20 Observations 242 242 242 𝑅 2 / 𝑅 2 adjusted . 700 / . 691 . 195 / . 171 . 379 / . 361 * * * 𝑝 < . 001 * * 𝑝 < . 01 * 𝑝 < . 05 Table A1 . The interaction of interface cues and harassment severity on perceived appropriateness , deserved - ness , and justifiability of retributive harassment . Appropriate Deserved Justified Predictors Estimates std . Error Estimates std . Error Estimates std . Error ( Intercept ) 1 . 17 * * * . 30 3 . 09 * * * . 14 1 . 97 * * . 66 Cue [ High Dislikes ] − 1 . 99 * * * . 46 − 1 . 05 * * . 40 − 1 . 43 * . 69 Cue [ Low Dislikes ] − 1 . 13 * * . 36 − 1 . 46 * * * . 31 − . 29 . 75 Cue [ Flag ] 1 . 01 * . 48 − . 58 . 58 2 . 22 * * . 82 Severity [ linear ] 1 . 23 * * . 43 1 . 30 * * * . 20 2 . 33 * . 93 PO . 32 * * * . 07 . 22 * * * . 03 . 39 * . 15 Cue [ High Dislike ] × Severity [ linear ] − 1 . 57 * . 65 − 3 . 60 * * * . 57 − 3 . 29 * * * . 98 Cue [ Low Dislike ] × Severity [ linear ] − 2 . 27 * * * . 51 − 3 . 26 * * * . 43 − 4 . 97 * * * 1 . 06 Cue [ Flag ] × Severity [ linear ] − 4 . 04 * * * . 67 − 3 . 76 * * * . 82 − 8 . 21 * * * 1 . 16 Cue [ High Dislike ] × PO . 35 * * . 11 . 13 . 09 . 22 . 16 Cue [ Low Dislike ] × PO . 38 * * * . 09 . 41 * * * . 06 . 17 . 18 Cue [ Flag ] × PO − . 27 * . 11 . 06 . 13 − . 56 . 19 Severity [ linear ] × PO − . 47 * * * . 10 − . 31 * * * . 04 − . 62 * * . 22 Cue [ High Dislikes ] × Severity [ linear ] × PO . 37 * . 16 . 69 * * * . 13 . 65 * * . 23 Cue [ Low Dislikes ] × Severity [ linear ] × PO . 61 * * * . 12 . 69 * * * . 09 1 . 19 * * * . 26 Cue [ Flag ] × Severity [ linear ] × PO 1 . 04 * * . 16 . 73 * * * . 18 1 . 88 * * . 26 Observations 242 242 242 𝑅 2 / 𝑅 2 adjusted . 898 / . 892 . 877 / . 869 . 980 / . 978 * * * 𝑝 < . 001 * * 𝑝 < . 01 * 𝑝 < . 05 Table A2 . The three - way interaction of interface cues , harassment severity , and punishment orientation on perceived appropriateness , deservedness , and justifiability of retributive harassment . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 20 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe REFERENCES [ 1 ] Rohini Ahluwalia . 2002 . How prevalent is the negativity effect in consumer environments ? Journal of Consumer Research 29 , 2 ( Sept . 2002 ) , 270 – 279 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 341576 [ 2 ] Solomon E . Asch . 1956 . Studies of independence and conformity : I . A minority of one against a unanimous majority . Psychological Monographs : General and Applied 70 , 9 ( 1956 ) , 1 – 70 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0093718 [ 3 ] Elisabeth M . Baker . 2013 . OUI manslaughter : Getting away with murder . New England Journal on Criminal and Civil Confinement 39 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 385 – 406 . [ 4 ] Aparajita Bhandari , Marie Ozanne , Natalya N . Bazarova , and Dominic DiFranzo . 2021 . Do you care who flagged this post ? Effects of moderator visibility on bystander behavior . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 26 , 5 ( Sept . 2021 ) , 284 – 300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jcmc / zmab007 [ 5 ] Matt Billings and Leon A . Watts . 2010 . Understanding dispute resolution online : Using text to reflect personal and substantive issues in conflict . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1447 – 1456 . [ 6 ] Lindsay Blackwell , Tianying Chen , Sarita Schoenebeck , and Cliff Lampe . 2018 . When online harassment is perceived as justified . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , Vol . 12 . Issue : 1 . [ 7 ] Lindsay Blackwell , Jill Dimond , Sarita Schoenebeck , and Cliff Lampe . 2017 . Classification and its consequences for online harassment : Design insights from heartmob . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( 2017 ) , 24 . [ 8 ] Gwen Bouvier . 2020 . Racist call - outs and cancel culture on Twitter : The limitations of the platform’s ability to define issues of social justice . Discourse , Context & Media 38 ( 2020 ) , 100431 . [ 9 ] Amanda Burgess - Proctor , Justin W . Patchin , and Sameer Hinduja . 2009 . Cyberbullying and online harassment : Reconceptualizing the victimization of adolescent girls . In Female Crime Victims : Reality Reconsidered , V . Garcia and J . Clifford ( Eds . ) . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ , 162 – 176 . [ 10 ] Kevin M . Carlsmith and John M . Darley . 2008 . Psychological aspects of retributive justice . In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology . Vol . 40 . Elsevier , 193 – 236 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0065 - 2601 ( 07 ) 00004 - 4 [ 11 ] Kevin M . Carlsmith , John M . Darley , and Paul H . Robinson . 2002 . Why do we punish ? Deterrence and just deserts as motives for punishment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 284 – 299 . [ 12 ] Luis Carretié , Francisco Mercado , Manuel Tapia , and José A . Hinojosa . 2001 . Emotion , attention , and the ‘negativity bias’ , studied through event - related potentials . International Journal of Psychophysiology 41 , 1 ( May 2001 ) , 75 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 8760 ( 00 ) 00195 - 1 [ 13 ] Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Umashanthi Pavalanathan , Anirudh Srinivasan , Adam Glynn , Jacob Eisenstein , and Eric Gilbert . 2017 . You can’t stay here : The efficacy of Reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( 2017 ) , 1 – 22 . [ 14 ] Justin Cheng , Michael Bernstein , Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , and Jure Leskovec . 2017 . Anyone can become a troll : Causes of trolling behavior in online discussions . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , Portland Oregon USA , 1217 – 1230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998213 [ 15 ] Justin Cheng , Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , and Jure Leskovec . 2014 . How community feedback shapes user behavior . In Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media . [ 16 ] Robert B . Cialdini . 2007 . Descriptive social norms as underappreciated sources of social control . Psychometrika 72 , 2 ( June 2007 ) , 263 – 268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11336 - 006 - 1560 - 6 [ 17 ] Sam Colt . 2014 . Facebook is going to add more engagement options . Business Insider ( Dec . 2014 ) . https : / / www . businessinsider . com / facebook - is - thinking - about - adding - a - dislike - button - 2014 - 12 ? r = US [ 18 ] Kate Crawford and Tarleton Gillespie . 2016 . What is a flag for ? Social media reporting tools and the vocabulary of complaint . New Media & Society 18 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 410 – 428 . [ 19 ] Jenny L . Davis and Timothy Graham . 2021 . Emotional consequences and attention rewards : The social effects of ratings on Reddit . Information , Communication & Society 24 , 5 ( April 2021 ) , 649 – 666 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2021 . 1874476 [ 20 ] Peter DeScioli . 2016 . The side - taking hypothesis for moral judgment . Current Opinion in Psychology 7 ( Feb . 2016 ) , 23 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . copsyc . 2015 . 07 . 002 [ 21 ] Peter DeScioli and Robert Kurzban . 2013 . A solution to the mysteries of morality . Psychological Bulletin 139 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 477 – 496 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0029065 [ 22 ] Dominic DiFranzo , Samuel Hardman Taylor , Franccesca Kazerooni , Olivia D . Wherry , and Natalya N . Bazarova . 2018 . Upstanding by design : Bystander intervention in cyberbullying . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 12 . [ 23 ] Judith Donath . 2007 . Signals in social supernets . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 13 , 1 ( Oct . 2007 ) , 231 – 251 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1083 - 6101 . 2007 . 00394 . x Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 21 [ 24 ] Danit Ein - Gar , Baba Shiv , and Zakary L . Tormala . 2012 . When blemishing leads to blossoming : The positive effect of negative information . Journal of Consumer Research 38 , 5 ( Feb . 2012 ) , 846 – 859 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 660807 [ 25 ] Bianca Fileborn . 2017 . Justice 2 . 0 : Street harassment victims’ use of social media and online activism as sites of informal justice . British Journal of Criminology 57 , 6 ( 2017 ) , 1482 – 1501 . [ 26 ] Peter Fischer , Joachim I . Krueger , Tobias Greitemeyer , Claudia Vogrincic , Andreas Kastenmüller , Dieter Frey , Moritz Heene , Magdalena Wicher , and Martina Kainbacher . 2011 . The bystander - effect : A meta - analytic review on bystander intervention in dangerous and non - dangerous emergencies . Psychological Bulletin 137 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 517 – 537 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0023304 [ 27 ] Norm Friesen and Shannon Lowe . 2012 . The questionable promise of social media for education : Connective learning and the commercial imperative : The questionable promise of social media . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 28 , 3 ( June 2012 ) , 183 – 194 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2729 . 2011 . 00426 . x [ 28 ] Tarleton Gillespie . 2020 . Content moderation , AI , and the question of scale . Big Data & Society 7 , 2 ( July 2020 ) , 205395172094323 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2053951720943234 [ 29 ] Emma Goodman . 2013 . Online comment moderation : Emerging best practices . Technical Report . World Association of Newspapers . netino . fr / wp - content / uploads / 2013 / 10 / WAN - IFRA _ Online _ Commenting . pdf [ 30 ] Dustin Harp , Josh Grimm , and Jaime Loke . 2018 . Rape , storytelling and social media : How Twitter interrupted the news media’s ability to construct collective memory . Feminist Media Studies 18 , 6 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 979 – 995 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14680777 . 2017 . 1373688 [ 31 ] Molly - Gloria Harper . 2017 . The online culture of cyberbullying : Examining the cycle of subcultures through media constructions of cyberbullying as a deviant youth internet phenomenon . Master’s thesis . University of Windsor , Windsor , Canada . https : / / scholar . uwindsor . ca / etd / 5983 [ 32 ] RebeccaA . Hayes , CalebT . Carr , andDongheeYvetteWohn . 2016 . Oneclick , manymeanings : Interpretingparalinguistic digital affordances in social media . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 60 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 171 – 187 . [ 33 ] Jules Holroyd . 2010 . The retributive emotions : Passions and pains of punishment . Philosophical Papers 39 , 3 ( Nov . 2010 ) , 343 – 371 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 05568641 . 2010 . 538914 [ 34 ] Yubo Hou , Tonglin Jiang , and Qi Wang . 2017 . Socioeconomic status and online shaming : The mediating role of belief in a just world . Computers in Human Behavior 76 ( Nov . 2017 ) , 19 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2017 . 07 . 003 [ 35 ] Shagun Jhaver , Amy Bruckman , and Eric Gilbert . 2019 . Does transparency in moderation really matter ? : User behavior after content removal explanations on Reddit . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359252 [ 36 ] Shagun Jhaver , Sucheta Ghoshal , Amy Bruckman , and Eric Gilbert . 2018 . Online harassment and content moderation : The case of blocklists . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 25 , 2 ( March 2018 ) , 1 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3185593 [ 37 ] Dan M . Kahan and Martha C . Nussbaum . 1996 . Two conceptions of emotion in criminal law . Columbia Law Review 96 , 2 ( March 1996 ) , 269 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1123166 [ 38 ] Anja Kalch and Teresa K . Naab . 2017 . Replying , disliking , flagging : How users engage with uncivil and impolite comments on news sites . Studies in Communication | Media 6 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 395 – 419 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5771 / 2192 - 4007 - 2017 - 4 - 395 [ 39 ] Franccesca Kazerooni , Samuel Hardman Taylor , Natalya N . Bazarova , and Janis Whitlock . 2018 . Cyberbullying bystander intervention : The number of offenders and retweeting predict likelihood of helping a cyberbullying victim . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 23 , 3 ( May 2018 ) , 146 – 162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jcmc / zmy005 [ 40 ] Kathy Kellermann . 1989 . The negativity effect in interaction : It’s all in your point of view . Human Communication Research 16 , 2 ( Dec . 1989 ) , 147 – 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2958 . 1989 . tb00208 . x [ 41 ] M . Laeeq Khan . 2017 . Social media engagement : What motivates user participation and consumption on YouTube ? Computers in Human Behavior 66 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 236 – 247 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2016 . 09 . 024 [ 42 ] Kate Klonick . 2016 . Re - shaming the debate : Social norms , shame , and regulation in an internet age . Maryland Law Review 75 , 4 ( 2016 ) , 1029 – 1065 . [ 43 ] Christina Koehler and Mathias Weber . 2018 . ”Do I really need to help ? ! ” Perceived severity of cyberbullying , victim blaming , andbystanders’willingnesstohelpthevictim . Cyberpsychology : JournalofPsychosocialResearchonCyberspace 12 , 4 ( Dec . 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5817 / CP2018 - 4 - 4 [ 44 ] Korea Bizwire . 2017 . “Bloodied middle school student” : Bullying case raises concerns about police ineptitude and juvenile criminal law . http : / / koreabizwire . com / bloodied - middle - school - student - bullying - case - raises - concerns - about - police - ineptitude - and - juvenile - criminal - law / 94346 [ 45 ] Hengky Latan , Charbel Jose Chiappetta Jabbour , and Ana Beatriz Lopes de Sousa Jabbour . 2020 . Social media as a form of virtual whistleblowing : Empirical evidence for elements of the diamond model . Journal of Business Ethics ( Aug . 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 020 - 04598 - y Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . 334 : 22 Song Mi Lee , Andrea K . Thomer , and Cliff Lampe [ 46 ] Larissa Leonhard , Christina Rueß , Magdalena Obermaier , and Carsten Reinemann . 2018 . Perceiving threat and feeling responsible . How severity of hate speech , number of bystanders , and prior reactions of others affect bystanders’ intention to counterargue against hate speech on Facebook . Studies in Communication | Media 7 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 555 – 579 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5771 / 2192 - 4007 - 2018 - 4 - 555 [ 47 ] Sarah Lutz and Frank M . Schneider . 2020 . Is receiving Dislikes in social media still better than being ignored ? The effects of ostracism and rejection on need threat and coping responses online . Media Psychology ( Aug . 2020 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15213269 . 2020 . 1799409 [ 48 ] Alice E . Marwick . 2021 . Morally motivated networked harassment as normative reinforcement . Social Media + Society 7 , 2 ( April 2021 ) , 205630512110213 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 20563051211021378 [ 49 ] Adrienne Massanari . 2017 . # Gamergate and The Fappening : How Reddit’s algorithm , governance , and culture support toxic technocultures . New Media & Society 19 , 3 ( March 2017 ) , 329 – 346 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444815608807 [ 50 ] Thomas Mejtoft , Sarah Hale , and Ulrik Söderström . 2019 . Design friction . In Proceedings of the 31st European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics . 41 – 44 . [ 51 ] Jack Morse . 2020 . Twitter ‘exploring’ adding a dislike button or downvote system . Mashable ( Nov . 2020 ) . https : / / mashable . com / article / twitter - explores - dislike - button - downvote - system / [ 52 ] Shannon R . Muir , Lynne D . Roberts , and Lorraine P . Sheridan . 2021 . The portrayal of online shaming in contemporary online news media : A media framing analysis . Computers in Human Behavior Reports 3 ( 2021 ) , 100051 . [ 53 ] Jeffrie G . Murphy . 1990 . Getting even : The role of the victim . Social Philosophy and Policy 7 , 2 ( 1990 ) , 209 – 225 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0265052500000832 [ 54 ] German Neubaum , Leonie Rösner , Tina Ganster , Kristina Hambach , and Nicole C . Krämer . 2018 . United in the name of justice : How conformity processes in social media may influence online vigilantism . Psychology of Popular Media Culture 7 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 185 . [ 55 ] Jon Ronson . 2015 . How one stupid tweet blew up Justine Sacco’s life . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2015 / 02 / 15 / magazine / how - one - stupid - tweet - ruined - justine - saccos - life . html [ 56 ] JenniferD . Rubin , LindsayBlackwell , andTerriD . Conley . 2020 . Fragilemasculinity : Men , gender , andonlineharassment . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Honolulu HI USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376645 [ 57 ] Michael Salter . 2013 . Justice and revenge in online counter - publics : Emerging responses to sexual violence in the age of social media . Crime , Media , Culture 9 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 225 – 242 . [ 58 ] Sarita Schoenebeck , Oliver L . Haimson , and Lisa Nakamura . 2020 . Drawing from justice theories to support targets of online harassment . New Media & Society ( March 2020 ) , 1461444820913122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444820913122 [ 59 ] Valentin Schöndienst , Florian Kulzer , and Oliver Günther . 2012 . Like versus dislike : How Facebook’s like - button influences people’s perception of product and service quality . Thirty Third International Conference on Information Systems , Orlando 2012 . ( 2012 ) , 16 . [ 60 ] Joseph Seering . 2019 . Building more positive online communities through improving moderation and strengthening social identity . In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , Austin TX USA , 89 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311957 . 3361855 [ 61 ] Re’Em Segev . 2005 . Moral justification , administrative power and emergencies . Cleveland State Law Review 53 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 629 – 656 . [ 62 ] F . F . Severin . 1925 . Origin of state punishment . Canadian Bar Review 3 , 3 ( 1925 ) , 121 – 134 . [ 63 ] Joshua Smallridge and Philip Wagner . 2020 . The rise of online vigilantism . The Palgrave Handbook of International Cybercrime and Cyberdeviance ( 2020 ) , 1307 – 1331 . [ 64 ] Jiyeon Song and Insoo Oh . 2018 . Factors influencing bystanders’ behavioral reactions in cyberbullying situations . Computers in Human Behavior 78 ( 2018 ) , 273 – 282 . [ 65 ] Samuel Hardman Taylor , Dominic DiFranzo , Yoon Hyung Choi , Shruti Sannon , and Natalya N . Bazarova . 2019 . Ac - countability and empathy by design : Encouraging bystander intervention to cyberbullying on social media . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359220 [ 66 ] Kurt Thomas , Devdatta Akhawe , Michael Bailey , Dan Boneh , Elie Bursztein , Sunny Consolvo , Nicola Dell , Zakir Durumeric , Patrick Gage Kelley , Deepak Kumar , Damon McCoy , Sarah Meiklejohn , Thomas Ristenpart , and Gianluca Stringhini . 2021 . SoK : Hate , harassment , and the changing landscape of online abuse . Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy ( 2021 ) , 21 . [ 67 ] Jeffrey W . Treem and Paul M . Leonardi . 2013 . Social media use in organizations : Exploring the affordances of visibility , editability , persistence , and association . Annals of the International Communication Association 36 , 1 ( Jan . 2013 ) , 143 – 189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 23808985 . 2013 . 11679130 [ 68 ] Daniel Trottier . 2020 . Confronting the digital mob : Press coverage of online justice seeking . European Journal of Communication 35 , 6 ( Dec . 2020 ) , 597 – 612 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0267323120928234 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 . The Use of Negative Interface Cues to Change Perceptions of Online Retributive Harassment 334 : 23 [ 69 ] Amrisha Vaish , Tobias Grossmann , and Amanda Woodward . 2008 . Not all emotions are created equal : The negativity bias in social - emotional development . Psychological Bulletin 134 , 3 ( 2008 ) , 383 . [ 70 ] Laura Vitis and Fairleigh Gilmour . 2017 . Dick pics on blast : A woman’s resistance to online sexual harassment using humour , art and Instagram . Crime , Media , Culture 13 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 335 – 355 . [ 71 ] Joseph B . Walther and Malcolm R . Parks . 2002 . Cues filtered out , cues filtered in : Computer - mediated communication and relationships . In Handbook of Interpersonal Communication ( 3rd ed . ) , M . L . Knapp and J . A . Daly ( Eds . ) . Sage , 529 – 563 . [ 72 ] Joseph B . Walther , Stephanie Tom Tong , David C . DeAndrea , Caleb T . Carr , and Brandon Van Der Heide . 2011 . A juxtaposition of social influences : Web 2 . 0 and the interaction of mass , interpersonal , and peer sources online . ( 2011 ) . [ 73 ] Joseph B . Walther , Brandon Van Der Heide , Lauren M . Hamel , and Hillary C . Shulman . 2009 . Self - generated versus other - generated statements and impressions in computer - mediated communication : A test of warranting theory using Facebook . Communication Research 36 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 229 – 253 . [ 74 ] James Q . Whitman . 2004 . Between self - defense and vengence / between social contract and monopoly of violence . Tulsa Law Review 39 , 4 ( 2004 ) , 901 – 924 . [ 75 ] Pamela Wisniewski , Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Zahra Ashtorab , and Jessica Vitak . 2020 . Happiness and fear : Using emotions as a lens to disentangle how users felt about the launch of Facebook Reactions . ACM Transactions on Social Computing 3 , 4 ( Oct . 2020 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3414825 [ 76 ] SusanYamamoto . 2014 . Thereasonswepunish : Creatingandvalidatingameasureofutilitarianandretributivepunishment orientation . Master’s thesis . Carleton University , Ottawa , Canada . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22215 / etd / 2014 - 10298 Received April 2021 ; revised November 2021 ; accepted March 2022 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 6 , No . CSCW2 , Article 334 . Publication date : November 2022 .