3 ARTICLES The role of hybrid communities and socio - technical arrangements in the participatory design Michel Callon Centre de Sociologie de l ' Innovation Ecole des mines de Paris 60 Bvd Saint - Michel 75006 Paris , France callon @ csi . ensmp . fr Abstract This paper highlights the importance of " hybrid collectives " in the design process . In the first part , the active role of technologies and broadly speaking of non humans , in the construction and the functioning of those collectives , is emphasized : they allow heterogeneous actors to coordinate their projects ; they contribute to the emergence and the transformation of social identities ; they help to frame the spatial and temporal settings in which these collectives exist and act ; they are directly engaged in action and cognition . For all these reasons non humans are to be considered as strategic players in the dynamics and the organization of these collectives , and in particular of design communities . Symmetrically , the very existence of hybrid collectives induces a new vision of human agency , that must be considered as diversified and variable : needs , demands , expectations , feelings , capacities of action and cognition depend on the socio - technical configurations of their environment , i . e . of the collectives they are part from . Finally some general lessons for participatory design and information ecology are drawn from the recognition of the centrality of hybrid collectives in our advanced societies . Keywords actor - network theory , human agency , socio - technical devices , distributed cognition and action , hybrid collectives , epistemic community , information ecology Recent studies on innovation have shown that conception is a critical phase for the success or failure of an innovation . They point out that the linear model in which innovation passes through a series of successive stages from design to diffusion is very exceptional . Theoreticians of innovation have suggested replacing this over - simplified model by a whirlwind model in which the different phases can no longer be separated ( Figure 1 ) . Basically , this means that the user , as well as all the intermediaries in development and production , participate in the design work ( Akrich et al . , 2002 ) . Another feature of the whirlwind model is that design is a never - ending process . Goods and services have a social life ; they go from hand to hand and change along the way . Each actor involved reconfigures and reshapes them depending on her needs and conceptions . Adopting an innovation means adapting it . This is why it is important for the design work to include all those who are going to be concerned by the innovation , and why it must be as open as possible . The case of open sources clearly illustrates this point . The papers delivered at this symposium provide many examples to show that information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) help to endow the different actors with an enhanced capacity to participate in the innovation process and its governance . How is organized this hybridization between design and use ? The challenge is to achieve co - operation between groups whose competencies and interests are different and often antagonistic . To describe these new forms of organization , economists and management scientists have proposed a notion that is at the JOURNAL OF THE CENTER FOR INFORMATION STUDIES ( 5 ) 2004 . 3 4 center of my paper : the notion of community ( Amin and Cohendet . , 2004 ) ( Knorr - Cetina , 1999 ) ( Lave and Wenger , 1991 ) ( Callon and Law , 1995 ) . Talking of community means giving up the myth of the brilliant individual innovator and inventor . It means recognizing that users or consumers who express their preferences are not isolated but caught up in social networks . It is collectives that invent , design , develop and use innovations . In fact , more and more often , the same collectives simultaneously take care of all these activities . In order to do so they combine the competencies of different actors . These collectives also contain technical devices and in particular systems of communication without which they would be ineffective . In short , these strange melting pots are a mix of humans and non - humans . I will use the words " communities " or " hybrid collectives " to denote these new actors of innovation . These hybrid communities are everywhere ( Callon , 2003a ) . I mentioned open source communities in which users and designers are one and the same , but many other examples exist . With Vololona Rabeharisoa , we have studied organizations formed by patients suffering from very serious genetic diseases . They form collectives in which researchers , clinicians , patients and industry collaborate , and which are at the origin of important therapeutic breakthroughs ( Callon and Rabeharisoa , 2003 ) . The profile of these increasingly numerous collectives is as follows : ・Their boundaries never coincide with organizational limits : they generally transcend several organizations ( firms , universities , etc . ) and , within those organizations , their different departments or units . ・These collectives are cosmopolitan . They include specialists and lay people , professionals , users , and experts from different disciplines . ・Some collectives are highly structured or hierarchized ; others are loosely organized ; some aim primarily to produce formal knowledge ( economists call them epistemic communities ) ; others focus on solving technical problems and developing know - how ( these are called communities of practice ) . Very often , they combine both objectives or shift from one to the other . ・These collectives are alive : their boundaries , composition and forms of organization constantly change as new collectives appear , others disappear , and some merge or split up . ・In these collectives non - humans play a key part . The proliferation of these communities and their increasing role in the dynamics of innovation raise many questions . How can a place be made for them in our societies that tend rather to favor individuals and formal structures ? How can their dynamics be accounted for ? How can their existence be supported ? How can concerned groups or actors be identified and included in these collectives ? Which procedures should be implemented to organize the interactions within these hybrid communities ? All these questions are important but in this article I will follow another track . I will focus on a more basic and tricky issue . I would like to suggest here that , to understand the functioning of the communities involved both in designing goods and in defining the needs to be satisfied , we need to give up the traditional opposition between ( wo ) men and machines , between ends and means , or in other words between human beings and non human beings . I will examine two points . First , I will show that the technologies cannot be considered simply as servants or as subordinates . They participate fully in action and cognition , as partners of humans and not as instruments in their hands . This means - and this is my second point - that we have to revise our conceptions of human beings themselves , of their competencies and of the forms of expression of their needs . What they want , think or feel depends on the configuration of their socio - technical environment . In short , there is a multiplicity of possible kinds of human being . This confirms the value of the ecology of information approach and leads to some practical conclusions for the organization of hybrid communities of design and use . 1 . Participation of non - humans in action and cognition Let ' s start by examining the status of non - humans . The thesis that I ' m going to defend is familiar to some of you , but I think that it ' s worth presenting it , at least briefly . It can be summed up as follows : Like humans , non - humans and especially technologies participate in their own right in the definition and course of action , and in the production of knowledge on which design is based . This participation can be analyzed from several points of view . 1 . 1 Non humans contribute to link and co - ordinate social groups The first way of describing the social role of technical artefacts is by recognizing that they allow very different groups , sometimes unknown to one another , to establish relations of communication and to coordinate their actions ( Bijker et al . , 1987 ) . My first research project was on the history of an innovation in the making that can now be considered as largely unsuccessful : the electric vehicle ( Callon , 1980 ) ( Callon , 1987 ) . This project , which mobilized substantial resources and many actors in the 1970s , resulted in cooperation between groups whose expectations and needs have until then been incompatible . For example , organizations demanding better and more efficient public transport never imagined they could form partnerships with the car manufacturers against whom they were fighting . Yet once they realized that these firms could support the development of the electric vehicle , they decided to talk to them and work with Callon : The role of hybrid communities and socio - technical arrangements in the participatory design 5 them . Progressively the organizations ' and car manufacturers ' conceptions and worldviews changed . Before the project there was a large number of fragmented antagonistic groups who knew nothing about one another . As the project advanced relations were formed and a collective was constituted − a community of design comprising users , researchers , firms and government officials . What allowed this collective to exist and to develop was obviously the electric vehicle , without which its emergence and development cannot be understood . 1 . 2 Technologies shape new social groups and identities But the social role of non - humans is more than that . Not only do transform the relations within society . They also transform its composition , for they contribute to the emergence of new identities and new groups ( Akrich , 1992 ) ( Akrich , 1993 ) . Take the case of the cell phone and SMS ( short messages of a maximum 160 characters in text mode which are written and received on mobile terminals ) . One can hardly say that this innovation simply met a communication need that already existed , satisfying it most effectively and productively ! In reality it contributed to the creation of new social groups or , as sociologists say , new social identities . Teenagers - with - mobile - phones are for instance profoundly different , infinitely more diverse in their behaviors and desires , than teenagers who never even imagined the existence of this technology . But the most spectacular effect related to mobile phones , to stick to this example , is the one triggered by relay - antennae in European countries . For complex reasons , people living near these antennae are grouping together to form organizations that oppose the installation of these antennae . They consist of parents concerned about their children ' s health . Before the antennae and before mobile phones , these groups never existed . They were shaped entirely by this technology . No one knows whether these groups are going to be active for very long , but telecom operators , municipalities and governments have to deal with them . Remove the antennae , the electromagnetic waves they produce , and the defaced landscape they cause , and these groups disappear ! The same applies to all the high - risk groups pointed out by epidemiological studies : it is the viruses , microbes and toxic molecules made visible by researchers that cause their emergence and enable them to exist . The circulation of information contributes powerfully to this emergence . This examples show that new technologies contribute to the emergence of new , non pre - existing groups , which create and forge new individual identities . This is what Marylin Strathern calls proliferation of the social ( Strathern , 1999 ) . As shown by many authors , ICTs powerfully contribute to this proliferation ( Callon and Law , 2003a ) 1 . 3 Dislocation of spaces and times Let ' s go a little further in the description of non - humans and their social role . Non - humans don ' t only construct and reconstruct collectives ; they also transform the spatial and temporal settings in which those collectives exist and act ( Callon , 2001 ) . ・It is obviously not difficult to understand why techniques profoundly alter the structure of space . Anyone interested in so - called globalization is aware that the concept of distance has been totally disrupted by the upsurge of information and communication network technologies . We all know that a researcher working in Tokyo can be closer to a researcher in Boston than to her neighbor in the laboratory . ・These technologies also alter the meaning of co - presence . A young teenager in a train who puts his cell phone on the seat next to him , like a kind of impassable barrier , is showing that he ' s not available for the people around him . He is present in other distant places and absent from the one in which he is physically situated . Information and communication technologies redistribute presence and absence ( Callon and Law , 2003b ) ) ・But , more fundamentally , and perhaps less visibly , technologies dislocate time frames . First , in a pretty obvious way : electronic mail , for example , separates the transmission and reception of messages in time . But , more profoundly , ICTs powerfully establish relations between disjoint time frames and create completely new collectives that stretch out in time . This is best illustrated by a very simple example showing that all technologies , even the most primitive , operate such reconfigurations ( that ICTs produce on a large scale ) . When I was a schoolboy our teacher gave us a proverb to think about every day . One of these was : " Invisible but present beside the ploughman is the blacksmith who made his ploughshare " . Obviously the field and the farm were the context for the ploughman ' s life , but the adage tells us that he shared his life with many other people and things . He was part of a community , we would say now : a virtual community , extending into other places and other times . Question : what is the cornerstone of this set of relations , of this virtual community ? Response : The ploughshare transported and circulated through time from one place to another . This maxim is wonderful . The ploughshare binds the ploughman to all those who designed , produced , distributed and maintained it . The ploughman thought he was working alone , using an ordinary tool intended to multiply his strength and increase his productivity . But no ! Thanks to the ploughshare he is surrounded by a silent but real crowd , absent yet present and active . This presence is produced by the ploughshare . Eliminate this humble non - human and the poor ploughman is isolated , helpless , excluded , marginalized and inactive . It is not the ploughman who works but the ploughman + the ploughshare + all those inscribed in the ploughshare , not only the blacksmith but also his forge and his bellows , not only the distributor but his entire logistics . What the ploughshare does in its own modest way , information and communication technologies do on a vast scale JOURNAL OF THE CENTER FOR INFORMATION STUDIES ( 5 ) 2004 . 3 6 and with unprecedented efficiency . Collectives spread not only in space but above all in time , and non - humans are the active operators of that extension . Software and search engines on the Web bind me to a multitude of other places and time - frames , to a host of unknown actors who lived before me , elsewhere . They actually produce communities . 1 . 4 Promissive technologies : distributed action and cognition So , contrary to general belief , technologies do not produce effects or impacts on preexisting societies . They actively participate in the production of the social . To measure the extent of this reversal , it is useful to introduce the notion of distributed action and cognition that help us to understand the social role of technologies . Since readers are familiar with this approach , I will simply mention a few key points . ・If non - humans , and technologies in particular , participate in action and cognition , it is primarily because action and cognition are collective . As far as action is concerned , the demonstration is obvious . As we have just seen , ploughing a field is not a solitary action . Driving a car is another action that is accomplished with the participation of thousands of human and non - human entities . When I drive from Tokyo to Kyoto , as soon as I turn the ignition key of my Nissan , I mobilize all the engineers who designed my car , the researchers who studied the resistance of materials , the firms that explored the deserts of the Middle - East and drill for oil , the refineries that produce petrol , the civil engineering firms that built the highways and maintain them , the driving school and its teacher who taught me to drive , the governments that drafted and issued traffic laws , the police who enforce them , and the insurance companies that help me to face my responsibilities . The simple act of turning an ignition key and driving from Tokyo to Kyoto mobilizes an extended network of human and non - human entities that participate , as many and yet as one , in this very ordinary action of transporting me from Tokyo to Kyoto . This action is collective . ANT talks of actants , be they human or non human , to qualify all these active entities participating in an elementary action . What is true for the action of going by car from Tokyo to Kyoto , is equally true for all other actions and in particular for cognitive activities such as thinking , conceiving , knowing and learning . Hutchins , for example , in his beautiful study of the steering of a military vessel , shows that a fairly straightforward and traditional operation such as rowing a boat to the harbor depends on a complex system of collective cognition : The cognitive task - determining the location of the ship - is performed by a collective , an organized group , and could not physically be carried out by a single individual . And Hutchins ' conception of cognition includes not only persons but also instruments and other artefacts as parts of the cognitive system ( Hutchins , 1995 ) . Thus , among the components of the cognitive system determining the ship ' s position are the theodolites used to observe the bearings of landmarks , and the navigational charts on which bearings are drawn with ruler - like systems . Ron Giere , an American philosopher of science , gives another striking example ( Giere , 2002 ) . It is not only practical knowledge that is distributed , but also the production of highly theoretical scientific knowledge , as shown by research on observations made by means of the Hubble Space Telescope . The question that Giere asks is : How is knowledge produced that leads to the assertion that 13 billion old galaxies exist ? He observes that there is no one person that can be identified as the cognitive agent acquiring the representation and doing the computation . To answer this question , we have no choice but to talk of a collective or community : It is the collective that observes , thinks , computes and formulates arguments . It is obviously a collective cognition in action . The Hubble collective is nothing without the Hubble Telescope itself , without the computers , without the network of communication . These non - humans play an active part in the production of knowledge ; they are not substituted for a human mind , they act , so to speak , as a telescope , as a computer . When I talk of non - humans I must be taken seriously . I don ' t consider only technical devices . The Abel 1689 galactic cluster , which acts as a lens , is part of the system detecting the distant galaxies . It is not an artefact produced by humans , but a set of celestial bodies out there , that cooperate in the observation . Human brains are connected to a whole series of actants that , with them , produce scientific facts . These actants are distributed in space and in time . Answering the question " How old is the Universe ? " is a collective undertaking of knowledge production that , like the action of ploughing or driving a car , mobilizes a host of situated , distributed entities in different times and places . ・Why introduce the notion of distribution and not settle for shared or collective action or cognition ? Because each entity , each actant is a source of action in its own right . To describe this particular capacity that techniques , or natural entities like galaxies or genes have to renew and to re - launch action , specialists in distributed cognition have invented the term " affordance " . I don ' t know whether this word is easy to translate into Japanese , but in French it ' s quite impossible ! My colleagues have got round the problem by inventing a neologism that I think is much richer and more suggestive than the English word . They talk of promissions , which is a concatenation of the two words , " promise " and " permission " , and a mixture of their meanings . An affordance allows ( permission ) and suggests ( promise ) some course of action . For instance , a SMS allows new forms of distant presence for lovers or even for the marketing people and their clients ! Electronic maps made available on the dashboard of a car suggest certain courses of action the driver and his passengers would otherwise not have thought of . The same map combined with radio information , and coupled with a mobile phone , will Callon : The role of hybrid communities and socio - technical arrangements in the participatory design 7 enable them to imagine new directions , to conceive new activities , to determine the route to follow . The distant galaxy : Abel 1689 , coupled with algorithms , makes it possible to see events that no one imagined , and allows certain calculations . The ploughshare , owing to its shape , is also a promission that suggests and allows . Change the shape of the ploughshare and the ploughman does something else . Remove it and he ' s lost ! Without non - humans and their promissions , without " promissive " technologies , a person is as good as dead , no longer existing as a human being . All these non - humans are not inert . Owing to their very existence , their constitution , they cause events to happen that would otherwise have been neither conceivable nor possible . They are active , not passive . ICTs , as it is easy to check , are even more active , more promissive than any other previous technologies . Let me summarize what has been said by applying it to communities of design . In order to understand the constitution , the structuring and the extension of those communities , technologies do matter because they are active forces . They create coordination , they link existing actors and provoke the emergence of new ones who want to be taken into account . But technologies , or generally speaking : non humans , matter for another reason : they take part in the process of production of knowledge and know - how . Intellectual achievements , ideas , projects , plans , production of information , are through and through material processes . Technologies shape their content . My first very simple message will be : don ' t forget to consider these communities of design and use as socio - technical arrangements . They can not be seen as simple associations of humans mobilizing powerful and sophisticated technologies . Technologies , and particularly ICTs , must be considered and managed as authentic actors who shape collectives and open new ways of thinking and acting . At this point , I ' d like to examine my second question , which is symmetrical to the one I ' ve been focusing on until now . In a sense , I ' ve rehabilitated non - humans . I ' ve recognized that they have real competencies and an active role in cognition and action . But , by making non - humans more competent and more active , aren ' t we making humans more stupid and passive ? I ' m now going to suggest that the opposite is true . This redistribution is not a zero sum game . The more we recognize that non - humans have an active social role , the more we enrich human nature . A consequence of the rehabilitation of non - humans is thus the rehabilitation of humans . 2 . Human agency At the beginning of my paper I mentioned the great divide that the social and natural sciences had created between humans and non - humans . Their concern - which is understandable from an ethical point of view - is to separate human beings from the rest of the world . Thanks to paleao - archeologists we know now that such a neat and clear divide does not exist . For example well - trained primates can enter into sophisticated symbolic communication ; they can conceptualize differences between the beings surrounding them , and conceive of themselves as different . There is no distinct boundary between those beings that we consider as humans and others considered as being deprived of humanity . In reality , there is a continuum or rather a vast diversity of configurations that correspond to different ways of being human or being non human ( Picq , 2001 ) ( Serres , 2001 ) . To describe this diversity the key concept is the English concept of agency . This word denotes the capacity of any being to act , think and experience emotions . The definition of needs , the expression of demands , the preferences for certain goods and uses , are also strongly related to agency . There are obviously several modes or forms of agency , since there are several ways of acting , thinking , feeling and expressing needs ( Moser , 2003 ) . We must refrain ourselves from making assumptions on an eventual specificity of human agency . We should rather consider that there might be several forms of agency within what is known as humankind . The characterization of these different forms is a matter for empirical study and not for metaphysics . Not only are agencies diverse and multiple , they are also subjected to evolution and reconfiguration , depending on their environments . Put me into the collective Hubble and perhaps I ' ll make shattering discoveries ; take me out and I go back to being an ordinary sociologist who ' s having trouble imagining the origins of the universe ! The agency of any human being , his ability to conceive of actions , to plan them and to accomplish them by following the plan ; the ability to have ideas and to associate them ; the ability to be moved or gripped by compassion , the capacity to define his expectations and needs , all that depends on the arrangements , the socio - technical niches in which she or he is situated . This observation is the consequence of what I said earlier on about collectives , and in particular about distributed action and cognition . To make myself clearer , I ' ll take an example from daily life . The motor car is the emblem of the modern world and the car driver is one of its heroes . Motor car drivers are generally individual human beings whose agency depends primarily on the socio - technical environment designed for them , and in which they find themselves . Designers have imagined a host of different configurations . Just to illustrate the diversity of human agencies , I ' m going to distinguish two that are contrasting extremes . The first arrangement is intended to produce an active , autonomous driver , that is , one who is capable , on his own , of determining the decisions he ' s going to make . A list of alternatives is available to him ; he controls all necessary information for preparing his decisions ; he is now capable of seeing beyond his visual field , as such , and of anticipating the JOURNAL OF THE CENTER FOR INFORMATION STUDIES ( 5 ) 2004 . 3 8 long term ; and , last but not least , he is responsible for the consequences of the decisions that he took with full knowledge of the facts ( think of accidents ) . Moreover , this being experiences particular emotions that are related to his autonomy , to his self - control and to the control of his environment . He delights in his power and freedom , and challenges other drivers , for the pleasure of existing is sometimes , for him , synonymous with the risk to die . The speedometer measures the intensity of his emotions . In short , he is the model of the free and autonomous subject , active , enterprising , defining goals and fighting to achieve them . He is self - mastering . This model is becoming dominant in our societies . But admit that this profile is neither natural nor universal ! This self - mastering individual is a highly prosthetic human being . To act , to think , to make decision , to be an autonomous subject , he co - operates with algorithms , technical assistants , road infrastructures , satellites , GPS , complex and advanced system of communication . You can easily imagine the huge quantity of information to be obtained , collected and processed , to feed and to produce this improbable and highly artificial being : the self - mastering , individual and autonomous driver . Remove his GPS , his dashboard , road signs and signals , maps , in short , the arrangement that shapes his agency , and he becomes awkward , incapable of choice and autonomy . That ' s the paradox : the free and responsible individual , versatile , capable of devising projects , is a being equipped with multiple prostheses and human or non human assistants ; a being manufactured from scratch and in no way a being of nature . What the driver , as any other self mastering subject , can , wants , thinks and feels , depends on environments that are created by engineers , town planners , local politicians , briefly , by a host of other agencies , themselves equipped with prostheses and empowered . But this form of agency is not the only possible figure . Engineers and politicians imagine other forms . Some consider , for example , that in the long run the free , autonomous and responsible driver will be a source of problems : pollution , traffic congestion , accidents or global climate change . Basically , they think that it ' s not a viable species . Hence , the idea of switching to another form of agency . The driver is no longer maintained as a self - mastering individual . Sophisticated technological devices , mainly based on ICTs , take care of him , decide on his behalf , and frame his behaviors . What is shaped here is a passive agency , a driver who depends on choices made for him by complex but intelligent technological devices . The driver allows himself to be transported by the arrangements . The speed of his vehicle is set according to the traffic and the speed limits of the area in which he is driving ; the distance from the car in front is controlled by an on - board computer . He is still the driver , but many of his competencies have been delegated , transferred to the actants incorporated into the car or situated in the road infrastructure ( Latour , 1996 ) . He can let go , think of other things , may be send SMS ; he needs no competency , no moral judgement . The arrangement is competent and moral for him . His body , brain , muscles and genes are not necessarily different from those of the self - mastering driver , but he ' s no longer the white Western male framed and enacted by the first option even if he is as artificial as him . On the contrary , he lets himself be transported and enjoys this active passivity ! Hence , the slogan I propose : change the collective , change the socio - technical arrangement , and you change the agency . You obtain another form of human being . As suggested by the example of the car driver , the role of information technologies in the shaping of these agencies is central . Without them , this shaping would be much less efficient . But ICTs contribute also to increase the variety of possible human agencies . I would dare to say that , in the future , coupled with genomics and biotechnologies , ICTs will make realistic to start off from human diversity to customize agencies . I have taken the example of the car driver because it corresponds to our everyday lives and experiences . But the existence of diverse forms of human agencies is the rule . In a book that I ' ve recently published I show that what applies to the car driver applies equally to the economic agent ( Callon , 1998 ) . Myriam Winance has even extended this analysis to handicapped people ( Winance , 2001 ) . We are all handicapped in some or other way , because we are all different . The question is not that of disabilities but of the socio - technical shaping or , if you prefer , the design of abilities ( Moser , 2003 ) ( Callon , 2003b ) . Lucy Suchman has given a very original analysis of wearable technologies that equip the body with a sort of artificial skin allowing faster and more precise reactions and interactions with the environment . She says that intelligent technologies will propose in the future even more personalized and diversified forms of agency ( Suchman , 2002 ) . This vision of human agency has many implications and raises a number of questions . Here are some of them . ・Human agencies can be formatted . Accordingly , we cannot talk of cognitive and emotional capacities or of modes of action that would be peculiar to human beings . ・Human agency is diverse : Its characteristics depend on the socio - technical arrangements to which it is articulated . It exists in different forms of autonomous , quasi - autonomous , passive or passionate individuals . But these are only examples , and there are many others to explore like the shaping of collective agencies . ・Designing an innovation or a technology means participating in the shaping of new agencies or in the reconfiguration of existing ones ; it doesn ' t mean only responding to demands or to satisfy needs . ・Debates on agencies , and consequently on forms of arrangements and on the innovations that we want , are under - developed . For example , we consider that economic agents are homo economicus and we format markets so that only this type of economic agency prospers . But there are thousands of other Callon : The role of hybrid communities and socio - technical arrangements in the participatory design 9 ways of being economically rational . We must be aware that when designing ICTs what is at stake is the type of human agency , of human being we want to develop . 3 . Concluding remarks All this may seem exotic and without any immediate relation to the question of participatory design . To conclude , I would nevertheless like to argue the opposite . Let me revert to my starting point . Everyone agrees that design is a decisive activity not only in the economic battle but also in the determination of our lifestyles and in the construction of our future world . Everyone knows and recognizes that design work is less and less often separate from development and production . Furthermore , use and design merge , or at least constantly interpenetrate each other . The corresponding social roles become hybrid ; any designer is a user and vice - versa . This hybridization creates communities consisting of actors with different competencies and sometimes antagonistic interests and conceptions . These collectives are made and unmade . They appear , spread , diffuse throughout organizations , merge , and sometimes disappear . They are the key actors of our innovation societies . Participatory design highlights one of the key characteristics of these collectives , the fact that they trigger collaboration between all those concerned by innovation . No success , no social acceptability , without participation , without representation of actors concerned by innovation , of producers , intermediaries , political authorities and end users . Once the importance of these different collectives has been recognized , we need to further our understanding of their functioning . That has been the object of my paper . I suggested , that this understanding involves two departures from common sense and from our view of relations between technologies and societies . To study these communities , we first need to recognize that technologies have a capacity for action in their own right . Without them our societies would collapse . There would no longer be either action , or thought , or cognition . And this is all the more true since ICTs are concerned . The consequence , and this is the second departure I ' m suggesting , concerns the definition of the human actor . Instead of considering him as a being with specific qualities and characteristics , with a clearly - defined identity , I have shown that we need to represent her or him as an agency with a variable and diversified profile , shaped by the arrangement , the collective in which she or he lives . In terms of participatory design two general lessons can be drawn . First , when one thinks of participatory process , we spontaneously consider participation of human actors . Then the emphasis is put on the information which is available to them . What I ' ve said underlines the limits of such an approach . We must place at the center the hybrid , socio - technical collectives without disentangling human and non humans . These communities constitute a new category of actor , which must be organized and studied as such . These communities can not been reduced to the individuals who constitute them ; and they can not be considered as pure associations of human beings who communicate one to each other . Second , to conceive new technologies , new goods and new services , is not just a question of satisfying needs or demands expressed by well - identified human beings . It is also and mainly shaping new forms of human agencies and consequently constructing new types of collective life . The main challenge for the next years will be to discuss which type of human agencies people want to develop . Or , in other terms , which types of socio - technical arrangements people will design and experiment . This is a key issue for participatory design of information . The tricky thing is that human agencies who will imagine and design those arrangements that at their turn will transform human agencies , are themselves equipped , dependent on their socio - technical environment . Put it briefly , humans depend more and more on the socio - technical arrangements that depend on them . It ' s this cross - over that defines the human nature of human societies ( Serres , 2001 ) . But that is also what has to be recognized , analyzed and organized . My conviction is that , given the importance of ICTs in this cross - over ( they transform our nature by transforming our environment and vice - et - versa ) , the approach in terms of ecology of information will contribute towards a better understanding of those collectives , the agencies they format , and hence the creative capacities they spawn , as well as the demand they generate . The more civilized society that everyone hopes for requires the recognition of the increasing role of these hybrid communities . References Akrich , M . ( 1992 ) " The De - Scription of Technical Objects " , in W . Bijker and J . Law , ( ed . ) , Shaping Technology / Building Society : Studies in Sociotechnical Change , Cambridge , The MIT Press . Akrich , M . ( 1993 ) " Essay of Technosociology : a Gasogene in Costa Rica " , in P . Lemonnier , ( ed . ) , Technological choices : Transformation in material cultures since the Neolithic , Londres , Routledge . Akrich , M . , M . Callon , B . Latour ( 2002 ) " The key to success in innovation " , International Journal of Innovation Management , 6 , 2 ( June ) , pp . 187 - 225 . Amin , A . , P . Cohendet , ( 2004 ) Architectures of Knowledge : Firms , Capabilities , and Communities , Oxford : Oxford University Press . Bijker , W . E . , T . P . Hughes , T . Pinch ( eds . ) ( 1987 ) The Social Construction of Technological Systems : New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology , Cambridge : Mass , MIT JOURNAL OF THE CENTER FOR INFORMATION STUDIES ( 5 ) 2004 . 3 10 Press . Callon , M . ( 1980 ) " The State and Technical Innovation : a Case Study of the Electrical Vehicle in France " , Research Policy , 9 , pp . 358 - 376 . Callon , M . ( 1987 ) " Society in the Making : the Study of Technology as a Tool for Sociological Analysis " , in W . Bijker , T . Hughes and T . Pinch , ( ed . ) , New Directions in the Social Studies of Technology , Cambridge , The MIT Press . Callon , M . ( ed . ) ( 1998 ) The Laws of the Markets , London , Blackwell . Callon , M . ( 2001 ) " Actor Network Theory . " , in N . Smelser and P . Baltes , ( ed . ) , International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences . , Oxford , UK , , Elsevier . Callon , M . ( 2003a ) " The increasing involvement of concerned groups in R & D policies : what lessons for public powers ? " , in A . Geuna , A . Salter and W . E . Steinmueller ( ed . ) , Science and Innovation : Rethinking the Rationales for Funding and Governance , Cheltenham , UK . , Edward Elgar . Callon , M . ( 2003b ) " No innovating markets without innovating social policies : from prosthetic policies to habilitation policies " , ( working paper - CSI ) . Callon , M . , J . Law ( 1995 ) " Agency and the Hybrid Collectif " , The South Atlantic Quaterly , 94 , 2 , pp . 481 - 508 . Callon , M . , J . Law , ( 2004 ) " Introduction " , in : Callon , Law and Urry , ( ed . ) , Special Issue : Society and Space ( Environmental and Planning D ) . Callon , M . , J . Law , J . Urry ( ed . ) ( 2004 ) Absence Presence , Special Issue : Society and Space ( Environmental and Planning D ) . Callon , M . , V . Rabeharisoa ( 2003 ) " Research in the Wild and the Shaping of New Social Identities " , Technology in Society , 25 , pp . 193 - 204 . Giere , R . ( 2002 ) " Scientific Cognition as Distributed Cognition " , in Peter Carruthers , ( ed . ) , Cognitive Bases of Science , Cambridge , Cambridge University Press . Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) Cognition in the Wild , Cambridge , The MIT Press . Knorr - Cetina , K . ( 1999 ) Epistemic Cultures : How Scientists Make Sense , Chicago , Indiana University Press . Latour , B . ( 1996 ) Aramis or the Love of Technology , Cambridge , Harvard University Press . Lave , J . , E . Wenger ( 1991 ) Situated Learning ; Legitimate Peripheral Participation , New York , Cambridge University Press . Moser , I . ( 2003 ) Road Traffic Accidents : the Ordering of Subjects , Bodies and Disabilities . Thesis Universitetet i Oslo . Picq , P . ( 2001 ) " A la recherche des premiers hommes " , in Y . Coppens and P . Picq , ( ed . ) , Aux origines de l ' humanite , Paris , Fayard . Serres , M . ( 2001 ) Hominescence , Paris , Le Pommier . Strathern , M . ( 1999 ) " What is intellectual property after ? " , in J . Law and J . Hassard , ( ed . ) , Actor Network Theory and After , Oxford , Blackwell . Suchman , L . ( 2002 ) " Refiguring interactivity at the interface " , Presented at the workshop on " Absence Presence : localities , Globalities and Methods " Helsinki . Winance , M . ( 2001 ) , These et Prothese . Le processus d ' habilitation comme fabrication de la personne . These de Socio - economie de l ' Innovation . Ecole des mines de Paris .