Science and Information Conference 2013 October 7 - 9 , 2013 | London , UK 791 | P a g e www . conference . thesai . org How User Experience is Understood ? Helena Tokkonen Department of Computer Science and Information Systems University of Jyväskylä Jyväskylä , Finland Pertti Saariluoma Department of Computer Science and Information Systems University of Jyväskylä Jyväskylä , Finland Abstract —There have been many attempts to understand the phenomenon of user experience ( UX ) , but a widely accepted theory is still missing . In this paper we present the results of our investigations on the practical and multidimensional side of user experience . We have studied how professional designers and novices with different backgrounds understand user experience . According to our findings there are three important user experience components : user , product and company . User is perceived to be in the center of user experience among professionals . The importance of user’s feelings as part of a holistic user experience is emphasized . For novice designers experiences concerning the use of a product are more important than user’s feelings . Technical solutions provided by a company , cultural matters and customer feedback are factors to be considered when targeting a holistic user experience . Keywords—user experience ; user experience components ; design I . I NTRODUCTION Recently the importance of understanding user experience in design has been emphasized [ 9 ] . In addition there have been various attempts to define the phenomenon of user experience . But a shared understanding of user experience is still missing , even scientists have tried to find a common definition for it [ 13 ] . One obvious reason for diversified understanding is the different background of researchers . Engineering , marketing , sociology and psychology , for example , are conceptually quite different disciplines and for this reason scientists with these backgrounds easily conceive the basic concepts and related methods differently . A less recognized problem is that designers in industry also have different backgrounds . They work in multidisciplinary teams , but thanks to their education they may understand user experience and design problems differently and use different language from each other . To understand the problems of practical UX design better we interviewed professional designers and gathered data among novices through a questionnaire . Intuitively , experience is subjective , dynamic and complex phenomenon . Various product qualities , context , relationships with other people , objects and places affect how a product is perceived [ 3 ] . The quality of user’s experience changes over time , since multiple contextual factors have an influence on the experience ( ibid ) . User experience is regarded as a holistic approach including the context of use [ 7 ] , emotions [ 6 ] , meaningfulness of a product [ 10 , 5 ] , consumer - product attachment [ 16 ] and how a product is understood to work [ 1 ] . Furthermore , prior experience and user values have an impact on user experience . As part of experience product features , aesthetics , social , cultural and organizational factors affect perceived experience [ 9 ] . User experience is related to the quality of experience . Two quality attributes can be distinguished : pragmatic and hedonic quality . Pragmatic quality refers to product ' s ability to support user’s achievements i . e . do - goals . On the contrary hedonic quality is about product’s ability to support be - goals i . e . the basic human needs [ 11 ] . As noted on previous studies , three user experience factors can be distinguished , which are user’s state , system properties and the context around the user [ 15 ] . User ’s mental and physical’ resources , mood , expectations and motivation affect how a system is experienced . System refers to the system properties that have been designed or added or changed by the user . System is also related to the image and brand of a manufacturer . Context is defined as a combination of social , physical , task , technical and information contexts . We are interested in to studying practical aspects of user experience . The focus of our research is in design science . The key issue is how designers think and organize their discourse around the design problems [ 4 ] . User experience is an elusive but practically very important topic . This is why , it makes sense to ask how practitioners in industry see user experience and whether there are differences between various groups . These differences in language , concepts and thinking are important and therefore they must be studied systematically . In this paper , we outline the problem of practical user experience design that was investigated by two empirical studies . Our research goal was to look whether the difference in scientific background really affects the way practical designers see user experience . Additional goal was to analyze what the differences are . In the following sections the studies and the key findings are explained in more detailed . II . S TUDYING U SER E XPERIENCE We conducted two separate studies to understand the discourse of user experience among professionals and novice designers . The first study was executed with semi - structured interviews and the second with a questionnaire . Moreover , the professionals reported their subjective opinions of user experience after the interviews . A . The first study 1 ) Method Our first study was designed to investigate how professionals with different backgrounds comprehend user experience . The overall goal of the interviews was to understand how experiences were designed in practice and how Science and Information Conference 2013 October 7 - 9 , 2013 | London , UK 792 | P a g e www . conference . thesai . org user experience was understood . Furthermore , with an open question the participants were able to express their opinions about user experience . Previous academic design research was used as an input for forming research questions for the interviews [ 4 ] . Semi - structured questions were used as a framework for topics to be discussed [ 8 , 12 ] . A content analysis [ 14 ] was made for the interview data and user experience definitions to understand what kind of terms and concepts are used to define the phenomenon of user experience . 2 ) Participants Qualitative interviews were conducted with 18 experienced designers ( 6 females and 12 males ) mainly in their work premises ; three of them were interviewed via VoIP call , because of practical reasons . All of the participants were Finnish , and therefore the citations were translated into English . The participants worked as user interface designers , researchers , industrial designers , user experience managers or concept designers in the field of human - computer interaction . They had on the average ten years of work experience in various user experience design roles . They had background from engineering ( N = 5 ) , information processing science ( N = 5 ) , psychology ( N = 1 ) , humanities ( N = 1 ) , arts ( N = 2 ) , industrial design ( N = 2 ) and economics ( N = 2 ) . 3 ) Results The study findings were organized into two categories representing technology ( N = 10 ) , business , arts and humanities ( N = 8 ) . The basis for these categories is participants’ background . Technology category was formed of engineering , information processing science and process engineering backgrounds . Industrial design , architecture , media technology , English philology and psychology were included in the business & humanities category , since there were only few participants representing these backgrounds . Based on our studies , three major user experience components were found , which are a user , a product and a company . Aspects concerning the user are emotions , opinions and expectations . Matters concerning the product are usage , interaction , functions and other properties . Company matters concern common company activities such as design , product quality , cultural issues , brand and customer data . User needs , emotions , satisfaction , product experience , quality and holistic user experience are common terms used to describe user experience among participants with technical background ( see table 1 ) . Understanding user needs in the early phases of design is important while designing experiences . The product use can evoke positive emotions and the user can be satisfied with the product . The quality aspects concern how customers perceive products or services provided by a company . Participants perceive user experience as a holistic approach to design user experiences . For example in design the focus is on the overall experience rather than focusing only on the features of a solution . A term total experience is used to describe design that includes both user interface and industrial design aspects . Other user experience factors , which are mentioned only once concern experience design , product characteristics and company level aspects . Experience design consists of various design activities such as user research , user interface design and visual design . All these activities aim at a good experience . User goals and tasks are identified and expected user experience targets are set for the design . Participants think that user experience is related to the development of all type of solutions and not only to the design of technical devices . User interacts with a product and can create friendship with it . How user feels before using a product / service , during the use and after the use is also part of the whole user experience . Attributes attached to a product are utility of a product , product aesthetics and functions , efficiency and effortless use and usability . Furthermore , the whole product lifecycle from the first sight to the end of the life cycle is part of the user experience . For a company user experience is a quality measure . User experience is also related to the company’s brand i . e . the image of the company in customers’ mind . The thoughts of user experience among the subjects with background in business , arts and humanities were scattered . Six common user experience terms were found : user’s expectations , emotions , user needs , use of a product , product experiences and cultural aspects ( see table 1 ) . User’s expectation s concern the image of a product before using it . User’s feelings are attached to the interaction with a product . A product must be designed in a way that user needs are fulfilled . There are several aspects that affect experiences during the use of a product , for example provided services and interaction between the user and the product . Product experience is regarded to be related to user’s opinions of the product . C ultural aspects must be considered in design , for example legal matters and visual look and feel ( see table 1 ) . There are several , isolated aspects that concern user experience . Those aspects are related to the user , the product , requirements and enablers . Aspects concerning the user are related to subjective matters such as user’s actions , attitudes towards the product , what users think , how they perceive the product . User’s goals are also part of the experience design i . e . the product must meet user goals . TABLE I . C OMMON U SER E XPERIENCE C OMPONENTS B ASED O N P ARTICIPANTS ’ B ACKGROUND Component Background Technology , N = 10 Business & Humanities , N = 8 Terms used User Emotions ( 80 % ) User needs ( 30 % ) Satisfaction ( 20 % ) Expectations ( 25 % ) User needs ( 25 % ) Emotions ( 25 % ) Product Experience ( 20 % ) Use ( 25 % ) Experience ( 25 % ) Company Holistic experience ( 30 % ) Quality ( 20 % ) Cultural aspects ( 25 % ) Science and Information Conference 2013 October 7 - 9 , 2013 | London , UK 793 | P a g e www . conference . thesai . org Experiences related to the product concern using and owning it . User experience components from a product viewpoint consist of the functions , services , aesthetics , how useful the product is and the usage environment . In addition it is important to understand the connections to the surroundings of the product and what kind of relations there are with other users of the product . In experience design physical ergonomics , overall design , visual elements , input methods must be taken into account when designing experiences . Moreover , technical limitations and other conditions must be taken into account when developing the best possible solution . B . The Second Study The difference between different professional groups strengthens during studies . This is why it is important to compare how advanced students with different background think about user experience . This question has been examined within medical professionals . It has been named as a mediocre effect [ 2 ] . It means that students who have recently ended their studies are often more expert in the domain than medium level experts , who have ended their studies some time ago . Therefore , student’s conceptions often reflect better than medium level experts where the field is going . The second study was conducted using a paper questionnaire among university students . The questionnaire was filled in during the last session of a design course . An open question of user experience was presented to the participants ; they were asked to define user experience in their own words . The definitions were translated into English , because all participants were Finnish . 1 ) Participants 59 university students participated in the study . Most of the participants were male 67 % and 33 % were female . The participants were 19 – 50 years old ( mean age was 22 ) . They studied information systems science ( N = 47 ) , information technology ( N = 5 ) , cognitive science ( N = 4 ) , history ( N = 1 ) , political economy ( N = 1 ) and biotechnology ( N = 1 ) . Most of the students ( 79 % ) had graduated from high school and their computer skills varied from novice to expert . Over 70 % of the participants reported that they did not have any or had some programming experience . Over half ( 60 % ) of the participants reported that they had design experience and 10 % of them had taken a design course earlier . 2 ) Results Based on the participants’ background the study findings were classified into two groups : cognitive science & humanities , and technology . The group representing cognitive science and humanities was formed of participants , who had background in history , political economy , biotechnology and cognitive science . Information systems science and information technology groups were reorganized and named as technology . Subjects , who had background from technology , think that user experience consists of experiences , a product use , user’s feelings , usability , customer information , user’s mind and technology ( see table 2 ) . The experiences are subjective , personal and related to a product - user interaction . Certain types of attributes are related to the use of a product : simplicity , pleasantness , fluency , successfulness , difficult to use , ease - of - use and attractiveness . These attributes concern especially experiences after the use of a product . Other aspects of a product use concern the product idea and how a product is understood to work . There are various meanings for a product . It is understood to be a device , a vehicle , a service , a technical device , a system , a solution , a program or software . Technology use can evoke different type of subjective feelings that needs to be known . Furthermore , user can have feelings towards the use of a product . User’s emotions are related to the periods of use or especially feelings after using a product . The feelings are related to good or bad experiences , pleasant or ease - of - use or how a product fulfills user’s needs . User experience is regarded to be the result of usability activities or same as usability . Information that is collected from customers , for example information about the use of a program is utilized to understand product experiences . Aspects that concern a technology are the utility and usability of a technology . Furthermore , participants’ separated experiences and feelings that concern the use of technology from a product experience . Other terms related to user experience , are mentioned only once are user needs , user group , appearance and a story . It is mentioned that the product must respond to users’ needs to offer good product experience . The user experience does not concern only one person , but group of users , who have experiences of using the same product . User experience is also related to the versatile appearance of a product and how it is perceived by the users . User experience is perceived as a story that describes a personal use . Moreover , experience is related to user’s opinions about the product after use . The quality of interaction between a user and a product matters . For participants that have background in cognitive science & humanities , user experience consists of users’ feelings , product use , experiences and usability ( see table 2 ) . The emotions are linked to the feeling s and experiences evoked during and after using a product . Good usability does not guarantee positive user experience , for example if the design is old . TABLE II . C OMMON U SER E XPERIENCE C OMPONENTS B ASED O N P ARTICIPANTS ’ B ACKGROUND Component Background Technology , N = 47 Cognitive Science & Humanities , N = 7 Terms used User Feelings ( 23 % ) User needs ( 4 % ) Mind ( 4 % ) Feelings ( 43 % ) Product Use ( 38 % ) Experience ( 38 % ) Usability ( 6 % ) Use ( 43 % ) Usability ( 29 % ) Experience ( 29 % ) Company Technology ( 13 % ) Customer data ( 4 % ) Other , uncommon user experience factors concern a product , a user and company level issues . The form , price and design of a produc t affect experiences . User has certain opinions , attitudes and experiences of a produc t . A company can collect information about user experiences through research . New products are innovated , developed and created Science and Information Conference 2013 October 7 - 9 , 2013 | London , UK 794 | P a g e www . conference . thesai . org based on customer understanding . The company brand can have an impact on the expected user experience . III . D ISCUSSION The results of our study show that there are several approaches , concepts and definitions for user experience . The reasons behind various viewpoints can be derived from previous attempts to understand the phenomenon . There is no shared understanding of user experience . Practitioners and novice designers try to understand user experience based on their past design experiences and knowledge . Our study shows that the main user experience components are a user , a product and a company . Our results differ to some extent from previously classified user experience factors [ 15 ] . These factors can be used to understand the situation in which a person is experiencing [ 15 ] . Based on our studies context is not regarded to be a distinguished user experience component in design . Instead , context is understood to be included into product use , for example task and physical contexts are part of usage experiences . Product and company level aspects are separate user experience components : the decisions of technical solutions or brand are made company wide . According to our findings the major part of user experience is regarded to be connected to user’s emotions i . e . how a user feels during and after interacting with a product . The focus of design has shifted from a product and its features to users . In particular technically - oriented professionals highlight the importance of emotions in design . The emotional side of user experience has been identified earlier [ 1 , 6 ] . The product use and product - user experiences are regarded to be important part of user experiences among novices . However , it is a surprise that the importance of user needs is not obvious . There are only few professionals and novices with background in technology , who think that a product must respond to user’s needs . Furthermore , it is not clear if user tasks and goals are understood and have an impact on experience design . The usability of a product must be regarded to be linked to user goals , since the focus of usability is usually on user tasks . Usability is understood to be one part of user experience , but not prime . Especially novice designers with background in cognitive science and technology think that it is important to understand usability aspects as part of user experience . The ease - of - use or efficiency of a product is part of positive product experience . Ultimately usability is considered to be the same concept as user experience or the end result of usability activities . It is not enough to view user experience from a user and a product perspective , but a holistic approach to user experience is needed . User experience is understood to include cultural aspects , technologies and customer data . In design cultural regulations must be followed , such as legal matters . In addition to how technical solutions are implemented to be accepted among customers affect user experience . Customer information is regarded to be valuable data to be utilized when developing experiences . There are only few findings how user experiences are developed or validated . Methods , how user experiences are designed , are rarely mentioned . Technically - oriented experts and students with background in cognitive science refer to design activities . User research is perceived of being a part of design activities , empirical research principles are mentioned as ways to innovate and develop experiences and usability is understood to be criteria for a positive experience and satisfaction . Few technically - oriented professionals mentioned that user experience targets are set in the early phases of design . It seems that user experience target setting is not a common way to focus design activities or measure user experience . However , usability is considered to be one product quality measure . IV . C ONCLUSION A ND F UTURE W ORK Our study shows how people with different backgrounds use different types of terms and concepts for user experience . However , these differences are neither straightforward nor easy to interpret . The comparisons were made between people with various backgrounds . The main idea was to find out what kinds of concepts people with different backgrounds find important when considering users experience . The differences in terminology illustrate differences in how subjects emphasize the nature of user experience . Surprisingly the emotional side of user experience was more common among technical people . Practitioners with technical background and students seemed to emphasize usability issues . The latter had thus much more traditional view of user experience . Based on our findings professionals aimed at getting a deep understanding of users , to be able to develop successful solutions that satisfy users . Users’ expectations , emotions and needs were regarded to be important factors . Furthermore , the designers tried to predict the role of a product in people’s lives . Due to the nature of design practice , designers need to have an in - depth understanding of users to be able to design positive user experiences . Our study shows the practical situation in certain organizations concerning user experience knowledge , how it is distributed between different professionals and how multidimensional it is . In organizations user experience must be understood as a strategic factor . Activities taken by a company and an individual designer affect expected and perceived user experiences . Product quality , company brand and design activities are attached to the development of user experience . User experience components can be applied in design as guidelines or focus areas to be considered . Furthermore , it is easier for other stakeholders , for example managers or developers to understand how user experience is seen among professionals and novices to better understand their viewpoint . In the future it would be valuable to study if corresponding results can be found among professionals who are in charge of the implementation of a solution and among other stakeholders involved in design practice . Science and Information Conference 2013 October 7 - 9 , 2013 | London , UK 795 | P a g e www . conference . thesai . org In addition studies of practical methods , processes and tools used to capture user experience should be conducted . It would also be essential to explore experience design targeting to non - technical solutions . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This paper was written as part of FIMECC Research Program , User Experience & Usability in Complex Systems ( UXUS 2010 – 2015 ) . The program is funded by the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation ( Tekes ) participating companies and research institutes . We thank all persons for their comments . Special thanks to Timo Tokkonen and Pia Perälä for their support . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] L . Alben , “Quality of Experience” , Interactions 3 ( 3 ) , 1996 , 11 - 15 . [ 2 ] H . Boshuizen , and H . Schmidt , “On the role of Biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning by experts , intermediates and novices , ” Cognitive Science 16 , 1992 , 153 - 184 . [ 3 ] M . Buchenau , and J . Fulton Suri , “Experience Prototyping , ” In Proc . DIS , ACM Press 2000 , 424 - 434 . [ 4 ] N . Cross , “Creative Cognition in Design : Processes of exceptional designers , ” , In : Hewett , T . and Kavanagh , T . ( Eds . ) . Creativity and cognition . ACM Press , 2002 , pp . 14 - 19 . [ 5 ] P . M . Desmet , and P . Hekkert , “Framework of Product Experience” , International Journal of Design , vol 1 , No 1 , 2007 . [ 6 ] P . M . Desmet , R . Porcelijn , and D . M . van Dijk , “Emotional Design ; Application of a research - based design approach” , Knowledg , Technology & Policy 2007 ( 20 ) , 141 - 155 . [ 7 ] P . Dourish , “ What we talk about when we talk about context” , Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , 2004 ( 8 ) , 19 - 30 . [ 8 ] A . Fontana , and J . H . Frey , “Interviewing : the art of science” , In : N . K . Denzin and Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds . ) , Handbook of qualitative research . London : Sage , 1994 . [ 9 ] J . Forlizzi , and S . Ford , “The building blocks of experience . An early framework for interaction designers , ” In Proc . DIS 2000 , ACM Press 2000 , 419 - 423 . [ 10 ] M . Hassenzahl , “Experience before things a primer for the ( Yet ) unconvinced” , In Proc . CHI EA , ACM Press , 2013 , 2059 - 68 . [ 11 ] M . Hassenzal , “User experience ( UX ) . Towards an experiental perspective on product quality , ” In Proc . IHM , ACM Press , 2008 , 11 - 15 . [ 12 ] D . M . Keats , “Interviewing : a practical quide for students and professionals” , Buckingham : Open University Press , 2000 . [ 13 ] E . Law , V . Roto , M . Hassenzahl , A . Vermeeren and J . Kort “Understanding , scoping and defining user eXperience : A survey approach . , ” In Proc . CHI , ACM Press , 2009 , 719 - 728 . [ 14 ] P . Mayring , “Qualitative content analysis” , Forum : Qualitative Social Research , Vol 1 , No 2 ( 2000 ) . [ 15 ] V . Roto , E . Law , A . Vermeeren and J . Hoonhout , “User experience white paper . Bringing clarity to the concept of user experience , ” http : / / www . allaboutux . org / files / UX - WhitePaper . pdf , 2011 . [ 16 ] H . N . J . Schifferstein and E . P . H . Zwartkruis - Pelgrim , “Consumer - product attachment : Measurement and design implications” , International Journal of Design , 2008 , 2 ( 3 ) , 1 - 13 .