An Analysis of a Media - Based Approach to Teach Programming to Middle School Students Luis Gustavo J . Araujo UEFS – State University of Feira de Santana Feira de Santana , Bahia , Brazil luisaraujo . ifba @ gmail . com Roberto A . Bittencourt UEFS – State University of Feira de Santana Feira de Santana , Bahia , Brazil roberto @ uefs . br David M . B . Santos UEFS – State University of Feira de Santana Feira de Santana , Bahia , Brazil davidmbs @ uefs . br ABSTRACT Previous studies have presented approaches to teach programming based on contexts close to students , such as games , robotics , and media . Those contexts may turn learning easier and more motivat - ing . Media manipulation is one of such contexts relevant to teenage students , for their thorough use of image applications and social networks . In this work , we design and evaluate a spiral approach to teach programming to ninth - grade students of a middle school in Brazil’s countryside . The approach is contextualized by media , i . e . , image creation and manipulation , and we use the Python lan - guage with turtle graphics and JES tools to support it . Results point out to the influence of context and tools on learning , significant changes of perception about computing , high motivation to learn how to code , as well as a positive correlation between learning and motivation . ACM Reference format : Luis Gustavo J . Araujo , Roberto A . Bittencourt , and David M . B . Santos . 2018 . An Analysis of a Media - Based Approach to Teach Programming to Middle School Students . In Proceedings of The 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education , Baltimore , MD , USA , Feb . 21 – 24 , 2018 ( SIGCSE ’18 ) , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3159450 . 3159526 1 INTRODUCTION Childrenandteenagersincreasinglyinteractwithcomputers , tablets and smartphones . However , Their use of information technology ( IT ) is mostly passive , instead of learning how to actively express themselves in those technologies by means of computer program - ming and computational thinking . In an environment where IT is pervasive , learning how to code software is becoming a fundamen - tal skill , and various initiatives throughout the world are conceiving curricula , pedagogies and tools to help translate such knowledge and skills to middle school education [ 6 , 16 , 17 ] . In Brazil , middle school education ( grades 6 to 9 , ages 11 to 14 ) aims to ensure that each and every student has the background and develops the skills needed for the exercise of life in society as well as the means to advance at work and in further studies . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . SIGCSE ’18 , Feb . 21 – 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA © 2018 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5103 - 4 / 18 / 02 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3159450 . 3159526 However , very little is mentioned in Brazilian middle school educa - tion curriculum guidelines about either computational thinking or computer programming . To fill that gap , the Brazilian Computer Society ( SBC ) has recently published the References of Formation in Computing : Basic Education , which describes guidelines , competencies and skills of computing for child education , for the nine years of basic education , and for the three years of high school [ 15 ] . Among those competencies and skills , computer programming is present both in basic education and in high school . Although lacking in the educational guidelines of the Brazilian government , computer programming is present in various initia - tives of teaching computational skills in schools of this country [ 2 ] . Some schools include computing as a separate subject in the middle school . In those schools , it is usual to teach computer pro - gramming , mostly by using a context - based approach , with typical contexts like games or robotics . These contexts are usually close to the students’ concerns and likes and are intended to foster their motivation . Very few of those initiatives , however , use the context of media ( e . g . , creation and manipulation of images , sounds or video by means of programming ) [ 1 ] . One of the first approaches to teaching programming using the context of media manipulation occurred at Georgia Tech , and aimed to minimize the problems faced by students of Architecture , Admin - istration and Arts [ 8 ] . In this approach , called media computation , students manipulate pixels to create Photoshop - like image effects , manipulate samples to split or revert sounds , create text to compose HTML sites , and overlay images in frames to create videos . In this case , media manipulation becomes a motivating and facilitating element to learn programming , combining the abstraction of ad - vanced concepts with immediate and visual feedback , as well as for being close to students’ lives . However , this context requires more thorough investigation in other institutions , especially in other levels of education . In Brazil , the literature is scarce on the use of media computation [ 2 ] . Recently , two papers used media to teach programming , both in middle school [ 1 ] and in higher education [ 14 ] . Both papers aimed to arouse interest and motivation for the area of computing . However , further studies are needed to investigate the adequacy and appropriate translation of this context into middle school , especially in the Brazilian reality . The work presented in this paper aims to evaluate the use of media computation as a contextualized activity for teaching pro - gramming to ninth - grade , middle school students . We used two learning blocks : building geometric figures and image manipula - tion . In addition to the chosen context , we used a spiral learning Paper Session : K thru 8 # 2 SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1005 approach , in which content is repeated at increasingly complex levels , and a lab organization based on pair programming . We used a mixed - methods case study strategy to answer the following research questions : RQ1 – What is the impact of using a context of media computation to student motivation ? , RQ2 – What is the impact of a spiral approach to motivation ? and RQ3 – How does the approach affect student perceptions of programming and computing ? . Our case study was performed with 28 students of a municipal school of Amelia Rodrigues , Bahia , Brazil . 2 BACKGROUND Here we describe the background on the contexts we used , and the pedagogical and psychological foundations of our work . 2 . 1 Screen Turtle In the 1970s , Simon Papert envisioned the potential of computer use and the possibility for its users not only to consume technology , but also to produce it [ 12 ] . Papert’s proposal initially aimed at introducing children into the world of computing through creative activities . The core of his idea was to abstract information on how the computer performs its actions , focusing on how the user could construct commands to program a computer according to his goals [ 12 ] . Screen Turtle is an environment developed by Papert that allows drawing figures on a computer screen through simple commands . In this environment , it is possible to use select and repeat struc - tures , as well as variable manipulation , function definition and use , and parameter passing . There are no limits to the exploration and creativity use to create geometric shapes and drawings . Nowadays , the screen turtle has several versions in different languages such as C + + [ 13 ] and Python [ 8 ] . 2 . 2 Media Computation In 1999 , the CS1 course became mandatory for all students of Geor - gia Tech [ 9 ] . The great challenge of this mixed scenario – majors in CS and in other programs – was to meet the diverse demands of these groups . This scenario initially led to problems such as high failure rates and high plagiarism rates , as there was no specific concern about this varied audience . In order to minimize these prob - lems , Georgia Tech professors have created three adapted courses : one for Computer Scientists , another for Engineers , and a third for Architecture , Business and Liberal Arts Students [ 7 ] . In the third course , called Media Computation [ 8 ] , students ma - nipulate pixels to create image effects such as grey scale and nega - tive , manipulate samples to splice or revert sounds , compose text in HTML sites , and create videos from overlay image frames [ 9 ] . The first pilot course with Media Computation was given in 2002 [ 8 ] . Among other goals , students should be able to read , understand and make functional changes to small programs ( up to 50 lines of code ) , build graphs , and manipulate databases . Reports on media computation in schools are not as common as in higher education . Davis [ 5 ] uses it at summer program for high school students . This approach is based on image manipulation , and uses using the C language , alternating short lecture periods and a hands - on lab . The aim is teaching basic concepts of programming . In this course , students create projects such as : spliting images , fade effects , grey scale , replacing color and composing image with chroma key . The course was the most popular of this summer program , students’ experiences have been positive and effective , showing how this approach is engaging and motivating . Another work introduces a creative computing course in two high schools [ 18 ] . In it , instead of solving for roots of polynomials or creating commercial programs , student create art , interactive media and visualizations . Students learn about basic concepts of programming through well - defined projects . Teachers have successfully adapted their courses for the creative computing approach , increasing both enroll rate and female participation . 2 . 3 Spiral Approach The spiral approach was created by psychologist Jerome Bruner . Brunner is known to be the creator of scaffolding theory and the spiral curriculum . According to Brunner , “Any subject can be taught effectively , in some intellectually honest way , to any child at any stage of development” [ 3 ] . The spiral approach to teaching presents concepts repeatedly and in varied ways , with increasing depth , thus , creating several episodes to deepen a theme from what has been previously taught . A subject can be taught in its simplest form , with examples that target actions or interaction with certain objects . In a second moment , this same subject can be approached in more depth , adding some important conceptual aspects . In a third moment , one can introduce a general abstraction of the subject , as well as formulas that explain physical phenomena , for instance . This process allows , at each step , the use of students’ previous experience on certain topics that , if taught in their completeness , could appear confusing and decontextualized . Thus , there would ini - tially be very few interest to understand formulas , rules or concepts outside real contexts . In addition , there is a noticeable reduction of cognitive overload by dividing content based on its degree of complexity . 2 . 4 Motivation Motivation is an important element of the learning process , and is based on several factors . In order to better understand each of these factors , Keller created a model based on four dimensions : Attention , Relevance , Trust and Satisfaction , and named it the ARCS model of motivation [ 10 ] . The first element of ARCS is attention . Attention is paramount both for student learning and motivation [ 11 ] . Through attention , one can observe how committed the student is in performing an activity or in learning something . Relevance is an element that leads us to do something . If some - thing is not relevant to one’s interests , he or she will not voluntarily do it . When applied to instruction , one must provide an environ - ment of relevance , giving the student an apparent reason and in - terest to engage in activities . Furthermore , students should realize that the subject to be learned will have some use for their lives . Confidence is directly related to control and to a perspective of success . When a student feels confident , she , in a way , feels in control of something that makes her feel secure about her goals [ 11 ] . Paper Session : K thru 8 # 2 SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1006 Satisfaction can be the result of extrinsic and intrinsic factors . The extrinsic factors include grades , promotion , certificates and other material rewards . Intrinsic factors may be anything that in - creases self - esteem , such as a positive relationship with people or mastering challenges that enhance one’s feelings of competence . Keller has also developed instruments to measure those dimen - sions , both from educational materials and courses . The Instruc - tional Material Motivation Survey ( IMMS ) is an instrument that measures motivation of instructional materials to students based on those dimensions [ 11 ] . Although originally planned for self - administered learning materials , IMMS may also be used for mea - suring motivation of approaches that involve interaction with in - structors , tools and materials . 3 METHODOLOGY We used a research strategy of a mixed - methods case study , with qualitative and quantitative methods [ 4 , 19 ] . Table 1 : Overview of Our Planning Place Gov . Luis Viana Filho Basic School , Amelia Rodrigues , Bahia , Brazil Participants 28 Students Activities Geometric Figures ( square , triangle , circle , start ) Image Effects ( Hue , Negative , Greyscale , Black and white , Text ) Content Functions , parameters , select and repeat structures , variables , assignment , arithmetic and relational operators Tools Python Language , JES and Turtle Duração 8 hours ( 1h per week ) 3 . 1 Scenario The municipality of Amelia Rodrigues has recently added the Com - puting subject to the curriculum of its basic education network . According to the new curriculum , approved in 2016 , ninth - grade , middle school students are introduced to concepts of computer programming . For the computing classes , we used the school’s computer lab , currently with 14 desktop computers , a whiteboard and internet connection . The first author of this work was also a teacher at this school , and was in charge of all computing courses there . 3 . 2 Participants Participants were 28 students from the ninth grade of middle school : 10 boys and 18 girls , with a mean age of 14 . 8 ± 0 . 63 years . This research project was approved by the institutional review board at the State University of Feira de Santana . At the beginning of the research , a informed consent form was distributed to students’ parents , who agreed with their childrens’ participation and signed it . All participants’ data were anonymized . 3 . 3 Approach In this work , we used two modules from the Jython Environment for Students ( JES ) : the Turtle module , who provides screen turtle commands , and the Image module , which allows image manipu - lation through simple functions that act over pictures , pixels and colors in the RGB format . The two modules present visual feedback and are complementary in terms of complexity . Creating pictures with Turtle is simpler and is suitable for the introduction , while image manipulation uses more complex concepts like matrices , that become appropriate for student after they learn to deal with the Cartesian plane , loops and functions seen in the Turtle module . Table 1 presents an overview of the planning . In the first month , we work with programming concepts such as select structures , loops , functions and parameters , in a context of creating geometric figures . We use the screen turtle to create simple geometric figures such as the square , evolving into more elaborate shapes such as the star . After we present concepts , students are encouraged to create shapes by writing code in Python . In the second month , we discuss programming concepts such as functions , parameters , variables , arithmetic and relational operators , select structures and loops in a context of image manipulation using JES and the Python language . Concepts such as variables , select and repeat structures , which have already been addressed in previous examples , were reintroduced in this new context of image manipulation . 3 . 4 Data Collection and Analysis In a mixed - methods case study , we collect both quantitative and qualitativedata . Asquantitativedata , students filledapre - intervention survey aiming to identify their profile and their perceptions of computing and programming . After the intervention , they filled a post - intervention survey to capture changes to students’ percep - tions . In this survey , we also captured their motivation from the validated questions of the IMMS questionnaire [ 11 ] . All 28 students answered the first survey , but only 26 answered the second one : 10 boys ( 38 % ) and 16 girls ( 62 % ) . We used inferential statistics to inves - tigate whether changes in perception occurred due to intervention . Descriptive statistics were used for the other questions . To collect qualitative data , we conducted semi - structured in - terviews after the intervention with six students . In addition , the researcher - teacher wrote reflective diaries right after each class . Diaries and interviews were coded through content analysis . The coding steps involved open coding and axial coding [ 4 ] . Descriptive categories were generated as analytic memos . The analysis led us to explain and describe the results through central themes . Qualitative and quantitative results were triangulated to improve our findings . We also built some diagrams to integrate the different types of information . 4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In this section we present and discuss our qualitative and quan - titative results . Figures 1 , 3 , 2 and 4 synthesize the relationships between findings from both qualitative and quantitative data 1 . 1 Survey results in https : / / sites . google . com / site / sigcse2018school / Paper Session : K thru 8 # 2 SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1007 4 . 1 Motivation Here we present the findings related to motivation , according to the ARCS model . In the surveys , we used a Likert scale of 5 points : full disagreement , partial disagreement , neutral , partial agreement and full agreement . In the following , whenever we mention agreement , we mean both partial and full agreement . Similarly , for disagree - ment . 4 . 1 . 1 Attention . Analyzing the Attention aspect , we noticed that several factors influence students’ attention . In general , students disagreed that content repetition led to boredom ( 83 % ) and that materials ( slides ) were unattractive ( 65 % ) . Students agreed that they learned something surprising or unexpected ( 92 % ) and that the organization of the course ( 96 % ) , variety of exercises and examples ( 100 % ) contributed to attention . From Figure 1 , we see that the approach using a variety of con - tent , provided by the spiral approach and the variety of exercises and examples , and by the configuration of the contextualized blocks , increases attention . The spiral approach also makes it possible to organize content in levels of complexity : from the least complex to the most complex , a factor pointed out by students . Although geometric figures and images are elements of students’ everyday life , the possibility of creating these elements with code has aroused interest . Thus , learning surprising or unexpected things contributes to attention . It is noticed that during classes , students took a stance of cu - riosity , perceived through exploration of the tool , questions to the teacher , and code manipulation in an autonomous and experimental way . 4 . 1 . 2 Relevance . Results on Relevance show that all students relate the content to elements they have already seen , done or thought , and they think it is important to finish their projects . Although the content is something that most students ( 80 % ) already know , they agreed ( 88 % ) that the content was relevant to their interests and disagreed ( 96 % ) with the idea that the content was not relevant because they already knew it . Students generally agreed with the idea that the content taught was important to their lives , being worth knowing , relevant to their interests , and important to whom was learning programming . According to Figure 2 , some factors related to context closeness to students’ lives , how the content is related to something they have already seen or to what they already know give the approach the sense of relevance . The explanations on how to use the learned skills , as well as the content being relevant to students’ interests , for it allows creating filters and figures , are elements that give the sensation of relevance . Elements such as teaching materials ( slides ) and their being able to finish the projects , caused by the ease of the Python language and JES , are also important aspects . 4 . 1 . 3 Confidence . On the Confidence aspect , we observed that 14 students ( 53 % ) have initially found JES not easy , but 84 % felt confident that they could learn the subject , and 88 % agreed that they would be able to pass a test . Of the 26 students , 74 % already felt more confident in their first class . 80 % disagreed that the content was more difficult than they wished . Figure 3 describes confidence in detail . Looking at the diagram , we realize that some factors decrease and other factors increase students’ confidence . The first contact with JES is a factor that reduces confidence , because it is their first contact with an IDE - type tool . Another factor that lowers confidence is the high degree of difficulty of the activities that , although adequate to students and classes , are impacted by difficulties with mathematics , English language and programming . However , the approach reveals other aspects that increase confi - dence . Although the first contact is poor , JES provides confidence that students will pass tests and learn content . Due to the closeness of the context , in the first class , students already felt confident about what they should learn . The spiral approach also contributes to student confidence with two aspects : content organization , which aids to the certainty that they will learn , and the little amount of in - formation given during classes , because the content was presented very gradually . 4 . 1 . 4 Satisfaction . Regarding the Satisfaction aspect , we noticed that all the students ( 100 % ) felt fulfilled after completing their codes , felt good in successfully completing the activities , and felt rewarded for their efforts made in the projects after the feedback or comments by the teacher . 70 % would like to learn more about the content and 88 % said they enjoyed studying image manipulation . Figure 4 describes how satisfaction is affect by the various factors . Satisfaction is an element that relates to confidence . We noticed that the challenges and difficulties faced by students create a feel - ing of satisfaction at the end of the activity , a factor provided by the challenges proposed during classes . Feedback is a factor that increases satisfaction , and it can be visual , with is made possible by python and JES . Python and JES also make it possible for students to complete activities , and this satisfaction can be seen in students’ celebrations in the classroom . Another form of feedback is that by the teacher . We noticed that comments and incentives impact student satisfaction . 4 . 2 Perception Changes about Computing We tried to measure changes in perceptions and feelings on some aspects such as a taste for editing images and for Computing ca - reers . Table 2 shows , through Wilcoxon’s non - parametric test , that there were significant changes in some aspects . The Likert scale was converted into a numeric scale , from − 2 ( fully disagree ) to 2 ( fully agree ) . Median results of pre - and post - intervention students’ perceptions are also shown . Significant results are highlighted in bold . Results show that the approach has positively impacted stu - dents’ perceptions of image editing as being fun , about knowing how an editing program works and about what programmers do . In addition , there has been a positive change on the perception of the Computing profession as being fun . 4 . 3 Threats to Validity Since we used a mixed - methods case study research approach , we do not intend to generalize results to other schools , educational systems or countries . On the other hand , we believe that the rich ac - counts from this study will help both researchers and practitioners to better understand how motivation arises in such in a scenario . Paper Session : K thru 8 # 2 SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1008 Figure 1 : Factors Related to Attention ATTENTION Variety of exercises and examples Contextualized blocks Images and figures Learning surprising or unexpected things Content organization From the least to the most complex causes Spiral approach provides increases Arousing curiosity Tool exploration Questions to the teacher Code manipulation shows as provides Variety of content provides Factors related to the Approach IMMS constructs ARCS Dimension increases increases happens increases increases Figure 2 : Factors Related to Relevance RELEVANCE Factors related to the Approach IMMS constructs ARCS Dimension Descriptions and examples of how people use Importance of finishing projects content is relevant to students ' interests content and form convey the idea that it is worth learning content is related to things they know content is related to things they have already seen Python + JES Figures and image effects Slides Apps and Social Networks Programming what ? what ? how ? causes causes provides provides increases increases increases increases increases increases Figure 3 : Factors Related to Confidence CONFIDENCE Confidence they would be able to pass a test Factors related to the Approach IMMS constructs ARCS Dimension Confidence they could learn the subject First contact with tool gives impression it would be hard JES Less information in classes Content organization helped them feel they would learn Classes + Slides + Spiral High level of difficulty of the activities After first lesson they felt more confident about what they should learn Contextualization Difficulties Math English Programming provides causes provides decreases increases increases provides provides in in in decreases increases provides decreases increases causes increases 4 . 4 Answering Research Questions Here we analyze the results to answer our research questions . RQ1 – What is the impact of using a context of media com - putation to student motivation ? From our results , we noticed that the context influences several elements of motivation . The choice of context should be essentially determined by students’ profiles . In this study , students were 14 . 8 years old on average , and use social networks and image editing applications . Thus , the media context is suitable for these students . However , manipulating media through code is something sur - prising and unexpected , a factor that increases students’ attention . Closeness gives the sense of relevance , because content is related to something they already know or have seen , as well as being something that they are interested in , since they are constantly using social media applications . Because they already know the context and know what applica - tions do , students understand early what is to be learned , which raises their confidence in the approach . Finally , finishing activi - ties and having visual feedback that is related to what they like to do affects student satisfaction . All these factors reveal a level of motivation that leads students to engage in the activities . RQ2 – What is the impact of a spiral approach to motivation ? The introduction to programming can be somewhat complex and frustrating . However , if the content is presented respecting the level of complexity and the student’s current moment , this situation can be circumvented . We noticed that some factors related to the spiral approach directly affect motivation in two aspects : attention and confidence . The spiral approach we used allows a gradual introduction of content which affects content organization , a factor positively evalu - ated by students . In addition , this approach associated with contexts Paper Session : K thru 8 # 2 SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1009 Figure 4 : Factors Related to Satisfaction Factors related to the Approach IMMS constructs ARCS Dimension SATISFACTION Feedback or comments after activities Visual feedback Completing the code Challenges and difficulties ( w hen finished ) Congratulating and Encouraging Students ' celebrations JES Python shows as provides provides provides increases increases increases increases how ? Table 2 : Changes in Students’ Perceptions ( Wilcoxon’s Test ) . Question Median ( Pre ) Median ( Post ) V p - Value Q1 – I like to use effects in images . 0 0 29 0 . 0655 Q2 – Editing images is fun . 0 2 3 . 5 0 . 0004 Q3 – I know how programs with images work . - 1 0 . 5 25 0 . 0131 Q4 – I know what programmers do . 0 1 15 . 5 0 . 0010 Q5 – Computer programming is easy . 1 2 182 . 5 0 . 9985 Q6 – I think the Computing Profession is fun . 1 2 57 . 5 0 . 0107 Q7 – I think the Computing Profession is easy . 0 0 86 . 5 0 . 2487 Q8 – I’d like to follow the Computing Profession . 0 0 . 5 15 0 . 1951 enabled content variety . Both aspects contribute to increased at - tention . A spiral approach also affects students’ confidence as it provides very few information during class and helps them to be sure they will learn the content . RQ3 – How does the approach affect student perceptions of programming and computing ? Our approach uses a language and environment appropriate to novice students , in addition to a context close to their interests , and a teaching approach that reduces cognitive overload . In this scenario , we noticed that students come to understand what programmers do and how image applications work , something that is unusual for most middle school students . Computing is often seen as boring and tedious . In our approach , students have come to find computing something more fun . 5 CONCLUSIONS A contextualized approach , using appropriate materials and asso - ciated with an appropriate pedagogical approach , is a powerful combination to teach programming . Our study presented an ap - proach based on media manipulation , a context close to the students , using the JES environment and the Python language , through an spiral approach , to teach computer programming to ninth - grade middle school students in Brazil . Our results point out that the context used and the spiral ap - proach positively affect student motivation . In addition , the ap - proach made significant changes to students’ perceptions of pro - gramming and computing . Currently , we are running two case studies in vocational high school education , in classes of tenth and eleventh grades . In this study , we are using other contexts and tools . We intend to evaluate motivation as well as learning with this approach to vocational education . These different contexts may also be evaluated in the different phases of basic education , contributing to building a cur - riculum for the subject of computing in schools . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Luis Gustavo J . Araujo , Roberto A . Bittencourt , and David M . B . Santos . 2017 . EnsinodeProgramaçãonaEducaçãoBásicaatravésdaManipulaçãodeMídias . In COBENGE 2017 - XLV Congresso Brasileiro de Educação em Engenharia . Joinville . [ 2 ] Adriana Bordini , Christiano M . O . Avila , Yuri Weisshahn , Mônica M . da Cunha , SimoneA . C . Cavalheiro , LucianaFoss , MariltonS . Aguiar , andRenataH . S . Reiser . 2016 . Computação na Educação Básica no Brasil : o Estado da Arte , In Revista de Informática Teórica e Aplicada . Revista de Informática Teórica e Aplicada 23 , 2 , 210 – 238 . [ 3 ] Jerome S Bruner . 2009 . The process of education . Harvard University Press . [ 4 ] John W . Creswell . 2013 . Research design : Qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods approaches . Sage publications . [ 5 ] Timothy A . Davis . 2012 . A Summer Science Experience with Computer Graphics for Secondary Students . In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education ( SIGCSE ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 295 – 300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2157136 . 2157224 [ 6 ] Katrina Falkner , Rebecca Vivian , and Nickolas Falkner . 2014 . The Australian Digital Technologies Curriculum : Challenge and Opportunity . In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Australasian Computing Education Conference - Volume 148 ( ACE ’14 ) . Australian Computer Society , Inc . , Darlinghurst , Australia , Australia , 3 – 12 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2667490 . 2667491 [ 7 ] Andrea Forte and Mark Guzdial . 2005 . Motivation and nonmajors in computer science : identifyingdiscreteaudiencesforintroductorycourses . IEEETransactions on Education 48 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 248 – 253 . [ 8 ] MarkGuzdial . 2003 . Amediacomputationcoursefornon - majors . In ACMSIGCSE Bulletin , Vol . 35 . ACM , 104 – 108 . [ 9 ] Mark Guzdial . 2013 . Exploring hypotheses about media computation . In Proceed - ings of the ninth annual international ACM conference on International computing education research . ACM , San Diego , 19 – 26 . [ 10 ] John M . Keller . 1987 . Development and use of the ARCS model of instructional design . Journal of instructional development 10 , 3 ( 1987 ) , 2 – 10 . [ 11 ] John M . Keller . 2009 . Motivational design for learning and performance : The ARCS model approach . Springer Science & Business Media . [ 12 ] Seymour Papert and Cynthia Solomon . 1971 . Twenty things to do with a computer . June , Massachusetts . [ 13 ] Abhiram G . Ranade . 2016 . Introductory Programming : Let Us Cut through the Clutter ! . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education . ACM , Arequipa , 278 – 283 . [ 14 ] Bianca L . Santana , José S . L . Figuerêdo , and Roberto A . Bittencourt . 2017 . Mo - tivação de Estudantes Non - Majors em uma Disciplina de Programação . In WEI 2017 - XXV Workshop sobre Educação em Computação . São Paulo , 2287 – 2296 . [ 15 ] SBC . 2017 . Referenciais de Formação em Computação : Educação Básica . ( 2017 ) . http : / / www . sbc . org . br / files / ComputacaoEducacaoBasica - versaofinal - julho2017 . pdf [ Online ; accessed 28 - August - 2017 ] . [ 16 ] Carsten Schulte , Malte Hornung , Sue Sentance , Valentina Dagiene , Tatjana Jevsikova , Neena Thota , Anna Eckerdal , and Anne - Kathrin Peters . 2012 . Com - puter Science at School / CS Teacher Education : Koli Working - group Report on CS at School . In Proceedings of the 12th Koli Calling International Conference on Computing Education Research ( Koli Calling ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 29 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2401796 . 2401800 [ 17 ] DeborahSeehorn , StephenCarey , BrianFuschetto , IreneLee , DanielMoix , Dianne O’Grady - Cunniff , Barbara B . Owens , Chris Stephenson , and Anita Verno . 2011 . CSTA K – 12 Computer Science Standards : Revised 2011 . Technical Report . New York , NY , USA . 104111 . [ 18 ] Dianna Xu , Aaron Cadle , Darby Thompson , Ursula Wolz , Ira Greenberg , and Deepak Kumar . 2016 . Creative Computation in High School . In Proceedings of the 47th ACM Technical Symposium on Computing Science Education ( SIGCSE ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 273 – 278 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839509 . 2844611 [ 19 ] Robert K Yin . 2013 . Case study research : Design and methods . Sage publications . Paper Session : K thru 8 # 2 SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1010