the cell cortex is a rate - limiting step for force generator function . Given that cortically lo - calized G (cid:1) i and Pins also dictate spindle positioning in Drosophila ( 10 ) , we propose that modulation of cortical G (cid:1) signaling to generate defined pulling forces on astral mi - crotubules is a conserved mechanism to translate polarity cues into appropriate spin - dle positioning . References and Notes 1 . J . A . Knoblich , Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 11 ( 2001 ) . 2 . P . Go¨nczy , Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 332 ( 2002 ) . 3 . J . Pellettieri , G . Seydoux , Science 298 , 1946 ( 2002 ) . 4 . K . J . Kemphues , J . R . Priess , D . G . Morton , N . Cheng , Cell 52 , 311 ( 1988 ) . 5 . S . W . Grill , P . Go¨nczy , E . H . Stelzer , A . A . Hyman , Nature 409 , 630 ( 2001 ) . 6 . M . Gotta , J . Ahringer , Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 297 ( 2001 ) . 7 . F . Yu , X . Morin , Y . Cai , X . Yang , W . Chia , Cell 100 , 399 ( 2000 ) . 8 . M . Schaefer , A . Shevchenko , J . A . Knoblich , Curr . Biol . 10 , 353 ( 2000 ) . 9 . M . Schaefer , M . Petronczki , D . Dorner , M . Forte , J . A . Knoblich , Cell 107 , 183 ( 2001 ) . 10 . Y . Cai , F . Yu , S . Lin , W . Chia , X . Yang , Cell 112 , 51 ( 2003 ) . 11 . P . Go¨nczy et al . , Nature 408 , 331 ( 2000 ) . 12 . Examination of the genome sequence and sequencing of full - length cDNAs revealed that gpr - 1 ( WormBase code F22B7 . 13 ) and gpr - 2 ( C38C10 . 4 ) are both ex - pressed and that they result from a recent gene duplication event . We found a single gpr homolog in the available C . briggsae genome ( CBG10100 ) , whose inactivation caused a phenotype indistinguishable from that observed in C . elegans . 13 . B . Zhang et al . , Nature 390 , 477 ( 1997 ) . 14 . K . Colombo , P . Go¨nczy , unpublished data . 15 . B . Etemad - Moghadam , S . Guo , K . J . Kemphues , Cell 83 , 743 ( 1995 ) . 16 . L . Boyd , S . Guo , D . Levitan , D . T . Stinchcomb , K . J . Kemphues , Development 122 , 3075 ( 1996 ) . 17 . S . Guo , K . J . Kemphues , Cell 81 , 611 ( 1995 ) . 18 . T . J . Hung , K . J . Kemphues , Development 126 , 127 ( 1999 ) . 19 . S . Strome , W . B . Wood , Cell 35 , 15 ( 1983 ) . 20 . K . J . Reese , M . A . Dunn , J . A . Waddle , G . Seydoux , Mol . Cell 6 , 445 ( 2000 ) . 21 . L . De Vries et al . , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 14364 ( 2000 ) . 22 . R . J . Kimple et al . , J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 29275 ( 2001 ) . 23 . M . Natochin , K . G . Gasimov , N . O . Artemyev , Bio - chemistry 40 , 5322 ( 2001 ) . 24 . See supporting online material . 25 . Average peak velocities in (cid:2) m / s ( (cid:3) SEM at the 0 . 95 conﬁdence interval ) were as follows ( A , anterior spin - dle pole ; P , posterior spindle pole ) : gpr - 1 / 2 ( RNAi ) , A : 0 . 20 (cid:3) 0 . 03 , P : 0 . 18 (cid:3) 0 . 04 , n (cid:4) 15 ; goa - 1 / gpa - 16 ( RNAi ) , A : 0 . 21 (cid:3) 0 . 04 , P : 0 . 22 (cid:3) 0 . 03 , n (cid:4) 15 ; par - 3 ( it71 ) gpr - 1 / 2 ( RNAi ) , A : 0 . 18 (cid:3) 0 . 04 , P : 0 . 18 (cid:3) 0 . 03 , n (cid:4) 13 . Values for par - 3 ( it71 ) were A : 0 . 89 (cid:3) 0 . 11 , P : 0 . 90 (cid:3) 0 . 07 , n (cid:4) 20 ( 5 ) . 26 . K . G . Miller , J . B . Rand , Genetics 156 , 1649 ( 2000 ) . 27 . M . F . Tsou , A . Hayashi , L . R . DeBella , G . McGrath , L . S . Rose , Development 129 , 4469 ( 2002 ) . 28 . L . S . Rose , K . Kemphues , Development 125 , 1337 ( 1998 ) . 29 . S . W . Grill , J . Howard , E . Scha¨ffer , E . H . K . Stelzer , A . A . Hyman , unpublished data . 30 . We thank A . Ashford , J . Corbitt , T . K . Harden , M . Glozter , A . Hyman , M . Koelle , Y . Kohara , G . Seydoux , and V . Simanis for reagents ; A . Debant and S . Schmidt for advice ; K . Baumer for technical support ; M . Brauchle for movie S1 ; and K . Afshar , M . Delattre , and M . Labouesse for critical reading of the manuscript . Supported by Swiss National Science Foundation grant 31 - 62102 . 00 ( P . G . ) and NIH grant GM62338 ( D . P . S . ) . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 1084146 / DC1 Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S4 References Movies S1 to S7 28 February 2003 ; accepted 8 May 2003 Published online 15 May 2003 ; 10 . 1126 / science . 1084146 Include this information when citing this paper . Transmission Dynamics of the Etiological Agent of SARS in Hong Kong : Impact of Public Health Interventions Steven Riley , 1 * † Christophe Fraser , 1 * Christl A . Donnelly , 1 Azra C . Ghani , 1 Laith J . Abu - Raddad , 1 Anthony J . Hedley , 2 Gabriel M . Leung , 2 Lai - Ming Ho , 2 Tai - Hing Lam , 2 Thuan Q . Thach , 2 Patsy Chau , 2 King - Pan Chan , 2 Su - Vui Lo , 3 Pak - Yin Leung , 4 Thomas Tsang , 4 William Ho , 5 Koon - Hung Lee , 5 Edith M . C . Lau , 6 Neil M . Ferguson , 1 Roy M . Anderson 1 We present an analysis of the ﬁrst 10 weeks of the severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) epidemic in Hong Kong . The epidemic to date has been characterized by two large clusters—initiated by two separate “super - spread” events ( SSEs ) —and by ongoing community transmission . By ﬁtting a stochastic model to data on 1512 cases , including these clusters , we show that the etiological agent of SARS is moderately transmissible . Excluding SSEs , we estimate that 2 . 7 secondary infections were generated per case on average at the start of the epidemic , with a substantial contribution from hospital trans - mission . Transmission rates fell during the epidemic , primarily as a result of reductions in population contact rates and improved hospital infection control , but also because of more rapid hospital attendance by symptomatic individuals . As a result , the epidemic is now in decline , although continued vigilance is necessary for this to be maintained . Restrictions on longer range population movement are shown to be a potentially useful additional con - trol measure in some contexts . We estimate that most currently infected persons are now hospitalized , which highlights the importance of control of nosocomial transmission . The evolution and spread of the etiological agent of severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) , a novel coronavirus ( 1 ) , has resulted in an unparalleled international effort coordi - nated by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) to characterize the virus , develop diagnostic tests , and formulate optimal treat - ment protocols to reduce morbidity and mor - tality ( 2 – 4 ) . Great progress has been made with , for example , the full sequence of the RNA virus reported on 13 April 2003 ( 5 , 6 ) . The epidemic apparently originated in early November in the Guandong province of the People’s Republic of China , and then spread rapidly throughout the world via air travel . As of 21 May 2003 , 7956 cases have been reported to WHO from 28 countries , with 666 deaths recorded . The epidemics in Hong Kong , mainland China , Singapore , Taiwan , and Toronto ( Canada ) have been of partic - ular concern because of the multiple gen - erations of local transmission seen in those areas . The extent of these epidemics has been worsened by the occurrence of large clusters of infection linked to single indi - viduals and / or spatial locations . The rate of spread of an epidemic—and whether such spread is self - sustaining— depends on the magnitude of a key epidemi - ological parameter , the basic reproduction number ( R 0 ) , defined as the average number of secondary cases generated by one primary case in a susceptible population ( 7 ) . After the introduction of an agent into a population , a 1 Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology , Fac - ulty of Medicine , Imperial College London , Exhibition Road , London SW7 2AZ , UK . 2 Department of Com - munity Medicine , University of Hong Kong , 21 Sas - soon Road , Pokfulam , Hong Kong . 3 Research Ofﬁce , Health , Welfare and Food Bureau , Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region , 19th Floor , Murray Building , Garden Road , Hong Kong . 4 Depart - ment of Health , Government of the Hong Kong Spe - cial Administrative Region , Wu Chung House , 213 Queen’s Road East , Wanchai , Hong Kong . 5 Hong Kong Hospital Authority , 147B Argyle Street , Kowloon , Hong Kong . 6 Department of Community and Family Medicine , Chinese University of Hong Kong , School of Public Health , Prince of Wales Hospital , Shatin , N . T . , Hong Kong . * These authors contributed equally to this work . † To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : s . riley @ imperial . ac . uk R E P O R T S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 300 20 JUNE 2003 1961 on A ugu s t 12 , 2017 h tt p : / / sc i en c e . sc i en c e m ag . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m related parameter—the effective reproduction number ( R t ) —quantifies the number of infec - tions caused by each new case occurring at time t . This value is typically lower than that of R 0 for two reasons : the effect of control measures in reducing transmission , and the depletion of susceptible individuals during the epidemic . For an epidemic to be con - trolled , R t needs to be reduced below 1 , the self - sustaining threshold . Estimation of re - production numbers requires population het - erogeneity to be accounted for—reflecting , for example , variation in infection risk with spatial location , variation in contact rates be - tween groups , and between - case variability in infectiousness ( 7 , 8 ) . Heterogeneity in R t between cases appears to be particularly important for SARS be - cause of the occurrence of “super - spread” events ( SSEs ) —rare events where , in a par - ticular setting , an individual may generate many more than the average number of sec - ondary cases . The Hong Kong epidemic to date has been characterized by two large clusters of cases , together with ongoing trans - mission to close contacts . In the first cluster , at least 125 people were infected on or soon after 3 March 2003 in the Prince of Wales Hospital ( PWH ) by the index patient for the Hong Kong epidemic ( 2 ) . In the second clus - ter , an unknown number of people were in - fected from a probable environmental source in the Amoy Gardens ( AG ) estate ( Kwung Tong district ) . After mixing with fellow res - idents , families , and friends , more than 300 people became infected . Examination of local reports of SARS investigations ( 9 ) support the distinction between these two large SSEs and the other contact - based infections . It may be that the distinction between typical infec - tion events and SSEs reflects the two differ - ent routes of transmission so far identified as likely for this virus—namely , respiratory ex - udates and fecal - oral contact ( with contami - nated surfaces also perhaps of importance in hospital and residency settings ) . As it may be some time before these SSEs can be characterized in terms of transmission route , we adopt the usual epidemiological notation and define R 0XSS to be the average number of infections caused by one typically infectious individual , excluding SSEs , in an entirely susceptible population . Similarly , R t XSS is the average number of infections , excluding SSEs , caused by individuals in lat - er generations at time t . The long - term fate of the outbreak ( containment , growth , or en - demic persistence ) will therefore ultimately depend on both the extent of typical transmis - sion ( and how this is modified by controls ) and the relative frequency and magnitude of SSEs . These two factors contribute additively to the overall reproduction number R t : R t (cid:1) R t XSS (cid:5) p SSE N SSE ( 1 ) where p SSE is the probability that any in - fection leads to an SSE , and N SSE is the average number infected during an SSE . Because little is currently known about how to influence either p SSE or N SSE , reducing R t XSS should be the key aim in any early public health intervention strategy . We therefore focus on estimating R t XSS for the outbreak of SARS in Hong Kong and on evaluating the effectiveness of different in - terventions in reducing transmission . We estimate R t XSS for the SARS epidemic in Hong Kong by fitting a detailed mathemat - ical transmission model to spatially stratified incidence time series derived from the clini - cal records of the 1512 cases reported by 6 May 2003 ( 10 ) . The possible effects of asymptomatic ( and thus unreported ) cases were not analyzed in the current study be - cause of insufficient population serological survey data with which to estimate infection levels . Three epidemiological parameters de - termine the reproduction number : R t XSS (cid:4) (cid:6) TS ( 2 ) where (cid:6) is the transmission coefficient ( in - corporating infectiousness and contact rate ) , T is the infectiousness - weighted duration of infection , and S is a factor representing the effect of geographic heterogeneity and sus - ceptible depletion on disease spread ( 11 ) . All three factors are likely to change as an epi - demic progresses and control measures are introduced . This expression illustrates how controls can limit transmission : by reducing local contact rates ( affecting (cid:6) ) , by shorten - ing the delay between onset of symptoms and hospitalization ( affecting T ) , by improving the effectiveness of isolation measures in hospitals ( also affecting T ) , and by imposing restrictions on longer range movements / con - tacts ( affecting S ) . However , a coherent estimation frame - work requires the use of a more sophisticated dynamical model to capture the nonlinearity and spatial locality of transmission and to incorporate information on how key parame - ters ( e . g . , incubation period , time from expo - sure to first appearance of clinical symptoms of infection , and T ) vary between individu - als . Capturing the duration and temporal evo - lution of infectiousness within the infected patient is critical . Data are limited , but cir - cumstantial evidence based on contact tracing Fig . 1 . Input data and model structure . ( A ) Map of Hong Kong showing the location of each district used in the model . More than 70 % of cases reported through 16 April 2003 are from the three colored districts : Kwung Tong ( red ) , Tai Po ( green ) , and Sha Tin ( blue ) . ( B ) Weekly incidence ( by time of hospital admission ) with the color coding used in ( A ) . ( C ) Schematic ﬂow diagram of transmission model used . Each district in the metapopulation model uses the structure shown . Susceptible individuals ( S ) become infected and enter a latent class ( L ) . They then progress to a short asymptomatic and potentially infectious stage , I ( see text ) , before the onset of symptoms and progression to class Y . It is assumed that every infected individual eventually enters hospital and either recovers ( H R ) or dies ( H D ) . Color code : red , incubation period ; blue , time from symptoms to hospitalization ; magenta , time from hospitalization to death ; green , time from hospitalization to recovery . ( D ) Distributions [ of gamma form ; see ( 10 ) ] for the waiting times of the compartments of the stochastic model shown in ( C ) . Colors match those used in ( C ) . Distributions shown are estimates for the start of the epidemic . The onset - to - hospitalization distribution changes during the epidemic as a result of more rapid hospital admission . R E P O R T S 20 JUNE 2003 VOL 300 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1962 on A ugu s t 12 , 2017 h tt p : / / sc i en c e . sc i en c e m ag . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tentatively suggests that infectiousness coin - cides with , but does not precede , clinical symptoms ( 3 ) . Additionally , the large number of SARS cases reported to have resulted from hospital exposure ( about 200 cases in addi - tion to the PWH cluster ) suggests that infec - tiousness does not wane substantially for some time after symptoms become appar - ent—a conclusion reinforced by the temporal evolution of patients’ viral loads ( 12 ) . Choice of a suitable model framework is not straightforward ; a variety of approaches are possible , ranging from a simple deterministic compartmental approach to a spatially explicit , individual - based simulation . Given the data available for Hong Kong , we base our analyses on a stochastic metapopulation compartmental model . A metapopulation approach is appropri - ate because the incidence of SARS has varied substantially by geographical district ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . A stochastic model is required because chance fluctuations in case numbers can be large in the early stages of an epidemic . Sto - chastic models predict both average trends and variability , so that a more robust assessment can be made of what changes are likely to be caused by chance and what changes genuinely reflect process and the impact of interventions . We classify the population of each district into susceptible , latent , infectious , hospital - ized , recovered , and dead individuals ( Fig . 1C ) . Epidemiological coupling between dis - tricts is assumed to depend on their adjacency ( Fig . 1A ) ( 11 ) . Incubating and infectious cat - egories are further divided into multiple stag - es , chosen in number and duration so as to match accurately the estimated delay distri - butions determining disease progression and diagnosis ( Fig . 1D ) ( 10 ) . Multiple realiza - tions of the stochastic model are required both for parameter estimation and to generate predicted case incidence time series . The mean time from the onset of symp - toms until hospital admission and subsequent isolation of suspect SARS cases has de - creased significantly over the course of the epidemic to date ( Fig . 1D ) ( 10 ) . Changes in the onset - to - hospitalization distribution were treated as an input to the model . Other poten - tial factors , such as time variation in the rate or nature of close contact between individu - als , could also affect R t XSS . The impact of these can be captured by allowing the under - lying coefficient of transmission , (cid:6) , to vary through time . For simplicity , we assume (cid:6) could have taken different values during each of three equally spaced time periods over the epidemic observed to date . We assume that infectiousness begins just before the onset of symptoms and re - mains constant during the symptomatic phase . We assigned the relative infectious - ness of hospitalized patients to match the overall rate of within - hospital transmission for the epidemic to date . Simulations are seeded explicitly with the PWH cluster , given its importance in determining the later pattern of the Hong Kong epidemic . Detailed contact tracing identified 125 first - generation cases in this cluster . How - ever , it is also important to account for the fact that the index patient arrived in Hong Kong more than a week before admission to PWH , during which time he infected mul - tiple individuals . It is not possible to gain a precise estimate of the number of SARS infections occurring before 3 March 2003 ( the index patient’s admission date to PWH ) , but examination of the case data stratified by onset and admission date indi - cate this number to be definitely less than 110 and most likely in the 60 – 70 range . We therefore include within the seeding infec - tion event the first 70 cases admitted to hospital that were not traced to the PWH cluster ( 11 ) —giving a total of 195 infec - tions assumed to occur on 3 March . Model fit [ see ( 11 ) for full list of estimat - ed parameters ] to the case - incidence data was qualitatively good , in terms of capturing both the temporal development of overall inci - dence ( Fig . 2A ) and the pattern of spatial spread ( Fig . 2B ) . We estimate the initial value of the reproduction number , R 0XSS , in Hong Kong to have been 2 . 7 [ 95 % confidence in - terval ( CI ) , 2 . 2 to 3 . 7 ] . Therefore , even in the absence of SSEs , the virus was capable of inducing an epidemic from the first intro - duced case . To reproduce the approximately 20 % of cases known from contact tracing to have hospital - related exposure , hospital transmission must constitute about 50 % of the value of R 0XSS , the discrepancy being a result of the time delay between infections generated before and after admission as well as the extreme nonlinearity of the epidemic curve . We estimate that patients in hospital transmit infection at about 20 % of the rate of symptomatic patients in the community— reflecting the effectiveness of isolation pro - cedures and perhaps lowered infectiousness once recovery starts . However , this lowered rate of transmission is counterbalanced by the longer time spent in hospital relative to the time spent symptomatic in the community before hospitalization . If the seeding is assumed to include only the 125 contacts traced to the PWH index patient rather than the 195 total early infec - tions assumed for the baseline scenario , the estimated value of R 0XSS increases to 3 . 4 , but the quality of model fit is decreased very significantly ( P (cid:7) 0 . 001 ) . If 35 ( half of the 70 assumed in the baseline scenario ) extra non – contact - traced cases are included in the seeding event , R 0XSS is estimated to be 2 . 8 with a comparable quality of fit to the baseline scenario . This variation in R 0XSS estimates associated with the as - sumed seed size reflects the fact that pre - cise attribution of early infections into SSE and non - SSE categories is problematic ; by assuming a larger initial seed size , we in - crease the size of the SSE caused by the PWH index case , and hence decrease esti - mates of the level of non - SSE transmission required to reproduce the observed epidemic . Fig . 2 . ( A ) Estimated reproduction number in the absence of SSEs , R t XSS , for the period of the epidemic for which data are available . Conﬁ - dence intervals are also shown . The self - sustaining threshold R t XSS (cid:4) 1 is shown as a solid line . ( B ) Model estimates of weekly case incidence ( average of 1000 model realizations ) for the three districts with the most cases , by date of hospital admission ( to be compared with Fig . 1B ) . ( C ) Model estimate of case inci - dence ( average of 1000 model realizations at the best - ﬁt parameter set with 95 % prediction intervals ) . Prediction intervals are generated from extreme realizations at the boundaries of the multivariate conﬁdence intervals . The up - per and lower bounds of the data are also shown . R E P O R T S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 300 20 JUNE 2003 1963 on A ugu s t 12 , 2017 h tt p : / / sc i en c e . sc i en c e m ag . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Despite this uncertainty , R 0XSS values in the range 2 . 2 to 3 . 7 represent low to moderate transmissibility ; hence , the early rapid growth in case numbers observed reflects the chance occurrence of the PWH SSE ( without which it is arguable that the Hong Kong outbreak would never have reached epidemic proportions ) . An important conclusion emerges from this esti - mate of R 0XSS : Epidemic control will be easier to achieve than for other viral infectious agents such as influenza ( 13 ) or measles ( 7 ) with higher R 0 values . We estimate the Amoy Gardens ( AG ) SSE to have occurred on 19 March ( 95 % CI , 18 March to 20 March ) and to have infected 331 ( 95 % CI , 295 to 331 ) people . Although the model was constrained to al - low only a single SSE after the initial seed - ing of the PWH SSE , it is encouraging that the timing of the event is consistent with independent investigations into that cluster of cases . It is thought that the sewage sys - tem became infected when the brother of a resident of AG used a toilet there on either 14 or 19 March ( 14 ) . We determined that current data do not permit reliable estimation of the level of in - fectiousness during the period just before symptom onset . A better understanding of how infectiousness varies during disease pathogenesis—such as that which might be gained from detailed contact - tracing studies or quantitative assessment of viral shedding through time ( 12 ) —would clearly benefit dis - ease control planning . However , to date , in - dications are that most transmission occurs late in infection , which clearly facilitates in - fection control . Our analysis gives insight into the effect of different control measures on transmis - sion , as quantified by R t XSS ( Fig . 2C ) . The mean time from symptom onset to hospital admission fell to 79 % of its original value by 26 March ( a reduction of 1 day on average ) and to 76 % of its original value by 1 April , giving rise to 9 % and 11 % drops in transmis - sion , respectively ( 10 , 11 ) . Changes in the transmission coefficient were even more sig - nificant , with (cid:6) estimated to have dropped to 37 % of its original value by 12 March and to 6 % of its original value by 1 April . Reduc - tions in (cid:6) are most easily attributed to in - creased awareness of the infection , leading to voluntary drops in contact rates and to im - proved control measures in hospitals ; howev - er , control measures such as school closures and recommendations against unnecessary travel could also have played an effect . Over - all , the reductions in onset - to - hospitalization time , population contact rate , and hospital transmission are estimated to have caused the reproduction number , R t XSS , to drop to 1 . 0 ( 95 % CI , 0 . 7 to 1 . 2 ) by 21 March , to 0 . 9 ( 95 % CI , 0 . 6 to 1 . 1 ) by 26 March , and to 0 . 14 ( 95 % CI , 0 . 09 to 0 . 35 ) by 10 April ( Fig . 2C ) . The Hong Kong epidemic has been char - acterized by substantial levels of transmission occurring in hospitals ( Fig . 3A ) . Contact trac - ing indicates that more than 22 % of cases were associated with hospital - related expo - sure . In part this reflects the SSE that oc - curred in the Prince of Wales hospital . None - theless , if we exclude the Amoy Gardens outbreak , then 19 % of all cases subsequent to the PWH cluster are still linked to hospital exposure . Figure 3B shows how well the model reproduces the separate case time se - ries for the PWH and Amoy clusters and cases arising from hospital and non – hospital - based exposure , and Fig . 3C illustrates the good fit between observed and estimated hos - pital occupancy levels . Figure 3C also shows that as a result of the long period spent by SARS patients in hospital , the total preva - lence of hospitalized SARS patients inevita - bly becomes much higher than the commu - nity prevalence after new admission rates start to decline , reinforcing the need for ef - fective hospital infection control measures even in the latter stages of the epidemic . These results indicate that R t XSS is now below the self - sustaining threshold of 1 in Hong Kong , and thus that the epidemic is currently under control—in the sense that infection rates are declining . They also suggest that reductions in population contact rates ( both in the commu - nity and in hospitals ) played the predominant role in achieving control . However , more rapid hospitalization also provided an important ad - ditional effect . It should also be noted that these estimates assume constant infectiousness from the onset of symptoms up to the time of hospi - talization ; if infectiousness increases after symptom onset , the effect of the observed 1 - day reduction in onset - to - hospitalization times could have been substantially greater , reducing R t XSS by up to 34 % ( 11 ) . However , even in this Fig . 3 . ( A ) Weekly admissions stratiﬁed by SSE cluster or type of exposure , as determined by contact tracing : 125 cases ( green line ) were attributed to direct exposure to the Hong Kong index patient on or shortly after his admission to the Prince of Wales Hospital on 3 March 2003 [ only ﬁrst - generation cases are shown ( 11 ) ] ; 331 cases ( blue line ) were attributed to the Amoy Gardens outbreak . Of the remaining 1056 cases , 201 were attributed to exposure occurring in a hospital or clinic ( purple line ) and 855 were attributed to other exposures or had no contact tracing available ( ochre line ) . ( B ) Best ﬁt model predictions stratiﬁed by expo - sure , matching deﬁnitions in ( A ) . The predicted Amoy Gardens case time series has been fur - ther stratiﬁed into ﬁrst - generation cases only ( dashed line ) and ﬁrst - generation plus all addi - tional cases ( solid line ) . The correspondence between ( B ) and ( A ) is reasonable , although the discrepancy between the data and model pre - dictions for Amoy Gardens suggests that only ﬁrst - generation cases were successfully linked to the Amoy cluster by contact tracing . The narrow width of the observed Amoy cluster peak shown in ( A ) suggests that cases in this cluster had a narrower onset - to - hospitalization distribution than other cases . Comparing model predictions and data for hospital exposure – related cases also indicates that hospital trans - mission has decreased faster in recent weeks than is captured by the model . ( C ) Best ﬁt model predictions for the total prevalence of symptomatic SARS patients , stratiﬁed accord - ing to whether they have been hospitalized . R E P O R T S 20 JUNE 2003 VOL 300 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1964 on A ugu s t 12 , 2017 h tt p : / / sc i en c e . sc i en c e m ag . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m case , we estimate contact rate reductions and hospital infection control to have been key in achieving control of transmission . The structure of the model also allows us to investigate the effect of contact patterns between districts on disease transmission [ as quantified by S in the expression for R t given above ( 11 ) ] . The contact rate of an individual with the pop - ulation from a contiguous district relative to that from the same district was estimated as 0 . 57 ( 95 % CI , 0 . 42 to 1 . 0 ) . However , the contact rate between noncontiguous districts was much low - er , at 0 . 02 ( 95 % CI , 0 to 0 . 10 ) relative to the within - district contact rate . Hence , transmission appears to be highly geographically localized , offering further options for control . Given that the most populous districts are highly connected , these estimates of between - district mixing suggest that restricting movement could have a substantial impact on net transmission . A complete ban on travel between districts is estimated to have the potential to reduce R t XSS by 76 % . Be - yond Hong Kong , this suggests that move - ment restrictions might represent a useful control measure in circumstances where it was not possible to reduce the average onset - to - hospitalization time substantially—for example , in resource - poor countries or if a num - ber of SSEs occurred in close succession and hospital capacity was temporarily exceeded . A key advantage of transmission mod - eling is that alternative control scenarios can be examined , giving insight into the potential effectiveness of different inter - vention strategies . Figure 4 shows five such scenarios , simulated with parameters esti - mated for the earliest stages of the Hong Kong epidemic . The scenario of no control measures is shown to give rise to a cata - strophic epidemic , even in the absence of SSEs . Figure 4 also illustrates that although reductions in onset - to - hospitalization times comparable to those achieved in Hong Kong can achieve some reduction in transmission , on their own they are insufficient to control SARS ; other measures are also needed ( such as im - proved infection control in hospitals , voluntary reductions in population contact rates , or move - ment restrictions ) . Given the R 0XSS estimate of 2 . 7 , our analy - ses suggest that the etiological agent of SARS is moderately rather than highly transmissible , ex - cept in the very specific settings that have in - duced the two major clusters to date . The epi - demic in Hong Kong appears to have moved through three phases : early exponential growth , a plateau period with daily case numbers fluc - tuating around 50 , and ( from May onward ) a phase of declining incidence with daily case numbers below 20 . The low value of R t XSS in the latter phase in part reflects the considerable changes in human behavior within Hong Kong that have taken place during the epidemic . In - dividuals have been mixing , traveling , and so - cializing less in public areas , such as restaurants or sports venues . Isolation measures in affected hospitals have been improved . As the epidemic wanes and the public perception of risk chang - es , there is a danger that increased mixing could act to trigger a resurgence in case numbers , with R t XSS again exceeding 1 . Moreover , because of the slow rate of clinical progression to recovery or death ( on the order of 1 month ) , most infect - ed people in a decaying epidemic will be found in hospitals , so that hospital control measures should be enforced rigorously . Continued vigi - lance is necessary during the decay phase of the epidemic , with reinforcement of public health messages , to ensure eradication of this infection from Hong Kong . Ensuring as rapid a decline of the epidem - ic as possible is also important to minimize the probability that another SSE might occur , given that the frequency of SSEs is likely to be related to infection prevalence . Epidemic decay is guaranteed only where R t is main - tained below 1 , which ultimately depends not just on controlling regular transmission events ( i . e . , maintaining R t XSS (cid:7) 1 ) but also on understanding and controlling SSEs . Giv - en our current estimates of R t XSS (cid:4) 0 . 14 and an SSE event size of N SSE (cid:8) 250 , epidemic growth driven by SSEs would occur only if more than 1 in 300 infections were to gener - ate new SSEs ( i . e . , p SSE N SSE (cid:9) 0 . 86 from Eq . 1 ) . Given current controls in Hong Kong and the current tally of two documented SSEs from more than 1500 infections , this outcome appears unlikely . However , without a much better understanding of the causes of the ex - treme between - case heterogeneity in second - ary infection rates for SARS , it is impossible to exclude the possibility that a much higher frequency of SSE - based transmission might be seen in other countries and / or contexts . In the context of Hong Kong , our analysis shows that further reducing the mean time from onset of symptoms to hospital admis - sion by a day or so would speed eradication if contact rates remain low , and would ensure continued control of the epidemic even in the face of moderate increases in population con - tact rates . Therefore , every effort to promote more rapid admission and subsequent isola - tion of suspect SARS cases should continue to be made . The availability of specific and sensitive virological diagnostic tests will help in this task . The reported cases to date in Hong Kong and elsewhere may simply reflect people with the most severe clinical symptoms of infec - tion with the new SARS virus . Our estimates of case reproductive numbers are based on reported SARS cases only . If additional asymptomatic infections in the community were not diagnosed , reproduction number es - timates based on all infections may differ depending on the frequency of asymptomatic cases , whether this frequency varied during the epidemic , and the extent to which such cases can transmit infection . Community - based serological surveys will therefore be valuable to assess past infection levels and should be a priority once a specific and sen - sitive serological test is available . Worldwide , the virus appears to have been contained in most developed countries . Dangers still persist , however , in populous regions of the world with a limited public health infrastructure and poor disease - report - ing systems . The situation in mainland China remains severe , with high case numbers re - ported daily . The Chinese government re - cently introduced more draconian measures designed to restrict mixing and travel ( 15 ) . The current analysis provides some optimism that such methods might be successful at limiting further spread , although it remains too early to judge whether they will be suf - ficient to bring the epidemic under control . One of the key lessons from recent events in Hong Kong has been the importance of good - quality data capture systems to permit de - tailed epidemiological analyses day by day , to inform both health policy formulation and the evaluation of intervention impact . Fig . 4 . Effect of alternative control scenarios on progression of a hypothetical epidemic with Hong Kong – like characteristics . No SSEs other than an initial seeding event of 50 infections on day 0 are modeled . Five scenarios are shown : ( A ) No control measures or change in popula - tion behavior , giving rise to a catastrophic ep - idemic . ( B ) No change in behavior but a reduc - tion in mean onset - to - hospitalization time of 2 days achieved on day 30 , the effect of which is to temporarily increase admission numbers but to reduce transmission by 19 % . ( C ) As B , but with complete cessation of movement between districts imposed on day 45 ( the effect of which is to reduce transmission by 76 % ) . These con - trol measures are seen to be sufﬁcient to con - trol the epidemic even in the absence of pop - ulation behavior change . ( D ) As B , but with a 50 % drop in population contact rates and hos - pital infections from day 45—just sufﬁcient to prevent epidemic growth . ( E ) As D , but with a 70 % reduction in hospital transmission from day 55—sufﬁcient to rapidly control the epi - demic . For all scenarios , Hong Kong demo - graphic parameters were used and averages of 1000 model realizations are shown . R E P O R T S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 300 20 JUNE 2003 1965 on A ugu s t 12 , 2017 h tt p : / / sc i en c e . sc i en c e m ag . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m References and Notes 1 . J . S . Peiris et al . , Lancet 361 , 1319 ( 2003 ) . 2 . N . Lee et al . , N . Engl . J . Med . 348 , 1986 ( 2003 ) . 3 . S . M . Poutanen et al . , N . Engl . J . Med . 348 , 1995 ( 2003 ) . 4 . T . G . Ksiazek et al . , N . Engl . J . Med . 348 , 1953 ( 2003 ) . 5 . Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre ( www . bcgsc . ca / bioinfo / SARS ) . 6 . M . A . Marra et al . , Science 300 , 1399 ( 2003 ) ; published online 1 May 2003 ( 10 . 1126 / science . 1085953 ) . 7 . R . M . Anderson , R . M . May , Infectious Diseases of Humans : Dynamics and Control ( Oxford Univ . Press , Oxford , 1991 ) . 8 . O . Diekmann , J . A . P . Heesterbeck , Mathematical Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases : Model Build - ing , Analysis and Interpretation ( Wiley , New York , 2002 ) . 9 . Hong Kong Police Department , Selection of Daily Reports of SARS Cases ( unpublished ) . 10 . C . A . Donnelly etal . , Lancet , publishedonline7May2003 ( http : / / image . thelancet . com / extras / 03art4453web . pdf ) . 11 . See supporting data on Science Online . 12 . J . S . M . Peiris et al . , Lancet , published online 9 May 2003 ( http : / / image . thelancet . com / extras / 03art4432web . pdf ) . 13 . N . M . Ferguson , S . Mallett , H . Jackson , N . Roberts , P . Ward , J . Antimicrob . Chemother . 51 , 977 ( 2003 ) . 14 . Outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome ( SARS ) at Amoy Gardens , Kowloon Bay , Hong Kong , Main Findings of the Investigation ( Hong Kong De - partment of Health , 2003 ) . 15 . World Health Organization , Communicable Disease Surveillance & Response ( www . who . int / csr / sars / guidelines / en ) . 16 . Supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( S . R . , N . M . F . ) , the Royal Society ( A . C . G . , N . M . F . ) , the Medical Research Council ( C . F . , L . J . A . - R . , N . M . F . ) , and the Wellcome Trust ( R . M . A . ) . We thank the Health , Welfare and Food Bureau , the Department of Health , and the Hospital Authority for primary data collec - tion , collation , and facilitation . Above all , we pay tribute to all frontline health care workers who have been working around the clock at great personal risk to care for SARS patients and keep health records of importance to epidemiological analysis . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 1086478 / DC1 SOM Text References 6 May 2003 ; accepted 22 May 2003 Published online 23 May 2003 ; 10 . 1126 / science . 1086478 Include this information when citing this paper . Transmission Dynamics and Control of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Marc Lipsitch , 1 Ted Cohen , 1 Ben Cooper , 1 James M . Robins , 1 Stefan Ma , 2 Lyn James , 2 Gowri Gopalakrishna , 2 Suok Kai Chew , 2 Chorh Chuan Tan , 2 Matthew H . Samore , 3 David Fisman , 4 , 5 Megan Murray 1 , 6 * Severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) is a recently described illness of humans that has spread widely over the past 6 months . With the use of detailed epidemiologic data from Singapore and epidemic curves from other settings , we estimated the reproductive number for SARS in the absence of interventions and in the presence of control efforts . We estimate that a single infectious case of SARS will infect about three secondary cases in a population that has not yet instituted control measures . Public - health efforts to reduce transmission are expected to have a substantial impact on reducing the size of the epidemic . SARS is a recently described illness of humans with a high case - fatality rate ( 1 ) that has spread widely since November 2002 . Probable cases have been reported in 31 countries , with exten - sive ongoing transmission in Taiwan and Chi - na , continuing transmission in Hong Kong , and major outbreaks that are now under control in Singapore ( Fig . 1A ) and Vietnam ( 2 ) . The caus - ative agent of SARS appears to be a novel coronavirus ( 3 – 5 ) . We have used mathematical models of SARS transmission to estimate the infectious - ness of SARS from the rate of increase of cases , to assess the likelihood of an outbreak when a case is introduced into a susceptible population , and to draw preliminary conclusions about the impact of control measures . The basic reproductive number of an infec - tion , R 0 , is defined as the expected number of secondary infectious cases generated by an av - erage infectious case in an entirely susceptible population . This quantity determines the poten - tial for an infectious agent to start an outbreak , the extent of transmission in the absence of control measures , and the ability of control measures to reduce spread . R 0 can be expressed as R 0 (cid:4) kbD , where k is the number of contacts each infectious individual has per unit time , b is the probability of transmission per contact between an infectious case and a susceptible person , and D is the mean duration of infec - tiousness . In contrast to R 0 , the effective repro - ductive number , R , measures the number of secondary cases generated by an infectious case once an epidemic is underway . In the absence of control measures , R (cid:4) R 0 x , where x is the proportion of the population susceptible . Dur - ing the course of an epidemic , R declines be - cause of the depletion of susceptibles in the population and the implementation of specific control measures . To stop an outbreak , R must be maintained below 1 . We analyzed data on the first 205 proba - ble cases of SARS reported in Singapore to obtain relevant epidemiologic parameters ( 6 ) . The number of secondary SARS cases per index case was highly variable ( Fig . 1B ) in each week but fell from a mean of 7 for index cases with symptom onset in the first week of the Singapore outbreak to a mean of 1 . 6 in the second week to a mean below 1 in most weeks thereafter ( Fig . 1B ) ( P (cid:7) . 04 , Cuzick test for trend ) . This decline in secondary cas - es coincided with the application of control measures , including isolation of SARS cases and quarantine of their asymptomatic con - tacts . Enhanced surveillance of contacts for the development of symptoms resulted in a decline in the time from symptom onset until hospital isolation ( Fig . 1C ) . Because control measures were rapidly applied , there are too few data from Singapore to provide a reliable estimate of R from the period before the institution of control measures . We therefore used an alternate approach , estimating R from the rate of exponential growth in the number of cases in several other settings and with the use of data from Singapore on the mean serial interval , de - fined as the time from the onset of symptoms in an index case to the onset of symptoms in a subsequent case infected by the index pa - tient ( 7 ) . The mean serial interval ( 8 ) in Singapore was 8 . 4 days ( SD (cid:4) 3 . 8 ) ( Fig . 1E ) , although , as expected , it was higher for epi - sodes of transmission in which the index case had onset of symptoms in the first 2 weeks of the outbreak before full - scale interventions were in place ( Fig . 1F ; mean for first 2 weeks was 10 . 0 days ; SD (cid:4) 2 . 8 days ) . With the use of these estimates , we esti - mated values of R on the basis of the number of cases that had been reported by a particular time , Y ( t ) , under four assumptions : ( i ) Y ( t ) (cid:4) 1358 cases reported in Hong Kong on 19 April , t (cid:4) 63 days after the first case on 15 February ( 2 ) ; ( ii ) Y ( t ) (cid:4) 425 cases reported in Hong Kong on 28 March ( 2 ) , just before the application of specific measures to control 1 Department of Epidemiology , Harvard School of Pub - lic Health , 677 Huntington Avenue , Boston , MA 02115 , USA . 2 Epidemiology and Disease Control Di - vision , Ministry of Health , College of Medicine Build - ing , 16 College Road , Singapore 169854 . 3 Department of Medicine , University of Utah , Salt Lake City , UT 84132 , USA . 4 Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics , McMaster University , Hamilton , On - tario L8N 3Z5 , Canada . 5 City of Hamilton Public Health and Community Service Department , Hamil - ton , Ontario L8R 3L5 , Canada . 6 Infectious Disease Unit , Massachusetts General Hospital , 55 Fruit Street , Boston , MA 02114 , USA . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : mmurray @ hsph . harvard . edu R E P O R T S 20 JUNE 2003 VOL 300 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1966 on A ugu s t 12 , 2017 h tt p : / / sc i en c e . sc i en c e m ag . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m InterventionsTransmission Dynamics of the Etiological Agent of SARS in Hong Kong : Impact of Public Health Koon - Hung Lee , Edith M . C . Lau , Neil M . Ferguson and Roy M . Anderson Lai - Ming Ho , Tai - Hing Lam , Thuan Q . Thach , Patsy Chau , King - Pan Chan , Su - Vui Lo , Pak - Yin Leung , Thomas Tsang , William Ho , Steven Riley , Christophe Fraser , Christl A . Donnelly , Azra C . Ghani , Laith J . Abu - Raddad , Anthony J . Hedley , Gabriel M . Leung , originally published online May 23 , 2003 DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . 1086478 ( 5627 ) , 1961 - 1966 . 300 Science ARTICLE TOOLS http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / 300 / 5627 / 1961 MATERIALSSUPPLEMENTARY http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / suppl / 2003 / 06 / 19 / 1086478 . DC1 CONTENTRELATED http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / sci / 300 / 5627 / 1884 . full http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / sci / 300 / 5627 / 1966 . full REFERENCES http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / 300 / 5627 / 1961 # BIBL This article cites 6 articles , 1 of which you can access for free PERMISSIONS http : / / www . sciencemag . org / help / reprints - and - permissions Terms of Service Use of this article is subject to the registered trademark of AAAS . is a Science American Association for the Advancement of Science . No claim to original U . S . Government Works . The title Science , 1200 New York Avenue NW , Washington , DC 20005 . 2017 © The Authors , some rights reserved ; exclusive licensee ( print ISSN 0036 - 8075 ; online ISSN 1095 - 9203 ) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science on A ugu s t 12 , 2017 h tt p : / / sc i en c e . sc i en c e m ag . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m