Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 1 YAP nuclear localization in the absence of cell - cell contact is mediated by a filamentous actin - dependent , myosin II - and phospho - YAP independent pathway during ECM mechanosensing * Arupratan Das 1 , 2 , Robert S . Fischer 1 , Duojia Pan 2 and Clare M . Waterman 1 , 3 1 Cell Biology and Physiology Center , National Heart Lung and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA , 2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21205 , USA * Running Title : Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 3 To whom correspondence may be addressed : Clare M . Waterman , Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Morphodynamics , NHLBI , National Institutes of Health , Building 50 South Dr . , Room 4537 , Bethesda , MD 20892 - 8019 USA . Tel . : ( 301 ) - 435 - 2949 ; E - mail : watermancm @ nhlbi . nih . gov Keywords : Hippo signaling , YAP , mechanotransduction , F - actin and cytoskeletal integrity , contact inhibition , fluorescence microscopy . ABSTRACT Cell - cell contact inhibition and the mechanical environment of cells have both been shown to regulate YAP nuclear localization to modulate cell proliferation . Changes in cellular contractility by genetic , pharmacological and matrix stiffness perturbations regulate YAP nuclear localization . However , since contractility and F - actin organization are interconnected cytoskeletal properties , it remains unclear which of these distinctly regulates YAP localization . Here we show that in the absence of cell - cell contact , actomyosin contractility suppresses YAP phosphorylation at S112 , however neither loss of contractility nor increase in YAP phosphorylation is sufficient for its nuclear exclusion . We find that actin cytoskeletal integrity is essential for YAP nuclear localization , and can override phosphoregulation or contractility - mediated regulation of YAP nuclear localization . This actin - mediated regulation is conserved during mechanotransduction , as substrate compliance increased YAP phosphorylation and reduced cytoskeletal integrity leading to nuclear exclusion of both YAP and pS112 - YAP . These data provide evidence for two actin - mediated pathways for YAP regulation ; one in which actomyosin contractility regulates YAP phosphorylation , and a second which involves cytoskeletal integrity – mediated regulateion of YAP nuclear localization independent of contractility . We suggest that in non - contact inhibited cells , this latter mechanism may be important in low stiffness regimes , such as may be encountered in physiological environments . INTRODUCTION Nuclear localization of the transcriptional co - activator YAP ( and its ortholog TAZ ) and activation of the TEAD family transcription factors promote cell proliferation , differentiation , stem cell fate , and organ size regulation ( 1 - 3 ) . Deficiencies in YAP regulation lead to developmental defects ( 4 ) and tumor formation ( 5 ) . YAP nuclear localization is regulated by a broad range of biochemical and mechanical cues which include serum soluble cues ( 6 ) , cell - cell contact mediated by adherens junction ( AJs ) ( 7 ) , and cell mechanosensing of extracellular matrix http : / / www . jbc . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M115 . 708313 The latest version is at JBC Papers in Press . Published on January 12 , 2016 as Manuscript M115 . 708313 Copyright 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 2 ( ECM ) physical properties or stretch ( 8 - 10 ) . These upstream inputs converge on the regulation of the core components of the Hippo signaling pathway to regulate YAP nuclear localization . Genetic studies in Drosophila and cell biological studies in culture have identified the epistatic relationship of the core components of the Hippo signaling pathway ( 3 ) . Upstream signals activate Mst1 / 2 ( Hippo kinase in Drosophila ) , which in turn activates Lats1 / 2 kinases ( Wts in Drosophila ) , and Lats phosphorylates YAP ( Yorkie in Drosophila ) on serine 112 , which induces it to form a complex with 14 - 3 - 3 and retains it in the cytoplasm ( 1 , 11 - 13 ) . In the absence of the activation of Hippo signaling , YAP is imported into the nucleus where it promotes TEAD - mediated transcription . However , the interplay between the inputs of serum factors , cell - cell contact , and cell mechanosensing in regulation of YAP nuclear localization is not well understood . Hippo signaling - mediated regulation of YAP via cell - cell contact has been well characterized ( 14 ) . YAP is localized to the nucleus and active in cells growing at low density , but becomes cytoplasmic in confluent cultures , and thus underlies the classic paradigm of contact inhibition of proliferation ( 12 ) . YAP S112 phosphorylation increases during contact inhibition , and overexpression of non - phosphorylatable YAP delays proliferation arrest , allowing cells to reach higher densities than controls ( 12 ) . The role of cadherin - and catenin - mediated cell - cell AJs in this process is being elucidated ( 14 ) . In Drosophila , α - catenin and the LIM protein Ajuba form a complex at AJs and recruit Wts / Lats1 / 2 kinase to regulate YAP phosphorylation , cytoplasmic retention , and tissue growth ( 15 ) . Hippo signaling regulation via AJs occurs during mouse embryonic development , in which the protein angiomotin forms a complex with Lats1 / 2 at the AJs to activate Hippo signaling and thus retain YAP in the cytoplasm ( 7 ) . On the other hand , cellular mechanosensation - mediated regulation of YAP localization is thought to be distinct from the cell junctional complexes that regulate the Hippo cascade ( 16 ) . Cell spreading on large patches of ECM , cell attachment to stiff or stretched ECM , ( 8 , 10 ) or fluid shear stress ( 17 ) all induce YAP activation and nuclear localization in a range of cell types . These pathways may be Hippo independent or dominant , as LATS1 / 2 inactivation cannot rescue YAP inhibition in cells with reduced mechanical stress ( 8 ) . Although mechanical regulation of YAP localization depends on cell attachment , it is not dependent on integrin engagement ( 18 ) , but rather thought to be dependent on the maintenance of tension in an intact , contractile actomyosin cytoskeleton . Indeed , pharmacological inhibition of actin assembly or myosin II ATPase blocks YAP nuclear translocation in cells on stiff or large ECMs ( 8 ) . Although the initial evidence that YAP is regulated by the cytoskeleton came from studies of mechanosensation , more recent evidence suggests that cells need mechanical tension to sustain YAP transcriptional activities and / or nuclear localization , irrespective of the inducing input ( 16 ) . In contact inhibited Drosophila epithelial tissue , myosin II contractility regulates the formation of the Wts kinase complex at AJs to suppress Hippo signaling , and in the absence of contractility this complex is disrupted and Hippo signaling is activated ( 15 ) . Furthermore , in dense cultures in - vitro , YAP nuclear localization is rescued by ECM stretching ( 9 , 10 ) . Mechanoregulation of YAP in the absence of cell - cell contact has also been shown to be dependent on ECM stiffness sensation , myosin II motor activity and cell spreading area ( 8 , 19 ) . Thus , the mechanisms by which the actomyosin cytoskeleton regulates YAP localization and phosphorylation and their relationship to cell - cell contact remain major unanswered questions in the field . Although mechanosensation is well known to alter myosin II activity ( 20 , 21 ) , it is not known how mechanosensation might affect F - actin levels in cells . Furthermore , recent evidence suggests that actin filaments , rather than myosin II activity , may be the key regulator of YAP . Two elegant studies by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 3 in Drosophila showed that Hippo signaling reduces cellular F - actin ( 22 ) , while increasing F - actin by loss of capping protein can suppress Hippo signaling ( 23 ) . In addition , LATS1 / 2 - independent regulation of YAP can be achieved in cells cultured on soft , small matrices or at high cell density by promotion of actin assembly via depletion the actin depolymerizing factor Cofilin , or the filament capping proteins capZ or gelsolin ( 10 ) . Further complicating these findings , it has also been shown that myosin inhibition by blebbistatin only partially affects YAP nuclear localization , yet it was predominantly dependent on the actin binding protein angiomotin ( 24 ) . To resolve the role of myosin contractility and F - actin in regulation of YAP nuclear localization , we utilized breast epithelial cells as a contact - inhibited model system , and mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEF ) as a contact - independent model system . We found that in the absence of cell - cell contacts in either epithelial or fibroblast cells , YAP localizes to the nucleus even in the absence of actomyosin contractility . Furthermore , actomyosin contractility suppresses YAP phosphorylation at S112 residue , and when myosin II is inhibited , even phosphorylated YAP localized to the nucleus . Though contractility and phosphorylation is dispensable for YAP nuclear localization , we find that nuclear localization of YAP or phosphorylated YAP is strictly dependent on the abundance F - actin filaments . This actin - dependent regulation is also conserved during mechanotransduction when cells are grown on soft substrates , as would be expected to occur physiologically . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell culture , treatments and transfections - Mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs , kindly provided by Mary C . Beckerle , Huntsman Cancer Institute , Salt Lake City , UT ) were cultured in DMEM ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 100µg / ml penicillin / streptomycin ( P / S ) , 2mM L - glutamine and 10 % FBS . MCF10A mammary epithelial cells ( ATCC , Manassas ) were cultured in mammary epithelium basal medium ( MEBM , Lonza , catalog # cc - 3151 ) supplemented with BPE , hEGF , insulin , hydrocortisone from MEGM Single Quots kit ( Lonza , catalog # cc - 4136 ) , 100ng / ml cholera toxin , 100µg / ml P / S and 10 % FBS . For immunofluorescence assays under sparse culture conditions , ~ 3 , 500 cell / cm 2 were plated on cover slips coated with 10µg / ml fibronectin or 10µg / ml poly - L - lysine , as noted , and allowed to spread overnight . For dense culture assays , ~ 4 x 10 5 cell / cm 2 cells were seeded on fibronectin - coated coverslips and cultured at 37 0 C in 5 % CO 2 for 24hr . Cells were treated with blebbistatin ( Toronto research Chemicals ) , Latrunculin - A ( Invitrogen ) , Y - 27632 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , manganese chloride , or DMSO vehicle control at the indicated concentrations for 2hrs . Cell culture and drug treatments were performed at 37 0 C in 5 % CO 2 . For ECM stiffness - dependent assays , quinone - activated polyacrylamide / bisacrylamide hydrogels on cover slips or 10cm Petri dishes were purchased from ( Matrigen , California ) or were made by hand ( 55 . 0 and 0 . 7 kPa ) in which the gel surface was cross - linked with Sulfo - SANPAH reactive amines by UV exposure . Hydrogels were coupled with 10µg / ml fibronectin at room temperature for 1hr and equilibrated with media prior to cell plating . For immunofluorescence , ~ 3 , 500 cell / cm 2 were plated on coverslip hydrogels , for biochemical assays ( whole cell lysis , F / G actin separation ) cells were plated on Petri dish hydrogels and grown overnight to ~ 60 % confluence . The Flag - YAP and Flag - YAP - 8SA ( including the following mutations : S61A , S109A , S127A , S128A , S131A , S163A , S164A , and S381A ) expression vector consisting of the cDNA encoding human YAP fused to COOH - terminus of flag ( Obtained from Kun - Liang Guan , UCSD ) which were used in ( 12 ) . The YAP1 - GFP expression vector consisting of the cDNA encoding mouse YAP1 fused at its COOH - terminus to eGFP was purchased from Genecopoeia ( catalog # EX - Mm21312 - M98 ) . YAP1 S112A mutant was generated on the YAP1 - GFP construct using QuickChange site - directed mutagenesis ( Agilent technologies ) . mApple - β - actin construct was kindly provided by M . Davidson ( Florida State University , Tallahassee , by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 4 FL ) . MEFs were transfected with these constructs ( Nucleofactor solution - V , Lonza ) and seeded on fibronectin coated coverslips or hydrogels for ~ 18hr prior to fixation . Flag - YAP constructs were transfected ( Effectene , Qiagen ) and cultured for 24hr then seeded on fibronectin coated coverslips for another ~ 16hr prior to fixation . Immunofluorescence - For immunolocalizing YAP and Flag - YAP , cells on fibronectin - coated coverslips or on polyacrylamide / bisacrylamide hydrogels were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Science ) in cytoskeleton buffer ( CB ; 20mM PIPES , pH 6 . 8 , 138mM KCl , 3mM MgCl 2 and 2mM EGTA ) . Cells were permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in CB for 5min followed by a 10min wash with 0 . 1M glycine to quench free aldehydes . Next , cells were washed with TBST ( Tris buffered saline , 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 ) two times for 5min each and blocked for 1hr with blocking buffer ( TBST and 2 % BSA ) . Cells were incubated with anti - mouse - YAP ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . sc - 101199 ) in blocking buffer at 1 : 200 dilution for 2hr at room temperature or anti - rat - Flag ( BioLegend # 637301 ) at 1 : 200 overnight at 4 0 C and washed three times for 5min each with TBST . Coverslips were then incubated with fluorophore - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Jackson Immuno Research Laboratories , Inc . ) at 1 : 500 in blocking buffer for 1hr at room temperature . F - actin was stained with Alexa Fluor 488 or 561 phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) at 1 : 500 dilution along with the secondary antibodies . Coverslips were washed again with TBST three times for 5min each , and DNA was stained with 1 . 4µM DAPI ( Sigma - Aldrich ) with the second wash . Finally , coverslips were mounted on glass slides with mounting media ( DAKO ) and sealed with nail polish . To immunolocalize phospho ( S112 ) - YAP , cells were fixed with pre - chilled ( - 20 0 C ) methanol for 20min at - 20 0 C , washed three times for 5min each with CB and continued with the immunofluorescence protocol as above , using anti - rabbit - phospho - YAP ( S127 ) ( Cell Signaling , # 4911 ) at 1 : 200 dilution . Cells expressing YAP1 - GFP and mApple - actin were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in CB and washed with 0 . 1M glycine . After a wash with TBS and TBS with DAPI , cells were mounted on a glass slide and sealed with nail polish . F and G - actin staining was performed as in ( 25 ) with modifications . Cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in CB followed by a single wash with PBS and permeabilization with PBS containing 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 10min . Permeabilized cells were washed with 0 . 1M glycine in CB for 10min , then washed with PBS two times for 5min each , and rinsed with PBS with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . After blocking with antibody dilution solution ( PBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 2 % BSA ) for 1hr , F - actin was stained with Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin at 1 : 500 dilution and G - actin with Deoxyribonuclease - I conjugated with Alexa Fluor - 594 ( Invitrogen ) at 5µg / ml concentration for 1hr at room temperature . Coverslips were washed three times with PBS , 5min each and mounted on glass slide with mounting media ( DAKO ) and sealed with nail polish . Microscopy and image analysis - Immunolabeled samples were imaged by spinning disc confocal microscopy with an Eclipse Ti microscope body ( Nikon ) equipped with a Yokogawa spinning disc scanning unit as described in ( 26 ) . Samples on coverslips were imaged with a 60x 1 . 49 NA / oil objective and on hydrogels with 60x 1 . 2 NA / water objective . Images were acquired with a cooled - CCD camera ( HQ2 or Myo from Photometrics ) . For immunostained cells , Z - stacks of images were acquired for each channel , and the middle confocal slice was chosen from the images of the nucleus detected in the DAPI channel . On the corresponding slice in the YAP channel , the average fluorescence intensity in the nucleus and just outside the nucleus ( cytoplasm ) was measured to determine the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio . For cells expressing YAP1 - GFP and mApple - actin , to reduce image photobleaching , instead of z - stacks , a single image at the middle nuclear plane ( determined in the DAPI channel ) was acquired in the GFP channel , then the microscope was focused to the coverslip surface for acquiring the image in the mApple channel . For F - to G - actin ratio measurements , confocal Z - stacks of images were acquired for by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 5 each channel with 400nm step size using a stage piezo Z - stepper ( Mad City Labs ) integrated with an XYZ automated stage and controller ( Applied Scientific Instruments ) . Integrated fluorescence intensity was measured on the background - subtracted sum - projections for each channel and ratioed to give the F / G actin ratio . Image analysis was performed using ImageJ software . Nuclear / cytoplasmic fractionation - Nuclear / cytoplasmic fractionation was performed essentially according to Dignam ( 27 ) but with the following modifications . All the buffers used were kept on ice and centrifugations were done at 4 0 C with soft braking . MEFs were grown on fibronectin - coated 15cm culture dish to ~ 60 % confluence . After a single wash with PBS , cells were scraped with PBS ( containing 1mM DTT and 1X protease inhibitor ) and harvested by centrifugation at 1000g for 15min . The cell pellet was gently resuspended with five times the volume of pellet with buffer - A ( 10mM HEPES , pH 7 . 9 , 1 . 5mM MgCl 2 , 10mM KCl , 0 . 5mM DTT and 1X protease inhibitor ) and incubated on ice for 15min , followed by homogenization ( Wheaton ) . Cell lysis was checked by trypan blue staining of the nucleus after every 20 strokes . The cell lysate was spun at 1000g for 5min to collect the pellet as the nuclear fraction and the supernatant as the cytoplasmic fraction . The nuclear fraction was washed by centrifugation two times with buffer - A ( 1000g for 5min each ) , resuspended with buffer - A to a similar volume as the cytoplasmic fraction and sonicated . Both the fractions were boiled with sample buffer keeping an identical final volume . Each fraction was immunoblotted for YAP , pS112 - YAP and histone H3 . Fractionation of F - and G - actin by triton solubilization - Determination of the fraction of F and G - actin in cells was done following the method of Rasmussen et al ( 28 ) with modifications . MEFs were grown on fibronectin - coated 10cm culture dishes to ~ 60 % confluence . Cells were washed briefly with cold PBS , and lysed with 600 µl actin stabilization buffer ( 0 . 1 M PIPES , pH 6 . 9 , 30 % glycerol , 5 % DMSO , 1 mM MgSO 4 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM ATP and 1X protease inhibitor ) for 10min at room temperature . Cells were collected by scraping , followed by centrifugation at 90 , 000g for 30min at 4 0 C to separate detergent insoluble ( F - actin ) and soluble ( G - actin ) fractions . An equal volume of 2X sample buffer was added to the soluble fraction and 1X sample buffer to the insoluble pellet to make both fractions 1X of identical volume . Samples were boiled for 10min , and equal volume was loaded for immunoblotting actin . Determination of F to G - actin from cells grown on hydrogels or dense culture was performed according to Cramer ( 25 ) with modifications . Cells were grown to ~ 60 % confluence on fibronectin - coated hydrogels or to 100 % confluence for dense culture in 10cm culture dishes . Cells were washed with PBS and incubated with actin stabilization buffer for 10min . The triton - soluble G - actin was then collected upon cell lysis by pipetting up the solution from the dish at room temperature . After a brief wash with actin stabilization buffer , the triton - insoluble F - actin was dissolved directly on the hydrogel surface by adding boiling F - actin solubilization buffer ( 0 . 06 M Tris pH 6 . 8 , SDS 2 % ( w / v ) , β - mercaptoethanol 1 % ( v / v ) ) . The F - actin fraction was collected from the dish by carefully scraping and pipetting the solution . Both the triton - soluble and insoluble fractions were concentrated by speed - vac and made to identical volume with actin - stabilizing buffer . Sample buffer was added to each fraction to the identical volume and boiled for 10min and immunoblotted for actin . For experiments to compare the F : G ratio in dense culture and sparse cultures , an extra pair of culture dishes at the two plating densities was used to count cells , and the sample loading volume was adjusted accordingly to keep the cell number similar between dense and sparse conditions . Western blot - For immunoblotting whole cell extracts , the same number of MEFs grown and treated with the indicated drugs for 2hr were washed with PBS and directly lysed with boiling 1x sample buffer ( Quality Biological , Inc . ) supplemented with 5 % BME . Samples were collected by scraping , sonicated and boiled for 10min . Protein samples from whole cell lysis , nucleus / cytoplasmic or F / G actin fractionations were separated by SDS - PAGE and electrotransferred to immobilon - FL ( Millipore ) by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 6 membrane for immunoblotting . Membranes were blocked for 1hr at room temperature with blocking solution ( 3 % skim milk in TBST ) , incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 0 C in blocking solution . After reacting with primary antibodies , membranes were washed three times for 5min each with TBST and incubated with fluorescent - conjugated secondary antibodies for 1hr 30min at room temperature . Secondary antibodies used at 1 : 5 , 000 dilutions in blocking solutions are ; anti - rabbit IRDye 680RD and anti - mouse IR dye 800CW ( LI - COR , Inc . ) . Membranes were washed three times for 5min each with TBST and imaged with the Odyssey infrared imaging system ( LI - COR , Inc . ) and analyzed with ImageJ software . Integrated fluorescence intensity for each of the western blot bands was measured from the background - subtracted images . Primary antibodies used for western blots were : anti - mouse - actin , clone C4 ( 1 : 8 , 000 , Millipore # MAB1501 ) , anti - mouse - YAP ( 1 : , 1 , 000 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology # sc - 101199 ) , anti - rabbit - phospho - YAP ( S127 ) ( 1 : 1 , 000 , Cell Signaling # 4911 ) and anti - rabbit - Histone H3 ( 1 : 5 , 000 , Cell Signaling # 9715 ) . Statistical analysis – Statistical comparison done with the student’s t - test between pair of datasets . One - way ANOVA tests were performed on group of data containing three or more than three data sets , p - values from ANOVA tests are listed in table1 . RESULTS In the absence of cell - cell contact , nuclear localization of YAP requires F - actin cytoskeletal integrity , but not ROCK - mediated myosin II contractility - We sought to examine the interplay between cytoskeletal integrity , contractility and cell contact inhibition in regulation of YAP nuclear localization and phosphorylation . We utilized MFC - 10A epithelial cells that normally form tissues , and mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) that exhibit contact inhibition of motility ( 29 ) , but also function and proliferate as individual cells . We first examined the role of cytoskeletal integrity and contractility in YAP localization in confluent cultures by immunolocalizing YAP and staining actin filaments ( F - actin ) with fluorescent phalloidin in cells treated with pharmacological inhibitors . In confluent cultures of either MEFs or MCF10A cells plated on fibronectin , F - actin formed a band around the cell periphery at cell - cell contacts , and YAP was excluded from the nucleus ( Fig . 1 , A - B ) . To test if YAP localization was affected by cytoskeletal integrity in confluent culture , cells were treated with either vehicle ( DMSO ) control or 2 µM Latrunculin - A ( Lat - A ) for 2hr to depolymerize F - actin . This showed that treatment with Lat - A disrupted the peripheral F - actin band , which was replaced by a series of F - actin punctae , and YAP remained excluded from the nucleus ( Fig . 1 , A - B ) . To test the role of contractility , myosin II was inhibited directly with the myosin II ATPase inhibitor blebbistatin ( 50 µM for 2hr ) or indirectly by inhibiting the upstream regulator of myosin II , Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) with Y - 27632 ( 50 µM for 2hr ) . In fibroblasts , these treatments caused disruption of the peripheral F - actin band , while in MCF10 - A cells the peripheral F - actin remained intact , but F - actin was additionally distributed through the cytoplasm . In spite of these effects on the cytoskeleton , inhibition of contractility did not affect YAP localization , which remained excluded from the nucleus as in controls , as expected . Thus , in confluent cells , YAP is retained in the cytoplasm in both epithelial cells and fibroblasts , independent of actomyosin activities . Next , we tested the role of the actomyosin cytoskeleton in YAP localization in the absence of contact inhibition . Sparsely plated MEFs and MFC10A cells spread on fibronectin exhibited thick F - actin stress fibers , and unlike in dense cultures where YAP was retained in the cytoplasm , YAP was strongly localized to the nucleus ( Fig . 1 , C and E ) , indicating that YAP cytoplasmic retention requires cell - cell contact . Treatment of sparse cultures of both cell types with Lat - A showed that disruption of F - actin caused loss of nuclear YAP and its retention in the cytoplasm , similar to the effects of confluence ( Fig . 1 , C and E ) . Inhibition of contractility with blebbistatin or Y - 27632 induced loss of stress fibers and promoted lamellipodia as expected ( Fig . 1 , C and E ) . However , surprisingly , in sparse cells with contraction inhibited , YAP remained partially by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 7 localized to the nucleus in both MEFs and MCF10A cells ( Fig . 1 , C and E ) . Quantification of the nuclear : cytoplasmic ratio of YAP in immunofluorescence images confirmed these observations ( Fig . 1 , D and F ) . Together , these results indicate that in both fibroblasts and epithelial cells , YAP nuclear localization is primarily regulated by cell - cell contact . While in the absence of cell - cell contact nuclear localization of YAP requires F - actin cytoskeletal integrity , but not ROCK - mediated myosin II contractility . In sparse cells , nuclear localization of YAP is promoted by F - actin , and is independent of integrin signaling , myosin II contractility and is not fully dependent on S112 phosphorylation - We next sought to understand the cytoskeletal mechanisms regulating YAP localization in the absence of cell - cell contact . As results were similar in fibroblasts and epithelial cells , subsequent studies were done on MEFs , since these were more easily maintained in sparse culture . Because disruption of cytoskeletal integrity by Lat - A causes dissolution of focal adhesions , this suggests that effects of Lat - A on YAP localization could be due to changes in integrin signaling from focal adhesions . In addition , integrins have been shown to regulate Hippo signaling in MCF - 10A cells under serum - starvation ( 30 ) . To test the role of integrin in mediating actin - dependent regulation of Yap in sparsely plated cells in the presence of serum , we cultured cells in serum - containing media and blocked integrin engagement by culturing MEFs on poly - L - lysine - coated coverslips ( 31 ) and compared YAP localization to that in cells grown on the integrin ligand fibronectin . This showed that on poly - L - lysine YAP was localized to the nucleus , while disrupting actin cytoskeleton by Lat - A excluded YAP from the nucleus under both plating conditions ( Fig . 2 , A - B and D ) . Next , we constitutively activated integrin by treatment of cells with Mn 2 + ( 1mM ) ( 32 ) . This showed that manganese treatment failed to suppress YAP nuclear exclusion by actin cytoskeletal disruption ( Fig . 2 , C - D ) . Together , these results suggest that in sparse cells in presence of serum , YAP nuclear localization is independent of integrin signaling but dependent on cytoskeletal integrity . The canonical pathway for regulation of YAP localization is through phospho - regulation of S112 , which promotes YAP nuclear exclusion and retention in the cytoplasm when phosphorylated , and nuclear localization when dephosphorylated ( 11 , 12 , 33 , 34 ) . To determine the effects of cytoskeletal perturbations on YAP phosphorylation , we treated sparse MEFs with cytoskeletal inhibitors followed by western blot analysis of total YAP and YAP phosphorylated on S112 ( pS112 - YAP ) . This showed that compared to control , both Lat - A ( 18 ) and blebbistatin treatment increased pS112 - YAP ( Fig . 3A ) . This is in agreement with effects of blebbistatin on YAP phosphorylation reported in cancer associated fibroblasts ( 35 ) and in mammary epithelial cell ( 18 ) . Since our findings above showed that a substantial portion of YAP localized to the nucleus under myosin II inhibition in sparse cells , this suggested that phosphorylated YAP could localize in the nucleus when contractility is inhibited . To test this , we co - immunolocalized YAP and pS112 - YAP in sparse MEFs under cytoskeletal perturbations . This showed that even in vehicle control , about half the pS112 - YAP was localized to the nucleus ( nuclear : cytoplasmic ratio of 1 ) ( Fig . 3 , B - C ) , in agreement with Wada et al ( 19 ) . However , pS112 - YAP was significantly excluded from the nucleus when the actin cytoskeleton was depolymerized with Lat - A ( Fig . 3 , B - C ) . In contrast , treatment of cells with Y - 27632 or a range of concentrations of blebbistatin had no effect on the nuclear : cytoplasmic ratio of pS112 - YAP as compared to control ( Fig . 3 , B - C ) . Results from immunofluorescence assays were further supported by biochemical fractionation of nucleus and cytoplasm from sparse MEFs . This showed in control cells that although YAP and pS112 - YAP were concentrated in the nucleus , both were also present in the cytoplasm at low levels ( Fig . 3 , D ) . Depolymerizing actin filaments with Lat - A decreased both YAP and pS112 - YAP in the nuclear fraction relative to the cytoplasm ( Fig . 3 , D ) . In contrast , in cells treated with blebbistatin and Y - 27632 , although the cytoplasmic fraction of YAP and pS112 - YAP increased relative to control , there was still a substantial proportion of by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 8 pS112 - YAP in the nucleus ( Fig . 3 , D ) . Furthermore , considerable pS112 - YAP was present in the nuclear fraction across a range of blebbistatin doses ( Fig . 3 , D ) . Taken together , these data show that neither lack of contractility nor YAP phosphorylation at S112 is sufficient for YAP nuclear exclusion in sparse cells , but loss of F - actin is sufficient for nuclear exclusion of both YAP and pS112 - YAP . Together our results indicate that in the absence of cell - cell contact , nuclear localization of YAP is promoted by F - actin cytoskeletal integrity , independent of integrin activation and ligand binding , myosin II contractility , or S112 YAP phosphorylation . Mechanosensation of stiff ECM promotes nuclear localization of YAP and pS112 - YAP in an F - actin - dependent manner - Mechanosensation of ECM stiffness is known to modulate myosin II activity ( 21 ) and YAP nuclear localization ( 8 ) such that soft ECMs down - regulate myosin II activity , increase YAP phosphorylation and retain YAP in the cytoplasm , while stiff ECMs promote myosin II activity , YAP dephosphorylation and drive YAP into the nucleus ( 9 , 36 ) . Given our observation that pS112 - YAP can reside in the nucleus during myosin II inhibition in sparse cells , we first sought to determine the effects of ECM compliance on YAP localization and phosphorylation , and then determine the role of F - actin cytoskeletal integrity in these effects . We plated cells sparsely on ECMs made of polyacrylamide substrates of defined stiffness with fibronectin coupled to their surface , and performed immunofluorescence and western blot analysis of YAP localization and phosphorylation , and analysis of F - actin integrity . In agreement with previous reports ( 8 , 9 ) , in MEFs grown on stiff substrates ( 50 kPa ) , cells were well - spread and exhibited stress fibers and strong nuclear localization of YAP , while on soft substrates ( 0 . 5 kPa ) , cells were poorly spread and YAP was excluded from the nucleus ( Fig . 4 , A - B ) . Western blot analysis showed that , consistent with previous studies ( 9 ) , pS112 - YAP was higher in cells on soft compared to that in cells on stiff ECMs ( Fig . 4 , C - D ) . Phospho - immunolocalization showed that in cells on soft ECMs , both YAP and pS112 - YAP were significantly excluded from the nucleus ( Fig . 4 , E - F ) . Together , these results show that ECM compliance and myosin II inhibition both promote YAP phosphorylation at S112 , but show differential effects on YAP and pS112 - YAP localization in sparse MEFs . Our results further show that the effects of substrate compliance on both YAP and cell morphology more closely resemble the effects of actin depolymerization ( Fig . 1 , C and Fig . 4 , A ) than they do the effects of myosin II inhibition ( Fig . 1 , C ) , possibly implicating F - actin as a potential contractility - independent regulator of YAP during mechanosensation . Whether stiffness sensing or cell - cell contacts modulate F - actin integrity to regulate YAP localization is not known . We thus sought to test whether F - actin regulates YAP nuclear localization independent of contractility during mechanosensation or cell - cell contact . To determine the effects of ECM compliance or cell - cell contact on F - actin integrity , we used either biochemical fractionation or localization - based ( 25 ) assays to quantify the F - actin - to - globular - actin ( G - actin ) ratio ( F : G ) in cells . We first validated the assays by determining the F : G ratio in cells treated with Lat - A . Fractionation of the detergent soluble G - actin from the insoluble F - actin or direct staining of F - actin by fluorescent phalloidin and G - actin by fluorescent deoxyribonuclease - I ( 25 ) in individual cells both showed that Lat - A treatment significantly reduced the F : G ratio compared to vehicle control ( Fig . 5 , A - D ) , as expected . In contrast , treatment of cells with blebbistatin to inhibit myosin II contractility had no effect on the F : G ratio ( Fig . 5 , A - D ) . We then determined how substrate compliance affected the F : G actin ratio in cells plated sparsely on ECMs of different stiffness . Surprisingly , both detergent fractionation and localization - based assays showed that the F / G actin ratio in cells grown on soft substrates was significantly lower compared to cells grown on stiff substrates ( Fig . 5 , E - H ) . This shows that ECM mechanosensing regulates both contractility ( 20 , 21 ) and F - actin integrity . Together with our aforementioned results , this shows that high F : G actin ratio correlates with YAP nuclear localization , but contractility and YAP by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 9 phosphorylation do not . This further suggests that F - actin may be responsible for YAP nuclear localization in blebbistatin - treated cells . To test the hypothesis that F - actin regulates YAP localization when myosin II is inhibited , we used a high dose of blebbistatin ( 100 µM ) for 2hr to completely inhibit myosin contractility ( 37 ) , then subsequently depolymerized actin filaments with Lat - A . Similar to 50 µM blebbistatin treatment , YAP was still partially localized to the nucleus even in the presence of 100 µM blebbistatin ( Fig . 5 , I - J ) . Importantly however , Lat - A mediated actin depolymerization in blebbistatin - treated cells caused YAP to be excluded from the nucleus ( Fig . 5 , I - J ) . Coupled with the results from low - stiffness substrates , these results suggest that F - actin is responsible for YAP nuclear localization in cells under low contractility conditions . To test whether cell - cell contact - mediated inhibition of YAP nuclear localization also occurs through actin disassembly , we compared the actin assembly state in dense and sparse cultures . This showed that the F : G actin ratio was not effected by cell confluence ( Fig . 5 , K - L ) , suggesting that signaling from adherens junctions during contact inhibition dominates over cytoskeletal integrity in regulation of YAP nuclear localization . However it is also possible that changes in F - actin architecture in dense culture compared to sparse culture ( Fig 1 . A - B and C , E ) may contribute to YAP regulation . Together , these data support the notion that in the absence of cell - cell contact , F - actin , and not myosin II contraction , is the critical regulator of YAP nuclear localization during mechanosensation . Two pathways regulate YAP localization in sparse cells : an F - actin - dependent , phosphorylation - independent pathway , and a myosin II - and phosphorylation - dependent pathway - Our results suggest that F - actin can override the canonical phospho - regulation of YAP localization to promote nuclear localization of phospho - YAP . We sought to test this by assaying the effects of cytoskeletal perturbation on constitutively active mutants of tagged YAP constructs ( FLAG - YAP wt , GFP - YAP1 wt ) that cannot be regulated by Lats1 / 2 kinase by using FLAG - YAP 8SA that has all the known Lats phosphorylation sites mutated to alanines , or GFP - YAP1 S112A , that carries a mutation at the Lats phosphorylation site that has been shown to be the most potent regulator of YAP nuclear localization ( 12 , 38 ) . To first validate the functionality of the YAP constructs , we examined their localization in MEFs where phosphorylation by Lats kinase is known to be key for YAP nuclear exclusion ( 12 , 39 ) . This showed under sparse culture conditions where YAP phosphorylation is known to be low ( 12 ) , both the FLAG - tagged and GFP - tagged YAP wild type constructs and both FLAG - YAP 8SA and GFP - YAP1 S112A localized to the nucleus ( Fig . 6 , A , I and K ) , as expected . In dense culture conditions where YAP is known to become phosphorylated ( 12 ) , FLAG - YAP wt and GFP - YAP1 wt were reduced in the nucleus , while the FLAG - YAP 8SA and GFP - YAP1 S112A were significantly enriched in the nucleus ( Fig . 6 , D , F G - H ) . Thus , tagged YAP constructs localize in a manner that is consistent with that described for Lats - mediated phospho - regulation of endogenous YAP in sparse and dense culture . We next examined the localization of the phospho - mutants in response to cytoskeletal perturbations . This showed that in sparse culture , treatment with Lat - A to depolymerize F - actin induced nuclear exclusion of all of the constructs ( Fig . 6 , B - C and I - L ) , significantly decreasing the nuclear : cytoplasmic ratio of YAP signal , albeit to a lesser extent for the 8SA mutant relative to the S112A mutant or for the 8SA mutant relative to the wild - types ( Fig . 6 , A - C and K - L ) . In dense culture , although actin depolymerization did not affect FLAG - YAP wt localization , this treatment surprisingly caused exclusion of FLAG - YAP 8SA from the nucleus ( Fig . 6 , D - F ) . Together , these results support the notion of a phosphorylation - independent but actin cytoskeleton - dependent pathway for YAP nuclear exclusion , even in contact - inhibited cells . We then determined the role of YAP S112 phosphorylation in myosin - dependent regulation of YAP localization . We found that inhibition of myosin II caused GFP - YAP1 wt to behave similarly to that of the endogenous protein with partial decrease in the nuclear localization compared to by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 10 untreated cells ( Fig . 6 , I - J ) and ( Fig . 1 , C - D ) . However , the non - phosphorylatable GFP - YAP1 S112A remained strongly localized to the nucleus , with no significant difference in nuclear : cytoplasmic signal ratio compared to the same construct in controls ( Fig . 6 , K - L ) . These data , along with endogenous YAP data , suggest that in the absence of contact inhibition , two distinct pathways act to regulate YAP localization in MEFs , an F - actin - mediated pathway that is pS112 - YAP - independent , and a myosin II mediated pathway that requires phospho - regulation of S112 . ECM - compliance - mediated regulation of YAP nuclear localization occurs via an F - actin - dependent , phosphorylation - independent pathway - We then examined the role of S112 phosphorylation in F - actin - dependent nuclear localization of YAP during mechanosensation in MEFs . We expressed either YAP1 wt - GFP , or YAP1 S112A - GFP in sparse cells grown on stiff and soft ECMs . This showed that on stiff ECMs YAP1 wt - GFP or YAP1 S112A - GFP constructs all localized to the nucleus . In contrast , on soft ECMs cells formed small clusters and could not spread effectively , and YAP1 wt - GFP or YAP1 S112A - GFP constructs were excluded from the nucleus , and exhibited a significantly reduced nuclear : cytoplasmic localization ratio ( Fig . 7 , A - D ) . Together with our observation of reduced F - actin content in cells plated on soft ECMs , this shows ECM - compliance - mediated regulation of YAP nuclear localization occurs through an F - actin - dependent but phospho - S112 - independent pathway . DISCUSSION Our study shows that in both mouse embryonic fibroblasts and in human mammary epithelial cells , contact inhibition promotes nuclear exclusion of YAP , overriding actomyosin cytoskeletal regulation of YAP . However , in the absence of cell - cell contact , integrity of the actin filament cytoskeleton becomes the dominant regulator of YAP nuclear localization , independent of ROCK - mediated myosin II contractility . A detailed characterization in MEFs revealed that actomyosin contractility suppresses YAP phosphorylation at S112 residue , yet in the absence of cell - cell - contact and contractility , S112 phosphoregulation is overridden by actin cytoskeletal integrity leading to nuclear localization of both phospho and non - phospho YAP . These data along with YAP phospho - mutant data , show the existence of two mechanisms for the cytoskeleton - mediated YAP regulation ; one actomyosin contractility - mediated regulation of YAP phosphorylation and , a second cytoskeletal integrity - mediated dominant mechanism which overrides phosphoregulation . Such actin mediated YAP regulation is also conserved during mechanotransduction , where we found YAP nuclear localization through ECM stiffness sensation occurs through an F - actin - dependent but phospho - S112 - independent manner . Hippo signaling - mediated YAP phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion have been well documented in animal tissue and in - vitro dense cell culture systems ( 12 , 40 - 43 ) . Phosphorylation mediated YAP nuclear exclusion is largely dependent on cell - cell adherens junction ( AJ ) , as YAP is sequestered at the AJ by α - catenin and in - vitro assay showed pS112 - YAP binding to 14 - 3 - 3 also depends on α - catenin ( 40 ) . In the absence of α - catenin , this complex breaks apart and YAP gets into the nucleus independent of Hippo signaling ( 40 ) . In sparse culture conditions there is no AJ , possibly leading to the disassembly of the α - catenin - YAP and 14 - 3 - 3 - pS112 - YAP - α - catenin complex which could provide a possible mechanism for the observed YAP and pS112 - YAP localization in the nucleus independent of contractility . In addition , a recent report showed that even under the activation of Hippo signaling cascade and YAP phosphorylation ( S112 ) , YAP localizes to the nucleus of intestinal epithelial cell via the Src family kinase Yes , causing more cell proliferation ( 44 ) . This also suggests the existence of additional mechanisms in regulation of YAP nuclear localization other than phosphorylation of S112 residue . Our data provides a step forward in understanding actin - mediated YAP nuclear localization beyond the requirement of actomyosin contractility and S112 phosphorylation of YAP . A by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 11 possible molecular player for such actin - mediated YAP regulation is through angiomotin - like proteins ( 24 ) . Angiomotins bind WW domain of YAP independent of its phosphorylation at S112 residue , and over - expression of angiomotin could sequester constitutively active YAP ( YAP S112A ) in the cytoplasm ( 45 ) . Angiomotins competitively bind to both F - actin and YAP , and overexpression of an actin binding mutant of angiomotin sequesters more YAP in the cytoplasm than overexpression of wild - type protein ( 24 ) . This mechanism could underlie our observations that a high F / G actin ratio in control and myosin - inhibited cells was associated with both YAP and pS112 - YAP nuclear localization . A high level of F - actin could sequester angiomotins , leaving YAP and pS112 - YAP free to be imported into the nucleus . In support to this notion , it was also reported that knocking down angiomotins significantly rescued YAP nuclear localization in the blebbistatin treated cells ( 24 ) . In support of our findings of an F - actin - dependent pathway of YAP nuclear localization , it was shown that knocking down the actin depolymerization factor cofilin , which is known to increase F / G actin ratio ( 28 ) , rescued YAP transcriptional activity on soft substrates ( 10 ) . Promoting more F - actin by knocking down cofilin or by capping protein in animal tissue was also found to increase YAP nuclear localization and tissue growth ( 22 , 23 ) . In agreement with our findings , it was also reported that overexpressing actin promotes more filamentous actin which helps cell to spread more and overriding the small cell shape phenotype of soft gel ( 46 ) . F - actin mediated YAP regulation could have physiologically important role as it was shown promoting F - atcin polymerization increased ovarian follicle growth mediated by YAP ( 47 ) . Our study suggests a model where in cells at low density , YAP is nuclear and has low levels of phosphorylation because of the lack of adherens junctions and the high level of myosin II contractile activity . Also at low cell density , F - actin structures promote YAP nuclear localization . Inhibition of myosin II contractility in cells in sparse culture increases YAP phosphorylation , but not sufficiently to trigger cytoplasmic accumulation of YAP . However F - actin disruption can trigger cytoplasmic localization of YAP . At high cell density , YAP is highly phosphorylated and out of the nucleus , presumably because of signaling from adherens junctions . The observation that non - phosphorylatable YAP localizes to the nucleus in cells at high density is consistent with an essential role for phosphorylation in YAP nuclear exclusion under these conditions . One question that remains is why myosin II inhibition in cells at low density triggers YAP phosphorylation , but not nuclear exclusion , whereas at high cell density , YAP phosphorylation appears to effectively promote YAP nuclear exclusion . One possibility is that YAP is much more highly phosphorylated on S112 and other LATS sites in cells at high density compared to cells at low density treated with myosin inhibitors . This prediction awaits future experimentation . Contractility - and phosphorylation ( S112 ) - independent localization of YAP in the nucleus , especially in the absence of cell - cell contact , may reflect a cellular adaptation for cancer cells . Cancer cells during metastasis often lose cell - cell contact and migrate through tissues of different stiffnesses . Having contractility and phosphorylation independent nuclear localization of YAP might promote cancer cell proliferation and maintenance in soft tissue . by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 12 Acknowledgements - We thank Mary Beckerle for the kind gift of MEFs , William Shin for maintenance of the Waterman Lab Microscopes , and Schwanna Thacker for administrative assistance . This work was supported by the NHLBI Division of Intramural Research and in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( EY015708 ) . D . P . is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . Conflict of interest – The authors declare no conflict of interest . Author Contributions – A . D . performed experiments and quantification , A . D . , R . S . F . , D . P and C . M . W . interpreted data and wrote the manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . Wu , S . , Huang , J . , Dong , J . , and Pan , D . ( 2003 ) hippo encodes a Ste - 20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts . Cell 114 , 445 - 456 2 . Lian , I . , Kim , J . , Okazawa , H . , Zhao , J . , Zhao , B . , Yu , J . , Chinnaiyan , A . , Israel , M . A . , Goldstein , L . S . , Abujarour , R . , Ding , S . , and Guan , K . L . ( 2010 ) The role of YAP transcription coactivator in regulating stem cell self - renewal and differentiation . Genes & development 24 , 1106 - 1118 3 . Pan , D . ( 2010 ) The hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer . Dev Cell 19 , 491 - 505 4 . Polesello , C . , and Tapon , N . ( 2007 ) Salvador - warts - hippo signaling promotes Drosophila posterior follicle cell maturation downstream of notch . Current biology : CB 17 , 1864 - 1870 5 . Lu , L . , Li , Y . , Kim , S . M . , Bossuyt , W . , Liu , P . , Qiu , Q . , Wang , Y . , Halder , G . , Finegold , M . J . , Lee , J . S . , and Johnson , R . L . ( 2010 ) Hippo signaling is a potent in vivo growth and tumor suppressor pathway in the mammalian liver . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 , 1437 - 1442 6 . Yu , F . X . , Zhao , B . , Panupinthu , N . , Jewell , J . L . , Lian , I . , Wang , L . H . , Zhao , J . , Yuan , H . , Tumaneng , K . , Li , H . , Fu , X . D . , Mills , G . B . , and Guan , K . L . ( 2012 ) Regulation of the Hippo - YAP pathway by G - protein - coupled receptor signaling . Cell 150 , 780 - 791 7 . Hirate , Y . , Hirahara , S . , Inoue , K . , Suzuki , A . , Alarcon , V . B . , Akimoto , K . , Hirai , T . , Hara , T . , Adachi , M . , Chida , K . , Ohno , S . , Marikawa , Y . , Nakao , K . , Shimono , A . , and Sasaki , H . ( 2013 ) Polarity - dependent distribution of angiomotin localizes Hippo signaling in preimplantation embryos . Current biology : CB 23 , 1181 - 1194 8 . Dupont , S . , Morsut , L . , Aragona , M . , Enzo , E . , Giulitti , S . , Cordenonsi , M . , Zanconato , F . , Le Digabel , J . , Forcato , M . , Bicciato , S . , Elvassore , N . , and Piccolo , S . ( 2011 ) Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 - 183 9 . Codelia , V . A . , Sun , G . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2014 ) Regulation of YAP by mechanical strain through Jnk and Hippo signaling . Current biology : CB 24 , 2012 - 2017 10 . Aragona , M . , Panciera , T . , Manfrin , A . , Giulitti , S . , Michielin , F . , Elvassore , N . , Dupont , S . , and Piccolo , S . ( 2013 ) A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 154 , 1047 - 1059 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 13 11 . Dong , J . , Feldmann , G . , Huang , J . , Wu , S . , Zhang , N . , Comerford , S . A . , Gayyed , M . F . , Anders , R . A . , Maitra , A . , and Pan , D . ( 2007 ) Elucidation of a universal size - control mechanism in Drosophila and mammals . Cell 130 , 1120 - 1133 12 . Zhao , B . , Wei , X . , Li , W . , Udan , R . S . , Yang , Q . , Kim , J . , Xie , J . , Ikenoue , T . , Yu , J . , Li , L . , Zheng , P . , Ye , K . , Chinnaiyan , A . , Halder , G . , Lai , Z . C . , and Guan , K . L . ( 2007 ) Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control . Genes & development 21 , 2747 - 2761 13 . Chan , E . H . , Nousiainen , M . , Chalamalasetty , R . B . , Schafer , A . , Nigg , E . A . , and Sillje , H . H . ( 2005 ) The Ste20 - like kinase Mst2 activates the human large tumor suppressor kinase Lats1 . Oncogene 24 , 2076 - 2086 14 . McClatchey , A . I . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2012 ) Contact inhibition ( of proliferation ) redux . Current opinion in cell biology 24 , 685 - 694 15 . Rauskolb , C . , Sun , S . , Sun , G . , Pan , Y . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2014 ) Cytoskeletal tension inhibits Hippo signaling through an Ajuba - Warts complex . Cell 158 , 143 - 156 16 . Piccolo , S . , Dupont , S . , and Cordenonsi , M . ( 2014 ) The biology of YAP / TAZ : hippo signaling and beyond . Physiol Rev 94 , 1287 - 1312 17 . Zhong , W . , Tian , K . , Zheng , X . , Li , L . , Zhang , W . , Wang , S . , and Qin , J . ( 2013 ) Mesenchymal stem cell and chondrocyte fates in a multishear microdevice are regulated by Yes - associated protein . Stem cells and development 22 , 2083 - 2093 18 . Zhao , B . , Li , L . , Wang , L . , Wang , C . Y . , Yu , J . , and Guan , K . L . ( 2012 ) Cell detachment activates the Hippo pathway via cytoskeleton reorganization to induce anoikis . Genes & development 26 , 54 - 68 19 . Wada , K . , Itoga , K . , Okano , T . , Yonemura , S . , and Sasaki , H . ( 2011 ) Hippo pathway regulation by cell morphology and stress fibers . Development 138 , 3907 - 3914 20 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2005 ) Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 - 1143 21 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , Reinhart - King , C . A . , Margulies , S . S . , Dembo , M . , Boettiger , D . , Hammer , D . A . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2005 ) Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer cell 8 , 241 - 254 22 . Fernandez , B . G . , Gaspar , P . , Bras - Pereira , C . , Jezowska , B . , Rebelo , S . R . , and Janody , F . ( 2011 ) Actin - Capping Protein and the Hippo pathway regulate F - actin and tissue growth in Drosophila . Development 138 , 2337 - 2346 23 . Sansores - Garcia , L . , Bossuyt , W . , Wada , K . , Yonemura , S . , Tao , C . , Sasaki , H . , and Halder , G . ( 2011 ) Modulating F - actin organization induces organ growth by affecting the Hippo pathway . EMBO J 30 , 2325 - 2335 24 . Mana - Capelli , S . , Paramasivam , M . , Dutta , S . , and McCollum , D . ( 2014 ) Angiomotins link F - actin architecture to Hippo pathway signaling . Mol Biol Cell 25 , 1676 - 1685 25 . Cramer , L . P . , Briggs , L . J . , and Dawe , H . R . ( 2002 ) Use of fluorescently labelled deoxyribonuclease I to spatially measure G - actin levels in migrating and non - migrating cells . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 51 , 27 - 38 26 . Shin , W . D . , Fischer , R . S . , Kanchanawong , P . , Kim , Y . , Lim , J . , Myers , K . A . , Nishimura , Y . , Plotnikov , S . V . , Thievessen , I . , Yarar , D . , Sabass , B . , and , and Waterman , C . M . ( 2010 ) A Versatile , Multicolor Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence and Spinning - Disk by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 14 Confocal Microscope System for High - Resolution Live Cell Imaging , 2 nd Ed ed . , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY 27 . Dignam , J . D . , Lebovitz , R . M . , and Roeder , R . G . ( 1983 ) Accurate transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II in a soluble extract from isolated mammalian nuclei . Nucleic Acids Res 11 , 1475 - 1489 28 . Rasmussen , I . , Pedersen , L . H . , Byg , L . , Suzuki , K . , Sumimoto , H . , and Vilhardt , F . ( 2010 ) Effects of F / G - actin ratio and actin turn - over rate on NADPH oxidase activity in microglia . BMC Immunol 11 , 44 29 . Abercrombie , M . ( 1970 ) Contact inhibition in tissue culture . In vitro 6 , 128 - 142 30 . Kim , N . G . , and Gumbiner , B . M . ( 2015 ) Adhesion to fibronectin regulates Hippo signaling via the FAK - Src - PI3K pathway . The Journal of cell biology 210 , 503 - 515 31 . Aoudjit , F . , and Vuori , K . ( 2001 ) Integrin signaling inhibits paclitaxel - induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells . Oncogene 20 , 4995 - 5004 32 . Cluzel , C . , Saltel , F . , Lussi , J . , Paulhe , F . , Imhof , B . A . , and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2005 ) The mechanisms and dynamics of ( alpha ) v ( beta ) 3 integrin clustering in living cells . The Journal of cell biology 171 , 383 - 392 33 . Hao , Y . , Chun , A . , Cheung , K . , Rashidi , B . , and Yang , X . ( 2008 ) Tumor suppressor LATS1 is a negative regulator of oncogene YAP . The Journal of biological chemistry 283 , 5496 - 5509 34 . Mo , J . S . , Meng , Z . , Kim , Y . C . , Park , H . W . , Hansen , C . G . , Kim , S . , Lim , D . S . , and Guan , K . L . ( 2015 ) Cellular energy stress induces AMPK - mediated regulation of YAP and the Hippo pathway . Nat Cell Biol 35 . Calvo , F . , Ege , N . , Grande - Garcia , A . , Hooper , S . , Jenkins , R . P . , Chaudhry , S . I . , Harrington , K . , Williamson , P . , Moeendarbary , E . , Charras , G . , and Sahai , E . ( 2013 ) Mechanotransduction and YAP - dependent matrix remodelling is required for the generation and maintenance of cancer - associated fibroblasts . Nat Cell Biol 15 , 637 - 646 36 . Sun , Y . , Yong , K . M . , Villa - Diaz , L . G . , Zhang , X . , Chen , W . , Philson , R . , Weng , S . , Xu , H . , Krebsbach , P . H . , and Fu , J . ( 2014 ) Hippo / YAP - mediated rigidity - dependent motor neuron differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells . Nat Mater 13 , 599 - 604 37 . Shutova , M . S . , Spessott , W . A . , Giraudo , C . G . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2014 ) Endogenous species of mammalian nonmuscle myosin IIA and IIB include activated monomers and heteropolymers . Current biology : CB 24 , 1958 - 1968 38 . Chen , Q . , Zhang , N . , Xie , R . , Wang , W . , Cai , J . , Choi , K . S . , David , K . K . , Huang , B . , Yabuta , N . , Nojima , H . , Anders , R . A . , and Pan , D . ( 2015 ) Homeostatic control of Hippo signaling activity revealed by an endogenous activating mutation in YAP . Genes & development 29 , 1285 - 1297 39 . Zhou , D . , Conrad , C . , Xia , F . , Park , J . S . , Payer , B . , Yin , Y . , Lauwers , G . Y . , Thasler , W . , Lee , J . T . , Avruch , J . , and Bardeesy , N . ( 2009 ) Mst1 and Mst2 maintain hepatocyte quiescence and suppress hepatocellular carcinoma development through inactivation of the Yap1 oncogene . Cancer cell 16 , 425 - 438 40 . Schlegelmilch , K . , Mohseni , M . , Kirak , O . , Pruszak , J . , Rodriguez , J . R . , Zhou , D . , Kreger , B . T . , Vasioukhin , V . , Avruch , J . , Brummelkamp , T . R . , and Camargo , F . D . ( 2011 ) Yap1 acts downstream of alpha - catenin to control epidermal proliferation . Cell 144 , 782 - 795 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin 15 41 . Harvey , K . F . , Pfleger , C . M . , and Hariharan , I . K . ( 2003 ) The Drosophila Mst ortholog , hippo , restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis . Cell 114 , 457 - 467 42 . Lai , Z . C . , Wei , X . , Shimizu , T . , Ramos , E . , Rohrbaugh , M . , Nikolaidis , N . , Ho , L . L . , and Li , Y . ( 2005 ) Control of cell proliferation and apoptosis by mob as tumor suppressor , mats . Cell 120 , 675 - 685 43 . Huang , J . , Wu , S . , Barrera , J . , Matthews , K . , and Pan , D . ( 2005 ) The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie , the Drosophila Homolog of YAP . Cell 122 , 421 - 434 44 . Taniguchi , K . , Wu , L . W . , Grivennikov , S . I . , de Jong , P . R . , Lian , I . , Yu , F . X . , Wang , K . , Ho , S . B . , Boland , B . S . , Chang , J . T . , Sandborn , W . J . , Hardiman , G . , Raz , E . , Maehara , Y . , Yoshimura , A . , Zucman - Rossi , J . , Guan , K . L . , and Karin , M . ( 2015 ) A gp130 - Src - YAP module links inflammation to epithelial regeneration . Nature 519 , 57 - 62 45 . Wang , W . , Huang , J . , and Chen , J . ( 2011 ) Angiomotin - like proteins associate with and negatively regulate YAP1 . The Journal of biological chemistry 286 , 4364 - 4370 46 . Engler , A . , Bacakova , L . , Newman , C . , Hategan , A . , Griffin , M . , and Discher , D . ( 2004 ) Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys J 86 , 617 - 628 47 . Cheng , Y . , Feng , Y . , Jansson , L . , Sato , Y . , Deguchi , M . , Kawamura , K . , and Hsueh , A . J . ( 2015 ) Actin polymerization - enhancing drugs promote ovarian follicle growth mediated by the Hippo signaling effector YAP . FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology 29 , 2423 - 2430 48 . Kardash , E . , Bandemer , J . , and Raz , E . ( 2011 ) Imaging protein activity in live embryos using fluorescence resonance energy transfer biosensors . Nat Protoc 6 , 1835 - 1846 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Das , Page 16 Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin FIGURE LEGENDS Figure 1 . In the absence of cell - cell contact nuclear exclusion of YAP requires F - actin cytoskeletal integrity , but not ROCK - mediated myosin II contractility . A - B . Confocal immunofluorescence images of mouse embryo fibroblasts ( A , MEFs ) or human mammary epithelial cells ( B , MCF10A ) densely plated on fibronectin - coated coverslips and treated with the indicated agents for 2hr ( Latrunculin - A denoted as Lat - A ) . F - actin stained with phalloidin - 488 ( green ) , YAP with immunolocalization of  - YAP ( red ) and DNA with DAPI ( blue ) . ( C , E ) . Maximum projections of confocal z - stacks of sparsely plated MEFs ( C ) or MCF10A ( E ) , on fibronectin - coated coverslips and treated with the indicated agents for 2hr . Immunofluorescence staining as in ( A - B ) . ( D , F ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of YAP in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . Scale bars 30µm . Error bars are SEM . Statistical comparison done with Student’s t - test between pair of samples connected with lines on the column plots :  , p - value  0 . 005 ; ns , p - value > 0 . 05 . One - way ANOVA tests were performed on group of data containing three or more than three data sets , p - values from ANOVA tests are listed in table1 . Figure 2 . In sparse cells , F - actin Cytoskeletal integrity is required for YAP nuclear localization but not integrin signaling . A - C . Maximum projections of confocal Z - stacks of sparsely plated MEFs on fibronectin ( A , C ) and ploy - L - lysine ( B ) coated coverslips and treated with Lat - A ( 2 µM ) , Manganese ( II ) chloride ( Mn 2 + , 1mM ) and Mn 2 + along with Lat - A ( 2 µM ) as indicated . F - actin stained with phalloidin - 561 ( red ) , YAP with immunolocalization of  - YAP ( green ) and DNA with DAPI ( blue ) . ( D ) Quantification of nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of YAP as done in Figure 1 . Scale bars 30µm . Error bars are SEM . Statistical comparison done with Student’s t - test between pair of samples connected with lines on the column plot :  , p - value  0 . 005 ; ns , p - value > 0 . 05 . One - way ANOVA test was performed on “ D ” , p - value from ANOVA test is listed in table1 . Figure 3 . In sparse cells , nuclear localization of YAP is promoted by F - actin , independent of myosin II contractility and is not fully dependent on S112 phosphorylation . A . ( Left ) Representative western blots of whole cell lysates from MEFs grown on fibronectin - coated culture dish and treated with DMSO , Latrunculin - A ( Lat - A , 2 µM ) and blebbistatin ( 50 µM ) for 2hrs and probed with antibodies to YAP or YAP phosphorylated on S112 ( pS112 - YAP ) . ( Right ) Quantification represents ratio of integrated band intensity between pS112 - YAP and YAP from background subtracted images and normalized with respect to DMSO control ratio . B - C . ( B ) Maximum intensity projections of confocal z - stack immunofluorescence images of sparsely plated MEFs treated with the indicated agents for 2hr ( Latrunculin - A denoted as Lat - A ) . YAP immunostained with  - YAP ( red ) ,  - pS112 - YAP ( green ) and DNA with DAPI ( blue ) . Note that pS112 - YAP was better detected with methanol fixation ( used here ) however , YAP was better detected with paraformaldehyde fixation ( used in Figure 1 ) . ( C ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of pS112 - YAP in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . D . Representative western blots of the nucleus ( Nuc ) and cytoplasmic ( Cyt ) fractions from MEFs grown on fibronectin - coated culture dishes with indicated treatments for 2hrs for the indicated proteins and probed with antibodies to YAP , pS112 - YAP and Histone H3 . Scale bars 30 µm . Error bars are SEM , Statistical comparison done with Student’s t - test between pair of samples connected with lines on the column plots :  , p - value  0 . 05 ;  , p - value  0 . 005 ; ns , p - value > 0 . 05 . One - way ANOVA tests were performed on group of data containing three or more than three data sets , p - values from ANOVA tests are listed in table1 . Figure 4 . Mechanosensation of soft ECM promotes nuclear exclusion of YAP and phospho ( S112 ) - YAP . by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Das , Page 17 Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin A - F . MEFs were grown on fibronectin - coupled polyacrylamide hydrogels of 50 . 0 kPa ( stiff ) and 0 . 5 kPa ( soft ) stiffness . ( A ) Maximum intensity projections of confocal z - stack immunofluorescence images of YAP ( red ) , phalloidin staining of F - actin ( green ) and DAPI staining of DNA ( blue ) . ( B ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of YAP in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . ( C ) Representative western blots from whole cell lysates of MEFs grown on fibronectin coated soft and stiff substrates and probed with antibodies to YAP and YAP phosphorylated on S112 ( pS112 - YAP ) . ( D ) Quantification of the ratio of integrated band intensity between pS112 - YAP and YAP from background - subtracted western blot images and normalized with respect to 50 . 0 kPa . E - F . ( E ) Maximum intensity projections of confocal z - stack immunofluorescence images of sparsely plated MEFs grown on fibronectin coated stiff and soft substrates and fixed with methanol and immunostained to detect YAP ( red ) , pS112 - YAP ( green ) , and stained with DAPI for DNA ( blue ) . ( F ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of pS112 - YAP in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . Scale bars 30 µm . Error bars are SEM , Statistical comparison done with Student’s t - test :  , p - value  0 . 05 ;  , p - value  0 . 005 Figure 5 . F - actin promotes YAP nuclear localization in the absence of actomyosin contractility . ( A - B , E - F ) . ( A , E ) Representative western blots of the triton - insoluble ( F - actin ) and triton - soluble ( G - actin ) fractions extracted from MEFs grown on fibronectin coated culture dish treated with DMSO , Latrunculin - A ( Lat - A , 2 µM ) and blebbistatin ( 50 µm ) for 2hrs ( A ) or grown on fibronectin - coupled polyacrylamide hydrogels of 50 . 0 kPa ( stiff ) and 0 . 5 kPa ( soft ) stiffness ( E ) and probed with antibodies to actin . ( B , F ) Quantification represents ratio of integrated band intensity between the F - actin and G - actin from background - subtracted western blot images . The proportions of F and G actin were determined relative to the total actin content ( total actin content = F s + G s signal = 100 % ; F = F s / F s + G s ; G = G s / F s + G s ) , and these values were used to determine the F : G ratio ( F / G = ( F s / F s + G s ) / ( G s / F s + G s ) ) . The F : G ratio for the DMSO condition was then used as the normalization control to compare the effects of perturbations ( B ) or to 50 kPa control ratio ( F ) . ( C - D , G - H ) . ( C , G ) Sum - projections of confocal z - stacks of MEFs grown on fibronectin - coated culture dishes and treated with DMSO , Latrunculin - A ( Lat - A , 2 µM ) and blebbistatin ( 50 µm ) for 2hrs ( C ) or grown on fibronectin - coupled polyacrylamide hydrogels of 55 . 0 kPa ( stiff ) and 0 . 7 kPa ( soft ) stiffness ( G ) and stained for F - actin ( phalloidin - 488 , green ) and G - actin ( DNase I - 594 , red ) . The F / G actin ratio images were generated using ImageJ as explained in ( 48 ) . ( D , H ) Quantification represents ratio of integrated fluorescence intensity measured from background subtracted sum - projection of F - and G - actin images , normalized with respect to the average ratio of DMSO control ( D ) or 55 kPa control ( H ) . SEM and p - values were measured from the non - normalized data set . ( I - J ) ( I ) ( Above ) Experimental scheme for examining YAP localization in MEFs first treated with 100  M blebbistatin for 2hrs followed by Lat - A ( 2 µM ) treatment for another 2hrs ( Blebbistatin then Lat - A ) , and compared with 100  M blebbistatin treatment for 2hrs alone . Maximum intensity projections of confocal z - stack immunofluorescence images of sparsely plated MEFs grown on fibronectin coated coverslips and treated as explained above . F - actin stained with phalloidin - 488 ( green ) , YAP with immunolocalization of  - YAP ( red ) and DNA with DAPI ( blue ) . ( J ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of YAP in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . DMSO and Lat - A data are from Fig . 1D . ( K - L ) Representative western blot of the triton - insoluble ( F - actin ) and triton - soluble ( G - actin ) fractions extracted from MEFs grown sparsely and densely on fibronectin coated culture dish ( K ) and Quantification represents ratio of integrated band intensity between the F - actin and G - actin from background - subtracted western blot images and normalized with respect to sparse ratio . Scale bars 30 µm . Error bars are SEM , Statistical comparison done with Student’s t - test between pair of samples connected with lines on the column plots :  , p - value  0 . 05 ;  , p - value  0 . 005 ; ns , p - value > 0 . 05 . One - way ANOVA tests were performed on group of data containing three or more than three data sets , p - values from ANOVA tests are listed in table1 . by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Das , Page 18 Yap localization during mechanosensing requires filamentous actin Figure 6 . Loss of cytoskeletal integrity significantly excludes constitutively active YAP from the nucleus . ( A - B , D - E ) Maximum intensity projections of confocal z - stacks of MEFs transfected with plasmids expressing Flag - YAP and Flag - YAP - 8SA , cultured sparsely ( A - B ) or middle confocal slice of densely plated MEFs ( D - E ) on fibronectin coated coverslips and treated with DMSO and Lat - A ( 2 µM ) as indicated . ( C , F ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of Flag in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . F - actin stained with phalloidin - 488 ( green ) , Flag - YAP with  - Flag ( red ) and DNA with DAPI ( blue ) . ( G - L ) Confocal images of mouse embryo fibroblasts ( MEFs ) transfected with plasmids expressing YAP1 - GFP , or non - phosphorylatable YAP1 S112A - GFP ( green ) of mouse origin and mApple - actin ( red ) that were densely plated on fibronectin coated coverslips for 18hr and fixed with paraformaldehyde ( G ) . MEFs were transfected with plasmids expressing YAP1 - GFP ( I , green ) , non - phosphorylatable YAP1 S112A - GFP ( K , green ) of mouse origin and mApple - actin ( red ) and grown on fibronectin coated coverslips sparsely for 18hr followed by DMSO , Lat - A ( 2 µM ) , blebbistatin ( 50 µM ) and Y - 27632 ( 50 µM ) treatment for 2hr and formaldehyde fixation . YAP1 was detected by the GFP signal ( green ) , actin by red fluorescent protein mApple ( red ) and DNA stained with DAPI ( blue ) . ( H , J , L ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of YAP1 - GFP in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . Scale bars 30 µm . Error bars are SEM , Statistical comparison done with Student’s t - test between pair of samples connected with lines on the column plots :  , p - value  0 . 05 ;  , p - value  0 . 005 ; ns , p - value > 0 . 05 . One - way ANOVA tests were performed on group of data containing three or more than three data sets , p - values from ANOVA tests are listed in table1 . Figure 7 . ECM - compliance - mediated regulation of YAP nuclear localization is predominantly regulated by F - actin - dependent , phosphorylation - independent pathway . ( A - D ) MEFs were grown on fibronectin - coupled polyacrylamide hydrogels of 50 . 0 kPa ( stiff ) and 0 . 5 kPa ( soft ) stiffness . YAP1 wt - GFP ( A , green ) or non - phosphorylatable YAP1 S112A - GFP ( C , green ) was detected by the GFP signal , actin by red fluorescent protein mApple ( red ) and DNA stained with DAPI ( blue ) .  in ( C ) marks nuclei of an adjacent untransfected cell .  ( B , D ) Quantification of the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of YAP1 - GFP constructs in the middle confocal slice of the nucleus . Scale bars 30 µm . Error bars are SEM , Statistical comparison done with Student’s t - test :  , p - value  0 . 005 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Table 1 . One - Way ANOVA test for group of three or more data sets Figure p - value Fig . 1D 4 . 88E - 10 Fig . 1E 1 . 45E - 07 Fig . 2D 5 . 95E - 37 Fig . 3A 0 . 016866 Fig . 3C 0 . 000233 Fig . 5B 0 . 035483 Fig . 5D 1 . 99E - 10 Fig . 5J 3 . 99E - 16 Fig . 6C 1 . 04E - 07 Fig . 6F 2 . 07E - 09 Fig . 6J 6 . 77E - 06 Fig . 6L 0 . 100036 19 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Fig1 . In the absence of cell - cell contact nuclear exclusion of YAP requires F - actin cytoskeletal integrity , but not ROCK - mediated myosin II contractility . ) t yc / c un ( PA Y 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 DMSO Lat - A Blebb Y - 27632 ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ MEF D ∗∗ ns F MCF10A 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ DMSO Lat - A Blebb Y - 27632 ) t yc / c un ( PA Y ns ns C Y - 27632 50 . 0 µ M B l ebb i s t a t i n 5 0 . 0 µ M D M S O YAP F - Actin YAP / Actin / DAPI La t - A 2 . 0 µ M MEF ( sparse ) E YAP F - Actin YAP / Actin / DAPI MCF10A ( sparse ) A B l ebb i s t a t i n 50 . 0 µ M D M S O Y - 27632 50 . 0 µ M La t - A 2 . 0 µ M YAP F - Actin YAP / Actin / DAPI MEF ( dense ) YAP F - Actin YAP / Actin / DAPI MCF10A ( dense ) B 20 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Fig2 . In sparse cells , F - actin Cytoskeletal integrity is required for YAP nuclear localization but not integrin signaling . D 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 DMSO Lat - A DMSO Lat - A Mn 2 + Mn 2 + + Lat - A Fibronectincoated Poly - L - Lysine coated Fibronectincoated ∗∗ ns ∗∗ ∗∗ Y A P ( n u c / c y t ) ns Fibronectin coated DMSO Lat - A YAP F - Actin Actin / YAP / DAPI A Poly - L - lysine coated YAP F - Actin Actin / YAP / DAPI B Fibronectin coated YAP F - Actin Actin / YAP / DAPI Mn 2 + M n 2 + + La t - A C 21 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m C DMSO 2 µ M Lat - A 20 µ M 50 µ M100 µ M 50 µ M Y - 27632 Blebbistatin 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 p S 112 - YAP ( nu c / cy t ) ∗∗ ns ns ns ns ∗ b N o r na li z ed r a t i o o f p S 112 - YAP / YAP 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 DMSO Lat - A Bleb ∗ ∗ Fig3 . In sparse cells , nuclear localization of YAP is promoted by F - actin , independent of myosin II contractility and is not fully dependent on S112 phosphorylation . YAP pS112 - YAP DMSO Lat - A Blebb A D M S O La t - A 2 . 0 µ M B l ebb i s t a t i n 50 . 0 µ M Y - 276 3 2 50 . 0 µ M YAP pS112 - YAP YAP / pS112 - YAP / DAPI B Y - 2763 , 50 . 0 µ M Nuc Cyt Nuc Cyt DMSO YAP pS112 - YAP Histone H3 Yap1 pS112 - Yap1 Histone H3 Nuc Cyt DMSO Nuc Cyt Nuc Cyt Nuc Cyt Blebb , 20 . 0 µ M Blebb , 50 . 0 µ M Blebb , 100 . 0 µ M 22 M D Nuc Cyt Nuc Cyt DMSO Lat - A , 2 . 0 µ M YAP pS112 - YAP Histone H3 Blebb , 50 . 0 µ Nuc Cyt by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Fig4 . Mechanosensation of soft ECM promotes nuclear exclusion of YAP and phospho ( S112 ) - YAP . B ∗∗ 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 YAP ( nu c / cy t ) F 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa p S 112 - YAP ( nu c / cy t ) 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 1 . 1 1 . 2 ∗ C pS112 - YAP YAP 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa D N o r na li z ed r a t i o o f p S 112 - YAP / YAP 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 ∗ YAP F - actin YAP / a c t i n / D AP I 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa A YAP pS112 - YAP YAP / pS112 - YAP / DAPI 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa E 23 by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Fig5 . F - actin promotes YAP nuclear localization in the absence of actomyosin contractility . DMSO Lat - A Blebbistatin F - actin G - actin A 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa F - actin G - actin E B DMSO Lat - A Blebb 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 N o r na li z ed r a t i o o f F / G a c t i n ∗ ns F 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 ∗ N o r na li z ed r a t i o o f F / G a c t i n D DMSO Lat - A Blebb N o r m a li z e d I n t eg r a t ed - i n t en s i t y r a t i o o f F / G a c t i n ∗∗ ns 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 H N o r m a li z ed I n t eg r a t ed - i n t en s i t y r a t i o o f F / G a c t i n 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 55 . 0 kPa 0 . 7 kPa ∗∗ 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 DMSO Lat - A Blebb100 µ M Blebb100 µ M then Lat - A ∗∗ ∗∗ YAP ( nu c / cy t ) J C DMSO Lat - A Blebbistatin F - actin G - actin F / G ratio image Low High G 55 . 0 k P a F - actin G - actin F / G ratio image 0 . 7 k P a Low High 100 µ M Blebbistatin 2hr 2 µ M Lat - A 2hr Immunofluorescence I Blebbistatin Blebbistatinthen Lat - A YAP F - Actin YAP / Actin / DAPI 24 K Dense Sparse G - actin F - actin G - actin F - actin 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 Sparse Dense ns N o r m a li z ed r a t i o o f F / G a c t i n L by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m DAPI I YAP1 wt - GFP mApple - actin YAP1 wt / actin / D M S O La t - A B l ebb i s t a t i n Y - 27632 25 Fig6 . Loss of cytoskeletal integrity significantly excludes constitutively active YAP from the nucleus . 00 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 811 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 82 DMSO Lat - A Blebb Y - 27632 ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ J Y a p1 W t - G F P ( n u c / cy t ) L 00 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 811 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 82 Dmso LatA Blebb Y - 27632 ∗ ∗ ∗ ( 0 . 0518 ) ns ns Y A P 1 S 112 A - G F P ( nu c / cy t ) D M S O La t - A B l ebb i s t a t i n Y - 27632 YAP1 S112A - GFP mApple - actin YAP1 S112A / actin / K DAPI H 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 YAP1 wt - GFP YAP1 S112A - GFP ∗∗ Dense G F P ( nu c / cy t ) GFP / Actin / DAPI YAP 1 S 112 A - G F P Y ap1 W t - G F P Dense GFP mApple - actin G C F l ag ( nu c / cy t ) ∗ ∗∗ 0 0 . 51 1 . 52 2 . 53 3 . 54 Flag - YAP - 8SA Flag - YAP sparse Lat - A DMSO Lat - A DMSO F - Actin Flag Actin / Flag / DAPI A DMSO ( sparse ) F l ag - YAP - 8 SA F l ag - YAP F - Actin Flag Actin / Flag / DAPI B Lat - A ( sparse ) F l ag ( nu c / cy t ) ∗ ns Flag - YAP - 8SA Flag - YAP dense 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 Lat - A DMSO Lat - A DMSO F F l ag - YAP - 8 SA F l ag - YAP DMSO ( dense ) F - Actin Flag Actin / Flag / DAPI D Lat - A ( dense ) F - Actin Flag Actin / Flag / DAPI E by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Fig7 . ECM - compliance - mediated regulation of YAP nuclear localization is predominantly regulated by F - actin - dependent , phosphorylation - independent pathway . B 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa YAP 1 w t - G F P ( nu c / cy t ) ∗∗ 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa ∗∗ YAP 1 S 112 A - G F P ( nu c / c y t ) D A YAP1 wt - GFP mApple - actin YAP1 wt / actin / Dapi 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa 26 YAP1 S112A - GFP mApple - actin YAP1 S112A / actin / Dapi 50 . 0 kPa 0 . 5 kPa C ∗ by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Arupratan Das , Robert S . Fischer , Duojia Pan and Clare M . Waterman during ECM mechanosensing filamentous actin - dependent , myosin II - and phospho - YAP independent pathway YAP nuclear localization in the absence of cell - cell contact is mediated by a published online January 12 , 2016 J . Biol . Chem . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M115 . 708313 Access the most updated version of this article at doi : Alerts : When a correction for this article is posted • When this article is cited • to choose from all of JBC ' s e - mail alerts Click here http : / / www . jbc . org / content / early / 2016 / 01 / 12 / jbc . M115 . 708313 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 0 references , 0 of which can be accessed free at by gu e s t on M a r c h 7 , 2016 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m