Trust and TAM in Online Shopping : An Integrated Model Author ( s ) : David Gefen , Elena Karahanna , Detmar W . Straub Source : MIS Quarterly , Vol . 27 , No . 1 ( Mar . , 2003 ) , pp . 51 - 90 Published by : Management Information Systems Research Center , University of Minnesota Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 30036519 . Accessed : 14 / 05 / 2011 01 : 55 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = misrc . . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . Management Information Systems Research Center , University of Minnesota is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to MIS Quarterly . http : / / www . jstor . org Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping MIS arter RESEARCH ARTICLE TRUST AND TAM IN ONLINE SHOPPING : AN INTEGRATED MODEL1 By : David Gefen Department of Management LeBow College of Business Drexel University 101 North 33rd Street Philadelphia , PA 19104 - 2875 U . S . A . gefend @ drexel . edu Elena Karahanna Management Information Systems Department Terry College of Business University of Georgia Athens , GA 30602 U . S . A . ekarah @ terry . uga . edu Detmar W . Straub Robinson College of Business Georgia State University Atlanta , GA 30302 - 4015 U . S . A . dstraub @ gsu . edu Abstract A separate and distinct interaction with both the actual e - vendor and with its IT Web site interface is at the heart of online shopping . Previous research has established , accordingly , that online purchase intentions are the product of both consumer assessments of the IT itself - specifi - cally its perceived usefulness and ease - of - use ( TAM ) - and trust in the e - vendor . But these per - spectives have been examined independently by IS researchers . Integrating these two perspectives and examining the factors that build online trust in an environment that lacks the typical human inter - action that often leads to trust in other circum - stances advances our understanding of these constructs and their linkages to behavior . Our research on experienced repeat online shoppers shows that consumer trust is as impor - tant to online commerce as the widely accepted TAM use - antecedents , perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use . Together these variable sets explain a considerable proportion of variance in intended behavior . The study also provides evi - dence that online trust is built through ( 1 ) a belief that the vendor has nothing to gain by cheating , ( 2 ) a belief that there are safety mechanisms built into the Web site , and ( 3 ) by having a typical interface , ( 4 ) one that is , moreover , easy to use . Keywords : E - commerce , trust , TAM , familiarity , cognition - based trust , trust building processes , Net - enhanced B2C systems 1 Robert W . Zmud was the accepting senior editor for this paper . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 , pp . 51 - 90 / March 2003 51 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping ISRL Categories : GB02 , GB03 , GB07 Introduction Retaining customers is a financial imperative for electronic vendors ( e - vendors ) , especially as attracting new customers is considerably more expensive than for comparable , traditional , bricks - and - mortar stores ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . What , then , makes customers return to an e - vendor ? Research has used many avenues to look at this , including explanations based on trust ( Gefen 2000 ; Jarvenpaa et al . 1998 ; Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; McKnight et al . 2000 ) , tech - nology ( e . g . , Lederer et al . 2000 ; Lee et al . 2001 ) , and , to a lesser extent , on individual differences such as demographics and lifestyle ( e . g . , Bellman et al . 1999 ) . Recognizing that a vital key to retaining these customers is maintaining their trust in the e - vendor ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) and that trust is at the heart of relationships of all kinds ( Mishra and Morrissey 1990 ; Morgan and Hunt 1994 ) , this study examines customer trust as a primary reason for why customers return to an e - vendor . However , unlike the vendor - client rela - tionship in traditional business settings , the pri - mary interface with an e - vendor is an information technology ( IT ) , a Web site . Recognizing the dual nature of this interaction , our study incorporates the perceived technological attributes of the IT as an additional set of explanatory variables in under - standing why customers return to an e - vendor . This inseparable but complementary aspect of an e - vendor ' s Web site - an IT , on the one hand , and a vendor with whom the customer conducts busi - ness , on the other - is reflected in the empirical research that identifies these as two antecedents in the nomological network leading to consumer behaviors like making a purchase , namely ( 1 ) the technological attributes of the Web site , and ( 2 ) consumer trust in the e - vendor . The first school of thought considers a Web site to be an information technology , and as such argues that the same use - antecedents that apply across IT , namely perceived usefulness and perceived ease - of - use as identified by TAM ( Davis 1989 ; Davis et al . 1989 ) , apply here as well ( Gefen and Straub 2000 ; Lederer et al . 2000 ; Lee et al . 2001 ) . Even though TAM is the dominant model , other studies in this vein have extended TAM with constructs such as computer playfulness ( e . g . , Moon and Kim 2001 ) , cognitive absorption ( e . g . , Agarwal and Karahanna 2000 ) , and product involvement and perceived enjoyment ( Koufaris 2002 ) . Still other research has focused on Web design and has developed models and measures of perceived Web quality and usability ( e . g . , Agarwal and Venkatesh 2002 ; Aladwani and Palvia 2002 ; Loiacono 2000 ; Palmer 2002 ; Ranganathan and Ganapathy 2002 ; Torkzadeh and Dhillon 2002 ) as predictors of consumer acceptance . This stream of research identified a wide range of factors including download delay , navigability , information content , interactivity , response time , Web site personalization , Internet shipping errors , conven - ience , customer relations , informational fit to task , intuitiveness , and visual appeal . The second school of thought focuses on online purchase as an interaction with a vendor , where , extrapolating from other business transactions ( Fukuyama 1995 ; Morgan and Hunt 1994 ) , trust should be the defining attribute of the relationship , determining its very existence and nature , even beyond economic factors such as cheaper price ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . This is especially true when an activity involves social uncertainty and risk ( Fukuyama 1995 ; Luhmann 1979 ) . Social uncertainty and risk with an e - vendor are typically high because the behavior of an e - vendor cannot be guaranteed or monitored ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . Similarly , several other studies in this school have focused on trust as a reducer of risk among inexperienced online custo - mers and as a reducer of social uncertainty ( e . g . , Gefen 2000 ; Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; Jarvenpaa et al . 2000 ) , on familiarity and trust ( e . g . , Gefen 2000 ) , on seals of approval or privacy policy statements ( McKnight et al . 2000 ; Palmer et al . 2000 ) , and on affiliations with respectable com - panies ( e . g . , Stewart 1999 ) . Accordingly , the first 52 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Calculative - based Institution - based structural assurances Institution - based situational normality Knowledge - based familiarity H7 H9 H8 H H H12 Trust / H10o PEOU H3 PU Hi Intended Use \ H , ~ y H4 Figure 1 . Research Model objective of this research is to integrate trust - based antecedents and the technological attri - bute - based antecedents found in TAM into a theo - retical model . Trust is generally crucial in many of the economic activities that can involve undesirable opportun - istic behavior ( Fukuyama 1995 ; Luhmann 1979 ; Williamson 1985 ) . This is even more the case with e - commerce because the limited Web inter - face does not allow consumers to judge whether a vendor is trustworthy as in a typical , face - to - face interaction ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . More - over , trust is also an issue because vendors can easily take advantage of online consumers ( Jarvenpaa and Todd 1997 ; Jarvenpaa and Tra - ctinsky 1999 ) . The recent case of Amazon . com sharing its database of customer activity ( Rosen - crance 2000a , 2000b ) is a good demonstration of the kind of undesirable , yet legal , opportunistic behavior to which online customers are exposed , and hence the need for maintaining and con - stantly rebuilding their trust . Examining how customer trust can be maintained in an e - vendor is , accordingly , the second primary objective of this study . Literature Review and Research Model Given that a Web site is both an IT and the channel through which consumers interact with an e - vendor , technology - based and trust - based antecedents should work together to influence the decision to partake in e - commerce with a parti - cular e - vendor . This section elaborates on the theory base and derives the hypotheses . The research model is depicted in Figure 1 . TAM and E - Commerce A Web site is , in essence , an information tech - nology . As such , online purchase intentions should be explained in part by the technology acceptance model , TAM ( Davis 1989 ; Davis et al . 1989 ) . This model is at present a preeminent theory of technology acceptance in IS research . Numerous empirical tests have shown that TAM is a parsimonious and robust model of technology acceptance behaviors in a wide variety of IT ( for a summary of this literature , see Gefen and Straub MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 53 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping 2000 ) , across both levels of expertise ( Taylor and Todd 1995b ) , and across countries ( e . g . , Rose and Straub 1998 ; Straub et al . 1997 ) . Even though considerable TAM research has examined IT acceptance in the context of work - related activity , the theory is applicable and has been successfully applied to diverse non - organizational settings ( e . g . , Agarwal and Karahanna 2000 ; Davis et al . 1989 , 1992 ; Mathieson 1991 ; Sjazna 1994 ) , including e - commerce ( Gefen and Straub 2000 ; Gefen et al . 2000 ; Lederer et al . 2000 ; Lee et al . 2001 ) . According to TAM , the intention to voluntarily accept , that is to use , a new IT is determined by two beliefs dealing with ( 1 ) the perceived usefulness ( PU ) of using the new IT and ( 2 ) the perceived ease of use ( PEOU ) of the new IT . PU is a measure of the individual ' s subjective assessment of the utility offered by the new IT in a specific task - related context . 2 PEOU is an indi - cator of the cognitive effort needed to learn and to utilize the new IT . TAM has been discussed in great detail in previous research ( e . g . , Gefen and Straub 2000 ; Venkatesh and Davis 2000 ) . 3 , 4 As shown in previous research ( Gefen et al . 2000 ) , we hypothesize that paths predicted by TAM apply also to e - commerce . As in previous TAM studies , the underlying logic is that IT users ( in this case , online customers using a Web site ) react rationally when they elect to use an IT . The more useful and easy to use is the Web site in enabling the users to accomplish their tasks , the more it will be used : H , : PU will positively affect intended use of a business - to - consumer ( B2C ) Web site . H2 : PEOU will positively affect intended use of a business - to - consumer ( B2C ) Web site . H3 : PEOU will positively affect PU of a business - to - consumer ( B2C ) Web site . The Importance of Trust in E - Commerce An e - vendor is , of course , more than its IT inter - face . It is a business entity with whom the custo - mers are economically engaged . Trust is crucial in many such transactional , buyer - seller relation - ships , especially those containing an element of risk , including interacting with an e - vendor ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . Trust is an expec - tation that others one chooses to trust will not behave opportunistically by taking advantage of the situation . It is one ' s belief that the other party will behave in a dependable ( Kumar et al . 1995a ) , ethical ( Hosmer 1995 ) , and socially appropriate manner ( Zucker 1986 ) . Trust deals with the belief that the trusted party will fulfill its commitments ( Luhmann 1979 ; Rotter 1971 ) despite the trusting party ' s dependence and vulnerability ( Meyer and Goes 1988 ; Rousseau et al . 1998 ) . Accordingly , trust is vital in many business relationships ( Dasgupta 1988 ; Fukuyama 1995 ; Gambetta 1988 ; Gulati 1995 ; Kumar et al . 1995b ; Moorman et al . 1992 ; Williamson 1985 ) and actually deter - 2Even though PU was originally defined with respect to one ' s job performance ( Davis 1989 ) , PU refers to the performance of any generic task in non - organizational settings . This view is consistent with a number of studies such as Agarwal and Karahanna ( 2000 ) , Davis et al . ( 1992 ) , Mathieson ( 1991 ) , Rose and Straub ( 1998 ) , Sjazna ( 1994 ; 1996 ) , Taylor and Todd ( 1995a ) , and others which measured PU in settings other than an organization . 3Dropping attitude from the original TAM model is entirely consistent with most TAM - based research . Attitude , in fact , is not part of Davis ' ( 1989 ) own , more concise , version of TAM . 4Recent extensions of TAM ( e . g . , TAM2 , see Venkatesh and Davis 2000 ) include social norms . However , the effect of social norms on perceptions and behavior is likely to be greater in the absence of any experiential data ( Karahanna et al . 1999 ; Venkatesh and Davis 2000 ) . In such cases , potential consumers of an e - vendor Web site are likely to look to their social environ - ment and the opinions of trusted others for evaluative information and cues to increase their familiarity with the target site and to assess its trustworthiness . For initial purchases , it is likely that the social normative aspects weigh heavily on one ' s assessment of trust and on purchasing intentions . However , as consumers gain experience with the e - vendor , cognitive considerations based on first hand experience gain prominence and social normative considerations lose significance ( Kar - ahanna et al . 1999 ) . Since the focus of the study is on consumers with prior experience with the online vendor , social norms were excluded from the model . 54 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping mines the nature of many businesses and the social order ( Blau 1964 ; Fukuyama 1995 ; Luhmann 1979 ) . 5 Because of the absence of proven guarantees that the e - vendor will not engage in harmful opportunistic behaviors , trust is also a critical aspect of e - commerce ( Gefen 2000 ; Kollock 1999 ; Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . Such behaviors include unfair pricing , conveying inaccurate infor - mation , violations of privacy , unauthorized use of credit card information , and unauthorized tracking of transactions . Indeed , some researchers have suggested that online customers generally stay away from e - vendors whom they do not trust ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . Trust is a central aspect in many economic trans - actions because of a deep - seated human need to understand the social surroundings , that is , to identify what , when , why , and how others behave . Needless to say , comprehending the social environment is remarkably complicated because people , by their very nature , are free agents and as such their behavior is not necessarily rational or predictable . The combination of such over - powering social complexity with the inherent need to understand others leads people to adopt an assortment of social complexity reduction stra - tegies . When a social environment cannot be regulated through rules and customs , people adopt trust as a central social complexity reduc - tion strategy ( Luhmann 1979 ) . By trusting , people reduce their perceived social complexity through a belief that may , at times , be irrational , and that rules out the risk of undesirable but possible future behaviors on the part of the trusted party ( Luhmann 1979 ) . The same argument also holds with the Internet . Lacking effective regulation , consumers have to trust the e - vendor from which they purchase , assuming , in reality , that the e - vendor will be ethical and behave in a socially suitable manner , or else the overwhelming social complexity will cause them to avoid purchasing ( Gefen 2000 ) . Previous research supports this relationship , showing that trust increases purchase intentions both directly ( Gefen 2000 ) , as it does in other buyer - seller relationships ( Ganesan 1994 ) , and through reduced perceived risk ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; Kollock 1999 ) . In the words of Reichheld and Schefter ( 2000 ) : " Price does not rule the Web ; trust does " ( p . 107 ) . What Is Trust in E - Commerce ? Trust has been conceptualized by previous research in a variety of ways , both theoretically and operationally , and researchers have long acknowledged the confusion in the field ( e . g . , Lewis and Weigert 1985b ; McKnight et al . 1998 ; 2002 ; Shapiro 1987 ) . Table 1 provides a sum - mary of prior conceptualizations of trust along with the measures used to operationalize the con - struct . As the table shows , researchers view trust as ( 1 ) a set of specific beliefs dealing primarily with the integrity , benevolence , and ability of another party ( Doney and Cannon 1997 ; Ganesan 1994 ; Gefen and Silver 1999 ; Giffin 1967 ; Larzelere and Huston 1980 ) , ( 2 ) a general belief that another party can be trusted ( Gefen 2000 ; Hosmer 1995 ; Moorman et al . 1992 ; Zucker 1986 ) , sometimes also called trusting intentions ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) or " the ' willingness ' of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another " ( Mayer et al . 1995 , p . 712 ) , ( 3 ) affect reflected in " ' feelings ' of confidence and security in the caring response " of the other party ( Rempel et al . 1985 , p . 96 ) , or ( 4 ) a combination of these elements . Some researchers have combined the first two conceptualizations into one construct ( Doney and Cannon 1997 ) . Other researchers have split the first two conceptualizations , declaring the specific beliefs as antecedents to the general belief ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; Mayer and Davis 1999 ; Mayer et al . 1995 ) , sometimes naming the specific process beliefs as trustworthiness ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ) and sometimes 5This study examines trust as a social construct . Accordingly , trust relates to other people and organiza - tions . Trust in a technology , while dealing with capability and reliability , lacks the essential elements of integrity and benevolence and as such is excluded from the definition in this study . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 55 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Table 1 . Previous Conceptualizations of Trust Study Trust Conceptualization Trust Object Measures Anderson and Expectations about the behavior Business Overall trust Narus ( 1990 ) of the other company . relationships Butler ( 1991 ) Two sub - constructs : Organizational Measure of overall trust 1 . Attitude affective trust 2 . Cognitive specific trust Crosby et al . Confidence that the trusted party Buyer - seller Empirical : overall trust , ( 1990 ) will behave in the interest of the relationships caring , integrity customer . Doney and Perceived credibility ( integrity ) Buyer - seller Honesty , caring , Cannon ( 1997 ) and benevolence . relationships trustworthy Doney et al . Willingness to rely and be Culture Conceptual ( 1998 ) dependable upon another . This encompasses trust as a set of beliefs ( Fukuyama 1995 ; Larzelere and Huston 1980 ; Rotter 1971 ) and willingness to behave ( Luhmann 1979 ; McAllister 1995 ) . Fukuyama ( 1995 ) Expectations of regular , honest , Business Conceptual cooperative behavior . relationships Gambetta ( 1988 ) Subjective probability that the Conceptual Conceptual trusted party will behave in a way that warrants cooperation with them . Ganesan ( 1994 ) Willingness to rely on a partner in Buyer - seller Empirical : whom one has confidence based relationships 1 . Credibility ( ability on belief in that party ' s credibility and reliability / ( integrity and ability ) and honesty ) benevolence . 2 . Benevolence Gefen ( 2000 ) Willingness to depend . e - commerce Empirical : overall trust Gefen ( 2002a ) Willingness to depend . e - commerce Empirical : overall trust Gefen ( 2002b ) Willingness to depend based on Business Empirical : a single beliefs in ability , benevolence , relationships scale with items dealing and integrity . with ability , integrity , and benevolence Gefen and Silver Willingness to depend based on Business Empirical : a single ( 1999 ) beliefs in ability , benevolence , relationships scale with items dealing and integrity . with ability , integrity , and benevolence Giffin ( 1967 ) Reliance on the characteristics of Literature Conceptual : integrity , another in a risky situation . review benevolence , and ability 56 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Table 1 . Previous Conceptualizations of Trust ( Continued ) Study Trust Conceptualization Trust Object Measures Gulati ( 1995 ) Expectations that alleviate fear Business Empirical : indirect that the other party will be relationships measurement opportunistic . Hart and Saunders Confidence about the behavior Business Conceptual ( 1997 ) and goodwill of another . relationships Hosmer ( 1995 ) The expectation of ethical Literature Conceptual behavior , related to the willing - review ness to rely on the trusted party based on optimistic expectations that the trusted party will behave in a morally correct manner . Jarvenpaa et al . Willingness to be vulnerable Online student Empirical : overall trust ( 1998 ) based on expectations that the teams that is built through other party will behave appro - beliefs in ability , bene - priately even without monitoring . volence , and integrity Jarvenpaa and Willingness to rely when there is e - commerce Empirical : overall trust Tractinsky ( 1999 ) vulnerability . combined with integrity , and caring Jarvenpaa et al . A governance mechanism in e - commerce Empirical : overall trust ( 2000 ) buyer - seller relationships . combined with integrity , and caring Korsgaard et al . Confidence in the goodwill of the Interpersonal Single item ( 1995 ) leader , meaning honesty , trust in organi - sincerity , and being unbiased . zational settings Kumar ( 1996 ) Belief in dependability and Business Conceptual honesty . relationships Kumar et al . Honesty and benevolence . Business Empirical : ( 1995a ) relationships 1 . Trust in honesty 2 . Trust in benevolence Separate from a willingness to invest construct Kumar et al . Honesty and benevolence . Business Empirical : ( 1995b ) relationships 1 . Trust in honesty 2 . Trust in benevolence Separate from a willingness to invest construct Larzelere and Benevolence and honesty . Interpersonal Integrity and Huston ( 1980 ) trust in close benevolence relationships MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 57 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Table 1 . Previous Conceptualizations of Trust ( Continued ) Study Trust Conceptualization Trust Object Measures Luhmann ( 1988 ) Willingness to behave based on Social life Conceptual expectation about the behavior of others when considering the risk involved . Mayer et al . A willingness to be vulnerable to Interpersonal Conceptual ( 1995 ) another party based on a trust in organi - separate set of trustworthiness zational settings beliefs in ability , benevolence , and integrity . Mayer and Davis Willingness to be vulnerable . Interpersonal Empirical : overall trust ( 1999 ) trust in which is separate from organizational trustworthiness that is settings defined as ability , benevolence , and integrity McAllister ( 1995 ) Willingness to depend upon Interpersonal Empirical : another . trust in 1 . Cognitive - based organizational trust ( ability , trust , settings monitor ) 2 . Affect - based trust ( share ideas and feelings , emotional investment ) McKnight et al . Trusting beliefs dealing with Interpersonal Conceptual ( 1998 ) benevolence , competence , trust in organi - honesty , and predictability that zational settings lead to a trusting intention . McKnight et al . Based on McKnight et al . ( 1998 ) . e - commerce Empirical : ( 2002 ) 1 . Trusting beliefs dealing with bene - volence , compe - tence , and integrity 2 . Resulting in trusting intentions mea - suring willingness aspects to interact with an e - vendor Mishra ( 1996 ) Willingness to be vulnerable Interpersonal Conceptual based on belief that the other trust in organi - party is competent , open , zational settings concerned , and reliable . 58 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Table 1 . Previous Conceptualizations of Trust ( Continued ) Study Trust Conceptualization Trust Object Measures Mishra and Two definitions : Interpersonal Empirical : Morrissey ( 1990 ) 1 . Integrity , character , ability of trust in organi - 1 . Integrity , character , others zational settings ability of others 2 . Confidence and support 2 . Confidence and support Moorman et al . Willingness to depend . It is both Business Empirical : overall trust ( 1992 ) a belief about the other party relationships and a behavioral intention . Morgan and Hunt Willingness to depend on a party Business Empirical : overall trust ( 1994 ) in whom one has confidence . relationships and integrity Same as Moorman et al . ( 1992 ) . Pavlou and Gefen Willingness to depend . Online auctions Empirical : one factor of ( 2002 ) being reliable , honest , and trustworthy Ramaswami et al . Faith that the trusted party will Interpersonal Empirical : overall trust ( 1997 ) continue to be responsive . trust in organi - zational settings Rempel et al . Willingness to depend based on Interpersonal Empirical : overall trust , ( 1985 ) a generalized expectation / trust in close benevolence , predic - confidence about what others relationships tability , and honesty will do . Rotter ( 1971 ) The expectation that one ' s word Social life Conceptual or promise can be relied upon . Rousseau et al . Willingness to be vulnerable Literature Conceptual ( 1998 ) based on confidence in positive review expectations about the intentions and behavior of the other . Schurr and Belief that promises are reliable Buyer - seller Trust was manipulated Ozanne ( 1985 ) and obligations will be fulfilled . relationships in an experiment . The manipulation check dealt with trustworthin - ess combined with fairness , dependability , and openness . Zaheer et al . The expectation that an actor will Buyer - supplier Empirical : fairness , ( 1998 ) 1 . Fulfill its obligations Relationships . non - opportunistic , keep 2 . Be predictable promises , and is 3 . Be fair and not opportunistic trustworthy Zand ( 1972 ) Trusting behavior is actions that Experiment with Trust was manipulated increase one ' s vulnerability . business in an experiment executives Zucker ( 1986 ) Set of expectations , an implicit Business Conceptual contract . relationships MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 59 Gefen et al / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping conceptualizing the specific beliefs as antece - dents to trusting intentions ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) . This latter stream of work , which is an effort to remove some of the conceptual confusion in the trust field , builds on the social psychology para - digm ( specifically , the theory of reasoned action ; see Fishbein and Ajzen 1975 ) that has a long tradition of separating beliefs from intended behavior . The same diversity in trust conceptualizations is also evident in e - commerce contexts . Trust has been conceptualized as a general belief in an e - vendor that results in behavioral intentions ( Gefen 2000 ) ; as a combination of trustworthiness , inte - grity , and benevolence of e - vendors that in - creases behavioral intentions through reduced risk among potential but inexperienced consumers ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ) ; as beliefs in integrity , benevolence , and ability that lead to a general belief in trust ( Jarvenpaa et al . 1998 ) ; or as specific beliefs in competence , integrity , and benevolence that lead to trusting intentions ( McKnight et al . 2002 ) . The distinction between trust as a set of specific beliefs and trust as a general belief has been made primarily in studies dealing with interper - sonal interactions , such as those occurring within an organization ( e . g . , Mayer et al . 1995 ; McKnight et al . 1998 ) . However , in ongoing economic trans - actional settings , such as those between buyers and sellers ( e . g . , Crosby et al . 1990 ; Doney and Cannon 1997 ; Ganesan 1994 ; Schurr and Ozanne 1985 ) , this distinction is seldom articulated . A possible reason for why this distinction between trusting intentions and specific beliefs is not made with respect to economic transactions is that the very nature of trust in these transactions is an extension , rather than direct implementation of the original definition of interpersonal trust ( Hosmer 1995 ) . The key to successful economic transac - tions is avoiding opportunistic behavior ( Hosmer 1995 ; Williamson 1985 ) , unlike interpersonal trust where trust serves more to solidify social rela - tionships ( Blau 1964 ) . Consequently , some re - searchers claim that actual behavior in ongoing economic alliances is a proxy for trust , defined in that context as confidence or an overall belief ( e . g . , Gulati 1995 ) . With such distinctions in mind , the current study has adopted the conceptualization of trust as a set of specific beliefs . Our definition relies on separa - tion between trust and actual behavioral intentions in the ongoing economic relationship of customers and e - vendors . This conceptualization is akin to that of other studies dealing with ongoing econo - mic relationships ( Crosby et al . 1990 ; Doney and Cannon 1997 ; Ganesan 1994 ; Gefen 2002b ; Schurr and Ozanne 1985 ) , including those with e - vendors ( Jarvenpaa et al . 2000 ) . Furthermore , the separation between beliefs and behavior is consistent with the theoretical foundations of TAM in social psychology ( i . e . , the theory of reasoned action ) and allows for a theoretically sound inte - gration of the two streams of research . Based on previous studies dealing with buyer - seller and business interactions , this set of specific beliefs includes integrity , benevolence , ability , and predic - tability , which together comprise the most widely used specific beliefs in the literature ( see in Table 1 for details ) . Trust as a feeling ( Rempel et al . 1985 , p . 96 ) has been previously studied in the context of interpersonal relationships , such as friendship and love . It is arguably irrelevant to a business transaction . Trust Consequents Based on prior work , it is hypothesized that heightened levels of trust , as specific beliefs about the e - vendor , are also associated with heightened levels of intended use . As in other commercial activities , interaction with a vendor requires the online consumer to deal with the social complexity embedded in the interaction and to take psycho - logical steps to reduce it . Trust is a significant antecedent of participation in commerce in general , and even more so in online settings because of the greater ease with which vendors can behave in an opportunistic manner ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . Trust helps reduce the social complexity a consumer faces in e - commerce by allowing the consumer to subjectively rule out undesirable yet possible behaviors of the e - vendor , including inappropriate use of purchase information . In this way trust encourages online customer business activity . 60 MIS Quarterly Vol 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping H4 : Trust in the e - vendor will positively affect intended use of a business - to - consumer ( B2C ) Web site . Trust should also increase certain aspects of the perceived usefulness of a Web site . The useful - ness of a Web site depends on both the effec - tiveness of its relevant technological properties , such as advanced search engines , and on the extent of the human service behind the IT , which makes the non - technological aspects of the IT effective . Viewed in this manner , the benefits of a Web site can be classified as benefits relating to the current activities , such as the usefulness of the technology itself , and to benefits relating to future benefits , such as getting the items that were ordered . Regarding the longer term benefits , trust should increase the perceived usefulness of the interaction through the Web site by increasing the ultimate benefits , in this case getting the products or services from an honest , caring , and able vendor , as expected . This ties into the dual nature of a Web site as both an IT and a social interface to the e - vendor . When the e - vendor is viewed as trustworthy , trust is related to the latter , it makes the Web site beneficial to the extent that customers are often willing to pay a premium price for just that added special relationship with an e - vendor that they trust ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . In general , when there is social uncertainty as to how others will behave , trust is a prime deter - minant of what people expect from the situation , both in social interactions ( Blau 1964 ) and in business interactions ( Fukuyama 1995 ) . This is especially true in business interactions where people depend upon the other party to fulfill com - mitments in order to benefit from the interaction , and yet find themselves in a situation where moni - toring or legal guarantees are impractical . In such cases , trust determines the very nature of the utility expected ( Fukuyama 1995 ) . The prominence of trust in these relationships is explained through social exchange theory , or SET ( Homans 1961 ; Kelley 1979 ; Kelley and Thibaut 1978 ; Thibaut and Kelley 1959 ) . In essence , SET views interactions in a similar manner to economic exchange : being composed of costs paid and rewards received . As in an economic exchange , people take part in an activity only if their outcome from it is satisfactory , i . e . , if their perceived sub - jective expected rewards exceed their subjective costs ( Blau 1964 ; Homans 1961 ) or at least satisfy their expectations and exceed their alternative investments ( Thibaut and Kelley 1959 ) . Unlike an economic exchange , however , a social exchange deals with situations where there is no explicit or detailed contract binding the parties or when the contract is insufficient to provide a complete legal protection to all of the parties involved . Thus , because rewards cannot be guaranteed in a social exchange , trust is essential and determines people ' s expectations from the relationship ( Blau 1964 ; Konovsky and Pugh 1994 ; Lewis and Weigert 1985a ; Luhmann 1979 ) . Trust increases the perceived certainty concerning other people ' s expected behavior ( Luhmann 1979 ; Zand 1972 ) and reduces the fear of being exploited ( Zand 1972 ) , especially when the social exchange involves current costs invested in exchange for expected future unguaranteed rewards ( Kelley 1979 ) , as is the case with online purchase . Research has shown that SET also explains how the PU of an IT is affected by trust in its vendor ( Gefen 1997 ) and its technical support ( Gefen and Keil 1998 ) . In fact , developing a business relationship based on trust is a prime asset in its own right . In a trusting relationship , people do not need to invest resources in monitoring and in maintaining complex legal contracts to gain their fair share ( Fukuyama 1995 ; Kumar 1996 ) , an action which would entail transaction costs ( Ganesan 1994 ; Gulati 1995 ; Kumar 1996 ) . Such trusting rela - tionships also provide a measure of indirect control and of assurance that the outcome will be fair to all parties involved ( Korsgaard et al . 1995 ; Kumar 1996 ) ; that all parties are in the relation - ship for the long run ( Fukuyama 1995 ) ; and that all parties will refrain from taking unfair or oppor - tunistic advantage ( Williamson 1985 ) . Basically , trust creates a " reservoir of goodwill " ( Kumar 1996 , p . 97 ) . Not surprisingly , the benefits of such a trusting relationship are such that customers , even online ones , are often willing to pay higher MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 61 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping prices for the benefits of buying from such a vendor through its Web site ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) . Even with one - time purchases where these benefits ( such as increased usefulness ) may be small , it is only by believing that the e - vendor will behave with integrity , caring , and acceptable ability that consumers can rule out socially unacceptable yet conceivable behavior on the part of the e - vendor . Only with an e - vendor who can be trusted will the consumer be able to success - fully accomplish their tasks on the Web site ( e . g . , search for product information and place an order ) . If the e - vendor does not know its market and its goal , has low ability , is not honest , or does not care about the consumer , accomplishing such a task will be much harder . Trust establishes the credibility of the vendor in providing what has been promised ( Ganesan 1994 ) . Thus , trust pro - vides a measure of subjective guarantee that the e - vendor can make good on its side of the deal , behave as promised , and genuinely care . All of these increase the likelihood that the consumer will gain the expected benefits from the Web site through which the e - vendor communicates with its consumers . Conversely , doing business with an e - vendor who cannot be trusted could result in detrimental consequences , i . e . , reduced useful - ness . This could occur , for example , when the e - vendor shares customer activity databases . Ac - cordingly , a trusting relationship is in itself a bene - fit of the interaction with the e - vendor ( Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) , an interaction manifested in the Web site , typically the only interaction medium consumers have with an e - vendor . H , : Trust will positively affect PU . Antecedents of Trust Drawing from several theoretical streams , research on trust has identified a number of trust antecedents : knowledge - based trust , institution - based trust ( specifically , structural assurance beliefs and situational normality beliefs ) , calcu - lative - based trust , cognition - based trust ( specifi - cally , categorization processes and illusion of control processes ) , and personality - based trust ( specifically , faith in humanity and a trusting stance ) . 6 The first three types of trust antecedents are the focus of this study and will be discussed extensively below . The other two trust antece - dents , personality - based and cognition - based , are more relevant for initial trust formation ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) and will thus be excluded from the current study , which focuses on consumers who had prior experience with a particular e - vendor . 7 For the sake of completeness , we discuss these briefly next . Personality - Based Trust Trust is the product of many antecedents , including personality . Personality - based trust or propensity to trust refers to the tendency to believe or not to believe in others and so trust them ( Farris et al . 1973 ; Mayer et al . 1995 ; McKnight et al . 1998 , 2000 ; Rotter 1971 ) . This form of trust is based on a belief that others are typically well - meaning and reliable ( Rosenburg 1957 ; Wrightsman 1991 ) . These beliefs are a trust credit that is given to others before exper - ience can provide a more rational interpretation . Such a disposition is especially important in the initial stages of a relationship ( Mayer et al . 1995 ; McKnight et al . 1998 ; Rotter 1971 ) . Later , as people interact with the trusted party , these dispo - sitions become of lesser importance because people are more influenced by the nature of the interaction itself ( McKnight et al . 1998 ; Rotter 1971 ; Zand 1972 ) . 6An alternative view of cognitive trust - building processes is provided by Doney et al . ( 1998 ) : calculative - based , prediction , intentionality , capability , and transference . Since , prediction , intentionality , and capability refer to the specific trusting beliefs of predictability , bene - volence , and ability that we use to operationalize trust in our study , McKnight et al . ' s ( 1998 ) classification of trust - building processes is more consistent with our conceptualization of trust . 7There are many other variables that could influence trust , especially initial trust . Among them are risk , vendor size , and reputation ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ) , and trust transference ( Doney and Cannon 1997 ) . In the interests of parsimony , these were deemed to be outside the scope of the research . They should be studied in future work , however . 62 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Arguably , this disposition should be especially important for inexperienced online consumers , since , in the absence of social cues and exper - ience with an e - vendor ( Gefen 2000 ; Reichheld and Schefter 2000 ) , new consumers are forced to base their trust primarily on their socialized dispo - sition to trust ( Gefen 2000 ) . Research suggests , however , that among experienced consumers these dispositions are immaterial ( McKnight et al . 2000 ) . Thus , since the current study focuses on consumers with prior experience with the online vendor , this construct is excluded from the theo - retical model of the study . Cognition - Based Trust Cognition - based trust research offers a different set of antecedents of trust . This view examines how trust is built on first impressions rather than through experiential personal interactions ( Brewer and Silver 1978 ; Meyerson et al . 1996 ) . Ac - cording to this research tradition , cognition - based trust is formed via categorization and illusions of control . Categorization processes ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) suggest that individuals place more trust in people similar to themselves and assess trust - worthiness based on second - hand information and on stereotypes ( Morgan and Hunt 1994 ; Zucker 1986 ) . Illusions of control describes how , in the absence of significant first - hand information , trusting beliefs can be over - inflated . In an effort to gain some sense of personal control in an uncer - tain situation , individuals will assess a person ' s trustworthiness ( Langer 1975 ) by observing and attending to cues that might confirm this person ' s trustworthiness ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) . The mere process of observing , even in the absence of any evidence , tends to over - inflate trust beliefs ( Davis and Kotteman 1994 ) . The current study focuses on consumers who have had prior first - hand experience with the online e - vendor . Therefore , as in the case of disposition to trust , this construct will not be part of the research model for the study since it mostly relates to trust formation in the absence of first - hand experience with the trusted party ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) . Knowledge - Based Trust Antecedents : Familiarity with the E - Vendor Familiarity is experience with the what , who , how , and when of what is happening . While trust re - duces social complexity relating to future activities of the other party , familiarity reduces social uncer - tainty through increased understanding of what is happening in the present ( Luhmann 1979 ) . Fami - liarity with the way other business partners work and their limitations is also an important antece - dent of trust in ongoing business interactions ( Kumar 1996 ; Kumar et al . 1995b ) . Familiarity counteracts concerns that the other party may be opportunistic , based on a reliance on past joint activities when that did not happen ( Gulati 1995 ) . Doney et al . ( 1998 ) , referring to this antecedent as a prediction process , argue that trust is created in this process when the trustor ' s knowledge about the other party allows it to predict the behavior of the other party . In e - commerce , consumer familiarity , for example , corresponds to how well a consumer comprehends the Web site procedures , including when and how to enter credit card information ( Gefen 2000 ) . Trust , on the other hand , deals with beliefs about the e - vendor ' s future intentions and behavior ( Gefen 2000 ) . Luhmann ( 1979 ) argues that with an a priori trustworthy party , familiarity builds trust because it creates an appropriate context to interpret the behavior of the trusted party ( Luhmann 1979 ) . This argument has been supported by empirical work on e - commerce which shows that familiarity with how to use a Web site as well as with the e - vendor increases trust in the e - vendor ( Gefen 2000 ) . With a trustworthy e - vendor , familiarity also lessens confusion about the Web site proce - dures and , in doing so , reduces the possibility that the customer may mistakenly sense that he or she is being taken unfair advantage of ( Gefen 2000 ) . Knowledge - based trust antecedents such as familiarity with the e - vendor suggest that trust develops over time with the accumulation of trust - relevant knowledge resulting from experience with the other party ( Holmes 1991 ; Lewicki and Bunker 1995 ) . Thus , the development of trust between parties requires time and an interaction history ( Blau 1964 ; McKnight et al . 1998 ) . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 63 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Accordingly , familiarity with an a priori trustworthy e - vendor should increase consumer trust because more familiarity implies an increasing amount of accumulated knowledge derived from experience from previous successful interactions through the Web site ( Gefen 2000 ) . In general , familiarity with what is going on , with why it is happening , and with the parties involved creates trust in business relationships ( Kumar 1996 ) . This accumulated trust - relevant knowledge and successful previous interactions lead to higher levels of trust ( Blau 1964 ) . H6 : Familiarity with a trustworthy e - vendor will positively affect trust in that e - vendor . Calculative - Based Trust Antecedents Based on economic principles , a second type of trust - building mechanism involves a calculative process ( Hosmer 1995 ) . According to the calcula - tive - based trust paradigm , trust can be shaped by rational assessments of the costs and benefits of another party cheating or cooperating in the rela - tionship ( Buckley and Casson 1988 ; Coleman 1990 ; Dasgupta 1988 ; Lewicki and Bunker 1995 ; Shapiro et al . 1992 ; Williamson 1993 ) . Trust in this view is derived from an economic analysis occurring in ongoing relationships , namely that it is not worthwhile for the other party to engage in opportunistic behavior ( Doney et al . 1998 ; Williamson 1985 ) . If the costs of being caught outweigh the benefits of cheating , then trust is warranted since cheating is not in the best interest of the other party ( Akelof 1970 ) . Therefore , according to this paradigm , the recognition that the trusted party has nothing to gain from not being trustworthy builds trust . This approach to trust is based on the assumption that while other people may not be necessarily good , they are rational , calculative , act in their own best self - interest , and , as such , will refrain from inflicting harm upon themselves . Thus , according to Shapiro et al . ( 1992 ) , calculative trust is deter - rence - based in that individuals will not engage in opportunistic behavior out of fear of facing the adverse consequences of being untrustworthy . In the context of e - commerce , a customer can be expected to trust an e - vendor more when the customer believes that the e - vendor has more to lose than to gain by cheating or has nothing to gain by breaking customer trust . H7 : Calculative - based beliefs will positively affect trust in an e - vendor . Institution - Based Trust Antecedents : Situational Normality and Structural Assurances Another trust - building process that may apply to online settings is institution - based trust . This refers to one ' s sense of security from guarantees , safety nets , or other impersonal structures inherent in a specific context ( Shapiro 1987 ; Zucker 1986 ) . The two types of institution - based trust discussed in the literature are situational normality and structural assurances ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) . Situational normality is an assessment that the transaction will be a success , based on how normal or customary the situation appears to be ( Baier 1986 ; Lewis and Weigert 1985b ) . This assures people that everything in the setting is as it ought to be and that a shared understanding of what is happening exists ( McKnight et al . 1998 ; Zucker 1986 ) . Bricks - and - mortar stores that look like a store , with salespeople that look like sales - people , build customer trust , while stores that do not look that way erode customer trust . This is because a person ' s trust disappears when a situa - tion is not normal ( McKnight et al . 1998 ) . In this view , people tend to extend greater trust when the nature of the interaction is in accordance with what they consider to be typical and , thus , antici - pated . This is in accord with sociologists such as Luhmann ( 1979 ) and Blau ( 1964 ) who view trust as the product of fulfilled expectations . In the con - text of the Internet , this view carries weight in that a Web site represents what customers expect based on their experience and knowledge of other similar Web sites , and for this reason , they will be more inclined to trust the e - vendor . On the other hand , when the Web site has a suspicious inter - face and requires customers to go through an 64 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping unexpected procedure or provide atypical informa - tion , consumers will understandably be more in - clined not to trust the e - vendor . In contrast with familiarity , however , situational normality does not deal with knowledge about the actual vendor ; rather , it deals with the extent that the interaction with that vendor is normal compared with similar sites . H , : Perceptions of situational normality will posi - tively affect trust in an e - vendor . Structural assurances or structural safeguards refer to an assessment of success due to safety nets such as legal recourse , guarantees , and regulations that exist in a specific context ( McKnight et al . 1998 ; Shapiro 1987 ; Zucker 1986 ) . According to this view , structural assur - ances built into the Web site , such as the Better Business Bureau ' s BBBOnline Reliability seal ( www . bbb . com ) , the TRUSTe seal of eTrust ( www . etrust . com ) , or a 1 - 800 number , should build trust ( Gefen 1997 ) . In this view , trust eman - ates from the security that one feels about the situation as a result of such guarantees , safety nets , or other structures ( McKnight et al . 2000 ; Shapiro 1987 ; Zucker 1986 ) . On the Web , cues appear on the Web page , and may include seals of approval ( McKnight et al . 2000 ; Noteberg et al . 1999 ) , explicit privacy policy statements ( McKnight et al . 2000 ; Palmer et al . 2000 ) , guarantees , affiliations with respected companies ( Stewart 1999 ) , and " contact us " clickable icons . Having a third party like the reputable Better Business Bu - reau vouch for the e - vendor as a trusted vendor should arguably build trust in that such assur - ances have typically been one of the primary methods of building trust in business ( Zucker 1986 ) . Moreover , the popularity of the Better Business Bureau ' s eTrust program attests to its success . The Better Business Bureau ' s program also builds trust by giving the customers recourse when there are disagreements about the quality of the products or services ( see www . bbboline . org for details ) . Indeed , experimental research shows that adding a structural assurance , such as a 1 - 800 number , to a Web site increases trust in that Web site ( Gefen 1997 ) . Such third - party certifications should build trust online just as they do in other commerce activities ( Zucker 1986 ) . H9 : Perceptions of structural assurances built into a Web site will positively affect trust in an e - vendor . Nature of the Interaction A key to creating trust in business interactions is to treat the weaker party fairly , without taking advantage of its dependency or lack of knowledge ( Hart and Saunders 1997 ; Kumar 1996 ) . In a business environment , this translates , among other things , into providing due process with regard to the procedures and policies that handle the relationship and providing explanations for what is going on ( Kumar 1996 ) . This is important because , when engaging with another person or persons , people subconsciously look for cues as to whether they can trust the other party ( Blau 1964 ) . Some cues relate to behavior , as indicated in hypotheses H6 through H9 ; other cues relate to appearance . Extrapolating from these findings to an e - commerce world , where the only real vendor interaction a customer has is through the Web site , implies that an easy - to - understand Web site ( equivalent to perceived ease of use ) that also explains what is going on should lead to the creation of trust . Arguably , one of the most promi - nent aspects of appearance in an e - vendor is the ease of use of its Web site . Conversely , a site that does not bother to help the user understand what is happening should , by virtue of not signaling due process , detract from accumulated trust . Moreover , well explained and easy to understand processes are a recipe for creating trust in business transactions ( Kumar 1996 ) as well as reducing the misunderstandings that undermine it ( Blau 1964 ) . PEOU should also increase trust through the perception that the e - vendor is investing in the relationship , and in so doing signals a commit - ment to the relationship . This applies in both social settings ( Blau 1964 ) and in buyer - seller relationships ( Ganesan 1994 ) . In a Web environ - ment , where the main interaction consumers have with the e - vendor is through the Web site , an obvious way to signal such a commitment is through the character of the Web site . If more MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 65 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping effort is placed in configuring the Web site so that it is usable and navigable , users will conclude that it is both easy to use and that the e - vendor is investing in the relationship . Conversely , a Web site that is unnecessarily hard to use does not connote ability or caring , let alone benevolence . A hard to use Web site might even insinuate that the e - vendor is not being straightforward ( i . e . , being dishonest ) , and is hiding something through an unnecessarily intricate interface . Consequen - tially , although PEOU is not the sole determinant of trust , it can be posited that it contributes to trust . H10 : PEOU will positively affect trust in an e - vendor . Some Trust - Related Antecedents of PEOU Situational normality , that is , creating the Web site so it looks and behaves in a typical manner , should increase PEOU since consumers ' prior knowledge of how to use the Web will be directly applicable to the task of purchasing from the present e - vendor ' s Web site . Thus , little cognitive effort will need to be expended to learn how to use the present Web site . In contrast , a Web site that has a unique , unusual interface implies that con - sumers cannot utilize their previous knowledge and will thus experience a higher cognitive load in using the site . The reason for this is that people typically address problems and tasks by applying their previously acquired cognitive maps of the world ( Anderson 1985 ) . When a task , such as using a Web site , maps neatly into an existing cognitive map , it is easy to solve , because solving it only requires applying an existing , previously learned pattern . The more normal a task is , the more a person can extrapolate from existing cognitive maps , making the solution easier . This ability to remember cognitive maps and apply them to problem solving is why experts can solve problems with greater ease and with a smaller number of errors ( Simon and Gilmartin 1973 ) . In this case , the Web site will be easier to use , i . e . , require less cognitive learning effort , if existing well - established cognitive patterns apply . When , on the other hand , the specific site is unique , previously learned cognitive patterns may even hinder the process by leading the user into inefficient paths and , in doing so , render the Web site even harder to use . H11 : Situational normality will positively affect PEOU . Indeed , the more familiar consumers are with a Web site as a result of prior visits , the more they will perceive the site to be easy to use . In that they already have an understanding of how to use the Web site as well as a knowledge of the basic structure and procedures used on the Web site , they will need to expend less cognitive effort to utilize it . Supporting this proposition , research shows that , with experience , users find an IT easer to use ( Karahanna et al . 1999 ) . Here too , cognitive maps can explain the process . An ac - quired cognitive map of the procedures involved , i . e . , familiarity , provides the user with additional tools to solve the problem quicker , with greater ease , and with fewer errors ( Simon and Gilmartin 1973 ) . Extrapolating to the e - vendor ' s site , such a cognitive map should increase user skill at using it and reduce errors , effectively increasing the perceived ease of use of the site . H12 : Familiarity with the e - vendor will positively affect PEOU . Research Method To examine the effects of trust and TAM on inten - tions to purchase from a Web site , a field study technique was employed . Our sampling and instrument development and validation processes ( Straub 1989 ) are described next . Instrument Development To gather data , a pretested instrument was administered to experienced online shoppers asking them to assess the last online book or CD vendor from whom they had made a purchase . 66 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Respondents were graduate or undergraduate students at a leading business school in the mid - Atlantic region of the United States . Books and CDs are among the most sought after products in e - commerce and are " low touch " items ( The Economist 2000 ) . Low touch products are the kind of products that typically require little exami - nation before purchase and , as such , require less trust in the vendor than other products , such as used cars . The sample for analysis in this study was drawn from those who were experienced users of such sites . Our research design deli - berately aimed to capture reactions to such pro - ducts . If consumer trust is significant even when little trust is required , then trust should be a key antecedent , in general . In short , the approach here is conservative , and a robust test of the theoretical model . The questionnaire contained the standard TAM scales of PU and PEOU adapted from Davis ' scales ( 1989 ) . These were previously shown to apply well to e - commerce purchase intentions for books ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; Jarven - paa et al . 2000 ) and airline tickets ( Gefen et al . 2000 ) . Intended use of a B2C Web site was assessed by two items . Since purchasing from an e - vendor is not a monolithic concept , but rather consists of a number of different activities , these two items were designed to capture two central activities that relate to and are essential aspects of purchasing products and services online . One item deals with a willingness to provide the e - vendor with credit card information for purchases and the other with a willingness to provide the e - vendor with the information it needs to provide good service . Examining behavioral intentions as they relate to specific outcome behaviors ( i . e . , not examining intentions toward a single general monolithic behavior ) is consistent with the way that Crosby et al . ( 1990 ) and Morgan and Hunt ( 1994 ) examined trust - related behavioral inten - tions and with the manner in which McKnight et al . ( 2002 ) operationalized trusting intentions in the context of e - commerce . 8 Trust items were com - posed to reflect specific beliefs of consumers in the e - vendor ' s integrity , benevolence , ability , and predictability as in the extensive previous empiri - cal research on buyer - seller relationships ( Crosby et al . 1990 ; Doney and Cannon 1997 ; Ganesan 1994 ; Gefen 2002b ; Jarvenpaa et al . 2000 ; McKnight et al . 2002 ; Schurr and Ozanne 1985 ) . Calculative - based trust - building items represent the calculation made by the consumer that the e - vendor has nothing to gain by being dishonest , uncaring , or unknowledgeable ( lacking ability ) . The familiarity items deal with customer familiarity with an e - vendor . The scale was created by ex - panding on the familiarity with the vendor themes used by Gefen ( 2000 ) . Situational normality items deal with the assessment that the interaction is typical of that type of e - vendor . Structural assur - ance items capture some of the typical steps taken by many Web sites to reassure their custo - mers that the interaction is safe . Namely , these items deal with ( 1 ) a 1 - 800 number being pro - vided , which has been previously shown to build trust ( Gefen 1997 ) , with ( 2 ) the belief that the Better Business Bureau ( BBB ) will help in case of trouble ( such service has become quite common - place with the BBB issuing various trust seals9 ) , with ( 3 ) the e - vendor providing a written statement of its guarantees , and with ( 4 ) the belief that the online transaction is safe . We chose to word these items as " I feel safe " because that is the wording of choice in the Better Business Bureau Web site . All of the items were on a seven - point scale ranging from strongly disagree ( 1 ) through neutral ( 4 ) to strongly agree ( 7 ) . The question - naire also collected demographic data . Pretest The instrument was pretested with 72 under - graduate students to check the psychometric pro - perties of the scales ( Straub 1989 ) . Respondents were not informed about the objective of the study . They were requested to complete the 8In addition to specific intended behaviors , McKnight et al . ( 2002 ) also had a general measure of trusting intentions . 9See http : / / www . bbbonline . org / for details of these programs . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 67 Gefen et al / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping questionnaire with regard to the last online book vendor or online CD vendor Web site at which they had made a purchase . Respondents were also asked to state the name of that e - vendor . Of the 72 questionnaires , 22 were discarded because respondents had not purchased books or CDs online , and so could not really assess any of the constructs that relate to the e - vendor . The convergent validity of each scale in the remaining 50 items was verified with a principal components factor analysis ( PCA ) . A separate PCA was run for each construct . A single eigen - value above 1 for each construct verified that the construct was unidimensional , showing the convergent validity of each scale . Discriminant validity could not be assessed at this stage because of the much larger sample size that is required ( Hair et al . 1998 ) . The Cronbach ' s a of all the scales was acceptable ( Nunnally and Bernstein 1994 ) , with the lowest being intended use at . 71 . All other alpha coefficients were at least . 88 . Primary Data Analysis and Descriptive Statistics The main data collection aimed at the same population , that is , experienced online shoppers who were undergraduate and graduate business students at a leading business school in the mid - Atlantic region of the United States . As in the pre - test , respondents were requested to complete the questionnaire by answering questions regarding the last online book vendor or online CD e - vendor at which they made a purchase , and to indicate its name . The questionnaire was administered to 400 students . As in the pretest , questionnaires from respondents who had not previously purchased books or CDs online were discarded . This resulted in a dataset of 213 responses . Of the respondents , 86 were women and 110 were men , with some missing values in the data - set . Respondents had purchased online an average of 7 . 18 times during the previous year . Most respondents were in their early 20s ( n = 157 ) or late 20s ( n = 31 ) . The most frequent sites for last purchase were Amazon . com ( 26 % ) , half . com ( 3 % ) , bn . com ( 11 % ) , cdnow . com ( 10 % ) , ecampus . com ( 3 % ) , and bmg . com ( 3 % ) . Data were pooled from 172 senior undergraduate students and 41 graduate students . Pooling was justified in that there were no significant dif - ferences between the senior undergraduate students and the graduate students in the answers to questionnaire items measuring key dependent and independent variables ( Wilks ' lambda = . 70407 , p - value = . 099 ) . Descriptive data are shown in Table 2 . All items ranged from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 7 ( strongly agree ) , and showed a reasonable dispersion in their distributions across the ranges , as seen in the standard deviations . Data Analysis LISREL was used for data analysis because it has distinct advantages over other techniques . LISREL accounts for all of the covariance in the data and so allows for the examination of all of the correlations , shared variances , and paths in the model when estimating the significance level and coefficient of the paths ( Bollen 1989 ) . The result is more accurate parameter estimation and a " more realistic " ( Bollen 1989 , p . 19 ) analysis . LISREL also enables unidimensionality analysis , an examination not possible using PCA or Cron - bach ' s a reliability tests ( Gerbing and Anderson 1988 ; Segars 1997 ) . Data analysis was carried out in accordance with a two - stage methodology ( Gerbing and Anderson 1988 ) where " the measurement model first is developed and evaluated separately from the full structural equation model " ( p . 191 ) . Accordingly , the first step in the data analysis was to establish the convergent and discriminant validity of the constructs with a LISREL confirmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) . The measurement model in the CFA was revised by dropping items , one at a time , that shared a high degree of residual variance with other items , according to the standard LISREL methodology ( Gefen et al . 2000 ; Gerbing and Anderson 1988 ) , and Churchill ' s ( 1979 ) scale 68 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Table 2 . Descriptive Statistics Construct Mean ( Std . ) of Construct Intended Use 4 . 18 ( 1 . 46 ) PU 4 . 28 ( 1 . 31 ) PEOU 4 . 76 ( 1 . 13 ) Trust 3 . 15 ( 1 . 21 ) Structural Assurances 3 . 18 ( 1 . 21 ) Situational Normality 4 . 13 ( 1 . 13 ) Familiarity with the e - Vendor 4 . 05 ( 1 . 49 ) Calculative Based 3 . 58 ( 1 . 43 ) development paradigm . Items were dropped de - pending on reported standardized residuals , that is , those showing a significant degree of shared nonspecified variance among the measurement items . Every item dropped was also carefully read to verify that its residual variance also made sense from a theoretical perspective . 10 After dropping items , the CFA showed acceptable model fit . The X2 of 364 . 31 with 247 degrees of freedom showed a X2 to degrees of freedom ratio of less than the recommended 1 : 3 . The AGFI at . 85 , NFI at . 91 , CFI at . 97 , RMR at . 041 , and MESEA at . 048 are all within the accepted thres - holds for CFA . 11 Only the GFI at . 88 was slightly below the . 90 benchmark . GFI can be brought to . 90 by dropping additional items , but , in the interest of content validity , it was decided to stop dropping items at this stage . 12 The composite construct reliabilities , shown in Table 3 , are also within the commonly accepted range greater than . 70 ( Gefen et al . 2000 ) . Appendix A contains item loadings before and after cleaning the CFA . Appendix B contains the correlation matrix generated by LISREL . Additionally , discriminant validity of the resulting scales was verified employing the guidelines advanced by Segars ( 1997 ) . All of the modifica - tion indices in the lambda X matrix were well below the critical threshold of 5 , meaning that adding a path from any measurement item to any other latent variable , other than the one to which it was assigned , would not cause a significant change in the model ' s overall X2 statistic . This shows that no cross loading of any measurement item on any other construct but its own is signi - ficant . Discriminant validity of the constructs was further validated by comparing the X2 Of the original CFA with its eight latent variables against other CFAs with only seven latent variables where every possible combination of two constructs was 10As a result of dropping the two trust items the trust scale overlaps in meaning with Doney and Cannon ( 1997 ) and Jarvenpaa , et al . ( 2000 ) . The one structural assurance item that was dropped dealt with a portal while the other items dealt with the guarantees and pro - cedures . The one situational normality item that was dropped dealt with the interaction rather than the requested information . The familiarity item dropped referred to familiarity gained through secondary sources such as magazines . In addition , two PU and two PEOU items were dropped . 11GFI , CFI , and NFI are best if above . 90 , AGFI above . 80 , and RMR below . 050 , and the ratio of x2to degrees of freedom below 1 : 3 , according to the majority of references in Gefen et al . ( 2000 ) and Hair et al . ( 1998 ) . There is some disagreement in the literature about the cutoff value of RMSEA . Hu and Bentler ( 1999 ) argue for a cutoff around . 06 while Jarvenpaa et al . ( 2000 ) claim that is should be at or below . 08 . 121t is common that LISREL models , including those published in leading MIS journals , seldom show excellent fit values in all the indices . See the recent analysis by Boudreau et al . ( 2001 ) . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 69 Gefen et al / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Table 3 . Composite Construct Reliabilities Reliability When All the Items Are Reliability Construct Included in the Model When Items are Dropped Intended Use . 83 . 83 Perceived Ease of Use . 90 . 90 Perceived Usefulness . 89 . 90 Trust . 83 . 83 Calculative - based . 79 . 79 Familiarity with the e - Vendor . 78 . 87 Structural Assurances . 76 . 77 Situational Normality . 85 . 88 examined , thus considering every possible pair - wise discriminant validity check . The X2 of the original CFA with its eight latent variables was significantly better than any possible union of any two latent variables13 ( see Appendix C ) . Uni - dimensional validity was assessed by examining standardized residual variance , the RMR , and the standardized modification indexes , based on guidelines provided by Gerbing and Anderson ( 1988 ) and by Segars ( 1997 ) . 14 Next , the structural model ( which includes hypo - theses in addition to the paths between the item and its latent construct ) was examined on the cleansed measurement model . The fit indexes are within accepted thresholds , except for GFI , which is slightly lower than the commonly cited threshold : X2 to degrees of freedom ratio of 1 : 1 . 52 ( Z2257 = 389 . 77 ) , CFI = . 96 , RMR = . 050 , RMSEA = . 049 , GFI = . 88 , AGFI = . 84 , and NFI = . 90 . Figure 2 shows the standardized LISREL path coefficients and the overall fit indexes . Squared multiple correlations were : intended use , 61 percent ; PU , 53 percent ; PEOU , 41percent ; and trust 59 percent . All the paths are significant except the path between familiarity in the e - vendor and trust which is insignificant ( F = - . 01 , t = - . 08 ) . 15 13This is shown statistically when the X2 of the original CFA is significantly smaller than the CFA of any alternative model . In this case , since uniting any two latent variables adds seven degrees of freedom to the model , the X20f the original CFA should be at least 16 . 01 smaller than the x2 of any alternative model . The differences in X2 were all above 300 . 14There were six standardized residuals slightly above the 2 . 58 threshold , the highest being 3 . 14 . However , the RMR at . 040 was well within the threshold and all the expected change statistics were insignificant . Moreover , rerunning the analysis specifying a slightly smaller sample size resulted in no standardized residuals above 2 . 58 . 15Contrary to previous research ( Gefen 2000 ) , there was a surprising lack of effect of familiarity on both trust and intended use . A post hoc analysis explored this further by excluding from the model all of the constructs except for familiarity , trust , and intended use . This tests whether familiarity may be important but that its effect is miti - gated by other constructs . This model , using the same items as in the latter LISREL analysis , showed that intended use was increased by both trust and familiarity ( standardized P and y being . 52 and . 22 , respectively ) , explaining 43 percent of its variance , and that trust was increased by familiarity ( standardized y = . 49 ) , explaining 24 percent of its variance . The model showed very good overall fit indexes . GFI at . 98 , AGFI = . 95 , RMR at . 032 , RMSEA at . 034 , NFI at . 98 , and CFI at . 99 are all well within their accepted thresholds . This analysis com - bined with the previous one suggests that , after all , familiarity does increase both trust and intended use , as suggested by previous research , but that this effect is channeled through other constructs . 70 MIS Quarterly Vol 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Calculative - based Institution - based structural assurances Institution - based situational normality Knowledge - based familiarity . 1 8 * * . 37 * 33 * * . 47 n . ys . 25 * * . 55 4 PU PEOU . 28 * * Trust . 26 * * S . 26 * * . 25 " * . 40 " * / Intended Use x2257 = 389 . 77 RMR = . 050 RMSEA = . 049 GFI = . 88 , AGFI = . 84 NFI = . 90 , CFI = . 96 * * path is significant at the . 01 level n . s . insignificant at the . 05 level . Figure 2 . Standardized LISREL Solution Table 4 . LISREL Standardized Correlation Matrix Intended Calculative - Knowledge - Institutional - Situational - Use PEOU PU Trust Based Based Based Based Intended Use 1 . 00 PEOU 0 . 67 1 . 00 PU 0 . 72 0 . 70 1 . 00 Trust 0 . 62 0 . 56 0 . 57 1 . 00 Calculative - based 0 . 18 0 . 13 0 . 16 0 . 32 1 . 00 Knowledge - based 0 . 41 0 . 51 0 . 41 0 . 48 0 . 22 1 . 00 Institutional - based 0 . 25 0 . 15 0 . 21 0 . 49 0 . 13 0 . 32 1 . 00 Situational - 0 . 50 0 . 61 0 . 49 0 . 58 0 . 17 0 . 56 0 . 15 1 . 00 normality MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 71 Gefen et al / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Table 4 contains the LISREL - calculated correla - tions among the constructs . 16 Discussion Summary of Results There are many issues affecting consumer deci - sions to return to an e - vendor . This study exam - ined two aspects of this decision , trust and TAM , and showed how these aspects are related to purchase intentions of low - touch low - risk items from e - vendors . The underlying premises of this study were ( 1 ) that online customers are influ - enced by both their trust in the e - vendor and technological aspects of the Web site interface , and ( 2 ) that consumer trust is increased by aspects of the interaction . It was also hypothe - sized that ( 3 ) some aspects of the interaction increase customer assessments of ease - of - use of the e - vendor Web site . The data show that experienced consumers intentions to transact with the last e - vendor from whom they purchased depends on both trust and the two beliefs iden - tified by TAM , perceived usefulness ( PU ) and perceived ease of use ( PEOU ) . This result corro - borates the findings of previous research on the need for trust in Internet activity ( Gefen 2000 ; Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; Salisbury et al . 1998 ) . The study also reveals some of the antecedents of trust in an online environment , namely : ( 1 ) a belief that the vendor has nothing to gain by cheating ( i . e . , calculative - based beliefs ) , ( 2 ) the belief that there are safety mechanisms built into the Web site ( i . e . , structural assurances ) , and having a ( 3 ) typical ( i . e . , situational normality ) and ( 4 ) easy - to - use interface . Although significantly correlated with trust , familiarity with the e - vendor ( i . e . , knowledge - based assessments ) per se did not significantly increase trust when the other ante - cedents were included in the model . Having a conventional and familiar site did , however , increase its perceived ease of use . In the research model for this study , the effect of fami - liarity on trust was fully mediated , an interesting modification to existing theory . A possible explanation of this finding may be the following . The familiarity construct used in the present study had two facets : ( 1 ) familiarity with the e - vendor gained through ads and articles in the popular press , and ( 2 ) familiarity with the e - vendor gained through visiting the site . Due to poor loadings , only the familiarity with the e - vendor via visiting the Web site items were retained . This may explain the mediating effect of PEOU in the relationship between familiarity and trust ; it also suggests that future research may be warranted . It is possible that each of the two facets of familiarity has a different set of ante - cedents and consequents . In other words , it is possible that the reason familiarity did not directly increase trust in the research model is that the increased understanding it provides , and through it the increased trust , was mainly related to understanding how to apply the technology . Additionally , the data support the hypotheses that trust increases the perceived usefulness of the Web site and that familiarity and situational normality contribute to customer assessments of the ease of use of the Web site . Examining the relative importance of the four trust - building antecedents identified in the study , we found that institution - based beliefs of structural assurances and situational normality have by far the most effect on trust . The standardized path coefficients of these two trust - building mecha - nisms were . 37 and . 33 respectively , whereas the 16To verify that the pattern of significant paths was not changed by dropping the items , the structural model analysis was rerun with all of the measurement items . The analysis shows the same pattern of significant paths , albeit with fit indexes slightly below the accepted thresholds . The analysis supported all hypotheses , except for H6 , i . e . , that familiarity with the e - vendor increases trust . Explained variance of intended use is 62 percent , of PU is 53 percent , of PEOU is 44 percent , and of trust is 58 percent . Some of the overall fit indexes were within accepted thresholds with CFI at . 93 and the ratio of X2 to degrees of freedom at 1 : 1 . 73 ( X2 59 at 882 . 54 ) . The other fit indexes were slightly lower than commonly cited thresholds : GFI at . 80 , NFI at . 86 , AGFI at . 76 , RMR at . 063 , and RMSEA at . 064 . Table 3 contains the LISREL composite construct reliabilities , which are all at acceptable levels . Appendix A contains the items and their standardized loadings . 72 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping path coefficient from calculative - based beliefs to trust was less at . 18 ; moreover , the relationship between trust and knowledge - based familiarity was nonsignificant . There is perhaps nothing surprising in these results . The perception of fair play is one of the major forces building trust in ongoing business interactions ( Kumar 1996 ) . Structural assurances and situational normality are both indicative of fair play , the first through outside guarantors , and the second through lack of suspicious elements . This conclusion supports the current industry trends to add both structural assurances , such as the Better Business Bureau ' s eTrust and BBB online seal , and to apply standardized and easy to use inter - faces . Given their importance as trust ante - cedents , institution - based mechanisms warrant additional research into their nature and effects . In addition , the TAM construct PU remains an important predictor of intended use , as in many past studies . In terms of the significant stan - dardized P coefficients , trust is . 26 and PU is . 40 . What this suggests is that while both are important , PU is a stronger direct predictor than trust , at least for experienced repeat consumers of an e - vendor . Limitations The study investigated experienced consumers who were working on undergraduate or MBA degrees . To the extent that these consumers are typical of online consumers , the results will hold across a more general population ( Gordon et al . 1986 ) . Remus ( 1986 ) found that business students were good surrogates for managers , but no one has reported on the extent to which they are good surrogates for online consumers . In brief , this might be a threat to the external validity of the study . Since measures of all constructs in the study were collected at the same point in time and via the same instrument ( method ) , the potential for com - mon method variance exists ( Straub et al . 1995 ) . Due to the cross - sectional nature of the study , causality can only be inferred through the theory . In addition , even though measures of behavioral intent captured two essential aspects of online purchasing ( viz . , intentions of providing one ' s credit card number to the e - vendor to purchase a product / service and providing information to the e - vendor ) , they did not focus on an overall measure of intention to shop from the e - vendor again . Thus , results of the study should be interpreted by keeping in mind this narrower conceptualization of intended behavior . In addition , the relationship between familiarity with an e - vendor and trust is likely to be moderated by whether or not the e - vendor is indeed trustworthy . If the e - vendor is trustworthy then increased familiarity should enhance per - ceptions of trust in the e - vendor resulting in a positive relationship between the two constructs . On the other hand , if the e - vendor is not trust - worthy , increased familiarity will likely be negatively related to trust . The respondents of the current study focused on vendors who happened to be trustworthy . Thus , we had posited a positive relationship between familiarity and trust . Future research is needed to explore this moderating relationship and to assess generalizability of our results to vendors who are not trustworthy . Furthermore , measures of calculative trust focused on the final outcome of the rational assessment process ( i . e . , the extent to which consumers believe that an e - vendor has nothing to gain by cheating ) rather than on specific costs and benefits or on an explicit assessment of overall costs and benefits . We believe that our measures effectively capture the essence of the construct . Future research may explore alterna - tive operational definitions of this construct in order to focus on ( 1 ) the identification and assess - ment of specific costs and benefits associated with an e - vendor ' s opportunistic behavior , or ( 2 ) an explicit assessment of whether the vendor has more to lose than to gain by engaging in opportunistic behavior ( e . g . , " the e - vendor has more to lose than to gain by being dishonest in its interactions with me " rather than " the e - vendor has nothing to gain by being dishonest in its interactions with me " ) . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 73 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Another limitation that is pertinent to LISREL analysis in general is that when items are dropped in a purely data - driven manner , the meaning of the constructs may change ( Bagozzi 1984 ) . Revalidating the trimmed scales with new data can be argued to increase validity of the scales as well as of the nomological network . While a common practice in LISREL analyses ( Gerbing and Anderson 1988 ) , dropping measurement items to improve model fit may have caused an over fitting of the model to the data ( Gefen et al . 2000 ) and may have increased the risk that the model as shown in Figure 2 may be affected by the specific characteristics of the sample ( Chin and Todd 1995 ; MacCallum et al . 1992 ) . Add - ressing this concern , we employed theory - based reasoning in dropping items . Great care was taken during the analysis to ensure that items were dropped based on likely problems with wording , rather than only on statistics . Moreover , it was verified that the pattern of significant paths was not changed as a result of dropping these items . Another topic that requires additional study is the conceptualization of trust . Trust was defined in this study as a set of specific beliefs , in accor - dance with other research on buyer - seller ongoing relationships that deal with integrity , benevolence , ability , and predictability ( e . g . , Doney and Cannon 1997 ; Jarvenpaa et al . 2000 ) . In addition , con - sistent with recent research ( e . g . , McKnight et al . 2002 ) , these beliefs lead to intended behavior ( or trusting intentions ) . As discussed earlier , there are alternative conceptualizations of trust in the management and psychology arenas . Some researchers in these arenas ( e . g . , Mayer et al . 1995 ) make a distinction between ( 1 ) the beliefs that our study calls trust and what Mayer et al . call antecedents of trust , and ( 2 ) a willingness to depend , which Mayer et al . call trust and we call intended behavior . Examining these additional perspectives in the context of the proposed model could shed additional light on how trust and TAM relate to e - commerce . Furthermore , our study focuses on consumers who had previously purchased from and had experience with an e - vendor ' s Web site . Results such as the relative importance of the various trust building mechanisms and TAM may be at variance with inexperienced consumers ( Karahanna et al . 1999 ) , or with experienced consumers who have never purchased from a site , and additional trust antecedents may become salient . Thus , the generalizability of results to potential consumers of an e - vendor who ( 1 ) have never visited the e - vendor ' s Web site and / or ( 2 ) have never pur - chased from the e - vendor is not immediately obvious and warrants further investigation . Finally , the study focused on relatively simple , low - touch products that require relatively less trust . As such , the study provides a more robust test for the model than focusing on more complex , high - touch products for which trust issues are expected to be more dominant . Future research needs to assess the generalizability of the model to the purchase of complex products and online services , including applicability to other unrelated online industries , such as financial services . Implications : Theoretical and Practical Trust is crucial in e - commerce , a finding already known from previous research ( Gefen 2000 ; Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ; Jarvenpaa et al . 2000 ) and from industry reports ( Cole 1998 ) . Empirical evidence on how it can be built in an online environment , however , has been largely an open question . This study sheds some light on this issue by showing , that among repeat con - sumers , trust is the product of several aspects of the Web site that are well within the control of the e - vendor . First , perceived ease of use emerges as a central aspect of e - commerce since it has both direct effects on intended use as well as indirect effects through trust and perceived usefulness . Designing easy - to - use Web sites is under the control of the e - vendor . Second , Web site ease of use is enhanced by e - vendors providing Web sites with interfaces that are typical and customary ( i . e . , situational normality ) and via increased familiarity with the e - vendor and its pro - cedures . Increased familiarity can be achieved , for example , through advertising , through articles 74 MIS Quarterly Vol 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping in the popular press , through linkages with well known Web sites , and through providing incen - tives to use the e - vendor ' s Web site ( e . g . , Delta provides an incentive to use the delta . com Web site to make ticket reservations by awarding additional frequent flyer miles ) . Third , situational normality ( i . e . , having a typical interface ) also directly contributes to the building of consumer trust . In the short run , e - vendors should attempt to understand the sequence of activities , function - ality , and types of information that match con - sumer mental models of " typical Web sites . " This can be achieved through a review of successful e - vendor Web sites or through focus groups of consumers . In the long run , this might imply less variability in Web site design . Additional research is needed to identify the aspects of a Web site that are salient in terms of assessing similarity so that Web sites can engender trust and maintain their individual character at the same time . Another way of increasing trust is by incorporating institution - based structural assurances into the Web site , assurances such as statements of guarantees , contact telephone numbers , and Better Business Bureau seals . Finally , convincing the consumers that the e - vendor has nothing to gain by not being trustworthy also builds trust . Convincing consumers of this might be achieved , as in other business interactions , through increased publicity of legal action taken by the authorities as well as by meaningful sanctions for untrustworthy vendors by consumer protection agencies such as the Better Business Bureau . The publicity that the IFCC17 recently received ( e . g . , Sullivan 2002 ) is one step in that direction . The emerging trend of online vendors to incorporate consumer protection seals , such as those given by the Better Business Bureau , and meaningful sanctions for breaching these obli - gations by these consumer protection agencies is another . It is quite reassuring in this regard that gaining consumer trust is largely under the control of the e - vendor , meaning that e - vendors can influence consumer trust . The success of some e - commerce companies such as e - Bay has indeed been attributed to such trust - building mechan - isms , namely institution - based structural assur - ances ( Hof 2001 ) . An online vendor is represented by features of its IT , that is , its Web site . This study shows that recognizing both technological and trust issues is important in increasing consumers ' intended use of the Web site and , through it , transactions with the e - vendor . The TAM beliefs and consumer trust are shown to be two distinct sets of beliefs , each contributing in its own right to use intentions , meaning that e - vendors need to pay attention to both aspects . Increasing familiarity with the e - vendor may actually be a way of increasing both aspects . Trust is a social antecedent . Perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are technological antecedents . These two distinct sets of antece - dents are intertwined in this case . As the sup - ported hypotheses indicate , perceived ease of use is associated with increased trust , and increased trust , in turn , is associated with increased per - ceived usefulness above and beyond the increase in perceived usefulness caused by perceived ease of use . Moreover , antecedents of trust are also antecedents of perceived ease of use , suggesting that e - vendors who invest in increased trust may achieve , as a desirable albeit inadvertent addition , increased user acceptance of their Web site through the rational antecedents advocated by TAM . At least in this case , the distinctive social process versus rational process distinction may be less than a chasm after Traditionally , antecedents of perceived usefulness consisted of social influences ( e . g , Karahanna and Straub 1999 ; Venkatesh and Davis 2000 ) , and characteristics of the system and of the task ( e . g . , Goodhue and Thompson 1995 ; Karahanna and Straub 1999 ) . Goodhue and Thompson sug - 17The Internet Fraud Complaint Center ( wwwl . ifccfbi . gov ) , operated jointly by the FBI and the National White Collar Crime Center , allows consumers to file fraud complaints and alert the authorities of online scams . Complaints to this center have resulted in legal action within the United States and in international pressure on foreign governments when the scams were managed from abroad ( Sullivan 2002 ) . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 75 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping gest , for instance , that a system will be perceived as more useful and job performance is likely to be enhanced if characteristics of the system match the requirements of the task . The relationship between trust and perceived usefulness in the current study suggests that the set of antece - dents , in cases where the technology is the inter - face via which a business ( or social ) relationship is manifest , should be expanded to include characteristics of the relationship such as trust . This is likely to be so , not just in B2C e - com - merce , but in other business - to - business ( B2B ) supply chain management activities as well . The finding that there is a considerable overlap between the antecedents of trust and perceived ease of use in this study can be attributed to the fact that , in online shopping , the e - vendor ' s Web site is the main means by which familiarity with the e - vendor is achieved and situational normality is assessed . Thus , becoming familiar with the e - vendor largely implies gaining experience with the e - vendor ' s Web site . Similarly , if the e - vendor ' s Web site ( in terms of procedures and information required ) is typical of other Web sites , a user ' s accumulated online experience is applicable and transferable to the e - vendor ' s Web site . Both of these effects translate to heightened ease - of - use perceptions . Thus , the processes by which trust is assessed and built are inexorably intertwined with the experience and cognitive map building processes leading to ease of use . Future research is required to examine how these rela - tionships may vary in cases where ( 1 ) familiarity with an e - vendor is acquired via means other than an e - vendor ' s Web site , and ( 2 ) familiarity sug - gests that the e - vendor is untrustworthy , yet this same familiarity leads to heightened ease of use perceptions . Additional Research Although explaining a great deal of the variance in trust , the scope of this study can be expanded to gain a more complete picture of trust in e - com - merce . The current study has focused on con - sumers who have previously transacted with the e - vendor . Both the trust ( e . g . , McKnight et al . 1998 ) and the IS literatures ( e . g . , Karahanna et al . 1999 ) suggest that determinants of intended behavior change based on the users ' level of experience . Therefore , it is not immediately obvious that the results of the current study generalize to inexperienced consumers . Addi - tional research , both longitudinal and cross - sectional , is needed to examine how antecedents and relationships of trust evolve as consumers progress from being aware of the e - vendor , to having experience with the e - vendor via having visited the e - vendor ' s Web site , to being repeat consumers having previously purchased from the e - vendor . For instance , factors such as social norms ( Karahanna and Straub 1999 ; Venkatesh and Davis 2000 ) , personality - related dispositions , such as disposition to trust and belief in humanity ( McKnight et al . 1998 ; Rotter 1971 ) as well as vendor characteristics such as size and reputation of the vendor ( Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999 ) are likely to affect initial trust formation . Further - more , the dichotomy between initial trust formation and ongoing trust may not be sufficient to capture how trust in an e - vendor evolves since trust is influenced by both aspects of the e - vendor and by aspects of the Web site . Thus , initial trust may be formed ( 1 ) in the absence of any interaction with the e - vendor ' s Web site and based on such factors as size and reputation of the e - vendor and ( 2 ) based on actual user interaction with the e - vendor ' s Web site . Accordingly , further theo - retical development is required in the initial trust versus on - going trust distinction to capture the nuances of this evolution and assess the impli - cations to trust antecedents and consequents . The study also examined trust as a direct predictor of behavioral intentions . This is in line with other research that views trust as having a direct impact on behavioral intentions in business relationships , irrespective of risk ( Doney and Cannon 1997 ; Fukuyama 1995 ; Ganesan 1994 ; Moorman et al . 1992 ; Morgan and Hunt 1994 ; Schurr and Ozanne 1985 ) and IT adoption ( Gefen 1997 ; Hart and Saunders 1997 ; Jarvenpaa et al . 1998 ) . Other conceptualizations of trust , however , include risk as a mediator of the effect trust has on behavioral intentions in both theory ( Mayer et al . 1995 ) and e - commerce practice ( Jarvenpaa 76 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping and Tractinsky 1999 ; Kollock 1999 ) . In that the objective of the study was to examine how e - vendors can create trust , examining risk and its relationship with trust was beyond the scope of this study . Clearly , additional research is needed in this area . Further research is also needed in examining other possible beliefs that are a part of trust . Based on the marketing and MIS literatures cited above , this study defined trust as belief in the integrity , benevolence , ability , and predict - ability of the e - vendor . Other beliefs have also been suggested , including loyalty , reliability , and openness ( Hosmer 1995 ) . More research would also be useful in examining whether the concep - tualization of trust in e - commerce can be extended . Conclusions E - vendors should build Web sites that are not only useful and easy to use , as TAM suggests , but that also include trust - building mechanisms . Creating a trust - based connection to customers is a primary benefit which is nearly as important as the technical attributes of the Web site such as usefulness . Some effective methods of doing so within an integrated model of trust and TAM have been identified in this study , namely , situational normality , structural assurances , calculative - based , and familiarity with the e - vendor . Both trust and technology acceptance ante - cedents have been studied for years in traditional physical commercial environments . In the mar - keting and management literatures , trust is strongly associated with attitudes toward products and services and toward purchasing behaviors . IT research has looked at the systems interface and characteristics of systems that are expected to have an impact on productivity . The current research has combined these research streams by placing use of a system into a context of usefulness and ease of use variables and trust variables . Both prove to be not only excellent predictors but also inexorably intertwined . Future research will hopefully paint a more complete picture of why and when consumers are willing to buy from a Web shop . References Agarwal , R . , and Karahanna , E . " Time Flies When You ' re Having Fun : Cognitive Absorption and Beliefs About Information Technology Usage , " MIS Quarterly ( 24 : 4 ) , 2000 , pp . 665 - 694 . Agarwal , R . , and Venkatesh , V . " Assessing a Firm ' s Web Presence : A Heuristic Evaluation Procedure for the Measurement of Usabilility , " Information Systems Research ( 13 : 2 ) , 2002 , pp . 168 - 186 . Akelof , G . A . " The Market for Lemons : Quality Under Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism , " Quarterly Journal of Economics ( 84 ) , 1970 , pp . 488 - 500 . Aladwani , A . M . , and Palvia , P . " Developing and Validating an Instrument for Measuring User - Perceived Web Quality , " Information & Management ( 39 : 6 ) , 2002 , pp . 467 - 476 . Anderson , J . C . , and Narus , J . A . " A Model of Distributor Firm and Manufacturer Firm Working Partnerships , " Journal of Marketing ( 54 : 1 ) , 1990 , pp . 42 - 58 . Anderson , J . R . Cognitive Psychology and Its Implications , W . H . Freeman and Company , New York , 1985 . Bagozzi , R . P . " A Prospectus for Theory Con - struction in Marketing , " Journal of Marketing ( 48 ) , Winter 1984 , pp . 11 - 29 . Baier , A . " Trust and Antitrust , " Ethics ( 96 ) , 1986 , pp . 231 - 260 . Bellman , S . , Lohse , G . L . , and Johnson , E . J . " Predictors of Online Buying Behavior , " Com - munications of the ACM ( 42 : 12 ) , 1999 , pp . 32 - 38 . Blau , P . M . Exchange and Power in Social Life , John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1964 . Bollen , K . A . Structural Equations with Latent Variables , John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1989 . Boudreau , M . , Gefen , D . , and Straub , D . W . " Validation in IS Research : A State - of - the - Art Assessment , " MIS Quarterly ( 25 : 1 ) , 2001 , pp . 1 - 16 . Brewer , M . B . , and Silver , M . " Ingroup Bias as a Function of Task Characteristics , " European Journal of Social Psychology ( 8 ) , 1978 , pp . 393 - 400 . Buckley , P . J . , and Casson , M . " A Theory of Co - operation in International Business , " in Cooper - MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 77 Gefen et al / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping ative Strategies in International Business , F . J . Contractor and P . Lorange ( eds . ) , Lexington Books , Lexington , MA , 1988 , pp . 31 - 53 . Butler , J . K . J . " Toward Understanding and Measuring Conditions of Trust : Evolution of a Conditions of Trust Inventory , " Journal of Management ( 17 : 3 ) , 1991 , pp . 643 - 663 . Chin , W . W . , and Todd , P . A . " On the Use , Use - fulness , and Ease of Use of Structural Equation Modeling in MIS Research : A Note of Caution , " MIS Quarterly ( 19 : 2 ) , 1995 , pp . 237 - 246 . Churchill , G . A . J . " A Paradigm for Developing Better Measures of Marketing Constructs , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 16 ) , February 1979 , pp . 64 - 73 . Cole , S . J . " Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Telecommunications , Trade and Consumer Protection Committee on Commerce , U . S . House of Representatives , Washington , D . C . , " Better Business Bureau , 1998 ( www . bbb . org / alerts / cole . asp ) . Coleman , J . S . Foundations of Social Theory , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 1990 . Crosby , L . A . , Evans , K . R . , and Cowles , D . " Relationship Quality in Services Selling : An Interpersonal Influence Perspective , " Journalof Marketing ( 54 : 7 ) , 1990 , pp . 68 - 81 . Dasgupta , P . " Trust as a Commodity , " in Trust , D . G . Gambetta ( ed . ) , Basil Blackwell , New York , 1988 , pp . 49 - 72 . Davis , F . D . " Perceived Usefulness , Perceived Ease of Use and User Acceptance of Informa - tion Technology , " MIS Quarterly ( 13 : 3 ) , September 1989 , pp . 319 - 340 . Davis , F . D . , Bagozzi , R . P . , and Warshaw , P . R . " Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivation to Use Com - puters in the Workplace , " Journal of Applied Social Psychology ( 22 : 14 ) , 1992 , pp . 1111 - 1132 . Davis , F . D . , Bagozzi , R . P . , and Warshaw , P . R . " User Acceptance of Computer Technology : A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models , " Management Science ( 35 : 8 ) , August 1989 , pp . 982 - 1003 . Davis , F . D . , and Kotteman , J . E . " User Percep - tions of Decision Support Effectiveness : Two Production Planning Experiments , " Decision Sciences ( 25 ) , 1994 , pp . 57 - 77 . Doney , P . M . , and Cannon , J . P . " An Examination of the Nature of Trust in Buyer - Seller Rela - tionships , " Journal of Marketing ( 61 ) , April 1997 , pp . 35 - 51 . Doney , P . M . , Cannon , J . P . , and Mullen , M . R . " Understanding the Influence of National Cul - ture on the Development of Trust , " Academy of Management Review ( 23 : 3 ) , 1998 , pp . 601 - 620 . Economist . " E - Commerce : Shopping Around The World , " February 26 , 2000 , pp . 5 - 54 . Farris , G . , Senner , E . , and Butterfield , D . " Trust , Culture , and Organizational Behavior , " Indus - trial Relations ( 12 ) , 1973 , pp . 144 - 157 . Fishbein , M . , and Ajzen , I . Belief , Attitude , Inten - tion and Behavior : An Introduction to Theory and Research , Addison - Wesley Publishing Company , Reading , MA , 1975 . Fukuyama , F . Trust : The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity , The Free Press , New York , 1995 . Gambetta , D . G . " Can We Trust Trust ? , " in Trust , D . G . Gambetta ( ed . ) , Basil Blackwell , New York , 1988 , pp . 213 - 237 . Ganesan , S . " Determinants of Long - Term Orien - tation in Buyer - Seller Relationships , " Journal of Marketing ( 58 ) , April 1994 , pp . 1 - 19 . Gefen , D . Building Users ' Trust in Freeware Providers and the Effects of this Trust on Users ' Perceptions of Usefulness , Ease of Use and Intended Use , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , Georgia State University , 1997 . Gefen , D . " Customer Loyalty in E - Commerce , " Journal of the Association for Information Systems ( 3 ) , 2002a , pp . 27 - 51 . Gefen , D . " E - Commerce : The Role of Familiarity and Trust , " Omega ( 28 : 6 ) , 2000 , pp . 725 - 737 . Gefen , D . " Nurturing Clients ' Trust to Encourage Engagement Success During the Customiza - tion of ERP Systems , " Omega ( 30 : 4 ) , 2002b , pp . 287 - 299 . Gefen , D . , and Keil , M . " The Impact of Developer Responsiveness on Perceptions of Usefulness and Ease of Use : An Extension of the Tech - nology Acceptance Model , " The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems ( 29 : 2 ) , Spring 1998 , pp . 35 - 49 . Gefen , D . , and Silver , M . " Lessons Learned from the Successful Adoption of an ERP System , " 78 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 5th International Conference of the Decision Sciences Institute , Athens , Greece , 1999 , pp . 1054 - 1057 . Gefen , D . , and Straub , D . W . " The Relative Importance of Perceived Ease - of - Use in IS Adoption : A Study of E - Commerce Adoption , " Journal of the Association for Information Systems ( 1 : 8 ) , 2000 , pp . 1 - 30 . Gefen , D . , Straub , D . W . , and Boudreau , M . - C . " Structural Equation Modeling and Regression : Guidelines for Research Practice , " Com - munications of the Association for Information Systems ( 4 : 7 ) , 2000 , pp . 1 - 70 . Gerbing , D . W . , and Anderson , J . C . " An Updated Paradigm for Scale Development Incorporating Unidimensionality and Its Assessment , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 25 ) , May 1988 , pp . 186 - 192 . Giffin , K . " The Contribution of Studies of Source Credibility to a Theory of Interpersonal Trust in the Communication Process , " Psychological Bulletin ( 68 : 2 ) , 1967 , pp . 104 - 120 . Goodhue , D . L . , and Thompson , R . L . " Task - Technology Fit and Individual Performance , " MIS Quarterly ( 19 : 2 ) , 1995 , pp . 213 - 236 . Gordon , M . E . , Slade , L . A . , and Schmitt , N . " The ' Science of the Sophomore ' Revisited : From Conjecture to Empiricism , " Academy of Management Review ( 11 : 1 ) , 1986 , pp . 191 - 207 . Gulati , R . " Does Familiarity Breed Trust ? The Implications of Repeated Ties for Contractual Choice in Alliances , " Academy of Management Journal ( 38 : 1 ) , February 1995 , pp . 85 - 112 . Hair , J . F . J . , Anderson , R . E . , Tatham , R . L . , and Black , W . C . Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings , Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1998 . Hart , P . , and Saunders , C . " Power and Trust : Critical Factors in the Adoption and Use of Electronic Data Interchange , " Organizational Science ( 8 : 1 ) , 1997 , pp . 23 - 42 . Hof , R . D . " The People ' s Company , " Business Week , December 3 , 2001 , pp . EB15 - EB21 . Holmes , J . G . " Trust and the Appraisal Process in Close Relationships , " in Advances in Personal Relationships , Volume 2 , W . H . Jones and D . Perlman ( eds . ) , Jessica Kingsley , London , 1991 , pp . 57 - 104 . Homans , G . G . Social Behavior : Its Elementary Forms , Harcourt , Brace and Company , New York , 1961 . Hosmer , L . T . " Trust : the Connecting Link Between Organizational Theory and Philoso - phical Ethics , " Academy of Management Review ( 20 : 2 ) , 1995 , pp . 379 - 403 . Hu , L . T . , and Bentler , P . M . " Cutoff Criteria for Fit Indexes in Covariance Structure Analysis : Conventional Criteria Versus New Alternatives , " Structured Equation Modeling ( 6 : 1 ) , 1999 , pp . 1 - 55 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . , Knoll , K . , and Leidner , D . E . " Is Anybody Out There ? Antecedents of Trust in Global Virtual Teams , " Journal of Management Information Systems ( 14 : 4 ) , 1998 , pp . 29 - 64 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . , and Todd , P . A . " Consumer Reactions to Electronic Shopping on the World Wide Web , " International Jouranl of Electronic Commerce ( 1 : 2 ) , 1997 , pp . 59 - 88 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . , and Tractinsky , N . " Consumer Trust in an Internet Store : A Cross - Cultural Validation , " Journal of Computer Mediated Communication ( 5 : 2 ) , 1999 , pp . 1 - 35 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . , Tractinsky , N . , and Vitale , M . " Consumer Trust in an Internet Store , " Infor - mation Technology and Management ( 1 ) , 2000 , pp . 45 - 71 . Karahanna , E . , and Straub , D . W . " The Psycho - logical Origins of Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease - of - Use , " Information & Management ( 35 ) , 1999 , pp . 237 - 250 . Karahanna , E . , Straub , D . W . , and Chervany , N . L . " Information Technology Adoption Across Time : A Cross - Sectional Comparison of Pre - Adoption and Post - Adoption Beliefs , " MIS Quarterly ( 23 : 2 ) , 1999 , pp . 183 - 213 . Kelley , H . H . Personal Relationships : Their Structure and Processes , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ , 1979 . Kelley , H . H . , and Thibaut , J . W . Interpersonal Relations : A Theory of Interdependence , John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1978 . Kollock , P . " The Production of Trust in Online Markets , " Advances in Group Processes ( 16 ) , 1999 , pp . 99 - 123 . Konovsky , M . A . , and Pugh , S . D . " Citizenship Behavior and Social Exchange , " Academy of Management Journal ( 37 : 3 ) , 1994 , pp . 656 - 669 . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 79 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Korsgaard , M . A . , Schweiger , D . M . , and Sapienza , H . J . " Building Commitment , Attach - ment , and Trust in Strategic Decision - Making Teams : The Role of Procedural Justice , " Academy of Management Journal ( 38 : 1 ) , 1995 , pp . 60 - 84 . Koufaris , M . " Applying the Technology Accep - tance Model and Flow Theory to Online Consumer Behavior , " Information Systems Research ( 13 : 2 ) , 2002 , pp . 205 - 223 . Kumar , N . " The Power of Trust in Manufacturer - Retailer Relationships , " Harvard Business Review ( 74 : 6 ) , 1996 , pp . 93 - 106 . Kumar , N . , Scheer , L . K . , and Steenkamp , J . - B . E . M . " The Effects of Perceived Interdependence on Dealer Attitudes , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 17 ) , 1995a , pp . 348 - 356 . Kumar , N . , Scheer , L . K . , and Steenkamp , J . - B . E . M . " The Effects of Supplier Fairness on Vulner - able Resellers , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 17 ) , February 1995b , pp . 54 - 65 . Langer , E . J . " The Illusion of Control , " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ( 32 ) , 1975 , pp . 311 - 328 . Larzelere , R . E . , and Huston , T . L . " The Dyadic Trust Scale : Toward Understanding Inter - personal Trust in Close Relationships , " Journal of Marriage and the Family , August 1980 , pp . 595 - 604 . Lederer , A . L . , Maupin , D . J . , Sena , M . P . , and Zhuang , Y . " The Technology Acceptance Model and the World Wide Web , " Decision Support Systems ( 29 : 3 ) , 2000 , pp . 269 - 282 . Lee , D . , Park , J . , and Ahn , J . " On the Explanation of Factors Affecting E - Commerce Adoption , " Proceedings of the 22nd International Confer - ence on Information Systems , V . Storey , S . Sarker , and J . I . DeGross ( eds . ) , New Orleans , Louisiana , 2001 , pp . 109 - 120 . Lewicki , R . J . , and Bunker , B . B . " Trust in Rela - tionships : A Model of Trust Development and Decline , " in Conflict , Cooperation and Justice , B . B . Bunker and J . Z . Rubin ( ed . s ) , Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , 1995 , pp . 133 - 173 . Lewis , J . D . , and Weigert , A . J . " Social Atomism , Holism , and Trust , " The Sociological Quarterly ( 26 ) , 1985a , pp . 455 - 471 . Lewis , J . D . , and Weigert , A . " Trust as a Social Reality , " Social Forces ( 63 : 4 ) , June 1985b , pp . 967 - 985 . Loiacono , E . WebQual : A Web Site Quality Instrument , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , University of Georgia , 2000 . Luhmann , N . " Familiarity , Confidence , Trust : Problems and Alternatives , " in Trust , D . G . Gambetta ( ed . ) , Basil Blackwell , New York , 1988 , pp . 94 - 107 . Luhmann , N . Trust and Power , John Wiley & Sons , Chichester , England , 1979 . MacCallum , R . C . , Roznowski , M . , and Necowitz , L . B . " Model Modifications in Covariance Struc - ture Analysis : The Problem of Capitalization on Chance , " Psychological Bulletin ( 111 : 3 ) , 1992 , pp . 490 - 504 . Mathieson , K . " Predicting User Intentions : Com - paring the Technology Acceptance Model with the Theory of Planned Behavior , " Information Systems Research ( 2 : 3 ) , September 1991 , pp . 173 - 191 . Mayer , R . C . , and Davis , J . H . " The Effect of the Performance Appraisal System on Trust in Management : A Field Quasi - Experiment , " Journal ofApplied Psychology ( 84 : 1 ) , 1999 , pp . 123 - 136 . Mayer , R . C . , Davis , J . H . , and Schoorman , F . D . " An Integration Model of Organizational Trust , " Academy of Management Review ( 20 : 3 ) , July 1995 , pp . 709 - 734 . McAllister , D . J . " Affect - and Cognition - Based Trust as Foundations for Interpersonal Co - operation in Organizations , " Academy of Management Journal ( 38 : 1 ) , 1995 , pp . 24 - 59 . McKnight , D . H . , Choudhury , V . , and Kacmar , C . " Developing and Validating Trust Measures for E - Commerce : An Integrative Typology , " Infor - mation Systems Research ( 13 : 3 ) , 2002 , pp . 334 - 359 . McKnight , D . H . , Choudhury , V . , and Kacmar , C . " Trust in E - Commerce Vendors : A Two - Stage Model , " Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Information Systems , W . Orlikowski , S . Ang , P . Weill , H . Krcmar , and J . I . DeGross ( eds ) , Brisbane , Australia , 2000 , pp . 532 - 536 . McKnight , D . H . , Cummings , L . L . , and Chervany , N . L . " Initial Trust Formation in New Organi - zational Relationships , " Academy of Manage - ment Review ( 23 : 3 ) , 1998 , pp . 472 - 490 . Meyer , A . D . , and Goes , J . B . " Organizational Assimilation of Innovations : A Multilevel Con - 80 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping textual Analysis , " Academy of Management Journal ( 31 : 4 ) , 1988 , pp . 897 - 923 . Meyerson , D . , Weick , K . E . , and Kramer , R . M . " Swift Trust and Temporary Groups , " in Trust in Organizations : Frontiers of Theory and Research , R . M . Kramer and T . R . Tyler ( eds . ) , Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA , 1996 , pp . 166 - 195 . Mishra , A . K . " Organizational Responses to Crisis : The Centrality of Trust , " in Trust in Organizations , Frontiers of Theory and Research , R . M . Kramer and T . R . Tyler ( eds . ) , Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA , 1996 , pp . 261 - 287 . Mishra , J . , and Morrissey , M . A . " Trust in Em - ployee / Employer Relationships : A Survey of West Michigan Managers , " Public Personnel Management ( 19 : 4 ) , 1990 , pp . 443 - 485 . Moon , J . , and Kim , Y . " Extending the TAM for a World - Wide - Web Context , " Information & Management ( 38 : 4 ) , 2001 , pp . 217 - 230 . Moorman , C . , Zaltman , G . , and Deshpande , R . " Relationships Between Providers and Users of Market Research : the Dynamics of Trust Within and Between Organizations , " Journal of Marketing Research ( 29 ) , August 1992 , pp . 314 - 328 . Morgan , R . M . , and Hunt , S . D . " The Commit - ment - Trust Theory of Relationship Marketing , " Journal of Marketing ( 58 ) , July 1994 , pp . 20 - 38 . Noteberg , A . , Christiaanse , E . , and Wallage , P . " The Role of Trust and Assurance Services in Electronic Channels : An Exploratory Study , " Proceedings of the 20th International Con - ference on Information System , P . De and J . I . DeGross ( eds . ) , Charlotte , NC , 1999 , pp . 472 - 478 . Nunnally , J . C . , and Bernstein , I . H . Psychometric Theory , McGraw - Hill , New York , 1994 . Palmer , J . " Web Site Usability , Design , and Performance Metrics , " Information Systems Research ( 13 : 2 ) , 2002 , pp . 151 - 167 . Palmer , J . W . , Bailey , J . P . , and Faraj , S . " The Role of Intermediaries in the Development of Trust in the WWW : The Use and Prominence of Trusted Third Parties and Privacy Statements , " Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication ( 5 : 3 ) , March 2000 ( http : / / www . ascusc . org / jcmc / vol5 / issue3 / palmer . html ) . Pavlou , P . A . , and Gefen , D . " Building Effective Online Auction Marketplaces with Institution - based Trust , " Proceedings of the 23rd Inter - national Conference on Information Systems , L . Applegate , R . Galliers , and J . I . DeGross ( eds . ) , Barcelona , Spain , 2002 , pp . 667 - 675 . Ramaswami , S . N . , Srinivasan , S . S . , and Gorton , S . A . " Information Asymmetry Between Sales - person and Supervisor : Postulates from Agency and Social Exchange Theories , " Jour - nal of Personal Selling & Sales Management ( 17 : 3 ) , 1997 , pp . 29 - 50 . Ranganathan , C . , and Ganapathy , S . " Key Dimensions of Business - to - Consumer Web Sites , " Information & Management ( 39 : 6 ) , 2002 , pp . 457 - 465 . Reichheld , F . F . , and Schefter , P . " E - Loyalty : Your Secret Weapon on the Web , " Harvard Business Review ( 78 : 4 ) , 2000 , pp . 105 - 113 . Rempel , J . K . , Holmes , J . G . , and Zanna , M . P . " Trust in Close Relationships , " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ( 49 : 1 ) , 1985 , pp . 95 - 112 . Remus , W . " Graduate Students as Surrogates for Managers in Experiments on Business Deci - sion Making , " Journal of Business Research ( 14 : 1 ) , 1986 , pp . 19 - 25 . Rose , G . , and Straub , D . W . " Predicting General IT Use : Applying TAM to the Arabic World , " Journal of Global Information Management ( 6 : 3 ) , 1998 , pp . 39 - 46 . Rosenburg , H . Occupations and Values , Free Press , Glencoe , IL , 1957 . Rosencrance , L . " Amazon Loses 2 Partners Over Privacy Policy , " Computerworld , September 18 , 2000a ( http : / / www . computerworld . com / cwil story / 0 , 1199 , NAV47 _ ST050529 , 00 . html ) . Rosencrance , L . " Amazon . com ' s Privacy Policies in Spotlight Again , U . S . , U . K . Probes Urged , " Computerworld , December 11 , 2000b ( http : / / www . computerworld . com / cwi / story / 0 , 1199 , NAV47 _ ST054993 , 00 . html ) . Rotter , J . B . " Generalized Expectancies for Interpersonal Trust , " American Psychologist ( 26 ) , May 1971 , pp . 443 - 450 . Rousseau , D . M . , Sitkin , S . B . , Burt , R . S . , and Camerer , C . " Not So Different After All : A Cross - Discipline View of Trust , " Academy of Management Review ( 23 : 3 ) , 1998 , pp . 393 - 404 . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 81 Gefen et al / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Salisbury , D . W . , Pearson , R . A . , and Harrison , A . W . " Who ' s Afraid of the World Wide Web ? An Initial Investigation into the Relative Impact of Two Salient Beliefs on Web Shopping Intent , " Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 4th Americas Conference on Information Systems , E . Hoadley and I . Benbasat ( eds . ) , Baltimore , Maryland , 1998 , pp . 338 - 341 . Schurr , P . H . , and Ozanne , J . L . " Influences on Exchange Processes : Buyers ' Preconceptions of a Seller ' s Trustworthiness and Bargaining Toughness , " Journal of Consumer Research ( 11 ) , March 1985 , pp . 939 - 953 . Segars , A . H . " Assessing the Unidimensionality of Measurement : A Paradigm and Illustration Within the Context of Information Systems Research , " Omega ( 25 : 1 ) , 1997 , pp . 107 - 121 . Shapiro , D . L . , Sheppard , B . H . , and Cheraskin , L . " Business on a Handshake , " Negotiation Journal ( 3 ) , 1992 , pp . 365 - 377 . Shapiro , S . P . " The Social Control of Impersonal Trust , " American Journal of Sociology ( 93 ) , 1987 , pp . 623 - 658 . Simon , H . A . , and Gilmartin , K . " A Simulation of Memory for Chess Positions , " Cognitive Psych - ology ( 5 ) , 1973 , pp . 29 - 46 . Stewart , K . J . " Transference as a Means of Building Trust in World Wide Web Sites , " Pro - ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Information Systems , P . De and J . I . DeGross ( eds . ) , Charlotte , NC , 1999 , pp . 459 - 464 . Straub , D . W . " Validating Instruments in MIS Research , " MIS Quarterly ( 13 : 2 ) , 1989 , pp . 147 - 169 . Straub , D . W . , Keil , M . , and Brennan , W . " Testing the Technology Acceptance Model Across Cultures : A Three Country Study , " Information & Management ( 33 ) , 1997 , pp . 1 - 11 . Straub , D . W . , Limayem , M . , and Karahanna , E . " Measuring System Usage : Implications for IS Theory Testing , " Management Science ( 41 : 8 ) , 1995 , pp . 1328 - 1342 . Sullivan , B . " lnternet Fraud Cost $ 17 . 8 Million in 2001 , Federal Study Says , " Computerworld , April 10 , 2002 ( http : / / www . computerworld . com / securitytopics / security / privacy / story / 0 , 10801 , 70007 , 00 . html ) . Szajna , B . " Empirical Evaluation of the Revised Technology Acceptance Model , " Management Science ( 42 : 1 ) , 1996 , pp . 85 - 92 . Szajna , B . " Software Evaluation and Choice : Predictive Validation of the Technology Accep - tance Instrument , " MIS Quarterly ( 17 : 3 ) , 1994 , pp . 319 - 324 . Taylor , S . , and Todd , P . A . " Assessing IT Usage : The Role of Prior Experience , " MIS Quarterly ( 19 : 4 ) , December 1995a , pp . 561 - 570 . Taylor , S . , and Todd , P . A . " Understanding Infor - mation Technology Usage : A Test of Com - peting Models , " Information Systems Research ( 6 : 2 ) , June 1995b , pp . 144 - 176 . Thibaut , J . W . , and Kelley , H . H . The Social Psychology of Groups , John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1959 . Torkzadeh , G . , and Dhillon , G . " Measuring Fac - tors that Influence the Success of Internet Commerce , " Information Systems Research ( 13 : 2 ) , 2002 , pp . 187 - 204 . Venkatesh , V . , and Davis , F . D . " A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance Model : Four Longitudinal Field Studies , " Man - agement Science ( 46 : 2 ) , 2000 , pp . 186 - 204 . Williamson , O . E . " Calculativeness , Trust , and Economic Organization , " Journal of Law and Economics ( 34 ) , 1993 , pp . 453 - 502 . Williamson , O . E . The Economic Institutions of Capitalism , Free Press , New York , 1985 . Wrightsman , L . S . " Interpersonal Trust and Atti - tudes Toward Human Nature , " in Measures of Personality and Social Psychological Attitudes , Volume 1 : Measures of Social Psychological Attitudes , P . R . Robinson , P . R . Shaver and L . S . Wrightsman ( eds . ) , Academic Press , San - Diego , 1991 , pp . 373 - 412 . Zaheer , A . , McEvily , B . , and Perrone , V . " Does Trust Matter ? Exploring the Effects on Inter - organizational and Interpersonal Trust on Performance , " Organizational Science ( 9 : 2 ) , 1998 , pp . 141 - 159 . Zand , D . E . " Trust and Managerial Problem Solving , " Administrative Science Quarterly ( 17 ) , 1972 , pp . 229 - 239 . Zucker , L . G . " Production of Trust : Institutional Sources of Economic Structure , 1840 - 1920 , " in Research in Organizational Behavior ( Volume 8 ) , B . M . Staw and L . L . Cummings ( eds . ) , JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 1986 , pp . 53 - 111 . 82 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping About the Authors David Gefen is an assistant professor of MIS at Drexel University in Philadelphia , where he teaches Strategic Management of IT , Database Analysis and Design , and VB . NET . He received his Ph . D . in CIS from Georgia State University , a Master of Sciences in MIS from Tel - Aviv Univer - sity , and a B . A . in psychology and computer sciences from Bar - Ilan University . His research focuses on psychological and rational processes involved in ERP and e - commerce implementation management . David ' s wide interests in IT adop - tion stem from his 12 years of experience in devel - oping and managing large information systems . His research findings have been published in MIS Quarterly , Journal of Management Information Systems , Data Base , Omega : The International Journal of Management Science , Journal of the AIS , eServices Journal , and Communications of the AIS , among others . Elena Karahanna is an associate professor of MIS at the Terry College of Business , University of Georgia . Her current research interests include the adoption , use , and infusion of information technologies , the effect of media choice and use on individuals and organizations , IS leadership , and cross - cultural issues . Her work has been published in MIS Quarterly , Management Science , Organization Science , Data Base , Journal of Or - ganizational Computing and Electronic Com - merce , and elsewhere . She currently serves on the editorial boards of the MIS Quarterly , Journal of the AIS , European Journal of Information Systems , and Computer Personnel . Detmar W . Straub is the J . Mack Robinson Dis - tinguished Professor of IS at Georgia State University . He has conducted research in net - enhanced organizations and e - commerce , com - puter security , technological innovation , and international IT . He holds a DBA in MIS from Indiana University and a Ph . D . in English from Penn State University . Detmar has published over 100 papers in such journals as MIS Quarterly , Management Science , Information Systems Research , Communications of the AIS , Journal of the AIS , Organization Science , Communications of the ACM , Journal of Management Information Systems , Journal of Global Information Manage - ment , Information & Management , Academy of Management Executive , and Sloan Management Review . He is currently an associate editor for Management Science and Information Systems Research and a senior editor for Data Base . Detmar has consulted widely in industry in the computer security area as well as technological innovation . He teaching at Georgia State includes courses in Electronic Commerce Strategy , IT Strategies for Management , IT Outsourcing , Inter - national IT , and Computer Security Management . MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 83 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Appendix A Standardized Item Loadings After All Dropping Item Wording Items Items Intended Use USE1 I would use my credit card to purchase from the online vendor . . 85 . 85 USE2 I am very likely to provide the online vendor with the information it needs to better serve my needs . . 78 . 78 Perceived Ease of Use EOU1 The Web site is easy to use . . 87 Dropped EOU2 It is easy to become skillful at using the Web site . . 91 . 89 EOU3 Learning to operate the Web site is easy . . 90 . 92 EOU4 The Web site is flexible to interact with . . 90 . 89 EOU5 My interaction with the Web site is clear and understandable . . 90 . 90 EOU6 It is easy to interact with the Web site . . 90 Dropped Perceived Usefulness PU1 The Web site is useful for searching and buying CDs / books . . 79 Dropped PU2 The Web site improves my performance in CD / book searching and buying . . 88 . 87 PU3 The Web site enables me to search and buy CDs / books faster . . 90 . 90 PU4 The Web site enhances my effectiveness in CD / book searching and buying . . 92 . 93 PU5 The Web site makes it easier to search for and purchase CDs / books . . 90 Dropped PU6 The Web site increases my productivity in searching and purchasing CDs / books . 88 . 86 Trust KB1 Based on my experience with the online vendor in the past , I know it is honest . 82 . 85 KB2 Based on my experience with the online vendor in the past , I know it cares about customers . 83 . 86 KB3 Based on my experience with the online vendor in the past , I know it is not opportunistic . 68 . 73 84 MIS Quarterly Vol 27 No . 1 / March 2003 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping After All Dropping Item Wording Items Items KB4 Based on my experience with the online vendor in the past , I know it provides good service . 89 Dropped KB5 Based on my experience with the online vendor in the past , I know it is predictable . 83 . 79 KB6 Based on my experience with the online vendor in the past , I know it is trustworthy . 91 Dropped KB7 Based on my experience with the online vendor in the past , I know it knows its market . 72 . 70 Calculative - Based CB1 The online vendor has nothing to gain by being dishonest in its interactions with me . . 69 . 69 CB2 The online vendor has nothing to gain by not caring about me . . 87 . 87 CB3 The online vendor has nothing to gain by not being knowledgeable when helping me . . 73 . 73 Familiarity with the E - Vendor FV1 I am familiar with the online vendor through reading magazines / newspaper articles or ads . . 49 Dropped FV2 I am familiar with the online vendor through visiting the site and searching for CDs / books . . 91 . 89 FV3 I am familiar with the online vendor through purchasing CDs / books at this site . . 82 . 84 Structural Assurances IB1 I feel safe conducting business with the online vendor because the Better Business Bureau will protect me . . 64 . 64 IB2 I feel safe conducting business with the online vendor because of it provides a 1 - 800 number . . 73 . 70 IB3 I feel safe conducting business with the online vendor because of its statements of guarantees . . 85 . 89 IB4 I feel safe conducting business with the online vendor because I accessed its site through a well - known , reputable portal . . 72 Dropped Situational Normality SN1 The steps required to search for and order a CD / book are typical of other similar Web sites . . 88 . 90 SN2 The information requested of me at this Web site is the type of information most similar type Web sites request . . 86 . 84 SN3 The nature of the interaction with the Web site is typical of other similar type Web sites . . 78 Dropped MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 85 01 ) 0 r , o 0 " CD ' 5 Appendix B Correlation Tables I CB1 CB2 CB3 E01 E02 E03 E04 E05 E06 FV1 FV2 FV3 IB1 IB2 CB1 1 CB2 0 . 6066 1 CB3 0 . 4735 0 . 6408 1 E01 0 . 1527 0 . 1514 0 . 1661 1 E02 0 . 1617 0 . 1649 0 . 1421 0 . 8543 1 E03 0 . 1713 0 . 1485 0 . 109 0 . 7624 0 . 8386 1 E04 0 . 1831 0 . 1609 0 . 1762 0 . 7982 0 . 7869 0 . 8128 1 E05 0 . 135 0 . 1382 0 . 1047 0 . 7476 0 . 7874 0 . 8147 0 . 8261 1 E06 0 . 1585 0 . 1024 0 . 1571 0 . 7538 0 . 8037 0 . 7919 0 . 8125 0 . 8502 1 FV1 0 . 2758 0 . 2009 0 . 1652 0 . 2759 0 . 2629 0 . 3117 0 . 3422 0 . 2707 0 . 2581 1 FV2 0 . 2215 0 . 1433 0 . 1119 0 . 3906 0 . 3972 0 . 4336 0 . 4157 0 . 3866 0 . 3924 0 . 4597 1 FV3 0 . 1809 0 . 1388 0 . 1244 0 . 3825 0 . 3823 0 . 3893 0 . 4107 0 . 3323 0 . 3436 0 . 3452 0 . 7483 1 IB1 0 . 0958 0 . 0319 0 . 0306 0 . 0745 0 . 0800 0 . 0797 0 . 1122 0 . 1661 0 . 1415 0 . 1886 0 . 305 0 . 2703 1 IB2 0 . 0427 0 . 017 - 0 . 0235 0 . 0495 0 . 0203 0 . 0253 0 . 1031 0 . 0996 0 . 0849 0 . 0859 0 . 1952 0 . 1969 0 . 4795 1 IB3 0 . 2026 0 . 0937 0 . 1141 0 . 0407 0 . 0298 0 . 0205 0 . 1104 0 . 1276 0 . 144 0 . 239 0 . 2347 0 . 221 0 . 5494 0 . 6261 IB4 0 . 1103 0 . 0965 0 . 1056 0 . 162 0 . 1825 0 . 1581 0 . 2363 0 . 2478 0 . 2222 0 . 2179 0 . 2237 0 . 1731 0 . 4114 0 . 5499 G ) Cr , , 6 , 0 . Z3 0 Cb 10 CD Jo N ) " - 4 " - 4 z CB1 CB2 CB3 EO1 E02 E03 E04 EO5 E06 FV1 FV2 FV3 IB1 IB2 KB1 0 . 2503 0 . 2003 0 . 2123 0 . 3628 0 . 3913 0 . 4305 0 . 4439 0 . 4462 0 . 4824 0 . 3072 0 . 3046 0 . 347 0 . 1949 0 . 2041 KB2 0 . 3004 0 . 2057 0 . 2936 0 . 3511 0 . 3793 0 . 4025 0 . 4196 0 . 4203 0 . 4339 0 . 3509 0 . 3389 0 . 3469 0 . 2509 0 . 13 KB3 0 . 2162 0 . 1595 0 . 2342 0 . 3092 0 . 3192 0 . 2506 0 . 3592 0 . 3375 0 . 3466 0 . 2927 0 . 2395 0 . 2949 0 . 275 0 . 2503 KB4 0 . 1787 0 . 2189 0 . 2751 0 . 5172 0 . 5429 0 . 5094 0 . 505 0 . 5021 0 . 5499 0 . 2604 0 . 3695 0 . 4063 0 . 1921 0 . 1615 KB5 0 . 2581 0 . 21 0 . 2617 0 . 3905 0 . 4159 0 . 389 0 . 3976 0 . 3964 0 . 4466 0 . 2525 0 . 3205 0 . 3402 0 . 2649 0 . 2336 KB6 0 . 2181 0 . 2656 0 . 3114 0 . 4323 0 . 4431 0 . 4472 0 . 4507 0 . 4829 0 . 4824 0 . 2651 0 . 3679 0 . 3934 0 . 2696 0 . 2243 KB7 0 . 1899 0 . 1512 0 . 1716 0 . 4216 0 . 4144 0 . 3999 0 . 4296 0 . 454 0 . 4412 0 . 31 0 . 3885 0 . 4174 0 . 2325 0 . 1751 PU1 0 . 2045 0 . 1281 0 . 1709 0 . 5936 0 . 6529 0 . 6673 0 . 644 0 . 6235 0 . 6265 0 . 3129 0 . 4948 0 . 4544 0 . 172 0 . 1568 PU2 0 . 1484 0 . 0613 0 . 1371 0 . 5141 0 . 5829 0 . 4916 0 . 5596 0 . 5492 0 . 5548 0 . 2685 0 . 3706 0 . 3912 0 . 1427 0 . 2205 PU3 0 . 1147 0 . 0642 0 . 0876 0 . 4964 0 . 5662 0 . 579 0 . 5817 0 . 6017 0 . 588 0 . 2974 0 . 445 0 . 4428 0 . 1989 0 . 2298 PU4 0 . 1743 0 . 0754 0 . 1403 0 . 5264 0 . 5806 0 . 564 0 . 5802 0 . 5636 0 . 5736 0 . 308 0 . 3885 0 . 4296 0 . 192 0 . 1993 PU5 0 . 1043 0 . 0679 0 . 1253 0 . 5174 0 . 5749 0 . 4799 0 . 5064 0 . 5556 0 . 544 0 . 2449 0 . 3821 0 . 4083 0 . 1837 0 . 2055 PU6 0 . 1578 0 . 0432 0 . 1216 0 . 4991 0 . 5696 0 . 4845 0 . 5201 0 . 5144 0 . 5442 0 . 2771 0 . 3921 0 . 3838 0 . 2098 0 . 2046 SN1 0 . 1297 0 . 1168 0 . 1453 0 . 4847 0 . 5214 0 . 5088 0 . 4478 0 . 4941 0 . 508 0 . 2336 0 . 443 0 . 3851 0 . 1254 0 . 093 SN2 0 . 0709 0 . 0962 0 . 0868 0 . 4409 0 . 4635 0 . 4092 0 . 4142 0 . 4746 0 . 4841 0 . 1831 0 . 4293 0 . 4448 0 . 1283 0 . 1042 SN3 0 . 1284 0 . 1322 0 . 0841 0 . 4657 0 . 5132 0 . 5281 0 . 466 0 . 4959 0 . 4813 0 . 215 0 . 3659 0 . 3854 0 . 1605 0 . 117 USE1 0 . 1534 0 . 1019 0 . 1175 0 . 444 0 . 4716 0 . 5296 0 . 4646 0 . 5035 0 . 5273 0 . 2375 0 . 3552 0 . 3547 0 . 147 0 . 1225 USE2 0 . 0977 0 . 0255 0 . 1355 0 . 4469 0 . 4513 0 . 4748 0 . 4996 0 . 505 0 . 5666 0 . 2028 0 . 323 0 . 3154 0 . 1856 0 . 196 C ) CD CD G0 CO CD C ) 0o 00 CD C ) 0 rU3 IB3 IB4 KB1 KB2 KB3 KB4 KB5 KB6 KB7 PU1 PU2 PU3 PU4 IB3 1 IB4 0 . 6009 1 KB1 0 . 3546 0 . 3957 1 KB2 0 . 3545 0 . 4118 0 . 7628 1 KB3 0 . 4319 0 . 4586 0 . 5773 0 . 6475 1 KB4 0 . 2237 0 . 3511 0 . 742 0 . 7525 0 . 566 1 KB5 0 . 3589 0 . 3727 0 . 671 0 . 6303 0 . 5931 0 . 7309 1 KB6 0 . 3411 0 . 4156 0 . 734 0 . 7289 0 . 5845 0 . 8218 0 . 8014 1 KB7 0 . 2717 0 . 3325 0 . 5404 0 . 6003 0 . 4788 0 . 6774 0 . 5819 0 . 6671 1 PU1 0 . 1856 0 . 2602 0 . 4923 0 . 4706 0 . 3578 0 . 5321 0 . 429 0 . 4708 0 . 423 1 PU2 0 . 1688 0 . 329 0 . 385 0 . 3839 0 . 4575 0 . 4561 0 . 3867 0 . 3983 0 . 4222 0 . 7049 1 PU3 0 . 2118 0 . 3848 0 . 4617 0 . 416 0 . 3878 0 . 4437 0 . 3697 0 . 4506 0 . 4319 0 . 7376 0 . 7767 1 PU4 0 . 1752 0 . 3409 0 . 4019 0 . 4112 0 . 4407 0 . 4463 0 . 4116 0 . 4623 0 . 4243 0 . 7218 0 . 807 0 . 8411 1 PU5 0 . 1719 0 . 3191 0 . 3336 0 . 3255 0 . 4002 0 . 4103 0 . 3792 0 . 4182 0 . 4105 0 . 6774 0 . 7967 0 . 7937 0 . 8265 PU6 0 . 1554 0 . 295 0 . 3379 0 . 3171 0 . 3207 0 . 4039 0 . 3536 0 . 4056 0 . 383 0 . 6618 0 . 7783 0 . 765 0 . 8024 SN1 0 . 1114 0 . 2824 0 . 4522 0 . 4412 0 . 3431 0 . 5341 0 . 4302 0 . 4955 0 . 3875 0 . 5848 0 . 5259 0 . 5009 0 . 4801 SN2 0 . 1227 0 . 235 0 . 3551 0 . 3828 0 . 3474 0 . 4685 0 . 3887 0 . 5209 0 . 4157 0 . 4759 0 . 4936 0 . 5213 0 . 4863 SN3 0 . 14 0 . 2561 0 . 4017 0 . 3354 0 . 2843 0 . 4561 0 . 4318 0 . 4708 0 . 3803 0 . 4699 0 . 3823 0 . 4675 0 . 4376 USE1 0 . 1631 0 . 3219 0 . 4302 0 . 4453 0 . 3781 0 . 4741 0 . 4495 0 . 5089 0 . 3655 0 . 4937 0 . 4995 0 . 5927 0 . 5626 USE2 0 . 2458 0 . 321 0 . 3987 0 . 3693 0 . 2764 0 . 4234 0 . 3939 0 . 451 0 . 4119 0 . 4458 0 . 4692 0 . 5163 0 . 4877 CD CD O C ' , " . CD Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping PU5 PU6 SN1 SN2 SN3 USE1 USE2 PU5 1 PU6 0 . 8517 1 SN1 0 . 4928 0 . 4575 1 SN2 0 . 4961 0 . 4904 0 . 7592 1 SN3 0 . 4174 0 . 3708 0 . 6744 0 . 6696 1 USE1 0 . 5486 0 . 5274 0 . 4325 0 . 4801 0 . 4324 1 USE2 0 . 4838 0 . 4768 0 . 368 0 . 4355 0 . 3677 0 . 6584 1 Appendix C Pairwise Discriminant Analyses Model X2df Original Model X2247 = 364 . 32 Combining Intended Use with PU X2254 = 442 . 62 Combining Intended Use with PEOU X22254 = 469 . 41 Combining Intended Use with Trust X2254 = 488 . 38 Combining Intended Use with Calculative - based X2254 = 578 . 55 Combining Intended Use with Knowledge - based X2254 = 499 . 48 Combining Intended Use with Institutional - based X2254 = 567 . 90 Combining Intended Use with Situational - normality X2254 = 464 . 71 Combining PU with PEOU x2254 = 804 . 14 Combining PU with Trust X2254 = 781 . 37 Combining PU with Calculative - based x22254 = 587 . 76 Combining PU with Knowledge - based X2254 = 523 . 48 Combining PU with Institutional - based x2254 = 578 . 58 Combining PU with Situational - normality X2254 = 511 . 50 Combining PEOU with Trust X2254 = 800 . 31 Combining PEOU with Calculative - based X2254 = 580 . 28 Combining PEOU with Knowledge - based X2254 = 533 . 68 Combining PEOU with Institutional - based X2254 = 602 . 65 Combining PEOU with Situational - normality X2254 = 530 . 42 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003 89 Gefen et al . / Trust and TAM in Online Shopping Model X2df Combining Trust with Calculative - based X2254 = 544 . 48 Combining Trust with Knowledge - based x2254 = 532 . 54 Combining Trust with Institutional - based x2254 = 533 . 01 Combining Trust with Situational - normality X2254 = 539 . 49 Combining Calculative - based with Knowledge - based Z2254 = 609 . 39 Combining Calculative - based with Institutional - based X2254 = 601 . 41 Combining Calculative - based with Situational - normality X2254 = 661 . 74 Combining Knowledge - based with Institutional - based x2254 = 553 . 95 Combining Knowledge - based with Situational - normality X2254 = 497 . 31 Combining Institutional - based with Situational - normality = 2254 = 656 . 40 90 MIS Quarterly Vol . 27 No . 1 / March 2003