Boise State University ScholarWorks Physics Faculty Publications and Presentations Department of Physics 10 - 1 - 2014 Kinetic Competition During the Transcription Cycle Results in Stochastic RNA Processing Antoine Coulon National Institutes of Health Matthew L . Ferguson National Cancer Institute Valeria de Turris Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia Murali Palangat National Cancer Institute Carson C . Chow National Institutes of Health See next page for additional authors This document was originally published by eLife Sciences Publications , Ltd . in eLife . This work is provided under a Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication . Details regarding the use of this work can be found at : http : / / creativecommons . org / publicdomain / zero / 1 . 0 / . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 Authors Antoine Coulon , Matthew L . Ferguson , Valeria de Turris , Murali Palangat , Carson C . Chow , and Daniel R . Larson This article is available at ScholarWorks : https : / / scholarworks . boisestate . edu / physics _ facpubs / 157 elifesciences . org Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 1 of 22 Kinetic competition during the transcription cycle results in stochastic RNA processing Antoine Coulon 1† , Matthew L Ferguson 2†‡ , Valeria de Turris 3 , Murali Palangat 2 , Carson C Chow 1 , Daniel R Larson 2 * 1 Laboratory of Biological Modeling , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , United States ; 2 Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression , Center for Cancer Research , National Cancer Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , United States ; 3 Center for Life Nanoscience , Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia , Rome , Italy Abstract Synthesis of mRNA in eukaryotes involves the coordinated action of many enzymatic processes , including initiation , elongation , splicing , and cleavage . Kinetic competition between these processes has been proposed to determine RNA fate , yet such coupling has never been observed in vivo on single transcripts . In this study , we use dual - color single - molecule RNA imaging in living human cells to construct a complete kinetic profile of transcription and splicing of the β - globin gene . We find that kinetic competition results in multiple competing pathways for pre - mRNA splicing . Splicing of the terminal intron occurs stochastically both before and after transcript release , indicating there is not a strict quality control checkpoint . The majority of pre - mRNAs are spliced after release , while diffusing away from the site of transcription . A single missense point mutation ( S34F ) in the essential splicing factor U2AF1 which occurs in human cancers perturbs this kinetic balance and defers splicing to occur entirely post - release . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 001 Introduction Co - transcriptional processing of nascent pre - mRNA is a central mechanism for gene regulation in eukaryotes and requires temporal coordination between transcription initiation , elongation , splicing , and cleavage . Each of these processes is carried out by megadalton macromolecular complexes acting at a single genetic locus , and kinetic competition between these processes has been proposed to determine RNA fate ( Bentley , 2014 ) . Genome - wide studies across organisms indicate heterogeneous distributions of both RNA polymerase and nascent RNA along the gene , suggesting that kinetic check - points exist throughout the gene , including at promoter - proximal sites , translation start sites , intron – exon boundaries , and at the 3 ′ end of genes ( Core et al . , 2008 ; Nechaev et al . , 2010 ; Churchman and Weissman , 2011 ; Hah et al . , 2011 ; Larson et al . , 2014 ) . However , population studies reflect the balance of kinetic rates and are unable to resolve the multiple competing processes occurring at a single gene . Moreover , genome - wide measurements lack the time - resolution which might provide mechanistic clues about the underlying enzymatic processes . The hypothesis of kinetic competition is that a fast process will out - compete a process which may in fact be more energetically preferred . Kinetic competition during the transcription cycle has been shown to influence splice site selection during alternative splicing ( de la Mata et al . , 2003 ) , recruit - ment of factors which release promoter - proximal pausing ( Li et al . , 2013 ) , and even RNAi - mediated genome defense ( Dumesic et al . , 2013 ) . Since these processes occur within the dynamic milieu of the nucleus , the stochastic interactions between macromolecules may result in a range of possible outcomes * For correspondence : dan . larson @ nih . gov † These authors contributed equally to this work Present address : ‡ Department of Physics , Boise State University , Boise , United States Competing interests : The authors declare that no competing interests exist . Funding : See page 19 Received : 11 July 2014 Accepted : 01 October 2014 Published : 01 October 2014 Reviewing editor : Douglas L Black , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , University of California , Los Angeles , United States This is an open - access article , free of all copyright , and may be freely reproduced , distributed , transmitted , modified , built upon , or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose . The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication . RESEARCH ARTICLE Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 2 of 22 Research article for the nascent RNA . Stochastic RNA synthesis—the phenomenon whereby the inherently stochastic nature of bio - molecular encounters and reactions leads to a non - deterministic production of transcripts— has been directly visualized in multiple organisms ( Golding et al . , 2005 ; Chubb et al . , 2006 ; Yunger et al . , 2010 ; Larson et al . , 2011 , 2013 ) . Yet , stochastic RNA processing—the possibility that stochas - tic bio - molecular reactions might lead to non - deterministic pathways / outcomes in the making and maturation of an RNA—has never been directly observed , and the potential consequences for gene regulation are largely unexplored . Alternatively , regulatory checkpoints have been proposed which safeguard against such stochastic RNA processing events , providing a level of quality control . For exam - ple , the model of exon definition requires that splicing of the terminal intron relies on synergy between 3 ′ end formation , nascent RNA cleavage , and intron excision ( Berget et al . , 1977 ; Niwa et al . , 1990 ) . Similarly , multiple studies indicate an increased density of nascent RNA present at the 3 ′ end of genes or in the chromatin - bound fraction , suggesting that nascent RNA is retained at the site of transcription to ensure correct processing ( Glover - Cutter et al . , 2008 ; Brody et al . , 2011 ; Carrillo Oesterreich et al . , 2010 ; Bhatt et al . , 2012 ) . In both the competition model and the checkpoint model , kinetics plays a prominent role , but in the latter case , the cell has developed additional safeguard mechanisms . In this article , we use an in vivo single - molecule RNA imaging approach to directly measure kinetic coupling between transcription and splicing of a human β - globin reporter gene . The approach is based on simultaneous dual - color imaging of both the intron and exon of the same pre - mRNA using both PP7 and MS2 stem loops ( Bertrand et al . , 1998 ; Chao et al . , 2008 ) . We find that kinetic eLife digest To make a protein , part of a DNA sequence is copied to make a messenger RNA ( or mRNA ) molecule in a process known as transcription . The enzyme that builds an mRNA molecule first binds to a start point on a DNA strand , and then uses the DNA sequence to build a ‘pre - mRNA’ molecule until a stop signal is reached . To make the final mRNA molecule , sections called introns are removed from the pre - mRNA molecules , and the parts left behind—known as exons—are then joined together . This process is called splicing . However , it is not fully understood how the splicing process is coordinated with the other stages of transcription . For example , does splicing occur after the pre - mRNA molecule is completed or while it is still being built ? And what controls the order in which these processes occur ? One theory about how the different mRNA - making processes are coordinated is called kinetic competition . This theory states that the fastest process is the most likely to occur , even if the other processes use less energy and so might be expected to be preferred . Alternatively , the different steps may be started and stopped by ‘checkpoints’ that cause the different processes to follow on from each other in a set order . Coulon et al . used fluorescence microscopy to investigate how mRNA molecules are made during the transcription of a human gene that makes a hemoglobin protein . To make the RNA visible , two different fluorescent markers were introduced into the pre - mRNA that cause different regions of the mRNA to glow in different colors . Coulon et al . made the introns fluoresce red and the exons glow green . Unspliced pre - mRNA molecules contain both introns and exons and so fluoresce in both colors , whereas spliced mRNA molecules contain only exons and so only glow with a green color . By looking at both the red and green fluorescence signals at the same time , Coulon et al . could see when an intron was spliced out of the pre - mRNA . This revealed that in normal cells , splicing can occur either before or after the RNA is released from where it is transcribed . Thus , splicing and transcription does not follow a set pattern , suggesting that checkpoints do not control the sequence of events . Instead , the fact that a spliced mRNA molecule can be formed in different ways suggests kinetic competition controls the process . In some cancer cells , there are defects in the cellular machinery that controls splicing . When looking at cells with such a defect , Coulon et al . found that splicing only occurred after transcription was completed . This study thus provides insight into the complex workings of mRNA synthesis and establishes a blueprint for understanding how splicing is impaired in diseases such as cancer . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 002 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 3 of 22 Research article competition results in multiple competing pathways for pre - mRNA splicing . Splicing of the terminal intron occurs stochastically both before and after transcript release , indicating there is not a strict quality control checkpoint . Post - release splicing occurs from freely diffusing transcripts in the nucleus and is an order of magnitude faster than splicing at the site of transcription . A single missense muta - tion ( Ser34Phe ) in the zinc finger domain of the conserved splicing factor U2AF1 which is recurrent in multiple cancers ( Yoshida et al . , 2011 ; Graubert et al . , 2012 ; Waterfall et al . , 2014 ) changes the balance , making all splicing post - release . This same effect can also be observed on the endogenous , un - modified fragile X mental retardation mRNA ( FXR1 ) . Our results show that kinetic competition governs the stochastic balance between multiple competing pathways for RNA synthesis and pro - cessing and that this balance is perturbed by oncogenic mutations . Results Real - time visualization of transcription and splicing at the single - molecule level in living cells To visualize transcription , splicing , and release of single transcripts in living cells , we used time - lapse fluorescence microscopy of multiply labeled RNA ( Bertrand et al . , 1998 ) . We stably integrated into U2 - OS cells , a human β - globin reporter with a DNA cassette that encodes for 24X PP7 RNA hairpins in the second intron ( Chao et al . , 2008 ) and a 24X MS2 hairpin cassette in the 3 ′ UTR ( Boireau et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 1A ) . The constitutively expressed PP7 - coat protein tagged with mCherry ( PCP - mCherry ) and MS2 - coat protein tagged with GFP ( MCP - GFP ) bind with high affinity ( the on rate for MCP is 0 . 54 μ M – 1 s – 1 . At a nuclear concentration of 1 μ M , the average time for the MCP to bind a completed stem loop is 1 . 85 s ) ( Buenrostro et al . , 2014 ) to the RNA stem loops as homodimers , tagging each A C B D E Figure 1 . Real - time measurement of transcription and splicing in living cells . ( A ) Schematic of the human β - globin report gene construct . Reporter splicing efficiency > 95 % by qRT - PCR ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1C ) . ( B ) 3D images of diffraction - limited spot in both channels corresponding to the transcription site ( TS , arrow ) . Bar : 4 µm . ( C ) Fluorescence fluctuations recorded at the TS reflect stochastic transcriptional events . Dotted lines are background traces recorded in the nucleus , 8 µm away from the TS . ( D and E ) Examples of pre - and post - release splicing observed when the intron ( red signal ) disappears simultaneously with ( D ) or before ( E ) the exon ( green signal ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 003 The following figure supplements are available for figure 1 : Figure supplement 1 . Human β - globin reporter gene . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 004 Figure supplement 2 . Integration site of the β - globin reporter and copy number analysis . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 005 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 4 of 22 Research article cassette with 48 fluorophores of a single color , resulting in orthogonal labeling of two different parts of the nascent transcript ( Hocine et al . , 2013 ; Martin et al . , 2013 ; Buenrostro et al . , 2014 ) . Since the PP7 cassette is intronic , unspliced RNAs appear in both colors , while spliced RNAs are only visible in green . Time - lapse imaging of cells in 3D reveals a temporally fluctuating diffraction - limited spot , co - localizing in both colors , that corresponds to the transcription site ( TS ) where nascent transcripts are synthesized ( Figure 1B – C , Videos 1 and Videos 2 ) . We observed mature mRNA ( exon only ) diffus - ing in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm ( Video 3 ) , and we verified expression of the protein prod - uct , indicating the message is spliced and translated correctly ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1B – C ) . By simultaneously observing the fluorescence intensity of the intron and the exon of a single nas - cent transcript , one can determine when the intron is excised from the pre - mRNA . We find that both pre - and post - release splicing are visible as single events at the same gene over time ( Figure 1C ) . In the case of post - release splicing , the intronic fluo - rescence appears , followed by the exon fluores - cence , followed by a coincidental drop in both colors reflecting the release of an unspliced RNA ( Figure 1D and Figure 1—figure supplement 1E ) . For pre - release splicing , there is a delay between the drop - off of the red and green signals , indicat - ing intron removal before release ( Figure 1E ) . Diffusion of the pre - mRNA away from the TS is rapid , which accounts for the precipitous drop of the signal in the time trace ( Figure 1C ) . Fluctuation analysis reveals the stochastic synthesis and processing kinetics of single transcripts Most of the time , multiple nascent RNA is present at the TS , necessitating a general analysis method for extracting kinetic information from the time traces ( Larson et al . , 2011 ) . We developed a dual - color fluctuation correlation analysis approach for analyzing the complete transcription cycle , result - ing in two temporal auto - correlation functions and a single temporal cross - correlation function ( Figure 2A ; See ‘Materials and methods’ ) . These functions measure , over many traces , how a fluc - tuation in one fluorescence channel is statistically correlated with a fluctuation in either the same or the other channel after a given time delay . The correlation functions for β - globin ( Figure 2B , Figure 2—figure supplement 1A – B ) reveal the kinetic features hidden in the fluorescence time traces and encapsulate the stochastic kinetics of single - transcript synthesis ( Figure 2—figure supplement 2 , Supplementary file 1 — § 2 ) . At short time delays ( < 40 s ) , the cross - correlation reflects the order of splicing and release events ( Figure 2B – C and Supplementary file 1 — § 2 ) . If splicing never occurs before transcript release , the intron - to - exon cross - correlation ( blue ) starts horizontally at positive delays . On the other hand , if splicing always occurs before release , this func - tion starts with a positive slope in alignment with its negative counterpart ( magenta ) . In the case Video 1 . Time - fluctuating transcription sites . Cells show a diffraction - limited fluorescent spot colocalizing in both colors ( red : intron , green : exon ) , corresponding to the transcription site of the reporter gene . The fluorescence intensity of each site fluctuates over time as nascent transcripts are synthesized , spliced , and released from the transcription site . Large orange shapes in nuclei are nucleoli ( Ferguson and Larson , 2013 ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 006 Video 2 . Tracking of a transcription site in 4D . The video shows , for the intron and exon signals ( left and center panels ) , the maximum intensity projected image from the top ( square image ) and from the sides ( rectangle images ) , revealing the transcription site ( TS ) in three dimensions ( 3D ) and over time ( 4D ) . Image analysis is used to track the TS over time in both colors . The blue box and cross indicate the location of the TS as found by the tracking algorithm . The right panel is the merge of both signals . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 007 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 5 of 22 Research article where splicing is stochastic and both outcomes may occur , their relative probability of occurrence is given by the change of slope of the cross - correlation at 0 delay ( Figure 2C , Figure 2— figure supplements 2D and 3 ) . The experimental cross - correlation determined from ∼ 2000 indi - vidual β - globin transcripts indicates that splicing occurs before release for a fraction of transcripts ( 13 ± 5 % , Figure 2B inset ) . We note that this change in slope at short time delay only denotes the relative order of splicing vs release but says nothing about the kinetics of these two pro - cesses . In summary , these data demonstrate that splicing and release are not firmly constrained to occur in a specific order ( p < 0 . 003 ) . At longer delays ( > 40 s ) , other features of the transcription cycle are visible . For example , the delay at which the intron - to - exon cross - correlation ( Figure 2B , blue circles ) starts decreas - ing ( ∼ 60 s ) corresponds to the elongation time between the two cassettes ( 2573 bases apart ) , resulting in an elongation rate of ∼ 2 . 6 kb / min . Finally , the decay at time - scales > 100 s relates to the dwell time of transcripts at the TS ( Figure 2—figure supplement 2A , B ) . Specifically , the long decays observed in all correlation functions indicates that RNA is not immediately released after transcription of the poly ( A ) site . Rather , the transcript remains at the TS for a duration which reflects either a pause at / near the poly ( A ) site , transcription past the termination site , or a post - cleavage retention of the transcript within the diffraction - limited spot ( Hofer and Darnell , 1981 ; Glover - Cutter et al . , 2008 ; Brody et al . , 2011 ; Carrillo Oesterreich et al . , 2010 ; Bhatt et al . , 2012 ) . To confirm our assignment of transcription cycle events to features in the correlation curve , we treated cells with drugs known to affect different aspects of RNA synthesis . The splicing inhibitor spli - ceostatin A ( SSA ) ( Kaida et al . , 2007 ) abolished splicing at the TS as evidenced by the disappearance of the rise in the intron - to - exon correlation function ( Figure 2D ) . Treatment with camptothecin ( CPT , a topoisomerase I inhibitor known to slow down elongation [ Singh and Padgett , 2009 ] ) resulted in a marked shift of the decreasing part of the intron - to - exon cross - correlation to longer delays ( Figure 2E ) , which is the expected manifestation of slower elongation ( Figure 2—figure supple - ment 2A – B , Supplementary file 1 — § 2 ) . As an additional control , when shuffling channels between traces or when using time traces recorded away from the TS , the correlation functions are flat ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1G – H ) , supporting the fact that the correlation functions shown on Figure 2B reflect the molecular events happening at the TS . Finally , we emphasize that an essential advantage of this approach is that correlation functions reveal single - transcript kinetics even from signals where multiple transcripts are present at any given time ( Supplementary file 1 — § 1 ) . As illustrated in Figure 3 , a single transcription and splicing event results in correlation functions with a peak near zero delay , reflecting the intra - transcript kinetics ( Figure 3A ) . If three transcripts are present , additional peaks appear at non - zero delay , due to inter - transcript kinetics but all the correlations resulting from intra - transcript kinetics accumulate around 0 ( Figure 3B ) . After averaging over many transcription and splicing events , inter - transcript correlations disappear , leaving only a central peak which reflects the kinetics of single transcripts ( Figure 3C ) . See also Video 4 and Figure 3—figure supplement 1 . Kinetic competition between splicing and transcript retention determines the balance between pre - and post - release splicing The preceding conclusions are general and make no reference to a specific model . To gain further insight , we developed mathematical models which relate the shape of the correlation functions to the timing of the underlying molecular processes ( see ‘Materials and methods’ ) . We generated five different mechanistic schemes : ( I ) purely post - release splicing , ( II ) independence between splicing and elongation / release , ( III ) polymerase pausing at the 3 ′ splice site ( ss ) until splicing is complete , Video 3 . Spliced RNAs diffusing in the nucleus and the cytoplasm . Cells are imaged here with a high laser power and a short exposure time so that diffusion of single RNAs can be appreciated . It reveals a population of transcripts diffusing in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm , as evidenced by fast fluctuations observed in the exon signal ( right panel ) . These transcripts are , for the most part , already spliced since the intron signal ( center panel ) does not show the same fluctuations . In these imaging conditions , unspliced transcripts are only visible at the transcription site ( bright spot in the nucleus colocalizing in both color ; see merge in left panel ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 008 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 6 of 22 Research article ( IV ) splicing only during 3 ′ end retention of the transcript , and ( V ) release only after splicing is complete ( Figure 2—figure supplement 4 and ‘Materials and methods’ ) . For each one of these general schemes , different time distributions were tested for elongation , splicing , and release ( Supplementary file 2 ) . Since by construction , the intron - to - exon cross - correlation at 0 delay is necessarily null in scheme III and have a null slope in scheme I , these two schemes can be ruled out ( See Figure 2—figure supplement 5A , D for fits ) . The three other schemes were better at fitting the correlation curves but the best model is one from scheme II , that is where splicing is independent of elongation and transcript release A B D E C Figure 2 . Transcription and splicing kinetics are revealed by fluctuation analysis of dual - color fluorescence intensity time traces . ( A ) Auto - and cross - correlation functions quantify statistically correlated fluctuations occurring at different time delays , respectively within the same or between two signals . ( B ) Correlation functions ( G ( τ ) ) of experimental time traces ( N = 21 ) . Auto - correlations ( red and green curves ) are symmetrical by construction . Cross - correlations ( blue and magenta curves ) are two halves of a single continuous curve . Inset : short - delay behavior of the cross - correlation reveals that 13 ± 5 % of the RNAs are spliced pre - release ( p - value : pre - release fraction ≠ 0 % and 100 % ; z - test ) . ( C ) Schematic representing stochastic pre - and post - release splicing . Purely pre - release splicing imposes the cross - correlation to have the same rising slope on both sides of the y - axis , while purely post - release makes the intron - to - exon cross - correlation ( blue curve , positive delay ) start as a plateau . The change of slope at τ = 0 delay is indicative of the fraction of splicing events occurring before release . ( D ) Spliceostatin A abolishes pre - release splicing . ( E ) Camptothecin delays the decay of the intron - to - exon cross - correlation and increases the pre - release fraction . All correlation functions are normalized by the value of the cross - correlation at 0 delay ( G rg ( 0 ) ) . Error : SEM ( bootstrap ) . Control correlation functions are shown in Figure 2—figure supplement 1G – H . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 009 The following figure supplements are available for figure 2 : Figure supplement 1 . Fluorescence time traces and correlation functions . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 010 Figure supplement 2 . Geometry of the correlation functions . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 011 Figure supplement 3 . Estimation of the fraction of pre - release splicing from slopes in the crosscorrelations . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 012 Figure supplement 4 . Mechanistic schemes . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 013 Figure supplement 5 . Model comparison using a Bayesian Information Criterion ( BIC ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 014 Figure supplement 6 . Counting transcripts at the transcription site . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 015 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 7 of 22 Research article A B C Figure 3 . Correlation functions reflect single - transcript kinetics . ( A ) A dual - color time trace with a single transcription event yields correlation functions with features around 0 delay and flat elsewhere . ( B ) When several transcription events are present in a time trace , the correlation coming from each individual RNA accumulates around 0 delay , while all the correlation between pairs of RNAs distributes uniformly on the delay axis . ( C ) When there are many transcription events per time trace and / or many traces are used to produce an average correlation function , the correlation from single transcripts dominates and that from pairs of transcripts averages out . The resulting correlation functions hence reflect single - transcript kinetics . Time traces shown are simulations where the statistics of transcript kinetics are similar to those we measured by live cell imaging . Traces in ( C ) have the same duration and number of transcripts as estimated in experimental data ( e . g . , Figure 1C ) . See Video 4 for an animation of how the correlation functions converge as the number of transcripts increases . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 016 The following figure supplement is available for figure 3 : Figure supplement 1 . Correlation functions with several gene copies at the TS reflect single - transcript kinetics . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 017 Video 4 . Correlation functions reveal single transcript kinetics . This video shows the convergence of the correlation functions for increasing number of transcripts in a time trace . See also Figure 3 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 018 ( See Figure 2—figure supplement 5 and discus - sion on Model comparison in ‘Materials and methods’ ) . In this 3 - parameter model ( Table 1 ) , splicing occurs a fixed amount of time after the 3 ′ ss has been transcribed , and transcript release involves a stochastic delay after the poly ( A ) site is reached . No pause at the 3 ′ ss was needed to fit the data . This observation does not rule out paus - ing at these sites but suggests that such a pause would be much shorter than the other timescales observed . Notably , our data are fit better with a model having a fixed time for intron removal rather than a stochastic ( exponential ) one , arguing for several sequential kinetic steps ( Aitken et al . , 2011 ; Schmidt et al . , 2011 ) . In total , the β - globin - terminal intron splicing time was 267 ± 9 s after the polymerase passes the 3 ′ ss . This measurement of splicing time is consistent with previous esti - mates either in vivo on cell populations ( Singh and Padgett , 2009 ) or in vitro at the single - molecule level ( Hoskins et al . , 2011 ) , suggesting that PP7 stem loops do not perturb splicing kinetics of this intron , contrary to MS2 stem loops ( Aitken et al . , 2011 ; Schmidt et al . , 2011 ) . As an independent validation of our modeling results , we counted the number of red and green RNAs at transcription sites using a normalized ratiometric approach ( Zenklusen et al . , 2008 ) ( See ‘Materials and methods’ and Figure 2—figure supplement 6 ) . The average red - to - green ratio of 1 . 41 is indistinguishable from the expected 1 . 4 value predicted by our modeling analysis of the correlation functions . Importantly , both SSA and CPT drug treatments only affected a single parameter ( Table 1 ) , arguing that splicing is kinetically independent of elongation / termination . Based on our measurements , splicing occurring at the TS is rarely completed during elongation but rather during a pause at the 3 ′ end of the gene . Because transcript release is stochastic , the 3 ′ end dwell time can be shorter or longer than Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 8 of 22 Research article the necessary time to remove the intron , resulting in splicing that can occur either before or after release . Splicing happens 10 - fold faster on freely diffusing transcripts than on chromatin Since the majority of β - globin pre - mRNA is released from the TS before splicing of the terminal intron , we addressed the question of where and when this splicing takes place . We observed a mobile popu - lation of unspliced pre - mRNA ( co - localized intron / exon ) diffusing in the immediate vicinity of the TS ( Figure 4A – B , Video 5 ) . In contrast , spliced mRNA ( exon only ) could be observed diffusing through - out the nucleus . A small population of red - only particles was also recorded , which could be due either to the false - discovery rate of the segmentation algorithm or the presence of free lariats ( See ‘Materials and methods’ ) . The radial distribution of mRNA and pre - mRNA indicated an enrichment for unspliced transcripts within 2 . 4 ± 0 . 1 µm of the TS ( Figure 4C , Figure 4—figure supplement 1 ) , meaning that splicing occurs faster than diffusion throughout the nucleus . This enrichment disappears upon treat - ment with splicing inhibitor SSA , in which case most of the transcripts are unspliced and dispersed throughout the nucleus ( Figure 4C , Video 6 ) . From the measured diffusion coefficient ( D = 0 . 12 µm 2 / s , Figure 4—figure supplement 2 ; See ‘Materials and methods’ ) , we calculated that post - release splic - ing takes place on average 13 ± 1 s after departure from chromatin . This time is much shorter than the expected 137 s it would take if pre - and post - release splicing kinetics were identical ( calculated from Table 1 ) . From this observation , it is tempting to speculate that transcripts are released only after they have passed a particular rate - limiting step in spliceosome assembly , explaining why the catalytic step occurs very soon after release . However , this interpretation is inconsistent with the fact that 3 ′ end retention time is not affected by SSA treatment which impairs binding of U2 and hence affects recruit - ment of all the snRNPs except U1 ( Corrionero et al . , 2011 ) . Note also that we cannot formally exclude the possibility that co - localized intron / exon particles are actually excised introns still in complex with transcripts . In summary , although introns can be retained for over 4 min on chromatin , once the tran - script is released , splicing is 10 - fold faster for freely diffusing transcripts . In most cases , the nascent intron is retained until transcription reaches the 3 ′ end of the gene and then removed either before or shortly after release of the transcript ( Figure 5 ) . Recurrent cancer - associated mutation in splicing factor U2AF1 delays splicing and makes it entirely post - release Because the balance of kinetic competition determines where and when introns are excised from the pre - mRNA , we then sought to determine whether trans - acting factors regulated splicing by per - turbing this balance . Deep sequencing studies in myelodysplastic syndrome , chronic lymphocytic leukemia , acute myeloid leukemia ( AML ) , breast cancer , lung adenocarcinoma , and hairy cell leu - kemia have all revealed the existence of mutated factors involved in 3 ′ ss recognition ( Yoshida et al . , 2011 ; Graubert et al . , 2012 ; Brooks et al . , 2014 ; Waterfall et al . , 2014 ; TCGA , 2012 ) . One recurrent change is a heterozygous point mutation in U2 auxiliary factor 1 ( U2AF1 ) , which is an essential factor for recognition of the AG dinucleotide consensus motif ( Figure 1A ) . The serine - to - phenylalanine ( S34F ) missense mutation in the zinc finger domain results in disparate changes in alternative splicing Table 1 . Kinetics of transcription and splicing under different experimental conditions Elongation rate ( kb / min ) Mean 3 ' end dwell time ( sec ) Splicing time ( sec ) Pre - release fraction ( % ) Control 2 . 60 ± 0 . 16 116 . 1 ± 5 . 8 267 ± 9 15 . 9 ± 3 . 2 SSA + 2 . 41 ± 0 . 26 126 . 7 ± 5 . 7 485 ± 62 * * 3 . 5 ± 2 . 4 * * CPT + 1 . 44 ± 0 . 09 * * 111 . 0 ± 10 . 3 251 ± 10 24 . 9 ± 6 . 9 U2AF1 ( wt ) 2 . 24 ± 0 . 27 120 . 7 ± 4 . 9 280 ± 8 16 . 6 ± 3 . 3 U2AF1 - S34F 2 . 64 ± 0 . 11 166 . 0 ± 7 . 0 * * 694 ± 176 * 2 . 1 ± 2 . 6 * * The table shows result of fits with model II . 4 ( ‘Materials and methods’ and Supplementary file 2 ) . Pre - release fraction is deduced from the 3 other parameters . Errors are propagated SEM from correlation functions . * p - value < 0 . 05 , * * p - value < 0 . 005 ( two - sided z - test vs control ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 019 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 9 of 22 Research article patterns including exon skipping , exon inclusion , and alternative 3 ′ ss selection ( Brooks et al . , 2014 ) . Although somatic genetics clearly indi - cate the importance of this mutation ( Waterfall et al . , 2014 ) , there is no functional or mechanistic understanding of how U2AF1 - S34F works at the molecular level . We performed time - lapse imaging on cells expressing moderate levels of either wild - type U2AF1 or U2AF1 - S34F , both fused to a cerulean fluorescent protein . We note that this experimental condition recapitulates the in situ case , because the mutant U2AF1 is present against the back - ground of at least one copy of the wild - type allele . Correlation functions revealed that U2AF1 - S34F completely abolishes pre - release splicing ( Figure 6A , horizontal slope ) and prolongs tran - script 3 ′ end dwell time ( Table 1 ) . Post - release imaging of transcripts showed a local enrich - ment for unspliced pre - mRNA near the TS , but with a greater spatial extent in the case of U2AF1 - S34F ( Figure 6B – C , Video 7 ) . Thus , all tran - scripts are post - transcriptionally spliced , albeit at a slower rate ( 27 ± 3 s ; Figure 6D , Figure 4— figure supplement 1 ) . Splicing efficiency , poly ( A ) length , and 3 ′ UTR length were unchanged ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1C – D ) . In sum - mary , these data suggest that the mutant delays splicing to post - release , slows splicing from freely diffusing transcripts , but has no detectable effect on splicing efficiency . We then confirmed this kinetic effect on the endogenous FXR1 mRNA , which was shown to be alternatively spliced in the presence of U2AF1 - S34F in both AML and lung adenocarcinoma ( Brooks et al . , 2014 ) . Using single - molecule FISH ( Femino et al . , 1998 ) ( Figure 6E ) , we examined the spatial distribution of intron and exon in fixed cells transfected with U2AF1 or U2AF1 - S34F . As was the case for the β - globin reporter , we observed a population of unspliced FXR1 pre - mRNA in the vicinity of an active TS , indicating that at least some fraction of FXR1 transcripts are released before splicing ( Figure 6F ) . We then performed the same spatial analysis as above , except on fixed cells instead of live cells . Expression of the U2AF1 - S34F mutant resulted both in an increase in the level of unspliced pre - mRNA in the nucleus ( 16 . 0 ± 0 . 4 % compared to 6 . 0 ± 0 . 3 % , Figure 6F ) and the radial distance from the TS ( 1 . 8 ± 0 . 5 μ m compared to 0 . 5 ± 0 . 2 μ m , Figure 6G ) . Taken together , both static and dynamic meas - urements on a reporter β - globin transcript and the endogenous FXR1 transcript suggest that the S34F mutation in U2AF1 acts in a dominant negative fashion to postpone splicing until after release and cause slower splicing from diffusing transcripts . Discussion The picture that emerges from this study is one in which the β - globin - terminal intron can be spliced during multiple steps of the transcription cycle ( Figure 5 ) . A minority of transcripts are spliced while Figure 4 . Visualization of splicing occurring after release from chromatin . ( A ) Individual frames from live - cell confocal imaging showing intron ( red dots ) , exon ( green dots ) , and the merged image . White arrow : TS . Bar : 4 µm . ( B ) Fluorescence intensity profile along the line in the inset shows co - localized intron / exon ( unspliced pre - mRNA ) and exon only ( spliced mRNA ) . ( C ) Radial distributions of mRNA ( green ) and pre - mRNA ( orange ) , as well as pre - mRNA under SSA treatment ( black ) are shown as a function of distance from the TS . Density distributions are normalized by the distribu - tion of random ( uniform ) positions within the nucleus ( see ‘Materials and methods’ ) . Error : SEM ( bootstrap over 9 cells ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 020 The following figure supplements are available for figure 4 : Figure supplement 1 . Localization of single RNAs diffusing in the nucleus . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 021 Figure supplement 2 . Measure of RNA diffusion in the nucleus by RICS . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 022 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 10 of 22 Research article retained at the 3 ′ end of the gene , but the domi - nant pathway is the one in which splicing is con - temporaneous with release or occurs shortly thereafter . These results are consistent with sev - eral studies which suggested that intron removal is enhanced upon cleavage ( Baurén et al . , 1998 ; Bird et al . , 2005 ) . In fact , we find that splicing is 10 - fold faster on freely diffusing transcripts than on chromatin - bound transcripts . Our data are consistent with a model where commitment to splicing of the terminal β - globin intron occurs co - transcriptionally but suggest there may be a high energy barrier to completion of intron removal while transcripts are still tethered to chro - matin , possibly due to steric constraints . Thus , post - release splicing may be the energetically favored process , but there is a long kinetic win - dow in which the less - favorable pre - release intron removal can occur . The time required to remove an intron there - fore becomes a central parameter in our under - standing of RNA processing , with implications for both constitutive and alternative splicing ( Bentley , 2014 ) . This fundamental kinetic quantity has been elusive . Population - based measurements suggest a splicing time for several endogenous , un - modified introns of 5 – 10 min ( Singh and Padgett , 2009 ) . Bulk in vitro measurements on β - globin indicate a 40 - to 50 - min timescale . A single - molecule in vitro study on yeast transcripts measured ∼ 10 - min splicing time . On the opposite end of the spectrum , previous live - cell imaging approaches relying on both direct and indirect measurements indicate splicing times in the order of ∼ 30 s ( Huranová et al . , 2010 ; Martin et al . , 2013 ) . One of the primary experimental advances in our study is the ability to observe the transcrip - tion and splicing process with a time resolution that spans three orders of magnitude . Since the time to splice is a distributed quantity , and splicing times vary from transcript to transcript , the variation in previously reported splicing rates may be strongly influenced by the temporal dynamic range of the method . Biologically , this variability in splic - ing rate may provide regulatory potential , as we discuss below . One potential criticism of the live - cell imaging approach is that the stem - loops and the coat protein may perturb kinetics . Several arguments stand against this view . First , our splicing kinetics are con - sistent with both population measurements ( Singh and Padgett , 2009 ) and in vitro single - molecule measurements ( Hoskins et al . , 2011 ) . Second , the splicing efficiency of the reporter is high ( Figure 1— figure supplement 1C ) , suggesting there are no dead - end intermediates . Third , endogenous meta - zoan RNAs are decorated with RNA - binding proteins from their inception ( Castello et al . , 2012 ) , sug - gesting that the spliceosome is well - equipped to handle bulky messages . Finally , since we can never exclude the possibility that a synthetic reporter may be missing features found in an endogenous gene , we have also recapitulated the results on the un - modified endogenous FXR1 message . Importantly , our single - molecule study reveals the existence of multiple pathways , indicating the absence of a strict checkpoint for intron removal ( Bird et al . , 2005 ; Alexander et al . , 2010 ; Brody et al . , 2011 ; Carrillo Oesterreich et al . , 2010 ; Bhatt et al . , 2012 ; Pandya - Jones et al . , 2013 ) . The presence of a delay at the 3 ′ end may be interpreted as a checkpoint mechanism to ensure that splic - ing takes place before transcript release , but there are several reasons to reject this interpretation of Video 5 . Single - RNA imaging reveals a transient population of unspliced transcript diffusing away from the transcription site . Using high - power confocal laser scanning microscopy , we were able to observe single transcripts with a better temporal resolution than with widefield imaging ( Video 3 ) . The video shows a single cell with an active transcription site ( TS , bright spot visible in both signals ) and diffusing RNA particles ( left : intron , center : exon , right : merge ) . Although most of the RNAs diffusing in the nucleus are spliced ( visible only in the exon signal ) , few unspliced RNAs ( visible in both colors ) are detectable in the vicinity of the TS as they diffuse away . Spatial distribution and diffusion analyses revealed that this population is very transient ( Figure 4C and Figure 4—figure supplements 1 and 2 ) . Large shapes in the nucleus are nucleoli ( Ferguson and Larson , 2013 ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 023 Video 6 . Single - RNA imaging with splicing inhibitor SSA . Imaging conditions are identical as in Video 5 , but cells are treated with splicing inhibitor spliceostatin A ( SSA ) . RNAs diffusing in the nucleus are now visible in both color , indicating that they are unspliced . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 024 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 11 of 22 Research article our data . First , none of the models which assume dependence between splicing and elongation / release fit better than one that assumes inde - pendence . Second , both splicing and elongation inhibition experiments support the view of the two processes being kinetically independent . Abolishing splicing with SSA does not lead to an increase in release times . Conversely , reducing elongation speed with CPT does not slow down splicing . Instead , it leads to an increase in pre - release splicing ( Figure 2E ) , as expected if the two processes are independent . Thus , splicing and release can happen in either order , with the order of events determined by kinetic competi - tion . It is this competition which results in sto - chastic outcomes for the RNA . What are the physiological implications of this stochastic outcome ? Does the cell utilize changes in kinetic balance to alter gene expres - sion ? Moreover , is the timing of intron removal of secondary importance to the timing of splicing commitment ? While , single - cell variation in alter - native splicing has been observed , the mech - anism behind this variability has remained elusive ( Waks et al . , 2011 ; Lee et al . , 2014 ) . We have found that a single point mutation in U2AF1 that is recurrent in multiple human cancers alters this kinetic balance to favor post - transcriptional splic - ing of both the β - globin reporter and also endog - enous FXR1 mRNAs . Interestingly , single - molecule measurements on fixed cells suggest that post - release splicing may be the preferred pathway for alternatively spliced transcripts ( Vargas et al . , 2011 ) . Our studies on the mutant U2AF1 provide a mechanistic basis for this observation and sug - gest a role for mutations in the core splicing ma - chinery for the increased levels of ‘noisy splicing’ which are observed in cancer ( Pickrell et al . , 2010 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ) . Furthermore , our time - resolved results indicate that post - release splicing is more efficient than pre - release splicing , which may explain how the timing of intron removal might lead to different outcomes for the message . Such a model relies on a degree of plasticity in spliceosome assembly and function , which has been suggested by in vitro single - molecule measurements ( Hoskins et al . , 2011 ; Shcherbakova et al . , 2013 ) . We speculate that the kinetic delay induced by U2AF1 - S34F allows either for alternate pairing between 5 ′ and 3 ′ ss during transcription or for post - release recon - figuration of pre - mRNA which is not yet committed to intron excision in the spliceosome . Other path - ological RNA processing defects may also originate from a similar kinetic imbalance . In summary , the single - molecule approach developed here provides a blueprint for dissecting the many competing processes which take place at the earliest stages of gene expression . Materials and methods Cell line and DNA constructs The reporter gene vector ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1A ) was constructed with the human β - globin DNA sequence placed under the control of a Tet - responsive promoter , as described previously ( Janicki et al . , 2004 ; Darzacq et al . , 2007 ) . Briefly , the 3 ′ end of the human β - globin sequence was truncated 72 bp upstream of the endogenous stop codon . It was replaced by a cassette coding for the cyan fluorescent protein fused to the peroxisome - targeting sequence serine - lysine - leucine ( CFP - SKL ) , Figure 5 . Schematic of β - globin transcription cycle kinetics . Transcript synthesis and processing can occur through different pathways , the choice of which is governed by a kinetic competition between transcription and splicing . After transcription of the 3 ′ splice site , intron removal takes about 260 s and elongation until the end of the gene , about 55 s . Hence , splicing does not occur during elongation . The transcript is retained at the 3 ′ end of the gene for a stochastic amount of time that can be shorter or longer than the remaining time to excise the intron . This results in two possible outcomes : either an unspliced pre - mRNA is released and then spliced very rapidly or splicing occurs while the transcript is retained on chromatin before being released . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 025 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 12 of 22 Research article ending with a translation stop codon . A cassette containing 24 repeats of the MS2 stem loop sequence was inserted in the 3 ′ untranslated region ( 3 ′ UTR ) , followed by a bovine growth hor - mone polyadenylation sequence ( BGH - PolyA ) . In our modified construct , we inserted a cas - sette containing 24 repeats of the PP7 stem loop sequence into the second and last intron of the gene , approximately halfway between the 5 ′ splice site ( 5 ′ ss ) and the branch point . In order to be the least perturbing , the cassette was inserted 463 bp downstream of the 5 ′ ss and 371 bp upstream of the branch point , and most of the endogenous DNA was conserved ( 8 bp in the intron were deleted ) . In addition , we replaced the MS2 cassette with one that is less prone to recombination . The repeating units of the PP7 and MS2 cassettes are composed of two - stem loop blocks , which are then multimerized 12× to get 24× total stem loops : MS2 : GATCCTACGGTACTTATTGCCAAGAAAGCACGAGCATCAGCCGTGCCTCCAGGTCGAATC TTCAAACGACGACGATCACGCGTCGCTCCAGTATTCCAGGGTTCATCAG PP7 : CTAAGGTACCTAATTGCCTAGAAAGGAGCAGACGATATGGCGTCGCTCCCTGCAGGTCGA CTCTAGAAACCAGCAGAGCATATGGGCTCGCTGGCTGCAGTATTCCCGGGTTCATTAGATC . The loops themselves are underlined . A C F G D B E Figure 6 . The U2AF1 - S34F mutant acts as a dominant negative by delaying splicing to post - release . ( A ) Expression of U2AF1 - cerulean does not alter pre - release splicing compared to the un - transfected control . Expression of U2AF1 - S34F - cerulean abolishes splicing at the TS ( horizontal slope of the intron - to - exon cross - correlation , blue curve ) . ( B ) Pre - mRNA ( red , marked by squares ) are enriched around the TS ( arrows ) indicating that splicing still occurs faster than diffusion . The enrichment is broader in the presence of U2AF1 - S34F despite the similar spatial distributions of both proteins . ( C ) Gaussian fits onto pre - mRNA radial distance distributions from the TS . ( D ) The U2AF1 - S34F mutant defers splicing to occur entirely away from the TS ( fractions obtained from model fits in Table 1 ) and increases post - release splicing time . * * p < 0 . 005 ( two - sided z - test vs untransfected control ) . ( E ) Two - color single - molecule FISH on endogenous FXR1 transcripts . Unspliced pre - mRNA ( co - localization of intronic and exonic probe ) appears in the vicinity of TSs ( the 4 bright dual - color spots ) . ( F ) The fraction of pre - mRNA transcripts in the nucleus in the presence of wt or mutant U2AF1 . ( G ) Spatial distribution of pre - mRNAs near TSs in the presence of wt or mutant U2AF1 ( N > 400 cells ) . Radial distributions show density of pre - mRNA normalized by density of mRNA . Bars : 4 µm . Error : SEM over cells ( bootstrap ) . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 026 Video 7 . Spatial distribution of pre - mRNA with wild type or mutant U2AF1 . Left and right images show a cell that was transfected with the wild type ( wt ) or the mutant ( S34F ) version of splicing factor U2AF1 . Both the image show the intron channel . The enrichment of unspliced pre - mRNA ( red spots ) diffusing in the vicinity of the transcription site is broader in the case of the mutant , showing that splicing rate is slower . Imaging conditions are identical as in Video 5 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 027 Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 13 of 22 Research article The construct was stably integrated into the genomic DNA of U2 - OS cells ( human osteosarcoma cell line ) through transfection of the plasmid followed by a screen for genomic integration . The cell line was made by co - transfection of the reporter plasmid and a puromycin resistance plasmid , followed by selection with puromycin . The cell line also constitutively expresses the PP7 bacteriophage - coat pro - tein fused to the mCherry fluorescent protein ( PP7 - mCherry ) and the MS2 bacteriophage - coat pro - teins fused to the green fluorescent protein ( MS2 - GFP ) . Both are under the control of a ubiquitin promoter and were stably introduced by lentivirus infection as described previously ( Larson et al . , 2013 ) . The clonal cell line used in this study was finally generated by single - cell cloning . The reporter is efficiently expressed and translated as evidenced from imaging of the protein product accumulating in peroxisomes ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1B ) . Cells were grown in DMEM medium ( Life technologies , Grand Island , NY ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS , Sigma - Aldrich , St Louis , MO ) . Cell were induced with 10 or 20 μ M doxycycline ( Sigma Aldrich , St Louis , MO ) , at least 24 hr prior to imaging . Imaging was performed in Leibovitz L - 15 phenol - free medium ( Life technologies , Grand Island , NY ) containing the same concentration of dox - ycycline and FBS . Pharmacological treatments were performed at 48 nM spliceostatin A ( Dr Minoru Yoshida , Chemical Genetics Lab , RIKEN Institute , Japan ) from 0 . 5 to 20 hr prior to imaging or 3 . 75 μ M Camptothecin ( Sigma , CAS : 7689 - 03 - 4 ) from 1 to 19hr . U2AF1 ( a . k . a . U2AF35 ) constructs were made from a U2AF35 - CFP plasmid provided by Angus Lamond ( University of Dundee , UK ) . The CFP cassette was replaced by a Cerulean one ( similar absorp - tion / emission spectra but more photostable ) . The U2AF1 cassette was then swapped with the mutant version ( U2AF1 - S34F ) provided by Peter Aplan ( NCI , NIH ) . Splicing efficiency and poly ( A ) tail length / site Cells were transfected with mock or with plasmids expressing either the WT or S34F mutant of U2AF1 . Expression of β - globin reporter was induced for 15 hr . Cells were scraped and total RNA isolated using the Qiagen RNA isolation kit . 1 μ g of total RNA was used to make first strand using ProtoScript II M - MuLV reverse transcriptase ( NEB , Ipsich , MA ) and random hexamers ( IDT , Coralville , IA ) according to the manufacturer ' s instructions in a final volume of 20 μ l . 2 μ l of the reverse transcription product was used in a qPCR reaction using IQ Syber Green mix ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) in a CFX96 qPCR machine ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) according to the manufacturer ' s instructions . We use varying amounts of G - block DNA ( IDT , Coralville , IA ) carrying primer pairs generating amplicons of the same size as those being tested . This G - block served as control and was used to generate the standard curves . Primer pairs spanning the junction of Exon2 - Intron2 , and Intron2 - Exon3 , and a primer pair amplifying a region of Exon3 served to measure unspliced and total RNA of β - globin reporter respectively . The unspliced fraction of the reporter RNA was calculated as 10 ^ [ ( Cq intron - K intron ) / S intron - ( Cq total - K total ) / S total ] where Cq is the cycle number , and K and S are the constant and slope respectively of the standard curve for the primer pair ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1C ) . The splicing fractions calculated using Exon2 - Intron2 primers or Intron2 - Exon3 primers were similar and were therefore combined together . Error bars are standard errors over four measurements . U2 - OS cells with the integrated β - globin reporter were transfected with mock or with plasmids expressing either the WT or S34F mutant of U2AF1 . Expression of β - globin reporter was induced for 15 hr . Cells were scraped and total RNA isolated using the Qiagen RNA isolation kit . 1 μ g of total RNA was treated with RNAse H ( NEB , Ipswich , MA ) in the presence oligo dT according to the manufactur - er ' s instructions . The digested RNA was then phenol : chloroform extracted , ethanol precipitated and suspended in 10 μ l of water . A DNA adaptor ( 5 - GGTCACCTTGATCTGAAGC , with a 5 - phosphate and 3 amino modification to prevent further ligation ) was ligated to 1 μ g of either total or RNAse H - treated RNA using T4 RNA ligase 1 ( NEB , Ipswich , MA ) in a final volume of 20 μ l . 10 μ l of the adaptor - ligated RNA was then used to synthesize the first strand using ProtoScript II RT ( NEB , Ipswich , MA ) and the reverse primer 5 ′ - GCTTCAGATCAAGGTGACCTTTTT according to the manufacturer ' s instructions . The reaction was denatured for 20 min at 80°C and 2 . 5 μ l of the first strand was used as template in a standard PCR reaction using the forward primer 5 ′ - CCAGGGTTCATCAGATCCTATTCTATAGTGTCAC and the reverse primer 5 - GCTTCAGATCAAGGTGACCTTTTT . Reaction products were then separated on a 3 % agarose gel ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1D ) . Genomic integration sites and copy number analysis Whole genome sequencing ( paired end sequencing ) was used to identify the integration sites of the reporter in the genome . The genomic library was prepared using TruSeq DNA sample preparation Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 14 of 22 Research article protocol . Samples were sequenced on HiSeq2000 using Illumina TruSeq v3 chemistry . The yield was 389 million reads after filtering . The reads were trimmed to remove low quality sequences ( Trimmomatic software ) and were aligned to both the human genome ( hg19 ) and the sequence of the β - globin reporter gene plasmid ( Bowtie2 and Illumina CASAVA Eland softwares ) . Paired reads that partially align to both genomic and plasmid sequences were extracted and used to identify possible insertion sites . Figure 1—figure supplement 2A shows an example of an insertion site : 4 read pairs align with both with genomic sequence ( up to chr8 : 145 , 074 , 337 ) and plasmid sequence ( all from the same posi - tion in the plasmid backbone ) . This defines the 5 ′ junction of the insertion . Similarly , three read pairs were found partially aligning a few bp downstream ( chr8 : 145 , 074 , 349 ) and with the plasimd up to the beginning of the MS2 cassette , defining the 3 ′ junction . Multiple copies of the plasmid may have been integrated . Three insertion sites were identified ( Figure 1—figure supplement 2B ) , including two where only one junction was found . All three were confirmed by PCR and the copy number of the reporter in the cell line was obtained as follows . Genomic DNA was isolated from cells ( 1 × 10 cm plate ) by standard protocols , and amplicons were PCR amplified using primer pairs overlapping the putative junctions . The PCR was performed for 24 cycles and the products separated on a 2 % agarose gel ( Figure 1— figure supplement 2C ) . All four junctions show a band at the expected size . To estimate the copy number of the inserted plasmid , we also use two primer pairs that amplify a region that is internal to the plasmid construct . Each junction should be present in one copy per cell so that , in comparison , the amount of the internal amplicon should reflect the total copy number in the cell line . The gel was quantitated using the ImageJ software ( Figure 1—figure supplement 2D ) . To correct for primer effi - ciency , each primer pair was also used in the same PCR run to amplify varying amount of G - block DNA ( IDT , Coralville , IA ) . The product was quantitated as described above and the resulting calibration curves ( Figure 1—figure supplement 2E ) were used to correct the data . The internal - to - junction ratio of the corrected amounts of PCR products indicates between 4 and 7 total copies of the reporter ( Figure 1—figure supplement 2F ) . Widefield microscopy and image processing Microscopy data acquisition from Figure 1 , Figure 2 and Figure 6A , E – G ( and associated supple - ments ) and Videos 1 to 3 was performed using a custom build wide - field microscope ( described in greater details in Ferguson and Larson , 2013 ) . It consists in an AxioObserver inverted microscope ( Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) with a high aperture objective ( Zeiss 63× C - Apochromat ) and two Evolve 512 EMCCD cameras ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . Excitation sources are 488 nm and 594 nm lasers ( Excelsior , Spectra Physics , Santa Clara , CA ) . Typical laser intensities are 250 μ W and 50 μ W respectively . For imaging Cerulean , we used a 445 LED ( Zeiss Colibri ) or an X - Cite lamp ( Lumen Dynamics ) . Cells were imaged in 35 - mm MatTek dishes ( MatTek , Ashland , MA ) placed in a Tokai Hit stage incubator ( INUB - LPS , Shizuoka - ken , Japan ) . Average temperature inside the dish was measured at 37°C using a ther - mocouple . Images were taken every 10 s as z - stacks ( 7 or 9 images , Δ z = 0 . 5 μ m ) and in both color simultaneously with two cameras , using an exposure time of 100 ms and for a duration between 45 and 512 frames . Raw images were collected using MicroManager software ( Edelstein et al . , 2001 ) . Maximum intensity projections were computed ( e . g . Video 1 ) and used for tracking . Video 3 was obtained using a shorter exposure time ( 50 ms ) to observe the fluctuations due to diffusing RNAs . Bicolor fluorescence time traces at the transcription site were generated using a custom software written in IDL ( Source code 1 ) that was previously described , with minor modifications to handle bicolor data sets . In each image , diffraction - limited spots are detected using band - pass filtering and refined using an iterative Gaussian mask localization procedure ( Crocker and Grier , 1996 ; Thompson et al . , 2002 ; Larson et al . , 2005 , 2011 ) . Trajectories are then generated based on a nearest - neighbor method with a maximal jump distance threshold . If no spot is detected within the threshold distance , the previous location is used as the initial guess for the iterative Gaussian mask localization procedure . Integrated fluorescence intensity over the diffraction - limited spot is collected using a Gaussian mask fit after local background subtraction ( Thompson et al . , 2002 ) . An example of time - lapse video with tracking is shown in Videos 2 . Time traces were corrected for photobleaching as follows . In an ideal experiment , the fluorescence intensity histogram of the whole nucleus should stay roughly unchanged throughout the acquisition . We computed smoothed versions ( polynomial fit ) of the mean and standard deviation ( s . d . ) of this histogram in each color over time . Time traces from TS tracking were then normalized by the s . d . Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 15 of 22 Research article ( because of the background subtraction in the tracking procedure , only the s . d . of the nucleus histo - gram acts as a scale factor on a time trace ) . Traces were inspected for ( i ) accurate tracking ( portions of inacurate tracking were trimmed off ; short traces ( < 100 frames ) were discarded ) , ( ii ) in - focus TS ( traces where TS reaches the first or last z - plan were discarded ) , and ( iii ) signal to noise ratio ( highly noisy traces were discarded ) . Examples are shown on Figure 1C and Figure 2—figure supplement 1A . Fluctuation analysis For each time trace , autocorrelation and crosscorrelation functions were computed as 〈 〉 〈 〉〈 〉 ab G ( ) = a ( t ) b ( t + ) / a ( t ) b ( t ) τ δ δ τ where < · > denotes time average , δ a ( t ) means a ( t ) - á a ( t ) ñ , and a ( t ) and b ( t ) can be any combination of the red and green time traces r ( t ) and g ( t ) . Correlation functions were computed using a multi - tau algorithm ( Wohland et al . , 2001 ) , which iteratively down - samples the signals for increasing time delay . This yields a somewhat uniform spac - ing of time delay points on a logarithmic scale , reducing the sampling noise at long delays while keeping a high temporal resolution at short delays . When shifting the two signals , non - overlapping ends are not wrapped . See Figure 2—figure supplement 1A for examples of correlation functions from single traces . To reach better statistical convergence , correlation functions from single time traces were averaged together ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1B ) . Each point of the single - trace correlation functions was given a weight corresponding to the number of overlapping time points from the signals used in its computation . Bootstrapping was performed to obtain standard error of the mean correlation functions ( SEM ) . Two normalizations were performed prior to bootstrapping : ( i ) Baseline subtraction : Slow pro - cesses ( e . g . bursting , cell cycle ) may produce a slow decay which adds up to the fast transcription / splicing kinetics . These are usually well separated ; see how the decay is much slower after 200 – 300 s on Figure 2—figure supplement 1B – F . The baseline subtraction gets rid of the slow decay , approxi - mating it as a constant offset at short delays . ( ii ) Normalization with null - delay crosscorrelation G rg ( 0 ) : All 4 correlation functions were normalized using an estimate of G rg ( 0 ) . This was done for 2 reasons : ( a ) doing this normalization prior to bootstrapping promotes a good convergence of the crosscorrelation at short delays 0 ( the most informative part of the correlation functions ; See Supplementary file 1 — § 2 ) . This constrains the fits to capture precisely the temporal features at short delays . ( b ) This normalization reduces by 1 the number of free parameters of all the models used to fit the data : On unnormalized correlation functions , changing the initiation rate of transcription simply scales up and down all 4 cor - relation functions together ( See Supplementary file 1 — § 1 ) . Normalizing them gets rid of this degree of freedom . Because most of the time G rg ( 0 ) is inaccurate due to shot noise and / or small tracking error ( e . g . Figure 2—figure supplement 1C , E , F ) , we use the estimate ( G rg ( Δ t ) + G gr ( Δ t ) ) / 2 instead ( Δ t = 10 s is the sampling time ) . Confocal microscopy and image processing We performed imaging with a confocal laser scanning microscope to observe single RNAs diffusing in the nucleus ( Figure 4 , Figure 6B – C [ associated supplements ] , Figure 2—figure supplement 6 and Videos 5 to 7 ) . Imaging was performed on a Zeiss 780 confocal microscope with 488 / 594 nm excitation . To detect and localize RNAs in the nucleus , we used the same spot - localization algorithm as for widefield microscopy ( Figure 4—figure supplement 1B ) . False positive spots due to nucleoli or local - ized outside of the nucleus were eliminated using a standard masking procedure . Spots were detected independently in both channels ( intron and exon ) in 9 videos of 50 frames on average taken with a 3 . 26 s frame interval . Pairs of red and green spots colocalized by less than 250 nm ( Figure 4—figure supplement 1C ) were hence considered single bi - color particles . The TS was tracked and used as a reference for radial distributions of particles ( Figure 4C , Figure 4—figure supplement 1D ) . These distributions were normalized by the distribution obtained for random locations in the nucleus ( i . e . , a value of 1 observed indicates a purely uniform distribution ) . RNAs in the nucleus being relatively sparse , colocalized particles are expected to be mostly true positive , that is unspliced RNAs . On the other hand , a proportion of the red - only and green - only particles may be false positive ( e . g . , bi - color RNA only detected in one color ) . mRNAs being much more abundant than pre - mRNA ( Figure 4A ) , green - only spots should only have a small portion of false positives . It is however difficult to estimate Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 16 of 22 Research article what portion of the red - only spots truly represents free lariat and what is a wrong detection / categorization of pre - mRNA . The fact that the red - only radial distributions and the co - localized radial distribution are very similar suggests that red - only spots have a high proportion of false positives ( Figure 4—figure supplement 1D ) and that lariat lifetime is likely shorter than that of post - release pre - mRNA ( i . e . < 13 s ) . Depletion at distances shorter than 1 μ m is due to the difficulty for the spot - localization algorithm to locate two spots closer than this distance . The radial distribution of colo - calized red – green spots was fit to a Gaussian distribution with three parameters : standard deviation σ , height h , and baseline y 0 ( Figure 4—figure supplement 1E ) . We determined the diffusion coefficient of RNAs in the nucleus using raster image correlation spec - troscopy ( RICS ) ( Brown et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure 4—figure supplement 2 ) . Imaging was performed in photon counting mode . Time series of 10 frames and 512 × 512 pixels were taken with a 100 μ s pixel dwell time , 61 ms line scanning time , and 52 nm pixel size . The 1 / e2 beam waist was determined to be 246 nm in the green channel and 375 nm in the red channel by fitting a 2D Gaussian to a profile through the diffraction limited transcription site . Correlation functions were calculated and fit to a two component diffusion model using the Globals software package developed at the Laboratory for Fluorescence Dynamics at the University of California at Irvine ( http : / / www . lfd . uci . edu / globals / ) . Based on the distribution of unspliced transcripts around the TS ( i . e . , normal distribution with σ = 2 . 421 μ m ± 0 . 087 ) and a diffusion coefficient of D = 0 . 12 μ m 2 / s , we deduce that the splicing time following release is on average σ 2 / 4D = 12 . 71 s ± 0 . 92 . We applied the same analysis to confocal vid - eos obtained on cells transfected with wild - type or mutant version of U2AF1 ( Figure 4—figure sup - plement 1E ) . We also used confocal images to normalize the intensity of the transcription site by the intensity of single transcripts , allowing us to count the number of nascent transcripts in both channels ( Figure 2— figure supplement 6 ) . The results were in agreement with the transcription and splicing kinetic param - eters we found in our modeling analysis ( Table 1 ) . Fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) To confirm our results obtained on a reporter gene , we performed FISH on the endogenous gene FXR1 ( fragile X mental retardation ) . FXR1 was identified by Brooks et al . ( 2014 ) as being alternatively spliced in the presence of U2AF1 - S34F mutation ( i . e . , higher retention of the second to last exon ) . According to our whole genome sequencing data ( See above ) , FXR1 is at a tetraploid locus in our line of U2 - OS cells . We designed 48 probes in the second to last intron ( right upstream the alternatively spliced exon ) and 48 probes in the exons of FXR1 that are common between all the RefSeq variants , and excluding the two last exons ( Figure 6E ) . Probes were generally 20 nucleotides . Intronic and exonic probe sets were synthesized and labeled with cyanine dyes Cy3 and Cy5 , respectively , by Biosearch Technologies ( Petaluma , CA ) . U2 - OS cells from the same cell line as in the rest of our study were grown on coverslips and transfected with wild type ( wt ) or mutant ( S34F ) U2AF1 labelled with Cerulean fluorescent pro - tein , 24 hr prior to fixation . Fixation and hybridization were performed according to the Stellaris RNA FISH protocol ( Biosearch Technologies , Petaluma , CA ) . Coverslips were mounted on microscope slides using mounting media with DAPI ( ProLong Gold antifade reagent , Life Technologies ) . Imaging was performed on the same widefield microscope as described above . Light sources for imaging DAPI , Cy3 , Cy5 , and Cerulean were 365 nm , 530 nm , 625 nm , and 445 nm LEDs respectively , from a Zeiss Colibri ( Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) . The detector was a Hamamatsu ORCA - R2 C10600 camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics , Japan ) . Fields of view were selected for cells with low levels of U2AF1 - Cerulean and stacks of nine images with z - step of 0 . 5 μ m were acquired in four colors . Maximum intensity pro - jection images were used for analysis . Diffraction limited spots were identified in the Cy3 and Cy5 channels independently using the same software as above . Nuclear masks were generated from the DAPI channel using CellProfiler software ( Broad Institute , http : / / www . cellprofiler . org ) . Spots within 200 nm of each other were paired and considered a bicolor particle . Bicolor particles with a fluores - cence more than a twofold of that of single RNAs were considered transcription sites ( TS ) . The measured number of mRNA ( exon only particles ) was similar with wild - type U2AF1 ( 29 . 9 mRNA / nucleus ) and with the mutant ( 35 . 5 mRNA / nucleus ) . However , the fraction of pre - mRNAs over total nuclear RNAs was significantly different : 6 . 0 % ( ±0 . 3 ) with the wild type and 16 . 0 % ( ±0 . 4 ) with the mutant ( Figure 6F ) . Radial distributions were obtained by computing the distance between single RNAs and all the TSs in a nucleus . Normalized density shown in Figure 6G is the density of pre - mRNA Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 17 of 22 Research article over the density of mRNA . The enrichment at short distances was fit with a Gaussian distribution as for the confocal data . The standard deviation parameter reveals that the local enrichment for pre - mRNA near TSs is broader with U2AF1 - S34F ( 1 . 83 ± 0 . 49 μ m ) than with U2AF1 - wt ( 0 . 48 ± 0 . 19 μ m ) . Note that the non - null baseline in the radial distributions also reveals a second population of pre - mRNAs which are spliced slower than diffusion in the nucleus . The proportion of this second population as well as its spatial distribution is not affected by U2AF1 - S34F mutation . Mechanistic models for RNA synthesis and processing In Supplementary file 1 — § 2 , we showed how different features in the geometry of the correlation functions ( e . g . , position of specific angles , decay times , change of slope , … ) are reflecting different aspects of the transcription / splicing kinetics ( e . g . , elongation speed , intron and exon dwell times , stochastic co - and post transcriptional splicing , … ) . Here , we want to build mathematical models that fully predict the correlation functions given ( i ) a certain underlying mechanism and ( ii ) a set of parameters . In essence , we want to ask what molecular mechanisms are consistent with all the above - mentioned kinetic features—and possibly more—that the correlation functions are encoding . The caveat is however that these models necessarily make assump - tions on the underlying mechanisms . Hence , we take a general approach in generating a series of simple models ( each assuming different mechanisms ) and assess which one ( s ) account for the experimental data . Generic approach To generate a series of 21 minimalistic competing models , we adopt a strategy in two steps . The first step consists in formulating five different general mechanistic schemes , each assuming a different causality relationship between transcription and splicing ( Figure 2—figure supplement 4 ) : •scheme I assumes that splicing is entirely post - release , •scheme II assumes no interdependence between splicing and transcription / release , •schemes III , IV , and V assume three different checkpoint mechanisms between transcription and splicing ( i . e . , one process waits for the other ) . These schemes are formulated in a generic way by describing the delays between key events in the transcription / splicing process as arbitrary distributions A ( t ) , B ( t ) , C ( t ) , D ( t ) , E ( t ) , and F ( t ) , as shown on Figure 2—figure supplement 4 . Using this generic description , we are able to derive the general expressions of the correlation functions for each scheme ( Supplementary file 1 —Appendix 2 ) . The sec - ond step is to generate multiple simple models from each of these schemes by affecting A ( t ) , B ( t ) , C ( t ) , D ( t ) , E ( t ) , and F ( t ) with particular distributions . For instance , in a model where everything is deterministic , all the distributions will be Diracs . If a certain step includes a stochastic pause , it will involve an exponen - tial distribution . If a step results from the succession of several biochemical reactions , it will involve a gamma distribution . Supplementary file 2 summarizes all the different models we derived from each scheme . For each of these models ( described thereafter ) , changing the parameter value ( s ) produces dif - ferent sets of correlation curves . We fit these correlation curves to the experimental data ( see exam - ples for the untreated condition on Figure 2—figure supplement 5A – F ) by fitting all four experimental correlation functions at once . We used a Levenberg - Marquardt non - linear least square fitting proce - dure , giving twice more weight to the crosscorrelations since they carry more information . Only time points up to typically 350 ∼ 500 s were used . Fit quality was compared between models using a Bayesian Information Criterion ( BIC , See Supplementary file 1 —Appendix 3 ) on Figure 2—figure supplement 5 ( the lower the BIC , the better the fit ) . The BIC favors simpler models : if two models with different number of parameters fit equally well the data , the BIC penalizes the one with extra degrees of free - dom so that only the simplest model is retained . In addition , as indicated in Supplementary file 2 , each model may or may not be consistent with : •the geometrical properties of G rg ( 0 ) described in the previous section ( Figure 2—figure supple - ment 2C – D ; example , scheme I necessarily yields a flat G rg ( 0 + ) by construction ) , or •the fact that transcripts can be released unspliced from the transcription site ( Figure 4A – B ) . Details of schemes and models Schematics of each scheme are shown on Figure 2—figure supplement 4 and the models gener - ated from them are listed in Supplementary file 2 . The general forms of the correlation functions are derived in Supplementary file 1 —Appendix 2 . Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 18 of 22 Research article Scheme I—splicing is post - release Here , the red signal always remains as long as the RNA is being transcribed and drops coincidentally with the green signal , when the transcript is released . Model I . 1 is the simplest possible : it assumes that everything is deterministic , that elongation proceeds with a constant speed , and that transcript release is instantaneous . It has a single parameter v , representing the speed of the polymerase . In models I . 2 , we add an elongation pause between the two cassettes . This can represent a pause any - where between the cassettes , such as , in particular , right after the 3 ′ splice site ( 3 ′ ss ) . This model has two parameters : the elongation speed v and the mean pause time ps . Model I . 3 is constructed simi - larly by introducing an exponentially distributed pause at the 3 ′ end of the gene . Model I . 4 includes pauses both after the 3 ′ ss and at the 3 ′ end of the gene . Scheme II—no crosstalk between transcription and splicing Once the 3 ′ ss is passed , splicing and transcription proceed independently and may complete in either order for different transcripts as a result of their own stochastic kinetics . The red signal drops either when splicing occurs ( after F ( t ) ) or when the transcript is released ( after E ( t ) ) , whichever of the two happens first . Models II . 1 and II . 2 consider a deterministic elongation ( equivalent of model I . 1 ) with either a deterministic or a stochastic splicing time . Models II . 3 to II . 5 include a pause at the 3 ′ ss , at the 3 ′ end of the gene , or at both ( as for models I . 2 to I . 4 ) , but also include here a deterministic splicing time . Of all the models described so far , the experimental data is best fit by model II . 4 where splicing is deterministic and 3 ′ end dwell time exponential . Hence , we generated three other closely related models : II . 6 where splicing is exponential and 3 ′ end dwell time deterministic , II . 7 where both are exponential , and II . 8 where 3 ′ end dwell time is exponential and splicing follows a gamma distribution . Scheme III—checkpoint at 3 ′ splice site : Elongation pauses after the 3 ′ ss until intron is spliced This is an obligatory checkpoint because splicing has to complete before the polymerase keeps elon - gating , as opposed to models II . 3 and II . 5 where there is a pause after the 3 ′ ss regardless of the splic - ing kinetics . By construction , the red signal always drops before the green signal starts rising . Hence , G rg ( 0 ) is necessarily null and flat on both sides of the y - axis ( first case of Figure 2—figure supple - ment 2C ) , making it obviously unable to fit our experimental data . For the sake of illustration , we derived two models , respectively with an exponential and a deterministic splicing / pausing time . Both fit very badly the experimental data ( Figure 2—figure supplement 5D ) . Scheme IV—checkpoint at exon end / termination site Splicing can only take place after the polymerase has reached the termination site ( or the 3 ′ end of the last exon ) . Once splicing happens , release of the transcript may require an extra time ( distribution F ( t ) ) . In models IV . 1 to IV . 3 , when the polymerase reaches the termination site , splicing occurs either imme - diately ( IV . 1 ) , or after an exponentially ( IV . 2 ) or gamma distributed ( IV . 3 ) delay . Then , the RNA is released after an exponentially distributed time ( e . g . , for additional 3 ′ end processing ) . These three cases cor - respond to a checkpoint mechanism that holds the splicing process respectively at its last biochem - ical step , or at 1 or several steps prior to its completion . In this scheme , RNAs cannot be released unspliced . So the only possibility for G rg ( 0 ) to show both a break of slope and a rising slope at 0 + would be that splicing and release occur simultaneously for a fraction of the transcripts . Hence , we built model IV . 4 which is similar to model IV . 2 except that , for a fraction of the transcripts , release is imme - diate after splicing . This corresponds to a mechanism where both splicing and RNA 3 ′ - end processing take ( independent ) exponential times after the termination site is reached , but the RNA is only released when both processes have come to completion . Scheme V—checkpoint for release After the polymerase has passed the 3 ′ ss , elongation and splicing happen independently of each other as in scheme II . However , here , the transcript can only be released after the intron is removed . In models V . 1 to V . 3 , the splicing time is respectively deterministic , exponentially distributed , or follows a gamma distribution , corresponding to different number of biochemical reaction in the splicing process . Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 19 of 22 Research article Model comparison Evaluating all the models on each experimental data set ( Figure 2—figure supplement 5 ) using the Bayesian Information Criterion ( BIC , Supplementary file 1 —Appendix 3 ) , we find that , the most likely models are either II . 4 or IV . 4 in the control case , as well as in many of the other cases . Models IV . 3 and V . 3 perform well in a number of cases , but only V . 3 is consistent with all the geometric features of G rg ( 0 ) ( Supplementary file 2 ) , making it also a good candidate to explain the data . Complementary to the BIC , a visual inspection of the fits ( Figure 2—figure supplement 5A – F ) also illustrates how the different models perform . In particular , how badly models II . 1 to II . 3 fit the data indicates the need for a pause at 3 ′ end . To conclude our modeling and data fitting analysis , three candidate models are able to reproduce the data accurately : II . 4 , IV . 4 , and V . 3 . All three models agree on the following : •the delay between splicing and release is stochastic , •only a fraction of the RNAs are spliced strictly before release , •pre - release splicing occurs mostly ( or exclusively ) at the 3 ′ end of the gene , •all three models give similar values for delays between events at the transcription site ( so that any may be used to report these delays ) . These models differ on the causality between events : whether splicing and transcription are inde - pendent or one waits for the other cannot be known purely from the correlation curves them - selves . Model II . 4 , however , appears as the simplest of all three since it assumes independence instead of a checkpoint mechanism and has only three parameters . In addition , several strong lines of evidence point toward model II . 4 . Indeed , only this model is consistent with the following observations : •inhibiting splicing does not affect 3 ′ - end dwell time ( Table 1 ) , •inhibiting elongation does not affect splicing time ( Table 1 ) , •some unspliced RNAs can be released from the transcription site ( Figure 4 and Video 5 ) . These observations argue that splicing and transcription are independent . Hence , we conclude that model II . 4 is the most likely mechanism and use it in the main article to report parameter values . Error on model parameters and statistical tests We used error propagation from the correlation functions to obtain SEM on the fitting parameters . To assess statistical significance in Table 1 , a standard two - sided z - test was systematically performed , for each model parameter , between the untreated condition and all the other conditions . Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Tom Johnson and Joseph Rodriguez for assistance with qRT - PCR and Nico Sturman and Arthur Edelstein for help with µManager . Spliceostatin A was a kind gift from M . Yoshida , RIKEN ASI . U2AF1 ( wt and S34F ) were provided by Angus Lamond and Peter Aplan . Aaron Hoskins and Joseph Rodriguez provided critical feedback on the manuscript . The cell line was sequenced by the sequencing facility of NCI , Frederick . The authors would like to acknowledge initial support from R01GM086217 to Robert Singer . The authors thank members of the Janelia Farm / HHMI Transcription Imaging Consortium for helpful discussions . Additional information Funding Funder Grant reference number Author National Cancer Institute 1ZIABC011383 - 03 Matthew L Ferguson , Murali Palangat , Daniel R Larson National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Antoine Coulon , Carson C Chow The funders had no role in study design , data collection and interpretation , or the decision to submit the work for publication . Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 20 of 22 Research article Author contributions AC , MLF , Conception and design , Acquisition of data , Analysis and interpretation of data , Drafting or revising the article ; VT , Conception and design , Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents ; MP , Acquisition of data , Analysis and interpretation of data , Drafting or revising the article ; CCC , Analysis and interpretation of data , Drafting or revising the article ; DRL , Conception and design , Analysis and interpretation of data , Drafting or revising the article Author ORCIDs Matthew L Ferguson , http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 0760 - 757X Valeria de Turris , http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 0872 - 185X Daniel R Larson , http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0001 - 9253 - 3055 Additional files Supplementary files • Supplementary file 1 . Mathematical analysis of the correlation functions . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 028 • Supplementary file 2 . Models from mechanistic schemes . From each scheme depicted in Figure 2— figure supplement 4 , we derive a series of models by simply affecting the arbitrary distributions A ( t ) , B ( t ) , C ( t ) , … to specific ones ( columns Time distributions ) . Each model represents a specific mechanism ( column Description ) and involves a different number of parameters ( column Params ) . Some models may be excluded simply because , by construction , they cannot reproduce certain basic geometric properties of the crosscorrelation functions ( columns Features of G rg ( 0 ) ; properties described in Figure 2—figure supplement 2C ) , or because they do not allow for unspliced transcripts to be released ( last column ) , as observed experimentally ( Figure 4 , Figure 4—figure supplement 1 and Video 5 ) . 3 ′ ss : 3 ′ splice site . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 029 • Source code 1 . Source code and executable file for the spot tracking software . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 . 032 References Aitken S , Alexander RD , Beggs JD . 2011 . Modelling reveals kinetic advantages of co - transcriptional splicing . PLOS Computational Biology 7 : e1002215 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1002215 . Alexander RD , Barrass JD , Dichtl B , Kos M , Obtulowicz T , Robert MC , Koper M , Karkusiewicz I , Mariconti L , Tollervey D , Dichtl B , Kufel J , Bertrand E , Beggs JD . 2010 . RiboSys , a high - resolution , quantitative approach to measure the in vivo kinetics of pre - mRNA splicing and 3 ′ - end processing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . RNA 16 : 2570 – 2580 . doi : 10 . 1261 / rna . 2162610 . Baurén G , Belikov S , Wieslander L . 1998 . Transcriptional termination in the Balbiani ring 1 gene is closely coupled to 3 ′ - end formation and excision of the 3 ′ - terminal intron . Genes & Development 12 : 2759 – 2769 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 12 . 17 . 2759 . Bentley DL . 2014 . Coupling mRNA processing with transcription in time and space . Nature Reviews Genetics 15 : 163 – 175 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg3662 . Berget S , Moore C , Sharp P . 1977 . Spliced segments at the 5 ' terminus of adenovirus 2 late mRNA . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 74 : 3171 – 3175 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 74 . 8 . 3171 . Bertrand E , Chartrand P , Schaefer M , Shenoy SM , Singer RH , Long RM . 1998 . Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Molecular Cell 2 : 437 – 445 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 00 ) 80143 - 4 . Bhatt DM , Pandya - Jones A , Tong AJ , Barozzi I , Lissner MM , Natoli G , Black DL , Smale ST . 2012 . Transcript dynamics of proinflammatory genes revealed by sequence analysis of subcellular RNA fractions . Cell 150 : 279 – 290 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 043 . Bird G , Fong N , Gatlin JC , Farabaugh S , Bentley DL . 2005 . Ribozyme cleavage reveals connections between mRNA release from the site of transcription and pre - mRNA processing . Molecular Cell 20 : 747 – 758 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2005 . 11 . 009 . Boireau S , Maiuri P , Basyuk E , de la Mata M , Knezevich A , Pradet - Balade B , Bäcker V , Kornblihtt A , Marcello A , Bertrand E . 2007 . The transcriptional cycle of HIV - 1 in real - time and live cells . The Journal of Cell Biology 179 : 291 – 304 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200706018 . Brody Y , Neufeld N , Bieberstein N , Causse SZ , Böhnlein EM , Neugebauer KM , Darzacq X , Shav - Tal Y . 2011 . The in vivo kinetics of RNA polymerase II elongation during co - transcriptional splicing . PLOS Biology 9 : e1000573 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000573 . Brooks AN , Choi PS , de Waal L , Sharifnia T , Imielinski M , Saksena G , Pedamallu CS , Sivachenko A , Rosenberg M , Chmielecki J , Lawrence MS , DeLuca DS , Getz G , Meyerson M . 2014 . A pan - cancer analysis of transcriptome Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 21 of 22 Research article changes associated with somatic mutations in U2AF1 reveals commonly altered splicing events . PLOS ONE 9 : e87361 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0087361 . Brown CM , Dalal RB , Hebert B , Digman MA , Horwitz AR , Gratton E . 2008 . Raster image correlation spectroscopy ( RICS ) for measuring fast protein dynamics and concentrations with a commercial laser scanning confocal microscope . Journal of Microscopy 229 : 78 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2007 . 01871 . x . Buenrostro JD , Araya CL , Chircus LM , Layton CJ , Chang HY , Snyder MP , Greenleaf WJ . 2014 . Quantitative analysis of RNA - protein interactions on a massively parallel array reveals biophysical and evolutionary land - scapes . Nature Biotechnology 32 : 562 – 568 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt . 2880 . Carrillo Oesterreich F , Preibisch S , Neugebauer KM . 2010 . Global analysis of nascent RNA reveals transcriptional pausing in terminal exons . Molecular Cell 40 : 571 – 581 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2010 . 11 . 004 . Castello A , Fischer B , Eichelbaum K , Horos R , Beckmann BM , Strein C , Davey NE , Humphreys DT , Preiss T , Steinmetz LM , Krijgsveld J , Hentze MW . 2012 . Insights into RNA Biology from an Atlas of mammalian mRNA - binding proteins . Cell 149 : 1393 – 1406 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 04 . 031 . Chao JA , Patskovsky Y , Almo SC , Singer RH . 2008 . Structural basis for the coevolution of a viral RNA - protein complex . Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 15 : 103 – 105 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb1327 . Chen L , Tovar - Corona JM , Urrutia AO . 2011 . Increased levels of noisy splicing in cancers , but not for oncogene - derived transcripts . Human Molecular Genetics 20 : 4422 – 4429 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddr370 . Chubb JR , Trcek T , Shenoy SM , Singer RH . 2006 . Transcriptional pulsing of a developmental gene . Current Biology 16 : 1018 – 1025 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 03 . 092 . Churchman LS , Weissman JS . 2011 . Nascent transcript sequencing visualizes transcription at nucleotide resolu - tion . Nature 469 : 368 – 373 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09652 . Core LJ , Waterfall JJ , Lis JT . 2008 . Nascent RNA sequencing reveals widespread pausing and divergent initiation at human promoters . Science 322 : 1845 – 1848 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1162228 . Corrionero A , Miñana B , Valcárcel J . 2011 . Reduced fidelity of branch point recognition and alternative splicing induced by the anti - tumor drug spliceostatin A . Genes & Development 25 : 445 – 459 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 2014311 . Crocker JC , Grier DG . 1996 . Methods of Digital Video Microscopy for Colloidal Studies . Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 179 : 298 – 310 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jcis . 1996 . 0217 . Darzacq X , Shav - Tal Y , de Turris V , Brody Y , Shenoy SM , Phair RD , Singer RH . 2007 . In vivo dynamics of RNA polymerase II transcription . Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 14 : 796 – 806 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb1280 . de la Mata M , Alonso CR , Kadener S , Fededa JP , Blaustein MA , Pelisch F , Cramer P , Bentley D , Kornblihtt AR . 2003 . A slow RNA polymerase II affects alternative splicing in vivo . Molecular Cell 12 : 525 – 532 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2003 . 08 . 001 . Dumesic PA , Natarajan P , Chen C , Drinnenberg IA , Schiller BJ , Thompson J , Moresco JJ , Yates JR III , Bartel DP , Madhani HD . 2013 . Stalled spliceosomes are a signal for RNAi - mediated genome defense . Cell 152 : 957 – 968 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 01 . 046 . Edelstein A , Amodaj N , Hoover K , Vale R , Stuurman N . 2001 . Computer control of microscopes using µManager . Current Protocols in Molecular Biology Chapter 14 : Unit14 . 20 . doi : 10 . 1002 / 0471142727 . mb1420s92 . Femino AM , Fay FS , Fogarty K , Singer RH . 1998 . Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science 280 : 585 – 590 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 280 . 5363 . 585 . Ferguson M , Larson D . 2013 . Measuring transcription dynamics in living cells using fluctuation analysis . In : Shav - Tal Y , editor . Imaging gene expression . Humana Press . p . 47 – 60 . Glover - Cutter K , Kim S , Espinosa J , Bentley DL . 2008 . RNA polymerase II pauses and associates with pre - mRNA processing factors at both ends of genes . Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 15 : 71 – 78 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb1352 . Golding I , Paulsson J , Zawilski SM , Cox EC . 2005 . Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual Bacteria . Cell 123 : 1025 – 1036 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 09 . 031 . Graubert TA , Shen D , Ding L , Okeyo - Owuor T , Lunn CL , Shao J , Krysiak K , Harris CC , Koboldt DC , Larson DE , McLellan MD , Dooling DJ , Abbott RM , Fulton RS , Schmidt H , Kalicki - Veizer J , O ' Laughlin M , Grillot M , Baty J , Heath S , Frater JL , Nasim T , Link DC , Tomasson MH , Westervelt P , DiPersio JF , Mardis ER , Ley TJ , Wilson RK , Walter MJ . 2012 . Recurrent mutations in the U2AF1 splicing factor in myelodysplastic syndromes . Nature Genetics 44 : 53 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 1031 . Hah N , Danko CG , Core L , Waterfall JJ , Siepel A , Lis JT , Kraus WL . 2011 . A rapid , extensive , and transient transcriptional response to estrogen signaling in breast cancer cells . Cell 145 : 622 – 634 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 03 . 042 . Hocine S , Raymond P , Zenklusen D , Chao JA , Singer RH . 2013 . Single - molecule analysis of gene expression using two - color RNA labeling in live yeast . Nature Methods 10 : 119 – 121 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2305 . Hofer E , Darnell JE Jnr . 1981 . The primary transcription unit of the mouse β - Major globin gene . Cell 23 : 585 – 593 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 81 ) 90154 - 9 . Hoskins AA , Friedman LJ , Gallagher SS , Crawford DJ , Anderson EG , Wombacher R , Ramirez N , Cornish VW , Gelles J , Moore MJ . 2011 . Ordered and dynamic assembly of single spliceosomes . Science 331 : 1289 – 1295 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1198830 . Huranová M , Ivani I , Benda A , Poser I , Brody Y , Hof M , Shav - Tal Y , Neugebauer KM , Stan ě k D . 2010 . The differential interaction of snRNPs with pre - mRNA reveals splicing kinetics in living cells . The Journal of Cell Biology 191 : 75 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201004030 . Janicki SM , Tsukamoto T , Salghetti SE , Tansey WP , Sachidanandam R , Prasanth KV , Ried T , Shav - Tal Y , Bertrand E , Singer RH , Spector DL . 2004 . From Silencing to gene expression : real - time analysis in single cells . Cell 116 : 683 – 698 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 04 ) 00171 - 0 . Biophysics and structural biology | Genes and chromosomes Coulon et al . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03939 . DOI : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03939 22 of 22 Research article Kaida D , Motoyoshi H , Tashiro E , Nojima T , Hagiwara M , Ishigami K , Watanabe H , Kitahara T , Yoshida T , Nakajima H , Tani T , Horinouchi S , Yoshida M . 2007 . Spliceostatin A targets SF3b and inhibits both splicing and nuclear retention of pre - mRNA . Nature Chemical Biology 3 : 576 – 583 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchembio . 2007 . 18 . Larson DR , Fritzsch C , Sun L , Meng X , Lawrence DS , Singer RH . 2013 . Direct observation of frequency modulated transcription in single cells using light activation . eLife 2 : e00750 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 00750 . Larson DR , Johnson MC , Webb WW , Vogt VM . 2005 . Visualization of retrovirus budding with correlated light and electron microscopy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 102 : 15453 – 15458 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0504812102 . Larson DR , Zenklusen D , Wu B , Chao JA , Singer RH . 2011 . Real - time observation of transcription initiation and elongation on an endogenous yeast gene . Science 332 : 475 – 478 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1202142 . Larson MH , Mooney RA , Peters JM , Windgassen T , Nayak D , Gross CA , Block SM , Greenleaf WJ , Landick R , Weissman JS . 2014 . A pause sequence enriched at translation start sites drives transcription dynamics in vivo . Science 344 : 1042 – 1047 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1251871 . Lee K , Cui Y , Lee LP , Irudayaraj J . 2014 . Quantitative imaging of single mRNA splice variants in living cells . Nature Nanotechnology 9 : 474 – 480 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nnano . 2014 . 73 . Li J , Liu Y , Rhee HS , Ghosh SK , Bai L , Pugh BF , Gilmour DS . 2013 . Kinetic competition between elongation rate and binding of NELF controls promoter - proximal pausing . Molecular Cell 50 : 711 – 722 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2013 . 05 . 016 . Martin RM , Rino J , Carvalho C , Kirchhausen T , Carmo - Fonseca M . 2013 . Live - cell visualization of pre - mRNA splicing with single - molecule sensitivity . Cell Reports 4 : 1144 – 1155 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2013 . 08 . 013 . Nechaev S , Fargo DC , dos Santos G , Liu L , Gao Y , Adelman K . 2010 . Global analysis of short RNAs reveals widespread promoter - proximal stalling and arrest of Pol II in Drosophila . Science 327 : 335 – 338 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1181421 . Niwa M , Rose SD , Berget SM . 1990 . In vitro polyadenylation is stimulated by the presence of an upstream intron . Genes & Development 4 : 1552 – 1559 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 4 . 9 . 1552 . Pandya - Jones A , Bhatt DM , Lin CH , Tong AJ , Smale ST , Black DL . 2013 . Splicing kinetics and transcript release from the chromatin compartment limit the rate of Lipid A - induced gene expression . RNA 19 : 811 – 827 . doi : 10 . 1261 / rna . 039081 . 113 . Pickrell JK , Pai AA , Gilad Y , Pritchard JK . 2010 . Noisy splicing drives mRNA isoform diversity in human cells . PLOS Genetics 6 : e1001236 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1001236 . Schmidt U , Basyuk E , Robert MC , Yoshida M , Villemin JP , Auboeuf D , Aitken S , Bertrand E . 2011 . Real - time imaging of cotranscriptional splicing reveals a kinetic model that reduces noise : implications for alternative splicing regulation . The Journal of Cell Biology 193 : 819 – 829 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201009012 . Shcherbakova I , Hoskins AA , Friedman LJ , Serebrov V , Corrêa IR Jnr , Xu MQ , Gelles J , Moore MJ . 2013 . Alternative spliceosome assembly pathways revealed by single - molecule fluorescence microscopy . Cell Reports 5 : 151 – 165 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2013 . 08 . 026 . Singh J , Padgett RA . 2009 . Rates of in situ transcription and splicing in large human genes . Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 16 : 1128 – 1133 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 1666 . TCGA 2012 . Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours . Nature 490 : 61 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature11412 . Thompson RE , Larson DR , Webb WW . 2002 . Precise nanometer localization analysis for individual fluorescent probes . Biophysical Journal 82 : 2775 – 2783 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 02 ) 75618 - X . Vargas DY , Shah K , Batish M , Levandoski M , Sinha S , Marras SA , Schedl P , Tyagi S . 2011 . Single - molecule imaging of transcriptionally coupled and uncoupled splicing . Cell 147 : 1054 – 1065 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 10 . 024 . Waks Z , Klein AM , Silver PA . 2011 . Cell ‐ to ‐ cell variability of alternative RNA splicing . Molecular Systems Biology 7 : 506 . doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2011 . 32 . Waterfall JJ , Arons E , Walker RL , Pineda M , Roth L , Killian JK , Abaan OD , Davis SR , Kreitman RJ , Meltzer PS . 2014 . High prevalence of MAP2K1 mutations in variant and IGHV4 - 34 - expressing hairy - cell leukemias . Nature Genetics 46 : 8 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 2828 . Wohland T , Rigler R , Vogel H . 2001 . The standard deviation in fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Biophysical Journal 80 : 2987 – 2999 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 01 ) 76264 - 9 . Yoshida K , Sanada M , Shiraishi Y , Nowak D , Nagata Y , Yamamoto R , Sato Y , Sato - Otsubo A , Kon A , Nagasaki M , Chalkidis G , Suzuki Y , Shiosaka M , Kawahata R , Yamaguchi T , Otsu M , Obara N , Sakata - Yanagimoto M , Ishiyama K , Mori H , Nolte F , Hofmann WK , Miyawaki S , Sugano S , Haferlach C , Koeffler HP , Shih LY , Haferlach T , Chiba S , Nakauchi H , Miyano S , Ogawa S . 2011 . Frequent pathway mutations of splicing machinery in myelodysplasia . Nature 478 : 64 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature10496 . Yunger S , Rosenfeld L , Garini Y , Shav - Tal Y . 2010 . Single - allele analysis of transcription kinetics in living mamma - lian cells . Nature Methods 7 : 631 – 633 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1482 . Zenklusen D , Larson DR , Singer RH . 2008 . Single - RNA counting reveals alternative modes of gene expression in yeast . Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 15 : 1263 – 1271 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 1514 .