Exploiting Participatory Design in Open Innovation Factories Valerio Bellandi , Paolo Ceravolo , Ernesto Damiani , Fulvio Frati , Jonatan Maggesi and Li Zhu Computer Science Department Università degli Studi di Milano - Crema , Italy { valerio . bellandi , paolo . ceravolo , ernesto . damiani , fulvio . frati , jonatan . maggesi , li . zhu } @ unimi . it Abstract — In this paper we describe a methodology and a set of tools that support the exploitation of ideas , suggestions and proposals coming from different sources , internal and external to the organization ( e . g . customers and employees ) . Items extracted from incoming message flows are used as a basis of a participatory design process . In this context , we discuss the design principles of an environment we call Open Innovation Factory , supporting collaborative design of new products and services . Index Terms — Open Innovation , Innovation Factory , Collective Knowledge I . I NTRODUCTION Traditionally , large firms relied on internal Research and Development ( R & D ) to create new products . In many industries , large internal R & D labs were a strategic asset and represented a considerable entry barrier for potential rivals . According to conventional wisdom , large firms with high R & D capabilities would outperform smaller rivals [ 1 ] . This process , in which large firms run internal processes for discovering , developing and commercializing new technologies , has been labelled as a closed innovation model . Although closed innovation worked remarkably well for a long time , the current innovation landscape has changed . Due to labour mobility , abundant venture capital and widely dispersed knowledge across multiple public and private organizations , enterprises can no longer afford to innovate on their own , but rather need to engage in collaborative innovation practices . As a result , a growing number of organizations have moved to open innovation models where they employ both internal and external processes and sources to develop new technologies [ 2 ] . External actors’ involvement is a key difference between Open Innovation ( OI ) and traditional research and development . Today , most companies adopt OI processes in order to exploit inflows and outflows of knowledge for accelerating their innovation dynamics [ 2 ] . For our purposes , a major aspect of OI is bringing research and development closer to collaborative design . In this paper we show how knowledge items extracted from incoming knowledge flows can be proposed to a team composed of multiple participants , each capable of proposing values for design issues and / or evaluating these choices from her own specific perspective . In our collaborative approach , the outcome of an OI process can be regarded as an agreement between team members , to be reached via negotiation and communication . In other words , OI triggers a participatory design ( also called consensus design or collaborative problem solving ) process , which is essentially the mediation of a conflict that involves many parties . Our technique is composed of two steps : firstly , incoming flows are mined to extract knowledge items to be used as “stimuli” . Then , stimuli are fed to a recommender system in order to generate useful recommendations ( seeds ) to be presented to the innovation team , fostering collaborative development of new products or services . Periodically , partial results ( e . g . , terms extracted from on - going discussions ) are fed again to the recommender system , reseeding the collaboration . The contribution of this paper is the design of the overall software environment ( called the Innovation Factory – IF ) that supports our methodology . The IF is composed by a synchronous wiki - based Virtual Product Designer , a tool for the automatic extraction of innovative concepts and ideas from internal and external sources , and a set of recommender services used for recommending ( i ) people that can join the innovation team , and ( ii ) contents that could help in the definition of the new product or service . The IF will be developed within the ARISTOTELE FP7 research project 1 . The project aims at relating the learning process to the organizational one as well as to the innovation process management . In particular , the project focuses and relies on the three main processes that are traditionally identified in the organizational contexts : organizational processes ( marketing and communication , human resources management , business ) , learning processes ( group training sessions ) , and social collaboration processes ( spontaneous formation of groups within the organization ) . The paper is organized as follows . Section II defines the link between OI and Collaborative Design . Then , Section III describes IF methodology and Section IV introduces the IF design principles . Finally , Section V describes the IF interface , and Section VI draws our conclusions . 1 http : / / www . aristotele - ip . eu 2012 Eighth International Conference on Signal Image Technology and Internet Based Systems 978 - 0 - 7695 - 4911 - 8 / 12 $ 26 . 00 © 2012 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / SITIS . 2012 . 139 937 II . C OLLABORATIVE D ESIGN AND O PEN I NNOVATION Our approach relies on two interconnected pillars : Open Innovation and Collaborative Design . In the following sub - sections we provide the state of the art related to the two areas . A . Open Innovation A way to distinguish between traditional and open design process is looking at their approach to innovation . Traditionally innovation has been seen only as the result of a Research and Development ( R & D ) process . Today , the management community agrees nearly unanimously that improvements to classic R & D – based processes can only be carried so far . R & D resources are naturally limited in terms of funds to invest , and of qualified researchers to carry out the work . The paradigm of OI , then , has been proposed as a new model for the management of industrial innovation in the 21 st century , in which firms work with external partners both to commercialize their internal innovations and to obtain a source of external innovations that can be successfully marketed . OI brought about a paradigm shift that works in two directions : ( i ) outside - in open innovation , which consists in reaching across organizational boundaries to access innovation capabilities of external players , and ( ii ) inside - out open innovation , which deals with scenarios where an organization holds a technology but does not have the channel to market . OI sources can be classified as follows : ( i ) internal sources , composed by ideas and suggestions on new products , functionalities , and services coming from company collaborative systems , ( ii ) external sources , composed by ideas and concepts coming from external sources . B . Collaborative Design The definition of OI must be made operational by specifying collaborative techniques to develop new services or products . In fact , like user - centred design , OI is widely recognized as being ill - defined or even “wicked” [ 3 ] . In contrast to R & D problems that scientists and engineers usually focus on , which are well defined and with all the necessary information , OI process has not been subject to exhaustive analysis and there is no guaranteed correct solution [ 3 ] . Particularly relevant to the notion of IF is the one of participatory design , described as “ a democratic and participatory process ” [ 4 ] . Participatory design involves users in the design process by empowering them to propose and generate design ideas , and exploiting different techniques to support communication and collaboration within interdisciplinary teams . A major connection between participatory design and OI is the capability of involving final users and customers in assessing the potential of technological novelties in real work practice . From the IF point of view , the notions of OI and collaborative design are complementary ; in fact , collaborative design is triggered by an inflow of knowledge items , presented to a diverse innovation team , whose members are potentially capable of proposing values for design issues and / or evaluating these choices from their own specific perspective [ 5 ] . Collaboration within the innovation team fosters the emergence of a Virtual Product ( see sub - section V . A ) as a co - evolution of an artefact by stakeholders ( the innovation team members ) who have a shared understanding of the innovation goals and of the means of achieving them [ 6 ] . Exploiting collaboration of innovation team members requires appropriate solutions for resolving conflicts among them . In our methodology , reaching an agreement on innovative solutions is not only based on technical criteria , but also results from compromises between actors through negotiation and communication . III . IF O PEN I NNOVATION M ETHODOLOGY Our OI methodology relies on two fundamental concepts : the concept of Meta - design and the one of Virtual Product ( VP ) . We define a VP as a conceptual definition of a new product consisting in the identifications of the requirements , functionalities , and the competences required to develop it [ 7 ] . In turn , meta - design aims at empowering designers to modify and tune the design process rather than passively following it . Some researchers stretch the meta - design notion to the point of leaving “ the design of design environments to designers ” [ 8 ] , i . e . empowering designers to shape their own design environments . In our approach , meta - design means empowering innovation team members to act as co - designers , defining the scope and basis of their interaction at design time . In fact , our methodology extends the Seeding , Evolutionary growth , Reseeding ( SER ) stepwise process model [ 9 ] , which describes the development of systems and information repositories that evolve over time ( Fig . 1 ) . The three steps that compose the SER model are the following : 1 . Seeding : team members feed our Recommender System ( henceforth called the ARISTOTELE Recommender System - ARS [ 10 ] ) with items extracted from one or more knowledge inflows to obtain recommendations of external resources . In our IF , seeds come from external and internal knowledge inflows . Seeds do not necessarily have to be complete , since an under - designed seed engages users to use the system , and to extend and refine the innovation outcome . Fig . 1 : The Seeding , Evolutionary growth , Reseeding model ( Adapted from [ 9 ] ) 938 TABLE 1 : I NNOVATION F ACTORY D ESIGN P RINCIPLES . DP Description IF - 1 Support exploration : Searching digital libraries for related resources and thus being inspired . IF - 2 Low threshold , high ceiling , and wide walls : Users should work on projects that grow out of their own interests and passions ; which implies that creativity support tools need to support a wide range of different types of usage and projects . IF - 3 Support many paths and many styles : Important for interdisciplinary design teams’ collaboration , in that they have different ways , skills and cognitive styles to externalize their ideas . IF - 4 Support collaboration : Supporting the integration and iteration of the contributions of team members with their different strengths and talents . IF - 5 Support open interchange : Supporting extensibility , exporting and importing from other c tools . IF - 6 Make it as simple as possible : Providing the simplest ways to do the most complex things . IF - 7 Iterate , iterate and iterate again : Rapid prototyping , playing with prototypes , and improving them . IF - 8 Serendipitous meeting : Suggest , encourage new meeting , and get in touch different profile , workers with the objective to stimulate new relations . IF - 9 Stimulate new ideas : using open innovations sources is possible to stimulate , encourage and define new ideas , new products . 2 . Evolutionary Growth : team members use the IF to develop and extend the initial set of seeds according to their needs and ideas . This phase leads to the emergence of a VP , as a first incarnation of the OI process outcome . 3 . Reseeding : it occurs when incremental changes , introduced in the previous phase , stop proceeding smoothly . During this phase , ARS is used again , feeding it with the VP requirements generated in the evolutionary growth step . Recommendations help team members to organize , reformulate , and incorporate incremental changes from the second step into the VP to support the next cycle of Evolutionary growth and Reseeding . Our OI methodology is loosely controlled , as the team itself decides if and when stop reseeding and , thus , release the VP . A . Support for Creativity Creativity has been studied over decades , and many researchers have tried to define the notion of creative process , person , and even product . One of the most influential creativity models in the 20 th century is the one originally proposed by Wallas [ 11 ] . This model defines the creative process as involving the phases of Preparation , Incubation , Illumination , and Verification . Other creative process models exist , such as Osborn’s seven - step model [ 12 ] , which share with our IF a common theme , namely the dualism between imaginative idea generation and critical evaluation . Creativity is a central theme in design and innovation research , since “ design deals with making things while innovation deals with making new things ” [ 13 ] . In our IF , we support creativity by increasing serendipity in the Seeding and Reseeding phase . The rationale behind this choice is that the larger the number of ideas produced , the greater the probability of identifying a fruitful innovation . Also , the collaborative nature of VP development aims at fostering interactions with other people . Using ARS for seeding provides a contact with artefacts that embody group knowledge and previous thinking , arranging informal ways for stakeholders to share experiences , in order to articulate their collective knowledge [ 14 ] . Additionally , bringing divergent viewpoints together and creating a shared common understanding will help team members to discover new insights and alternatives , and hence to solve problems more creatively . IV . D ESIGN P RINCIPLES FOR THE IF Starting from the considerations exposed above , we are now ready to define the design principles used to set up IF’s collaborative environment to support the Open Innovation process . Collaboration , creativity , and serendipity are at the core of our IF . Work in [ 15 ] is particularly relevant to ARISTOTELE , as the authors explored computer - based tools that support creativity for interdisciplinary teams . They highlight the importance of supporting communication by developing a shared language and an understanding , as communicate and exchange creative ideas is an essential part of the creative process . According to them , a way to encourage communication is to provide lightweight tools to support polymorphic articulation of ideas . Another way to collect requirements is via focus groups . In 2006 , the National Science Foundation sponsored workshop brought together 25 leading researchers to share their expertise on creativity support tools , to develop improved software interfaces that empower users to be more productive and more innovative [ 16 ] . They defined a set of design principles to guide the development of new creativity support tools . These principles are quite different from traditional ones as they focus on easy exploration , rapid experimentation , and adventitious combinations that lead to innovation . As results of the analysis on Sections II and III , in Table 1 we provide the list of design principles for an environment supporting Open Innovation , Collaborative Design , and the SER approach . V . I NNOVATION F ACTORY I NTERFACE Design principles in Table 1 have been taken as basis for the definition of the ARISTOTELE Innovation Factory environment , under development by the SESAR Lab of the Università degli Studi di Milano . Figure 2 shows a mock - up of the interface , highlighting the three areas that compose it : 939 1 . Open Innovation Data Corpus ( Light Blue Area ) . This zone exposes the main information coming from the open innovation sources ( sub - section V . B ) . 2 . Virtual Product Designer ( Grey Area ) . The synchronous collaborative tool that allows the developing of the Virtual Product requirements ( sub - section V . C ) . 3 . Proactive Tools Area ( Brown Area ) . This area contains a set of common and ad hoc tools that support the innovation process by providing suggestions and recommendations ( sub - section V . D ) . In the IF , innovation team members are empowered to perform collaborative development as well as to tailor their environment , communication , coordination , and all aspects of collaboration , in a more fluid way according to situated problems . We use a classical accounting model defining , in details , two different user levels ( administrator and designer ) : (cid:2) Administrator : users enabled to start and setup a new innovation process . The main functionalities available of this kind of user are : o Select the OI data sources ( see sub - section V . B ) ; o Include personalized widgets ( see sub - section V . C ) ; o Involve designers in the project ( see sub - section V . D ) . (cid:2) Designer : users involved in the innovation process and deputed to design the VP . Moreover , in the IF we define two data levels : folder and sheet . The folder level characterises a new innovation process and , on setup time , do not impose a predefined structure on all design communities , but allow the sharing of specific features among selected employees . It is the collector of one or many sheets , which represent the editors where the employees design the VP . In particular , a folder describes an overall VP encompassing all the features and tools exploitable for its definition , while a sheet can be seen as a distinct area of the folder , allowing to develop a specific aspect or functionality of the VP . Therefore , a folder can contain one or more distinct sheets . The communication channels are described in [ 17 ] as “ means to support communication between designers as well as between designers and administrators ” . In our view , the IF itself acts as a communication channel : all innovation - related communication , negotiation , development , and social interactions are supported by the IF . More specifically , all the accessible folders , sheets , and widgets can be seen as a communication channel . A flexible mechanism will allow innovation teams to partition and locally configure communication . A . Virtual Product Definition The data sources of OI considered by the IF are of three types : (cid:2) Contributions coming from designers ( for example a specialist or an innovation manager ) that , manually , using their knowledge and skills , define specific requirements for a new product . (cid:2) Contributions coming from users that send comments and ideas , which can be collected and transformed in requirements to be analysed . (cid:2) Contributions coming from external sources , using software crawlers that analyse electronic resources and extract information ( see Section V . B ) . Aggregating the gathered requirements , the new VP is modelled by aggregating different inputs , and relating them to other knowledge items of the ARISTOTELE models . This aggregation provides a conceptual definition of a product instance consisting of the desired requirements or functionalities and the competences required to develop it . The schema in Fig . 2 describes the general structure of a VP , showing how a set of inputs is linked with a set of competences . In fact , the VP is first linked to the inputs triggering its development ( Req . 1 , … , Req . Z ) , and then it is related to the competences ( Comp1 , … , CompN ) necessary to support the proposed requirements . The aim of IF is to provide the specific recommendations that a team should follow in order to acquire the competences requested by a VP . In fact , the IF exploits the functionalities of Fig . 3 : Mock up of the IF user interface . Fig . 2 : General structure of a VP linking requirements and competences . 940 the ARS to compute recommendations [ 10 ] , tailored to the innovation team memebrs that develops the product . The Virtual Product Designer ( VPD ) , described in sub - section V . C , is a service specifically devoted to the identification of the requirements most relevant for innovation , and to the associations of requirements to competences . This way the VPD outcome is a VP structured by descriptors that make it comparable with other data objects of the ARISTOTELE models . B . Open Innovation Data Corpus Our methodology considers knowledge inflows as the ideas’ repository of the IF . We recall that two types of sources are considered : 1 . Internal . Data coming from sources inside the platform ( e . g . internal forum or customer care log files ) ; in the IF we define a set of automatic analysers designed to extract information from internal sources . 2 . External . Electronic data coming outside the platform , e . g . competitors’ web site , Twitter posts , etc . ; usually crawlers that collect external sources are strictly goal - dependent , and need an accurate configuration at start - up . When setting up a new IF folder , a set of data sources are selected by the current administrator . She also configures the crawlers , selecting the data sources to explore , and defining the crawler filter to specify the focus of the analysis . Regarding the internal sources , we initially define three types of data crawlers : 1 . Blog Crawler , which extracts tags from every posts or comments of a specific blog ; during the setup phase it requires to select the employee’s blog hosted in the platform . 2 . Forum Crawler , which extracts tags from each post or discussion of a forum , and , to be configured , it needs the specification of the URL of the forum to analyse . 3 . Generic Data Crawler , which analyses generic files . Regarding external data sources , each company that adopts the ARISTOTELE platform needs to implement specific software crawlers strictly dependent on the domains ( and on the document formats ) to analyse . Possible sources of external data will include : 1 . Competitor web sites . This source is important since it permits to monitor the competitor products . Data retrieved from them should represent the inspiration for new functionalities or requirements . 2 . Blog of trend setters / opinion leaders , which could help in defining new trends of the market , or new technologies that could be exploited to define new projects or update old ones . 3 . Technical or opinion forums . This source is an important point of discussion where many possible solutions or requests coming from the market can be identified . After the data source configuration step , crawlers extract a list of incoming items ( posts , documents , etc . ) potentially related to innovation , according to the filter defined by the administrator . For each item of that list , tag extraction techniques are exploited to retrieve possible tags . The list of tags , ranked with its frequency , is presented in the light blue area of Fig . , and represents the starting point of the methodology Seeding step . Each team member can select some tags , further analyse the associated items , invoke the ARS , and start to work taking the results as seeds . C . Virtual Product Designer In this sub - section we provide a description of the VPD , the synchronous collaborative environment that permits to develop ( see Section II . B ) new products or services . The VPD is a collection of wiki - style pages ( i . e . , the sheets ) that can be edited by innovation team members in order to model the new VP . We adopted the wiki architecture as VPD base structure , because the wiki architecture matches many conceptual aspects of our methodology . In fact , the VPD leverages some features of a regular wiki , like for instance collaboration , rich context , openness , and dynamic links . Beside normal wiki functionalities , VPD extends wikis with specific development functionalities , using a macro - like system to change and evolve the system along with collaboration practice . As shown in the grey area of Fig . , a VPD page consists of three parts , a header ( Projects Bar ) , that indicates the current sheet and the user’s profile information , a VPD Editor , and a side panel , that shows the active environments and widgets in the whole folder . VPD provides a common collaboration context across the system where each team member can work while being aware of the activities of others . Beyond providing tools for content production like traditional wikis , VPD allows innovation team members to collaboratively modify and create seeds , and to evolve them continuously . An important aspect of the VPD is represented by the widgets , i . e . functional blocks that can be implemented and configured by the organization that adopts the ARISTOTELE IF . While our methodology favours diversity exploiting ARS functionalities [ 10 ] , innovation team members with different cultural backgrounds will use different systems of signs , languages , devices and representations [ 18 ] . Communication is therefore needed to reach a common understanding . VPD is itself a mechanism to negotiate between divergent viewpoints regarding an object of interest . A mediation mechanism is not in itself a new idea ; but open mediation mechanisms for inspection and evolution in the innovation process have not been fully explored . In our approach , the mediation mechanism is itself defined within a wiki page , and it is open to modifications . Instead of gathering data about the innovation team members culture , role and access device , and automatically customizing information for them , our open mediation mechanism goes beyond the “perfect personalization dilemma” [ 19 ] and enables team members to decide directly what is meaningful information and how to represent it opportunistically . 941 In other words , the VDP mediation mechanism works by allowing several users to access the same data page . The same data is accessed and modified by two or more designers , while the way of representing and interacting with data can be very different . The mediation mechanism empowers team members to create appropriate information representations for seeds , as well as to configure communication channels . For instance , a team member could be hindered by the chat widget while working on a seed during the Evolutionary growth phase , and decide to temporarily disable it . The widgets available for the innovation process are selected by the administrator ( usually a Project Manager ) , which can choose among a set of standard components supplied with the IF . The widgets package that initially the IF will include is the following : (cid:2) Chat . A classical tool for message exchanging is provided , that implements the feature of communicating with one or more designers in real - time or off - line mode , allowing to store the history of each discussion . (cid:2) File Browsing . This widget enables the capability of exploring files in the knowledge base , allowing to find documents using tags or other information ( e . g . creation date , file name , etc . ) . (cid:2) Images Embedding . The widget allows to display an image exposing clearly concepts and features of the VP . (cid:2) Multimedia Video Embedding . The widget allows to embed videos in the VPD . The video screen can be resized , rearranged , played simultaneously or in a particular sequence to convey certain concepts . The result can be more powerful than static images . (cid:2) CAD Viewer . This widget allows to display a CAD file , exploitable when the new product is a real object . It permits to visualize and understand the shape of the object . (cid:2) External Files Linking . The widget allows to embed in the VPD external websites , PDF files , slides , and the like . Users can easily collect resources , and store and share them with other members . Combined with the Document Tagging widget , users can better organize and retrieve resources . This keeps IF lightweight and flexible , as resources are independent from IF . (cid:2) Document Tagging . This widget enables the feature of tagging documents , people and other elements within and in combination with the External Files Linking widget . (cid:2) Survey Administering . This widget allows to create , manage , and administer surveys and questionnaires to the designers . It will facilitate the decision - making process . (cid:2) Team Coordination . This widget provides functionalities to coordinate task and time of the designer team , specifying deadlines , assignments , and expected effort . Thanks to its modular architecture , the IF is open to the integration of new functionalities ; in fact , any organization adopting the ARISTOTELE IF can define and implement new field - centric widgets . For instance , an innovation team set up in a Fashion House , that want to exploit customers’ messages as an external knowledge source , can develop a widget to manage and represent dresses shape , in order to enable the innovation team to discuss customers’ suggestions while manipulating 3D representations rather than using text messages only . It is important to note that the role of a widget is not clearly defined and can be specific of the current task and the needs of the individual innovation team member . For example , the communication channel is not atomically implemented by the chat widget , but several widgets can be exploited to define and enact a concrete communication channel . Currently , with reference to principles listed in the Table 1 , VPD addresses in particular the following ones : (cid:2) IF - 1 Support Exploration : the activities of collecting , tracing , finding , and presenting data are addressed by the File Browsing widget . (cid:2) IF - 2 Low threshold , high ceiling , and wide walls : The possibility of expressing doubts or questions and the agile capability to plan activities are addressed by the Chat and Survey Administering widgets . (cid:2) IF - 4 Support collaboration : the structure of the VPD and the Chat widget support collaboration among team members . (cid:2) IF - 5 Support open interchange : this requirement is addressed by the technology widgets ( e . g . CAD viewer and Images Embedding ) ; in fact , the possibility to add a specific widget permits to open the IF to every kind of data . (cid:2) IF - 7 Iterate , iterate and then iterate again : the VPD is developed to implement the innovation methodology described in Section III . In fact , the possibility to use the innovation source tags as input for defining a new tag cloud , allows to iterate again and again the steps of our innovation process . D . Proactive Tools Area In this sub - section we describe the brown area of the IF shown in Fig . . The Proactive Tools Area ( PTA ) accepts in input the list of required competences returned by the VPD , and returns in output a list of suggestions specific of each innovation team member . In fact , the first requirement of IF is to define personalised suggestions that will cover all the competences defined by VPD . The PTA exploits the functionalities of the ARS , to compute ad hoc recommendations covering all the competences associated by VPD . ARS is therefore configured to return suggestions in terms of employees’ interactions , human resources , and electronic resources [ 10 ] . ARS is executed taking as stimulus the list of VPD competences , and as target the innovation team . First of all the ARS identifies competences related to the stimulus . Then , ARS returns a set of suggestions that are useful to acquire , for each innovation team member , all competences 942 related to the stimulus . Also , recommendations are computed based on the current VP definition at each Reseeding step . An automatic check will verify that all the employees composing the innovation team have been mapped on at least one competence . If some competences cannot be assigned , the ARS suggests additional innovation team members selected among the available HR capital . Of course , the composition of the innovation team can always be modified manually . The IF configuration of ARS can also define different cardinalities for particular competences , with the goal of having some competences covered by more than one team member . Finally , the associations between employees and competences are exploited to create customized suggestions tailored to VPD requirements and team members’ profiles . Summarizing , the PTA contains a set of suggestions , coming from the ARS , supporting the evolutionary growth phase of our methodology and , in general , the innovation process . Incoming knowledge items are generated and proposed to innovation team members in a proactive way . With a pre - determined frequency , current sheet contents are analysed , and associated tags are extracted using common knowledge extraction techniques . Then , starting from this set of tags , the competences associated are identified and used as stimulus to invoke the ARS . VI . C ONCLUSIONS In this paper we outlined a methodology and a set of tools that support organizations in the exploitation of knowledge flows , i . e . flows of ideas , suggestions and proposals coming from external sources . We discussed how items mined from incoming knowledge flows can trigger a participatory “meta - design” process . Finally , we finalized our discussion to stating and describing the design principles behind our open Innovation Factory , a software environment developed at SESAR Lab , Università degli Studi di Milano . The IF supports collaborative design of new products and services , fostering creativity and diversity during the design process . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The research reported in this paper is partially funded by the European Commission under the Collaborative Project ARISTOTELE “Personalized Learning & Collaborative Working Environments Fostering Social Creativity and Innovations Inside the Organizations” under Grant Agreement n . 257886 . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . Teece , " Profiting from technological innovation : Implications for integration , collaboration , licensing and public policy , " Research Policy , vol . 15 , pp . 285 – 305 , 1986 . [ 2 ] H . Chesbrough , Open Innovation : The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . , 2003 . [ 3 ] H . Rittel , " Second - Generation Design Methods , " in Developments in Design Methodology : John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1984 , pp . 317 - 327 . [ 4 ] P . Ehn , " Scandinavian Design : On Participation and Skill , " in Participatory Design : Principles and Practices . , 1993 , pp . 41 - 70 . [ 5 ] M . Klein , H . Sayama , P . Faratin , and Y . Bar - Yam , " The Dynamics of Collaborative Design : Insights From Complex Systems and Negotiation Research , " Concurrent Engineering , vol . 11 , no . 2 , pp . 201 - 209 , 2003 . [ 6 ] K . Piirainen , G . Kolfschoten , and S . Lukosch , " Unraveling Challenges in Collaborative Design : A Literature Study , " in Groupware : Design , Implementation , and Use - 15th International Workshop Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Vol . 5784 , 2009 . [ 7 ] E . Mumford , " Sociotechnical Systems Design : Evolving Theory and Practice , " in Computers and Democracy : Avebury , Aldershot , UK , 1987 , pp . 59 - 76 . [ 8 ] M . F . Costabile , D . Fogli , P . Mussio , and A . Piccinno , " End - User Development : the Software Shaping Workshop Approach , " End - User Development , vol . 9 , pp . 195 - 217 , 2006 . [ 9 ] G . Fischer , R . McCall , J . Ostwald , B . Reeves , and F . Shipman , " Seeding , Evolutionary Growth and Reseeding : Supporting Incremental Development of Design Environments , " in Proc . of Conf . on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 94 ) , 1994 , pp . 292 - 298 . [ 10 ] V . Bellandi , P . Ceravolo , F . Frati , J . Maggesi , I . Seeber , and G . Waldhart , " Design Principles for Competence - based Recommender Systems , " in Proc . of 2012 IEEE Int . Conference on Digital Ecosystem Technologies ( DEST ) , 2012 , pp . 1 - 6 . [ 11 ] S . Arieti , Creativity : the Magic Synthesis : Basic Books , New York , 1976 . [ 12 ] A . F . Osborn , Applied imagination : principles and procedures of creative problem - solving : Scribner , New York , 1963 . [ 13 ] O . Bærenholdt , M . Büscher , D . Scheuer , and J . Simonsen , " Perspectives on design research . , " in Design Research : Synergies from Interdisciplinary Perspectives : Routledge , 2010 . [ 14 ] E . Edmonds , L . Candy , G . Cox , J . Eisenstein , G . Fischer , B . Hughes , and T . Hewett , " Individual and / versus social creativity ( panel session ) , " in Proc . of the 3rd conference on Creativity & cognition ( C & C ' 99 ) , 1999 . [ 15 ] L . Mamykina , L . Candy , and E . Edmonds , " Collaborative creativity , " Commun . ACM , vol . 45 , no . 10 , pp . 96 - 99 , 2002 . [ 16 ] B . Shneiderman , " Creativity Support Tools : Accelerating Discovery and Innovation , " Communications of the ACM , vol . 50 , no . 12 , pp . 20 - 32 , 2007 . [ 17 ] G . Stevens , V . Pipek , and V . Wulf , " Appropriation Infrastructure : Supporting the Design of Usages , " in Proc . of the 2nd International Symposium on End - User Development , 2009 . [ 18 ] C . P . Snow , The Two Cultures : Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1993 . [ 19 ] E . Pariser , The Filter Bubble : What the Internet Is Hiding from You : Penguin Press HC , New York , 2011 . 943