Reprogramming Control of an Allosteric Signaling Switch Through Modular Recombination John E . Dueber , 1 , 3 Brian J . Yeh , 2 , 3 Kayam Chak , 3 Wendell A . Lim 3 * Many eukaryotic signaling proteins are composed of simple modular binding domains , yet they can display sophisticated behaviors such as allosteric gating and multi - input signal integration , properties essential for complex cellular circuits . To understand how such behavior can emerge from combinations of simple domains , we engineered variants of the actin regulatory protein N - WASP ( neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) in which the “output” domain of N - WASP was recombined with heterologous autoinhibitory “input” domains . Synthetic switch proteins were created with diverse gating behaviors in re - sponse to nonphysiological inputs . Thus , this type of modular framework can facilitate the evolution or engineering of cellular signaling circuits . Cellular behavior is mediated by circuits of interconnected signal transduction proteins . Many of these proteins are allosteric—their catalytic output activity is gated by specific upstream inputs such as ligand binding or covalent modification . Most eukaryotic sig - naling proteins are composed of modular do - mains with binding or catalytic functions ( 1 , 2 ) . It has been proposed that domain recom - bination could facilitate the evolution of pro - teins with novel signaling functions ( 1 – 4 ) . Consistent with such a model , complex allosteric gating in some signaling switches is mediated by modular , autoinhibitory interac - tions ( 4 , 5 ) . For example , the actin regulatory switch N - WASP ( 6 , 7 ) ( Fig . 1A ) , which dis - plays sophisticated signal integration , con - tains an output region ( “VCA” domain ) that in isolation is constitutively active—it stim - ulates actin polymerization by binding and activating the actin - related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex . However , two modular domains , a highly basic ( B ) motif and a guanosine 5 (cid:1) - triphosphatase ( GTPase ) – binding domain ( GBD ) repress activity through autoinhibi - tory interactions ( 8 , 9 ) . Two activating stim - uli , the phosphoinositide PIP 2 and the acti - vated GTPase Cdc42 , bind the B and GBD motifs , respectively , and disrupt autoinhibi - tion ( 9 , 10 ) . Because the two inputs act co - operatively , N - WASP approximates an AND gate in which strong activation is only ob - served in the presence of both inputs ( 9 , 11 ) . Such multi - input regulation is thought to yield precise spatial and temporal control over actin polymerization . We explored the flexibility of such mod - ular regulation by attempting to use domain recombination to reprogram input control of N - WASP . As a simple test of whether mod - ular autoinhibition is interchangeable , we en - gineered a synthetic signaling switch gated by a single heterologous ligand ( Fig . 1B ) . The design involved tethering an unrelated modular domain - ligand pair—in this case a PDZ domain and its cognate C - terminal pep - tide ligand—to the termini of the N - WASP output domain . This design would create a potential autoinhibitory interaction that could be relieved by competitive binding of an external PDZ ligand . Under basal conditions , this synthetic switch was repressed in an in vitro actin polymerization assay ( 12 ) ( Methods , fig . S1 ) . Repression required an intact , intramolecular autoinhibitory interaction : constructs contain - ing only one interaction partner were not repressed , and addition of saturating free PDZ domain ( (cid:2) 10 - fold (cid:3) K d ) in trans to a construct bearing only the PDZ ligand did not yield repression ( fig . S2 ) . The intramolecular PDZ interaction likely locks the output do - main in an inactive conformation or restricts dynamic properties required for activity . The switch was activated by increasing concentrations of free PDZ ligand ( Fig . 1C ) , with maximal activity close to that of the isolated output domain . Half - maximal activa - tion ( K act ) required 50 (cid:4) M input . Precise gating behavior was dependent on the affinity of the autoinhibitory interaction ( fig . S3 ) ; reducing affinity of the internal ligand result - ed in lower basal repression but increased input sensitivity ( reduced K act ) , as would be expected if the intramolecular PDZ interac - tion was required for repression . As in electronic circuits , complex cellular regulation often requires multi - input integrat - ing gates ( AND , OR , XOR , etc . ) used in combinatorial control or feedback and feed - forward loops ( 4 ) . We attempted the design of synthetic AND - gate switches by co - valently tethering two modular domain - ligand pairs to N - WASP’s output domain such that the intramolecular interactions 1 Program in Biological Sciences , 2 Chemistry and Chemical Biology Graduate Program , 3 Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology , University of California , San Francisco , CA 94143 – 2240 , USA . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : wlim @ itsa . ucsf . edu . Fig . 1 . Design of synthetic switch gated by heterologous ligand . ( A ) N - WASP is a modular allosteric switch : its output domain constitutively stimulates Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization but is repressed by autoinhibitory interactions involving two domains , the GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) and a basic ( B ) motif . Input ligands activate by disrupting autoinhibitory interactions : GTP - loaded Cdc42 binds GBD ; PIP 2 binds B motif . These two inputs act synergistically ( 9 , 11 ) , thus , N - WASP resem - bles an AND gate . ( B ) Design strategy for a synthetic single - input switch using N - WASP’s output domain and a PDZ domain - ligand pair as heter - ologous autoinhibitory module ( (cid:5) - syntrophin PDZ ; ligand comprising NH 2 - GVKESLV - COOH ; K d (cid:6) 8 (cid:4) M ) . ( C ) Synthetic switch protein is basally repressed but can be activated by addition of exogenous PDZ ligand . We tested switches with an in vitro pyrene - actin polymerization assay ( ﬁg . S1 ) , using the time required to reach 50 % polymerization ( t 1 / 2 ) as the ( relative ) activity metric . Basal repression is observed only in constructs containing the intramolecular PDZ domain – ligand pair ( ﬁg . S2 ) . Peptide concentration required for half - maximal activation ( K act ) is 50 (cid:4) M . Studies with variant switches show that degree of repression is correlated with afﬁnity of the intramolecular ligand ( K PDZ ) , whereas sensitivity to external PDZ ligand shows an inverse correlation ( ﬁg . S3 ) . Assays in this and all other ﬁgures were performed with 50 nM switch protein , 5 nM Arp2 / 3 , and 1 . 3 (cid:4) M actin ( 10 % pyrene - actin ) . R E P O R T S 26 SEPTEMBER 2003 VOL 301 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1904 might cooperatively repress activity . Such a switch would respond cooperatively to the combination of both competing external li - gands ( Fig . 2A ) . Because of increased com - plexity of two - input switches , we created a combinatorial library in which switch design parameters including domain type , domain - ligand affinity , linker length , and domain ar - chitecture were varied ( Fig . 2B ) . To further increase variability , we used two forms of the N - WASP output domain , long and short ; both display constitutive activity ( 13 ) . Two classes of switches were designed . For the first class—“chimeric” switches—the target behavior was dual regulation by PDZ ligand and Cdc42 , a nonnative and a native N - WASP regulator , respectively . We con - structed these switches using a PDZ domain and the native N - WASP GBD as regulatory modules . The GBD binds a peptide within the N - WASP output region ( residues 461 to 479 ) , an interaction that is competitively dis - rupted by activated Cdc42 ( 8 ) . Although the intramolecular GBD interaction is required for autoinhibition in native N - WASP , it is not sufficient : the interaction does not repress N - WASP activity unless combined with the autoinhibitory interaction of the B module ( the PIP 2 responsive element ) . ( 9 ) . For the second class—“heterologous” switches—the target behavior was dual regulation by PDZ and SH3 domain ligands , two nonnative in - puts . We constructed these switches using the PDZ domain from (cid:5) - syntrophin and the SH3 domain from Crk . SH3 domains recognize short proline - rich motifs ( 14 , 15 ) . A library of 34 such switches ( Fig . 2B ) was tested for gating by the appropriate high - affinity intermolecular ligands . Activ - ity was tested in the presence of no inputs , each individual input , and both inputs to - gether . Like most signaling proteins , these modular allosteric switches did not give simple binary responses ; the precise re - sponse observed depended on the input concentrations used . We therefore per - formed activation screens under a standard set of input concentrations : 10 (cid:4) M Cdc42 – GTP - (cid:7) - S [ guanosine 5 (cid:1) - O - ( 3 (cid:1) - thiotriphos - phate ) ] , 200 (cid:4) M PDZ ligand , and 10 (cid:4) M SH3 ligand . Each of these concentrations is Fig . 2 . Design of synthetic dual - input switch library . ( A ) Two - input switch design strategy . ( B ) Switch library constructed by domain recombination . Components used ( table S1 ) are two output domains of N - WASP ( output A and B ) , which differ in length ; three different input domains ( PDZ , SH3 , GBD ) ; from one to three intramolecular ligands of differing afﬁnities for each of the input domains ( ligand for GBD is contained within the output domain ) ; and four different - length interdomain linkers ( Gly - Ser repeats ) . Switch architecture and design parameters are listed at left . Component afﬁnities are given in micromolar units . Observed gating behavior is listed at right . Activity of library members was screened in the presence of no inputs , each individual input , and both inputs simultaneously by using a standard set of input concentrations ( Cdc42GTP - (cid:7) - S : 10 (cid:4) M ; PDZ ligand : 200 (cid:4) M ; SH3 ligand : 10 (cid:4) M ; all of these concentrations are 20 to 100 times the K d for input binding to its isolated recognition domain ) . Relative activity ( measured as in ﬁg . S1 ) under these conditions is indicated by a color code ( from low to high : black , green , yellow , white ) . ( C ) Classes of gating behavior observed in the library ( see ﬁg . S4 for class deﬁnitions ) . For linkers n and m , see the scheme at the left ; lig . , ligand ; polym . , polymerization . R E P O R T S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 301 26 SEPTEMBER 2003 1905 20 to 100 times the K d observed for input ligand binding to its isolated recognition domain . Switches could be divided into diverse behavioral classes ( Fig . 2C ) . At the extremes , five switches showed little or no basal repres - sion , and nine were extremely well - repressed , but could not be activated under any of the tested conditions . Most constructs , however , showed some type of gating behavior . Of the remaining 20 switches , 16 showed positive gating ( both inputs activate ) . Two of the pro - teins displayed antagonistic gating : one input activates , whereas the other represses ( mech - anism discussed later ) . The positively gated dual - input switches could be further subdi - vided . Two proteins showed OR gate – like behavior ( roughly equivalent activation in the presence of either individual input or both together ) , five proteins showed clear AND gate – like behavior , whereas the remaining constructs showed intermediate behavior . Thus , this relatively small library yielded a diversity of switch behaviors , including sev - eral with the targeted AND - gate behavior . Several design principles were revealed by examining how switch parameters alter behavior . Basal repression and input sensi - tivity were directly linked to the affinity of autoinhibitory interactions . For example , the chimeric switch C11 , which has an intramolecular PDZ ligand with K d (cid:6) 8 (cid:4) M , was well repressed under basal condi - tions but insensitive : It could not be acti - vated by the standard concentrations of PDZ ligand or Cdc42 , even in combination ( Fig . 3A ) . However , if the intramolecular PDZ ligand - affinity was reduced ( K PDZ (cid:6) 100 (cid:4) M ) , the protein then resembled an AND gate ( switch C12 ) . Heterologous switch behavior was also dependent on affinity of the autoinhibitory interactions . For example , switch H15 , which has internal SH3 and PDZ ligands with K SH3 (cid:6) 10 (cid:4) M and K PDZ (cid:6) 100 (cid:4) M , resembled an OR gate ( Fig . 3B ) . However , increasing the affinity of the internal PDZ ligand by (cid:2) 10 - fold ( K PDZ (cid:6) 8 (cid:4) M ) within the same architecture yielded a well - be - haved AND gate ( switch H14 ) . Interesting - ly , in one architectural context , the 8 (cid:4) M PDZ affinity was too high to yield AND - gate behavior ( switch C11 ) , whereas in an - other context this affinity was ideal ( switch H14 ) . This difference may be due to differ - ences in the affinity of the partner domain ; in C11 the partner domain is the GBD , which binds its internal ligand with K d (cid:6) 1 (cid:4) M ( 9 , 16 ) , whereas in H14 the partner domain is an SH3 domain with K SH3 (cid:6) (cid:2) 10 (cid:4) M . Maintaining a balance between switch repression and sensitivity may re - quire balancing the affinities of the highly coupled autoinhibitory interactions . Linker length also affected switch behav - ior . For example , if the linker length between the PDZ and SH3 domains in H14 was in - creased from 5 to 20 residues , the switch became more sensitive to the isolated inputs ( switch H16 ) , indicative of reduced domain coupling . This finding is consistent with ob - servations that coupling between regulatory domains of Src family kinases depends strongly on conformational and energetic fea - tures of the interdomain linker ( 17 ) . Within this library , however , increasing interdomain linker length did not uniformly reduce cou - pling , which suggests that these effects are context - dependent . Synthetic AND - gate switches were tested for targeted activation of actin polymeriza - tion in Xenopus oocyte extracts ( Fig . 3C ) . Carboxylated polystyrene beads were coated with glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) fusions to the relevant input ligands : no ligand ( GST alone ) , SH3 ligand , PDZ ligand , or SH3 and PDZ ligands connected in tandem . When beads were incubated with soluble H14 switch and oocyte extract , actin filament nu - cleation was observed only on beads coated with the tandem SH3 - PDZ ligand , consistent with multi - input targeting . The combinatorial switch library also yield - ed switches with the unexpected behavior of antagonistic or negative input control ( H1 , H2 ) in which PDZ ligand acted as an activator , but SH3 ligand acted as a repressor ( Fig . 4A ) . Detailed examination of the gating properties of switch H2 in various input concentration re - gimes revealed that PDZ ligand always acts as an activator ; SH3 ligand , however , increased the basal level of repression ( Fig . 4B ) . Antag - onistic regulation is consistent with a model in which the intramolecular PDZ interaction is Fig . 3 . Synthetic switches that resemble AND gates . ( A ) Chimeric switch C12 ( right ) resembles an AND gate ; it shows strong actin polymerization only in the presence of both PDZ ligand and Cdc42 . Adjacentbargraphshowsmaximalpolym - erization rates under each condition nor - malized to the basal rate ( no input ) . Related switch ( C11 ) with identical archi - tecture but a higher afﬁnity intramolec - ular PDZ ligand ( left ) is insensitive or overrepressed . ( B ) Heterologous switch H14 ( right ) resembles an AND gate that responds to SH3 and PDZ ligand . A related switch ( H15 ) with identical architecture but a weaker afﬁnity intramolecular PDZ ligand ( left ) resembles an OR gate ; individual ligands yield relatively strong activation . ( C ) Switch H14 , which resembles an AND gate , can spatially target actin polymerization in a Xenopus oocyte extract . Polystyrene beads were coated with GST fusions to no ligand , SH3 ligand , PDZ ligand , or a tandem SH3 - PDZ ligand ( see Methods , Supporting Online Material ) . The tandem ligand was used at half concentration relative to monovalent ligands . Only beads coated with the tandem ligand and incubated with switch H14 ( 100 (cid:4) M ) nucleated polymerization of rhodamine - labeled actin ( red ) . Merge of bright - ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence images are shown . Fraction ( fract . ) of beads displaying actin polymerization ( polym . ) is given . R E P O R T S 26 SEPTEMBER 2003 VOL 301 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1906 solely responsible for autoinhibition , and the intramolecular SH3 interaction destabilizes the intramolecular PDZ interaction , but , by itself , has no direct effect on output activity ( Fig . 4C ) . We modeled this scheme by assuming that the state in which both intramolecular interactions take place is unfavorable and unpopulated ( fig . S5 ) . Such a scheme predicted an activation surface ( Fig . 4C ) resembling the observed be - havior of switch H2 ( Fig . 4B ) . For related switches ( H1 to H3 ) , the maximum level of repression observed ( in the presence of SH3 ligand ) , directly correlated with PDZ affinity , a trend consistent with repression driven solely by the intramolecular PDZ interaction . In this type of antagonistic switch , the two domains appear to act in a nested manner : The SH3 intramolecular interaction regulates the PDZ intramolecular interaction negative - ly , which in turn negatively regulates the output activity ( Fig . 4C ) . Addition of exoge - nous SH3 ligand , therefore , stabilizes the au - toinhibitory PDZ interaction , leading to the observed inhibitory effect . In contrast , in pos - itive integrating switches that resemble AND gates , the two domains work in concert to negatively regulate output function ( Fig . 4D ) . Consequently , disruption of both intramolec - ular interactions yields activation . This unanticipated class of switches high - lights a striking feature of the library : Subtle changes in switch parameters can lead to dramatic changes in gating behavior . The architecture of antagonistic switches ( H1 , H2 ) is identical to a set of positive switches ( H7 to H12 ) except for the size of the output domain ( long output in the antagonistic switches ; short in the positive switches ) . The geometry of the output domain must have significant impact on the coupling between regulatory domains , presumably by altering stability of the various conformational states of the switch . These results demonstrate that multido - main signaling switches like N - WASP are functionally modular ; diverse and complex gating behaviors can be generated through relatively simple recombination events be - tween input and output domains , even among domains with no known evolutionary rela - tion . By allowing the establishment of novel regulatory connections between molecules with no previous physiological relation , such recombination events would be a powerful force driving evolution of novel cellular cir - cuitry ( 18 ) . This interchangeability exists be - cause , in modular allosteric switches , regions that mediate input control are physically sep - arable from output regions . Facile inter - change of gating properties is unlikely to Fig . 4 . Mechanism of antagonistic switch . ( A ) PDZ and SH3 ligands have opposing effects on the activ - ity of switch H2 ; PDZ ligand is an activator , SH3 ligand is a repressor . Fraction ( fract . ) of beads displaying actin polymerization ( polym . ) is shown ; lig . ligand ; rel . , relative . ( B ) Effect of PDZ ligand on switch H2 activity in the presence of different , constant concentrations of SH3 li - gand . ( C ) Antagonistic behavior of switch H2 can be explained by a model in which the SH3 and PDZ intramolecular interactions are anti - cooperative ( i . e . , the state with both intramolecular interactions is unfa - vorable and unpopulated ) , and the intramolecular PDZ interaction me - diates autoinhibition . Although the intramolecular SH3 interaction is neutral , it indirectly relieves repres - sion by opposing the intramolecular PDZ interaction . A simple circuit di - agram shows how this nested series of regulatory interactions yields an - tagonistic input control . Positive and negative net effects of inputs are indicated . Modeling of such a switch predicts an activation sur - face ( green ) consistent with experi - mental behavior ( ﬁg . S5 ) . ( D ) Model of switches that resemble AND gates . Both intramolecular domain interactions contribute to autoinhi - bition . Thus , both ligands are posi - tive regulators . Modeling yields an activation surface ( green ) consis - tent with more potent activation in the presence of both ligands simul - taneously ( ﬁg . S5 ) . R E P O R T S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 301 26 SEPTEMBER 2003 1907 occur in conventional allosteric proteins in which input and output activities are central - ized in a single folded structure , and gating is mediated by subtle conformational shifts . Domain recombination space sampled in these experiments proved functionally rich : Although constructs showed a range of different gating behaviors ( negative - pos - itive , integrating - nonintegrating , etc . ) , nearly all of them show some form of gating . Gating as an emergent property , therefore , does not appear to be extremely rare , as might be expected if only very precise domain arrangements yielded regu - lation . This modular framework , in addi - tion to promoting switch protein evolution , could be used to engineer proteins with novel regulatory control and , in principle , novel cellular circuits . References and Notes 1 . T . Pawson , P . Nash , Genes Dev . 14 , 1027 ( 2000 ) . 2 . T . Pawson , P . Nash , Science 300 , 445 ( 2003 ) . 3 . E . S . Lander et al . , Nature 409 , 860 ( 2001 ) . 4 . W . A . Lim , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 12 , 61 ( 2002 ) . 5 . M . A . Pufall , B . J . Graves , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 421 ( 2002 ) . 6 . R . D . Mullins , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 91 ( 2000 ) . 7 . H . N . Higgs , T . D . Pollard , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 ( 2001 ) . 8 . A . S . Kim , L . T . Kakalis , N . Abdul - Manan , G . A . Liu , M . K . Rosen , Nature 404 , 151 ( 2000 ) . 9 . K . E . Prehoda , J . A . Scott , R . D . Mullins , W . A . Lim , Science 290 , 801 ( 2000 ) . 10 . R . Rohatgi , H . Y . Ho , M . W . Kirschner , J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1299 ( 2000 ) . 11 . R . Rohatgi et al . , Cell 97 , 221 ( 1999 ) . 12 . R . D . Mullins , L . M . Machesky , Methods Enzymol . 325 , 214 ( 2000 ) . 13 . J . Zalevsky , L . Lempert , H . Kranitz , R . D . Mullins , Curr . Biol . 11 , 1903 ( 2001 ) . 14 . B . J . Mayer , J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1253 ( 2001 ) . 15 . A . Zarrinpar , R . P . Bhattacharyya , W . A . Lim , Sci . STKE 2003 , re8 ( 2003 ) . 16 . M . Buck , W . Xu , M . K . Rosen , Biochemistry 40 , 14115 ( 2001 ) . 17 . M . A . Young , S . Gonﬂoni , G . Superti - Furga , B . Roux , J . Kuriyan , Cell 105 , 115 ( 2001 ) . 18 . J . Monod , J . - P . Changeux , J . Jacob , J . Mol . Biol . 6 , 306 ( 1963 ) . 19 . We thank R . Bhattacharyya , H . Bourne , C . Co , S . Collins , E . Cunningham , H . Madhani , D . Mullins , E . O’Shea , K . Shokat , J . Weissman , K . Prehoda , and members of the Lim laboratory for comments and discussion ; and J . Taunton for Xenopus oocyte ex - tract . Supported by grants from the Sandler Founda - tion , NSF Bio - Qubic Program , the Packard Founda - tion , and the NIH ( W . A . L . ) . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 301 / 5641 / 1904 / DC1Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S5 Table S1 References and Notes 21 April 2003 ; accepted 21 August 2003 An Age - Induced Switch to a Hyper - Recombinational State Michael A . McMurray and Daniel E . Gottschling * There is a strong correlation between age and cancer , but the mechanism by which this phenomenon occurs is unclear . We chose Saccharomyces cerevisiae to examine one of the hallmarks of cancer—genomic instability— as a function of cellular age . As diploid yeast mother cells aged , an (cid:2) 100 - fold increase in loss of heterozygosity ( LOH ) occurred . Extending life - span altered neither the onset nor the frequency of age - induced LOH ; the switch to hyper - LOH appears to be on its own clock . In young cells , LOH occurs by reciprocal recombination , whereas LOH in old cells was nonreciprocal , oc - curring predominantly in the old mother’s progeny . Thus , nuclear genomes may be inherently unstable with age . Age may be the greatest carcinogen : Can - cer incidence increases exponentially near the end of human life ( 1 ) . Chromosomal abnormalities are a hallmark of most tu - mors , and it is widely held that genomic instability is a prerequisite for tumorigene - sis ( 2 ) . In older individuals , there is evi - dence for increased genomic instability , even in noncancerous cells ( 3 ) . Although numerous hypotheses exist to explain the association between aging and genomic in - stability ( 1 ) , these have been difficult to test . To develop a mechanistic understand - ing of age - related genomic instability , we asked whether such a phenomenon occurs in a model biological system , the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Heterozygosity was created in a diploid strain by the insertion of a marker gene in one copy of a locus . Loss of heterozygosity ( LOH ) at the locus was detected when a genetic alter - ation occurred in which the marker was “lost . ” Although LOH in yeast can arise by multiple mechanisms , spontaneous LOH in wild - type cells occurs primarily through mitotic recombi - nation ( 4 ) . Recombination is presumed to be initiated by DNA damage along the chromo - some and is typically accompanied by LOH at all centromere - distal loci ( 5 , 6 ) ; accordingly , distal markers were more likely to undergo spontaneous LOH ( table S1 ) . Therefore , in order to maximize the chance of observing LOH events , we inserted markers distally on the two longest chromosome arms : at the SAM2 locus on the right arm of chromosome IV and at the MET15 locus on the right arm of XII , about 1 and 2 Mb , respectively , from their centromeres ( 7 ) . Marker genes affecting colony color when lost were inserted at these loci ( 8 , 9 ) . The number of daughter cells produced before death by a yeast ( mother ) cell de - fines her life - span ( 10 ) . In order to deter - mine whether genomic instability , mani - fested as LOH , was affected by a mother cell’s increasing age , we isolated by micro - manipulation every daughter cell produced from a mother and allowed each daughter to form a colony ( 11 ) . When the life - spans of the mother cells were complete , daughter colonies were assayed for LOH by changes in colony color . LOH was readily observed in the progeny of aging mothers by the appearance of uniformly colored colonies , or colored sectors within colonies . LOH events resulting in sectored daughter colo - nies were scored as half - , quarter - or eighth - sectors , which are consistent with the daughter cell or its progeny experienc - ing an LOH event one , two , or three gen - erations after separation of the daughter from the original mother cell ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . Examination of these pedigrees revealed a marked change in LOH with the mother’s age ( Fig . 1C ) . Daughter colonies early in the life - span had no LOH events , whereas LOH was observed frequently in the colo - nies produced by daughters of old mothers . The first LOH events observed in the ped - igrees of individual mothers did not occur until the mothers had gone through 23 cell divisions ( median value ) ; this late onset was observed at both loci analyzed ( Fig . 1D , open bars ) . However , once an LOH event was observed in a lineage , subse - quent LOH events were much more fre - quent , occurring in every third to fourth daughter colony ( Fig . 1 , B and D , solid bars ) . The rate of LOH per cell division in old cells was (cid:2) 40 to 200 times that of young cells ( Table 1 ) . The frequency of LOH remained constant as the mother cells continued to age : After the first event , there was no significant correlation between the age of the mother and the frequency of subsequent LOH events ( MET15 P (cid:6) 0 . 69 and SAM2 P (cid:6) 0 . 39 for a nonparametric Spearman correlation coefficient ) . Division of Basic Sciences , The Fred Hutchinson Can - cer Research Center , and Molecular and Cellular Biol - ogy Program , University of Washington , Seattle , WA 98109 , USA . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : dgottsch @ fhcrc . org R E P O R T S 26 SEPTEMBER 2003 VOL 301 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1908