Introduction Epithelial cells form cell - cell junctional complexes through tight junctions , adherens junctions and desmosomes . These junctions maintain epithelium structural integrity , creating a critical assembly for the physiological function of epithelial tissues . These junctional structures share a common organization , containing transmembrane adhesive components bound to cytosolic adapter proteins providing a link to the cytoskeleton . In adherens junctions , catenins link transmembrane E - cadherin to the actin cytoskeleton ( Jou et al . , 1995 ; Ozawa et al . , 1990 ; Rimm et al . , 1995 ) . The transmembrane protein occludin in tight junctions is linked to the actin cytoskeleton by binding to ZO - 1 , which in turn binds to actin and ZO - 2 ( Furuse et al . , 1994 ; Gumbiner et al . , 1991 ; Ito et al . , 1997 ; Stevenson et al . , 1986 ) . Desmosomal cadherins , distantly related to E - cadherin , are linked to intermediate ﬁlaments through cytosolic desmosomal plaque proteins , such as desmoplakin and plakoglobin ( Buxton and Magee , 1992 ; Green and Jones , 1996 ) . During junctional complex assembly , cadherin - catenin complexes initially formed at sites of cell - cell contact ( Adams et al . , 1996 ; Angres et al . , 1996 ) develop into mature adherens junctions . The cadherin superfamily of adhesion molecules possesses the common structural features of an extracellular domain with calcium - binding motifs , a single transmembrane domain and a C - terminal cytoplasmic domain . Classical cadherins , including E - , P - and N - cadherin , bind homotypically to cadherins neighboring cells ( Nose et al . , 1988 ) . The conserved cytoplasmic domain then interacts with the cytoskeleton to enhance cell - cell adhesion ( Ozawa et al . , 1989 ; Ozawa et al . , 1990 ; Reynolds et al . , 1994 ) . The coordinated assembly of junctional complexes is dependent on E - cadherin ( Gumbiner et al . , 1988 ; Pasder and Nelson , 1988a ) . E - cadherin appears to reside at the top of the epithelial junctional complex assembly hierarchy . Incubation of epithelial cells in either low calcium concentrations or E - cadherin - blocking antibodies prevents proper assembly of adherens junctions , tight junctions and desmosomes ( Gumbiner et al . , 1988 ; Pasder and Nelson , 1988a ; Pasdar and Nelson , 1988b ; Siliciano et al . , 1988 ) . Furthermore , cells deﬁcient in a - catenin also lack E - cadherin function , leading to defects in junctional complex assembly ( Watabe et al . , 1994 ) . Mutant cadherins possessing truncated extracellular domains perturb cadherin - based adhesion and the formation of both adherens junctions and desmosomes ( Amagai et al . , 1995 ; Troxell et al . , 1999 ; Troxell et al . , 2000 ; Zhu and Watt , 1996 ) . Thus , proper functioning of classical cadherins is necessary for desmosome assembly under these experimental conditions . Snail is a zinc ﬁnger - containing transcription factor required for proper development of vertebrate and invertebrate embryos ( Gray et al . , 1994 ; Manzanares et al . , 2001 ) . This molecule triggers epithelial to mesenchymal transitions allowing epithelial cells to emigrate from their place of origin and form tissues such as the mesoderm and neural crest ( Hay , 1995 ; 1675 Snail , a transcriptional repressor of E - cadherin expression , is involved in epithelial - mesenchymal transitions during development . We demonstrate that Snail activity is not restricted to E - cadherin downregulation . Expression of tight junction proteins , including claudin - 1 , occludin and ZO - 1 , was downregulated in MDCK cells exogenously expressing Snail protein . Although occludin mRNA levels were downregulated by Snail expression , the transcription of claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 were unaffected . Reporter assays using the claudin - 1 promoter region revealed that promoter activity was not affected by Snail overexpression . Decreased synthesis of claudin - 1 protein was observed , however , suggesting that Snail may act in translation initiation . Snail expression also altered the splicing pattern of p120 . The levels of mRNA encoding the epithelial variant decreased , while the ﬁbroblastic mRNA form increased . Although ectopic E - cadherin expression resulted in a downregulation of Snail - induced ﬁbronectin expression , ﬁbroblastic morphology was affected only minimally ; the expression of tight junctional proteins remained at low levels . These results indicate that Snail is involved in both the direct transcriptional repression of genes , such as E - cadherin and occludin , and post - transcriptional events , including downregulation of claudin - 1 . These data support the idea that Snail is a transcription factor possessing pleiotropic activities . Key words : Snail , Cadherin , Adherens junction , Tight junction Summary The transcription factor Snail downregulates the tight junction components independently of E - cadherin downregulation Tadashi Ohkubo and Masayuki Ozawa * Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences , Kagoshima University , Kagoshima 890 - 8544 , Japan * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : mozawa @ m . kufm . kagoshima - u . ac . jp ) Accepted 21 November 2003 Journal of Cell Science 117 , 1675 - 1685 Published by The Company of Biologists 2004 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01004 Research Article JCS ePress online publication date 9 March 2004 1676 Duband et al . , 1995 ) . Snail also functions in epithelial to mesenchymal transitions responsible for the acquisition of invasiveness during tumor progression ( Cano et al . , 2000 ; Batlle et al . , 2000 ; Blanco et al . , 2002 ) . This tumorigenic activity is associated with the ability of Snail to repress E - cadherin transcription ( Cano et al . , 2000 ; Batlle et al . , 2000 ) . Transfection of Snail cDNA into MDCK cells induced epithelial to mesenchymal transitions ; transfected cells acquired motile and invasive properties concurrent with transcriptional downregulation of E - cadherin . While the morphological changes induced by Snail expression suggested that adherens junctions , tight junctions and desmosomes are all disrupted by Snail expression , the mechanisms controlling these changes have not been addressed comprehensively . In this study , we demonstrate that ectopic Snail expression downregulates the expression of E - cadherin and the expression of the tight junction components , occludin , claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 . Occludin downregulation occurred at the transcriptional level in a manner similar to that of E - cadherin . The downregulation of claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 , however , is not regulated at the transcriptional level . Introduction of an E - cadherin expression vector , which is not subject to Snail - mediated suppression , restored E - cadherin expression at the cell surface . Re - expression of E - cadherin , however , is not sufficient to re - establish tight junction protein expression and assembly . This result is consistent with the observation that Snail does not act indirectly through E - cadherin downregulation . We also demonstrate that Snail expression altered the p120 splicing variant expression pattern from the dominant epithelial form to the dominant ﬁbroblastic form in MDCK cells . Materials and Methods cDNA construction The cDNA encoding human Snail was isolated from a human heart cDNA library by polymerase chain reaction using the combination of speciﬁc sense ( 5 ¢ - CGGGATCCACTATGCCGCGCTCTTT ) and antisense ( 5 ¢ - ATCGCGGGGACATCCTGAGCA ) primers . Polymerase chain reaction was performed using Pwo DNA polymerase ( Roche Diagnostics GmbH , Mannheim , Germany ) . The PCR product was assembled into the pBluescript II KS ( + ) vector with the addition of a sequence encoding the nine amino acid hemagglutinin ( HA ) epitope . After conﬁrming the sequence of the C - terminally HA - tagged human Snail cDNA , this fragment was cloned into the mammalian expression vector , pCAGGSneo . The sequence encoding the HA tag within the HA - tagged mouse E - cadherin cDNA ( Ozawa , 2002 ) was replaced by a sequence encoding a myc tag , to yield a myc - tagged E - cadherin construct . The cDNA was then cloned into the mammalian expression vectors , pCAGGSneo and pCAGGSpuro . The latter vector was constructed by replacing the neo gene with a puro gene , which encodes Streptomyces alboniger puromycin - N - acetyltransferase gene conferring resistance to puromycin . Cells and transfection MDCK cells ( kindly provided by Y . Daikuhara , Kagoshima University Dental School ) were grown in DME supplemented with 10 % FCS . MDCK T23 cells , which express the tetracycline - repressible transactivator ( Barth et al . , 1997 ) , and the pHMR272 plasmid , which carries the hygromycin resistance gene ( Gossen and Bujard , 1992 ) , were kindly provided by Dr W . J . Nelson ( Stanford University ) . MDCK cells ( 5 · 10 5 ) were transfected with expression vectors ( 10 m g ) by calcium phosphate methodology ( Ozawa et al . , 1989 ) . G418 - resistant clones ( MDCK - Sna cells ) were isolated as single colonies and examined for HA - tagged Snail expression by immunoblot and immunoﬂuorescence analysis . MDCK - Sna cells were co - transfected with the mouse E - cadherin construct ( 10 m g ) and pMIKHygB ( 1 m g ) using LipofectAmine Plus ( GibcoBRL , Gaithersburg , USA ) . Hygromycin B - resistant clones were isolated as single colonies and examined for myc - tagged E - cadherin expression by immunoblot and immunoﬂuorescence analysis . Antibodies Mouse mAbs against E - cadherin , a - catenin , b - catenin , p120 ( pp120 ) and ﬁbronectin were purchased from Transduction Laboratories ( Lexington , KY ) . A mouse mAb against vinculin was purchased from Sigma ( St Louis , USA ) . Antibodies against claudin - 1 , claudin - 3 , claudin - 4 , claudin - 7 , occludin and Z0 - 1 were obtained from ZYMED ( South San Francisco , USA ) . A mouse mAb recognizing Desmoplakins 1 and 2 was purchased from Progen Biotechnik GmbH ( Heidelberg , Germany ) . A rat mAb against HA was purchased form Roche Diagnostics GmbH ( Mannheim , Germany ) . A mAb speciﬁc for myc was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( CA , USA ) . Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation For immunoblot analysis , cells were boiled for 5 minutes in SDS gel sample buffer ( Laemmli , 1970 ) . Proteins were separated by either 7 % or 11 % polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes . Membranes were blocked with 5 % nonfat milk in PBS , then incubated with speciﬁc primary antibodies followed by treatment with peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories , West Grove , PA ) . After washing with PBS containing 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 , protein bands were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) ( Amersham International , Little Chalfont , UK ) . Immunoprecipitation was performed as described previously ( Ozawa et al . , 1989 ) with the following modiﬁcations . After washing in PBS , cells were lysed in 10 mM Tris - HCl buffer , pH 7 . 4 , containing 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM sodium orthovanadate , 1 mM PMSF , 5 m g / ml leupeptin and 25 m g / ml aprotinin . The myc - tagged E - cadherin – catenin complex was collected using mouse anti - myc antibodies , preabsorbed to protein A - Sepharose CL4B ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech , NJ ) . Immunocomplexes were then washed in lysis buffer three times and boiled for 5 minutes in SDS - PAGE sample buffer . RT - PCR Southern blot analysis Poly ( A ) + - RNA was extracted from cells using an mRNA Puriﬁcation Kit ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . RNA was reverse transcribed using M - MLV reverse transcriptase ( GibcoBRL , Gaithersburg , USA ) . The resulting products were employed as templates for speciﬁc PCR reactions using Pwo DNA polymerase ( Roche Diagnostics , Mannheim , Germany ) . The conditions for PCR were optimized for each primer pair . The following primer combinations were used : for E - cadherin , sense ( GACACCCGATTCAAAGTGGG ) , antisense ( GTCTCTCTTCTGTCTTCTGAG ) ; for p120 , sense ( GCTGGATTT - GTCTTTCTCAGC ) , antisense ( CCATCATCTGAGGTCTCCAC ) ; for claudin - 1 , sense ( CCAACGCGGGGCTGCAGCT ) , antisense ( GG TTGTTTTTCGGGGACAGGA ) ; for occludin , sense ( GATGACTT - CAGGCAGCCTCG ) , anti - sense ( CTATGTTTTCTGTCTATCA - TAGTC ) ; for ZO - 1 , sense ( ATGAAGACACAGATACAGAAGG ) , antisense ( GGTGACCAACAGCTGGCTG ) ; for GAPDH , sense ( ACCACAGTCCATGCCATCAC ) , antisense ( TCCACCACCCTG - TTGCTGTA ) . PCR products were then subjected to electrophoresis on 1 . 5 % agarose gels . The DNA fragments were then capillary transferred to nylon membranes , followed by UV cross - linkage . All Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 9 ) 1677 Snail - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition of the probes used in Southern hybridization were labeled using the Gene Image random prime labeling module ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . Probes were hybridized to the membranes during a 60°C overnight incubation . After hybridization , blots were ﬁrst washed in 1 · SSC , 0 . 1 % SDS at 60°C for 15 minutes , then washed again in 0 . 1 · SSC , 0 . 1 % SDS under the same conditions . Trypsin treatment and biotinylation of cell surface proteins Trypsin treatment of cell surface proteins was performed as described ( Ozawa and Kemler , 1990 ) . To biotinylate cell surface proteins , 4 . 5 · 10 5 cells were seeded on 0 . 4 m m polycarbonate membranes ( Nunc , Roskilde , Denmark ) and cultured overnight . Following washing at 4°C in PBS ( + ) , cells were soaked in 0 . 5 mg / ml Sulfo - NHS - Biotin ( Pierce , Rockford , IS ) . Cells were then washed three times in PBS ( + ) and lysed in the immunoprecipitation buffer deﬁned above . Immunoprecipitation of biotinylated proteins was performed as above using SoftLink ™ Avidin Resin ( Promega , Madison , WI ) . The remaining proteins were precipitated from the post - nuclear supernatants by ethanol precipitation . Isolated proteins and the ethanol - precipitated proteins were boiled for 5 minutes in SDS gel sample buffer and subjected to 7 % SDS - PAGE . Samples were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and immunoblotted using an anti - E - cadherin antibody . Reporter assay The promoters of human E - cadherin ( – 178 to + 66 ) , occludin ( – 190 to + 341 ) and claudin - 1 ( – 82 to + 236 ) were isolated by PCR from the genomic DNA of A431 cells using following combinations of speciﬁc primers for E - cadherin ( 5 ¢ - ACTCCAGGCTAGAGGGTCA and 5 ¢ - TGGAGCGGGCTGGAGTCT ) , occludin ( 5 ¢ - CTGGAGCTCTAGA - TGCCTTTTTCCAGCAA and 5 ¢ - GCGCTCTGGACCTGGCTC ) and claudin - 1 ( 5 ¢ - GGGCGCTCCCCGGCTG and 5 ¢ - GAAGATCTGA - CTCGCTCGGGCGCCC ) . After conﬁrming the sequences , these fragments were cloned into pGL3 - Basic vector ( Promega ) . 2 · 10 5 A431 cells were seeded in 24 - well plates 24 hours prior to transfection . One m g of reporter vector , 1 m g of pCAGGS - Snail and 20 ng of pRL were transfected per well using LipofectAmine Plus . After 48 hours , both ﬁreﬂy and Renilla luciferase activity was measured using the Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay Kit ( Promega ) . Fireﬂy luciferase activities were normalized to the Renilla luciferase activities . Pulse - chase analysis 7 · 10 5 MDCK - neo and MDCK - Sna cells were plated on 6 - well dishes . After an overnight culture , cells were labeled with 70 m Ci / ml of [ 35 S ] methionine in methionine - and cysteine - free DMEM supplemented with 10 % dialyzed FCS for 16 hours . When speciﬁed , cells were labeled for 1 , 3 or 6 hours . After culture in chase media for the indicated periods , cells were washed with ice cold PBS and lysed with RIPA buffer ( 1 % TritonX - 100 , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 2 % SDS , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM EDTA , 10 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 1 mM PMSF , 5 m g / ml leupeptin and 25 m g / ml aprotinin ) . Claudin - 1 was collected with protein A - Sepharose beads conjugated to anti - claudin - 1 antibodies , separated by gel electrophoresis and subjected to autoradiography . Results Expression of Snail in MDCK cells results in downregulation of tight junction components Although the ability of Snail to induce epithelial to mesenchymal transitions and downregulate E - cadherin transcription has been well established , the molecular mechanisms underlying cellular morphological changes are poorly understood . To examine the effects of Snail expression on the levels of adherens junction and tight junction components , we introduced a hemagglutinin ( HA ) epitope - tagged human Snail cDNA into the MDCK epithelial cell line , to obtain Snail - expressing stable cell lines ( MDCK - Sna cells ) ( Figs 1 and 2 , HA ) . As reported previously ( Cano et al . , 2000 ; Batlle et al . , 2000 ) , MDCK - Sna cells exhibited epithelial - mesenchymal transitions , while control neomycin resistance cells ( MDCK - neo ) did not exhibit any morphological changes ( Fig . 2 , Phase ) . Immunoﬂuorescence staining and immunoblot analysis with anti - E - cadherin antibodies revealed the loss of E - cadherin from cell - cell contact sites ( Fig . 2 , E - cad ) and the overall downregulation of E - cadherin protein levels ( Fig . 1 , E - cad ) , respectively . RT - PCR / Southern blot analysis revealed only low levels of E - cadherin mRNA present in MDCK - Sna cells ( Fig . 3 ) . Despite the E - cadherin downregulation , approximately 50 % of the b - catenin protein of MDCK - neo cells was detectable in MDCK - Sna cells ( Fig . 1 , b - catenin ) . Low levels of b - catenin were still detectable at cell - cell contact Fig . 1 . Immunoblot analysis of the changes in cell junction protein expression . MDCK cell lines expressing control neo gene ( MDCK - neo ) , Snail ( MDCK - Sna ) , E - cadherin ( MDCK - Ecad ) , or Snail and E - cadherin together ( MDCK - Sna - Ecad ) were lysed in SDS sample buffer and subjected to immunoblot analysis . HA - tagged Snail protein and ectopically expressed myc - tagged mouse E - cadherin protein were detected with the indicated antibodies . Myc - tagged E - cadherin migrates more slowly than the endogenous canine E - cadherin . Vinculin serves as an internal control for protein loading . 1678 sites ( data not shown ) . Increased expression of additional cadherins recognizable by anti - pancadherin antibodies ( data not shown ) explains this observation . The morphological changes and cell scattering induced by ectopic Snail expression in MDCK cells suggested the possible disruption of tight junction and desmosome complexes . To examine this hypothesis , cells were stained with antibodies speciﬁc for components of these junctional complexes . Staining speciﬁc for occludin , claudin - 1 , ZO - 1 or desmoplakin could not be detected at the surface of MDCK - Sna cells ( Fig . 2 ) . Immunoblot analysis revealed that negative staining of cells for claudin - 1 and occludin is due to their absence ( Fig . 3B ) . A decreased amount of ZO - 1 was detected in MDCK - Sna cells ; this protein migrated faster than ZO - 1 from MDCK - neo cells on SDS - PAGE ( Fig . 3B ) . To determine the level at which Snail exerts an effect , we performed RT - PCR / Southern blot analyses . Consistent with previous reports ( Cano et al . , 2000 ; Batlle et al . , 2000 ) , the levels of mRNA encoding E - cadherin decreased signiﬁcantly following ectopic Snail expression , whereas those for glyceralde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase were unaltered ( Fig . 3 ) . Occludin mRNA levels also decreased in MDCK - Sna cells , consistent with a recent report ( Ikenouchi et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , mRNAs encoding claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 were detectable in MDCK - Sna cells at levels similar to those seen in control MDCK - neo cells ( Fig . 3 ) . Thus , while ectopic Snail expression downregulates the transcription of E - cadherin and occludin , transcription of additional tight junction proteins was not signiﬁcantly altered . Therefore , the major mechanism downregulating the expression of these proteins must be post - transcriptional . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 9 ) Fig . 2 . Immunolocalization of cell junctional proteins . Proteins were detected with the indicated antibodies . Endogenous and ectopically expressed E - cadherin was detected using an anti - E - cadherin antibody . Only ectopically expressed E - cadherin was detected with an anti - myc antibody . Whereas no cell contact staining pattern of tight junctional proteins could be observed in MDCK - Sna cells , the additional ectopic expression of E - cadherin restored a minimal cell contact staining pattern . 1679 Snail - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition We carried out reporter assays to determine whether the downregulation of tight junction proteins occurs at the transcriptional level . As no sequence data is available for canine E - cadherin , occludin and claudin - 1 , we isolated the promoters for human occludin , claudin - 1 and E - cadherin from the genomic DNA of A431 cells . Stable expression of Snail in A431 cells also results in the downregulation of E - cadherin , occludin , claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 ( Fig . 4A ) . We transfected reporter constructs containing these promoters ( Fig . 4B ) into A431 cells and analyzed for promoter activity . Consistent with the RT - PCR analysis , the promoter activity of occludin was repressed by Snail expression in a manner similar to that of E - cadherin , whereas that of claudin - 1 was not ( Fig . 4C ) . To determine the post - transcriptional events responsible for claudin - 1 downregulation , we performed pulse - chase experiments . Cells were labeled with [ 35 S ] methionine for 16 hours and then cultured in normal chase medium . Claudin - 1 was immunoprecipitated with speciﬁc antibodies , run on gels and subjected to autoradiography . The amount of labeled claudin - 1 obtained from MDCK - neo cells was much larger than that of claudin - 1 from MDCK - Sna cells ( Fig . 5 ) . Labeling of cells for shorter periods ( 1 , 3 and 6 hours ) gave similar results ( not shown ) . Thus , the synthesis of claudin - 1 was decreased in MDCK - Sna cells in comparison with MDCK - neo cells . Expression of Snail in MDCK cells results in changes in alternative splicing of p120 and ZO - 1 Immunoblot analysis with anti - p120 antibodies revealed that MDCK - Sna cells express a species of p120 with an altered mobility from that in MDCK - neo cells ( Fig . 1 ) or parental MDCK cells ( not shown ) . MDCK - neo cells express proteins of 118 kDa and 100 kDa , with the latter appearing more prominently . In MDCK - Sna cells , the 120 - kDa species was more prominent than the minor 100 kDa band . Following isolation by immunoprecipitation , phosphatase treatment of p120 protein increased their electrophoretic mobility slightly , as previously described ( Ohkubo and Ozawa , 1999 ) , but did not change the ratio of the intensities of the two forms . Thus , differential phosphorylation of p120 is not responsible for the altered electrophoretic mobility of p120 in MDCK - Sna cells . We observed the same electrophoretic mobility changes after ectopic Snail expression in A431 cells ( data not shown ) , suggesting this is not a cell - type speciﬁc phenomenon . RT - PCR / Southern blot analysis revealed the presence of at least two p120 mRNA species produced by alternative splicing ( Fig . 6 ) . Direct sequencing of the PCR products identiﬁed an alternatively spliced sequence of 407 bp , corresponding to a published alternatively spliced nucleotide sequence . p120 mRNA isolated Fig . 3 . Whereas the tight junctional protein occludin was transcriptionally downregulated following Snail expression , claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 were not . The mRNA expression levels of junctional proteins were detected by RT - PCR / Southern blot analysis using the indicated probes . While the expression of the a ( + ) ZO - 1 isoform was not changed in each cell , the a ( – ) isoform expression levels were elevated in two Snail - expressing cells . Fig . 4 . Snail - induced downregulation of occludin expression , but not claudin - 1 expression , is ascribed to suppression of promoter activity . ( A ) Downregulation by Snail of junction protein expression in A431 cells . ( B ) The promoter region of human E - cadherin , occludin and claudin - 1 . E - boxes are indicated by open boxes . The putative transcription start point is denoted by + 1 . For occludin , two putative transcription start points are proposed ( Mankertz et al . , 2000 ) . ( C ) Repression of the promoter activities of human E - cadherin and occludin , but not that of claudin - 1 , by Snail in A431 cells . Reporter constructs carrying the human E - cadherin , occludin or claudin - 1 promoters were co - transfected with a pCAGGS - Snail vector or an empty pCAGGS vector . Whereas the promoter activities of E - cadherin and occludin were repressed by Snail , that of claudin - 1 was not repressed . The results represent the mean±s . d . of two independent experiments . 1680 from MDCK - Sna cells contained the sequence absent from MDCK - neo cells ( Fig . 6 ) . Therefore , the p120 proteins detected by immunoblot analysis are the protein products of the alternatively spliced mRNA isoform . RT - PCR / Southern blot analysis revealed the presence of at least three isoforms of ZO - 1 in MDCK cells ( Fig . 3 ) . Sequencing ( data not shown ) revealed that the intermediate band represented a ZO - 1 a ( + ) isoform ( Willott et al . , 1992 ) , the conventional epithelial ZO - 1 isoform ( Sheth et al . , 1997 ) . The higher mobility band encoded the ZO - 1 a ( – ) isoform . The ZO - 1 a ( – ) isoform inﬂuences the plasticity of tight junctions ( Balda and Anderson , 1993 ) and affects the early stages of membrane assembly ( Sheth et al . , 1997 ) . Expression of this isoform increased in MDCK - Sna cells in comparison with MDCK - neo cells ( Fig . 4 ) . The identity of the larger band is as yet unknown . Ectopic expression of E - cadherin in Snail - expressing mesenchymal cells did not induce epithelial morphological changes E - cadherin is essential for maintaining epithelial morphology and for the proper formation of epithelial cell junctions , including adherens junctions , tight junctions and desmosomes ( Gumbiner et al . , 1988 ; Pasder and Nelson , 1988a ; Pasdar and Nelson , 1988b ; Siliciano et al . , 1988 ) . The expression of Snail in MDCK cells results in the transcriptional downregulation of E - cadherin and occludin , followed by the downregulation of the tight junction component claudin - 1 at the post - transcriptional level . The expression of catenins is regulated at the post - transcriptional level ( Papkoff , 1997 ) ; the stability of catenins increases signiﬁcantly following cadherin expression in a variety of cells . Therefore , we were interested in which of the changes induced by Snail expression can be reversed by exogenous expression of E - cadherin . We introduced a mouse E - cadherin cDNA construct , tagged with a myc epitope , under the control of b - actin promoter and cytomegalovirus enhancer into MDCK - Sna cells to establish several stable cell lines expressing a myc - tagged E - cadherin ( MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells ) ( Figs 1 and 2 ) . As a control , MDCK cells transfected with the E - cadherin construct alone were also isolated ( MDCK - Ecad cells ) . MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells retained ﬁbroblastic morphology , despite exogenous expression of E - cadherin ( Fig . 2 ) . While the levels of E - cadherin protein expressed on MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells are similar to those of MDCK - Ecad cells and MDCK - neo cells ( Fig . 1A ) , none of the MDCK - Sna - Ecad clones exhibited epithelial morphology . In MDCK - Ecad cells , the majority of E - cadherin was observed at cell junctions by immunoﬂuorescence staining , indicating that the expressed construct is successfully transported to the cell surface ( Fig . 2 ) . In MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells , however , E - cadherin was found intracellularly , concentrated in the perinuclear region , in addition to residing at cell - cell contact sites ( Fig . 2 ) . To conﬁrm the intracellular staining pattern of ectopically expressed E - cadherin molecules resulting from Snail activity , we transfected MDCK cells established for ectopic E - cadherin expression ( MDCK - Ecad cells ) with the Snail construct . The isolated stable transfectants also showed intracellular staining of E - cadherin ( data not shown ) . Thus , transport of E - cadherin to the cell surface is partially inhibited by Snail expression . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 9 ) Fig . 5 . Pulse - chase analysis of claudin - 1 in MDCK cells . Cells were metabolically labeled with [ 35 S ] methionine for 16 hours and chased for the indicated periods . Claudin - 1 was collected by anti - claudin - 1 immunoprecipitation ; collected proteins were subjected to gel electrophoresis and autoradiography . Fig . 6 . RT - PCR / southern bolt analysis revealed changes in the relative p120 isoform levels in Snail - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transitions . ( A ) Schematic representation of four possible start sites , resulting from N - terminal splicing variations . The alternatively spliced 407 bp sequence is deleted from the N - terminus in isoform 3 cDNA . The primer positions for RT - PCR and the regions used to synthesize southern blot probes ( probe 1 , 2 ) are also depicted . ( B ) Using probe 1 , N - terminally spliced shorter fragments were detected in MDCK - neo cells , while longer fragments derived from the ﬁbroblastic isoform cDNA ( isoform 1 ) were detected in MDCK - Sna and MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells by RT - PCR / Southern blot analysis . Only the longer fragments were detected using a splice region - speciﬁc probe ( probe 2 ) . 1681 Snail - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition As a portion of the ectopically expressed E - cadherin remained in cytoplasm , we quantitated the amount of ectopic E - cadherin at the cell surface in MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells biochemically . Cell surface E - cadherins become resistant to trypsin digestion in the presence of Ca 2 + , but can be degraded in the absence of Ca 2 + . Thus , the pool of E - cadherin remaining undigested by trypsin in the presence of EGTA ( TE treatment ) represents the intracellular population ; that remaining after trypsinization in the presence of Ca 2 + ( TC treatment ) represents total cadherin . Immunoblot analysis of cells after TC and TE treatment using anti - E - cadherin antibodies revealed that all of the E - cadherin on control MDCK - neo cells and MDCK - Ecad cells was digested following TE treatment . Around 30 - 40 % of the E - cadherin on MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells , however , remained undigested after TE treatment , indicating that these molecules reside intracellularly ( Fig . 7A ) . Thus , only 60 - 70 % of the total E - cadherin was expressed on the cell surface . The cell surface levels of ectopically expressed E - cadherin are also supported by surface biotinylation studies . Cell surface proteins were biotinylated using sulfo - NHS - biotin ; the biotinylated E - cadherin pool was collected using avidin beads ( surface proteins ) . Non - biotinylated protein remained in the supernatant ( intracellular pool ) . Both pools were examined by immunoblot analysis using anti - E - cadherin antibodies . Whereas almost all of E - cadherin in control MDCK - Ecad cells was biotinylated , only 40 - 50 % of the E - cadherin in MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells was biotinylated ( Fig . 7B ) . While these cell surface biotinylation studies detected a lower degree of E - cadherin on the cell surface , the discrepancy between these methods may be explained by incomplete biotinylation of surface proteins . The reason for an increased relative ratio of E - cadherin retaining the precursor segment in the intracellular pool relative to the total E - cadherin in the biotinylation experiments is unknown . We concluded that , in contrast to control cells , approximately 50 % of the total E - cadherin was expressed on the cell surface of MDCK - Sna - Ecad , while the remainder remained localized intracellularly . Ectopic expression of E - cadherin increased the levels of catenins , as measured by immunoblot analysis ( Fig . 1 ) . The amounts of catenins in MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells increased to the reach levels similar to those seen in epithelial MDCK - neo cells or MDCK - Ecad cells , suggesting that the ectopically expressed E - cadherin can associate with catenins . The shift in the expression pattern of p120 induced by Snail expression , characterized by the presence of the larger isoform , was not altered by ectopic E - cadherin expression ( Figs 1 and 6 ) . Immunoblot analysis of the ectopically expressed E - cadherin immunoprecipitates with anti - catenin antibodies revealed the association of ectopically expressed E - cadherin with catenins ( Fig . 7C ) . a - Catenin and b - catenin co - precipitated with the ectopic E - cadherin to the same extent as seen in control MDCK - Ecad cells . The larger isoform of p120 also co - precipitated with ectopic E - cadherin in MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells . Minimal staining of tight junctional components was observed in MDCK - Sna cells ( Fig . 2 ) . Ectopic expression of E - cadherin did not induce signiﬁcant changes in the staining pattern or intensities of these components ( Fig . 2 ) . Faint junctional staining was occasionally observed in MDCK - Sna - Fig . 7 . Ectopic E - cadherin cell surface expression and association with catenins . The amount of surface E - cadherin was analyzed biochemically . ( A ) E - cadherin was detected by immunoblot analysis after trypsin / Ca 2 + ( TC ) or trypsin / EGTA ( TE ) treatment . E - cadherin expressed on the cell surface was resistant to TC treatment , but sensitive to TE treatment . Only intracellular E - cadherin was detected following TE treatment . ( B ) E - cadherin was detected by immunoblot analysis after cell surface proteins were biotinylated and collected using avidin beads . After surface biotinylation , cells were lysed . After collection of biotinylated proteins ( collected 1 ) , the remaining lysate was re - collected ( collected 2 ) . The E - cadherin protein contained in either the collected ( 1 ) or remainder ( 2 ) portions were subjected to immunoblot analysis using an anti - E - cadherin antibody . To facilitate estimation , dilutions of the materials in each fraction were applied to the gels . ( C ) Formation of E - cadherin and catenin complexes in MDCK - Sna - Ecad cells . Cells were lysed and subjected to immunoprecipitation with an anti - myc antibody to precipitate ectopically expressed E - cadherin . Immunoprecipitates were subjected to immunoblot analysis using the indicated antibodies . 1682 Ecad cells . Regions staining faintly for occludin , claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 coincided with regions staining intensely for E - cadherin . The expression levels of these tight junctional proteins , however , were not altered by exogenous E - cadherin expression ( Fig . 3B ) . Thus , the presence of E - cadherin is not sufficient for either the formation of tight junctions or the post - transcriptional regulation of these proteins . In addition , ectopic expression of occludin in MDCK - Sna cells did not induce any changes in the expression of tight junction proteins ( data not shown ) . Despite the lack of an apparent effect of exogenous E - cadherin expression on cell shape and tight junction , the presence of exogenous E - cadherin protein suppressed the Snail - induced expression of ﬁbronectin ( Fig . 1 ) , supporting previous evidence demonstrating the downregulation of ﬁbronectin expression by exogenous cadherin expression ( Finnemann et al . , 1995 ) . Cessation of Snail expression reversed the epithelial - mesenchymal transition in MDCK - Sna cells Attempts to express Snail protein in MDCK cells under the control of the tetracycline - repressible transactivator were not successful for unknown reasons . Therefore , we attempted to isolate revertant cell lines . We had obtained several MDCK - Sna cell clones , all of which demonstrated mesenchymal morphology and downregulated E - cadherin expression , despite signiﬁcant differences in Snail protein expression levels . A clone expressing relatively low amounts of Snail ( MDCK - Sna - L ) was subcloned twice by limiting dilution to eliminate possible contamination of Snail - negative cells with epithelial morphology . After several weeks in G418 - free medium , epithelial cell islands appeared amongst the ﬁbroblastic cells . These epithelial cells were re - established as cell lines and tested for Snail expression . The expression of Snail had been completely lost in these cell lines , as revealed by both immunoﬂuorescence staining ( Fig . 8A ) and immunoblotting ( Fig . 8B ) . To determine whether the cessation of Snail expression is due to the disappearance of the integrated snail - HA transgene from the genomic DNA of the revertant cells , we examined the isolated cells for the presence of the transgene . Genomic DNA was isolated from the cells and subjected to PCR analysis using primers speciﬁc for the transgene ( Fig . 8C ) . The snail - HA transgene was detected in MDCK - Sna - L cells , but not in MDCK - Sna - L revertant cells ( Fig . 8D ) . The complete junctional staining pattern of E - cadherin , ZO - 1 ( Fig . 8A ) , claudin - 1 and occludin ( not shown ) was re - established in the revertant cell lines ; levels of E - cadherin protein expression were also elevated ( Fig . 8B ) . The reappearance of complete epithelial - like revertants from Snail - expressing mesenchymal cells indicated that ectopic Snail expression did not induce the differentiation of MDCK cells into mesenchymal cells , but instead induced morphological changes in the cells of our system . Discussion Epithelial to mesenchymal transitions are essential morphological conversions occurring during embryonic development , which also occur during metastatic cancer progression . During this mesenchymal transition , epithelial cells dissociate from each other , accompanied by the disruption of epithelial junctional complexes . As E - cadherin is a major Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 9 ) Fig . 8 . Cessation of Snail expression reversed the mesenchymal phenotype into an epithelial phenotype . ( A ) MDCK cells expressing low levels of Snail ( MDCK - Sna - L ) and revertant cell lines lacking Snail expression were immunostained with the indicated antibodies . ( B ) Snail and E - cadherin expression were examined by immunoblotting . Owing to low expression levels , HA - tagged Snail proteins were collected with an anti - HA antibody and then subjected to immunoblot analysis . ( C ) The Snail - HA gene and the positions of the primers used to detect the transgene . The following speciﬁc primers were used . Snail 5 ¢ primer , ACTATGCCGCGCTCTTTCCTC and HA 3 ¢ primer , GTCGTAGGGGTA GCCGATATC . ( D ) Detection of the transgene . PCR was performed on genomic DNA isolated from the three A431 cell lines indicated . The transgene could not be detected in A431 - Sna - L revertant cells . 1683 Snail - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition constituent of adherens junctions that probably plays an essential role in the assembly of junctional complexes and the maintenance of epithelial cell morphology , functional downregulation of E - cadherin correlates well with epithelial to mesenchymal transitions . The epithelial to mesenchymal transition of mouse mammary epithelial cells requires E - cadherin downregulation and the upregulation of b - catenin transcriptional activity ( Stockinger et al . , 2001 ) . The transformation of mammary epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells following the overexpression of integrin - linked kinase also involves the downregulation of E - cadherin at both the protein and mRNA levels . ( Somasiri et al . , 2001 ) . The transcriptional repressor , Snail , is expressed in regions undergoing epithelial to mesenchymal transitions during development , such as the early mesoderm and neural crest ( Nieto , 2002 ) . This molecule effectively downregulates E - cadherin transcription ( Cano et al . , 2000 ; Batlle et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , several malignant tumors demonstrate an inverse correlation between Snail and E - cadherin expression ( Cano et al . , 2000 ; Batlle et al . , 2000 ; Blanco et al . , 2002 ) . Snail expression induces drastic morphological changes in MDCK cells , causing these cells to lose the integrity of their cell - cell contacts . These results suggest that Snail disrupts the function of adherens junctions as well as other cell - cell junctions , including tight junctions . Our results conﬁrm this hypothesis , demonstrating that disorganization of tight junction results from a lack of junctional components . As occludin mRNA decreased signiﬁcantly , occludin downregulation occurs at the transcription level , consistent with recently published studies ( Ikenouchi et al . , 2003 ) . The downregulation of claudin - 1 , however , appears to be post - transcriptional ; we could detect claudin - 1 mRNA in Snail - expressing MDCK cells . A lack of repression in reporter assays by Snail of human claudin - 1 promoter activity , which is also downregulated by Snail expression in A431 cells , supports this conclusion . Pulse - chase analysis observed the decreased synthesis of claudin - 1 in Snail - expressing cells in comparison with control neo - MDCK cells . Further studies will be necessary to determine the mechanism by which Snail , a transcriptional repressor , reduces translation of claudin - 1 . Snail blocks E - cadherin transcription by binding to speciﬁc DNA sequences ( CANNTG , where N is any nucleotide ) , called E - boxes , within the promoters of target genes ( Cano et al . , 2000 ; Batlle et al . , 2000 ) . The human occludin promoter contains one E - box ( Mankertz et al . , 2000 ) , while the mouse and human claudin - 1 promoters each have two E - boxes ( Kramer et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , the presence of the E - box DNA sequences within the promoter is not sufficient to be suppressed by Snail . Recently , Snail was shown to suppress the promoter activity of claudin - 3 , claudin - 4 and claudin - 7 ( Ikenouchi et al . , 2003 ) . Consistent with this , we observed downregulation of these claudins in Snail - expressing MDCK cells ( Ohkubo , T . , unpublished observation ) . While we do not know the reason for the differential suppression of claudin promoter activities by Snail , we hypothesize that there must be functional differences between these claudins allowing these differences . Downregulation of ZO - 1 is unexpected , as ZO - 1 is expressed ubiquitously in a variety of cell types , including ﬁbroblasts ( Itoh et al . , 1993 ) . The decreased expression of ZO - 1 upon TGF - b - induced transdifferentiation of mammary epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells has been reported ( Miettinen et al . , 1994 ) . Interestingly , the levels of mRNA encoding an alternative splice variant of ZO - 1 , the a ( – ) isoform , were increased following Snail expression . These levels could not be altered by ectopic E - cadherin expression . This isoform may inﬂuence the plasticity of tight junctions ( Balda and Anderson , 1993 ) or may function in the early stages of membrane assembly ( Sheth et al . , 1997 ) . Analysis of the multiple alternatively spliced isoforms of p120 present in a variety of murine cell lines indicates that motile cells , such as ﬁbroblasts and macrophages , preferentially express isoform 1 , while epithelial cells preferentially express isoform 3 ( Mo and Reynolds 1996 ; Keirsebilck et al . , 1998 ) . Isoform 1 expression is dramatically upregulated in a Src - transformed MDCK cell line , indicating that the pattern of isoform expression can be altered following cellular transformation . Isoform switching did not strictly correlate with transformation , however , as not all Src - transformed cell lines exhibited this effect ( Mo and Reynolds , 1996 ) . Contrary to this observation , all MDCK - Sna and MDCK - Sna - Ecad clones demonstrated isoform switching . This is the ﬁrst report that Snail expression alters the splicing pattern of p120 . We also observed an unexpected retardation of E - cadherin transport to the plasma membrane in cells overexpressing Snail . Ectopically expressed E - cadherin remained primarily within the Golgi apparatus ( T . O . , unpublished observation ) . One possible explanation for this localization is that junctional complex maturation at cell contact sites was disturbed by Snail expression , either directly or indirectly . This disturbance may signal to the trans - Golgi network to halt the supply of additional E - cadherin molecules to sites of cell contacts . The possibility remains , however , that Snail expression may also regulate the trans - Golgi network system directly , possibly through interactions with a rab GTPase - dependent vesicle transport system . Further studies will be necessary to resolve this question . Overexpression of integrin - linked kinases in mammary epithelial cells , which may stimulate Snail expression , transforms these cells into mesenchymal cells ( Somasiri et al . , 2001 ; Tan et al . , 2001 ) . While the type of transition induced by integrin - linked kinase overexpression can be reversed by forced expression of E - cadherin ( Somasiri et al . , 2001 ) , Snail - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transitions could not be reversed by such ectopic expression . Detailed analysis revealed that while E - cadherin expression could reverse the upregulation of ﬁbronectin expression , it could not reverse the downregulation of tight junction components . Although a portion of ectopically expressed E - cadherin was retained internally , biochemical data demonstrated that approximately 50 % of the total E - cadherin was expressed at the cell surface . Recent analysis of MDCK cells expressing a mutant E - cadherin indicated that substantial desmosome and tight junction assembly occurred in cells overexpressing mutant E - cadherins , despite downregulation of endogenous E - cadherin and possible inhibition of the remaining E - cadherin by dominant - negative and / or competitive effects ( Troxell et al . , 1999 ; Troxell et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , low levels of cadherin function appear to be sufficient for cell - cell junctional complexes to assemble and remain stable . In that sense , our ﬁndings seem to be an apparent contradiction to previous studies . The action of Snail is thus not restricted to E - cadherin 1684 downregulation , but is rather pleiotropic , additionally inducing the downregulation of tight junctional components . Thus , it is reasonable that the expression of E - cadherin cannot reverse the transition induced by Snail . Catenin expression is regulated at the post - transcriptional level ; association with cadherins stabilizes these proteins . In contrast , ectopic expression of occludin could not restore the expression and localization of tight junctional proteins . This result is consistent with the observation that the subcellular localization of claudin was not affected by the loss of occludin expression . In addition , tight junctions are not affected either morphologically or functionally in occludin - deﬁcient mice ( Saitou et al . , 2000 ) . Therefore , independent mechanism ( s ) are probably involved in the post - translational regulation of claudin - 1 and ZO - 1 levels . The increased expression of an additional cadherin , detectable with pancadherin antibodies , may be responsible for the failure of ectopic E - cadherin expression to reverse some of the Snail - induced changes . Expression of N - cadherin in epithelial cells also induces epithelial to mesenchymal transition and increased motility ( Kim et al . , 2000 ) . A variety of intracellular signals regulate tight junction assembly and function ( Madara , 1998 ) , including the Rho family of GTPases . These small GTPases are actin cytoskeletal regulatory molecules controlling cortical actin structures and tight junction assembly in epithelial cells ( Gopalakrishnan et al . , 1998 ; Jou and Nelson , 1998 ; Jou et al . , 1998 ; Nusrat et al . , 1995 ; Takaishi et al . , 1997 ) . Rho - family GTPases localize to the apical junctional complex in epithelial cells ( Jou and Nelson , 1998 ; Jou et al . , 1998 ; Takaishi et al . , 1997 ) . Future experiments will need to address the actin regulatory mechanisms disrupted by Snail expression and the effects of this disruption on tight junction function . We thank Rolf Kemler , Yasushi Daikuhara , James Nelson , Akihiko Yoshimura and Ken - ichi Yamamura for providing us with reagents , Misako Haraguchi for her helpful advice with the reporter assays , and Kumiko Sato for secretarial assistance . This work was supported by a grant from the Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science and Technology of Japan , a Grant - in Aid for Science Research on Priority Area ( B ) . References Adams , C . L . , Nelson , W . J . and Smith , S . J . ( 1996 ) . Quantitative analysis of cadherin - catenin - actin reorganization during development of cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1899 - 1911 . Amagai , M . , Fujimori , T . , Masunaga , T . , Shimizu , H . , Nishikawa , T . , Shimizu , N . , Takeichi , M . and Hashimoto , T . ( 1995 ) . Delayed assembly of desmosomes in keratinocytes with disrupted classic - cadherin - mediated cell adhesion by a dominant negative mutant . J . Invest . Dermatol . 104 , 27 - 32 . Angres , B . , Barth , A . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1996 ) . Mechanism for transition from initial to stable cell - cell adhesion : kinetic analysis of E - cadherin - mediated adhesion using a quantitative adhesion assay . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 549 - 557 . Balda , M . S . and Anderson , M . ( 1993 ) . Two classes of tight junctions are revealed by ZO - 1 isoforms . Am . J . Physiol . 264 , C918 - C924 . Barth , A . I . , Pollack , A . L . , Altschuler , Y . , Mostov , K . E . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1997 ) . NH2 - terminal deletion of beta - catenin results in stable colocalization of mutant beta - catenin with adenomatous polyposis coli protein and altered MDCK cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 693 - 706 . Batlle , E . , Sancho , E . , Franci , C . , Dominguez , D . , Monfar , D . , Baulida , J . and de Herreros , A . G . ( 2000 ) . The transcription factor Snail is a repressor for E - cadherin gene expression in epithelial tumor cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 84 - 89 . Blanco , M . J . , Moreno - Bueno , G . , Sarrio , D . , Locascio , A . , Cano , A . , Palacios , J . and Nieto , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Correlation of Snail expression with histological grade and lymph node status in breast carcinomas . Oncogene 21 , 3241 - 3246 . Buxton , R . S . and Magee , A . I . ( 1992 ) . Structure and interactions of desmosomal and other cadherins . Semin . Cell Biol . 3 , 157 - 167 . Cano , A . , Pérez - Moreno , M . A . , Rodrigo , I . , Locascio , A . , Blanco , M . J . , del Barrio , M . G . , Portillo , F . and Nieto , M . A . ( 2000 ) . The transcription factor Snail controls epithelial - mesenchymal transition by repressing E - cadherin expression . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 76 - 83 . Duband , J . L . , Monier , F . , Delannet , M . and Newgreen , D . ( 1995 ) . Epithelium - mesenchyme transition during neural crest development . Acta Anat ( Basel ) 154 , 63 - 78 . Finnemann , S . , Kuhl , M . , Otto , G . and Wedlich , D . ( 1995 ) . Cadherin transfection of Xenopus XTC cells downregulates expression of substrate adhesion molecules . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 5082 - 5091 . Furuse , M . , Itoh , M . , Hirase , T . , Nagafuchi , A . , Yonemura , S . , Tsukita , S . and Tsukita , S . ( 1994 ) . Direct association of occludin with ZO - 1 and its possible involvement in the localization of occludin at tight junctions . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1617 - 1626 . Gopalakrishnan , S . , Raman , N . , Atkinson , S . J . and Marrs , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPase signaling regulates tight junction assembly and protects tight junctions during ATP depletion . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , C798 - C809 . Gossen , M . and Bujard . H . ( 1992 ) . Tight control of gene expression in mammalian cells by tetracycline - responsive promoters . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 5547 - 5551 . Gray , S . , Szymanski , P . and Levine , M . ( 1994 ) . Short - range repression permits multiple enhancers to function autonomously within a complex promoter . Genes Dev . 8 , 1829 - 1838 . Green , K . J . and Jones , J . C . ( 1996 ) . Desmosomes and hemidesmosomes : structure and function of molecular components . FASEB J . 10 , 871 - 881 . Gumbiner , B . , Stevenson , B . and Grimaldi , A . ( 1988 ) . The role of the cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin in the formation and maintenance of the epithelial junctional complex . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 1575 - 1587 . Gumbiner , B . , Lowenkopf , T . and Apatira , D . ( 1991 ) . Identiﬁcation of a 160 - kDa polypeptide that binds to the tight junction protein ZO - 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 3460 - 3464 . Hay , E . D . ( 1995 ) . An overview of epithelio - mesenchymal transformation . Acta Anat ( Basel ) 154 , 8 - 20 . Ikenouchi , J . , Matsuda , M . , Furuse , M . and Tsukita , S . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of tight junctions during the epithelial - mesenchymal transition : direct repression of the gene expression of claudin / occludin by Snail . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1991 - 1967 . Itoh , M . , Nagafuchi , A . , Yonemura , S . , Kitani - Yasuda , T . , Tsukita , S . and Tsukita , S . ( 1993 ) . The 220 - kD protein colocalizing with cadherins in non - epithelial cells is identical to ZO - 1 , a tight junction - associated protein in epithelial cells : cDNA cloning and immunoelectron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 491 - 502 . Ito , M . , Nagafuchi , A . , Moroi , S . and Tsukita , S . ( 1997 ) . Involvement of ZO - 1 in cadherin - based cell adhesion through its direct binding to a - catenin and actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 181 - 192 . Jou , T . S . , Stewart , D . B . , Stappert , J . , Nelson , W . J . and Marrs , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Genetic and biochemical dissection of protein linkages in the cadherin - catenin complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 5067 - 5071 . Jou , T . S . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Effects of regulated expression of mutant RhoA and Rac1 small GTPases on the development of epithelial ( MDCK ) cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 85 - 100 . Jou , T . S . , Schneeberger , E . E . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Structural and functional regulation of tight junctions by RhoA and Rac1 small GTPases . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 101 - 115 . Keirsebilck , A . , Bonne , S . , Staes , K . , van Hengel , J . , Nollet , F . , Reynolds , A . and van Roy , F . ( 1998 ) . Molecular cloning of the human p120ctn catenin gene ( CTNND1 ) : expression of multiple alternatively spliced isoforms . Genomics 50 , 129 - 146 . Kim , J . B . , Islam , S . , Kim , Y . J . , Prudoff , R . S . , Sass , K . M . , Wheelock , M . J . and Johnson , K . R . ( 2000 ) . N - Cadherin extracellular repeat 4 mediates epithelial to mesenchymal transition and increased motility . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1193 - 1206 . Kramer , F . , White , K . , Kubbies , M . , Swisshelm , K . and Weber , B . H . ( 2000 ) . Genomic organization of claudin - 1 and its assessment in hereditary and sporadic breast cancer . Hum . Genet . 107 , 249 - 256 . Laemmnli , U . K . ( 1970 ) . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature 227 , 689 - 685 . Madara , J . L . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of the movement of solutes across tight junctions . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 60 , 143 - 159 . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 9 ) 1685 Snail - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition Mankertz , J . , Tavalali , S . , Schmitz , H . , Mankertz , A . , Riecken , E . O . , Fromm , M . and Schulzke , J . D . ( 2000 ) . Expression from the human occludin promoter is affected by tumor necrosis factor alpha and interferon gamma . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2085 - 2090 . Manzanares , M . , Locascio , A . and Nieto , M . A . ( 2001 ) . The increasing complexity of the Snail gene superfamily in metazoan evolution . Trend Genet . 17 , 178 - 181 . Miettinen , P . J . , Ebner , R . , Lopez , A . R . and Derynck , R . ( 1994 ) . TGF - beta induced transdifferentiation of mammary epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells : involvement of type I receptors . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 2021 - 2036 . Mo , Y . - Y . and Reynolds , A . B . ( 1996 ) . Identiﬁcation of murine p120cas isoforms and heterogeneous expression of p120cas isoform in human tumor cell lines . Cancer Res . 56 , 2633 - 2640 . Nieto , M . A . ( 2002 ) . The Snail superfamily of zinc - ﬁnger transcription factors . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 3 , 155 - 166 . Nose , A . , Nagafuchi , A . and Takeichi , M . ( 1988 ) . Expressed recombinant cadherins mediate cell sorting in model systems . Cell 54 , 993 - 1001 . Nusrat , A . , Giry , M . , Turner , J . R . , Colgan , S . P . , Parkos , C . A . , Carnes , D . , Lemichez , E . , Boquet , P . and Madara , J . L . ( 1995 ) . Rho protein regulates tight junctions and perijunctional actin organization in polarized epithelia . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 10629 - 10633 . Ohkubo , T . and Ozawa , M . ( 1999 ) . p120ctn binds to the membrane - proximal region of the E - cadherin cytoplasmic domain and is involved in modulation of adhesion activity . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 21409 - 21415 . Ozawa , M . , Baribaut , H . and Kemler , R . ( 1989 ) . The cytoplasmic domain of the cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin associates with three independent proteins structurally related in different species . EMBO J . 8 , 1711 - 1717 . Ozawa , M . , Ringwald , M . and Kemler , R . ( 1990 ) . Uvomorulin - catenin complex formation is regulated by a speciﬁc domain in the cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 4246 - 4250 . Ozawa , M . ( 2002 ) . Lateral dimerization of the E - cadherin extracellular domain is necessary but not sufficient for adhesive activity . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 19600 - 19608 . Papkoff , J . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of complexed and free catenin pools by distinct mechanisms . Differential effects of Wnt - 1 and v - Src . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 4536 - 4543 . Pasdar , M . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1988a ) . Kinetics of desmosome assembly in Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells : temporal and spatial regulation of desmoplakin organization and stabilization upon cell - cell contact . I . Biochemical analysis . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 677 - 685 . Pasdar , M . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1988b ) . Kinetics of desmosome assembly in Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells : temporal and spatial regulation of desmoplakin organization and stabilization upon cell - cell contact . II . Morphological analysis . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 687 - 695 . Reynolds , A . B . , Daniel , J . , McCrea , P . D . , Wheelock , M . J . , Wu , J . and Zhang , Z . ( 1994 ) . Identiﬁcation of a new catenin : the tyrosine kinase substrate p120cas associates with E - cadherin complexes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 14 , 8333 - 8342 . Rimm , D . L . , Koslov , E . R . , Kebriaei , P . , Cianci , C . D . and Morrow , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Alpha 1 ( E ) - catenin is an actin - binding and - bundling protein mediating the attachment of F - actin to the membrane adhesion complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 8813 - 8817 . Saitou , M . , Furuse , M . , Sasaki , H . , Schulzke , J . D . , Fromm , M . , Takano , H . , Noda , T . and Tsukita , S . ( 2000 ) . Complex phenotype of mice lacking occludin , a component of tight junction strands . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 4131 - 4142 . Sheth , B . , Fesenko , I . , Collins , J . E . , Moran , B . , Wild , A . , Anderson , J . M . and Fleming , T . P . ( 1997 ) . Tight junction assembly during mouse blastocyst formation is regulated by late expression of ZO - 1 a + isoform . Development 124 , 2027 - 2037 . Siliciano , J . D . and Goodenough , D . A . ( 1988 ) . Localization of the tight junction protein , ZO - 1 , is modulated by extracellular calcium and cell - cell contact in Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 2389 - 2399 . Somasiri , A . , Howarth , A . , Goswami , D . , Dedhar , S . and Roskelley , C . D . ( 2001 ) . Overexpression of the integrin - linked kinase mesenchymally transforms mammary epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1125 - 1136 . Stevenson , B . R . , Siliciano , J . D . , Mooseker , M . S . and Goodenough , D . A . ( 1986 ) . Identiﬁcation of ZO - 1 : a high molecular weight polypeptide associated with the tight junction ( zonula occludens ) in a variety of epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 755 - 766 . Stockinger , A . , Eger , A . , Wolf , J . , Beug , H . and Foisner , R . ( 2001 ) . E - cadherin regulates cell growth by modulating proliferation - dependent beta - catenin transcriptional activity . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1185 - 1196 . Takaishi , K . , Sasaki , T . , Kotani , H . , Nishioka , H . and Takai , Y . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of cell - cell adhesion by rac and rho small G proteins in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 1047 - 1059 . Tan , C . , Costello , P . , Sanghera , J . , Dominguez , D . , Baulida , J . , de Herreros , A . G . and Dedhar , S . ( 2001 ) . Inhibition of integrin linked kinase ( ILK ) suppresses beta - catenin - Lef / Tcf - dependent transcription and expression of the E - cadherin repressor , snail , in APC – / – human colon carcinoma cells . Oncogene 20 , 133 - 140 . Troxell , M . L . , Chen , Y - T . , Cobb , N . , Nelson , W . J . and Marrs , J . M . ( 1999 ) . Cadherin function in junctional complex rearrangement and post - translational control of cadherin expression . Am . J . Physiol . 276 , C404 - C418 . Troxell , M . L . , Gopalakrishnan , S . , McCormack , J . , Poteat , B . A . , Pennington , J . , Garringer , S . M . , Schneeberger , E . E . , Nelson , W . J . and Marrs , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Inhibiting cadherin function by dominant mutant E - cadherin expression increases the extent of tight junction assembly . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 985 - 996 . Watabe , M . , Nagafuchi , A . , Tsukita , S . and Takeichi , M . ( 1994 ) . Induction of polarized cell - cell association and retardation of growth by activation of the E - cadherin - catenin adhesion system in a dispersed carcinoma line . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 247 - 256 . Willott , E . , Balda , M . S . , Heintzelman , M . , Jameson , B . and Anderson , J . M . ( 1992 ) . Localization and differential expresson of two isoforms of the tight junction protein ZO - 1 . Am . J . Physiol . 262 , C1119 - C1124 . Zhu , A . J . and Watt , F . M . ( 1996 ) . Expression of a dominant negative cadherin mutant inhibits proliferation and stimulates terminal differentiation of human epidermal keratinocytes . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 3013 - 3023 .