 Abstract — In this paper we present StimCards : an interactive game for cognitive training exercises . To increase the impact of this game we experiment four kinds of interfaces : a basic computer , an embodied conversational agent and a robot with two different appearances . The report of these experiments shows that the robot is the best positive feedback for cognitive game . I . I NTRODUCTION Nowadays there is growing concern about people with cognitive troubles . Their cognitive capabilities should be improved to protect their life quality as long as possible with cognitive stimulation , cognitive training and cognitive rehabilitation [ 1 ] . Informatics helps to practice this kind of activities . Cognitive training can be completely automated . People can work independently . To be efficient , this computer system should deal with acceptability , lassitude feelings and loss of attention . Acceptability is the first problem to consider because it appears when people are introduced to new technologies . The elderly are generally the most reluctant to use computers because computers should not replace real people . In their mind , loneliness is the worst for feelings . They need to feel helpful , to improve their mind and to stay connected to other people [ 2 ] . Acceptability is not linked to social skills [ 3 ] or to computers knowledge . A study [ 4 ] showed that people with Alzheimer’s learnt how to interact with computers , although they never used it before . They even gain advantage from that if computers allow them to practice training exercises and communicate with their family and doctors . Imbeault [ 5 ] specifies that games which combine training exercises and technology give more pleasure that paper games . Games seem therefore a good solution to do cognitive training because they give cognitive profit ensuring that gamers enjoy themselves without making any effort [ 6 ] . Moreover games are interesting for their learning process , often used in education [ 7 ] . If game can solve the acceptability problem , there are two problems left : lassitude feeling and loss of attention . A study from Lazar [ 8 ] showed that passivity can cause lassitude feeling and loss of attention . To avoid people passivity , the computing system has to take human into account . People should actively contribute to the task and get an immediate positive feedback about their participation . In the Human - Computer Interaction domain , Goth showed [ 9 ] that it is the end of Graphical User Interface ( GUI ) because users are too passive . The system combining mouth and keyboard disappears . It is replaced by new  * Research supported by French National Research Agency . C . Jost is with the University of South Brittany in the Lab - STICC laboratory . Vannes , France . ( e - mail : celine . jost @ gmail . com ) B . Le Pévédic is with the University of South Brittany in the Lab - STICC laboratory . Vannes , France . ( e - mail : brigitte . le - pevedic @ univ - ubs . fr ) D . Duhaut is with the University of South Brittany in the Lab - STICC laboratory . Vannes , France . ( e - mail : dominique . duhaut @ univ - ubs . fr ) applications with more natural interaction , that is : multimodal [ 10 ] . An efficient game should respect the Natural User Interface ( NUI ) considerations [ 9 ] . The question is to know how to create such a game in order to maximize its impact [ 11 ] . The game we built is guided by users . We tested several “human - game” interfaces ( HGI ) : a GUI , an embodied conversational agent and a robot ( with two different appearances ) . The experimentation objective was to test our game acceptability and to determine what kind of “human - game” interface is the most impacting for a training game . Chapter II shows a list of research studies about games . Chapter III introduces our game StimCards . Chapter IV presents the four environments we compared in our experimentation . Chapter V details our experimentation which makes the conclusion that the robot is the best training cognitive game partner . Chapter VI gives conclusion and perspectives . II . S OLUTIONS OF TODAY Table I shows a list of research studies about cognitive stimulation or reeducation games . They can be classified according to their technology or according to target people . Generally , these games are specialized and can not be adapted to other domains . Five out of the six more current games are GUI although the community [ 9 ] [ 10 ] showed that they might be NUI . Some others games – that do no use computer – cause acceptability problems . ZPLAY [ 12 ] requires that patients wear sensor in order to supervise their health . This kind of systems is too invasive . New technologies should be transparently integrated [ 13 ] in existing systems to avoid a long learning period of time . Jecripe application [ 6 ] asks gamers to make movements or to mimic an avatar . It is a first step toward NUI . The problem is that the application does not take gamer actions into account , although “the human should be at the core of the system” [ 14 ] . Only a few games innovate with their technology : mobile peripherals , bike , augmented reality , game consoles . But these games are too specialized and closed . It is not possible to adapt them to others contexts . TABLE I . C URRENT COGNITIVE GAMES Name Year Target domain Technology Story Mahsup [ 15 ] 2007 Everyone Mobiles + PC No name [ 16 ] 2007 Alzheimer Bike + PC No name [ 17 ] 2009 Cognitive troubles Robot Jecripe [ 6 ] 2010 Down syndrome Computer ZPLAY [ 12 ] 2010 Alzheimer Computer + skin sensors No name [ 18 ] 2010 Elderly Augmented reality + tangram Robot is best to play with human ! * C . Jost , B . Le Pévédic , and D . Duhaut ha l - 00745638 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 Author manuscript , published in " RO - MAN 2012 - 21st IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , paris : France ( 2012 ) " Name Year Target domain Technology VI - Tennis [ 19 ] 2010 Blind Sound + vibration ( WII ) No name [ 20 ] 2011 People with disabilities Computer 3D character SAVION [ 4 ] 2011 Dementia 3D No name [ 5 ] 2011 Alzheimer Computer No name [ 21 ] 2011 Cognitive difficulties Computer No name [ 22 ] 2011 Amblyopia Ipod Touch No name [ 23 ] 2011 Cognitive troubles Computer These limitations suggest that an open game might be created . It should be adaptable to other domains and as many people as possible . To answer this objective , we created StimCards , which combines technology and card game . We designed it to be “all publics” . Some experiments have to check this hypothesis . This paper presents the young public . The game is completely configurable and takes place in NUI domain . III . S TIM C ARDS A . Equipment StimCards is an interactive card game ( see Fig . 1 . ) The elements of the game are : card with barcode ( a QR code ) on the verso , a camera , a computer and a tactile tablet . To play , gamers must put a card in front of the camera which recognizes the card and displays its environment in StimCards GUI as shown in Fig . 2 . We developed a QR code reader based on a free library . The problem is that recognition capabilities are limited . So , we encoded only the question number in the QR code . When the program decodes this number , it reads a file which makes the link between question number and an associated XML file which contains question data ( see III . B ) . Gamers give their answer with the tactile tablet . Others digital devices can be added to the game , such as avatars or robots . Fig . 1 . shows an interaction example with a small humanoid robot and a Nabaztag . Figure 1 . StimCards , the interactive game B . Game configuration StimCards can be adapted with others questions . People only have to change the card file description . Each card is associated to a XML file which contains : the question label and associated picture , question type ( multiple choice question , open question … ) , a card category ( entertainment , sciences , math … ) , GUI background color , font color , a set of clues which can help gamers , a set of suggested answers ( text and / or picture ) and the true answer . These data are displayed in StimCards GUI . Fig . 2 . shows an example of a loaded card . Figure 2 . A loaded card example in StimCards GUI C . Game dynamic The game sequences are not permanent . StimCards is created with MICE [ 24 ] . It is a computing modular environment which allows digital devices to communicate altogether . New module integration is easy and fast . Interaction scenarios are creating with a visual programming GUI . Thus , StimCards is configurable in two ways : it is possible to create new cards and to describe the game sequences . 1 ) Game example In order to study StimCards acceptability , we created a simple scenario , tested with four different “human - game” interfaces ( HGI ) : a computer , an ECA and a robot with two different appearances . In the interaction beginning , the HGI introduced itself . Then , it explains the game rules . It is mental arithmetic game1 . There are five difficulty levels : light - yellow ( most easy ) , dark yellow , light - green , dark green and blue ( most difficult ) . The HGI asks the gamer to show a card to the camera . Gamer has one minute to react . If the time is out or if the gamer shows an inappropriate card , the HGI remind instructions . If the card is correct , the question is displayed on the StimCards GUI . In the same time , the HGI asks the question . Gamer has one minute to answer the question . If the answer is correct , game levels up . But if the time is out or if the gamer gives a wrong answer , the level does not evolve . 2 ) Scenario building with MICE Fig . 3 . shows the scenario which was creating with MICE . It is a state automaton , where states represent a game stage . For example , the I state corresponds to the HGI asking the gamer to show a card to the camera . If an appropriate card is detected , the current state is J , where the question is asked by the HGI . Orange states represent alternative situations . One possible alternative is the reaction after sixty seconds without any action or after a wrong card or a wrong answer . The K state is the moment when the HGI congratulates the gamer . Then , the HGI asks the gamer to show a new card and current game is I . After nine iterations , ( 1 ) built with teachers from school which participated to the experiment . ha l - 00745638 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 game is complete and activates L state . The HGI thanks the human for the game . Figure 3 . StimCards interaction scenario Game stage or sequences can be easily changed by creating a new StimCards scenario . IV . T HE FOUR COMPARED ENVIRONMENT Fig . 4 . shows the four environments which were tested during experimentation and which are described below . Environment 1 : This environment corresponds to the A picture . It is the « computer » HGI . In this case , the environment is composed of a computer which displays StimCards GUI and a camera visual control . There are two external sound speakers . Environment 2 : This environment corresponds to the B picture . It is the “character” HGI . It is the same environment than the first one except that an avatar is added . This avatar , which is Greta [ 25 ] , is screened on a scale of 1 : 1 . Speakers are hidden behind the screen . Environment 3 : This environment corresponds to the C picture . It is the “robot” HGI . It is the same environment than the first one except that a small humanoid robot , called Bioloïd [ 26 ] , is added . Speakers are located on both robot sides . Environment 4 : This environment corresponds to the D picture . It is the “animal” HGI . It is the same environment than the third one except that the robot is dressed up as a “cartoon chicken” . The fabric is soft , like stuffed animal . We tested two different robots to determine if the robot appearance has an incidence for interaction . Figure 4 . The four compared HGI V . E XPERIMENTATION Our global objective is to check if StimCards is “all publics” and to determine which kinds of digital objects can ensure the best human - game interaction . This experiment - tation was a part of our global objective . There were two objectives . First , StimCards was tested in order to check its usability and acceptability with children . Second , four different Human - Game Interfaces ( HGI ) were tested in order to determine children favourite one . The experimentation was composed of four sessions which lasted ten minutes . There was one session per environment , during two weeks ( two schools ) . Each participant interacted with the four environments . Each HGI played the same scenario ( see III . C . 2 ) , spoke with the same voice and said the same speech . They did not have any particular expression , no emotion , and no personality ( see conclusion and perspectives ) . A . Global setting Participants were pupils in the last “level” of elementary school ( average age : 10 . 27 years old ) . We choose young people to test StimCards because we wanted to check if the game was easy to use enough . Young people are not expert in computing , so they represent a big cross - section . And they do not have problems with technology , so it is a good starting point . Indeed , if children do not accept StimCards , it is not worth testing it with the elderly . This experimentation was realized by 52 children from two schools ( 27 girls and 25 boys ) . To have the same experimental setting , the experimentation was conducted in a 1 . 60 meters cubic room , closed by green curtains . Green has been chosen to increase luminosity in the room and because it is bright and calming . Children were isolated in the room . The both lateral curtains have one way mirrors to make sure the experimentation went smoothly . Fig . 5 . illustrates the experimental setting . A desk and a chair were at the end of the room , back to the entrance . Two cameras filmed the interaction . The first one filmed children face . The second one filmed from head to knees in order to see legs and hands movements and general posture . A projector illuminated the room . A computer displayed the StimCards GUI . Game cards were placed in front of the computer . There were five ha l - 00745638 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 packages corresponding to the five difficulty levels : light - yellow , dark yellow , light - green , dark green and blue . A tactile tablet was placed in front of children . A camera was fixed in a black box , on the left of the computer . Children had to put a card in the box slit . The card was placed in front of the camera which read the barcode and treated the question . When children finished playing with a card , they throw it away in the trash box . The tested HGI was placed on the left of the computer . Figure 5 . Experimental setting B . Evaluation At the end of each ten minutes game session , children had to fill a questionnaire which corresponded to 1 to 13 questions of Table II . At the end of the four sessions , they had to fill a final questionnaire which corresponded to 14 to 21 questions . The first questionnaire valued the four HGI . The second questionnaire valued StimCards . Questions 20 and 21 valued the favourite HGI . Thus , each participant filled five questionnaires . The term “HGI” was replaced by “computer” , “animal” , “robot” and “character” according to the current session . Concerning 1 to 19 questions , a Likert scale was used to answer : Strongly disagree , Disagree , Neither agree or disagree , Agree , Strongly agree . Questions 20 and 21 were free . In results study , we associate a value to these answers . 0 = Strongly disagree , 1 = Disagree , 2 = Neither agree or disagree , 3 = Agree and 4 = Strongly agree . In the figures , the significance level was marked * for p < 0 . 05 , * * for p < 0 . 01 and * * * for p < 0 . 001 . TABLE II . A SKED QUESTIONS 1 . Did you find exercises were easy ? 2 . Did you find that the HGI presence helped you to answer the questions ? 3 . Did you enjoy playing with the HGI ? 4 . Did you feel encouraged by the HGI during the game ? 5 . Did you find the HGI was nice ? 6 . Did you find the HGI was irritating ? 7 . Would you like to have the HGI at home to help you doing your homework ? 8 . Do you think that the HGI can do mental arithmetic ? 9 . Do you think that the HGI can understand your answers ? 10 . Do you think that the HGI can see you ? 11 . Do you think that the HGI can hear you ? 12 . Do you think that the HGI likes you ? 13 . Do you think that the HGI is happy to play with you ? 14 . Did you enjoy playing with StimCards ? 15 . Would you like to have StimCards at home ? 16 . Were the game rules easy to understand ? 17 . Do you think the HGI timely spoke or move ? 18 . Would you like to be able to decide whenever the HGI has to make movement or to speak ? 19 . Would you like that the HGI was personal ( adapted to you ) ? 20 . What is your order of preference of the four HGI ? 21 . If you could choose a companion to help you in your daily life , which one would you choose ? C . Results Statistical analysis were realized with Minitab 15© software . The Chi - square test determined the significant answers . The significant level ( p ) was equal to 0 . 05 . 1 ) HGI results From questions 1 until 13 , each HGI ( computer , character , robot and animal ) were computed statistics . In addition , each question received a score which corresponds to a weighted sum ( the value of each answer multiplied by the number of obtained votes for this answer ) . Thus , the highest is the score ; the most positive votes are received . There are no statistical differences between the four HGI and between boys and girls . So , this paper presents the results for all HGI and without any gender distinction . Insignificant results : Questions 2 , 4 and 12 are not significant . That means children were not able to answer . These three questions deal with HGI empathic capabilities . This results show that the appearance is not sufficient to make a digital partner nice and empathic . Significant “Strongly disagree” results : Concerning the first question , a few children judged the exercises difficult despite the growing difficulty . The majority judged the exercises easy . HGI have never been judged irritating . The majority of children think that HGI were not able to see them . Significant “Strongly agree” results : Children enjoyed playing with the HGI and found them nice . In spite of the result about vision , children thought that the HGI were able to hear them and to do mental arithmetic . In children mind , the HGI were able to understand their answer . Moreover , children thought that the HGI were happy to play with them . They wanted to have the HGI at home . Questionnaire study : The questionnaire statistical study did not identify the HGI which was significantly preferred by the children . We therefore counted each time the HGI had the highest score , each time the HGI had the lowest score and the score of all questions ( without taking the question 6 into account because its score is negative ) . The animal was cited the maximum number of times and get the best score whereas the robot was cited the minimum number of times and get the worst score . TABLE III . I NTERFACES SCORE HGI Number of min Number of max Total Computer 3 2 1450 ha l - 00745638 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 HGI Number of min Number of max Total Character 2 3 1432 Robot 1 6 1411 Animal 7 2 1483 2 ) StimCards acceptability results Concerning StimCards evaluation , children really enjoyed playing with it ( X² = 86 . 8462 , p = 0 . 000 , Fig . 6 ) . They would like to have this game at home ( X² = 61 . 8462 , p = 0 . 000 , Fig . 6 ) . The game rules were judged really easy ( X² = 53 . 5769 , Fig . 6 ) . Concerning the game scenario , children thought that the HGI timely spoke and move ( X² = 21 . 2549 , p = 0 . 000 , Fig . 6 ) . The majority of children indicated that they wanted to be able to decide whenever the HGI had to make movement or to speak ( X² = 31 . 6538 , p = 0 . 000 , Fig . 6 ) . However , this question is contrasted because the second given answer is “Strongly disagree” . Finally , children wanted that the HGI were personalized ( X² = 69 . 7308 , p = 0 . 000 , Fig . 6 ) . Figure 6 . StimCards acceptability 3 ) HGI order of preference results The order of preference given by the children indicated that the robot was the most of time cited first ( 46 . 15 % , X² = 21 . 2308 , p = 0 . 011 , Fig . 7 ) . It was never the last . The second preferred HGI was also the robot with 36 . 54 % , followed by the animal with 30 . 77 % . The group Robot - Animal received 80 . 77 % as the first position and 67 . 31 % as the second position . The computer was significant the least cited at the second position ( 5 . 77 % , X² = 11 . 2308 , p = 0 . 011 , Fig . 7 ) . The third preferred HGI was the character ( 42 . 31 % , X² = 10 . 3077 , p = 0 . 016 , Fig / 8 ) . The last preferred HGI was the computer ( 55 . 77 % , X² = 33 . 0769 , p = 0 . 000 , Fig . 7 ) . The animal is more cited at the fourth position than at the third position with 21 . 15 % of the votes . Figure 7 . Companion order of preference 4 ) HGI chosen by children results Concerning the choice of the favourite HGI , robot and animal had both the lead with 39 . 22 % of the votes . The robotic system received 78 . 43 % of the votes . The third HGI was the character with 11 . 76 % . The last one was the computer with 9 . 80 % . The computer was significantly the HGI which was not chosen by the children ( X² = 16 . 5294 , p = 0 . 001 , Fig . 8 ) . Figure 8 . Companion chosen by children Discussion : The statistical study of the questions 1 - 13 did not determine the preferred HGI . These questions judged it as game coordinator . The study showed that the HGI shape was not important to be liked . However , the children would surely be able to make a choice if the HGI had some character and personality . Nevertheless the animal seemed to be the most interesting for the children because it obtained the best questions score . This result was contradicted by the children order of preference . Indeed , the robot won this question . Even the last question was not able to decide between the robot and the animal , because they were tied as the first place . To conclude , there is no doubt that the robotic system is the preferred HGI because it received around 80 % of the votes . StimCards acceptability was easier to value because all of the answers were significant . StimCards is liked and accepted . All the children did not like our activity because it was mental arithmetic . However , they liked playing with the game . This result showed that StimCards can stimulate . StimCards could be a good cognitive training help for older people . VI . C ONCLUSION This paper presented a new game for cognitive stimulation : StimCards . We realized experimentation with 52 children ( 4 ha l - 00745638 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 sessions of 10 minutes ) . We tested this game with a young public and with four different interlocutors : the computer , a virtual character , a metallic robot and a plush robot . Results showed that our game is accepted by children . They really liked playing with it and found that it was easy to use . Moreover , results showed that the robot motivated children to work . Our study shows that the robot ( with any appearance ) is the best game partner for cognitive training . We currently do other experimentation with old people having cognitive troubles to complete this study . We think that StimCards is an attractive game , which requires an active gamer participation . Gamers have to manipulate game cards and also to use technology in order to make questions appear and to answer them . StimCards stimulates the brain . It is not a “mouse + keyboard” applications and because it requires gamer dexterity , it avoids the passivity problem . Perspective : we choose to test a neutral robot , which means a robot without any emotion , giving no encouragement . All digital objects ( robot , animal , character and computer ) pronounced the same speech with the same voice . We evaluated only appearances and the capability of objects without any other parameter . Our interest now is to experiment our game with a more emotive robot , having a personality in comparison of a neutral robot . They will both have the same appearance . It will indicate whether an empathic robot can increase the game impact . Our final objective is to provide an efficient game which can be used in education or in cognition . It will be improved to ensure gamers progression . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] L . Clare , RT . Woods , ED . Moniz Cook , M . Orrell , and A . Spector , " Cognitive rehabilitation and cognitive training for early - stage Alzheimer ' s disease and vascular dementia " ( 2003 ) , Cochrane Database Syst Rev ( 4 ) : CD003260 . [ 2 ] V . A . Vanden Abeele , V . Van Rompaey , " Introducing Human - Centered Research to Game Design : Designing Game Concepts for and with Senior Citizens " , CHI ' 06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM , ( 2006 ) , 1469 - 1474 . [ 3 ] M . Heerink , B . Krose , V . Evers , B . Wielinga , " The influence of a Robot ' s Social Abilities on Acceptance by Elderly Users , Robot and Human Interactive Communication " , ROMAN 2006 . on the 15th IEEE International Symposium , ( 2006 ) , 521 - 526 [ 4 ] R . Berenbaum , Y . Lange , and L . Abramowitz , " Augmentative alternative communication for Alzheimer ' s patients and families ' using SAVION " , In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments , PETRA ' 11 , ACM , ( Grèce 25 - 27 mai 2011 ) 2011 , 46 [ 5 ] F . Imbeault , B . Bouchard , and A . Bouzouane , " Serious Games in Cognitive Training for Alzheimer’s Patients " , 1st International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health ( SeGAH ) , IEEE , 2011 [ 6 ] A . Brandão , L . Brandão , G . Nascimento , B . Moreira , C . N . Vasconcelos , and E . Clua , " Jecripe : stimulating cognitive abilities of children with down syndrome in pre - scholar age using a game approach " , In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology , ACE ' 10 , ACM , ( Taiwan 17 - 19 novembre 2010 ) , 2010 , 15 - 18 [ 7 ] Z . Wei , L . Li , J . Zhu , and Z . Chi , " Games for service science education " , International Conference on Service Sciences ( ICSS ) , IEEE , ( Chine 13 - 14 mai 2010 ) , 2010 , 237 - 241 [ 8 ] A . Lazar , " Engaged learning in a computer science course " , In Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges , Consortium for Computing Sciences in Colleges , Vol . 23 , No 1 , 2007 , 38 - 44 [ 9 ] G . Goth , " Brave NUI world " , in Communications of the ACM , Vol . 54 , No 12 , décembre 2011 , 14 - 16 [ 10 ] J . Jain , A . Lund , and D . Wixon , " The future of natural user interfaces " , In proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , CHI ' 11 , ACM ( Canada 7 - 12 Mai 2011 ) 2011 , 211 - 214 [ 11 ] S . Pesty , D . Duhaut , " Artificial Companion : building a impacting relation Robotics and Biomimetics " , IEEE - Robio 2011 December 7 - 11m 2011 [ 12 ] F . Makedon , R . Zhang , G . Alexandrakis , C . B . Owen , H . Huang , and A . J . Saykin , " An interactive user interface system for Alzheimer ' s intervention " , In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments , PETRA ' 10 , ACM , ( Grèce 23 - 25 juin 2010 ) , 2010 , 35 [ 13 ] A . Ndiwalana , C . M . Chewar , J . Somervell , D . S . McCrickard , " Ubiquitous computing : By the people , for the people " , CHI ' 03 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM , ( 2003 ) , 968 - 969 , [ 14 ] M . Tedre , " What should be automated ? " , Interactions , ( 2008 ) , 47 - 79 [ 15 ] J . Scheible , V . H . Tuulos , and T . Ojala , " Story Mashup : design and evaluation of novel interactive storytelling game for mobile and web users " , Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Mobile and ubiquitous multimedia , MUM07 , ACM , ( Finlande 12 - 14 décembre 2007 ) , 2007 , 139 - 148 [ 16 ] N . Chilukoti , K . Early , S . Sandhu , C . Riley - Doucet , and D . Debnath , " Assistive technology for promoting physical and mental exercise to delay progression of cognitive degeneration in patients with dementia " , Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference , BIOCAS , IEEE , ( Canada 27 - 30 novembre 2007 ) , 2007 , 235 - 238 [ 17 ] A . Tapus , C . Tapus , and M . Mataric , " The role of physical embodiment of a therapist robot for individuals with cognitive impairments " , The 18th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , RO - MAN 2009 , IEEE , ( Japon 27 septembre - 02 octobre 2009 ) , 2009 , 103 - 107 [ 18 ] B . G . Zapirain , A . M . Zorrilla , and S . Larrañaga , " Psycho - stimulation for elderly people using puzzle game " , Games Innovations Conference ( ICE - GIC ) , 2010 International IEEE Consumer Electronics Society ' s , ( Chine 21 - 23 décembre 2010 ) , 2010 , 1 - 8 [ 19 ] T . Morelli , J . Foley , L . Columna , L . Lieberman , and E . Folmer , " VI - Tennis : a vibrotactile / audio exergame for players who are visually impaired " , Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games , FDG ' 10 , ACM , ( Etats - Unis 19 - 21 juin 2010 ) , 2010 , 147 - 154 [ 20 ] P . F . Abreu , V . M . B . Werneck , R . M . E . Costa , and L . A . V Carvalho , " Employing Multi - agents in 3 - D Game for Cognitive Stimulation " , In Sympsium on Virtual Reality ( SVR ) , 2011 XIII , IEEE , ( Brésil 23 - 26 mai 2011 ) , 73 - 78 [ 21 ] A . M . Hussaan , K . Sehaba , and A . Mille , " Tailoring Serious Games with Adaptive Pedagogical Scenarios : A Serious Game for Persons with Cognitive Disabilities " , 11th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT ) , ( Etats - Unis 06 - 08 juillet 2011 ) , 2011 , 486 - 490 [ 22 ] L . To , B . Thompson , J . R . Blum , G . Maehara , R . F . Hess , and J . R . Cooperstock , " A game platform for treatment of amblyopia " , IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2011 ; 19 : 280 – 289 . [ 23 ] A . Lopez - Martinez , S . Santiago - Ramajo , A . Caracuel , C . Valls - Serrano , M . J . Hornos , and M . J . Rodriguez - Fortiz , " Game of gifts purchase : Computer - based training of executive functions for the elderly " , 1st International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health , IEEE , ( Portugal 16 - 18 novembre 2011 ) , 2011 [ 24 ] C . Jost , B . Le Pévédic , D . Duhaut , " Creating Interaction Scenarios With a New Graphical User Interface " , in IIHCI 2012 , International Workshop on Intelligent Interfaces for Human Computer Interaction . Published by IEEE CSP and are part of CISIS - 2012 conference proceedings . Palermo , Italy , July 2012 . [ 25 ] S . Pasquariello , C . Pelachaud , " Greta : A Simple Facial Animation Engine " , 6th Online World Conference on Soft Computing in Industrial Applications , Session on Soft Computing for Intelligent 3D Agents 2001 [ 26 ] Bioloïd http : / / www . robotis . com / xe / bioloid _ en ha l - 00745638 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012