A Pseudoatomic Model of the Dynamin Polymer Identiﬁes a Hydrolysis - Dependent Powerstroke Joshua S . Chappie , 1 Jason A . Mears , 2 , 3 Shunming Fang , 3 Marilyn Leonard , 4 Sandra L . Schmid , 4 Ronald A . Milligan , 4 Jenny E . Hinshaw , 3 , * and Fred Dyda 1 , * 1 Laboratory of Molecular Biology , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA 2 Department of Pharmacology , School of Medicine , Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH 44106 , USA 3 Laboratory of Cell Biochemistry and Biology , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA 4 Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA * Correspondence : jennyh @ helix . nih . gov ( J . E . H . ) , dyda @ helix . nih . gov ( F . D . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 09 . 003 SUMMARY The GTPase dynamin catalyzes membrane ﬁssion by forming a collar around the necks of clathrin - coated pits , but the speciﬁc structural interactions and conformational changes that drive this process remain a mystery . We present the GMPPCP - bound structures of the truncated human dynamin 1 helical polymer at 12 . 2 A˚ and a fusion protein , GG , linking human dynamin 1’s catalytic G domain to its GTPase effector domain ( GED ) at 2 . 2 A˚ . The structures reveal the position and connectivity of dynamin fragments in the assembled structure , showing that G domain dimers only form between tetramers in sequential rungs of the dynamin helix . Using chemical crosslink - ing , we demonstrate that dynamin tetramers are made of two dimers , in which the G domain of one molecule interacts in trans with the GED of another . Structural comparison of GG GMPPCP to the GG transi - tion - state complex identiﬁes a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke that may play a role in membrane - re - modeling events necessary for ﬁssion . INTRODUCTION Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is a highly regulated pathway wherein nutrients , growth factors , and macromole - cules are concentrated in invaginating clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) that pinch off to form vesicles to carry these cargo into the cell ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . The large , multido - main GTPase dynamin assembles into collars at the necks of deeply invaginated CCPs to catalyze membrane ﬁssion in the ﬁnal stages of CME ( Mettlen et al . , 2009 ; Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) . Puriﬁed dynamin exists as a tetramer ( Muhlberg et al . , 1997 ) that can self - assemble into helical structures reminiscent of collars observed in vivo ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) . Dynamin encodes ﬁve domains ( Figure S2A available online ) : a catalytic G domain ; a middle domain involved in self - assembly and oligo - merization ; a membrane - binding pleckstrin homology ( PH ) do - main ; a GTPase effector domain ( GED ) ; and a C - terminal proline - and arginine - rich domain ( PRD ) that binds SH3 domains of accessory proteins important for CME ( Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) but is not essential for GTPase activ - ities or oligomerization in vitro ( Muhlberg et al . , 1997 ) . Aside from the PRD , structures of all of dynamin’s individual domains or their homologs have been solved by crystallography ( Figure S2A ) . These include the human dynamin 1 PH domain ( Ferguson et al . , 1994 ; Timm et al . , 1994 ) , the G domains of rat dynamin ( Reubold et al . , 2005 ) and dictyostelium dynamin A ( Niemann et al . , 2001 ) , the middle domain and GED of the related inter - feron - induced GTPase MxA ( Gao et al . , 2010 ) , and a fusion link - ing the C terminus of human dynamin 1’s GED ( C GED ) to its G domain ( GG ) ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . Crystallographic and bio - chemical studies have shown that the C GED forms a three - helix bundle with the N and C termini of the G domain ( N GTPase and C GTPase , respectively ) ( Figure S2B ) and that this module—the bundle - signaling element ( BSE ) —transmits the conformational changes associated with dynamin assembly to the G domain ( Chappie et al . , 2009 , 2010 ) . However , as the BSE was structur - ally characterized in the context of the GG fusion , it is not known whether C GED ’s interaction with the G domain occurs in cis within the same polypeptide or in trans via another polypeptide in the dynamin tetramer . Dynamin has a low afﬁnity for guanine nucleotides ( 10 – 100 m M ) and a high basal turnover ( (cid:1) 0 . 4 – 1 min (cid:3) 1 ) ( Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ) . Assembly into helical oligomers stimu - lates dynamin’s basal GTPase activity > 100 - fold ( Warnock et al . , 1996 ; Stowell et al . , 1999 ) . This enhancement arises from G domain dimerization , which optimally positions dyna - min’s catalytic machinery and stabilizes conformationally ﬂexible switch regions ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . Mutations that impair GTP binding , assembly , or stimulated GTP hydrolysis also cause defects in endocytic uptake in vivo ( reviewed in Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) , thus establishing the importance of dynamin’s GTPase activities in CME . Despite its essential role in CME , the mechanism of dynamin - catalyzed membrane ﬁssion remains poorly understood . Efforts Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 209 to recapitulate these activities in vitro using synthetic mem - branessuggestedthatdynaminfunctionsasamechanochemical enzyme that actively severs the membrane via hydrolysis - dependent conformational changes ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ; Stowell et al . , 1999 ; Chen et al . , 2004 ; Mears et al . , 2007 ; Roux et al . , 2006 ) that generate a constricted neck and impose strain on the membrane lipids ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Roux et al . , 2010 ) . GTP hydrolysis also promotes partial dissoci - ation of dynamin subunits from membranes ( Danino et al . , 2004 ; Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ; Pucadyil and Schmid , 2008 ; Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ) . Loosening of the dynamin scaffold could allow local lipid rearrangements and an energetically favorable hemiﬁssion intermediate that promotes nonleaky membrane scission ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) . The hydrolysis - dependent conformational changes that trigger these membrane - remodeling events have yet to be elucidated . Unraveling the mechanisms governing dynamin - catalyzed membrane ﬁssion requires a detailed structural understanding of the architecture of assembled dynamin and the confor - mational changes induced by stimulated GTP hydrolysis . Dy - namin’s propensity to form helical arrays in vitro has previously been exploited for cryo - electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ) struc - ture determination . Three - dimensional reconstructions of trun - cated dynamin 1 ( D PRD , Figure S2A ) polymers assembled on anionic lipid scaffolds have been obtained both in the absence of nucleotides ( Chen et al . , 2004 ) and in the presence of the nonhydrolyzable GTP analog GMPPCP ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ) . In both cases , the asymmetric unit of assembly is a dimer that adopts a T shape when viewed in cross - section ( ‘‘T view’’ ) . The structural differences between these maps suggest that rearrangements in the middle domain and GED mediate a nucleotide - dependent constriction of the D PRD as - sembly ( Chen et al . , 2004 ) . Constriction alone , however , is not sufﬁcient for membrane ﬁssion ( Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ; Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ) , suggesting that additional conformational changes are required . Although it has been in - ferred that the middle domain and GED form a coiled - coil ‘‘stalk’’ that connects the PH domain ‘‘leg’’ to the G domain ‘‘head’’ ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2004 ) , neither the organization nor their connectivity in the polymer is known , owing to the low resolution ( > 20 A˚ ) of the D PRD re - constructions and the lack of a complete , atomic - resolution dynamin structure . These limitations have also hindered our understanding of how assembly promotes G domain dimeriza - tion , leading to stimulated GTP hydrolysis and membrane ﬁssion . To address these issues , we have used cryo - EM to extend the resolution of the constricted D PRD polymer map and employed computational docking and biochemistry to deﬁne the underlying subunit interactions . We also present the crystal structure of GG in complex with GMPPCP , which identiﬁes a major hydrolysis - dependent BSE conformational change . Our results provide insights into how dynamin as - sembly directly facilitates G domain dimerization and stimu - lated turnover and suggest how the energy of this dimerization and GTP hydrolysis can be converted into large structural movements that may play a role in precipitating membrane ﬁssion . RESULTS 12 . 2 A˚ Cryo - EM Reconstruction of D PRD in the Constricted State Reveals Additional Structural Features of the Assembled Dynamin Polymer Our initial attempt to characterize GMPPCP - bound , constricted D PRD tubes using cryo - EM and Fourier - Bessel synthesis pro - duced an 18 A˚ resolution reconstruction ( Wilson - Kubalek et al . , 2010 ) that displayed only minor differences compared to pre - viously published structures ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2004 ; Wilson - Kubalek et al . , 2010 ) . The resolution was limited by variations in the tube diameter , which produced long - range disorder and diminished the overall diffracting power . To circumvent this , we segmented the tubes into individual , overlapping particles that were then aligned , classiﬁed , sorted , and averaged with the iterative helical real - space reconstruction ( IHRSR ) algorithm ( Egelman , 2007 ) ( Figure S1A – S1C ) . This single - particle - based approach produced a 12 . 2 A˚ helical map ( Figure 1A ; Figure S1D ) that has an inner lumenal diameter of 7 nm , an outer diameter of 40 nm , 13 . 2 subunits per turn , and a pitch of 99 . 3 A˚ . The improved resolution reveals additional structural features of the D PRD polymer . First , the stalk density , which constitutes the base of the characteristic ‘‘T view’’ ( Fig - ure 1B ; Movie S1 ) , appears to twist in a crisscross fashion ( Figures 1B and 1C ) , intersecting just below the cleft that sepa - rates the ‘‘head’’ density regions along the exterior of the poly - mer . Second , there are two additional strips of density within the cleft that wrap around the tube ( Figure 1D , highlighted with dashed boxes ) . Each strip forms a continuous connection with the alternating head densities of a single helical rung . Docking of Crystallized Dynamin Fragments Illustrates Ambiguities in Structural Models To decipher the subunit organization of the dynamin polymer , we docked the crystal structures of the GDP . AlF 4 (cid:3) - stabilized GG dimer ( GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) ; PDB 2X2E ) , the human MxA middle / GED stalk ( PDB 3LJB ) , and the human dynamin 1 PH domain ( PDB 1DYN ) into our improved D PRD reconstruction ( Figure 2A ) . The MxA stalk structure shares a high degree of sequence homology ( 19 . 5 % identical , 54 . 9 % similar ) with dynamin’s middle domain and GED ( Data S1 ) and currently represents the best structural model for these domains . Attempts to dock GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) as a dimer failed as one monomer always grossly protruded from the density , regardless of its orientation ( Figure S3A ) . The GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) dimer from an alternate crystal form ( PDB 2X2F ) exhibited the same discrepancies ( data not shown ) . We there - fore selected only one monomer for docking ( monomer A from PDB 2X2E ) , which allowed more degrees of freedom during the ﬁtting procedures . We similarly positioned the MxA stalks individually , as the crystallized assembly could only be ﬁt into a previously published 23 A˚ D PRD map after a signiﬁcant rotation between adjacent pairs of monomers ( Gao et al . , 2010 ) . Fitting was carried out using YUP ( Tan et al . , 2006 , 2008 ) as described in the Experimental Procedures . In total , 8 GG monomers , 12 MxA monomers , and 8 PH domains were positioned into the cryo - EM density . In agreement with previous biochemical data and structural modeling ( Chen et al . , 2004 ; Mears et al . , 2007 ) , the PH domain is situated in the ‘‘leg’’ density adjacent to the 210 Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Figure 1 . 12 . 2 A˚ Reconstruction of D PRD in the Constricted State Reveals New Structural Features of the Assembled Dynamin Polymer ( A ) Structure of the D PRD polymer . Two density thresholds of the D PRD map are shown : the lower threshold is colored gray , and the higher threshold is in mesh and colored radially todenote the locations of the‘‘leg’’ ( orange ) , ‘‘stalk’’ ( blue ) , and ‘‘head’’ ( green ) regions . Leftpanel shows aside view of the decorated helical tube oriented perpendicular to the helical axis . A section of the tube’s outer surface has been removed to show the interior of the structure in cross - section . The membrane bilayer ( M ) , inner lumenal diameter , outer tube diameter , and pitch are labeled . Black box denotes section of map highlighted in ( B ) . Right panel is an end - on view of the tube looking down the helical axis that is rotated 90 (cid:4) relative to the view on the left . ( B ) Cross - section through D PRD polymer ; the classical ‘‘T view’’ of dynamin subunits within individual helical rungs . The leg , stalk , head , and membrane bilayer ( M ) density regions are labeled and colored as in ( A ) . The cleft separating head densities within the same helical run is labeled . Dashed lines ( 1 – 4 ) indicate the locations of planar slices through a single helical rung that are shown in ( C ) with orientation deﬁned by black arrow . ( C ) Sequential planar sections through a single helical rung show the crisscross twisting of the dynamin stalk density . Black circles highlight intersection point of stalk density . Black dashed boxes in section 1 highlight the additionally resolved strips of density visible in the cleft between G domains in the same helical rung . ( D ) Two additional strips of density ( dashed red and black boxes ) are visible in the cleft along the exterior of the structure and form continuous connections with the head densities of a single helical rung . Subunits belonging to alternating helical rungs are labeled in red and black for distinction . View is rotated 90 (cid:4) relative to ( B ) . See also Figure S1 and Movie S1 . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 211 plasma membrane , the middle / GED fragment inhabits the inte - rior ‘‘stalk’’ density , and the G domain occupies the exterior ‘‘head’’ density of the tube ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . It should be noted that , in our model , the density in the T view cross - section represents the interaction of four different MxA stalk monomers ( Figure S3B ) . At the membrane surface , the PH domains are arranged as dimers within the same helical rung ( Figures 2C – 2E ) . The density within this region , however , is asymmetric , resulting in nonequiv - alent orientations for each of the neighboring monomers ( Figure 2E ) . Our conﬁdence in this ﬁtting is strengthened by the fact that in both PH domains variable loop 1—shown by Figure 2 . Computational Docking of Crystallized Fragments Derived from Dynamin Family Members ( A ) Crystal structures of isolated domains from different dynamin family members . From left to right : GDP . AlF 4 (cid:3) - stabilized dimer of the GTPase - GED fusion ( GG ) from human dynamin 1 ( PDB 2X2E , green ) , including the G domain and the BSE ; stalk dimer from human MxA ( PDB 3LJB , blue ) , which includes the middle domain and GED ; dynamin 1 PH domain ( PDB 1DYN , orange ) . ( B ) Computational docking of structures in ( A ) into the D PRD map ( gray ) . A section of the D PRD tube is shown in an end - on view looking down the helical axis to highlightthepositionsofthedockedfragmentsrelativetothemembranebilayer ( M ) . Solidverticalblacklineindicatesorientationofthecross - sectionplanethatis rotated by 90 (cid:4) in ( C ) . Dashed black lines denote the planar sections that are rotated by 90 (cid:4) and shown in ( D ) , ( H ) , and ( F ) . ( C ) T view cross - section illustrating the positioning of domains within a single helical rung . M denotes membrane bilayer . ( D and E ) Docking of PH domain monomers . ( D ) shows orientation of PH domains within the same helical rung . ( E ) depicts asymmetry of PH domain ﬁtting . Variable loop 1 ( VL1 ) is labeled . Orientation is the same as in the T - view in ( C ) . ( F and G ) Fitting of MxA stalk monomers . ( F ) shows azoomed intop view perpendicular to the membrane bilayer . Four of MxA stalk monomers ( colored blue and purple ) are shown . Note that portions of eachMxA monomer protrude from the D PRD density map ( yellowboxes ) . ( G ) is rotated 90 (cid:4) and shows aside view of the stalk monomers in the same orientation as shown in ( B ) . Residues corresponding to the putative dynamin proline hinge are labeled in the MxA structure ( yellow spheres ) . ( H – J ) Two possible ﬁttings of GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) monomers ( green and red ) viewed either from the top ( H ) or the side ( I ) . The different orientations are related by a 180 (cid:4) rotation about an axis parallel to the membrane surface ( H ) and result in the C GED helix of the BSE ( yellow ) facing either up ( green ) or down ( red ) . Each ﬁtting generates a different connection with the stalk ( I ) , resulting in subunits that are either ‘‘extended’’ or ‘‘kinked’’ ( J ) . See also Figure S2 , Data S1 , and Figure S3 . 212 Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . ﬂuorescence quenching experiments to penetrate the outer leaﬂet of PIP 2 - containing bilayers ( Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ) —points into the lipid bilayer density as expected . Although MxA middle / GED monomers match the overall shape of the stalk region density , a portion of these structures protrudes from the map ( Figures 2F and 2G , yellow boxes ) . Where they diverge , the human MxA model contains two prolines ( P468 and P597 ) and a threonine ( T416 ) in helices a 2 , a 4 , and a 1c , respectively ( Figure 2G , yellow spheres ) . Human dynamin 1 instead contains three highly conserved prolines ( Data S1 ) , and we speculate that these residues form a ﬂexible hinge that would allow the dynamin stalk to kink downward into the density and connect to the PH domain below . We also observe an unﬁlled segment of density beneath each docked MxA stalk model that is continuous with the PH domain density below ( Figure S3C ) . This is not unexpected as the dyna - min fragment structures are missing the amino acids ( 58 in total ) that link the middle domain to the PH domain ( residues 487 – 517 ) and the PH domain to the GED ( residues 631 – 657 ) ( Data S1 and Figure S2 ) , which likely occupy this density . The absence of these connections in our model prohibits us from deﬁning the stalk - PH domain connectivity unambiguously . Our docking yields two equally viable ﬁttings for the GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) monomers ( Figures 2H and 2I , green versus red ) . Although both place the globular G domain core into the head density and the BSE into the additional strips of density in the cleft ( Figure 1D ) , their relative orientations differ by a 180 (cid:4) rota - Figure 3 . Structure of GG GMPPCP ( A ) Domain structure of the G domain - GED ( GG ) fusion protein from human dynamin 1 and the structure of its complexwith GMPPCP . Gdomain cores are in yellow and light blue , and the three helices of the BSE are shown as N GTPase , purple ; C GTPase , purple ; C GED , green . A highly conserved ﬂexible hinge region ( BSE hinge , red ) connects the BSE to the G domain core . GMPPCP molecules ( green ) and active - site waters ( red spheres ) are shown . ( B and C ) Structural comparison of the GG GMPPCP ( B , yellow ) and GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) ( C , dark blue , PDB 2X2E ) active sites . The elements of the catalytic machinery are labeled in each structure along with the bound nucleotide ( green ) , Mg 2 + ion ( green spheres ) , and catalytic and bridging waters ( red spheres , H 2 0 cat and H 2 0 bridge , respectively ) . The AlF 4 (cid:3) ( gray ) and charge - compensating sodium ion ( purple sphere ) are shown for GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) . An additional water molecule ( H 2 0 cc , red sphere ) occupies the ion - binding site in GG GMPPCP . The trans - stabilizing loop and catalytic D180 residue from the adjacent monomer ( colored light blue and labeled with subscript ‘‘B’’ ) are shown at the top of each panel . Dashed black lines indi - cate hydrogen bonds . See also Figure S4 . tion around an axis parallel to the plasma membrane ( Figure 2H ) . In one orientation , the C GED helix is on top ( Figure 2H , green ) , whereas in the other , the C GTPase helix is on top ( Fig - ure 2H , red ) . Each orientation creates a different connectivity between the G domain and the stalk below ( Figure 2I ) , producing two possible subunit arrangements ( Figure 2J ) : long and extended ( green ) or short and kinked ( red ) . Each imposes a different set of con - straints on dynamin assembly and implies different structural contacts between neighboring subunits in the polymer . Structure of GMPPCP - Bound GG Identiﬁes a Major BSE Conformational Change We hypothesized that the uncertainty associated with docking GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) monomers into the D PRD map may reﬂect nucleo - tide - dependent conformational differences between the crystal - lized GG dimer , stabilized by the transition - state mimic GDP . AlF 4 (cid:3) , and D PRD dynamin in the assembled polymer , stabilized by the ground - state analog GMPPCP . To address this problem , we solved the crystal structure of GG in complex with GMPPCP ( GG GMPPCP ) at 2 . 2 A˚ ( Figure 3A ) . Although GG GMPPCP is entirely monomeric when analyzed by size - exclusion chromatography ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) and analytical ultracentrifugation ( Figures S4A and S4B ) , in the crystal it forms a dimer similar to that of the transition - state complex , presum - ably due to the high protein concentration during crystallization . One molecule of GMPPCP is bound to each active site along with a single Mg 2 + ion that is coordinated by S45 , T65 , and the b - and g - phosphates ( Figure 3B ) . As in the GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) structure ( PDB 2X2E ) ( Figure 3C ) , we resolve the catalytic water , appropri - ately positioned for an in - line nucleophilic attack on the g - phos - phate , and the adjacent bridging water , which contacts the conserved Q40 side chain ( Figure 3B ) . Unlike many small Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 213 Gproteins , dynamindoesnotusean‘‘arginineﬁnger’’sidechainto compensate for the developing negative charge in the transition state ( Scheffzeketal . , 1998 ) ; rather , thepositivechargeissupplied by a monovalent cation , whose binding is stabilized by G domain dimerization ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . Signiﬁcantly , this cation is absent in GG GMPPCP as GMPPCP’s b - g methylene connection does not provide the necessary hydrogen - bonding interactions requiredtocompletetheioncoordinationsphere . Instead , awater molecule ( H 2 0 cc , Figure 3B ) occupies the ion - binding site but is shifted 1 . 7 A˚ relative to the sodium observed in GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) ( Fig - ure 3C ) . H 2 0 cc is coordinated by the carbonyls of G60 and G62 and the S41 side chain , which rotates 90 (cid:4) to accommodate the offset from the transition - state complex . As a consequence , the hydrogen bond across the dimer interface between S41 and D180 is broken . The other facets of the nucleotide - binding and catalytic machineries remain essentially unchanged . The major structural difference between the ground - state GG GMPPCP and GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) transition - state complexes ( Fig - ure 4A ) is a 68 . 81 (cid:4) rigid - body rotation of the BSEs downward about an axis perpendicular to the C GTPase helix coupled with a slight counterclockwise twist ( Figure 4B ; Movie S2 and Movie S3 ) . This brings each BSE close to the b sheet of the G domain core and results in a more compact transition - state dimer , reducing its radius of gyration from 32 . 9 A˚ to 30 . 9 A˚ . Residues between H288 and G295 ( Figure 3A and Figure 4 , red ) — previously identiﬁed as a ﬂexible hinge ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) — and residues at the start of the G domain core ( P32 and Q33 ) serve as the pivot points for these motions . Whereas the P loop is essentially unchanged , helix a 2 tilts toward the active site ( Figure 4C ) . The downstream end of switch 1 ( residues 59 – 68 ) shifts (cid:1) 1 A˚ . The size of the changes increases toward the b sheet with a 3 . 5 A˚ shift at the upstream end of switch 1 at G53 and culminating in a 4 . 5 A˚ shift at the tip of the sheet affecting the connecting b 23 and b 45 loops ( Figure 4C , arrows ) . Moving toward the transition state , the net effect of these changes is a rotation of the central b sheet ( Movie S2 ) and tightening of the hydrophobic packing within the G domain core ( Figure S4C ) , which brings R54 , E79 , and S126 into hydrogen - bonding distance ( Figure S4C ) . This may also help stabilize switch II as the cis - stabilizing loop ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) shifts nearly 2 A˚ ( Figure 4C ) . The repositioning of elements within the core reconﬁgures the outer face of the b sheet and facilitates the formation of salt bridges and hydrophobic interactions with the N GTPase helix that anchor the BSE ( Figure 4D ) . Additional stabilization is provided by the N GTPase linker ( residues 22 – 31 ) , which partially reconﬁgures into a short helix and contacts the BSE’s hydro - phobic core via residues I23 , L29 , and L31 ( Figure 4E ) . Docking of GG GMPPCP Reveals Putative G Domain - Stalk Connectivity We next asked whether docking GG GMPPCP into our D PRD cryo - EM map could distinguish between the two possibilities for the G domain - stalk connection ( Figure 2J ) . The ﬁtting approach described above was expanded to include 48 GG GMPPCP mono - mers , 24 MxA stalk monomers , and 24 PH domains—nearly two complete turns of the D PRD helix ( Figure 5A ) . The ambiguity we previously encountered when ﬁtting the GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) monomers ( Figure 2J ) is now absent in the resulting model , as GG GMPPCP adopts a single preferred orientation in the D PRD map ( Fig - ure 5B ) . This is due to the different BSE conformations relative to the G domain core in the two GG structures . The BSEs are oriented with the C GED helices on top ( Figure 5B ) and occupy the cleft density strips ( Figures 5B – 5D ) that encircle the exterior of the map within each rung of the dynamin helix ( Figure 1D ) . This positions the ends of the C GTPase and C GED helices close to N and C termini of the stalk ( Figure 5C , N stalk and C stalk ) , allowing these segments to connect via two short stretches of amino acids that are missing from the docked crystal structures—residues 311 – 320 and residues 722 – 725 . The physical constraints of these connections and the docking indicate that the underlying dynamin subunits must adopt an extended conformation within the assembled polymer ( Figure 5C and Figure 2J ) . In this con - ﬁguration , the G domains in adjacent helical rungs are poised to form the productive dimers that were identiﬁed by crystallog - raphy and are needed for dynamin’s stimulated GTPase activity ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 5D ) . Unlike the crystallized GG dimers , these docked GG GMPPCP monomers are slightly sepa - rated , consistent with our ﬁndings that G domain dimerization only occurs in the presence of transition - state mimics and not with ground - state analogs such as GMPPCP ( Figures S4A and S4B ) ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . A similar docking procedure using a homology model for the dynamin 1 middle / GED stalk rather than the MxA structure yielded the same overall ﬁtting and extended subunit arrangement ( data not shown ) . C GED Is Domain Swapped in Full - Length Dynamin Although GG’s C GED helix mimics dynamin’s G domain - GED interactions , its minimal nature does not distinguish whether GED’s association with the G domain in the dynamin tetramer occurs in cis within the same polypeptide or is contributed by another polypeptide in trans ( Figure 6A ) . We therefore used chemical crosslinking to resolve this ambiguity . Two cysteine mutations ( R15C in N GTPase / R730C in C GED ) —previously shown to enable efﬁcient crosslinking of GG’s N and C termini by a short ( 3 . 6 A˚ ) , cysteine - reactive bifunctional crosslinker ( MTS - 1 - MTS ) ( Chappie et al . , 2009 ) —were introduced into a reactive - cysteine - less version of dynamin ( Dyn RCL ) to examine G domain - GED interactions in the tetramer . The resulting protein ( Dyn RCL R15C / R730C ) shows normal GTPase activity ( Figures S5A and S5B ) and migrates similarly to wild - type ( WT ) Dyn when analyzed by nonreducing SDS - PAGE ( Figure 6D ) . Like WT - Dyn ( Muhlberg et al . , 1997 ) , Dyn RCL R15C / R730C predomi - nantly generates a tetrameric species when incubated with the general amine - reactive bifunctional crosslinker BS3 ( Figure 6B ) . In contrast , speciﬁc G domain - GED crosslinking of Dyn RCL R15C / R730C by cysteine - reactive MTS - 1 - MTS predominantly generates a dimer ( Figure 6B ) . Importantly , we did not detect any faster - migrating species indicative of intrapolypeptide or in cis crosslinking . For both reagents , the crosslinking efﬁciency of the predominant species was unaffected by protein concen - tration ( Figure 6B ) , consistent with intratetramer or in trans cross - linking . This was conﬁrmed by size - exclusion chromatography of the crosslinked species , which eluted as a tetramer ( Figures S5C – S5E ) . Finally , Dyn RCL R15C / R730Cwassubjectedtolimited proteolysis with Lys - C , which cleaves sites bordering the PH 214 Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . domain ( Figures6Cand6D ) ( Muhlbergetal . , 1997 ) . Westernblot - ting with G domain - or GED - speciﬁc antibodies conﬁrmed that each of the higher - molecular - weight crosslinked species , but none of the lower - molecular - weight bands , contains both the G domain and the GED ( Figure 6D , a - GTPase and a - GED , respec - tively ) . Together these dataestablish that the GEDfrom onepoly - peptide docks on the G domain of an adjacent polypeptide to form a domain - swapped full - length dynamin dimer , two of Figure 4 . Structure of GG GMPPCP Identiﬁes a Hydrolysis - Dependent BSE Conformational Change ( A ) Structural superposition of GG GMPPCP ( yellow ) and GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) ( blue , PDB 2X2E ) . Note the different conformations of the BSE in each structure . The BSE hinge is colored red . ( B ) Hydrolysis - dependent BSE conformational change . Left panel is superposition of GG GMPPCP and GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) monomers . The N GTPase , C GTPase , and C GED helices of theBSE are labeled . Black arrow depicts 68 . 81 (cid:4) downward rotation of theBSE in thetransition - state complex . Middle and right panels depict different views of the monomer superposition . Small black arrow in middle panel describes the slight counterclockwise twist that is coupled to the downward rotation of the BSE ; black arrow in right panel describes combined translocation of the BSE . ( C ) BSEmovementinducesstructuralchangesinthecentral b sheetoftheGdomaincore . b strands2 – 5 , the a 2helix , andthe b 23 and b 45 loopsarelabeled . Black arrows illustrate how these segments shift to accommodate the BSE . The GMPPCP ( green ) , Mg 2 + ( green sphere ) , and active - site waters ( red spheres ) from the GG GMPPCP structure are shown . ( D ) Structural interactions between the BSE and G domain core in the GG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) transition - state complex . Residues contributing to salt bridges and hydro - phobic interactions are shown . Black dashed lines are hydrogen bonds . ( E ) Structural changes of the N GTPase linker . The linker reconﬁgures into a short helix , allowing I23 , L29 , and L31 to form stabilizing interactions with the BSE hydrophobic core . See also Figure S4 and Movie S2 and Movie S3 . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 215 which associate through middle / GED stalk interactions to form the dynamin tetramer . Membrane - Bound Structure of the Dynamin Tetramer Our docking suggests two possible architectures for this full - length domain - swapped dynamin dimer ( Figure 7A ; Figure S6A ) . Swapping the entire GED would produce a long , m - shaped dimer ( Figure 7A ) . Alternatively , exchanging only the C GED helix would result in a short , x - shaped dimer ( Figure S6A ) . The two dimers differ in the relative placement of the PH domains and the intermonomer interfaces . In the long dimer , the PH domains are close enough to allow complete GED exchange , whereas the stalks are separated from their partner in the other monomer ( Figure 7A ) . In the short dimer , this situation is reversed : the structure is stabilized by a back - to - back stalk interaction that forces the PH domains to be splayed apart ( Figure S6A ) . Despite Figure 5 . Docking of GG GMPPCP Reveals Putative G Domain - Stalk Connectivity ( A ) Docked model of assembled D PRD polymerin the constrictedstate . GG GMPPCP monomers are colored green , middle / GED stalk monomers are colored blue , PH domains are colored orange , and the GMPPCP - bound D PRD reconstruction is rendered in gray . A side view is shown perpendicular to the helical axis . ( B ) ComparisonofGG GDP . AlF4 (cid:3) ( top ) andGG GMPPCP ( bottom ) monomerdockings . GG GMPPCP yieldsasingle , preferredorientationwheretheC GED helixoftheBSE ( yellow ) is on top . Monomers are shown in the same orientation as in ( A ) . ( C ) Zoomed side ( upper panel , perpendicular to helical axis ) and end ( lower panel , looking down helical axis ) views highlighting the putative G domain - stalk connectivity . Labels : C GTPase , Cterminus ofGdomain ; N stalk , N terminus ofthemiddle domain ; C stalk , C - terminal portionof GEDpresent inMxA crystalstructure ; C GED , beginning of C - terminal GED helix present in GG GMPPCP structure . The proximity of C GTPase to N stalk and C stalk to C GED suggests that dynamin subunits adopt an ‘‘extended’’ conformation . ( D ) GG GMPPCP monomers in adjacent helical rungs are poised for dimerization ( dashed black lines ) . The BSEs occupy the cleft densities above the stalk on the exterior of the map ( black arrows ) . 216 Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . these differences , both dimers use the same stalk interface to form a tetramer ( Figure 7B ; Figures S6B and S6C ) . Mutations in this ‘‘assembly interface’’ ( Figure 7C ; Table S1 ) —including R399 and I690 in dynamin 1 ( Sever et al . , 2006 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ) , R408 , G392 , and Y440 - R444 in human MxA ( Gao et al . , 2010 ) , and G385 in S . cerevisiae Dnm1 ( Ingerman et al . , 2005 ) —shift the tetrameric state of these dynamin family members to stable dimers . This interface also provides stabi - lizing interactions between tetramers in our polymer structure , which may explain the cooperativity observed for membrane - mediated dynamin assembly ( Stowell et al . , 1999 ) and the assembly defects exhibited by dynamin mutant dimers ( Song et al . , 2004 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ) ( Table S1 ) . Although both of these conﬁgurations are consistent with our crosslinking data and with mutagenesis studies deﬁning assembly interfaces , we favor the long dimer for two reasons . First , its shape closely resembles the low - resolution structure of the R399A / I690K mutant dimer revealed by small - angle X - ray scattering ( Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ) . Second , recent crystallographic studies of the intact D PRD molecule show no indication of an interpolypeptide exchange of the C GED helix at the top of the molecule ( M . Ford and J . Nunnari , personal com - munication ) , arguing against the short dimer conﬁguration . Structural Constraints of G Domain Dimerization Dynamin’s stimulated GTPase activity arises from the transition - state - dependent dimerization of its G domains ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ) . This association has been proposed to occur between two dynamin tetramers and be driven by dynamin assembly on the plasma membrane ( Chappie et al . , 2010 ; Gao et al . , 2010 ) . Our docking model supports this hypothesis . The connectivity we derive from computational ﬁtting ( Figure 5A ) precludes G domain interactions within a single tetramer ( Figure S6C ) and between tetramers in the same helical rung ; instead , G domain dimers can only form between tetramers in adjacent rungs , regardless of the underlying subunit architecture ( Figure 7D ; Fig - ure S6D ) . Assembly of the helical collar beyond a single rung thus primes the dynamin subunits for stimulated turnover . Surpris - ingly , only 5 long tetramers ( 10 subunits ) ( Figure 7D ) or 6 short tetramers ( 12 subunits ) ( Figure S6D ) are needed to partner the Figure 6 . Dynamin Tetramer Is a Dimer of Domain - Swapped Dimers ( A ) Cartoons illustrating possible G domain - GED interactions in full - length dynamin . Domains are colored as in ( C ) . Black ‘‘X’’s denote expected crosslinks for each scenario . ( B ) Chemical crosslinking of Dyn RCL R15C / R730C . Targeted crosslinking of the engineered cysteine residues in the N GTPase and C GED by MTS - 1 - MTS produces a prominent dimeric species , whereas nonspeciﬁc crosslinking of surface - reactive amines by BS3 primarily yields a tetramer . Crosslinking efﬁciency of the predominant species was unaffected by protein concentration . ( C ) Cleavage products of Lys - C limited proteolysis ( Muhlberg et al . , 1997 ) . ( D ) Lys - C limited proteolysis and MTS - 1 - MTS crosslinking of WT and Dyn RCL R15C / R730C . Left panel shows Coomassie - stained gel of proteolyzed and / or crosslinked products ; right panel shows western blotting of the same species . a - GTPase and a - GED are primary antibodies recognizing dynamin’s N terminus ( residues 2 – 17 ) and GED , respectively . See also Figure S5 . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 217 Figure 7 . Structural Constraints of G Domain Dimerization and the Dynamin Powerstroke ( A ) Model for the domain - swapped dynamin dimer . In this conﬁguration , a long dimer is formed by a full GED domain swap . Monomers are colored purple and green . An alternative model also consistent with our crosslinking data is shown in Figure S6 . ( B ) Putative arrangement of membrane - bound long dynamin tetramer derived from the docked model of assembled D PRD polymer ( Figure 5 ) . The tetramer is comprised of two of the domain - swapped dimers shown in ( A ) ( colored blue and teal , labeled A and B ) . Black box indicates assembly interface between these dimers ( see also Figure S6B ) . ( C ) Structural mapping of mutations that impair dynamin oligomerization . A stalk monomer ( teal ) is shown in two orientations . Mutations within the putative assembly interface ( yellow ) are labeled and colored magenta ; mutations that also produce assembly defects but are localized outside this interface are also 218 Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . G domains across helical rungs in the constricted D PRD poly - mer , indicating that a complete turn of the helix ( 13 subunits ) is not required to facilitate G domain dimerization and stimulated GTPase activity . This observation may explain the inability to detect dynamin collars in vivo unless GTP hydrolysis has been inhibited ( Marks et al . , 2001 ; Takei et al . , 1995 ) . DISCUSSION The Building Blocks of Dynamin Assembly Here we have combined cryo - EM , X - ray crystallography , com - putational docking , and biochemistry to provide detailed insights into the structure of assembled dynamin . Our 12 . 2 A˚ reconstruc - tion of D PRD dynamin in the GMPPCP - bound constricted state revealed additional density features not observed in previous lower - resolution maps ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2004 ) , which served as an improved structural framework for computational docking . Guided by this molecular envelope , we successfully localized the G domain , the BSE , the middle / GED stalk , and the PH domain within the polymer assembly . The resulting pseudoatomic model , which incorporates our 2 . 2 A˚ GG GMPPCP crystal structure , reveals the putative G domain - stalk connectivity and suggests that the individual dynamin subunits are extended rather than kinked when assembled on a lipid membrane . We cannot yet deﬁne the linkages between the middle / GED stalk and the PH domain , as the intervening se - quences are absent from currently available crystallographic models . Our chemical crosslinking demonstrates that the C GED helix from one dynamin polypeptide interacts in trans with the G domain of a second polypeptide , resulting in a domain - swapped dimer . Two of these domain - swapped dimers would then asso - ciate via their stalks to form a tetramer . Such an arrangement is consistent with mutations in the middle domain ( R361S , R399A ) and GED ( I690K ) that destabilize the dynamin tetramer but generate soluble dimers ( Sever et al . , 2006 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2007 ) . An underlying domain - swapped dimer also explains how assembling tetramer subunits could generate a helical structure in which the asymmetric unit is a dimer ( Zhang and Hin - shaw , 2001 ) . We therefore propose that a domain - swapped dimer is the minimal unit of dynamin assembly , serving as the basic building block for the tetramer in solution and , by exten - sion , the helical assembly on the membrane . We identiﬁed two possible conﬁgurations for the domain - swapped dimers and their resulting tetramer counterparts that are consistent with all available data . A caveat of these models is that they represent a membrane - bound , assembly - competent conformation that may be distinct from the conformation of the free tetramer in solution . It is possible that dynamin undergoes a major conformational change upon membrane binding that exposes the assembly interface , allowing the rapid and cooper - ative association of multiple tetramers . Structural studies sug - gest that the bacterial dynamin - like protein ( BDLP ) undergoes a self - propagating transition , where GTP - and membrane - induced expansion of compact diamond - shaped BDLP dimers promotes polymerization ( Low and Lo¨we , 2006 ; Low et al . , 2009 ) . Interestingly , a subset of PH domain mutations linked to centronuclear myopathy—S619L , S619W , and V625 del—have been shown to promote higher - order assembly in the absence of a lipid scaffold ( Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ) . These changes also result in stimulated GTP hydrolysis ( Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ) , suggesting that they alleviate the inherent autoinhibition associated with the assembly - incompetent con - formation of the tetramer in solution . Conversion between assembly - incompetent and assembly - competent conforma - tions may thus represent a conserved regulatory mechanism common to dynamin family members . Implications for Dynamin - Catalyzed Membrane Fission Dynamin assembly and constriction generate high curvature and localized stress ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2009 ; Roux et al . , 2010 ) that impose a greater strain on the inner monolayer lipids of a tightly squeezed neck than on those of the outer monolayer ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) . PH domain interactions with the phospholipid head groups and the membrane insertion of variable loop 1 maintain this energetically unfavorable conﬁguration ( Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2009 ) , which can be shown and colored red . Dashed black circle deﬁnes assumed location of R399A Dyn1 and YRGR440AAAA MxA , which are disordered in the crystal structure . Phenotypes are in Table S1 . ( D ) Assembly of long dynamin tetramer models within the GMPPCP - stabilized constricted D PRD map ( gray ) . The numbering and rainbow coloring ( red to blue ) denote the sequential addition of tetramers and terminates when the ﬁrst G domain dimer is formed . Upper panel depicts end view of the long assembly looking down the helical axis ; lower panel is a side view perpendicular to this axis . The sequential rungs of the dynamin helix are marked in the lower panel with black brackets and numbered as ‘‘1’’ and ‘‘2 . ’’ Dashed black box highlights the partnering helical rungs facilitating G domain dimerization . ( E ) Proposed pathway of dynamin - catalyzed membrane ﬁssion . Dynamin tetramers exist in an assembly - incompetent conformation in solution ( 1 ) . Membrane bindingcausesaconformationalchangeinthetetramerthatexposestheassemblyinterface , inducingtherapid , cooperativeassemblyofahelicaldynamincollar at the neck of an invaginated clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) ( 2 ) . Initial constriction of the neck , triggered by GTP binding and structural changes in middle / GED stalk ( Chen et al . , 2004 ) , promotes G domain dimerization between tetramers in adjacent helical rungs to optimally position dynamin’s catalytic machinery ( 3 ) . Assembly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis drives a major rotation of the BSE in the transition state that constitutes the dynamin powerstroke ( 4 ) . Propagation of this change through multiple turns of the helical dynamin collar causes further constriction of the neck ( 4 ) . The resulting structural rearrangements might play arole in loosening the dynamin scaffold from the membrane surface , facilitating the membrane - remodeling events that contribute tomembrane ﬁssion ( 5 ) . The detached dynamin scaffold disassembles upon release of the hydrolyzed g - phosphate ( 6 ) , which stabilized the dimer interface . Coloring : G domains , green ; middle / GED stalk , blue ; PH domains , orange ; membrane bilayer , gray ; lipid head groups , gray circles . The large gray circle with cyan meshwork is the CCP . The assemblies areshowninthesameorientationsasin ( D ) ( upperpanels3 , 4 ) andinsideviewonthelowerpanels . Redarrowsindicatemovementsassociatedwiththedynamin powerstroke . The 7 nm measurement ( 3 ) corresponds to the inner lumenal diameter of our GMPPCP - stabilized D PRD reconstruction , which is poised for Gdomaindimerizationandrepresentsanintermediatealongtheﬁssionpathway ; the4nmmeasurement ( 4 ) indicatesthetheoreticalinnerlumenaldiameterofthe neck that would allow the spontaneous formation of a hemiﬁssion intermediate following partial detachment of the dynamin scaffold . See also Figure S6 and Table S1 . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 219 relaxed by partial detachment and / or disassembly of dynamin subunits following stimulated GTP hydrolysis ( Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ; Pucadyil and Schmid , 2008 ; Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ) . Theoretical modeling indicates that a hemiﬁssion intermediate will form at this stage if the lumenal diameter of the neck is equivalent to the bilayer thickness ( (cid:1) 4 nm ) ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ) . Our GMPPCP - stabilized D PRD polymer recon - struction has an inner lumenal diameter of 7 nm , indicating that it is an intermediate along the ﬁssion pathway and that additional constriction is necessary to constrain the membrane neck in a manner that allows ﬁssion to occur spontaneously once it is released from the dynamin scaffold . Further compression of the polymer also favors G domain dimerization , as the longitu - dinal proximity between adjacent helical rungs would be in - creased as the inner lumenal diameter decreases . Our structural data raise the tantalizing possibility of a BSE - mediated dynamin powerstroke ( Figure 7E ) that converts the energy of G domain dimerization and GTP hydrolysis into rearrangements affecting the entire dynamin collar . These changes could provide the mechanochemical force needed for constriction down to (cid:1) 4 nm and subsequent loosening of the dy - namin scaffold from the membrane , thus precipitating the membrane - remodeling events required for ﬁssion ( Figure 7E ) . Recently , large GTP hydrolysis - dependent conformational changes were also observed for the yeast mitochondrial dyna - min - like protein Dnm1 ( Mears et al . , 2011 ) that did not occur upon the addition of GMPPCP , suggesting that the formation of a G domain transition - state complex may also play an impor - tant role in mitochondrial ﬁssion . It remains to be seen whether this system exhibits a similar BSE conformational change . It has been proposed that the assembly - dependent posi - tioning of dynamin’s PH domains helps catalyze the lipid rearrangements needed for ﬁssion ( Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) . The PH domains are asymmetrically distributed in the long tetramer assembly with part of the membrane surface unoccu - pied ( Figure 7D ) and arranged uniformly around the neck in the short assembly ( Figure S6D ) . As the number of turns required to catalyze ﬁssion has yet to be established , the signiﬁcance of this differential distribution remains to be determined . Intramolecular Conformational Coupling Fluorescence studies have shown that PH domain binding to / dissociation from the plasma membrane is coupled to structural changes in the G domain’s nucleotide - binding pocket ( Solo - maha and Palfrey , 2005 ; Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ) . The large distance between these two domains ( Figure 2 ) suggests that a mechanism exists for long - range communica - tion within the dynamin molecule . We previously showed that the BSE senses and transmits assembly - dependent conforma - tional changes to the G domain in a back - to - front manner , i . e . , from the membrane to the G domain ( Chappie et al . , 2009 ) . The hydrolysis - dependent BSE conformational change de - scribed here ( Figure 4 ) illustrate that this module can also func - tion front - to - back ( i . e . , from the G domain to the membrane ) , amplifying nucleotide - dependent changes in the active site and relaying them through the stalk . These properties make the BSE an ideal regulator of intramolecular crosstalk . Recent evidence suggests that the C - terminal a helix of the PH domain ( C PH ) also plays a role in conformational coupling , as mutations in this region can indirectly modulate dynamin’s GTPase activity ( Kenniston and Lemmon , 2010 ) . Being situated at opposing ends of the GED , the C PH and BSE could communicate back and forth via structural ﬂuctuations in the stalk to coordinate membrane binding , dynamin assembly , stimulated GTP hydrolysis , and the subsequent disassembly of the polymer . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Protein Puriﬁcation and Biochemical Assays See Extended Experimental Procedures for detailed protocols describing the puriﬁcation of dynamin and GG constructs , chemical crosslinking , and sedi - mentation velocity experiments . Preparation of D PRD Dynamin Tubes Liposomes containing 100 % 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - L - serine ( DOPS ; Avanti Polar Lipids ) were prepared by extrusion through polycarbon - ate membranes ( Whatman ) with a pore size of 0 . 4 m m using an Avanti Mini - Extruder . Lipids were mixed , dried , rehydrated in buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 ) to a ﬁnal concentration of 2 . 5 mM ( (cid:1) 2 mg / ml ) , and sonicated prior to extrusion . The resulting unilamellar DOPS liposomes were diluted to 1 mg / ml and mixed 1 : 1 ( v : v ) with D PRD dynamin at 1 mg / ml in 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) / 100 mM NaCl . The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 2 hr and then applied to plasma cleaned C - ﬂat holey grids . The sample was washedwith20mMHEPES ( pH7 . 5 ) , blotted , andfrozeninliquidethane . Grids were transferred to liquid nitrogen and stored until use . Cryo - EM and Image Processing Samples were visualized using a Phillips Technai F20 electron microscope operating at 120 kV , and images were collected using Leginon ( Potter et al . , 1999 ; Suloway et al . , 2005 ) in manual mode at 1 . 0 – 2 . 0 m m underfocus with a 4K 3 4K Gatan CCD camera at a nominal magniﬁcation of 50 , 000 3 , corre - sponding to a resolution of 2 . 26 A˚ per pixel . Images were individually CTF cor - rected using ACE2 ( Mallick et al . , 2005 ) . Ordered , straight D PRD tubes were manuallyselectedforprocessingbytheiterativehelicalrealspacereconstruc - tion ( IHRSR ) methodology ( Egelman , 2007 ; see Extended Experimental Procedures for details ) . The resolution of the ﬁnal map was determined to be 12 . 2 A˚ by Fourier shell correlation ( FSC = 0 . 5 ) ( Figure S1D ) . X - Ray Data Collection , Structure Solution , and Reﬁnement Native data on a GG GMPPCP crystal were collected at 95 K on a rotating anode source equipped with multilayer focusing optics using Cu K a radiation and a Saturn A200 CCD detector . All data were integrated and scaled using XDS ( Kabsch , 2010 ) . The GG GMPPCP structure was solved by molecular replace - ment using PHASER ( McCoy et al . , 2007 ) and reﬁned with CNS v1 . 3 ( Bru¨nger et al . , 1998 ) . See Extended Experimental Procedures for details . X - ray data collection and reﬁnement statistics can be found in Table S2 . Computational Docking All - atom structures were reﬁned using the YUP . SCX method ( Tan et al . , 2008 ) of the YUP software package ( Tan et al . , 2006 ) . See Extended Experimental Procedures and Figure S1E for details . Initial ﬁtting was performed using GG GDP . AlF4 - monomers ( PDB 2X2E ) , MxA middle / GED stalk monomers ( PDB 3LJB ) , and PH domain monomers ( PDB 1DYN ) , representing (cid:1) 93 % of the D PRD sequence . A similar procedure was used to ﬁt GG GMPPCP . Orienta - tions of the middle / GED and PH monomers were largely unchanged , and the GG GMPPCP placement reﬁned to a single orientation that best matched the D PRD cryo - EM structure . GTPase Assays Basal and low - salt assembly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis was measured using a colorimetric malachite green assay described elsewhere ( Leonard et al . , 2005 ) . In each case , reactions were carried out at 37 (cid:4) C using 2 m M of His - tagged full - length dynamin 1 constructs and 500 m M GTP in buffer containing 220 Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and either 150 mM KCl ( basal ) or 0 mM KCl ( low - salt assembly - stimulated ) . ACCESSION NUMBERS Atomic coordinates for the GG GMPPCP structure have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under the accession number 3ZYC . The reconstructed density of GMPPCP - stabilized D PRD lipid tubes has been deposited in the EM Data Bank with accession code EMD - 1949 . Coordinates for the complete docked model consisting of GG GMPPCP , the human MxA stalk , and the human dynamin 1 PH domain have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank with accession code 3ZYS . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , a sequence comparison data ﬁle , six ﬁgures , two tables , and three movies and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 09 . 003 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankVasylLukiyanchukandSharmisthaAcharyaforassistanceincloning and puriﬁcation , Rodolfo Ghirlando for assistance with sedimentation velocity experiments , Juha - Pekka Mattila for communication of unpublished data , Joshua Zimmerberg for insightful discussions , Alison B . Hickman for technical adviceandcriticalreadingofthemanuscript , andYihongYeforcriticalreading of the manuscript . We especially thank Marijn Ford and Jodi Nunnari for the ongoing open dialogue regarding the intricacies of dynamin structure and assembly . This work was supported by the Intramural Program of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases ( NIDDK ) and NIH grants GM52468 and GM75820 ( to R . A . M . ) and GM42455 ( to S . L . S . ) . J . S . C . was supported by a Nancy Nossal Fellowship award from NIDDK . A portion of the work presented here was conducted at the National Resource for Auto - mated Molecular Microscopy , which is supported by the National Institutes of Health through the National Center for Research Resources’ P41 program ( RR017573 ) . Received : May 27 , 2011 Revised : July 26 , 2011 Accepted : September 1 , 2011 Published : September 29 , 2011 REFERENCES Bashkirov , P . V . , Akimov , S . A . , Evseev , A . I . , Schmid , S . L . , Zimmerberg , J . , and Frolov , V . A . ( 2008 ) . GTPasecycleofdynaminiscoupledtomembranesqueeze and release , leading to spontaneous ﬁssion . Cell 135 , 1276 – 1286 . Bru¨nger , A . T . , Adams , P . D . , Clore , G . M . , DeLano , W . L . , Gros , P . , Grosse - Kunstleve , R . W . , Jiang , J . S . , Kuszewski , J . , Nilges , M . , Pannu , N . S . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Crystallography & NMR system : A new software suite for macromolec - ularstructuredetermination . ActaCrystallogr . DBiol . Crystallogr . 54 , 905 – 921 . Chappie , J . S . , Acharya , S . , Liu , Y . W . , Leonard , M . , Pucadyil , T . J . , andSchmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Anintramolecularsignaling elementthatmodulatesdynaminfunc - tion in vitro and in vivo . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3561 – 3571 . Chappie , J . S . , Acharya , S . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , and Dyda , F . ( 2010 ) . G domain dimerization controls dynamin’s assembly - stimulated GTPase activity . Nature 465 , 435 – 440 . Chen , Y . J . , Zhang , P . , Egelman , E . H . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2004 ) . The stalk region of dynamin drives the constriction of dynamin tubes . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 574 – 575 . Danino , D . , Moon , K . H . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2004 ) . Rapid constriction of lipid bilayers by the mechanochemical enzyme dynamin . J . Struct . Biol . 147 , 259 – 267 . Egelman , E . H . ( 2007 ) . The iterative helical real space reconstruction method : surmounting the problems posed by real polymers . J . Struct . Biol . 157 , 83 – 94 . Ferguson , K . M . , Lemmon , M . A . , Schlessinger , J . , and Sigler , P . B . ( 1994 ) . Crystal structure at 2 . 2 A resolution of the pleckstrin homology domain from human dynamin . Cell 79 , 199 – 209 . Gao , S . , von der Malsburg , A . , Paeschke , S . , Behlke , J . , Haller , O . , Kochs , G . , andDaumke , O . ( 2010 ) . Structuralbasisofoligomerizationinthestalkregionof dynamin - like MxA . Nature 465 , 502 – 506 . Hinshaw , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 . Ingerman , E . , Perkins , E . M . , Marino , M . , Mears , J . A . , McCaffery , J . M . , Hinshaw , J . E . , and Nunnari , J . ( 2005 ) . Dnm1 forms spirals that are structurally tailored to ﬁt mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 1021 – 1027 . Kabsch , W . ( 2010 ) . XDS . Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 66 , 125 – 132 . Kenniston , J . A . , and Lemmon , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Dynamin GTPase regulation is altered by PH domain mutations found in centronuclear myopathy patients . EMBO J . 29 , 3054 – 3067 . Leonard , M . , Song , B . D . , Ramachandran , R . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . Robust colorimetric assays for dynamin’s basal and stimulated GTPase activities . Methods Enzymol . 404 , 490 – 503 . Low , H . H . , and Lo¨we , J . ( 2006 ) . A bacterial dynamin - like protein . Nature 444 , 766 – 769 . Low , H . H . , Sachse , C . , Amos , L . A . , andLo¨we , J . ( 2009 ) . Structureofabacterial dynamin - like protein lipid tube provides a mechanism for assembly and membrane curving . Cell 139 , 1342 – 1352 . Mallick , S . P . , Carragher , B . , Potter , C . S . , and Kriegman , D . J . ( 2005 ) . ACE : automated CTF estimation . Ultramicroscopy 104 , 8 – 29 . Marks , B . , Stowell , M . H . B . , Vallis , Y . , Mills , I . G . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) . GTPaseactivityofdynaminandresultingconformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 – 235 . McCoy , A . J . , Grosse - Kunstleve , R . W . , Adams , P . D . , Winn , M . D . , Storoni , L . C . , and Read , R . J . ( 2007 ) . Phaser crystallographic software . J . Appl . Cryst . 40 , 658 – 674 . McMahon , H . T . , and Boucrot , E . ( 2011 ) . Molecularmechanism and physiolog - ical functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 517 – 533 . Mears , J . A . , Ray , P . , andHinshaw , J . E . ( 2007 ) . Acorkscrewmodelfordynamin constriction . Structure 15 , 1190 – 1202 . Mears , J . A . , Lackner , L . L . , Fang , S . , Ingerman , E . , Nunnari , J . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2011 ) . Conformational changes in Dnm1 support a contractile mecha - nism for mitochondrial ﬁssion . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 20 – 26 . Mettlen , M . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Ramachandran , R . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Dissecting dynamin’s role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 , 1022 – 1026 . Muhlberg , A . B . , Warnock , D . E . , andSchmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . Domainstructureand intramolecular regulation of dynamin GTPase . EMBO J . 16 , 6676 – 6683 . Niemann , H . H . , Knetsch , M . L . W . , Scherer , A . , Manstein , D . J . , and Kull , F . J . ( 2001 ) . Crystal structure of a dynamin GTPase domain in both nucleotide - free and GDP - bound forms . EMBO J . 20 , 5813 – 5821 . Praefcke , G . J . , andMcMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . Thedynaminsuperfamily : universal membrane tubulation and ﬁssion molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 133 – 147 . Potter , C . S . , Chu , H . , Frey , B . , Green , C . , Kisseberth , N . , Madden , T . J . , Miller , K . L . , Nahrstedt , K . , Pulokas , J . , Reilein , A . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Leginon : a system for fully automated acquisition of 1000 electron micrographs a day . Ultramicro - scopy 77 , 153 – 161 . Pucadyil , T . J . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2008 ) . Real - time visualization of dynamin - catalyzed membrane ﬁssion and vesicle release . Cell 135 , 1263 – 1275 . Ramachandran , R . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2008 ) . Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dynamin’s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane . EMBO J . 27 , 27 – 37 . Ramachandran , R . , Surka , M . , Chappie , J . S . , Fowler , D . M . , Foss , T . R . , Song , B . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2007 ) . The dynamin middle domain is critical for tetra - merization and higher - order self - assembly . EMBO J . 26 , 559 – 566 . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 221 Ramachandran , R . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Liu , Y . W . , Acharya , S . , Leonard , M . , Lukiyanchuk , V . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Membrane insertion of the pleck - strin homology domain variable loop 1 is critical for dynamin - catalyzed vesicle scission . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4630 – 4639 . Reubold , T . F . , Eschenburg , S . , Becker , A . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , Vallee , R . B . , Kull , F . J . , and Manstein , D . J . ( 2005 ) . Crystal structure of the GTPase domain of rat dynamin 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 13093 – 13098 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2006 ) . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 441 , 528 – 531 . Roux , A . , Koster , G . , Lenz , M . , Sorre , B . , Manneville , J . B . , Nassoy , P . , and Bassereau , P . ( 2010 ) . Membrane curvature controls dynamin polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 4141 – 4146 . Scheffzek , K . , Ahmadian , M . R . , andWittinghofer , A . ( 1998 ) . GTPase - activating proteins : helping hands to complement an active site . Trends Biochem . Sci . 23 , 257 – 262 . Schmid , S . L . , and Frolov , V . A . ( 2011 ) . Dynamin : Functional design of a membrane ﬁssion catalyst . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . Published online May 18 , 2011 . 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 100109 - 104016 . Sever , S . , Skoch , J . , Newmyer , S . , Ramachandran , R . , Ko , D . , McKee , M . , Bouley , R . , Ausiello , D . , Hyman , B . T . , and Bacskai , B . J . ( 2006 ) . Physical and functional connection between auxilin and dynamin during endocytosis . EMBO J . 25 , 4163 – 4174 . Solomaha , E . , andPalfrey , H . C . ( 2005 ) . Conformationalchangesindynaminon GTP binding and oligomerization reported by intrinsic and extrinsic ﬂuores - cence . Biochem . J . 391 , 601 – 611 . Song , B . D . , Yarar , D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2004 ) . An assembly - incompetent mutant establishes a requirement for dynamin self - assembly in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 2243 – 2252 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Nucleotide - dependentconformationalchangesindynamin : evidenceforamechanochem - ical molecular spring . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 . Suloway , C . , Pulokas , J . , Fellmann , D . , Cheng , A . , Guerra , F . , Quispe , J . , Stagg , S . , Potter , C . S . , and Carragher , B . ( 2005 ) . Automated molecular microscopy : the new Leginon system . J . Struct . Biol . 151 , 41 – 60 . Sweitzer , S . M . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - depen - dent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 . Tan , R . K . - Z . , Petrov , A . S . , and Harvey , S . C . ( 2006 ) . YUP : A molecular simula - tion program for coarse - grained and multi - scale models . J . Chem . Theory Comput . 2 , 529 – 540 . Tan , R . K . , Devkota , B . , and Harvey , S . C . ( 2008 ) . YUP . SCX : coaxing atomic models into medium resolution electron density maps . J . Struct . Biol . 163 , 163 – 174 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1995 ) . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 – 190 . Timm , D . , Salim , K . , Gout , I . , Guruprasad , L . , Waterﬁeld , M . , and Blundell , T . ( 1994 ) . Crystal structure of the pleckstrin homology domain from dynamin . Nat . Struct . Biol . 1 , 782 – 788 . Warnock , D . E . , Hinshaw , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1996 ) . Dynamin self - assembly stimulates its GTPase activity . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 22310 – 22314 . Wilson - Kubalek , E . M . , Chappie , J . S . , and Arthur , C . P . ( 2010 ) . Helical crystalli - zation of soluble and membrane binding proteins . Methods Enzymol . 481 , 45 – 62 . Zhang , P . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction of dynamin in the constricted state . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 922 – 926 . 222 Cell 147 , 209 – 222 , September 30 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc .