Hyperosmotic stress induces Rho / Rho kinase / LIM kinase - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation in tubular cells : key role in the osmotically triggered F - actin response Ana C . P . Thirone , 1 Pam Speight , 1 Matthew Zulys , 1 Ori D . Rotstein , 1 Katalin Sza´szi , 1 Stine F . Pedersen , 2 and Andra´s Kapus 1 1 Keenan Research Centre in the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of the St . Michael’s Hospital and Department of Surgery , University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , Canada ; and 2 Section for Cell and Developmental Biology , Department of Biology , University of Copenhagen , DK - 2100 Copenhagen , Denmark Submitted 11 September 2008 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 19 December 2008 Thirone AC , Speight P , Zulys M , Rotstein OD , Sza´szi K , Pedersen SF , Kapus A . Hyperosmotic stress induces Rho / Rho ki - nase / LIM kinase - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation in tubular cells : key role in the osmotically triggered F - actin response . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 : C463 – C475 , 2009 . First published December 24 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00467 . 2008 . —Hyperosmotic stress induces cytoskeleton reorganization and a net increase in cellular F - actin , but the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood . Whereas de novo F - actin polymerization likely contributes to the actin response , the role of F - actin severing is unknown . To address this problem , we investigated whether hyperosmolarity regulates coﬁlin , a key actin - severing protein , the activity of which is inhibited by phosphorylation . Since the small GTPases Rho and Rac are sensitive to cell volume changes and can regulate coﬁlin phosphorylation , we also asked whether they might link osmostress to coﬁlin . Here we show that hyperosmolarity induced rapid , sustained , and reversible phosphory - lation of coﬁlin in kidney tubular ( LLC - PK1 and Madin - Darby canine kidney ) cells . Hyperosmolarity - provoked coﬁlin phosphorylation was mediated by the Rho / Rho kinase ( ROCK ) / LIM kinase ( LIMK ) but not the Rac / PAK / LIMK pathway , because 1 ) dominant negative ( DN ) Rho and DN - ROCK but not DN - Rac and DN - PAK inhibited coﬁlin phosphorylation ; 2 ) constitutively active ( CA ) Rho and CA - ROCK but not CA - Rac and CA - PAK induced coﬁlin phosphorylation ; 3 ) hyperosmolarity induced LIMK - 2 phosphorylation , and 4 ) inhibi - tion of ROCK by Y - 27632 suppressed the hypertonicity - triggered LIMK - 2 and coﬁlin phosphorylation . We thenexamined whether coﬁ - lin and its phosphorylation play a role in the hypertonicity - triggered F - actin changes . Downregulation of coﬁlin by small interfering RNA increased the resting F - actin level and eliminated any further rise upon hypertonic treatment . Inhibition of coﬁlin phosphorylation by Y - 27632 prevented the hyperosmolarity - provoked F - actin increase . Taken to - gether , coﬁlin is necessary for maintaining the osmotic responsiveness of the cytoskeleton in tubular cells , and the Rho / ROCK / LIMK - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation is a key mechanism in the hyperos - motic stress - induced F - actin increase . cytoskeleton ; hypertonicty ; cell volume ; small GTPases MAINTENANCE OF CELLULAR INTEGRITY under aniso - osmotic con - ditions is a vital homeostatic requirement . Accordingly , several mechanisms have evolved to cope with osmotic shock and the corresponding volume perturbation , which either help restore near - normal volume or remodel the cell structure , enabling it to withstand the physical challenge ( 7 , 20 , 36 ) . In case of hyper - osmotic stress , these compensatory / adaptive responses can be classiﬁed into three main categories : activation of solute trans - port systems ( 44 ) ; transcriptional changes impacting on the synthesis of osmolyte transporters and osmolyte - synthesizing enzymes ( 7 ) and cytoskeleton reorganization , which is neces - sary to maintain structural integrity , and may also contribute to the realization of the other two responses ( 1 , 11 , 20 , 54 , 73 ) . Regarding cytoskeleton remodeling , hyperosmolarity has been shown to induce a net increase in F - actin content in a variety of cells ( 28 , 29 , 37 , 50 , 55 ) , but neither the underlying mechanism nor the responsible signaling has been sufﬁciently deﬁned . Actin polymerization depends predominantly on the number of free barbed ends , which act as nuclei to receive actin monomers . Three major mechanisms are known to account for free barbed end generation ( 14 ) : de novo nucleation , mostly through the Arp2 / 3 complex ; F - actin severing , which cuts an existing ﬁlament into two ( or more ) parts ; and uncapping of blocked ( capped ) barbed ends . Previous studies from our lab have shown that hyperosmotic stress facilitates de novo F - actin assembly preferentially at the cell periphery with the involve - ment of cortactin - enhanced and Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation ( 21 ) . Although osmotic stress has been reported to impact on signaling pathways that could alter severing and uncapping ( 42 , 47 , 52 , 53 , 55 , 57 ) as well , it is unknown whether such mechanisms also participate in osmotic stress - induced F - actin remodeling . Filament severing is a “Janus - faced” process , since it may lead to a net increase or decrease in polymerized actin . Sever - ing generates new barbed ends , which facilitates net buildup if the rate of monomer addition to these new ends overrides monomer dissociation . On the other hand , fast and extensive severing can lead to actin depolymerization and rapid loss of actin ﬁlaments . Coﬁlin has emerged as a central F - actin - severing protein , the activity of which is tightly regulated by phosphorylation ( 3 , 27 , 38 , 46 , 68 ) . In neutrophils ( 46 ) and tumor cells ( 9 ) , coﬁlin - mediated severing is an important component of dynamic lamellipodial activity , operating in synergy with the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 68 , 69 ) . In Dictyostelium , hyperosmolarity was shown to induce translocation of coﬁlin to the cortical skeleton , and coﬁlin overexpression increased the thickness of cortical actin bundles ( 1 ) . Theoretically , in - creased coﬁlin activity or redistribution might play a role in the rapid cortical F - actin assembly in hyperosmotically shocked Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : A . Kapus , St . Michael’s Hospital Research Institute , Queen Wing 7 - 009 , 30 Bond St . , Toronto , ON , Canada M5B 1W8 ( e - mail : kapusa @ smh . toronto . on . ca ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . The article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 : C463 – C475 , 2009 . First published December 24 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00467 . 2008 . 0363 - 6143 / 09 $ 8 . 00 Copyright © 2009 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajpcell . org C463 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m cells . However , an opposite scenario is also possible ; namely , that downregulation of coﬁlin’s severing activity might con - tribute to the maintenance of the Arp2 / 3 complex - generated cortical meshwork . Importantly , coﬁlin phosphorylation results in decreased severing activity ( 71 ) , which might help to pre - serve the F - actin network . However , in mammalian cells the regulation of coﬁlin by osmotic stress and the potential func - tional consequences of such an event are unknown . The primary enzyme that phosphorylates coﬁlin is LIM kinase ( LIMK ) ( 6 , 58 ) . Rho kinase ( ROCK I ) phosphorylates LIMK1 at Thr508 ( 45 ) and LIMK2 at Thr505 ( 61 ) and en - hances the ability of LIMKs to phosphorylate coﬁlin ( 39 ) . In addition to the Rho / ROCK pathway , Cdc42 and Rac effector p21 - activated kinases ( PAKs ) can also phosphorylate LIMK1 leading to coﬁlin phosphorylation ( 16 , 23 , 39 ) . Relevant to this , our previous studies have shown that hyperosmotic stress induces a rapid and substantial increase in the level of active Rho in kidney tubular cells ( 19 ) . Likewise , hyperosmotic exposure caused a fast activation of Rac and Cdc42 in neutro - phils ( 37 ) , Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) ( 21 ) , and human embryonic kidney ( HEK ) - 293 ( 66 ) cells . Cognizant of this scenario we sought to determine whether hyperosmotic stress increases coﬁlin phosphorylation , and if so , whether this effect could be mediated by the Rho / ROCK / LIMK and / or the Rac / PAK / LIMK pathway . We also asked whether coﬁlin plays a role in the osmotically induced changes in F - actin level and whether altered coﬁlin activity leads to net F - actin destruction or stabilization during osmotic stress . Our results suggest that hyperosmolarity promotes Rho / ROK / LIMK - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation , which in turn is an important contributor to the shrinkage - triggered rise in F - actin in kidney epithelial cells . MATERIALS AND METHODS Chemicals and antibodies . The enhanced chemiluminescence kit was from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech . The protease inhibitor mix - ture containing 0 . 8 mg / ml benzamidine - HCl , 0 . 5 mg / ml aprotinin , 0 . 5 mg / ml leupeptin , 0 . 5 mg / ml pepstatin A , and 50 mM phenylmethyl - sulfonyl ﬂuoride ( PMSF ) was obtained from PharMingen and was dissolved in pure ethanol . The ROCK inhibitor Y - 27632 , the p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase ( designated as p38 ) inhibitor SB - 203580 and the PAK inhibitory peptide PAK18 , were from Calbio - chem . Rhodamine - labeled phalloidin was purchased from Cytoskele - ton . The following antibodies used were polyclonal anti - phospho - coﬁlin ( Ser3 ) , anti - coﬁlin , anti - phospho - PAK1 ( Ser144 ) / PAK2 ( Ser141 ) , and anti - phospho - LIMK1 ( Thr508 ) / LIMK2 ( Thr505 ) and were from Cell Signaling ; monoclonal anti - Rac was from Upstate Biotechnology , LIMK1 was from BD Transduction Laboratories ; monoclonal anti - Myc ( 9E10 ) and polyclonal anti - LIMK2 were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ; antibodies against (cid:1) - actin , myosin light chain , and tubulin were from Sigma , whereas anti - phospho - myosin light chain was from Abcam . FITC - labeled anti - mouse and Cy3 - labeled anti - rabbit and anti - mouse IgG were from Jackson Laborato - ries ; peroxidase - conjugated anti - mouse and anti - rabbit IgG were from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech . Rac / Cdc42 Assay Reagent ( PAK1 PBD , agarose ) was from Upstate Biotechnology . Small interfering RNAs ( siRNAs ) targeted against coﬁlin1 ( siCoﬁlin : GGT GTT CAA TGA CAT GAAA ) and nonrelevant control ( siNR : AUU CUA UCA CUA GCG UGA CUU ) were purchased from Dharmacon . Cell culture . In most experiments LLC - PK1 cells , a renal tubular epithelial cell line with several proximal tubule characteristics , were used . Some experiments were conducted using Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells ( a distal tubular line ) , the ﬁbroblast - like CHO cells or Ehrlich Letter Ascites ( ELA ) tumor cells . We previously generated an LLC - PK1 cell line that stably expresses a retroviral vector encoding for a nonphosphorylatable , dominant negative ver - sion of myosin regulatory light chain ( MLC ) , in which T18 and S19 were replaced with alanine ( AA - MLC ) ( 18 ) . The epithelial cell lines were grown in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium ( DMEM ) , whereas the CHO ( 21 ) and ELA cells ( 53 ) were cultured in (cid:2) - minimal essential medium and RPMI - 1640 medium , respectively . The growth media contained 25 mM NaHCO 3 and were supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum and 1 % antibiotic suspension ( penicillin and strepto - mycin , Sigma ) . Cells were grown in a humidiﬁed air - CO 2 ( 19 : 1 ratio ) atmosphere at 37°C . Media . Bicarbonate - free RPMI 1640 was buffered with 25 mM HEPES to pH 7 . 4 ( HPMI , osmolarity 290 (cid:3) 5 mosM ) . The isotonic sodium medium ( 290 (cid:3) 5 mosM ) consisted of ( in mM ) 130 NaCl , 3 KCl , 1 MgCl 2 , 1 CaCl 2 , 5 glucose , and 20 HEPES ( pH 7 . 4 ) . If not otherwise stated , hypertonic solution was obtained by supplementing the isotonic solution with 300 mM sucrose . In experiments in which other levels of hyperosmolarity were used , the desired value was set by adding the corresponding concentration of sucrose to the isotonic medium . Constructs and cell transfection . The plasmids encoding the Myc epitope - tagged dominant - negative ( DN ) forms of RhoA [ RhoA ( TN19 ) myc ] , Rac1 [ Rac1 ( T17N ) myc ] , and Cdc42 [ Cdc42 ( T17N ) myc ] , as well as the con - stitutively active ( CA ) RhoA [ RhoA ( Q63L ) myc ] , Rac1 [ Rac1 ( Q61L ) myc , and Cdc42 ( Q61L ) myc ] were kindly provided by Dr . G . Bokoch ( Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA ) ( 5 ) and were used as described in our earlier studies ( 19 , 21 ) . Expression vectors containing cDNAs encod - ing the constitutively active p160 Rho - associated kinase I ROK - CAT myc , ( designated as CA - ROCK ) and the dominant - negative p160 Rho - associated kinase I ROK - RB / PH myc ( DN - ROCK ) were described previously ( 41 , 48 ) . All these mutants are NH 2 terminally Myc tagged . The Myc - tagged constitutively active PAK1 ( CA - PAK ; H83 , 86L / T422E ) and dominant negative PAK1 ( DN - PAK1 ; H83 , 86L / K299R ) were kindly provided by Dr . A . S . Mak and have been used in our earlier studies ( 59 ) . Transient transfection with the corresponding plasmids was performed using FuGene reagent ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Rou - tinely , cells were transfected with 1 (cid:4) g of plasmid DNA per well ( for 6 - well plates ) or 4 – 5 (cid:4) g of DNA per 10 - cm dish . The ratio of plasmid DNA to FuGene reagent was 1 (cid:4) g to 2 . 5 (cid:4) l , respectively . The classical effects of each CA and DN construct on the cytoskeleton were veriﬁed using rhodamine phalloidin staining ( not shown ) . Preparation of cell extracts . Before the experimentation , conﬂuent cell cultures were kept in serum - free HPMI for 3 h . These quiescent cells were then preincubated in isotonic medium for 10 min and subsequently subjected to various treatments as indicated . Cells were treated with isotonic or hypertonic medium for different times as stated . The medium was then aspirated , and the cells were vigorously scraped into an ice - cold lysis buffer containing 100 mM NaCl , 30 mM HEPES , 20 mM NaF , 1 mM EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , pH 7 . 5 , which was supplemented with 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 1 mM PMSF , and 20 (cid:4) l / ml protease inhibitor cocktail . Western blot analysis . Cell lysates diluted in Laemmli buffer were boiled for 5 min , subjected to SDS - PAGE on 10 % or 15 % gels , and transferred to nitrocellulose by using a semidry apparatus ( Bio - Rad ) . Blots were blocked in Tris - buffered saline containing 5 % bovine serum albumin and incubated with the corresponding primary anti - body . Binding of the antibody was visualized by using the relevant ( anti - mouse , - rabbit , or - goat ) peroxidase - conjugated secondary anti - bodies ( 1 : 3 , 000 dilution ) with the enhanced chemiluminescence method . Rac activity assay . The abundance of active ( i . e . , GTP bound ) small GTPase proteins was followed by afﬁnity pull - down assays as described ( 5 , 37 ) . Conﬂuent cell cultures were serum deprived in HPMI medium for 3 h followed by a 10 - min incubation in isotonic medium . Subsequently , the medium was aspirated and replaced with C464 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m either isotonic or hypertonic medium for the indicated times . Cells were then scraped in ice - cold magnesium lysis buffer [ containing 10 % glycerol , 25 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Igepal CA - 630 , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EDTA , and 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and 20 (cid:4) l / ml protease inhibitor cocktail ] , and the lysates were precleared by brief centrifugation ( 1 min at 12 , 500 rpm ) . To capture active Rac , the supernatants were immediately mixed with 10 (cid:4) l of a 50 % suspension of glutathione beads covered with a fusion protein ( (cid:5) 10 (cid:4) g ) composed of glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) and the p21 - binding domain of the p21 - activated kinase ( Upstate Biotech - nology ) . After a 30 - min rotation at 4°C , the beads were washed four times with magnesium lysis buffer , suspended in Laemmli sample buffer , and boiled for 5 min . Precipitated proteins were subjected to electrophoresis on 15 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels , which was fol - lowed by Western blot analysis using anti - Rac antibody . To obtain controls for active and inactive GTPases , lysates from untreated cells were supplemented with 0 . 1 mM GTP (cid:6) S or 1 mM GDP , respectively , and incubated for 15 min . Nucleotide binding was locked by adding 60 mM MgCl 2 to the lysates , and the samples were analyzed . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Conﬂuent cultures grown on round , 25 - mm coverslips were serum deprived for 3 h inHPMI , preincubated for 10 min in isotonic medium , and treated as speciﬁed in the ﬁgure legends . Subsequently , the cells were ﬁxed for 30 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde . The coverslips were extensively washed with PBS , incubated with 100 mM glycine in PBS for 10 min , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 20 min , and then blocked with 3 % BSA or 1 % donkey serum in PBS for 1 h . Samples to be stained with the anti - phospho - coﬁlin were ﬁxed with ice - cold methanol for 6 min and blocked as described . Subsequently , the samples were incubated with primary antibodies for 1 h , washed with PBS , and incubated with ﬂuorescently labeled secondary antibodies for 1 h . The coverslips were washed and mounted on glass slides using mounting solution ( DAKO ) . Samples were viewed using an Olympus IX81 microscope ( Melville , NY ) ( (cid:7) 60 objective ) , coupled to an Evolution QEi Monochrome camera ( Media Cybernetics , Silver Spring , MD ) , and driven by the ImageQuant acquisition software . Transfection of siRNA . Kidney tubular epithelial cells ( LLC - PK 1 ) were transfected with 20 nM nonrelevant or coﬁlin siRNA using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagent from Invitrogen as per the manu - facturer’s instruction . Cells were incubated for 48 h following trans - fection , without any medium replacement . Quantiﬁcation of F - actin . Measurement of cellular F - actin content was based on a rhodamine phalloidin binding and extraction assay , essentially as described in Pedersen et al . ( 50 ) , with slight modiﬁca - tions . Cells were grown to conﬂuence in six - well plates , serum - deprived for 3 h , and preincubated with isotonic medium for 10 min , which was then aspirated and replaced with either the same isotonic or hypertonic medium ( (cid:8) 300 mM sucrose ) for 5 min . At the end of this period , the cells were ﬁxed in the corresponding medium supple - mented with 2 % paraformaldehyde ( ﬁnal concentration ) for 10 min at room temperature and placed on ice for another 30 min . The cells were then gently washed three times with PBS , permeablized for 10 min using a saponin buffer ( 10 mM MOPS , 5 mM EGTA , 20 mM K 2 HPO 4 , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 0 . 1 % saponin , pH 6 . 9 ) , and then incubated for 1 h in 250 (cid:4) l of the same solution supplemented with 0 . 33 (cid:4) M rhodamine phalloidin . The medium was aspirated , and the cells were washed three times in the MOPS solution without saponin . To extract the bound phalloidin , 2 . 5 ml of pure methanol were added to each well , and the samples were incubated under gentle shaking for 30 min . The entire volume of methanol from each sample was then transferred into a cuvette , and the ﬂuorescence of each sample was measured by a Photon Technologies ( PTI ) ﬂuorimeter using 540 and 576 nm for excitation and emission , respectively . The autoﬂuorescence of meth - anol extracts ( determined in the absence of added rhodamine phalloi - din ) was negligible . Both visual inspection and protein determination ( performed after methanol extraction ) veriﬁed that there was no loss of cells or protein during isotonic or hypertonic treatment . Relative canges in F - actin content are expressed compared with the ﬂuores - cence of the isotonic sample ( 100 % (cid:9) 1 ) . Protein assays . Protein concentrations were determined by bicin - choninic acid assay ( BCA Assay , Pierce ) using BSA as a standard . Densitometry . Quantiﬁcation of the bands was performed using a Bio - Rad GS - 690 Imaging Densitometer and the Molecular Analyst program as described previously ( 31 ) . Data are presented as representative immunoblots or photomicro - graphs of at least three similar experiments or as the means (cid:3) SE of the number of experiments indicated ( n ) . Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated using ANOVA or Student’s t - test . RESULTS Hypertonicity induces coﬁlin phosphorylation in tubular cells . To assess the effect of hyperosmotic stress on coﬁlin phosphorylation , LLC - PK1 cells were exposed to either iso - tonic ( 290 mosM ) or hypertonic ( 590 mosM ) media for various times ( 1 to 30 min ) and then lysed and subjected to Western blotting using phospho - coﬁlin and coﬁlin antibodies . Hyper - tonic treatment substantially increased coﬁlin phosphorylation , an effect that was readily apparent after 1 min , peaked after 2 – 10 min at about threefold over the isotonic level , and persisted for 30 min , i . e . , during the entire duration of these experiments ( Fig . 1 A ) . Restoration of isotonicity after hyper - tonic exposure resulted in a rapid decrease in coﬁlin phosphor - ylation , which returned to the prestimulus level within a few minutes ( Fig . 1 B ) . The magnitude of coﬁlin phosphorylation depended on the applied osmotic concentration ( Fig . 1 C ) : a discernable increase was attained at mild osmotic stress ( 325 – 400 mosM ) , the maximum was reached at approximately equaling a doubling of the isotonic level ( 600 mosM ) , whereas the response tended to diminish at very high osmolarities ( 900 mosM ) . MDCK cells , another tubular cell line , also exhibited coﬁlin phosphorylation upon hyperosmotic stimulation ; in these cells the response was even more pronounced ( (cid:10) 5 - fold ) after a 10 - min stimulation but appeared to be more transient in nature ( Fig . 1 D ) . In contrast , in the ﬁbroblast - like CHO cells , coﬁlin was highly phosphorylated even under resting ( isotonic ) conditions , and hyperosmolarity failed to induce any signiﬁ - cant change in the level of phospho - coﬁlin ( Fig . 1 E ) . Taken together , these results show that in kidney tubular cells hyper - osmotic stress induces rapid , sustained , and reversible coﬁlin phosphorylation , which shows a bell - shape dependence on osmolarity . Osmotic stress triggers a biphasic response in Rac activity and induces PAK phosphorylation in tubular cells . Depending on the stimulus and cell type , coﬁlin phosphorylation may be downstream to Rho / ROCK - mediated ( 45 , 61 , 67 ) or Rac / p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) - mediated ( 23 , 39 ) activation of LIMK ( and see Ref . 72 ) . Our earlier studies have shown that hyperosmotic stress induces robust and sustained Rho activa - tion in LLC - PK1 cells ( 19 ) . Whereas hyperosmolarity was also found to stimulate Rac ( 21 , 37 , 66 ) and PAK ( 10 , 13 , 56 ) in certain cell types , the osmotic responsiveness of this small GTPase has not been characterized in LLC - PK1 cells . To assess the potential involvement of the Rac pathway , we ﬁrst determined the effect of hypertonic stimulation on the level of active Rac and PAK . Exposure of the cells to hypertonicity caused a small but signiﬁcant increase ( 1 . 21 (cid:3) 0 . 04 - fold ; n (cid:9) 4 ) in the precipitated ( active ) Rac after 30 s , which was followed by a gradual and substantial decrease below the C465 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m resting level ( Fig . 2 A ) . This response was consistent with the early and transient Rac activation observed in HEK - 293 cells upon osmotic stimulation ( 66 ) . Since peripheral translocation of Rac is a strong indicator of Rac activation ( 64 ) , we followed the Rac distribution upon osmotic stress . In resting cells , Rac was present in the cytosol in a ﬁnely punctate manner . Hyper - tonicity caused early and marked increase in peripheral label - ing that manifested as enhanced Rac staining in a narrow line along the cell border , accompanied by Rac accumulation in perinuclear clusters ( Fig . 2 B ) . At later times peripheral labeling was still present albeit was less pronounced . Together these data may indicate early Rac activation , followed by deacti - vation , but they may also be consistent with the possibility that activated Rac binds preferentially to an endogenous effector , and thereby remains “invisible” for the PAK - binding domain of the GST - fusion protein , utilized in the pull - down assay . To substantiate that the apparently modest Rac activation may , nevertheless , have functional conse - quences , we examined the phosphorylation of PAK , a well - known downstream effect of Rac activation . Hyperosmolar - ity provoked transient PAK phosphorylation , which peaked at 5 min and decayed thereafter ( Fig . 2 C ) . Taken together , these data suggest that LLC - PK1 proximal tubular cells respond to hypertonic stress with a modest and transient activation of Rac and PAK , which is followed by an appar - ent Rac inactivation . Rho / ROCK but not rac / PAK pathway is the critical regula - tor of the osmotically induced coﬁlin phosphorylation . To delineate whether the Rac and / or Rho pathway ( s ) could be upstream of coﬁlin phosphorylation in tubular cells , we em - ployed two strategies in the following order : 1 ) we examined whether constitutively active members of the Rac and Rho pathways are able to promote coﬁlin phosphorylation ; and 2 ) we investigated whether genetic or pharmacological inter - ference with Rac or Rho signaling alters the hyperosmotically induced coﬁlin phosphorylation . Fig . 1 . Hyperosmolarity induces rapid and revers - ible coﬁlin phosphorylation in kidney tubular cells . A : conﬂuent layers of LLC - PK1 proximal tubule cells grown in 6 - well plates were preincubated in isotonic ( Iso ) medium for 10 min and then exposed to iso - or hyperosmolarity ( Hyper (cid:9) isotonic me - dium supplemented with 300 mM sucrose ) for the indicated times . Cells were then lysed , and aliquots of cell lysates containing equal amounts of protein were subjected to Western blot analysis using an anti - phospho - coﬁlin ( pcof ) antibody . To check for total coﬁlin expression and the equality of protein loading , the blots were reprobed using antibodies against coﬁlin ( cof ) and actin . Blot is not shown for the isotonic full time course . Routinely a 5 - min isotonic treatment was used as control ( labeled as Iso ) , since maximal responses ( plateau ) to hyperos - molarity were usually attained at this time point . Bottom : densitometric analysis of the hyperosmolar - ity - induced cof phosphorylation . Data are expressed as fold change , normalized to the pcof - to - cof ratio of the isotonic sample as 1 . Means (cid:3) SE for n (cid:9) 12 separate experiments are shown . B : reversibility of the osmotically provoked cof phosphorylation . Cells were treated iso - or hypertonically for 5 min as in A and then isotonicity was reestablished for the indi - cated times ( min ) . Subsequently cells were lysed and processed as in A . C : dependence of the hypertonic - ity - induced cof phosphorylation on the osmotic con - centration of the medium . Osmolarity was set to the indicated values using various concentrations of su - crose added to the isotonic medium . After 10 min preincubation in the isotonic medium , cells were challenged with the corresponding level of osmolar - ity for 5 min and then processed as in A . Changes in pcof levels are expressed compared with isotonic control . D : Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) distal tubular cells exhibit similar cof phosphoryla - tion upon hyperosmotic treatment . Similar condi - tions were used as in A . E : hyperosmolarity does not increase cof phosphorylation in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells . C466 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Monolayers of LLC - PK1 cells were transfected with Myc - tagged constitutively active ( CA ) Rac or Rho constructs and 24 – 48 h later were doubly stained for phospho - coﬁlin and the Myc epitope to indentify the successfully transfected cells . As shown on Fig . 3 A , cells expressing CA - Rho but not CA - Rac ( Myc - positive , green ) displayed enhanced phospho - coﬁlin la - beling compared with their untransfected neighbors . In fact increased coﬁlin phosphorylation was readily detectable by Western blot analysis in whole cells lysates obtained from CA - Rho - transfected cultures : there was a 1 . 44 - fold increase in the total phospho - coﬁlin signal , despite the low transfection efﬁciency ( (cid:11) 10 % ) , indicating that very substantial ( several - fold ) increase occurred in the phospho - coﬁlin content of CA - Rho - expressing cells ( Fig . 3 B ) . No increase in phospho - coﬁlin content was observed upon transfection of CA - Rac ( Fig . 3 C , bottom ) . In accordance with these ﬁndings , Myc - tagged CA - ROCK ( a downstream effector of Rho ) but not CA - PAK ( downstream effector or Rac and Cdc42 ) , induced enhanced phospho - coﬁlin labeling in tubular cells ( Fig . 3 C ) . These ob - servations were corroborated by Western blot analysis : trans - fection of cultures with CA - ROCK caused a signiﬁcant in - crease in the total phospho - coﬁlin content of the lysates , whereas CA - PAK had no effect , despite the fact that the overall PAK expression exceeded that of ROCK , as veriﬁed by the Myc - signal ( Fig . 3 D ) . Collectively , these ﬁndings suggest that in LLC - PK1 cells the Rho / ROCK pathway is a strong inducer of coﬁlin phosphorylation , whereas the Rac / PAK path - way does not appear to play a major role in the regulation of this process . In the following experiments we sought to determine whether the osmotically induced coﬁlin phosphorylation was mediated by the Rho / ROCK / LIMK pathway . Hyperosmolarity induced a general increase in phospho - coﬁlin staining in non - transfected cells , which was present in the entire cell interior without showing accumulation in any particular compartment . Expression of dominant negative ( DN ) Rho fully prevented the rise in phospho - coﬁlin staining in the cytosol ( Fig . 4 A ) . We occasionally observed that elevated phospho - coﬁlin labeling remained present in the nucleus ( see DISCUSSION ) , but the majority of the response was eliminated . In contrast , DN - Rac did not interfere with the osmotically evoked coﬁlin phosphor - ylation ( Fig . 4 B ) . In accordance with these ﬁndings , DN - ROCK but not DN - PAK abolished the hypertonicity - induced elevation in phospho - coﬁlin staining ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . To substantiate these ﬁndings with biochemical methods on entire cell populations , we used pharmacological approaches . Pretreatment of cells with the ROCK inhibitor Y - 27632 dras - tically reduced the basal coﬁlin phosphorylation under isotonic conditions and abolished its hypertonicity - triggered increase , as detected by Western blot analysis ( Fig . 6 A ) . In contrast , PAK18 , a selective cell - permeable PAK inhibitor failed to prevent coﬁlin phosphorylation ( Fig . 6 C ) . Importantly , hyper - osmolarity induced sizable and rapid LIMK2 phosphorylation that reached a plateau at approximately sixfold increase at 5 min ( Fig . 6 B ) . Moreover , the hyperosmolarity - provoked LIMK2 phosphorylation was entirely prevented by Y - 27632 ( Fig . 6 B ) . A recent report indicated that in endothelial cells vascular endothelial growth factor stimulated LIMK1 by inducing its phosphorylation on Ser - 323 , a distinct site from the ROCK target Thr - 508 . This reaction was mediated by MK2 , a down - stream target of p38 . Since hyperosmolarity is a well - known activator of p38 , we asked whether p38 could be involved , either upstream or downstream of ROCK , in the hypertonicity - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation . Figure 6 D shows that inhibi - tion of ROCK , which prevented the hyperosmolarity - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation , had no effect on the hyperosmolarity - induced p38 phosphorylation . Conversely , inhibition of p38 by SB - 203580 did not eliminate coﬁlin phosphorylation ; in fact , occasionally we observed elevated basal coﬁlin phosphoryla - tion under isotonic conditions after preincubation with SB - 203580 . Interestingly , PAK18 prevented the osmotically pro - voked p38 phosphorylation ( Fig . 6 E ) . Together these ﬁndings verify the efﬁciency of the PAK inhibitor , indicate that PAK is an important mediator of the hyperosmolarity - induced p38 phosphorylation , and argue against the possibility that p38 activation would play a major role in the osmotically induced coﬁlin phosphorylation in kidney tubular cells . Considered in Fig . 2 . The effect of hyperosmolarity on Rac and PAK in LLC - PK1 cells . A : conﬂuent layers of LLC - PK1 cells in 10 - cm dishes were challenged with a hypertonic solution for the indicated time . Cells were then lysed and processed for the Rac activity assay as described under MATERIALS AND METHODS . Before the pull - down assay , an aliquot was taken from each lysate to measure total Rac . Note that hyperosmolarity induced a rapid , small , but signiﬁcant increase in the amount of captured ( GTP - bound ) Rac , followed by a substantial decrease ( n (cid:9) 4 , * P (cid:11) 0 . 05 and * * * P (cid:11) 0 . 001 ) . B : effect of hyperosmolarity on the intracellular localization of Rac . LLC - PK1 cells , grown to conﬂuence on glass coverslips were treated iso - or hypertonically as indicated . Cells were then ﬁxed and stained for Rac using a primary and a Cy - 3 - labeled secondary antibody . Note that under isotonic condition Rac distribution is primarily cytosolic , exhibiting some vesicular pattern ; after exposure to hypertonicity , the most prominent Rac labeling occurs at the cell periphery , whereas the overall cytosolic staining is reduced . We often observed enhanced and polar - ized Rac labeling in the perinuclear area . C : hyperosmolarity induces transient PAK phosphorylation . Cells were treated as indicated , and cellular lysates were processed for Western blot analysis using a phospho - speciﬁc ( Ser 142 / 144 ) PAK1 / 2 antibody . Results of densitometric analyses obtained from 3 independent experiments are shown . C467 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m aggregate , our results suggest that the Rho / ROCK / LIMK path - way is the central mediator of the hypertonicity - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation . Functional signiﬁcance of coﬁlin phosphorylation : involve - ment in F - actin increase during osmotic stress . A variety of cell types was reported to respond with cytoskeletal remodel - ing and particularly with a net increase in their F - actin content to hyperosmotic stress ( 28 , 29 , 37 , 50 , 55 ) . The mechanism underlying this phenomenon remained largely undeﬁned . In the following experiments we sought to address whether coﬁlin in general and coﬁlin phosphorylation in particular might play a role in the osmotically triggered F - actin response . To address this question , we compared the effect of hyperosmotic chal - lenge on F - actin changes in control and coﬁlin - depleted cells . Cells were treated for 48 h either with a nonrelated siRNA or an siRNA designed to silence coﬁlin ( siCof ) . The siCof con - struct caused a near - complete ( (cid:10) 90 % ) reduction in coﬁlin expression , as veriﬁed by Western blot analysis ( Fig . 7 A ) . Hyperosmotic exposure caused a large increase in the total F - actin content ( measured as the extractable Rhodamine - phal - loidin ) in control siRNA - treated cells , indicating the osmotic sensitivity of the cytoskeleton in kidney tubular cells ( Fig . 7 B , columns 1 and 2 ) . Interestingly , downregulation of coﬁlin also led to a remarkable rise in F - actin . The magnitude of this increase was comparable to the osmotically provoked effect . Moreover , hypertonic stimulation of coﬁlin - depleted cells failed to elicit any further change in their F - actin content ( Fig . 7 B , columns 3 and 4 ) . These results unambiguously imply that the presence of coﬁlin is a prerequisite for the osmotic responsiveness of kidney tubular cells , in terms of remodeling of their F - actin skeleton . However , these data do not indicate whether coﬁlin , or more importantly , its osmotically induced phosphorylation plays a causal role in the osmotic stress - induced F - actin change . To address this question , we tested the effect of Y - 27632 , which abolished the hypertonically triggered coﬁlin phosphorylation ( Fig . 6 A ) . Importantly , control ( untreated ) cells responded with a substantial increase in their F - actin content 1 , whereas Y - 27632 completely prevented the hypertonicity - induced rise ( Fig . 7 C ) . These observations clearly indicate that the hypertonicity - induced elevation in polymerized actin is a ROCK - dependent process in LLC - PK1 cells . 1 Interestingly the hyperosmotic effect on F - actin was even somewhat bigger in cells transfected with nonrelated siRNA ( Fig . 7 B ) compared with untrans - fected cells ( Fig . 7 C ) , suggesting that the transfection reagent might sensitize cells to the effect of hyperosmolarity . Fig . 3 . Constitutively active ( CA ) Rho and ROCK but not Rac and PAK induce cof phosphorylation in tubular cells . A and B : LLC - PK1 cells grown on coverslips were trans - fected with one of the indicated constructs ( 1 (cid:4) g DNA ) encoding for the Myc epitope - tagged constitutively active form of Rho , Rac , ROCK , and PAK . Forty - eight hours later , the cells were brieﬂy washed , ﬁxed , and doubly stained for phosphorylated cof ( red ) and the Myc epitope ( green ) to identify the successfully transfected cells . Iden - tical cells on the corresponding images are marked with identical symbols ( arrows or asterisks ) . C : cells grown in 10 - cm dishes were transfected with empty vector ( Mock ) , CA - Rho , or CA - Rac and lysed 48 h later . Proteins of the whole cell lysates were separated by SDS - PAGE and sub - jected to Western blotting using anti - phospho - cof . The blots were reprobed with anti - Rho and anti - Myc antibodies to detect all and endogenous Rho proteins , respectively . Despite the fact that the transfection efﬁciency was only a few percent ( (cid:11) 10 % ) , a highly signiﬁcant ( P (cid:11) 0 . 001 ) 1 . 44 - fold increase was detected in the phospho - cof content of the CA - Rho - transfected monolayers . This increase cor - responds to a 5 - to 10 - fold increase in the CA - Rho express - ing cells . D : cells were transfected with empty vector or Myc - tagged CA - ROCK or CA - PAK1 and then processed as in C . Tubulin was used as loading control . Note that CA - ROCK caused a highly signiﬁcant increase in the phos - pho - cof content of the entire cell population ( with a few % transfection ) originating from a large increase present in the ROCK - expressing cells . CA - PAK failed to increase cof phosphorylation despite the fact that PAK1 expression was stronger than ROCK expression , as veriﬁed by the Myc signal . C468 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Whereas the above ﬁndings are consistent with a causal role of coﬁlin phosphorylation in the actin response , an important caveat is that coﬁlin phosphorylation is not the only ROCK - dependent , cytoskeleton - modulating process . The other ROCK - mediated downstream effect is MLC phosphorylation , which , as we have shown earlier ( 18 , 19 ) , indeed occurs during hyper - osmotic stress in LLC - PK1 cells . It was therefore conceivable that MLC phosphorylation ( or the consequent MLC activation ) might be the critical event . Myosin activity can be blocked pharmacologically with blebbistatin ; however , this drug in - duces drastic alterations in basal F - actin arrangement ( 18 ) and fails to prevent MLC phosphorylation per se . Therefore , we addressed the question with a more speciﬁc tool that directly targets MLC phosphorylation and does not induce gross alter - ation in the F - actin structure ( 18 ) . We have generated an LLC - PK1 cell line that stably expresses AA - MLC , dominant negative light chain mutant in which Thr18 and Ser19 , the critical target residues for phosphorylation , were replaced with phenylalanine . In accordance with our earlier ﬁndings ( 18 ) , expression of AA - MLC effectively inhibited the hypertonicity - provoked MLC phosphorylation ( Fig . 7 D ) . We considered a potential problem before testing the effect of AA - MLC on the F - actin response : it was conceivable that AA - MLC might inhibit ROCK ( as a competitive inhibitor ) since wild - type MLC is a direct substrate of ROCK . However , this possibility was excluded since hyperosmolarity elicited comparable coﬁ - lin phosphorylation also in AA - MLC cells , and Y - 27632 elim - inated the basal and stress - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation ( see blots on Fig . 7 E ) . We then tested the effect of hypertonicity : AA - MLC cells responded to osmotic stress with a marked increase in their F - actin content , similar to the parent cells , and Y - 27632 prevented the hypertonicity - induced F - actin increase in these cells as well ( Fig . 7 E ) . Y - 27632 in itself appeared to cause a slight elevation in the basal F - actin , which did not change upon hyperosmotic stress . Taken together , these obser - vations are consistent with the notion that ROCK - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation is a key contributor to the F - actin response triggered by hypertonic shock . The ﬁnding that ROCK activity was critical for the cell shrinkage - induced F - actin rise was somewhat surprising , be - cause this process was found to be insensitive to Y - 27632 in Ehrlich ascites ( EA ) cells ( 49 ) . Since these are suspended Fig . 4 . Dominant negative ( DN ) Rho but not DN - Rac prevents the hypertonicity - induced phosphorylation of cof . Cells were transfected with Myc - tagged DN - Rho ( A ) or DN - Rac ( B ) constructs , as described under Fig . 3 , treated iso - or hypertonically ( as indicated ) , and stained for phospho - coﬁlin ( pcof , red ) and the Myc epitope ( green ) . The presence of cells was visualized by the nuclear stain 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) ( blue ) . To help identi - ﬁcation of the transfected cells on the red image , the area of the corresponding cell ( s ) was traced with a dashed line . Note that the expressions of DN - Rho almost completely suppressed the hyperosmolarity - triggered in - crease in pcof staining , whereas the pcof con - tent of DN - Rac - expressing cells is indistin - guishable from their nontransfected neighbors . In DN - Rho expressors , we occasionally ob - served some pcof labeling in nuclear / perinu - clear areas . C469 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ( nonattached ) cells , it was not clear whether the difference was due to distinct cytoskeletal responses to osmotic stress in attached versus suspended cells , or it reﬂected cell type - speciﬁc differences in the mechanism whereby the F - actin change is brought about . To address this question , we investi - gated the ROCK - sensitivity of F - actin changes in ELA cells , an attached counterpart of EA cells . Hyperosmolarity provoked an increase in F - actin in ELA cells , albeit their response was smaller than that observed in LLC - PK1 cells . Importantly , Y - 27632 did not have any effect on the basal F - actin level or its hypertonicity - induced elevation ( Fig . 7 F ) . These ﬁndings suggest that a similar , general response ( stress - induced rise in F - actin ) can be realized by different mechanisms in a cell type - speciﬁc manner ( see DISCUSSION ) . Effects of strong , long - term hyperosmotic stress on coﬁlin . Nephrotoxicant - induced , apoptosis - promoting stress has been recently shown to reduce cellular coﬁlin levels in LLC - PK1 cells ( 17 ) . We were therefore interested whether , in addition to the regulation of coﬁlin phosphorylation , stronger ( and longer lasting ) osmotic stress might alter coﬁlin expression . Exposure of the cells to a medium of 900 mosM for 3 h ( acondition that was accompanied by caspase - 3 activation ; data not shown ) induced a strong decrease in their total coﬁlin content ( Fig . 8 ) . Moreover , this sustained and robust hyperosmotic shock was not accompanied by increased coﬁlin phosphorylation . In fact there was an overall decrease in the phosphorylation of the remaining coﬁlin compared with the isotonic levels ( Fig . 8 ) . This ﬁnding was in accordance with our observation that even at early times ( 5 min ) strong hyperosmolarity elicited much less coﬁlin phosphorylation than moderate osmolarity ( Fig . 1 C ) . This suggests that the phosphorylating pathways are less efﬁcient under these extreme conditions and / or coﬁlin phos - phatases are also activated . In any case , these results show that hypertonicity exerts multiple and profound effects on coﬁlin : short - term , milder osmotic stress induces coﬁlin phosphoryla - tion , whereas long - term strong osmotic stress induces coﬁlin degradation and may favor dephosphorylation . These changes , in turn may have major impact on the regulation of the actin skeleton during stress ( see DISCUSSION ) . DISCUSSION The reorganization of the cytoskeleton upon osmotic stress is a ubiquitous response that has been documented in a variety of eukaryotic organisms , including yeast ( 11 ) , Dictyostelium ( 1 , 73 ) , and mammalian cells ( see Ref . 20 ) . Despite the fact that this general phenomenon is thought to be critical for mechanical protection of the challenged cells ( 30 , 54 , 73 ) , the underlying mechanisms remained poorly deﬁned . Our current studies indicate that , in kidney tubular cells , hyperosmotic stress induces coﬁlin phosphorylation via the Rho / ROCK / LIMK pathway , and this process is a central contributor to the ensuing increase in F - actin . Several lines of evidence support this conclusion : hyperosmotic stress provokes rapid and sus - tained Rho activation ( 19 ) as well as substantial LIMK phos - phorylation ( current work ) with slightly delayed kinetics ; ge - netic or pharmacological inhibition of Rho or ROCK nearly eliminates the shrinkage - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation and LIMK activation ; and importantly , ROCK inhibition prevents the hypertonicity - triggered increase in F - actin . Moreover , downregulation of coﬁlin elevates the basal F - actin level and cancels further changes on osmotic stimulation . Together these ﬁndings imply that basal coﬁlin activity is essential to render the cell osmotically responsive , whereas the shrinkage - induced inhibition of coﬁlin activity is a key component of the response itself . Our results not only provide evidence for the involvement of the Rho / ROCK pathway in the osmotically provoked coﬁlin phosphorylation but also rule out the participation of the Fig . 5 . DN - ROCK but not DN - PAK prevents the hypertonicity - induced phos - phorylation of cof . Cells were transfected with Myc - tagged DN - ROCK ( A ) or DN - PAK1 ( B ) constructs , treated iso - or hypertonically , and stained for pcof ( red ) and the Myc epitope ( green ) . * Identical cells on the red and green images . In A the contours of the transfected cell clusters are also shown . Note that DN - ROCK strongly reduces the hypertonically provoked rise in pcof labeling , whereas DN - PAK had no effect . C470 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Rac / PAK pathway . The major arguments supporting this view are that the kinetics of the transient Rac and PAK activation do not correspond to the coﬁlin response and , more importantly , that DN - Rac , DN - PAK , and a PAK inhibitor do not prevent the shrinkage - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation . In addition , CA - Rac and CA - PAK fail to promote coﬁlin phosphorylation in tubular cells . The latter ﬁndings were somewhat surprising given the fact that Rac and PAK have been described as potent inducers of coﬁlin phosphorylation in neuronal cells ( 39 ) . However , recent reports indicate that the overall role of the Rac / PAK pathway in coﬁlin phosphorylation is very different in epithelial cells . Speciﬁcally , both Rac ( 32 , 60 ) and PAK1 ( 15 ) have been shown to promote coﬁlin dephosphorylation , presumably by activating the coﬁlin phosphatase , slingshot , and this effect seems the predominant in certain cell types . In agreement with the potential contribution of such mechanism , in some experiments we observed that CA - Rac seemed to reduce coﬁlin phosphorylation in hypertonically treated cells . Provided that the substantial decrease in precipitated GTP - Rac ( after the initial increase ) indeed reﬂects reduced Rac activity during osmotic shock , this effect might contribute to the maintenance of coﬁlin phosphorylation by suppressing coﬁlin phosphatase activity . Finally , it is worth mentioning that over - expression of CA - Cdc42 caused a slight increase in coﬁlin phosphorylation in some cells ( data not shown ) . This ﬁnding may be due to the fact that Cdc42 can activate LIMK through myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase - (cid:2) ( 62 ) . The osmosensitivity of this pathway remains to be deter - mined . Whereas in tubular cells the majority of the osmotically provoked coﬁlin phosphorylation is mediated by the Rho / ROCK pathway , alternative mechanisms may also contribute and may even be predominant in other cell types . A recent report shows that in endothelial cells vascular endothelial growth factor stimulates LIMK1 by inducing its phosphoryla - tion on Ser - 323 , a distinct site from the ROCK target Thr - 508 . This reaction is mediated by MK2 , a downstream target of p38 . In endothelial cells , strong osmotic stress increased the activity of LIMK1 and coﬁlin phosphorylation in a p38 - dependent manner ( 34 ) . Whereas our own data clearly show that the ROCK - dependent coﬁlin phosphorylation is not mediated by p38 , and thus represents a distinct mechanism , the involvement of a minor , p38 - dependent component cannot be excluded . Such mechanism may explain our observation that DN - Rho did not fully extinguish coﬁlin phosphorylation in areas corre - sponding to the nucleus and raises the notion that nuclear coﬁlin phosphorylation might be separately regulated . Since MK2 , p38 , and LIMK can all reside in the nucleus ( 4 , 26 , 43 , 70 ) and certain stresses can induce nuclear coﬁlin translocation ( 51 ) , it will be interesting to determine whether the Rho / ROCK / LIMK2 pathway is predominantly responsible for the cytosolic phosphorylation of coﬁlin , whereas the p38 / MK2 / LIMK1 pathway for its nuclear phosphorylation . A central ﬁnding of the present work is that the shrinkage - induced increase in F - actin critically depends on the Rho / Fig . 6 . Hyperosmolarity induces ROCK - mediated LIM kinase and cof phos - phorylation . A and B : cells grown in 6 - well plates were preincubated for 10 min with vehicle or 10 (cid:4) M Y - 27632 in isotonic medium and then challenged with hyperosmolarity ( 300 mM sucrose ) in the presence or absence of Y - 27632 for the indicated times . Subsequently cells were lysed and the lysates were subjected to Western blot anaylsis using pcof and cof antibodies . Cumulated data for n (cid:9) 6 . B : similar experiments were performed as in A , and the lysates were probed with phospho - LIMK and LIMK2 antibodies ( n (cid:9) 4 ) . Blotting with anti - LIMK1 did not provide clear , speciﬁc labeling ( not shown ) . C : cells were preincubated with vehicle or 10 (cid:4) M PAK18 , a selective PAK inhibitor , for 20 min under isotonoic condition and then challenged with hyperosmolarity for 5 min in the presence or absence of the drug . Cof and pcof content were determined by Western blots . GADPH was used as a loading control . D , top : cells were pretreated in isotonic medium with or without Y - 27632 , treated iso - or hypertonically for 5 min ( as indicated ) in the absence or presence of 10 (cid:4) M Y - 27632 , and then processed for Western blotting using an anti - phospho - p38 antibody . The blots were reprobed with anti - p38 . Bottom : cells were preincu - bated with 10 (cid:4) M SB - 203580 , treated in the absence or presence of the drug , and processed as stated above . Cell lysates were probed for pcof and reprobed for cof . E : similar experiments were performed as in C , and the lysates were probed with anti - p38 and anti - phospho - p38 antibodies . C471 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ROCK pathway and coﬁlin in tubular cells . We reported earlier that in these cells the Rho / ROCK pathway mediates the hy - pertonicity - triggered MLC phosphorylation as well ( 19 ) , and it has been shown to underlie the hypertonicity - provoked assem - bly of a novel cytoskeletal structure , myosin - containing stri - ated polygonal actin networks ( termed as SPAN ) in endothelial cells ( 40 ) . Thus this route can regulate net F - actin levels , myosin phosphorylation , and the assembly of acto - myosin , implying that it is a central mediator of the overall cytoskeletal response to osmotic stress . However , net F - actin generation is Fig . 7 . Role of cof and its phosphorylation in the regula - tion of basal F - actin levels and osmotically induced changes in F - actin content . A : cells were transfected with 20 nM nonrelated small interfering RNA ( siNR ) or siRNA against cof ( siCof ) for 48 h as described under MATERIALS METHODS . The efﬁciency of siCof was evaluated by West - ern blots , using tubulin as a loading control ( n (cid:9) 9 ) . B : cells grown in 6 - well plates were transfected with siNR or siCof , and 48 h later they were serum - deprived , prein - cubated in isotonic medium for 10 min , and exposed to iso - ( I ) or hypertonicity ( H , 300 mM sucrose ) for an additional 5 min . Subsequently , cells were ﬁxed , perme - abilized , incubated with 0 . 33 (cid:4) M rhodmine - labeled phal - loidin for 1 h , and extensively washed . Bound phalloidin ( as a measure of total F - actin ) was extracted with metha - nol and quantiﬁed ﬂuorimetrically as described under MATERIALS AND METHODS ( n (cid:9) 9 ) . Both visual inspection and parallel protein determinations veriﬁed that the con - ﬂuent layers remained intact during the extraction proce - dure . C : wild - type ( WT ) LLC - PK1 cells were incubated with vehicle or 10 (cid:4) M Y - 27632 for 10 min and then challenged with iso - or hypertonic medium ( 300 mM sucrose ) for 5 min . F - actin content was measured as above ( n (cid:9) 5 ) . D : LLC - PK1 cells , stably expressing AA - MLC , a nonphosphorylatable , dominant negative form of the my - osin light chain , were treated as in C ( n (cid:9) 6 ) . Bottom : hyperosmolarity induced cof phosphorylation in AA - MLC cells as well is shown . E : expression of AA - MLC inhibits the osmotically triggered phosphorylation of MLC . Wild - type and AA - MLC cells were treated iso - or hypertoni - cally for 5 min . Lysates obtained from these cells were probed with antibodies against Myc ( to detect Myc - tagged AA - MLC ) , phospho - MLC and MLC , as indicated . F : effect of hyperosmolarity and Y - 27632 on F - actin content was investigated in ELA cells , under iso - and hypertonic conditions ( n (cid:9) 4 ) . Fig . 8 . Effect of long - term , strong hyperosmolarity on coﬁlin expression and phosphorylation . LLC - PK1 cells were exposed to iso - osmolarity or challenged with strong hyperosmolarity ( isotonic Na (cid:8) medium supplemented with 600 mM sucrose ) for 3 h . The levels of total and pcof were detected by Western blotting and are expressed as percentage compared with the isotonic control ( n (cid:9) 5 ) . C472 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m a complex process that , in addition to changes in severing , involves de novo F - actin assembly ( nucleation ) and altered capping as well ( 14 ) . The relative contribution of these mech - anisms may grossly differ in various cell types . Accordingly , the present study shows that the Rho / ROCK ( coﬁlin ) pathway is central in two kidney tubular cell lines , but it plays no major role in ELA cells , and presumably in CHO cells , which fail to respond with increased coﬁlin phosphorylation . It is worth noting that although ELA cells exhibit Rho activation upon osmotic stress , this response is transient ( 53 ) . One of the alternative F - actin generating mechanisms may be the shrink - age - induced production of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphos - phate ( PIP2 ) ( 42 ) , which facilitates the dissociation of capping proteins ( e . g . , gelsolin ) from ﬁlament ends ( 63 ) and also activates the Arp2 / 3 complex , thereby inducing nucleation ( 65 ) . The latter process is mediated via Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome protein ( WASP ) family proteins , which in addition to phosphoinositides , require costimulation with Cdc42 or Rac . These small GTPases are also activated by hypertonicity in certain cells ( see Ref . 20 ) , and , at least in neutrophils ( 37 , 55 ) , were shown to be involved in the net F - actin elevation . More - over , shrinkage ( presumably through PIP2 ) activates members of the ezrin - radixin - moesin family , important organizers of the cortical cytoskeleton ( 53 ) . Interestingly , downregulation of ezrin signiﬁcantly reduced the hypertonicity - provoked Rho activation , suggesting that ezrin may be one of the upstream elements linking cell shrinkage to Rho ( 53 ) . It is worth noting that Rho might enhance F - actin assembly in a ROCK - indepen - dent manner as well , through mDia ( 24 ) . The involvement of this pathway awaits elucidation . Finally , activation of p38 may facilitate F - actin assembly either by inhibiting the ﬁlament capping - activity of heat shock protein - 27 ( 52 ) or by modifying severing via the alternative phosphorylation of LIMK1 ( 34 ) , as mentioned above . Clearly , these mechanisms do not act in isolation but cooperate ( with different weight ) in the cell - type - speciﬁc realization of the actin response . Our studies suggest that in tubular cells de novo F - actin assembly should be accompanied by decreased severing to ensure a net increase in the F - actin content . It is worth noting that in addition to phosphorylation , coﬁlin activity may also be modulated by other osmotically regulated factors , such as intracellular pH and PIP 2 ( 22 ) . Future studies are warranted to determine the impact of these parameters in various cell types . Finally , we address the potential functional role of coﬁlin and its Rho / ROCK - mediated phosphorylation during osmotic stress . In Dictyostelium , the reorganization of the cortical cytoskeleton ( increased F - actin content and bundling together with enhanced myosin - based contractility ) were shown to be osmoprotective ( 35 , 54 , 73 ) . Coﬂin was implicated in the process , as its overexpression was accompanied with increased length and thickness of cortical actin bundles during stress ( 1 ) . To explain this somewhat paradoxical observation , Aizawa et al . ( 1 ) proposed that increased severing might be followed by augmented ﬁlament annealing . Potential changes in coﬁlin phosphorylation during osmotic shock have not been investi - gated in the slime mold . Our studies suggest that in mammalian cells coﬁlin phosphorylation and consequently decreased F - actin severing , along with enhanced MLC phosphorylation may lead to the same functional outcome : increased cortical rigidity that helps the cells withstand acute mechanical stress . This “frozen” cytoskeletal arrangement may also be responsi - ble for the major ( and therapeutically exploited ) inhibitory effects of hypertonicity on processes that depend on actin dynamics , including endo - and exocytosis and cell motility ( 55 ) . Regarding the kidney , hyperosmolarity - induced increase in and reorganization of F - actin has also been documented in intact medullary thick ascending limb of Henle ( 8 ) . In addition to osmoprotection , such F - actin changes are thought to be involved in volume control ( 8 ) and solute transport through the regulation of the activity and trafﬁcking of various ion trans - porters and water channels ( 2 , 33 ) . Assessment of the potential role of volume - sensitive coﬁlin phosphorylation in these phys - iological processes is an attractive area for future research . In addition to its cytoskeletal functions , coﬁlin has been implicated in the regulation of apoptosis as well ; upon stress coﬁlin was shown to translocate to the mitochondria , where it facilitates the apoptotic machinery ( 12 ) . Interestingly , how - ever , only active ( nonphosphorylated ) coﬁlin seems to partic - ipate in this process . It is therefore conceivable that rapid phosphorylation of coﬁlin during stress would decrease the translocation - competent pool , thereby delaying apoptosis and providing time for volume - regulatory and other adaptive mech - anisms . However , the picture is more complex : Whereas short - term inhibition of coﬁlin may be useful both for acute mech - anoprotection and delayed onset of apoptosis , the overall absence of coﬁlin is likely deleterious . This view is supported by our ﬁnding that deletion of coﬁlin enhances caspase acti - vation , induced by strong and long - lasting hyperosmolarity ( work in preparation ) . This scenario is likely due to the fact that coﬁlin downregulation substantially increases the total F - actin in the cells ( Fig . 7 A ) , and excessive actin polymeriza - tion was found to be an inducer of cellular aging and apoptosis ( 25 ) . Furthermore , we and others observed that during extreme stress conditions , coﬁlin is degraded and dephosphorylated , events that may mark the dysregulation of coﬁlin and the irreversible phase of stress - induced death . Taken together , the presence and the phosphorylation of coﬁlin are important for the osmotic responsiveness of the cytoskeleton , the osmotically provoked adaptive cytoskeleton rearrangement , and presumably , for the regulation of survival / apoptosis in moderate versus extreme stress . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . A . Masszi for valuable comments . GRANTS This work was supported by research grants from the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada ( A . Kapus ) , the Kidney Foundation of Canada ( to A . Kapus and K . Sza´szi ) , the Danish National Research Council and by the Carlsberg Foundation ( to S . F . Pedersen ) . K . Sza´szi is a recipient of a KRESCENT New Investigator Award ( a joint award of the Kidney Foun - dation of Canada , Canadian Nephrology Society and Canadian Institute of Health Research ) . REFERENCES 1 . Aizawa H , Katadae M , Maruya M , Sameshima M , Murakami - Muro - fushi K , Yahara I . Hyperosmotic stress - induced reorganization of actin bundles in Dictyostelium cells over - expressing coﬁlin . Genes Cells 4 : 311 – 324 , 1999 . 2 . Alexander RT , Furuya W , Szaszi K , Orlowski J , Grinstein S . Rho GTPases dictate the mobility of the Na / H exchanger NHE3 in epithelia : role in apical retention and targeting . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 12253 – 12258 , 2005 . C473 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 3 . Arber S , Barbayannis FA , Hanser H , Schneider C , Stanyon CA , Bernard O , Caroni P . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphor - ylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 : 805 – 809 , 1998 . 4 . Ben - Levy R , Hooper S , Wilson R , Paterson HF , Marshall CJ . Nuclear export of the stress - activated protein kinase p38 mediated by its substrate MAPKAP kinase - 2 . Curr Biol 8 : 1049 – 1057 , 1998 . 5 . Benard V , Bohl BP , Bokoch GM . Characterization of rac and cdc42 activation in chemoattractant - stimulated human neutrophils using a novel assay for active GTPases . J Biol Chem 274 : 13198 – 13204 , 1999 . 6 . Bernard O . Lim kinases , regulators of actin dynamics . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 39 : 1071 – 1076 , 2007 . 7 . Burg MB , Ferraris JD , Dmitrieva NI . Cellular response to hyperosmotic stresses . Physiol Rev 87 : 1441 – 1474 , 2007 . 8 . Bustamante M , Roger F , Bochaton - Piallat ML , Gabbiani G , Martin PY , Feraille E . Regulatory volume increase is associated with p38 kinase - dependent actin cytoskeleton remodeling in rat kidney MTAL . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 285 : F336 – F347 , 2003 . 9 . Chan AY , Bailly M , Zebda N , Segall JE , Condeelis JS . Role of coﬁlin in epidermal growth factor - stimulated actin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J Cell Biol 148 : 531 – 542 , 2000 . 10 . Chan PM , Lim L , Manser E . PAK is regulated by PI3K , PIX , CDC42 , and PP2C (cid:2) and mediates focal adhesion turnover in the hyperosmotic stress - induced p38 pathway . J Biol Chem 283 : 24949 – 24961 , 2008 . 11 . Chowdhury S , Smith KW , Gustin MC . Osmotic stress and the yeast cytoskeleton : phenotype - speciﬁc suppression of an actin mutation . J Cell Biol 118 : 561 – 571 , 1992 . 12 . Chua BT , Volbracht C , Tan KO , Li R , Yu VC , Li P . Mitochondrial translocation of coﬁlin is an early step in apoptosis induction . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 1083 – 1089 , 2003 . 13 . Clerk A , Sugden PH . Activation of p21 - activated protein kinase alpha ( alpha PAK ) by hyperosmotic shock in neonatal ventricular myocytes . FEBS Lett 403 : 23 – 25 , 1997 . 14 . Condeelis J . How is actin polymerization nucleated in vivo ? Trends Cell Biol 11 : 288 – 293 , 2001 . 15 . Coniglio SJ , Zavarella S , Symons MH . Pak1 and Pak2 mediate tumor cell invasion through distinct signaling mechanisms . Mol Cell Biol 28 : 4162 – 4172 , 2008 . 16 . Dan C , Kelly A , Bernard O , Minden A . Cytoskeletal changes regulated by the PAK4 serine / threonine kinase are mediated by LIM kinase 1 and coﬁlin . J Biol Chem 276 : 32115 – 32121 , 2001 . 17 . de Graauw M , Tijdens I , Cramer R , Corless S , Timms JF , van de Water B . Heat shock protein 27 is the major differentially phosphorylated protein involved in renal epithelial cellular stress response and controls focal adhesion organization and apoptosis . J Biol Chem 280 : 29885 – 29898 , 2005 . 18 . DiCiano - Oliveira C , Lodyga M , Fan L , Szaszi K , Hosoya H , Rotstein OD , and Kapus A . Is myosin light - chain phosphorylation a regulatory signal for the osmotic activation of the Na (cid:8) - K (cid:8) - 2Cl (cid:12) cotransporter ? Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 289 : C68 – C81 , 2005 . 19 . DiCiano - Oliveira C , Sirokmany G , Szaszi K , Arthur WT , Masszi A , Peterson M , Rotstein OD , and Kapus A . Hyperosmotic stress activates Rho : differential involvement in Rho kinase - dependent MLC phosphory - lation and NKCC activation . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 285 : C555 – C566 , 2003 . 20 . DiCiano - Oliveira C , Thirone AC , Szaszi K , and Kapus A . Osmotic stress and the cytoskeleton : the R ( h ) ole of Rho GTPases . Acta Physiol ( Oxf ) 187 : 257 – 272 , 2006 . 21 . Di Ciano C , Nie Z , Szaszi K , Lewis A , Uruno T , Zhan X , Rotstein OD , Mak A , Kapus A . Osmotic stress - induced remodeling of the cortical cytoskeleton . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 : C850 – C865 , 2002 . 22 . dos Remedios CG , Chhabra D , Kekic M , Dedova IV , Tsubakihara M , Berry DA , Nosworthy NJ . Actin binding proteins : regulation of cytoskel - etal microﬁlaments . Physiol Rev 83 : 433 – 473 , 2003 . 23 . Edwards DC , Sanders LC , Bokoch GM , Gill GN . Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase signalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 253 – 259 , 1999 . 24 . Geneste O , Copeland JW , Treisman R . LIM kinase and Diaphanous cooperate to regulate serum response factor and actin dynamics . J Cell Biol 157 : 831 – 838 , 2002 . 25 . Gourlay CW , Ayscough KR . The actin cytoskeleton : a key regulator of apoptosis and ageing ? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6 : 583 – 589 , 2005 . 26 . Goyal P , Pandey D , Siess W . Phosphorylation - dependent regulation of unique nuclear and nucleolar localization signals of LIM kinase 2 in endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 281 : 25223 – 25230 , 2006 . 27 . Gungabissoon RA , Bamburg JR . Regulation of growth cone actin dynamics by ADF / coﬁlin . J Histochem Cytochem 51 : 411 – 420 , 2003 . 28 . Hallows KR , Law FY , Packman CH , Knauf PA . Changes in cytoskel - etal actin content , F - actin distribution , and surface morphology during HL - 60 cell volume regulation . J Cell Physiol 167 : 60 – 71 , 1996 . 29 . Hallows KR , Packman CH , Knauf PA . Acute cell volume changes in anisotonic media affect F - actin content of HL - 60 cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 261 : C1154 – C1161 , 1991 . 30 . Insall RH . Cyclic GMP and the big squeeze . Osmoregulation Curr Biol 6 : 516 – 518 , 1996 . 31 . Kapus A , Szaszi K , Sun J , Rizoli S , Rotstein OD . Cell shrinkage regulates Src kinases and induces tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin , independent of the osmotic regulation of Na (cid:8) / H (cid:8) exchangers . J Biol Chem 274 : 8093 – 8102 , 1999 . 32 . Kligys K , Claiborne JN , DeBiase PJ , Hopkinson SB , Wu Y , Mizuno K , Jones JC . The slingshot family of phosphatases mediates Rac1 regulation of coﬁlin phosphorylation , laminin - 332 organization , and motility behav - ior of keratinocytes . J Biol Chem 282 : 32520 – 32528 , 2007 . 33 . Klussmann E , Tamma G , Lorenz D , Wiesner B , Maric K , Hofmann F , Aktories K , Valenti G , Rosenthal W . An inhibitory role of Rho in the vasopressin - mediated translocation of aquaporin - 2 into cell membranes of renal principal cells . J Biol Chem 276 : 20451 – 20457 , 2001 . 34 . Kobayashi M , Nishita M , Mishima T , Ohashi K , Mizuno K . MAPKAPK - 2 - mediated LIM - kinase activation is critical for VEGF - induced actin remod - eling and cell migration . EMBO J 25 : 713 – 726 , 2006 . 35 . Kuwayama H , Ecke M , Gerisch G , Van Haastert PJ . Protection against osmotic stress by cGMP - mediated myosin phosphorylation . Science 271 : 207 – 209 , 1996 . 36 . Lang F , Busch GL , Ritter M , Volkl H , Waldegger S , Gulbins E , Haussinger D . Functional signiﬁcance of cell volume regulatory mecha - nisms . Physiol Rev 78 : 247 – 306 , 1998 . 37 . Lewis A , Di Ciano C , Rotstein OD , Kapus A . Osmotic stress activates Rac and Cdc42 in neutrophils : role in hypertonicity - induced actin poly - merization . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C271 – C279 , 2002 . 38 . Maciver SK , Hussey PJ . The ADF / coﬁlin family : actin - remodeling proteins . Genome Biol 3 : 3007 , 2002 . 39 . Maekawa M , Ishizaki T , Boku S , Watanabe N , Fujita A , Iwamatsu A , Obinata T , Ohashi K , Mizuno K , Narumiya S . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 : 895 – 898 , 1999 . 40 . Malek AM , Xu C , Kim ES , Alper SL . Hypertonicity triggers RhoA - dependent assembly of myosin - containing striated polygonal actin net - works in endothelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292 : C1645 – C1659 , 2007 . 41 . Masszi A , Di Ciano C , Sirokmany G , Arthur WT , Rotstein OD , Wang J , McCulloch CA , Rosivall L , Mucsi I , Kapus A . Central role for Rho in TGF - (cid:1) 1 - induced (cid:2) - smooth muscle actin expression during epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 284 : F911 – F924 , 2003 . 42 . Nasuhoglu C , Feng S , Mao Y , Shammat I , Yamamato M , Earnest S , Lemmon M , Hilgemann DW . Modulation of cardiac PIP2 by cardioac - tive hormones and other physiologically relevant interventions . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 : C223 – C234 , 2002 . 43 . Nielsen MB , Christensen ST , Hoffmann EK . Effects of osmotic stress on the activity of MAPKs and PDGFR - beta - mediated signal transduction in NIH - 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 294 : C1046 – C1055 , 2008 . 44 . O’Neill WC . Physiological signiﬁcance of volume - regulatory transport - ers . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 276 : C995 – C1011 , 1999 . 45 . Ohashi K , Nagata K , Maekawa M , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S , Mizuno K . Rho - associated kinase ROCK activates LIM - kinase 1 by phosphorylation at threonine 508 within the activation loop . J Biol Chem 275 : 3577 – 3582 , 2000 . 46 . Okada K , Takano - Ohmuro H , Obinata T , Abe H . Dephosphorylation of coﬁlin in polymorphonuclear leukocytes derived from peripheral blood . Exp Cell Res 227 : 116 – 122 , 1996 . 47 . Okada T , Otani H , Wu Y , Kyoi S , Enoki C , Fujiwara H , Sumida T , Hattori R , Imamura H . Role of F - actin organization in p38 MAP kinase - mediated apoptosis and necrosis in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes subjected to simulated ischemia and reoxygenation . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 289 : H2310 – H2318 , 2005 . 48 . Oshiro N , Fukata Y , Kaibuchi K . Phosphorylation of moesin by rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) plays a crucial role in the formation of microvilli - like structures . J Biol Chem 273 : 34663 – 34666 , 1998 . C474 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 49 . Pedersen SF , Hoffmann EK . Possible interrelationship between changes in F - actin and myosin II , protein phosphorylation , and cell volume regulation in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells . Exp Cell Res 277 : 57 – 73 , 2002 . 50 . Pedersen SF , Mills JW , Hoffmann EK . Role of the F - actin cytoskeleton in the RVD and RVI processes in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells . Exp Cell Res 252 : 63 – 74 , 1999 . 51 . Pendleton A , Pope B , Weeds A , Koffer A . Latrunculin B or ATP depletion induces coﬁlin - dependent translocation of actin into nuclei of mast cells . J Biol Chem 278 : 14394 – 14400 , 2003 . 52 . Pichon S , Bryckaert M , Berrou E . Control of actin dynamics by p38 MAP kinase - Hsp27 distribution in the lamellipodium of smooth muscle cells . J Cell Sci 117 : 2569 – 2577 , 2004 . 53 . Rasmussen M , Alexander RT , Darborg BV , Mobjerg N , Hoffmann EK , Kapus A , Pedersen SF . Osmotic cell shrinkage activates ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins : activation mechanisms and physiological implications . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 294 : C197 – C212 , 2008 . 54 . Rivero F , Koppel B , Peracino B , Bozzaro S , Siegert F , Weijer CJ , Schleicher M , Albrecht R , Noegel AA . The role of the cortical cytoskel - eton : F - actin crosslinking proteins protect against osmotic stress , ensure cell size , cell shape and motility , and contribute to phagocytosis and development . J Cell Sci 109 : 2679 – 2691 , 1996 . 55 . Rizoli SB , Rotstein OD , Parodo J , Phillips MJ , Kapus A . Hypertonic inhibition of exocytosis in neutrophils : central role for osmotic actin skeleton remodeling . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 279 : C619 – C633 , 2000 . 56 . Roig J , Huang Z , Lytle C , Traugh JA . p21 - activated protein kinase gamma - PAK is translocated and activated in response to hyperosmolarity . Implication of Cdc42 and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in a two - step mech - anism for gamma - PAK activation . J Biol Chem 275 : 16933 – 16940 , 2000 . 57 . Schafer DA , Jennings PB , Cooper JA . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J Cell Biol 135 : 169 – 179 , 1996 . 58 . Scott RW , Olson MF . LIM kinases : function , regulation and association with human disease . J Mol Med 85 : 555 – 568 , 2007 . 59 . Sebe A , Masszi A , Zulys M , Yeung T , Speight P , Rotstein OD , Nakano H , Mucsi I , Szaszi K , Kapus A . Rac , PAK and p38 regulate cell contact - dependent nuclear translocation of myocardin - related transcrip - tion factor . FEBS Lett 582 : 291 – 298 , 2008 . 60 . Sehgal BU , DeBiase PJ , Matzno S , Chew TL , Claiborne JN , Hopkin - son SB , Russell A , Marinkovich MP , Jones JC . Integrin beta4 regulates migratory behavior of keratinocytes by determining laminin - 332 organi - zation . J Biol Chem 281 : 35487 – 35498 , 2006 . 61 . Sumi T , Matsumoto K , Nakamura T . Speciﬁc activation of LIM kinase 2 via phosphorylation of threonine 505 by ROCK , a Rho - dependent protein kinase . J Biol Chem 276 : 670 – 676 , 2001 . 62 . Sumi T , Matsumoto K , Shibuya A , Nakamura T . Activation of LIM kinases by myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase al - pha . J Biol Chem 276 : 23092 – 23096 , 2001 . 63 . Sun HQ , Yamamoto M , Mejillano M , Yin HL . Gelsolin , a multifunc - tional actin regulatory protein . J Biol Chem 274 : 33179 – 33182 , 1999 . 64 . Takai Y , Sasaki T , Matozaki T . Small GTP - binding proteins . Physiol Rev 81 : 153 – 208 , 2001 . 65 . Takenawa T , Suetsugu S . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connect - ing the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 37 – 48 , 2007 . 66 . Uhlik MT , Abell AN , Johnson NL , Sun W , Cuevas BD , Lobel - Rice KE , Horne EA , Dell’Acqua ML , Johnson GL . Rac - MEKK3 - MKK3 scaffolding for p38 MAPK activation during hyperosmotic shock . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 1104 – 1110 , 2003 . 67 . Vardouli L , Moustakas A , Stournaras C . LIM - kinase 2 and coﬁlin phosphorylation mediate actin cytoskeleton reorganization induced by transforming growth factor - beta . J Biol Chem 280 : 11448 – 11457 , 2005 . 68 . Wang W , Eddy R , Condeelis J . The coﬁlin pathway in breast cancer invasion and metastasis . Nat Rev Cancer 7 : 429 – 440 , 2007 . 69 . Yamaguchi H , Lorenz M , Kempiak S , Sarmiento C , Coniglio S , Symons M , Segall J , Eddy R , Miki H , Takenawa T , Condeelis J . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and coﬁlin . J Cell Biol 168 : 441 – 452 , 2005 . 70 . Yokoo T , Toyoshima H , Miura M , Wang Y , Iida KT , Suzuki H , Sone H , Shimano H , Gotoda T , Nishimori S , Tanaka K , Yamada N . p57Kip2 regulates actin dynamics by binding and translocating LIM - kinase 1 to the nucleus . J Biol Chem 278 : 52919 – 52923 , 2003 . 71 . Zebda N , Bernard O , Bailly M , Welti S , Lawrence DS , Condeelis JS . Phosphorylation of ADF / coﬁlin abolishes EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subsequent lamellipod extension . J Cell Biol 151 : 1119 – 1128 , 2000 . 72 . Zhao ZS , Manser E . PAK and other Rho - associated kinases – effectors with surprisingly diverse mechanisms of regulation . Biochem J 386 : 201 – 214 , 2005 . 73 . Zischka H , Oehme F , Pintsch T , Ott A , Keller H , Kellermann J , Schuster SC . Rearrangement of cortex proteins constitutes an osmo - protective mechanism in Dictyostelium . EMBO J 18 : 4241 – 4249 , 1999 . C475 OSMOTIC STRESS - INDUCED COFILIN PHOSPHORYLATION AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 296 • MARCH 2009 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 2 on J une 24 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m