An Agent Based approach for sustainable ICT services toward environmental sustainability The use of Agent Based Models to explain the ICT - driven ( societal ) behavioural changes and their effects on environmental sustainability Giovanna Sissa Dipartimento di Tecnologia dell’Informazione Università degli Studi di Milano Milan , Italy giovanna . sissa @ unimi . it Abstract —ICTs have a direct impact on the environment , consuming energy , materials and producing e - waste . But ICTs are the major enabling technology for mitigation of environmental impacts across all economic sectors . ICT applications and services can help limit energy use and material consumption . In other words ICTs can contribute in achieving more sustainable lifestyles , consumption and production . The full exploitation of ICTs environmental potential benefits needs taking into account the social dimension of ICT as a service , where there is a shift of role from user to co - producer . After a short overview related to the assessment of ICTs service effects on the environment , we will focus on the role that users , consumers or citizens can play in spreading and adopting beneficial behavior . The enabling factor of this active participative role is the collective situational awareness about environmental effects of actions that can counter possible rebound effects and make a green behavior easier . Agent Based Model simulation is the proposed approach to study such individual and collective behavioral changes in using ICT services . Keywords : environmental collective situational awareness ; ICT for sustainability ; sustainable ICT ; digital ecosystem ; Agent Based Model ; emergent behavior ; ecology of participation I . I NTRODUCTION There is overwhelming evidence that our current lifestyle is not sustainable . Energy consumption , carbon dioxide emission and depletion of scarce resources have to be reduced . So the role and impact of ICTs ( Information Communication Technologies ) on the environment are gaining more and more attention . This impact is a mix of positive and negative effects . It is not only interesting to explore for ICT devices , but it is relevant for ICT services as well . The effects of ICTs on the environment are commonly ranked as first , second and third order effects [ 1 ] . The first - order are the direct effects of ICT themselves . They are negative for the environment , consuming energy , materials and producing e - waste . The second order effects represent the indirect environmental effects of ICTs due to their power to change processes ( such as production , transport or consumption ) . Second order effects are related to the applications of ICTs to other sectors , like logistic , energy , building or production and include effects leading to optimization of processing or to substitution effects , like in dematerialization . They can be positive for the environment , for example when ICT applications help limit energy use and material consumption or contribute to mitigate the environmental impacts across different economic sectors or enable more sustainable lifestyles , consumption and production . The third order effects are long - term environmental effects and are related to the societal changes that ICTs brings along . They include rebound effects , i . e . unanticipated consequences that may nullify the potential benefits of ICTs in term of sustainability . Rebound effects , also known as backfire , are negative unwanted effects . Their importance and their extent are underpinned with empirical evidence [ 2 , 3 ] , but they are difficult to foresee or to quantify , and , above all , to avoid . Till now rebound effects , and in particular rebound effects in the ICTs are relatively unexplored because of the complexity of assessing future directions of production and consumption . I focus my research on them , not according to the neo - classical economic framework , but following an innovative approach looking at the awareness as the key factor to avoid rebound effects . Changes in behavior can be fostered through a mix of social and technological intervention . The behavior of customers , users , and citizens is driven by the awareness level . Providing feedback , goal setting , and tailored information are useful in motivating people toward a more sustainable life style . Such an approach leads to implement Agent Based Models to study how rebound effects can be avoided or mitigated by raised awareness levels , both at individual and collective level . Before describing this approach , a short overview on the complex relationship between ICTs and environmental issues can help to better define the reference general framework . II . ICT SUSTAINABLE AND ICT FOR SUSTAINABILITY : AN OVERVIEW The effects of ICT on the environment are commonly considered in terms of first , second and third order effects . For 978 - 1 - 4673 - 1703 - 0 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE the sake of simplicity , I start from a short overview on assessment issues of each effect type separately , whereas they are conceptually and in fact nested . We will see that there is a gap in the analysis quality of the three different orders . A . First order effects : greening of ICTs The scale of ICTs’ estimated CO 2 emissions in 2007 have been around 2 % of the global emissions [ 4 ] . The projected growth in the ICTs sector under the Business As Usual scenario , are impressive [ 5 ] , in particular energy consumption of the Internet and cloud computing for the coming decade . Each stage of a computer’s life cycle , from its production , throughout its use , and to its disposal , increases carbon dioxide emissions and impact on the environment . Computers are continually making astonishing progress in energy efficiency [ 6 ] , measured in performance per watt , due to innovative design techniques ranging from technological aspects to the processing architecture and dynamic management . The power density is also increasing . But the demand for ICT is increasing even faster than the energy efficiency of ICT devices [ 1 ] . New - generation information technology ( IT ) systems provide more computing power per unit of energy but , despite this , they are actually responsible for an overall increase in energy consumption . This is because users are taking and using the increased computing power offered by modern systems regardless of its implication for sustainability . Moreover , cloud computing is changing how to quantify the ICT direct effects [ 7 ] . To formulate even a rough estimate , the entire life cycle of the whole system providing a given service should be studied in order to assess the environmental impact of producing one functional unit of the service . As consumers rely on cloud providers for computing needs , they have to require that a specific QoS ( Quality of Service ) will be maintained by their providers , in order to meet their objectives and sustain their operations [ 8 ] . If it’s clear that there are critical parameters such as time , cost , reliability and trust / security , less trivial are parameters linking with the green performance of the cloud . More cloud computing companies are pursuing design and siting strategies that can reduce the energy consumption of their data centers , but only as a cost containment measure . For most companies , the environmental benefits are generally secondary concerns . The emission factor , the rate to convert kilowatt - hours into units of carbon dioxide emissions , is the basis for any ICTs direct impact evaluation . But this rate is different country by country or region by region [ 9 ] because it depends on the source from which electric power is produced . Within the framework of environmental sustainability is necessary to have concrete and common methodologies , including a unified metric to describe and estimate objectively and transparently the present and future energy consumption of ICTs over their entire life cycles . New initiatives have been launched to help the ICT industry to measure its carbon footprint [ 10 ] . A new global guidance , the Greenhouse Gas ( GHG ) Protocol ICT supplement , will provide common approaches for calculating carbon emissions of ICT products and services and will be released in early 2012 [ 11 ] . In short we can say that first order effects are ( relatively ) known , in principle measurable . The degree of uncertainty in their quantification depends on the maturity of the assessment model . There are ongoing activities to improve the quality of the assessment methodologies . B . Second order effects : greening through ICTs ICTs are the essential driver for productivity improvements and innovation , as well as for more efficient management , control , and visualization of all kinds of networks ( buildings , energy production and use , mobility , water and sewage , open spaces , public health , and safety ) [ 5 ] . Some ICT services are potentially able to decrease emissions by replacing material intensive physical products and services with virtual alternatives , i . e . by dematerialization [ 12 ] . How to quantify the potential environmental benefits of ICT services ? Unlike for the first order effects of ICTs , direct measures are impossible . An ex - ante analysis can be just an estimate [ 13 ] . Only at a rough estimate level we can try to quantify the potential benefit , in terms of potential emission reduction . The basis for any quantification is the calculus of an “emission equivalent” for any activity [ 14 ] . There are a lot of tools to derive these figures . The annual “greenhouse gas emissions per passenger vehicle” is the basis of a lot of ICT services related to the traffic issues . Government agencies , non - governmental organizations , and private companies , to contribute to awareness and behavioral changes of the single user , often provide individual carbon footprint calculators . They allow users to learn and quantify each activity in terms of green house gas ( GHG ) emission equivalent . However , research on the comparison between several GHG calculators [ 15 ] shows inconsistencies in output values for a given input . Existing tools and methodologies allow only a rough assessment of ICTs enabling effect , giving an idea of the magnitude order of potential benefits rising from the adoption of an ICT service [ 11 , 16 , 15 ] . C . Third order effects : countertendencies Measures taken to protect the environment often have other , unintended effects on society . The substantial increases in efficiency that are being demonstrated in the ICT sector itself ( as per Moore ' s Law ) through application of ICT to optimize processes , to substitute information services for products or telecommunications for travel , do not automatically cause any resources to be saved . Technological measures alone do not assure a reduction in the use of natural resources for production and consumption , because potential environmental benefits can be reduced or overcompensated by rebound effects [ 17 ] . Their nature and extent depend on behavioral changes by individuals and groups of individuals . They are really hard to assess , and their extent is potentially high . Taking into account the unwanted rebound effects is the only effective possibility to try and avoid them , i . e . the final goal of sustainability [ 17 ] . How to foresee and model them ? How to quantify them ? A direct measure , unlike first order effects , is intrinsically impossible . Rough forecasts can be just hypothesis , because the intrinsic long term dimension and complexity are impossible to address under a classical economic framework . 978 - 1 - 4673 - 1703 - 0 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE III . R EBOUND EFFECTS , ICT S AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR A . The rebound effects in classic economic theory The term " rebound effect " originates in energy economics and describes the systematic response to a measure taken to reduce environmental impacts that offsets the effect of the measure . While the rebound effect literature is generally focused on energy consumption , the theory can be applied to any natural resource or externality that is embodied in final consumption [ 18 ] . ICT effects on the environment are externalities ( negative or positive ) . Rebound effects are generally expressed as a ratio of the lost environmental benefit to the potential environmental benefit . They are located [ 19 ] inside the framework of neo - classical economic principles , and the underlying hypothesis are of full rationality , certainty and completeness information and that the agents are insatiable ( “more is always preferred” ) . B . The rebound effects in ICTs The environmental benefits of specific ICT applications such as , for example , teleworking , smart buildings and intelligent transport systems can be characterized by combining models of energy and materials use , technology and user’s behavior . Rebound effects occur when adopting a technology ( such as a fuel - efficient vehicle ) or practice ( teleworking , say ) indirectly induces additional impacts . An economic rebound effect occurs when a technology change results in monetary savings that are then spent using that product more or purchasing other environmentally intensive goods or services . A second rebound effect occurs when saving time results in a behavioral change that induces further impacts , such as increased non - work driving by teleworkers [ 20 ] . The nature and extent of rebound effects depend on behavioral changes by individuals and groups of individuals . Such consideration , that under the classical economic approach is very hard to manage , can be the pivot for a different approach . To take an environmental advantage from a spread use of ICTs , humans must be engaged as active decision makers and not only as passive consumers [ 21 ] . Several research studies recommend to pay attention to understand rebound effects by including knowledge or experiments with behavioral patterns , so that circumstances can be introduced whereby beneficial impacts are promoted and the detrimental impacts are prevented as much as possible [ 17 , 22 ] . By using new perspectives from innovation theory and the role that users , consumers or citizens can play in spreading and adopting beneficial behavior the rebound effects might be countered . This brings to the need for new research as well . C . Collective situational awareness , environmental awareness and ICTs How individual and collective behaviors can shape a more sustainable society ? The emerging concept of collective awareness is meant to create an extended consciousness of the environment and of the consequences of our actions and to encourage taking informed and sustainability - aware decisions . Collective awareness platforms for social innovation and Sustainable Social Changes are ICT systems leveraging the emerging " network effect " by combining open online social media , distributed knowledge creation and data from real environments ( Internet of Things ) in order to create new forms of social innovation . Collective awareness is the subject of several European research projects , such as BeAware [ 23 ] , that is aimed at boosting energy awareness . ICT systems must help us to progress towards sustainability ( a beyond - GDP , low carbon economy ) , to use collective or individual self - regulation , in a lightly coordinated bottom - up approach . Examples range from informing consumer decisions to encouraging behavioral changes towards more sustainable lifestyles , enabling communities of peers to access real - time information about the environment , and anticipating social changes and social innovations . ICTs can help to build resilience through user empowerment . The principles are about making “more from less” , and making sense of data . The key is enabling access to trusted knowledge about the state of the environment , in order to allow people to understand the environmental impact of their own actions . An extended awareness can be enabled by ICTs , for instance by decentralized and federated social networks , interfaced in real - time to the environment through networks of sensors , available to all citizens , both in terms of access and content creation . Environmentally aware , grassroots processes and practices to share knowledge , to achieve changes in lifestyle , production and consumption patterns , will set up more participatory processes . Such participatory processes are enabled by the mechanisms of " motivating social environments " , " psychological ownership " and " social proof " . IV . C ONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK Changes in behavior to more sustainable life style can be fostered through a mix of social and technological intervention . A . Motivating social environments Measuring and understanding are the first steps to being able to act smart . For example smart meters and related services can reduce household energy consumption , but their success largely depends on behavioral changes by individuals and groups of individuals . Better access to information about the use and about the price of electricity can help reduce energy consumption . Personal carbon accounting is necessary for citizens to be able to understand and manage their carbon footprint . In other words it is essential to empower individuals and organizations with information that will help them to reduce their own carbon footprint . Providing feedback , goal setting , and tailored information are useful in motivating people to change their energy behavior [ 24 ] . To reach the goal of reducing energy consumption at a societal level , socio - technical interventions [ 25 ] that go beyond simple presentations of facts are necessary ; they need to make use of new insights into social and behavioral psychology to motivate consumers [ 26 ] . Basic steps for the building of a collective environmental situational awareness are accessing real - time to easily understandable information about resource consumption , and comparing 978 - 1 - 4673 - 1703 - 0 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE individual lifestyles against some ecological / environmental benchmark . B . Psychological ownership Psychological ownership [ 27 ] describes a state in which a person feels closely connected to an object or idea , to the degree that it becomes part of an ‘extended self’ . As soon as people see something as own , they value it higher and are more likely to invest time and effort in it . In research on psychological ownership , several requirements for psychological ownership have been identified , like for example control and modifiable targets [ 28 ] . C . Social proof Social proof [ 29 ] describes the effect that people act a certain way because they observe others acting this way . In such situations , the fact that others choose something acts as proof that this choice is preferable . A simple , but important reference is how aggregated data can be used to evaluate the performances of larger entities ( communities ) , i . e . the scale of city neighborhoods as in the Urban ecomap 1 of San Francisco in the United States of America or of Amsterdam in the Netherlands . Consumers are driven by a mix of basic needs , personal desires and social images [ 30 ] . Therefore it is important to share sustainability goals . Individuals are replacing common background or geographic proximity with a sense of well - defined purpose and the successful common pursuit of this purpose is the condensation point for human connection . If individual and collective behaviors are leveraging on environmental awareness , a deep understanding of this socio - technical ecosystem needs suitable tools and techniques . In the field of " ICTs and sustainability " simulations based on system dynamics can lead to very complex models , whose results are at too aggregated level to be someway useful [ 31 ] . A research corpus shows as behavioral changes can easily be modeled according to an ABM ( Agent Based Model ) approach . Inside this conceptual framework has born my idea of trying to simulate how agents can avoid ( or mitigate ) the rebound effects according to their awareness levels , both at individual and collective level . V . A GENT B ASED M ODEL AS APPROACH FOR SUSTAINABLE ICT SERVICES A . Agent based Models Formally , agent based modeling is a computational method that enables a researcher to create , analyze , and experiment with models composed of agents that interact within an environment . An ABM approach is particularly suitable when the emergence of a collective behavior , impossible to foresee at an individual level , is an important consideration [ 32 ] . Agent - based simulation as a modeling approach enables to build models where individual entities and their interactions are directly represented [ 33 ] . An ABM approach allows modelers 1 http : / / urbanecomap . org / to represent in a natural way multiple scales of analysis , the emergence of structures at the macro or societal level from individual action , and various kinds of adaptation , none of which is easy to do with other modeling [ 31 ] . Agent - based modeling is an important tool to investigate socio - ecological processes . Its use is driven by increasing demand from decision makers [ 34 ] to provide support for understanding the potential implications of decisions in complex situations , as , for example technology adoption [ 35 , 36 ] processes . B . ABM for ICT and sustainable behaviour A crucial feature of agent - based models is that the agents can interact , that is , they can pass informational messages to each other and act on the basis of what they learn from the messages . The messages may represent spoken dialogue between people or more indirect means of information flow , such as the observation of another agent or the detection of the effects of another agent’s actions . The possibility of modeling such agent - to - agent interactions is the main way in which agent - based modeling differs from other types of computational models . Agent Based Models can be descriptive , explanatory or predictive . I will implement ABMs to describe how behavior can avoiding rebound effects in the adoption of ICTs new products or services , leveraging on the awareness level of the agents . The system to be modeled is composed by a set of agents : the users of an ICT service with a potential environmental benefit that can be reduced or overcompensated by rebound effects . The starting assumption is that the default individual ( agent ) behavior leads to rebound effects if the agent has not environmental awareness . Awareness can reduce or avoid the rebound effects . An agent without environmental awareness has a behavior producing rebound effects . When an agent has some awareness the situation can change . How , when and how fast is a matter of my research . The user awareness of an " ICT - based service " plays a key role , because it allows the exploitation of the capabilities of such an ICT - based service , against climate change . The awareness helps avoiding rebound effects . My first proof of concept model will be related to the key role played by environmental awareness into a sustainable behavior in an ICT adoption case study . My ABM consists of a set of elements [ 37 ] and features , according to the ODD ( Overview , Design , Details ) protocol for ABM development . 1 ) Agent An agent is the user of an ICT service . All agents will have a fundamental attribute : the awareness . Awareness will be quantified by an “awareness level” , increasing as the agent acquires knowledge and sensibility about environmental issues in general and in particular on the effect of his own behavior on the specific case . The awareness level could be expressed by a function of several input parameters . The awareness level can change by interaction with neighbors and the change happens under different conditions ( depending on other agents and on the system 978 - 1 - 4673 - 1703 - 0 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE condition in general ) . Awareness level is a numerical quantity . According to this value several kinds of agents will be defined : blind , indifferent , observer , active , evangelist . A trigger level activates the switch of awareness level state . There is a threshold for the switch . For example an agent with blind awareness can improve its awareness level only if the “environmental information inputs” , coming from the influence of neighbors , exceeds a given threshold . All awareness levels that typify an agent as indifferent , observer , activist , or evangelist can increase or decrease by interaction with neighbors . The threshold to change the status is different from one level to another and is different in ascending or descending score . The threshold to shift from activist to evangelist is higher than other thresholds . There is another feature of agent , the one that can influence the awareness level that is a kind of aptitude to a social behavior . The information that can change the awareness level depends also by the global system state . 2 ) Agent methods According to the conceptual framework below described the agents can perform different “methods” : to identify which quantities to take into consideration ( observer level ) , to measure his own consumption of this quantity ( observer level ) , to compare with friends / colleagues / neighbors his own consumption ( observer , active level ) to accept to show his own consumption and to share with his social network ( in a broad sense ) ( active level ) to share a target level on consumption to achieve within the social network ( active level ) to act to achieve the target and to measure ( active , evangelist level ) and to share his own consumption continuously ( evangelist level ) . Agent awareness level corresponds to perform different kind of activities . Local information is obtained from interactions with an agent’s neighbors ( and maybe in some way with all agents ) and from its localized environment ( and from the entire environment ) . Agents are active , initiating their actions to achieve their internal goals , reactively responding to other . 3 ) Agent state The agent state can change continuously by the interaction with other agents . A change of state corresponds to a change of awareness level . Actions will be associated to awareness level and are different by level . For example the agent with an awareness level of observer will take into consideration the environmental quantity to be reduced ( for example energy or material ) and his own consumption . 4 ) Agent Space The agent space ( topology ) will be the social network . 5 ) Environment The environment can influence the awareness level . The default starting condition of system is that all agents have no awareness ( i . e . awareness level < 0 or = 0 ) A rebound effect happens when all agents have an awareness level of zero ( blind ) . When the awareness level improves in some agents , the rebound effect decreases . All the system tuning is based on how and how many agents improve their awareness level . C . Proof of concepts The default behavior of the agents leads to rebound effect . Then at the system default base I have to build the model starting from the theory of rebound effects . I have to identify which quantities have an increased efficiency that potentially could lead to an environmental benefit . Unaware behavior of the user leads to rebound effects that reduce or overcompensate the potential benefit . I will start with a simple direct rebound effect ( i . e . “more of the same” ) . The proof of concept can be , for example , related to the potential gain of energy coming from a more efficient PC , which is overcompensated by stronger and less careful use of the energy . In this case the physical quantities to be reduced is energy . A strong awareness level can lead to switch off the PC when not in use or to take other measure . Another toy example can be the potential environmental gain from the adoption of flat screen . The potential gain in energy is overcompensated by the fact that very often the old devices is taken in service and don’t substitute the new one . The awareness level can totally ( or partially ) avoid this rebound , using the new efficient screen to substitute an inefficient one , instead of adding it to other equipment . Proof of concept , at an early stage , is built in Net logo [ 32 ] . VI . C ONCLUSION The field of ICTs and sustainability is of increasing importance . Limited resources , whose consumption has to be reduced for environmental sustainability , are energy , materials , time or bandwidth ( in relation with mobile devices wide use ) . When an ICT - based service is enabling environmental benefit , the improvements in efficiency ( in energy or in other limited or critical resource ) can be overcompensated by rebound effects . The use of ABM to describe how to avoid rebound effects is innovative . This approach needs to cross the disciplinary borders between ICTs , energy and environment disciplines , as well as social and behavioral sciences . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Hilty , L . M . ( 2008 ) : Information technology and sustainability . Essays on the Relationship between ICT and Sustainable Development , Norderstedt , Books on demand GmbH 978 - 1 - 4673 - 1703 - 0 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE [ 2 ] Steve Sorrell , John Dimitropoulos , Matt Sommerville ( 2009 ) Empirical estimates of thedirect rebound effect : A review , Energy Policy 37 ( 2009 ) 1356 – 1371 [ 3 ] Polimeni , J . M . Mayumi , K . , Giampietro , M . and Alcott B . , 2009 , The myth of Resource efficinecy . The jevons paradox , Earthscan , London [ 4 ] Garner Group , 2007 http : / / www . gartner . com / it / page . jsp ? id = 503867 ( accessed 14 March 2012 ) [ 5 ] GeSi Group ( 2008 ) : Smart2020 : Enabling the low carbon economy in the information age ( accessed 12 March 2012 ) http : / / www . theclimategroup . org / _ assets / files / Smart2020Report . pdf [ 6 ] Murugesan , S . ( 2008 ) : Harnessing Green IT : Principles and Practices , IT Professional , Vol . 10 , 1 , pp . 24 - 33 [ 7 ] Sissa , G . ( 2011a ) : Utility computing : green opportunities and risks , UPGRADE , Vol . XII , Issue n . 4 , October 2011 pp . 16 - 21 [ 8 ] Buyya , R . , Yeo C . S . , Venugopal , S . , Broberg , J . , and Brandic , I . ( 2009 ) . Cloud computing end emerging IT platform : Vision , hype , and reality for delivering computing as the 5 th utility , Future generation Computer System , 25 , pp . 599 - 616 [ 9 ] Australian Computer Society by Connection Research ( 2010 ) : Carbon and Computers in Australia The Energy Consumption and Carbon Footprint of ICT Usage in Australia in 2010 [ 10 ] Recommendation ITU - T L . 1400 “Overview and general principles of methodologies for assessing the environmental impact of information and communication technologies” , 2011 [ 11 ] GHG Protocol Product Life Cycle Accounting and Reporting Standard ICT Sector Guidance http : / / www . ghgprotocol . org / feature / ghg - protocol - product - life - cycle - accounting - and - reporting - standard - ict - sector - guidance ( accessed 14 March 2012 ) [ 12 ] Joseph P . Fuhr and Stephen Pociask , “Broadband and Telecommuting : Helping the U . S . Environment and the Economy , ” Low Carbon Economy , Vol . 2 , pp . 41 - 47 , March 2011 [ 13 ] Coroama , V . , and Hilty , L . M . ( 2009 ) : Energy Consumed vs . Energy Saved by ICT - A Closer Look . In : Wohlgemuth , V . , Page , B . , and Voigt , K . ( Eds . ) : Environmental Informatics and Industrial Environmental Protection : Concepts , Methods and Tools , 23rd International Conference on Informatics for Environmental Protection , pp 353 - 361 , ISBN 978 - 3 - 8322 - 8397 - 1 [ 14 ] Pamlin , D . ( 2008 ) : The potential global CO2 reductions from ICT use , WWF Sweden [ 15 ] Padgett , P . G . , Steinemann , A . C . , Clarke , J . H . , and Vandenbergh , M . P . ( 2008 ) : A comparison of carbon calculators , Environmental Impact Assessment Review , 28 , pp . 106 – 115 [ 16 ] GeSi ( 2010 ) : Evaluating the carbon - reducing impacts of ICT An assessment methodology [ 17 ] Hilty , L . M . , Köhler , A . , Schéele , F . , Zah , R . , and Ruddy , T . F . ( 2006 ) : Rebound effects of progress in information technology Poiesis & Praxis : International Journal of Technology Assessment and Ethics of Science 4 , 1 , pp . 19 - 38 [ 18 ] Maxwell , D . , Owen , P . , McAndrew . L , Muehmel , K . , Neubauer , A . , Addressing the Rebound Effect , a report for the European Commission DG Environment , 26 April 2011 ( accessed 14 March 2012 ) http : / / ec . europa . eu / environment / eussd / pdf / rebound _ effect _ report . pdf [ 19 ] P . H . G . Berkhout , J . C . Muskens , J . W . Velthuijsen ( 2000 ) , Defining the rebound effect , Energy Policy 28 , 425 - 432 [ 20 ] Eric Williams , Environmental effects of information and communications technologies , Nature , Vol 479 November 2011 [ 21 ] Holger Dick , Hal Eden , and Gerhard Fischer ( 2010 ) , Energy Sustainability and Smart Grids : Fostering and Supporting Cultures of Participation in the Energy Landscape of the Future [ 22 ] OECD ( 2010a ) : Greener and smarter – ICTs the environment and Climate Change , Paris [ 23 ] http : / / www . energyawareness . eu / beaware / ( accessed 14 March 2012 ) [ 24 ] Abrahamse , W . , Steg , L . , Vlek , C . , Rothengatter , T . : The Effect of Tailored Information , Goal Setting , and Tailored Feedback on Household Energy Use , Energy - Related Behaviors , and Behavioral Antecedents . Journal of Environmental Psychology 27 , 265 – 276 ( 2007 ) [ 25 ] Mumford , E . : A Socio - Technical Approach to Systems Design . Requirements Engineering 5 , 59 – 77 ( 2000 ) [ 26 ] Costabile , Maria , Dittrich , Yvonne , Fischer , Gerhard ( 2011 ) : From Consumers to Owners : Using Meta design Environments to Motivate Changes in Energy Consumption , pg . 319 - 324 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume : 6654 Doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 21530 - 8 _ 33 [ 27 ] Pierce , J . L . , Kostova , T . , Dirks , K . T . : The State of Psychological Ownership : Integrating and Extending a Century of Research . Review of General Psychology ( 2002 ) [ 28 ] Fischer , G . : End - User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation . In : Pipek , V . , Rossen , M . B . , deRuyter , B . , Wulf , V . ( eds . ) End - User Development , pp . 3 – 14 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2009 ) [ 29 ] Cialdini , R . : Influence : Science and Practice , 5th edn . Pearson , Boston ( 2009 ) [ 30 ] European Community Report Consumer 2020 From Digital agenda to Digital action , May 2011 [ 31 ] Borshchev A . ; Filippov A . ( 2004 ) : From System Dynamics and Discrete Event to Practical Agent Based Modeling : Reasons , Techniques , Tools , The 22nd International Conference of the System Dynamics Society , Oxford [ 32 ] S . F . Railback , V . Grimm “Agent - based and Individual Based Modelling” , Princeton University Press , 2011 [ 33 ] Smajgl A . , Brown D . G . , Valbuena , D . , Huigen , M . G . A . ( 2011 ) : Empirical characterisation of agent behaviours [ 34 ] Bicking M . , Troitzsch K . G . , Wimmer M . ( 2010 ) : Regulatory Impact Assessment : Modelling and Simulation to Facilitate Policy Choices , in : Andreas Ernst , Silke Kuhn , eds . : Proceedings of the3rd World Congress on Social Simulation WCSS2010 , Kassel , Germany [ 35 ] Nuttall W . J . , Zhang T . , Hamilton D . J . , Roquesl F . A . ( 2009 ) : Sociophysics Simulations of Technology Adoption and Consumer Behavior , Second International Symposium on Engineering Systems , MIT , Cambridge , Massachusetts [ 36 ] D . J . Hamilton , W . J . Nuttall and F . A . Roques ( 2009 ) , Agent Based Simulation of Technology Adoption EPRG Working Paper 0923 [ 37 ] Grimm , V , Berger U . , U , DeAngelis D , Polhill , J . G , Giske , J . , Railsback , S ( 2010 ) : The ODD protocol : A review and first update , Ecological Modelling , 221 , 23 , pp . 2760 - 2768 978 - 1 - 4673 - 1703 - 0 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE