From the classroom to the game : applying available pedagogical guidelines in game - based learning Pedro Santos Bartolomé Process Engineering for Sustainable Systems ( Process ) KU Leuven Leuven , Belgium pedro . santosb @ kuleuven . be Tom Van Gerven Process Engineering for Sustainable Systems ( Process ) KU Leuven Leuven , Belgium tom . vangerven @ kuleuven . be Abstract — Abundant literature of game - based learning for engineering education exists , due to growing technical advances , familiarity , and previous studies showing improvements on engagement . Similarly , studies on pedagogical guidelines for traditional lectures are abundant and have been shown to improve student learning . However , literature is very limited on educational games for engineering designed using pedagogical principles . To address this issue we collect , from available guidelines validated for classroom settings , 17 guidelines that can be directly applied into pedagogical game design : these guidelines are studied , and a demonstration of their application is shown during the design of a pedagogical game for Vapor - Liquid equilibrium . Keywords — Game - based learning , Serious games , Active learning . I . I NTRODUCTION The idea of integrating game - based learning into engineering classes is not new : educational games ( games that focus on pedagogic objectives rather than entertainment , also known as serious games ) have been used and registered as part of the literature . We can see examples that range from interactive simulations where one studies the behavior of a distillation tower [ 1 ] , to racing games to learn automatic control [ 2 ] , machining web applications for mechanical engineering [ 3 ] , phone games for organic chemistry [ 4 ] , 3D chemical plants [ 5 ] , labs [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] , up to VR and AR applications [ 7 ] – [ 10 ] to show only a few examples . The origin of this motivation is clear : in some cases games can perform better than traditional instruction [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] . This is not an exclusive property of games : much has been written complaining about traditional instruction for engineering [ 13 ] , mainly , that it’s boring and demotivating , with many students choosing to drop out [ 3 ] . Engineering is an inherently active discipline , and yet , to learn it , most hours are spent sitting in lectures given by speakers of ranging ability , teaching content of which even in the best case , little can be retained after some hours have passed . Research shows that an alternative approach is more successful [ 14 ] – [ 19 ] : active learning is the name given to a range of teaching approaches that seek to make classes more effective by increasing the relevance for the student . Problem - based learning , flipped classrooms and project - based learning , are approaches shown to be effective by making the student become more active , and take responsibility of their own learning . It is then no surprise that game - based learning , an activity where the player is inherently active , has been seen as an approach to solve the same issue ( sometimes even used conjointly with active learning , as in [ 20 ] ) . However , due to its special technical demands , game - based learning is normally studied apart from the other active learning approaches , which has led to a loss of information . Unlike other examples of active learning , which benefit from useful guidelines ( see [ 21 ] ) that can be used to help implement them successfully , educational games are still in a state of infancy within finding their own pedagogic guidelines [ 9 ] , [ 22 ] , and examples in literature such as [ 1 ] – [ 9 ] show that they are generally designed ad - hoc , with almost no help from previous pedagogic research . This is the fundamental issue that the authors have looked to address in this work , where pedagogic guidelines used in active learning that can be incorporated directly into educational game design have been compiled . The authors will demonstrate the application of these guidelines for design by integrating them in an educational game for helping students learn about vapor - liquid equilibrium . The rest of the work is divided into three sections : the first reflects on the previous literature on educational game design , and compiles and describes the pedagogic guidelines taken from the general field of active learning . Section III shows the design of an educational game for introductory vapor - liquid equilibrium implementing the guidelines . The final section provides the conclusion and final comment of the work . II . P EDAGOGICAL GUIDELINES Despite the ample literature regarding educational games , it is hard to find pedagogical guidelines for the designer : on the one hand there exists a literature of descriptive models such as [ 23 ] , designed for analyzing the pedagogical content in existing games . As these models are intended for analyzing finished games , designers would find it challenging to make use of them during the design process . Prescriptive models , intended to help design games , also exist . However , they are not very specific , due to the nature of game design . Just like no military plan can survive first contact with the enemy , no prototype design can survive first contact with the players . In both cases , one of the engaged parties might plan what they want to happen ( although even the designer might find themselves doing something else once they start testing their own game ) , but they cannot predict with certainty how the other party will react to their actions . The approach to tackle this issue in game design is prototype iteration : a prototype is developed , and then iterated on and tested with students until the result is satisfactory [ 24 ] . Prototype iteration implies that very specific prescriptive models for educational game design will not be very useful , as interaction with the students will show that certain aspects of the educational game are not working as intended , others are working better than intended and should be focused on , and yet others are providing information that the student should have access to , or show that further information is required that the designers didn’t originally think of . All of th ese insights found during testing of a prototype will lead to changes , which will have to be tested again to observe the effects , leading to further changes to the prototype . This is especially true for educational games that have to be played outside of the class environment or in large classes , those Page 466 2022 I EEE G l ob a l E ng i n ee r i ng E du ca ti on C on f e r e n ce ( E DU C ON ) | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 4434 - 7 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I E EE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / E DU C ON 52537 . 2022 . 9766475 where the teacher does not have the ability to intervene in the moment to stop incorrect behavior or misconceptions the students might be developing . The literature shows that useful prescriptive design models such as [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] encourage this aspect of prototype iteration . These models focus on two design principles : maintaining constructive alignment ( see guideline 1 below ) and focusing on prototype iteration with students , principles that the authors encourage completely as well , but that will leave many designers with too many open directions and too little indication . Instead of looking for prescriptive models that give a step by step path to the final design , guidelines must be general , for the designer to apply them at a case by case basis depending on their specific educational game idea and their existing design . Some pedagogic guidelines specifically for the design of educational games are researched in the literature ( see the meta - analysis by [ 12 ] ) , but this is normally focused on aspects that pertain specifically to games , and still mostly a subject of research rather than widely applied . This stands in contrast with active learning guidelines for classrooms , which are well researched and widely applied by many teachers . In this section we will now go over the concept of active learning , and those existing guidelines that can be translated into game design . If we have found literature pertaining to the use of a specific guideline in educational games , we will include it as well . A . Active Learning Active learning means placing the student in an active position during the learning activity , as opposed to the passive position in which students are placed in traditional education . The main attraction of active learning is that it has been repeatedly shown to work quite well within traditional education , and particularly for engineering topics [ 14 ] – [ 19 ] . Active learning can be taken in many approaches , such as inverted classrooms , problem - based learning or project - based learning , and many guidelines have been developed to integrate it within traditional curricula [ 21 ] . We see game - based learning as a branch of active learning , as it is clear that a student playing a game is in a more active role than one listening to a lecture . With this in mind , we have extracted from those active learning guidelines compiled by [ 21 ] , 17 that we found especially valid for educational game design ( see Table I ) . While , to some extent , any active learning guideline is applicable for game - based learning , many of them are dependent on external circumstances such as the presence of a teacher or on the use of the classroom environment as it is normally understood . Here , however , we have considered only those that can be directly incorporated into the play of the game itself , without needed of anything external : these 17 are guidelines that can be considered during the design of a educational game , and that will become a part of the play experience of the students independently of in what environment they will end up engaging with the game . B . 17 guidelines for educational games Write and use observable Learning Objectives : Explicit learning objectives that are realistic and observable , as opposed to abstract objectives such as “understand” or “know” , allow to focus more clearly on the intended outcomes , to judge if they are being achieved , and to plan all the elements of the game to address them . This last approach is known as constructive alignment , and has been shown to be effective in game - based learning [ 26 ] , [ 27 ] , to the point where it has become a basis of the prescriptive design models ( see [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] ) . [ 28 ] provides a popular taxonomy that can be used for the design of learning objectives , and [ 29 ] proposes a framework for which type of game to design depending on the level of learning objective . Inform students of the Learning Objectives : Learning objectives help students focus on the relevant parts of the experience , as well as allowing them to organize better their own study efforts . Introduce deliberate practice : Practice should be focused towards those aspects the student performs worse at , rather than practicing all aspects equally [ 30 ] . Weak aspects are those where most improvement can be made . Avoid content overload : Too much information can hamper learning , if the student has to spread too thin [ 31 ] . Include only material that is necessary to know , and avoid blocks of text or other ways of presentation where the student faces large amounts of information . Instead , [ 26 ] suggests adding interesting but unnecessary material in internal encyclopedias similar to those used in games like Civilization . In the same line , consider making simulations simpler than the real world : [ 32 ] – [ 34 ] remark that in game - based learning , higher accuracy does not cause more learning . Present real - world problems before theory : Firstly , this motivates students , by giving them a reason to pay more attention to the theoretical content once it is presented . Additionally , by facing problems before they are fully equipped with the theory , they can explore and study them more fully , facing a desirable difficulty that helps deepen learning . Induce ( spaced ) repetition : Introduce the same concept multiple times , and have the students deal with it repeatedly . Instead of many repetitions in a short amount of time , aim for spacing in - between , which improves long - term learning . Introduce variation : Variety increases retention of knowledge , by allowing the student to face the same concept in different instances . Learning is enhanced by interacting with the same concept in different situations , environments , and tasks . Actively engage students : Games foster learning by placing students at the center of the learning process [ 35 ] . This active element can be hampered by taking away agency from the student , and by placing passive elements such as cutscenes . Provide support ( scaffolding ) : While active learning encourages students to take more control of their own learning , there is still a need for support and guidance during learning , which can be provided by placing questions , giving fast feedback , or providing strategies for tackling the problem . This is often known as scaffolding , and for the particular case of game - based learning it has been shown to improve the performance of students when compared with other approaches such as open exploration [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] . Introduce retrieval practice : Retrieval practice is the exercise of remembering a topic from memory , without looking up any notes . It has been shown to be more effective Page 467 than other ways of studying such as highlighting important information , or making concept maps . Foster the student’s self - efficacy : Higher self - efficacy ( perception of their own competence ) leads to increased results , both in learning results and in effort , as well as in the job market . Provide the student with early successes to improve their self - efficacy , and use supportive feedback . Avoid time pressure : Feeling time pressure can decrease motivation and performance in students , lowering the self - image of slower students , and giving less time for other elements that encourage learning , such as reflection , retrieval or repetition . This guideline is in particular need of research , because for the case of games , time pressure can also lead to increased engagement and a sense of “flow” ( even when it causes the players to fail more ) [ 38 ] , effects whose impact on learning remains unclear . Induce commitment to misconceptions : To correct a misconception , a student should first commit to it , then be faced with a demonstration of it being wrong , and finally be shown the correct belief . This cycle leaves a more lasting impression , and so it can be used when addressing incorrect beliefs held by the students . Benefit from peer instruction : By grouping students , those with higher knowledge get the learning benefits of tutoring those with lower level , while the students with lower level benefit from the extra tutoring . Research of games shows collaboration among students when playing a game can cause positive effects some times , but not always [ 12 ] , [ 39 ] ( this research addresses only in - person collaboration and not online or time - delayed , regarding which the authors could not find results in the literature ) . Use interleaving : Instead of blocking learning objectives separately , as most educational programs do ( e . g . , dedicate the first block exclusively to vapor - liquid equilibrium , the second to liquid - liquid equilibrium , the third to solid separations , etc . ) , interleaving is the practice of mixing these blocks ( place problems for the three blocks together , and have the students solve them simultaneously ) . It has been shown to provide significant improvements in learning , both on the short and long term [ 40 ] , [ 41 ] . Place gaps in learning materials : Incomplete materials , such as those missing formulas , diagrams or words , have been repeatedly shown to improve learning for students over the complete versions [ 42 ] . Encourage students to reflect : Reflection is a key part in the integration of knowledge , which lays mostly within the control of the student . Often the students already choose to reflect during the play of an educational game without any special encouragement , but reflection can also be encouraged by providing questions , checklists , asking the student to explain something , inducing discussion with other students , or asking for a debriefing as a final task . [ 43 ] found that some successful options to encourage self - reflection in educational games can be prompts , collaboration , and worked examples . Regarding prompts , [ 44 ] found focused self - explanation prompts were more effective than recall or abstract self - explanation . Keep testing the prototype : As the astute reader will guess , this guideline is game - specific and not actually extracted from any active learning guides , which is why it has been marked as the 0 th guideline . It is , however , so fundamental to educational game design , that it seemed reasonable to stress it none the less . Testing a game as early and as often as possible ( even if it is just with placeholder art or only with a few mechanics ) is fundamental to avoid surprises deep into the process . Since these guidelines have been tested specifically for lectures , it appears unlikely that all of them will be useful for every educational game . As examples , guideline 2 ( Inform students of the Learning Objectives ) is inappropriate for an educational game where the student should not be aware of the intended learning outcomes ( stealth instruction ) , and guideline 7 ( Introduce variation ) might be inappropriate for a game targeting a very specific learning goal , such as a standardized safety procedure for a specific chemical plant . It is to be expected that the closer the game is intended to be to an academic environment , the more these guidelines will apply . However , since learning is a universal experience based on fixed psychological patterns [ 45 ] , the authors expect the guidelines to be positive to some extent for a large variety of educational games . TABLE I . 17 P EDAGOGICAL G UIDELINES FOR EDUCATIONAL GAME DESIGN Pedagogical guidelines Relevant studies 1 Write and use observable Learning Objectives 2 Inform students of the Learning Objectives [ 46 ] 3 Induce deliberate practice [ 30 ] 4 Avoid content overload [ 31 ] 5 Present real - world problems before theory [ 47 ] 6 Induce ( spaced ) repetition [ 48 ] 7 Introduce variation [ 49 ] 8 Actively engage students [ 19 ] 9 Provide support ( scaffolding ) [ 50 ] 10 Introduce retrieval practice [ 51 ] 11 Foster the student’s self - efficacy [ 52 ] 12 Avoid time pressure [ 53 ] 13 Induce commitment to misconceptions [ 54 ] 14 Benefit from peer instruction [ 55 ] 15 Use interleaving [ 41 ] 16 Place gaps in learning materials [ 42 ] 17 Encourage students to reflect [ 56 ] 0 Keep testing the prototype [ 24 ] III . C ASE S TUDY Our target has been to begin the design process for a educational game that can be used to supplement traditional instruction for the first year of chemical engineering in the topic of vapor - liquid equilibrium ( VLE ) . Previous experience has shown that this topic is challenging to the students , as it is always one of the sources of mistakes during the examinations ( a previous study by [ 57 ] shows that students often retain misconceptions regarding this topic ) . It is also one of the fundamental topics in chemical engineering , as it is the basis of a branch of separation operations . Page 468 Since our intention is to integrate the use of the game into traditional education , the length of a play session should be as short as possible , to fit within an exercise session or even a lecture . An additional limitation is the amount of resources that can be destined into the design , since it is not intended to be a major project , in contrast to some educational games available in literature . Firstly , the authors analyze the basic content of VLE to choose some general learning objectives : the students will have to be able to understand the concept of vapor pressure , understand how it influences the VLE behavior of single components and mixtures , and be able to apply Raoult’s law to predict this behavior in binary mixtures . To address these objectives , we decide on a setup where the student is a researcher investigating these same topics , and will be hired to answer evaluating questions regarding VLE . A 2D game environment is decided on : this is done to reduce workload , and because it did not appear that the topic would benefit from 3D . The art was obtained from the open repository of [ 58 ] , as a placeholder until final art can be produced . The design requires at least three elements : the player , the research equipment ( with controls for pressure and heat ) , and a prompt which asks questions regarding the topic . This basic setup ( implemented in Unity ) can be seen in Fig . 1 . Fig . 1 . View of the starting game prototype . Elements from right to left and top to bottom : Funds display , research equipment ( pressure control , heat control , visualization ) , evaluating questions prompt , player character . After this initial step , we give a look through each guideline , and how they can be implemented to improve the design ( if relevant ) : Write and use observable Learning Objectives : Although we have chosen learning objectives that are already specific , they are not directly observable in the game . Instead , we will specify some more clear objectives : 1 . ( Understand ) Identify the vapor pressure of a single component for various temperatures ; 2 . ( Apply ) Predict the state changes of a VLE single component system of known vapor pressure under changes of pressure and temperature ; 3 . ( Apply ) Predict the state changes of an ideal VLE multiple component system of known vapor pressures and total concentrations under changes of pressure and temperature ; 4 . ( Apply ) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of a component in each phase of an ideal VLE binary system , for known vapor pressures , using Raoult’s Law . These four Learning Objectives are measurable inside a educational game , and we will integrate them into the design by using them to categorize the questions that will be placed to the student in the game , which will be divided into four levels of growing difficulty . Inform students of the Learning Objectives : We will integrate this guideline by providing the learning goals along with the introductory information to the game ( the manual ) . Induce deliberate practice : Since we have categorized the questions into four learning objectives , we can induce deliberate practice by keeping track of the performance of the student in each learning objective , and assign questions from the objective with lowest performance . Avoid content overload : We will avoid introducing more elements , or any knowledge that is not part of the learning objectives , e . g . we avoid explaining a molecular view of VLE . We also keep the questions as short as possible , and the machinery as simple as possible , e . g . the heat control will only show temperature values , and not any heat values , to avoid adding an additional variable for the student to pay attention to . Finally , we will present the levels of questions sequentially , so the student will have the chance to master the first learning objective before advancing into the second , third , etc . New levels are reached by buying more equipment with the money obtained from correct answers . Present real - world problems before theory : Students will be presented with real world questions regarding VLE , the answers for which they must find with the research equipment . To make questions more practical , air - water is chosen as the binary system ( simplifying “air” as a pure component ) , since this is the most common VLE system students encounter . The theoretical content is intended to be presented afterwards , in a traditional lecture , and is not included in the design . Induce ( spaced ) repetition : Each learning goal will be assigned many questions , so the students can practice multiple times and learn from mistakes . Questions are not placed in a battery to be asked one after another in quick succession , but instead some spacing is given between questions . However , as the game intended length is relatively short , the major benefits of spacing ( waiting hours or days ) cannot be achieved . Introduce variation : The questions address four different learning objectives , and will each be given a different context , ranging from everyday situations such as cooking or weather conditions into extraordinary ones like geographic or space expeditions . However , this is not a lot of variation , and this remains a weak point of the design . Higher variation could be achieved by including different characters and laboratory situations ( e . g . switching between a public and private research facility , or between research and process implementation ) , or by using other elements beyond water and air , but all the proposals the authors have handled either go against some of the other guidelines , or are too resource - demanding for the intended project . The guideline remains one to pay special attention to during the continuing design process . Actively engage students : The student will be placed in control through all the game , and can choose what action to take at any point , with no cutscenes or mandatory actions . Page 469 They can choose when and how to address a question , and how to structure their research with the equipment . Provide support ( scaffolding ) : To provide support for the students , scaffolding questions are introduced : these questions , unlike the evaluating ones , cannot be failed , and instead only ask the player to reach a certain state with the equipment ( for example , place water at 105 °C and 1 atm ) . These provide a safe guide for the player to get familiar with the controls and the behavior of the system , in what is often termed guided exploration . Additionally , when evaluating questions are answered , the feedback will provide useful advice . Introduce retrieval practice : When the students chooses to answer a question , they will be placed into a fixed state , where they cannot do anything else before they answer ( particularly important , they cannot look for the answers with the research equipment ) . Foster the student’s self - efficacy : After each level increase ( and at the start ) , the game will wait until some scaffolding questions have been answered before starting to present evaluating questions ( since the scaffolding questions cannot be failed , this will provide early successes which help foster self - efficacy ) . Further , we will avoid critical remarks for failed questions , and the main character will be addressed as a respected and competent researcher . Avoid time pressure : We avoid any influence of the speed of the student , except to provide some spacing between questions . Students have as much time as needed to answer any of the questions , and to decide when they wish to engage with them . Induce commitment to misconceptions : We target students that have not yet seen the material , and so misconceptions were not explicitly considered in the design . However , the evaluating question system forces commitment of the student to a certain answer before receiving feedback , and so can be used to tackle misconceptions that arise during further testing . Benefit from peer instruction : In order to simplify design and avoid technical challenges of implementing a multiplayer system , the design game does not include any peer instruction . This point can be tackled outside of the game design by placing players in groups . Use interleaving : Instead of removing previous learning objectives , as the student advances through the learning objectives they will continue to receive questions of the previous ones . This stands in contrast with many educational games where each level tackles a specific concept . Place gaps in learning materials : Since the game does not include any theory , this guideline was not found relevant . If the decision is made to include theory in the game as well , it will be included as incomplete notes from a previous researcher . Encourage students to reflect : Feedback from questions answered will make remarks about characteristics of the behavior of the system that the student should focus on . Further , after the game is finished , the student will be given a prompt to reflect on the learning goals , how they have advanced in their understanding through the game , and what they are still lacking on . Keep testing the prototype : As we keep testing the prototype , we found valuable insights that led to changes in the design . Firstly , it was found that the topic is too complex to address in such a limited time , and so it was decided to neglect the effect of liquid concentrations by assuming air is not absorbed into water , and focus instead exclusively on evaporation . It was also found that it was easy to fail many questions initially , and so restarting the game with newly acquired knowledge has become a part of the player loop . Scaffolding questions had to be given their own question prompt , because a single prompt asking two kinds of questions was confusing . A quest marker indicating the current scaffolding question was also asked for by testers , to reduce overload . Fig . 2 shows a view of the current game prototype , after these changes have been implemented , while Fig . 3 shows the structure of the game loop the players engage in . Further iterations will still be performed , placing particular attention on the topic of how to include further variation , the guideline that was not yet addressed to the full satisfaction of the authors . Fig . 2 . View of the current game prototype . Scaffolding questions prompt has been added , as well as a display on the top left . The first scaffolding question is shown at the bottom . Fig . 3 . Current prototype game loop . Page 470 A playable version of the game prototype is currently hosted in [ 59 ] . See also the webpage of the CHARMING EU project ( charming - etn . eu ) . IV . C ONCLUSION 17 pedagogical guidelines selected from active learning strategies , which have been shown in active learning literature to perform well for improving learning ( particularly within traditional engineering courses ) , can be easily translated from the traditional classroom environment to the process of educational game design with minimal effort . Further , we have demonstrated how they can be addressed during the design loop of a educational game , to provide valuable insight that helps guide design towards more effective learning . Although the guidelines have been mainly studied in the context of traditional education , and the authors have not conducted specific studies to show if these guidelines continue to increase learning after changing media , those that have been studied in existing game - based learning literature have been validated as effective . This shows a favorable pattern , which encourages the use of these already effective guidelines into the comparatively new medium of educational games , until contradicting results are found . The authors believe that the compiled guidelines will prove useful and help improve the learning outcomes of future educational games for engineering , particularly for games that are to be integrated into traditional education , the environment for which the guidelines proved effective originally . We hope that future research will look more positively to the idea of designing educational games with some pedagogic guidelines in mind instead of the current standard of ad - hoc design : not only would this lead to more efficient serious learning , but it would also create valuable literature of how each educator addresses these challenges for their own field . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This project has received funding from the European Union ' s EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Horizon 2020 under Grant Agreement 812716 . This publication reflects only the author’s view exempting the community from any liability . Project website : https : / / charming - etn . eu / . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . Mendes , C . Marangoni , A . P . Meneguelo , R . A . F . Machado , and A . Bolzan , “Educational simulator for multicomponent distillation research and teaching in chemical engineering , ” Comput . Appl . Eng . Educ . , vol . 18 , no . 1 , pp . 175 – 182 , 2010 . [ 2 ] B . D . Coller , “A video game for teaching dynamic systems & control to mechanical engineering undergraduates , ” 2010 , pp . 390 – 395 . [ 3 ] C . Pons - Lelardeux , M . Galaup , F . Segonds , and P . Lagarrigue , “Didactic study of a learning game to teach mechanical engineering , ” Procedia Eng . , vol . 132 , pp . 242 – 250 , 2015 . [ 4 ] O . A . Jones , M . Spichkova , and M . J . Spencer , “Chirality - 2 : Development of a multilevel mobile gaming app to support the teaching of introductory undergraduate - level organic chemistry , ” 2018 . [ 5 ] S . Ou yang , G . Wang , J . Yao , G . Zhu , Z . Liu , and C . Feng , “A Unity3D ‐ based interactive three ‐ dimensional virtual practice platform for chemical engineering , ” Comput . Appl . Eng . Educ . , vol . 26 , no . 1 , pp . 91 – 100 , 2018 . [ 6 ] N . S . Dholakiya , J . Kubík , J . Brozek , an d K . Sotek , “Unity3D Game Engine Applied to Chemical Safety Education , ” 2018 , pp . 81 – 87 . [ 7 ] P . Chan , T . V . Gerven , J . - L . Dubois , and K . Bernaerts , “Design and Development of a VR Serious Game for Chemical Laboratory Safety , ” 2021 , pp . 23 – 33 . [ 8 ] J . T . Bel l and H . Fogler , “The application of virtual reality to ( chemical engineering ) education , ” 2004 , pp . 217 – 218 . [ 9 ] S . G . Fracaro et al . , “Towards design guidelines for virtual reality training for the chemical industry , ” Educ . Chem . Eng . , vol . 36 , pp . 12 – 23 , 2021 . [ 10 ] J . L . D . Alfaro and P . V . Puyvelde , “Mobile Augmented Reality Apps in Education : Exploring the User Experience Through Large - Scale Public Reviews , ” 2021 , pp . 428 – 450 . [ 11 ] P . Backlund and M . Hendrix , “Educational games - are they worth the effor t ? A literature survey of the effectiveness of serious games , ” 2013 , pp . 1 – 8 . [ 12 ] P . Wouters , C . Van Nimwegen , H . Van Oostendorp , and E . D . Van Der Spek , “A meta - analysis of the cognitive and motivational effects of serious games . , ” J . Educ . Psychol . , vol . 105 , no . 2 , p . 249 , 2013 . [ 13 ] M . J . Prince and R . M . Felder , “Inductive teaching and learning methods : Definitions , comparisons , and research bases , ” J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 95 , no . 2 , pp . 123 – 138 , 2006 . [ 14 ] L . Bullard , R . Felder , and D . Raubenheimer , “Eff ects of active learning on student performance and retention in chemical engineering , ” presented at the Annual Conference of the American Society for Engineering Education , Pittsburgh , PA , 2008 . [ 15 ] K . Yang and S . - M . Cheah , “Designing Active Learning Expe riences for a First - year Introduction to Chemical Engineering Module : Lessons Learnt , ” presented at the 5th International CDIO Conference , 2009 . [ 16 ] R . M . Clark and S . J . Dickerson , “A case study of post - workshop use of simple active learning in an introd uctory computing sequence , ” IEEE Trans . Educ . , vol . 61 , no . 3 , pp . 167 – 176 , 2018 . [ 17 ] N . I . Karim , A . Maries , and C . Singh , “Impact of evidence - based flipped or active - engagement non - flipped courses on student performance in introductory physics , ” Can . J . Phys . , vol . 96 , no . 4 , pp . 411 – 419 , 2018 . [ 18 ] M . Prince , “Does active learning work ? A review of the research , ” J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 93 , no . 3 , pp . 223 – 231 , 2004 . [ 19 ] S . Freeman et al . , “Active learning increases student performance in science , engineeri ng , and mathematics , ” Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . , vol . 111 , no . 23 , pp . 8410 – 8415 , 2014 . [ 20 ] M . Rodriguez , I . Diaz , E . J . Gonzalez , and M . Gonzalez - Miquel , “Motivational active learning : An integrated approach to teaching and learning process control , ” Educ . Chem . Eng . , vol . 24 , pp . 7 – 12 , 2018 . [ 21 ] R . M . Felder and R . Brent , Teaching and learning STEM : A practical guide . John Wiley & Sons , 2016 . [ 22 ] D . Cermak - Sassenrath , “Should I Play or Should I Go ? : Identifying Challenges for Gamification , ” in Handbook of Research on Cross - Disciplinary Uses of Gamification in Organizations , IGI Global , 2022 , pp . 24 – 61 . [ 23 ] S . Arnab et al . , “Mapping learning and game mechanics for serious games analysis , ” Br . J . Educ . Technol . , vol . 46 , no . 2 , pp . 391 – 411 , 2015 . [ 24 ] B . Ch amberlin , J . Trespalacios , and R . Gallagher , “The learning games design model : Immersion , collaboration , and outcomes - driven development , ” Int . J . Game - Based Learn . IJGBL , vol . 2 , no . 3 , pp . 87 – 110 , 2012 . [ 25 ] P . Zemliansky and D . Wilcox , Design and Implementation of Educational Games : Theoretical and Practical Perspectives : Theoretical and Practical Perspectives . IGI Global , 2010 . [ 26 ] P . Mozelius , A . Fagerström , and M . Söderquist , “Motivating factors and tangential learning for knowledge acquisition in educational games , ” Electron . J . E - Learn . , vol . 15 , no . 4 , pp . pp343 - 354 , 2017 . [ 27 ] S . Vandercruysse and J . Elen , “Towards a Game - Based Learning Instructional Design Model Focusing on Integration , ” in Instructional Techniques to Facilitate Learning and Motivation of Serious Games , P . Wouters and H . van Oostendorp , Eds . Cham : Springer International Publishing , 2017 , pp . 17 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 39298 - 1 _ 2 . [ 28 ] D . R . Krathwohl , “A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy : An overview , ” Theory Pract . , vol . 41 , no . 4 , pp . 212 – 218 , 2002 . [ 29 ] M . Gosper and M . McNeill , “Implementing Game - Based Learning : The MAPLET Framework as a Guide to Learner - Centred Design and Assessment , ” in Assessment in Game - Based Learning : Foundations , Innovations , and Perspectives , D . Ifenthaler , D . Eseryel , and X . Ge , Eds . New York , NY : Springer New York , 2012 , pp . 217 – 233 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4614 - 3546 - 4 _ 12 . Page 471 [ 30 ] K . A . Ericsson , R . T . Krampe , and C . Tesch - Römer , “ The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance . , ” Psychol . Rev . , vol . 100 , no . 3 , p . 363 , 1993 . [ 31 ] S . Khalid , M . Saeed , and S . Syed , “Impact of Information Overload on Students’ Learning : An Empirical Approach , ” FWU J . Soc . Sci . , vol . 10 , no . 1 , p . 58 , 2016 . [ 32 ] A . H . Feinstein and H . M . Cannon , “Constructs of simulation evaluation , ” Simul . Gaming , vol . 33 , no . 4 , pp . 425 – 440 , 2002 . [ 33 ] G . Norman , K . Dore , and L . Grierson , “The minimal relationship between simulation fidelity a nd transfer of learning , ” Med . Educ . , vol . 46 , no . 7 , pp . 636 – 647 , 2012 . [ 34 ] E . Salas , C . A . Bowers , and L . Rhodenizer , “It is not how much you have but how you use it : Toward a rational use of simulation to support aviation training , ” Int . J . Aviat . Psychol . , vol . 8 , no . 3 , pp . 197 – 208 , 1998 . [ 35 ] S . Barab and C . Dede , “Games and immersive participatory simulations for science education : An emerging type of curricula , ” J . Sci . Educ . Technol . , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 3 , 2007 . [ 36 ] P . Wouters and H . Van Ooste ndorp , “A meta - analytic review of the role of instructional support in game - based learning , ” Comput . Educ . , vol . 60 , no . 1 , pp . 412 – 425 , 2013 . [ 37 ] R . Moreno and R . E . Mayer , “Role of guidance , reflection , and interactivity in an agent - based multimedia gam e . , ” J . Educ . Psychol . , vol . 97 , no . 1 , p . 117 , 2005 . [ 38 ] I . G . Yildirim , “Time pressure as video game design element and basic need satisfaction , ” 2016 , pp . 2005 – 2011 . [ 39 ] K . E . Bonnier , R . Andersen , and H . M . Johnsen , “Lessons Learned from Implementing a Serious Game in Higher Education – A Student and Trainer Perspective , ” 2020 , pp . 24 – 33 . [ 40 ] M . S . Birnbaum , N . Kornell , E . L . Bjork , and R . A . Bjork , “Why interleaving enhances inductive learning : The roles of discrimination and retrieval , ” Mem . Cognit . , vol . 41 , no . 3 , pp . 392 – 402 , 2013 . [ 41 ] K . Taylor and D . Rohrer , “The effects of interleaved practice , ” Appl . Cogn . Psychol . , vol . 24 , no . 6 , pp . 837 – 848 , 2010 . [ 42 ] T . L . Cornelius and J . Owen - DeSchryver , “Differential effects of full and partial notes o n learning outcomes and attendance , ” Teach . Psychol . , vol . 35 , no . 1 , pp . 6 – 12 , 2008 . [ 43 ] J . ter Vrugte and T . de Jong , “Self - Explanations in Game - Based Learning : From Tacit to Transferable Knowledge , ” in Instructional Techniques to Facilitate Learning and Motivation of Serious Games , P . Wouters and H . van Oostendorp , Eds . Cham : Springer International Publishing , 2017 , pp . 141 – 159 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 39298 - 1 _ 8 . [ 44 ] H . F . O’Neil , G . K . Chung , D . Kerr , T . P . Vendlinski , R . E . Buschang , and R . E . Mayer , “Adding self - explanation prompts to an educational computer game , ” Comput . Hum . Behav . , vol . 30 , pp . 23 – 28 , 2014 . [ 45 ] S . Blakemore and U . Frith , “The learning brain : lessons for education : a précis , ” Dev . Sci . , vol . 8 , no . 6 , pp . 459 – 465 , 2005 . [ 46 ] B . Os ueke , B . Mekonnen , and J . D . Stanton , “How undergraduate science students use learning objectives to study , ” J . Microbiol . Biol . Educ . , vol . 19 , no . 2 , pp . 19 – 2 , 2018 . [ 47 ] D . E . Allen , B . J . Duch , and S . E . Groh , “The power of problem ‐ based learning in te aching introductory science courses , ” New Dir . Teach . Learn . , vol . 1996 , no . 68 , pp . 43 – 52 , 1996 . [ 48 ] T . C . Toppino and E . Gerbier , “About practice : Repetition , spacing , and abstraction , ” in Psychology of learning and motivation , vol . 60 , Elsevier , 2014 , pp . 113 – 189 . [ 49 ] M . L . Gick and K . J . Holyoak , “Schema induction and analogical transfer , ” Cognit . Psychol . , vol . 15 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 38 , 1983 . [ 50 ] R . M . Clark and A . Mahboobin , “Scaffolding to support problem - solving performance in a bioengineering lab — a c ase study , ” IEEE Trans . Educ . , vol . 61 , no . 2 , pp . 109 – 118 , 2017 . [ 51 ] J . D . Karpicke and J . R . Blunt , “Retrieval practice produces more learning than elaborative studying with concept mapping , ” Science , vol . 331 , no . 6018 , pp . 772 – 775 , 2011 . [ 52 ] K . D . Mu lton , S . D . Brown , and R . W . Lent , “Relation of self - efficacy beliefs to academic outcomes : A meta - analytic investigation . , ” J . Couns . Psychol . , vol . 38 , no . 1 , p . 30 , 1991 . [ 53 ] J . W . Beck and A . M . Schmidt , “State - level goal orientations as mediators of the relationship between time pressure and performance : A longitudinal study . , ” J . Appl . Psychol . , vol . 98 , no . 2 , p . 354 , 2013 . [ 54 ] A . K . Taylor and P . Kowalski , “Student misconceptions : Where do they come from and what can we do ? , ” in Applying science of learning in education : Infusing psychological science into the curriculum , Society for the Teaching of Psychology , 2014 , pp . 259 – 273 . [ 55 ] C . H . Crouch and E . Mazur , “ Peer instruction : Ten years of experience and results , ” Am . J . Phys . , vol . 69 , no . 9 , pp . 970 – 977 , 2001 . [ 56 ] G . H . Wheatley , “The role of reflection in mathematics learning , ” Educ . Stud . Math . , vol . 23 , no . 5 , pp . 529 – 541 , 1992 . [ 57 ] A . Boudreaux and C . C ampbell , “Student understanding of liquid – vapor phase equilibrium , ” J . Chem . Educ . , vol . 89 , no . 6 , pp . 707 – 714 , 2012 . [ 58 ] ArMM1998 , Zelda - like tilesets and sprites . 1998 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / opengameart . org / content / zelda - like - tilesets - and - sprites [ 59 ] P . Santos , Researching evaporation . 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / psantos . itch . io / charming - vle - prototype Page 472