3342 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | ARTICLE Retrolinkin recruits the WAVE1 protein complex to facilitate BDNF - induced TrkB endocytosis and dendrite outgrowth ABSTRACT Retrolinkin , a neuronal membrane protein , coordinates with endophilin A1 and mediates early endocytic trafficking and signal transduction of the ligand – receptor complex formed between brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) and its receptor , tropomyosin - related kinase B ( TrkB ) , in dendrites of CNS neurons . Here we report that retrolinkin interacts with the CYFIP1 / 2 subunit of the WAVE1 complex , a member of the WASP / WAVE family of nucleation - promoting factors that binds and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to promote branched actin polymerization . WAVE1 , not N - WASP , is required for BDNF - induced TrkB en - docytosis and dendrite outgrowth . Disruption of the interaction between retrolinkin and CYFIP1 / 2 impairs recruitment of WAVE1 to neuronal plasma membrane upon BDNF addition and blocks internalization of activated TrkB . We also show that WAVE1 - mediated endocytosis of BDNF - activated TrkB is actin dependent and clathrin independent . These results not only reveal the mechanistic role of retrolinkin in BDNF – TrkB endocytosis , but also indicate that WASP / WAVE - dependent actin polymerization during endocytosis is regulated by cell type – specific and cargo - specific modulators . INTRODUCTION Brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) is a member of the neuro - trophin ( NT ) family , which includes nerve growth factor ( NGF ) , NT - 3 , and NT - 4 / 5 . It binds and activates the cell surface receptor tropomy - osin - related kinase B ( TrkB ) , a receptor tyrosine kinase , to regulate neuronal development , survival , and function in the CNS ( Huang and Reichardt , 2003 ; Segal , 2003 ) . Binding of BDNF triggers TrkB dimerization and autophosphorylation / activation of its intracellular domain , which provides docking sites for adaptor and effector pro - teins to activate multiple signaling pathways ( Huang and Reichardt , 2003 ; Segal , 2003 ) . In the highly polarized neuronal cell , the NT ligand – receptor complex is internalized through receptor - mediated endocytosis and transported from the nerve terminal to the cell body in the form of signaling endosomes ( Howe et al . , 2001 ; Delcroix et al . , 2003 ; Valdez et al . , 2005 ; Harrington et al . , 2011 ; Cosker and Segal , 2014 ) . Like those of other NTs and their cognate receptors , the endocytic trafficking of BDNF – TrkB is a complex and highly regulated process that endows the spatiotemporal specificity of downstream signaling events ( Chen et al . , 2005 ; Zheng et al . , 2008 ; Fu et al . , 2011 ) . However , the molecular mechanisms underly - ing BDNF – TrkB trafficking remain largely unknown . The Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) / verprolin homo - logue ( WAVE ) family of nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) activates the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex—the actin nucleation factor—to induce actin polymerization during multiple cellular processes , including cell migration , axonal outgrowth , den - dritic spine morphogenesis , and synapse formation ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ) . The WASP / WAVE family consists of WASP , N - WASP , WAVE1 , WAVE2 , and WAVE3 ( WASP - family verprolin - homologous proteins ) , characterized by a C - terminal VCA domain that binds to both Arp2 / 3 and actin to provide the nucleation reac - tion with monomeric actin ( G - actin ) when Arp2 / 3 initiates a branch from preexisting actin filaments ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ) . Monitoring Editor Jean E . Gruenberg University of Geneva Received : May 25 , 2016 Revised : Aug 29 , 2016 Accepted : Aug 31 , 2016 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 05 - 0326 ) on September 7 , 2016 . † Present address : Solomon H . Snyder Department of Neuroscience , Johns Hop - kins School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21205 . * Address correspondence to : Jia - Jia Liu ( jjliu @ genetics . ac . cn ) . © 2016 Xu et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biol - ogy under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : DIV , days in vitro ; VCA , verprolin , cofilin , and acidic . Chenchang Xu a , b , c , Xiuping Fu a , c , † , Shaoxia Zhu a , b , and Jia - Jia Liu a , b , * a State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology , Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology , and b CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100101 , China ; c Graduate School , University of Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100039 , China Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 WAVE1 promotes TrkB endocytosis | 3343 identify its interaction partners other than endophilin A1 ( Figure 1A ) . Three major bands in the silver - stained SDS – PAGE gel of bound proteins were identified and subjected to matrix - assisted laser de - sorption / ionization - time of flight ( MALDI - TOF ) mass spectrometry . Mass spectrometry analysis indicated that they were CYFIP2 , NAP1 , and WAVE1 , respectively , all of which are components of the WAVE1 protein complex ( Table 1 and Figure 1B ) . Immunoblotting analysis of bound proteins confirmed the presence of CYFIP2 , NAP1 , and WAVE1 but not N - WASP ( Figure 1C ) . Coimmunoprecipitation ( coIP ) from mouse brain lysates verified that endogenous retrolinkin associates with the WAVE1 complex ( Figure 1D ) . Of note , although antibodies against WAVE1 , NAP1 , and CYFIP2 could coimmunopre - cipitate each other , only anti - CYFIP2 could coimmunoprecipitate retrolinkin ( Figure 1D ) , suggesting that among the components of the WAVE1 complex , CYFIP2 is the direct interaction partner for retrolinkin . To determine which component of the WAVE1 complex directly interacts with retrolinkin , we performed coIP assay with lysates of transiently transfected HEK293 cells coexpressing retro - linkin and Flag - tagged WAVE1 , NAP1 , or Myc - tagged CYFIP2 , re - spectively , and found that only CYFIP2 could coimmunoprecipitate with retrolinkin ( Figure 1E ) . Conversely , GST pull down from lysates of HEK293 cells overexpressing Myc - CYFIP2 confirmed that the ex - treme C - terminus of retrolinkin binds to CYFIP2 ( Figure 1F ) . To map retrolinkin interaction site ( s ) in CYFIP2 , we performed coIP from ly - sates of HEK293 cells cooverexpressing retrolinkin and Myc - tagged full - length CYFIP2 or its fragments and found that its N - terminus ( aa 1 – 624 , CYFIP2 - N ) interacts with retrolinkin ( Figure 1G ) . In vitro binding assay with recombinant proteins purified from Escherichia coli verified direct interaction between RTLN - C and CYFIP2 - N ( Figure 1H ) . Moreover , consistent with the GST pull - down data by RTLN - C , Myc - tagged CYFIP2 could not be coimmunoprecipitated by a retrolinkin fragment truncated of the C - terminus ( aa 1 – 465 , Δ C ; Figure 1I ) , indicating that the CYFIP2 - interacting site of retrolinkin does not overlap with the N - terminal endophilin A1 – binding site . Further , although GST pull - down / mass spectrometry analysis did not find CYFIP1 , another component of the WAVE1 complex that is highly homologous to CYFIP2 ( with 87 % identity , 94 % similarity in amino acid sequence ) , in the bound proteins , it was most likely that the gel band containing CYFIP1 was omitted from the mass spec - trometry analysis . We therefore determined whether it binds to ret - rolinkin by coIP and GST pull - down assays and found that they did interact with each other ( Figure 1 , J and K ) . The WAVE1 complex is required for BDNF - induced dendrite outgrowth WAVE1 acts as a downstream effector of BDNF – TrkB signaling cas - cade during axonal outgrowth ( Namekata et al . , 2010 ) . Whether it is also involved in dendrite development is unknown . The finding that the WAVE1 complex interacts with retrolinkin prompted us to inves - tigate its role in dendrite outgrowth induced by BDNF . To deter - mine whether the WAVE1 complex functions in dendrite outgrowth , we performed short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) – mediated RNA interfer - ence ( RNAi ) in primary mouse hippocampal neurons ( Figure 2A ) . Among them , N - WASP plays a regulatory role in actin - based vesicu - lar transport and endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor recep - tor ( EGFR ) and transferrin ( Tf ) receptor in fibroblasts ( Kessels and Qualmann , 2002 ; Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) . N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ; Merrifield et al . , 2004 ) , and N - WASP deficiency causes a reduction in both re - cruitment of actin and Arp2 / 3 to clathrin - coated pits and receptor - mediated endocytosis of EGF ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ) . It was later found that N - WASP interacts with SNX9 and functions in both clath - rin - mediated and clathrin – independent , actin - dependent fluid - phase endocytosis ( Shin et al . , 2007 ; Yarar et al . , 2007 ) . Unlike N - WASP , of which the VCA domain is masked by intramo - lecular interaction , WAVE associates with other proteins to form a heteropentameric complex called WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) , which is composed of WAVE , Nck - associated protein 1 ( NAP1 or Nckap1 ) , Sra1 / PIR121 ( also known as cytoplasmic FMR1 - interactiing protein 1 / 2 , [ CYFIP1 / CYFIP2 ] ) , hematopoietic stem / progenitor cell protein 300 ( HSPC300 ) , and Abl interactor 1 ( Abi - 1 ; Eden et al . , 2002 ) . The activity of WAVE VCA domains is inhibited by intramo - lecular and intermolecular interactions within the WRC ( Chen et al . , 2010 ) . In response to upstream signals , including the activated , GTP - bound form of the Rac and Arf GTPases , acidic phospholipids , and kinases , the WRC is recruited to the membrane and undergoes conformational change to release its inhibition of WAVE ( Oikawa et al . , 2004 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ; Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ; Koronakis et al . , 2011 ) . WAVE1 and WAVE2 are essential in forma - tion of dorsal and peripheral ruffles at lamellipodia during migration of embryonic fibroblasts ( Suetsugu et al . , 2003 ) . WAVE1 , which is also known as Scar1 / Wast1 ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ) , is pre - dominantly expressed in brain and plays a role in neuronal growth cone dynamics , dendritic spine morphology , and synaptic plasticity ( Dahl et al . , 2003 ; Nozumi et al . , 2003 ; Soderling et al . , 2003 , 2007 ; Kim et al . , 2006 ) . Whether the WAVE complexes also function in endocytosis is unclear . Previously we found that retrolinkin , a neuronal membrane protein , interacts with endophilin A1 through its proline - rich do - main ( PRD ) and mediates endocytosis , early endocytic trafficking , and signaling of the BDNF – TrkB signal complex during dendrite outgrowth . Here we report that retrolinkin recruits the WAVE1 complex through direct interaction with CYFIP1 / 2 to facilitate ac - tin - dependent endocytosis of BDNF – TrkB . These findings not only reveal the mechanistic role of retrolinkin in mediating inter - nalization of BDNF – TrkB , but also identify WAVE1 as a novel regu - lator of receptor - mediated endocytosis at the neuronal plasma membrane . RESULTS Retrolinkin directly binds to the CYFIP2 subunit of the WAVE1 complex To investigate the mechanistic role ( s ) of retrolinkin in endocytosis of the BDNF – TrkB signal complex , we performed glutathione S - trans - ferase ( GST ) pull down of mouse brain lysates with the C - terminus of retrolinkin ( RTLN - C , amino acids [ aa ] 489 – 574 ) fused to GST to Protein name National Center for Biotechnology Information accession number Molecular mass ( kDa ) Sequence coverage ( % ) Spectral counts Mascot score CYFIP2 GI : 19526988 145 . 59 31 . 2 32 108 NAP1 GI : 148695316 128 . 78 18 . 62 14 98 WAVE1 GI : 13994209 61 . 47 13 . 6 6 88 TABLE 1 : Proteins that associate with GST - RTLN - C . 3344 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell in the total length of dendrites was observed in CYFIP1 - or CYFIP2 - depleted neurons , double knockdown of CYFIP1 / 2 caused dra - matic decrease in dendrite length , suggest - ing redundancy in their function ( Figure 2 , B – D ) . Moreover , whereas knockdown of ei - ther CYFIP1 or CYFIP2 caused a reduction in the total length of dendritic branches , dou - ble knockdown caused further reduction ( Figure 2E ) , indicating that both proteins contribute to outgrowth of dendritic branches . Of note , although N - WASP , an - other member of the WASP family that is also highly expressed in neuronal tissues , has been reported to play important roles in axonal outgrowth of spinal commissural neurons and dendritic spine morphogenesis of excitatory neurons ( Irie and Yamaguchi , 2002 ; Shekarabi et al . , 2005 ) , depletion of N - WASP had no effect on axonal or den - dritic outgrowth of hippocampal neurons ( Figure 2 , B – G ) , suggesting that it plays dis - tinct roles at early stages of neuronal devel - opment . Moreover , the dendrite outgrowth defect caused by WAVE1 knockdown was rescued by coexpression of an RNAi - resis - tant mutant of WAVE1 ( Figure 2 , I – M ) , indi - cating that the WAVE1 - knockdown effect was specific . Next we determined whether WAVE1 functions in BDNF - induced dendrite out - growth . Hippocampal neurons were treated with 25 ng / ml BDNF in addition to the B27 supplement in culture medium on day in vi - tro 1 ( DIV1 ) , and neuronal morphology was observed on DIV5 . Consistent with previous studies ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) , depletion of retro - linkin impaired BDNF - induced dendrite out - growth ( Figure 3 , A – E ) . Depletion of WAVE1 but not N - WASP caused similar effects ( Figure 3 , A – E ) , indicating that it is also in - volved in BDNF signaling during dendrito - genesis . Double but not single knockdown of CYFIP1 and CYFIP2 also impaired BDNF - induced dendrite outgrowth ( Figure 3 , A – E ) , supporting the notion that these two pro - teins are functionally redundant in WAVE1 complex – mediated dendrite outgrowth . Consistently , the defect in BDNF - induced dendrite outgrowth caused by WAVE1 knockdown was also rescued by coexpres - sion of the RNAi - resistant mutant of WAVE1 ( Figure 3 , F – I ) . The WAVE1 complex is required for BDNF – TrkB endocytosis and BDNF - induced acute ERK activation Binding of BDNF not only activates TrkB , it also triggers internalization of the ligand – receptor complex , which is then transported in the form of signaling endosomes to medi - ate downstream signaling events ( Kaplan and Miller , 2000 ; Huang and Reichardt , 2003 ; Segal , 2003 ) . Although the role of WAVE1 in FIGURE 1 : Retrolinkin interacts with the WAVE1 complex . ( A ) Schematic representation of the domain structure of retrolinkin ( RTLN ) and its fragments used in this study . PRD , proline - rich domain ; TM , putative transmembrane region . ( B ) Lysates from adult mouse brain were subjected to GST pull down using GST - tagged RTLN - N ( aa 31 – 460 ) and RTLN - C ( aa 489 – 574 ) . Shown is silver stained SDS – PAGE gel of bound proteins . ( C ) Input and bound proteins from B were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies as indicated . ( D ) Lysates from adult mouse brain were subjected to coIP using antibodies against RTLN , CYFIP2 , NAP1 , WAVE1 , or a combination of antibodies . Input and immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies as indicated . ( E ) Lysates from HEK 293T cells transfected as shown at the top were subjected to coIP assay with antibodies against Myc or FLAG . Input and bound proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies to Myc , FLAG , and RTLN . ( F ) Lysates from HEK 293T cells overexpressing Myc - CYFIP2 were subjected to GST pull - down assay using GST - tagged RTLN - N and RTLN - C . ( G ) Lysates from HEK 293T cells expressing Myc - tagged CYFIP2 fragments ( CYFIP2 - N [ aa 1 – 624 ] and CYFIP2 - C [ aa 625 – 1253 ] , top ) were subjected to coIP assay with antibodies against Myc . Input and immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Myc and RTLN ( bottom ) . ( H ) Recombinant His - tagged CYFIP2 - N ( aa 1 – 624 ) purified from E . coli was subjected to GST pull - down assay using GST - tagged RTLN - N and RTLN - C . GST serves as negative control . ( I ) Lysates from HEK 293T cells coexpressing Myc - tagged CYFIP2 and full - length or truncated RTLN ( shown in A ) were subjected to coIP assay with antibodies against Myc . Bound proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Myc and RTLN . ( J ) Lysates from adult mouse brain were subjected to coIP using antibodies against RTLN or CYFIP1 . Input and immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against RTLN and CYFIP1 . ( K ) Lysates from adult mouse brain were subjected to GST pull down using GST - tagged RTLN - N and RTLN - C . Input and bound proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against CYFIP1 . CBB , Coomassie brilliant blue staining . Confocal microscopy analysis indicated that similar to retrolinkin depletion , WAVE1 depletion impaired dendrite complexity and out - growth ( Figure 2 , B – E ) without apparent effects on either axon length or soma size ( Figure 2 , F – H ) . Of interest , although no change Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 WAVE1 promotes TrkB endocytosis | 3345 generating membrane protrusions during cell migration is well established , whether it is also involved in endocytosis is unclear . The finding that the WAVE1 complex inter - acts with retrolinkin prompted us to investi - gate its role in endocytosis of the BDNF – TrkB ligand – receptor complex . A surface biotinylation assay on lentivirus - transduced hippocampal neurons indicated that , in agreement with the results from the neuro - nal morphology assay , depletion of either retrolinkin or WAVE1 , but not N - WASP , caused a block of BDNF - triggered TrkB en - docytosis ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . Consistently , whereas knockdown of neither CYFIP1 nor CYFIP2 affected TrkB uptake , depletion of both proteins also caused a block of TrkB internalization ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . To con - firm the role of WAVE1 in ligand - induced , receptor - mediated endocytosis , we overex - pressed FLAG - tagged TrkB in hippocampal neurons by transient transfection and moni - tored its internalization with live - fed fluo - rescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) – conjugated anti - FLAG antibodies ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) . Con - focal microscopy revealed that , indeed , BDNF - triggered endocytosis of FLAG - TrkB was greatly impaired in WAVE1 - depleted neurons ( Figure 4 , C and D ; Supplemental Figure S1 ) . Moreover , internalization of Al - exa Fluor 488 – conjugated transferrin mole - cules was also inhibited in WAVE1 - depleted neurons ( Figure 4 , E and F ; Supplemental Figure S1 ) . Together these results indicate that WAVE1 is required for receptor - medi - ated endocytosis in CNS neurons . Previously we showed that retrolinkin coordinates with endophilin A1 to mediate early endocytic trafficking of BDNF – TrkB and signaling from early endosomes ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) . To determine whether WAVE1 is involved in the retrolinkin - mediated endo - cytic pathway that is required for acute activation of ERK on early endosomes , we examined the phosphorylation kinetics of extracellular signal – regulated kinase ( ERK ) FIGURE 2 : The WAVE1 complex is required for dendritic outgrowth . ( A ) Mouse hippocampal neurons were infected with lentivirus expressing shRNA for 6 d . Protein levels of RTLN , CYFIP2 , CYFIP1 , WAVE1 , or N - WASP and actin were detected by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting of whole - cell lysates . ( B ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected at DIV1 with shRNA constructs coexpressing DsRed and fixed at DIV5 , followed by immunostaining with antibodies against DsRed . Scrambled nontargeting shRNA served as control ( CTRL ) . Shown are the somatodendritic regions of transfected neurons . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( C ) Sholl analysis was performed to quantify dendritic complexity of transfected hippocampal neurons in B ; 30 – 40 transfected neurons per group were analyzed . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . ( D , E ) Quantification of total dendritic branch length ( D ) and total dendritic branch tip length ( E ) from neurons in B . ( F ) Full view of neurons transfected and immunostained as described in B . Bottom , enlargements of boxed somatodendritic regions . Scale bar , 50 μm . ( G , H ) Quantification of axon length ( G ) and soma size ( H ) of transfected neurons in F . Shown are average axon length ( ± SEM ) and soma size ( ± SEM ) of 30 – 40 neurons ( N = 3 ) . ( I ) Expression constructs for control shRNA , WAVE1 shRNA , or WAVE1 shRNA and Myc - tagged RNAi - resistant WAVE1 ( WAVE1 * ) were transfected into HEK 293T cells cultured in six - well plates . Cell lysates were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against WAVE1 and β - actin . ( J ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected at DIV1 with a construct coexpressing DsRed and control or WAVE1 shRNA or cotransfected with WAVE1 shRNA and WAVE1 RNAi - resistant expression construct and fixed at DIV5 . RNAi - resistant WAVE1 was immunostained with anti - Myc . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( K ) Sholl analysis was performed on transfected hippocampal neurons in J . ( L , M ) Quantification of total dendritic branch length ( L ) and total dendritic branch tip length ( M ) from neurons in J . Data from 30 – 35 neurons . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . One - way ANOVA was used to determine significance for all comparisons . * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , n . s . , not significant . 3346 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Accumulation of WAVE1 at the endocytic sites of BDNF - activated TrkB requires retrolinkin Internalization of neurotrophin - activated Trk receptors occurs via both clathrin - de - pendent and pincher - dependent pathways ( Beattie et al . , 2000 ; Valdez et al . , 2005 ) . Actin polymerization plays an essential role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis , which is required for invagination and scission of cargo - loaded clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCV ) from plasma membrane ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . Whether and how the NPFs are recruited to endocytic sites of BDNF - activated TrkB to promote actin polymer - ization remains unknown . Although data from aforementioned knockdown experi - ments showed that WAVE1 is required for endocytosis of BDNF - activated TrkB , coIP assay using antibodies against WAVE1 or Trk receptors did not detect interaction be - tween WAVE1 and Trk ( Figure 5A ) . In addition , although studies reveal a highly conserved peptide motif shared by poten - tial WRC ligands that binds to an interac - tion surface formed by the Sra / CYFIP and Abi components of the WRC ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) , we did not identify similar sequence motif ( s ) in either retrolinkin or TrkB . Having found that retrolinkin interacts with the CY - FIP1 / 2 subunit of the WAVE1 complex and that WAVE1 is required for endocytosis and signaling of BDNF - activated TrkB , we rea - soned that retrolinkin might function by recruiting the WAVE1 complex to endo - cytic sites of activated TrkB to promote ac - tin polymerization . To determine whether retrolinkin regulates TrkB endocytosis through its interaction with WAVE1 , first we examined the colocalization of WAVE1 with activated TrkB ( pTrk ) upon BDNF stimula - tion . Quantitative analysis of confocal images showed that , whereas the mean fluorescence intensity of pTrk signals in neurons increased upon BDNF addition and kept increasing during the time moni - tored ( Figure 5B ) , in agreement with the dynamics of both clathrin - dependent and - independent endocytosis ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 ; Basquin et al . , 2015 ) , colocalization be - tween WAVE1 and ligand - activated TrkB ( pTrk ) in hippocampal neurons increased and peaked at 2 min after BDNF addition , indicating that WAVE1 was recruited to the sites of BDNF – TrkB endocytosis or clathrin - coated pits containing activated TrkB ( Figure 5 , C and D ; see Supplemental Figure S2 for testing of anti - bodies to pTrk for immunofluorescence staining ) . Indeed , although no change in expression levels of WAVE1 was detected in retro - linkin - depleted neurons ( Figure 5E ) , there was a significant de - crease in colocalization between WAVE1 and pTrk at the 2 - min time point after BDNF addition in retrolinkin - depleted neurons ( Figure 5 , F and G ) , indicating that accumulation of WAVE1 at the sites of pTrk endocytosis requires retrolinkin . and Akt in BDNF - stimulated neurons . Indeed , immunoblotting anal - ysis revealed that , similar to retrolinkin knockdown , shRNA - mediated knockdown of WAVE1 impaired acute activation of ERK in neurons treated with BDNF , whereas neither prolonged activation of ERK nor the kinetics of Akt activation was affected ( Figure 4 , G and H ) . In contrast , depletion of N - WASP did not affect BDNF – TrkB endocyto - sis and signaling ( Figure 4 , A – D , G , and H ) . Nevertheless , in good agreement with previous findings ( Kessels and Qualmann , 2002 ; Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) , N - WASP knockdown impaired receptor - me - diated endocytosis of transferrin in hippocampal neurons ( Figure 4 , E and F ) . Together these results indicate that both retrolinkin and WAVE1 are required for BNDF - induced acute ERK activation via en - docytic trafficking of activated TrkB . FIGURE 3 : The WAVE1 complex is required for BDNF - induced dendritic outgrowth . ( A ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected at DIV1 with shRNA constructs coexpressing DsRed , cultured for 4 d in the presence of BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) after transfection , fixed at DIV5 , and immunostained with antibodies against DsRed . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( B – E ) Quantification of soma area ( B ) , total dendritic branch length ( C ) , total dendritic branch tip length ( D ) , and Sholl analysis ( E ) from neurons in A ; 20 – 30 transfected neurons were analyzed . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 2 ) . Note that data for control groups are omitted from E for better visualization . ( F ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected at DIV1 with constructs coexpressing DsRed and shRNA or cotransfected with WAVE1 shRNA and WAVE1 RNAi - resistant ( WAVE1 * ) expression constructs . Cells were then cultured for 4 d in the presence of BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) after transfection , fixed at DIV5 , and immunostained with antibodies against anti - Myc . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( G – I ) Quantification of total dendritic branch length ( G ) , total dendritic branch tip length ( H ) , and Sholl analysis ( I ) from neurons in F . Data from 30 – 35 neurons . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . n . s . , not significant . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 WAVE1 promotes TrkB endocytosis | 3347 Disruption of retrolinkin - CYFIP1 / 2 interaction impairs recruitment of WAVE1 to the plasma membrane , BDNF - TrkB endocytosis , and signaling Given that retrolinkin interacts with the CYFIP1 / 2 subunits of the WAVE regulatory complex and that the colocalization between WAVE1 and BDNF - activated TrkB during en - docytosis requires retrolinkin , we reasoned that retrolinkin recruits WAVE1 through its interaction with CYFIP1 / 2 to the plasma membrane to facilitate BDNF – TrkB endocy - tosis and signaling . To determine whether the interaction between retrolinkin and CYFIP1 / 2 is required for the recruitment of the WAVE1 complex to the sites of TrkB en - docytosis , first we tested whether a retrolinkin mutant truncated of the C - terminal CYFIP1 / 2 - interaction domain ( RTLN Δ C ) would rescue dendrite outgrowth phenotype of retrolinkin - depleted neurons ( Figure 1 , A and I ) . Over - expression of the RNAi - resistant RTLN Δ C did not rescue the dendrite complexity and out - growth phenotype of retrolinkin - depleted neurons ( Figure 6 , A – D ) , indicating that the CYFIP1 / 2 - interacting C - terminus of retro - linkin is required for its function in dendrite development . Consistently , overexpression of the RTLN Δ C mutant also failed to rescue impairment in BDNF - induced dendrite out - growth caused by retrolinkin knockdown ( Figure 6 , E – H ) . Next we overexpressed the C - terminus of retrolinkin in neurons ( Figures 1A and 7A ) . We reasoned that binding of a cytosolic ret - rolinkin fragment to CYFIP1 / 2 would se - quester these molecules and prevent them from interacting with the endogenous full - length retrolinkin . By doing so , retrolinkin would not be able to recruit the WAVE1 complex to BDNF – TrkB endocytic sites , so that internalization of the ligand – receptor complex would be blocked . Indeed , overex - pression of a retrolinkin C - terminal fragment that binds to CYFIP2 ( RTLN − C1 ) ( Figures 1A and 7A ) caused a significant decrease in co - localization between WAVE1 and pTrk upon BDNF stimulation ( Figure 7 , B and C ) , indi - cating that it impaired recruitment of WAVE1 to BDNF – TrkB endocytic sites . Consistently , in neurons overexpressing RTLN − C1 , not only was endocytosis of BDNF - activated TrkB impaired ( Figure 7 , D and E , and Supplemental Figure S3 ) , but also dendrite FIGURE 4 : The WAVE1 complex , not N - WASP , is required for BDNF - induced endocytosis of TrkB and acute Erk activation . ( A ) Cortical neurons infected with shRNA - expressing lentivirus were treated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min . Endocytosis of TrkB was then measured by cleavable surface biotinylation . Surface TrkB was detected by immunoblotting of biotinylated proteins with anti – pan - Trk . Total TrkB and β - actin were detected by immunoblotting of whole - cell lysates . ( B ) Quantification of immunoblotting results in A . Values were normalized to the respective TrkB levels of control . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . ( C ) Hippocampal neurons were cotransfected with FLAG - TrkB and shRNA - expressing constructs at DIV4 . Neurons were treated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min at DIV8 . Internalized FLAG - TrkB was labeled with FITC – α - FLAG . Insets , enlarged images of the boxed regions . ( D ) Quantification of TrkB endocytosis in neurons in C by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of FLAG - TrkB puncta per neuron ( 35 neurons from three independent experiments ) . ( E ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected with shRNA constructs at DIV4 and treated with 10 μg / ml Alexa Fluor 488 – conjugated transferrin ( Tf ) for 15 min at DIV8 . Insets , enlarged images of the boxed regions . ( F ) Quantification of Tf uptake in neurons in E by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of Tf puncta per cell ( 42 neurons from three independent experiments ) . ( G ) Cortical neurons infected with shRNA - expressing lentivirus were treated with BDNF for different periods . Levels of the total and phosphorylated proteins were detected by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . ( H ) Quantitative analysis of the immunoblot bands in G . Average pAkt and pERK1 / 2 levels were normalized to levels detected at the 0 - min time point and represented as fold induction . Data represent mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . * * * p < 0 . 001 , n . s . , not significant . Scale bar , 10 μm . 3348 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell F - actin ( Wulf et al . , 1979 ; Figure 8A ) —but also a significant decrease in the amount of endocytosed fluorescence - labeled Flag - TrkB ( Figure 8 , B and C , and Supplemental Figure S4 ) , indicating that the ligand - in - duced endocytosis of TrkB is actin polym - erization dependent . Next we asked whether WAVE1 is re - quired for actin polymerization at the sites of BDNF – TrkB endocytosis . To determine whether silencing of WAVE1 affects actin po - lymerization that is required for TrkB endocy - tosis , we transfected neurons with a WAVE1 shRNA – expressing construct and monitored colocalization between activated TrkB ( pTrk ) and phalloidin - labeled F - actin upon BDNF treatment . Confocal microscopy analysis in - dicated that , compared with control cells , there was a significant decrease in colocal - ization between pTrk and phalloidin puncta in WAVE1 - depleted neurons ( Figure 8D ) , in - dicating that WAVE1 activity is required for actin polymerization during endocytosis of BDNF - activated TrkB endocytosis . Because WAVE1 stimulates the nucle - ation activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex to ac - celerate branched actin polymerization , we attempted to test whether Arp2 / 3 is re - cruited to the endocytic sites of BDNF - TrkB upon BDNF addition . Unfortunately , immunostaining with antibodies against the p34 or the Arp2 subunit of Arp2 / 3 gave rise to strong diffuse fluorescence signals with no particular pattern throughout the neuronal cytoplasm , preventing us from as - sessing colocalization between Arp2 / 3 and endocytosed TrkB puncta by quantitative analysis , given the high background of Arp2 / 3 immunofluorescence signals . As an alternative approach to determine whether Arp2 / 3 plays a role in BDNF - induced TrkB internalization , an inhibitor of Arp2 / 3 activ - ity , CK - 666 ( Nolen et al . , 2009 ) , was applied to hippocampal neu - rons . Immunostaining and confocal microscopy analysis revealed that , indeed , CK - 666 treatment caused not only a decrease in F - actin content ( Figure 8E ) but also a huge reduction in the amount of endocytosed Flag - TrkB ( Figure 8 , F and G , and Supplemental Figure S4 ) , whereas it had no effect on colocalization of WAVE1 with pTrk ( Figure 8 , H and I ) . Further , overexpression of the C - ter - minal fragment of human WAVE1 ( Scar - WA ) in neurons , which binds to the p21 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex and serves as dominant - negative mutant to disrupt its localization ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ) , also severely impaired internalization of TrkB upon BDNF stimulation and accumulation of F - actin at sites of TrkB activation ( Figure 8 , J – L , and Supplemental Figure S4 ) . Together these results indicate that Arp2 / 3 is required for endocy - tosis of BDNF - activated TrkB and works downstream of the WAVE1 complex . Next , to verify that retrolinkin recruits WAVE1 through CYFIP1 / 2 to promote actin polymerization at BDNF - TrkB endocytic sites , we overexpressed the retrolinkin C - terminus as dominant - negative mu - tant to disrupt the interaction between full - length retrolinkin and outgrowth with or without BDNF was affected compared with that in control neurons ( Figure 7 , F – M ) . Together these data indicate that the interaction between retrolinkin and CYFIP1 / 2 is required for re - cruitment of WAVE1 to the plasma membrane to promote BDNF – TrkB endocytosis and signaling during dendrite outgrowth . The WAVE1 complex accelerates actin polymerization through Arp2 / 3 at the endocytic site of the BDNF – TrkB signal complex Because retrolinkin recruits WAVE1 to endocytic sites of BDNF - activated TrkB , endocytosis of the ligand – receptor signal complex might be facilitated by WAVE1 - promoted actin polymerization . To determine whether endocytosis of BDNF - TrkB requires actin polym - erization , we examined the effect of latrunculin A , a sponge toxin that binds and sequesters actin monomers ( G - actin ) from polymer - izing ( Coue et al . , 1987 ; Spector et al . , 1989 ) , on internalization of Flag - TrkB in hippocampal neurons upon BDNF stimulation . Indeed , latrunculin A treatment caused not only a decrease in the content of polymerized actin ( F - actin ) as detected by the fluorescence intensity of phalloidin—a mushroom toxin that selectively binds and labels FIGURE 5 : Retrolinkin is required for recruitment of WAVE1 to TrkB endocytic sites . ( A ) Cultured cortical neurons with or without BDNF stimulation were subjected to coIP using antibodies against pan - Trk , WAVE1 , or a combination of antibodies to CYFIP2 , NAP1 , and WAVE1 . Bound proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against pan - Trk , CYFIP2 , RTLN , NAP1 , and WAVE1 . ( B ) DIV7 hippocampal neurons expressing DsRed were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for different periods , and immunostained with antibodies against phosphorylated Trk ( pTrk ) , the activated form of Trk . Quantification of changes in mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of pTrk signal over time ; 30 neurons . ( C ) DIV7 hippocampal neurons were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for different periods , and double stained with antibodies against WAVE1 and pTrk . ( D ) Quantification of the colocalization between WAVE1 and pTrk . Thirty neurons from three independent experiments were analyzed . ( E ) Hippocampal neurons infected with RTLN shRNA – expressing lentivirus were lysed and analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies to RTLN and WAVE1 . ( F ) Hippocampal neurons transfected with shRNA - expressing constructs were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF for 2 min , and double stained with antibodies against WAVE1 and pTrk . ( G ) Quantification of the colocalization between WAVE1 and pTrk in transfected neurons in F . Thirty neurons from three independent experiments were analyzed . Data represent mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . * * * p < 0 . 001 . Scale bar , 10 μm . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 WAVE1 promotes TrkB endocytosis | 3349 sion constructs with the CME inhibitors chlorpromazine and Pitstop2 ( Wang et al . , 1993 ; von Kleist et al . , 2011 ) . Unfortunately , both drugs were so toxic to neurons that we did not detect fluorescence signals of Flag - TrkB on the plasma membrane of drug - treated transfected cells ( Supplemen - tal Figure S5 ) . As an alternative approach , we overexpressed the DIII mutant of the AP - 2 – interacting protein Eps15 , which in - terferes with the assembly of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ; Benmerah et al . , 1998 , 1999 , 2000 ) , in hippocampal neurons . Con - sistent with previous findings ( Benmerah et al . , 1998 ) , transferrin uptake was largely inhibited in neurons overexpressing Eps15 DIII but not those overexpressing enhanced GFP ( EGFP ) or Eps15 DIII Δ 2 , another Eps15 mutant that is deleted of AP - 2 – binding sites and does not inhibit CCP assembly ( Figure 9 , A and B ) . In contrast , overexpres - sion of Eps15 DIII caused only ∼ 30 % de - crease in BDNF - induced endocytosis of TrkB ( Figure 9 , C and D ) . Moreover , confo - cal microscopy and colocalization analysis showed that neither the colocalization be - tween pTrk and WAVE1 nor that between pTrk and phalloidin was affected in neurons expressing Eps15 DIII ( Figure 9 , E – G ) . Together these data suggest that WAVE1 - mediated actin - dependent endocytosis of BDNF - activated TrkB in the somatoden - dritic region of hippocampal neurons is clathrin independent . DISCUSSION In this study , we present evidence that retro - linkin mediates BDNF - induced endocytosis of TrkB by recruiting the WAVE1 protein complex to the plasma membrane to pro - mote actin polymerization ( Supplemental Figure S6 ) . Retrolinkin directly binds to the CYFIP1 / 2 subunits of the WAVE1 complex through its C - terminus . Both retrolinkin and WAVE1 are required for BDNF – TrkB endo - cytic trafficking and signaling , whereas N - WASP , another member of the WASP family that has been shown to function in endocy - tosis in fibroblasts ( COS7 and Swiss 3T3 ) and epithelial ( HeLa ) cells , is not required for BDNF – TrkB endocytosis and downstream signaling . By shRNA - me - diated knockdown experiments we show that CYFIP1 and CYFIP2 are functionally redundant in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Dis - ruption of the protein – protein interaction between retrolinkin and CYFIP1 / 2 impairs BDNF - TrkB endocytosis and BDNF - induced den - drite outgrowth . In the absence of retrolinkin , WAVE1 cannot be recruited to BDNF – TrkB endocytic sites to promote actin polymer - ization . Previous studies implicated Numb , an endocytic adaptor protein , and GSK3 β , a kinase that phosphorylates the dynamin 1 component of the clathrin - dependent endocytic machinery , as posi - tive and negative regulators of BDNF - dependent TrkB endocytosis , respectively ( Zhou et al . , 2011 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ) . Our study identifies CYFIP1 / 2 in neurons and monitored accumulation of F - actin around BDNF - activated TrkB / pTrk . Overexpression of RTLN - C1 caused a significant decrease in colocalization between pTrk and phalloidin puncta ( Figure 8M ) , indicating that the interaction between retro - linkin and CYFIP1 / 2 is required for actin polymerization during BDNF – TrkB endocytosis . WAVE1 - mediated , actin - dependent endocytosis of BDNF – TrkB is clathrin independent Finally , to determine whether WAVE1 - mediated , actin - dependent endocytosis of activated TrkB is clathrin dependent or not , we treated neurons cotransfected with Flag - TrkB and DsRed expres - FIGURE 6 : The C - terminal CYFIP - binding region of retrolinkin is required for dendritic outgrowth . ( A ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected at DIV1 with shRNA constructs coexpressing DsRed or cotransfected with shRNA and RNAi - resistant ( RTLN * ) RTLN or RTLN Δ C expression constructs ( shown in Figure 1A ) and fixed at DIV5 , followed by immunostaining with antibodies against DsRed and RTLN . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( B – D ) Sholl analysis ( B ) , quantification of total dendritic branch length ( C ) , and total dendritic branch tip length ( D ) from neurons in A . Data from 30 – 35 neurons . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . ( E ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected as described in A and cultured for 4 d in the presence of BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) after transfection . ( F – H ) Sholl analysis ( F ) , quantification of total dendritic branch length ( G ) , and total dendritic branch tip length ( H ) from neurons in E . Data from 30 – 35 neurons . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . * * * p < 0 . 001 . Scale bar , 10 μm . 3350 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell WAVE1 as the NPF required for endocytosis of the BDNF – TrkB signal complex in CNS neurons by promoting Arp2 / 3 - mediated ac - tin polymerization . In our previous study on retrolinkin , it was predicted by a protein analysis algo - rithm that this protein contains two trans - membrane regions , leading us to believe that both its extreme N - and C - termini are on the luminal side , with the segment of aa 30 – 467 exposed to the cytosol and interact - ing with other proteins ( Liu et al . , 2007 ) . However , our follow - up studies show that retrolinkin interacts with CYFIP1 / 2 through its extreme C - terminus ( Figures 1F and 7A ) . Because CYFIP1 / 2 is a cytosolic protein , cur - rent evidence indicates that retrolinkin is a type I transmembrane protein . In BDNF - induced TrkB endocytic traf - ficking and signaling , retrolinkin mediates not only endocytosis of the signal complex but also postendocytic trafficking of the signaling endosomes carrying activated TrkB via its interaction with endophilin A1 ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) . Nevertheless , how retro - linkin is activated upon BDNF – TrkB binding to interact with CYFIP1 / 2 and recruits the WAVE1 complex ( Figure 5A ) remains to be explored . Changes in the conformational state of retrolinkin might enhance its inter - action with CYFIP1 / 2 ; another possible mechanism is via changes in its phosphory - lation state , as protein sequence analysis ( www . phosphosite . org / homeAction . action ) predicts putative phosphorylation sites in retrolinkin . Whether and how posttransla - tional modification ( s ) of retrolinkin regu - lates its function in BDNF - TrkB endocytosis await further investigation . The WASP and WAVE family proteins promote F - actin assembly by stimulating Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation of actin fila - ments . Through interactions mediated by sites located outside of the VCA domain and the WRC , they are targeted by a variety of regulatory factors to different subcellular locations and signaling pathways to serve distinct cellular and physiological roles , for example , in endocytosis , membrane traffic , cell motility , and neuronal morphogenesis . The growth factor EGF induces recruitment of N - WASP to lipid rafts in plasma mem - brane and its association with endophilin FIGURE 7 : Disruption of the interaction between retrolinkin and CYFIP1 / 2 impairs BDNF - induced TrkB endocytosis and dendritic outgrowth . ( A ) Lysates from HEK 293T cells coexpressing Myc - tagged CYFIP2 and RTLN - C1 - EGFP ( shown in Figure 1A ) were subjected to coIP assay with antibodies against GFP . Bound proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Myc and GFP . ( B ) Hippocampal neurons transfected with construct expressing EGFP or RTLN - C1 - EGFP were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF for 2 min , and immunostained with antibodies against WAVE1 and pTrk . ( C ) Quantification of the colocalization between WAVE1 and pTrk in B . Thirty neurons from three independent experiments were analyzed . Data represent mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . ( D ) Hippocampal neurons cotransfected with expression constructs for FLAG - TrkB and EGFP or RTLN - C1 - EGFP were treated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min . Internalized FLAG - TrkB was labeled with Cy3 – α - FLAG . ( E ) Quantification of TrkB endocytosis in neurons in D by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of FLAG - TrkB puncta per neuron ( 35 neurons from three independent experiments ) . ( F ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected at DIV1 with EGFP or RTLN - C1 - EGFP expression construct and fixed at DIV5 , followed by immunostaining with anti - GFP . Scale bar , 10 μm . ( G – I ) Sholl analysis ( G ) , quantification of total dendritic branch length ( H ) , and total dendritic branch tip length ( I ) from neurons in F . Data from 30 – 35 neurons . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . ( J ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected as described in F and cultured for 4 d in the presence of BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) after transfection . ( K – M ) Sholl analysis ( K ) , quantification of total dendritic branch length ( L ) , and total dendritic branch tip length ( M ) from neurons in J . Data from 30 – 35 neurons . All values are shown as mean ± SEM ( N = 3 ) . * * * p < 0 . 001 . Scale bar , 10 μm . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 WAVE1 promotes TrkB endocytosis | 3351 A3 , a component of the endocytic machinery and binding partner for dynamin , implicat - ing it in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Otsuki et al . , 2003 ) . Moreover , time - lapse fluorescence microscopy imaging of fibro - blast cells reveals that both N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 , but not WAVE2 , the ubiquitously expressed WAVE family member , are re - cruited to clathrin - coated pits ( Merrifield et al . , 2004 ; Benesch et al . , 2005 ) and that N - WASP deficiency causes a reduction in the accumulation of both actin and Arp2 / 3 at clathrin - coated structures and a decrease in EGF internalization ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ) . Nevertheless , our study demonstrates that WAVE1 , not N - WASP , interacts with retro - linkin and is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis of BDNF – TrkB in CNS neurons , indicating that WAVE1 and N - WASP play distinct roles in neuronal cells , as well as in other cell types . Of note , depletion of ei - ther WAVE1 or N - WASP impairs transferrin uptake at the neuronal plasma membrane , implying variance in cargo selectivity of re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis by the actin - dependent endocytic machinery . Actin is essential for many types of endo - cytosis , including phagocytosis , macropino - cytosis , and the circular dorsal ruffle pathway ( Mooren et al . , 2012 ) . Although a role for ac - tin polymerization in CME in yeast has been firmly established , studies in metazoan cells yielded conflicting results , indicating that the relative importance of actin in CME varies depending on cell type and experimental setting ( Mooren et al . , 2012 ) . Moreover , a study reported that actin depolymerization FIGURE 8 : Retrolinkin regulates BDNF - TrkB endocytosis through WAVE1 - activated actin polymerization . ( A ) Hippocampal neurons treated with DMSO ( vehicle control ) or latrunculin A ( 1 μM ) for 1 h were stained with Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated phalloidin to monitor F - actin content . EGFP serves as volume marker . ( B ) Hippocampal neurons cotransfected with DsRed and FLAG - TrkB – expressing constructs were treated with DMSO or latrunculin A ( 1 μM ) for 1 h , rinsed with MEM , and stimulated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min . Internalized FLAG - TrkB was labeled with FITC – α - FLAG and analyzed by confocal microscopy . ( C ) Quantification of TrkB endocytosis in neurons in B by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of FLAG - TrkB puncta per cell ( 35 neurons from two independent experiments ) . ( D ) Hippocampal neurons transfected with construct expressing shRNA were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF for 2 min , fixed , and stained with anti - pTrk and Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated phalloidin . Representative confocal images . ( E ) Hippocampal neurons treated with DMSO or CK - 666 ( 200 μM ) for 2 h were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 – conjugated phalloidin to monitor F - actin content . ( F ) Hippocampal neurons cotransfected with DsRed and FLAG - TrkB – expressing constructs were treated with DMSO or CK - 666 ( 200 μM ) for 2 h , rinsed with MEM , and stimulated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min . Internalized FLAG - TrkB was labeled with FITC – α - FLAG and analyzed by confocal microscopy . ( G ) Quantification of TrkB endocytosis in neurons in F by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of FLAG - TrkB puncta per cell ( 42 neurons from three independent experiments ) . ( H ) Hippocampal neurons were treated with DMSO or CK - 666 ( 200 μM ) for 2 h , rinsed with MEM , and stimulated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 2 min and immunostained with antibodies against WAVE1 and pTrk . ( I ) Quantification of the colocalization between WAVE1 and pTrk in H . Thirty neurons from two independent experiments were analyzed . ( J ) Hippocampal neurons were cotransfected with expression constructs for FLAG - TrkB and Myc - tagged Scar - W or Scar - WA at DIV4 and treated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min at DIV8 . Internalized FLAG - TrkB was labeled with Cy3 - α - FLAG . Scar - W and Scar - WA were stained with anti - Myc antibody . Scar - W does not bind to Arp2 / 3 and serves as negative control for Scar - WA . ( K ) Quantification of Flag - TrkB endocytosis in neurons in J by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of FLAG - TrkB puncta per neuron ( 25 neurons from two independent experiments ) . ( L ) Hippocampal neurons transfected with construct expressing Myc - tagged Scar - W or Scar - WA were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF for 2 min , fixed , and stained with anti - pTrk and Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated phalloidin . Representative confocal images . ( M ) Hippocampal neurons transfected with construct expressing EGFP or RTLN - C1 - EGFP were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF for 2 min , fixed , and stained with anti - pTrk and Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated phalloidin . Representative confocal images . Data represent mean ± SEM . * * * p < 0 . 001 , n . s . , not significant . Scale bar , 10 μm . 3352 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell rather than polymerization is essential for internalization of NGF - acti - vated TrkA in distal axons of sympathetic neurons ( Harrington et al . , 2011 ) , in contrast to our findings that WAVE1 - promoted actin polym - erization is required for endocytosis of BDNF - activated TrkB in den - drites of CNS neurons . These seemingly contradictory findings sug - gest that a role for actin polymerization / depolymerization in trafficking of Trk family members in the highly polarized neuronal cells may also vary depending on cell type , type and site of endocy - tosis ( e . g . , axon vs . dendrite or soma ) , and receptor - specific modula - tors . Internalization of Trk receptor upon neurotrophin binding occurs via both clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent pathways ( Grimes et al . , 1997 ; Shao et al . , 2002 ; Valdez et al . , 2005 , 2007 ; Zheng et al . , 2008 ) . In the present study , we demonstrate that the majority of BDNF - acti - vated TrkB endocytosis in the somatoden - dritic region of hippocampal neurons is clathrin independent . We also show that in - hibition of CME does not affect recruitment of WAVE1 and accumulation of F - actin at endocytic sites of pTrk , indicating that WAVE1 - mediated , actin - dependent endocy - tosis of TrkB is clathrin independent , which is in good agreement with recent findings on WAVE involvement in actin - dependent , clathrin - independent endocytosis of inter - leukin - 2 receptor ( Basquin et al . , 2015 ) . Stimulation of N - WASP during endocy - tosis is accomplished by the combination of upstream signals , including membrane lip - ids , Cdc42 , and endophilin A ( Prehoda et al . , 2000 ; Rohatgi et al . , 2000 ; Otsuki et al . , 2003 ) . As a result , N - WASP integrates multiple upstream signals to target actin polymerization precisely to the endocytic site . In retrolinkin - mediated endocytosis of BDNF - TrkB , WAVE1 is recruited by retro - linkin through the CYFIP1 / 2 components of the WRC . It remains to be determined whether other factors , such as cargo adap - tors , membrane lipids generated through pTrk - activated PI3K / Akt signaling pathways , components of the endocytic machinery , and / or any other unknown factors contrib - ute to WAVE1 activation and association with receptor - clustered plasma membrane . It is conceivable that multiple weak interac - tions between WASP / WAVE family members and cellular factors ensure site specificity for subcellular localizations to achieve precise spatiotemporal control of actin filament net - work assembly in distinct cellular processes . MATERIALS AND METHODS Animal studies The use of animals was approved by the Animal Care Committee of the Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology , Chinese Academy of Sciences . DNA constructs and shRNAs pGEX4T - 1 - RTLN - N ( aa 31 – 460 ) and pGEX4T - 1 - RTLN - C ( aa 489 – 574 ) were con - structed with mouse retrolinkin cDNA . RTLN Δ C ( aa 1 – 465 ) was inserted into pCDH - CMV - MCS - EF1 - copGFP ( System Biosciences , Mountain View , CA ) . RTLN - C1 ( aa 496 - 574 ) was inserted into pEGFP - N2 ( Clontech , Mountain View , CA ) . Mouse CYFIP2 and NAP1 cDNA were amplified from mouse brain cDNA obtained by reverse transcription ( RT ) - PCR and inserted into pcDNA3 . 1 ( + ) and pCMV - Tag2B , respectively . pcDNA3 . 1 ( + ) - CYFIP2 , pcDNA3 . 1 ( + ) - CYFIP2 - N ( aa 1 – 624 ) , pcDNA3 . 1 ( + ) - CYFIP2 - C ( aa 625 – 1253 ) , and pET28a - CYFIP2 - N ( aa 1 – 624 ) were constructed with mouse CY - FIP2 cDNA using standard molecular biology methods . The FLAG - WAVE1 expression construct was a generous gift from Lance Terada ( UT Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX ) . The FIGURE 9 : WAVE1 - mediated endocytosis of BDNF - TrkB is not inhibited by overexpression of Eps15 dominant - negative mutant . ( A ) Hippocampal neurons were transfected with construct expressing EGFP , EGFP - Eps15 DIII Δ 2 ( also known as EGFP - DIII Δ 2 ) , or EGFP - Eps15 DIII ( also known as EGFP - DIII ) at DIV6 , treated with 10 μg / ml Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated Tf for 15 min , washed with acid buffer , and fixed at DIV7 . ( B ) Quantification of Tf endocytosis in neurons in A by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of Tf puncta per neuron ( 20 – 25 neurons from two independent experiments ) . EGFP - DIII Δ 2 serves as negative control for EGFP - DIII . ( C ) Hippocampal neurons cotransfected with expression constructs for FLAG - TrkB and EGFP , EGFP - DIII Δ 2 , or EGFP - DIII at DIV6 were treated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min at DIV7 . Internalized FLAG - TrkB was labeled with Cy3 – α - FLAG . ( D ) Quantification of Flag – TrkB endocytosis in neurons in C by measuring mean fluorescence intensity of FLAG - TrkB puncta per neuron ( 25 neurons from two independent experiments ) . ( E ) Hippocampal neurons transfected with construct expressing EGFP , EGFP - DIII Δ 2 , or EGFP - DIII were starved for 2 h , stimulated with BDNF for 2 min , and immunostained with antibodies against WAVE1 and pTrk . ( F ) Quantification of the colocalization between WAVE1 and pTrk in E . Twenty neurons from two independent experiments were analyzed . ( G ) Same as E , except that neurons were stained with anti - pTrk and Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated phalloidin . Representative confocal images . Data represent mean ± SEM . * p < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . n . s . , not significant . Scale bar , 10 μm . Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 WAVE1 promotes TrkB endocytosis | 3353 GST pull - down assays and mass spectrometry analysis GST pull - down assays were performed as described previously ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) . Briefly , GST - fused RTLN - N and RTLN - C were expressed and purified from E . coli . CYFIP2 , NAP1 , or WAVE1 constructs were expressed in HEK 293T cells for 48 h , and lysates were prepared in a buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % NP - 40 ) plus pro - tease inhibitors . Cell lysates were centrifuged at 12 , 000 × g for 15 min at 4°C , and the supernatant was incubated with individual GST - fused proteins immobilized on glutathione – Sepharose beads for 2 h at room temperature . Beads were washed five times with a buffer containing 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and boiled in SDS – PAGE sample buffer ( 100 mM Tris - Cl , pH 6 . 8 , 4 % SDS , 0 . 2 % bromophenol blue , 20 % [ vol / vol ] glycerol , 10 % [ vol / vol ] 2 - mercaptoethanol ) . Bound proteins were analyzed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . For GST pull down from mouse brain lysates , adult mouse brain was homogenized in cold homoge - nization buffer ( 50 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 4 , 20 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % NP - 40 , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [ PMSF ] , and 1 × protease inhibi - tors ) . Lysates were centrifuged at 12 , 000 × g for 15 min at 4°C , and the supernatants were incubated with GST fusion protein conjugated with glutathione – Sepharose beads overnight at 4°C . For mass spec - trometry analysis of bound proteins , beads were boiled with 2 × SDS sample buffer , and the protein samples were subjected to SDS – PAGE . The silver - stained protein bands were excised from the gel and subjected to in - gel digestion with trypsin and mass spectrometry analysis . For in vitro binding assay , histidine ( His ) - tagged CYFIP2 - N was purified from E . coli with Ni – nitriloacetic acid resin ( EMD Millipore ) for 2 h at 4°C with gentle rotation . A 10 - μg amount of GST - tagged retrolinkin conjugated with glutathione – Sepharose beads was incubated with 3 μg of His - tagged CYFIP2 - N in binding buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 1 % NP - 40 , and bovine serum albumin [ BSA ; 25 mg / ml ] ) at 4°C overnight . Beads were washed five times with binding buffer , and bound proteins were eluted from the beads in 2 × SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . Immunoprecipitation Adult mouse brain or HEK 293T cells were homogenized in 1 ml of cold homogenization buffer , and the homogenates were centri - fuged at 12 , 000 × g for 15 min at 4°C . For FLAG - IP , supernatants were incubated with anti - FLAG Affinity Gel ( Sigma - Aldrich ) over - night at 4°C . For other IPs , the supernatants were incubated with antibodies ( 2 – 5 μg ) at 4°C for 2 h , followed by incubation with 25 μl of Protein A / G – Sepharose ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) preequili - brated in lysis buffer overnight at 4°C . Precipitates were washed five times with ice - cold TBS ( 50 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) . Bound proteins were eluted from the beads in 2 × SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . Membrane IP was performed with the membrane fractions ( P100 ) of brain lysates after ultracentrifugation at 100 , 000 × g for 1 h . After ultracentrifugation , the pellets were resuspended with lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % NP - 40 ) and incubated with antibodies ( 2 – 5 μg ) and 25 μl of Protein A / G Sepharose ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) at 4°C . After overnight incubation of mem - branes with beads , the beads were washed with ice - cold TBS five times , and bound proteins were eluted from the beads in 2 × SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . Cell culture , transfection , and viral infection HEK 293T and HEK 293 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum . Transfections were performed using pCMV - Myc - WAVE1 construct was a generous gift from Yong Kim ( Rockefeller University , New York , NY ) . The pRK5myc - Scar - W and - WA expression constructs were generous gifts from Laura Machesky ( Glasgow University , Glasgow , United Kingdom ) . The Eps15 mutant constructs pEGFP - C2 - DIII Δ 2 and pEGFP - C2 - DIII were generous gifts from Alexandre Benmerah ( INSERM , Institut Imagine , Paris , France ) . Myc - tagged , shRNA - resistant WAVE1 expression construct was generated by mutating AAGTAGCCTAAGTAAATAT ( nucleotides [ nt ] 123 – 141 of human WAVE1 - coding region ) to AAG - TAGCCTATCTAAATAT by site - directed mutagenesis . The shRNA - resistant retrolinkin expression construct was generated by mutating ACAACCTGAGCTACTGGAA ( nt 1505 – 1523 of retrolinkin coding region ) to ACAACCTGTCCTACTGGAA without changing the amino acid sequence . To prepare shRNA constructs , each shRNA contained a 19 - nt tar - get sequence , the sense and antisense strands were annealed , and then the annealing oligos were inserted into pLentiLox 3 . 7 between the Xho I and Hpa I sites . All constructs were verified by sequencing . Target sequences for mouse retrolinkin shRNA ( nt 1505 – 1523 ) were described previously ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) . Target sequences for mouse CYFIP1 shRNA ( nt 2177 – 2195 ) : 5 ′ - GGTTACGGTCAGAATGCAA - 3 ′ ; for mouse CYFIP2 shRNA # 1 ( nt 363 – 381 ) : 5 ′ - GCTCATGAAGTTCATGTAC - 3 ′ ; for mouse CYFIP2 shRNA # 2 ( nt 2940 – 2958 ) : 5 ′ - GGACATCATCGAGTATGCA - 3 ′ ; for mouse WAVE1 shRNA ( nt 123 – 141 ) : 5 ′ - GAGTAGCCTAAGTAAG - TAT - 3 ′ ; for mouse N - WASP shRNA # 1 ( nt 178 – 196 ) : 5 ′ - GGTGTC - GCTTGTCTGGTTA - 3 ′ ; mouse N - WASP shRNA # 2 ( nt 325 – 343 ) : 5 ′ - GGAGATACTTGTCAAGTAG - 3 ′ ; and for nontargeting control shRNA , which has no homology to known gene sequences : 5 ′ - GAATGCTCTTACGATGATA - 3 ′ . All shRNA expression constructs were tested for knockdown efficiency . CYFIP2 shRNA # 2 and N - WASP shRNA # 2 were used for knockdown of CYFIP2 and N - WASP , respectively . Antibodies and reagents Rabbit and guinea pig polyclonal antibodies against mouse retro - linkin were prepared as described previously ( Liu et al . , 2007 ) . Rab - bit anti - CYFIP2 ( peptide antigen CPFTQEPQRDKPANVQPY ) and rabbit anti - NAP1 ( peptide antigen CHAVYKQSVTSSA ) were pro - duced by Medical & Biological Laboratories ( Naka - ku Nagoya , Ja - pan ) . Antibodies used include rabbit polyclonal antibody against phospho - Trk ( Tyr - 490 ) , rabbit anti - ERK1 / 2 , mouse anti – phospho - ERK1 / 2 ( Thr - 202 / Tyr - 204 ) , rabbit anti - Akt , rabbit anti – phospho - Akt ( Ser - 473 ) , rabbit anti – N - WASP ( Cell Signaling Technology , Beverly , MA ) , rabbit polyclonal antibody against phospho - Trk ( Tyr - 490 ; GeneTex , Irvine , CA ) , rabbit anti – pan - Trk , rabbit anti - TrkB , mouse anti - Myc ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) , rabbit anti - Myc , rabbit and mouse anti - GFP , rabbit and mouse anti - RFP , which recognizes DsRed and mCherry ( Medical & Biological Laborato - ries ) ; mouse anti – β - actin , mouse anti – FLAG M2 - FITC , mouse anti – FLAG M2 - Cy3 ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , mouse - anti - WAVE1 , mouse anti - CYFIP1 ( EMD Millipore , Billerica , MA ) , and rabbit anti - WAVE1 ( Abcam , Cambridge , United Kingdom ) . Secondary anti - bodies for immunofluorescence staining were from Molecular Probes ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) and latrunculin A were from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . CK - 666 was obtained from EMD Millipore . Alexa Fluor 488 – and Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated transferrin and Alexa Fluor 568 – and Alexa Fluor 488 – conjugated phalloidin were obtained from Thermo Fisher Sci - entific ( Waltham , MA ) . Chlorpromazine was purchased from Target Molecule Corp . ( TargetMol , Boston , MA ) , and Pitstop2 was from Abcam . 3354 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell selected as the center of all of the circles to be analyzed . The con - centric circles were drawn from 10 to 100 μm by 5 - μm - step intervals . The number of circles was chosen to cover the entire dendrite from soma to tips . A series of concentric circles was centered on the cell body , and the number of processes crossing each of the circles was counted . Between 30 and 35 neurons per condition were quanti - fied , and the results at each interval were compared by an unpaired Student’s t test . Quantification of neurite length and soma size In the morphological study of hippocampal neurons , the length of axon and dendrite and the soma area were measured with NIS - Ele - ments AR . Total dendritic branch length ( TDBL ) is the sum of the lengths of all dendrites . Primary dendrite lengths were excluded from the total dendritic branch tip length . Axons were excluded from the dendrites by their distinct morphology ( Cheadle and Bie - derer , 2014 ) . TrkB internalization assay and transferrin uptake assay TrkB internalization assay was performed as described previously ( Sharma et al . , 2010 ; Fu et al . , 2011 ) . Briefly , DIV3 hippocampal neu - rons were cotransfected with the FLAG - TrkB and shRNA expression constructs . After starvation with MEM for 2 h on DIV7 , neurons were incubated with FITC – anti - FLAG antibody ( 5 μg / ml ; Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min at room temperature to label FLAG - tagged TrkB recep - tors on the plasma membrane . Cells were rinsed with MEM twice to remove unbound antibodies and then incubated with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) for 30 min at 37°C , followed by two quick washes with acid buf - fer ( 500 mM NaCl , 200 mM acetic acid ) to remove surface - bound fluorescent antibodies . Cells were then fixed with 4 % PFA and ana - lyzed by confocal microscopy , with the intracellular fluorescence representing the internalized receptors . Transferrin ( Tf ) uptake assay was performed basically as de - scribed previously ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) , except that neurons were incu - bated with Alexa Fluor 488 – or Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated Tf for 15 min at 37°C followed by two quick washes with acid buffer to remove surface - bound Tf . Biotinylation assay of surface TrkB Biotinylation assay of surface TrkB was performed as described ( Wan et al . , 2008 ; Fu et al . , 2011 ) . BDNF signaling assays Primary mouse cortical neurons were infected with lentivirus ex - pressing shRNA on DIV3 and cultured for 7 d . DIV10 neurons were starved for 2 h with MEM supplemented with 20 μg / ml cyclohexi - mide , followed by incubation with BDNF ( 25 ng / ml ) in MEM for 15 , 30 , or 60 min . Cells were then washed once with ice - cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 10 mM NaF , 1 mM PMSF ) . After centrifuga - tion at 12 , 000 × g at 4°C for 10 min , the supernatant was boiled with SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS – PAGE and immunoblot - ting . The immunoblots were probed with antibodies against Erk1 / 2 , pErk , Akt , and pAkt . Drug treatment and phalloidin staining For inhibition of actin polymerization , neurons were starved with MEM for 1 h . Latrunculin A dissolved in DMSO was diluted with MEM and added to neurons at a final concentration of 1 μM for 1 h . For inhibition of Arp2 / 3 activity , neurons were starved with MEM for 2 h . CK - 666 dissolved in DMSO was diluted with MEM and added to neurons at a final concentration of 200 μM for 2 h . For F - actin VigoFect ( Vigorous Biotechnology , Beijing , China ) according to manufacturer’s instructions . Cells were harvested 24 – 48 h after transfection . Primary neuronal cultures from mouse hippocampi or cortex were prepared as described previously ( Banker and Goslin , 1988 ) . Briefly , hippocampi and cortex were dissected from embryonic day 16 . 5 ( E16 . 5 ) BALB / c mouse , dissociated with 0 . 25 % trypsin in Hanks’ balanced salt solution without Ca 2 + and Mg 2 + at 37°C for 15 min , and triturated in DMEM , 10 % F - 12 , and 10 % fetal bovine serum . Hippocampal neurons were plated on coverslips coated with poly - d - lysine ( 0 . 1 mg / ml ) in 24 - well plates at a density of 1 × 10 5 cells / well . Cortical neurons were plated on six - or 12 - well plates coated with poly - d - lysine ( 0 . 1 mg / ml ) at a density of 5 × 10 5 or 1 × 10 6 cells / well . The medium was changed to the serum - free medium ( Neurobasal Medium supplemented with B27 supplement [ 2 % ] , GlutaMAX [ 1 % ] , Fungizone [ 1 : 500 ] , and gentamicin [ 1 : 1000 ] ) 4 h after plating . For neuronal morphology and immunostaining analyses , neurons were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) following the man - ufacturer’s instructions . Briefly , DNA ( 1 . 2 μg / well ) was mixed with 1 μl of Lipofectamine 2000 in 250 μl of Neurobasal Medium , incu - bated for 20 min , and then added to neurons in 250 μl of Neuro - basal Medium at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 for 1 h . Neurons were then incu - bated in the original medium at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 for 3 – 5 d . For Western blotting , neurons were infected with lentivirus prepared from HEK293T cells ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) for 6 – 8 h at DIV3 – 4 , Neurons were then rinsed with Neurobasal Medium , transferred to the origi - nal medium at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 , and harvested after 6 – 7 d . Immunofluorescence staining , image acquisition , and analysis Hippocampal neurons were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) / 4 % sucrose in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) for 15 min at room tem - perature and then permeabilized in 0 . 4 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 10 min at room temperature . After blocking with 1 % BSA in PBS con - taining 0 . 4 % Triton X - 100 for 1 h at room temperature , neurons were incubated with primary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature or overnight at 4°C , and appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 , Alexa Fluor 555 , or Alexa Fluor 647 were used for detection . Confocal images were collected using the Spectral Imaging Confocal Microscope Digital Eclipse C1Si ( Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) with a 100 × Plan Apochromat VC numerical aperture 1 . 40 oil objective . Quantification of the colocalization between pTrk and WAVE1 in neurons was performed as described previously ( Fu et al . , 2011 ) . The colocalization of the pTrk and WAVE1 fluorescence signals was calculated as the Mander’s overlap coefficient with the NIS - Elements AR software ( Nikon ) . Values for colocalization analysis represent mean value ± SEM . For quantitative analyses of BDNF - stimulated TrkB endocytosis and transferrin uptake , we drew out the region of interest ( ROI ) of transfected neurons according to the volume marker and then measured mean fluorescence intensity of the fluo - rescent puncta superimposed on an unspecific background with the NIS - Elements AR software . For quantification of FLAG - TrkB surface level and transferrin binding to the plasma membrane , we drew out the cell body area and three dendritic segments ( 15 μm / segment ) as ROI of transfected neurons and measured mean fluorescence intensity . Sholl analysis A modified Sholl analysis was performed with the Sholl analysis plu - gin of ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) as de - scribed ( Whitford et al . , 2002 ) . In brief , the center of the soma was Volume 27 November 1 , 2016 WAVE1 promotes TrkB endocytosis | 3355 staining , Alexa Fluor 488 – or Alexa Fluor 568 – conjugated phalloidin diluted with PBS ( 1 : 200 ) was incubated with neurons for 1 h at room temperature . Statistical analysis All data are presented as mean ± SEM . GraphPad Prism 5 ( Graph - Pad Software , La Jolla , CA ) was used for statistical analysis . For two - sample comparisons versus controls , the two - tailed unpaired Student’s t test was used . One - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with a Dunnett’s multiple - comparison was used to evaluate statisti - cal significance of three or more groups of samples . p < 0 . 05 was considered statistically significant . Delcroix JD , Valletta JS , Wu C , Hunt SJ , Kowal AS , Mobley WC ( 2003 ) . NGF signaling in sensory neurons : evidence that early endosomes carry NGF retrograde signals . Neuron 39 , 69 – 84 . Derivery E , Gautreau A ( 2010 ) . Generation of branched actin networks : as - sembly and regulation of the N - WASP and WAVE molecular machines . Bioessays 32 , 119 – 131 . Eden S , Rohatgi R , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Kirschner MW ( 2002 ) . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 , 790 – 793 . Fu X , Yang Y , Xu C , Niu Y , Chen T , Zhou Q , Liu JJ ( 2011 ) . Retrolinkin cooper - ates with endophilin A1 to mediate BDNF - TrkB early endocytic traffick - ing and signaling from early endosomes . Mol Biol Cell 22 , 3684 – 3698 . Grimes ML , Beattie E , Mobley WC ( 1997 ) . A signaling organelle containing the nerve growth factor - activated receptor tyrosine kinase , TrkA . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 , 9909 – 9914 . Harrington AW , St Hillaire C , Zweifel LS , Glebova NO , Philippidou P , Halegoua S , Ginty DD ( 2011 ) . Recruitment of actin modifiers to TrkA endosomes governs retrograde NGF signaling and survival . Cell 146 , 421 – 434 . Howe CL , Valletta JS , Rusnak AS , Mobley WC ( 2001 ) . NGF signaling from clathrin - coated vesicles : evidence that signaling endosomes serve as a platform for the Ras - MAPK pathway . Neuron 32 , 801 – 814 . Huang EJ , Reichardt LF ( 2003 ) . Trk receptors : roles in neuronal signal trans - duction . Annu Rev Biochem 72 , 609 – 642 . Innocenti M , Gerboth S , Rottner K , Lai FP , Hertzog M , Stradal TE , Frittoli E , Didry D , Polo S , Disanza A , et al . ( 2005 ) . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat Cell Biol 7 , 969 – 976 . Irie F , Yamaguchi Y ( 2002 ) . EphB receptors regulate dendritic spine develop - ment via intersectin , Cdc42 and N - WASP . Nat Neurosci 5 , 1117 – 1118 . Kaplan DR , Miller FD ( 2000 ) . Neurotrophin signal transduction in the nervous system . Curr Opin Neurobiol 10 , 381 – 391 . Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2002 ) . Syndapins integrate N - WASP in receptor - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J 21 , 6083 – 6094 . Kim Y , Sung JY , Ceglia I , Lee KW , Ahn JH , Halford JM , Kim AM , Kwak SP , Park JB , Ho Ryu S , et al . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation of WAVE1 regulates actin polymerization and dendritic spine morphology . Nature 442 , 814 – 817 . Koronakis V , Hume PJ , Humphreys D , Liu T , Horning O , Jensen ON , McGhie EJ ( 2011 ) . WAVE regulatory complex activation by cooperating GTPases Arf and Rac1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 , 14449 – 14454 . Lebensohn AM , Kirschner MW ( 2009 ) . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident signals controls actin assembly . Mol Cell 36 , 512 – 524 . Liu JJ , Ding J , Wu C , Bhagavatula P , Cui B , Chu S , Mobley WC , Yang Y ( 2007 ) . Retrolinkin , a membrane protein , plays an important role in retrograde axonal transport . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 , 2223 – 2228 . Liu XH , Geng Z , Yan J , Li T , Chen Q , Zhang QY , Chen ZY ( 2015 ) . Blocking GSK3beta - mediated dynamin1 phosphorylation enhances BDNF - dependent TrkB endocytosis and the protective effects of BDNF in neuronal and mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease . Neurobiol Dis 74 , 377 – 391 . Machesky LM , Insall RH ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 8 , 1347 – 1356 . Merrifield CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Merrifield CJ , Qualmann B , Kessels MM , Almers W ( 2004 ) . Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are re - cruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts . Eur J Cell Biol 83 , 13 – 18 . Mettlen M , Stoeber M , Loerke D , Antonescu CN , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) . Endocytic accessory proteins are functionally distinguished by their differential effects on the maturation of clathrin - coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 3251 – 3260 . Mooren OL , Galletta BJ , Cooper JA ( 2012 ) . Roles for actin assembly in endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 81 , 661 – 686 . Namekata K , Harada C , Taya C , Guo X , Kimura H , Parada LF , Harada T ( 2010 ) . Dock3 induces axonal outgrowth by stimulating membrane recruitment of the WAVE complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 7586 – 7591 . Nolen BJ , Tomasevic N , Russell A , Pierce DW , Jia Z , McCormick CD , Hartman J , Sakowicz R , Pollard TD ( 2009 ) . Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 460 , 1031 – 1034 . Nozumi M , Nakagawa H , Miki H , Takenawa T , Miyamoto S ( 2003 ) . Differential localization of WAVE isoforms in filopodia and lamellipodia of the neuronal growth cone . J Cell Sci 116 , 239 – 246 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Lance Terada , Yong Kim , Laura Machesky , and Alexandre Benmerah for generously providing us with reagents ; Yuhang Chen ( Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology , Chinese Acad - emy of Sciences ) for technical advice on recombinant protein ex - pression ; and the Research Centre for Life Sciences , University of Science and Technology of China , and Institute of Biophysics , Chinese Academy of Sciences , for mass spectrometry analysis . We also thank the members of the Liu lab for helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by the Na - tional Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31530039 , 31471334 , and 31325017 ) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China ( 2014CB942802 and 2016YFA0500100 ) . REFERENCES Banker G , Goslin K ( 1988 ) . Developments in neuronal cell culture . Nature 336 , 185 – 186 . Basquin C , Trichet M , Vihinen H , Malarde V , Lagache T , Ripoll L , Jokitalo E , Olivo - Marin JC , Gautreau A , Sauvonnet N ( 2015 ) . Membrane protru - sion powers clathrin - independent endocytosis of interleukin - 2 receptor . EMBO J 34 , 2147 – 2161 . Beattie EC , Howe CL , Wilde A , Brodsky FM , Mobley WC ( 2000 ) . NGF signals through TrkA to increase clathrin at the plasma membrane and enhance clathrin - mediated membrane trafficking . J Neurosci 20 , 7325 – 7333 . Benesch S , Polo S , Lai FP , Anderson KI , Stradal TE , Wehland J , Rottner K ( 2005 ) . N - WASP deficiency impairs EGF internalization and actin assem - bly at clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Sci 118 , 3103 – 3115 . Benmerah A , Bayrou M , Cerf - Bensussan N , Dautry - Varsat A ( 1999 ) . Inhibi - tion of clathrin - coated pit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J Cell Sci 112 , 1303 – 1311 . Benmerah A , Lamaze C , Begue B , Schmid SL , Dautry - Varsat A , Cerf - Bensussan N ( 1998 ) . AP - 2 / Eps15 interaction is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 140 , 1055 – 1062 . Benmerah A , Poupon V , Cerf - Bensussan N , Dautry - Varsat A ( 2000 ) . Mapping of Eps15 domains involved in its targeting to clathrin - coated pits . J Biol Chem 275 , 3288 – 3295 . Cheadle L , Biederer T ( 2014 ) . Activity - dependent regulation of dendritic complexity by semaphorin 3A through Farp1 . J Neurosci 34 , 7999 – 8009 . Chen B , Brinkmann K , Chen Z , Pak CW , Liao Y , Shi S , Henry L , Grishin NV , Bogdan S , Rosen MK ( 2014 ) . The WAVE regulatory complex links diverse receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . Cell 156 , 195 – 207 . Chen Z , Borek D , Padrick SB , Gomez TS , Metlagel Z , Ismail AM , Umetani J , Billadeau DD , Otwinowski Z , Rosen MK ( 2010 ) . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature 468 , 533 – 538 . Chen ZY , Ieraci A , Tanowitz M , Lee FS ( 2005 ) . A novel endocytic recycling signal distinguishes biological responses of Trk neurotrophin receptors . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 5761 – 5772 . Cosker KE , Segal RA ( 2014 ) . Neuronal signaling through endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 , a020669 . Coue M , Brenner SL , Spector I , Korn ED ( 1987 ) . Inhibition of actin polymer - ization by latrunculin A . FEBS Lett 213 , 316 – 318 . Dahl JP , Wang - Dunlop J , Gonzales C , Goad ME , Mark RJ , Kwak SP ( 2003 ) . Characterization of the WAVE1 knock - out mouse : implications for CNS development . J Neurosci 23 , 3343 – 3352 . 3356 | C . Xu et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Suetsugu S , Kurisu S , Oikawa T , Yamazaki D , Oda A , Takenawa T ( 2006 ) . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J Cell Biol 173 , 571 – 585 . Suetsugu S , Yamazaki D , Kurisu S , Takenawa T ( 2003 ) . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral ruffle formation for fibro - blast cell migration . Dev Cell 5 , 595 – 609 . Valdez G , Akmentin W , Philippidou P , Kuruvilla R , Ginty DD , Halegoua S ( 2005 ) . Pincher - mediated macroendocytosis underlies retrograde signal - ing by neurotrophin receptors . J Neurosci 25 , 5236 – 5247 . Valdez G , Philippidou P , Rosenbaum J , Akmentin W , Shao Y , Halegoua S ( 2007 ) . Trk - signaling endosomes are generated by Rac - dependent macroendocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 , 12270 – 12275 . von Kleist L , Stahlschmidt W , Bulut H , Gromova K , Puchkov D , Robertson MJ , MacGregor KA , Tomilin N , Pechstein A , Chau N , Chircop M , et al . ( 2011 ) . Role of the clathrin terminal domain in regulating coated pit dynamics revealed by small molecule inhibition . Cell 146 , 471 – 484 . Wan J , Cheung AY , Fu WY , Wu C , Zhang M , Mobley WC , Cheung ZH , Ip NY ( 2008 ) . Endophilin B1 as a novel regulator of nerve growth factor / TrkA trafficking and neurite outgrowth . J Neurosci 28 , 9002 – 9012 . Wang LH , Rothberg KG , Anderson RG ( 1993 ) . Mis - assembly of clathrin lat - tices on endosomes reveals a regulatory switch for coated pit formation . J Cell Biol 123 , 1107 – 1117 . Whitford KL , Marillat V , Stein E , Goodman CS , Tessier - Lavigne M , Chedotal A , Ghosh A ( 2002 ) . Regulation of cortical dendrite development by Slit - Robo interactions . Neuron 33 , 47 – 61 . Wulf E , Deboben A , Bautz FA , Faulstich H , Wieland T ( 1979 ) . Fluorescent phallotoxin , a tool for the visualization of cellular actin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 76 , 4498 – 4502 . Yang Y , Wei M , Xiong Y , Du X , Zhu S , Yang L , Zhang C , Liu JJ ( 2015 ) . Endophilin A1 regulates dendritic spine morphogenesis and stability through interaction with p140Cap . Cell Res 25 , 496 – 516 . Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL ( 2007 ) . SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev Cell 13 , 43 – 56 . Zheng J , Shen WH , Lu TJ , Zhou Y , Chen Q , Wang Z , Xiang T , Zhu YC , Zhang C , Duan S , Xiong ZQ ( 2008 ) . Clathrin - dependent endocytosis is required for TrkB - dependent Akt - mediated neuronal protection and dendritic growth . J Biol Chem 283 , 13280 – 13288 . Zhou P , Alfaro J , Chang EH , Zhao X , Porcionatto M , Segal RA ( 2011 ) . Numb links extracellular cues to intracellular polarity machinery to promote chemotaxis . Dev Cell 20 , 610 – 622 . Oikawa T , Yamaguchi H , Itoh T , Kato M , Ijuin T , Yamazaki D , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T ( 2004 ) . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 binding is necessary for WAVE2 - induced formation of lamellipodia . Nat Cell Biol 6 , 420 – 426 . Otsuki M , Itoh T , Takenawa T ( 2003 ) . Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is recruited to rafts and associates with endophilin A in response to epidermal growth factor . J Biol Chem 278 , 6461 – 6469 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Mullins RD , Lim WA ( 2000 ) . Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 , 801 – 806 . Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW ( 2000 ) . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Cell Biol 150 , 1299 – 1310 . Segal RA ( 2003 ) . Selectivity in neurotrophin signaling : theme and variations . Annu Rev Neurosci 26 , 299 – 330 . Shao Y , Akmentin W , Toledo - Aral JJ , Rosenbaum J , Valdez G , Cabot JB , Hilbush BS , Halegoua S ( 2002 ) . Pincher , a pinocytic chaperone for nerve growth factor / TrkA signaling endosomes . J Cell Biol 157 , 679 – 691 . Sharma N , Deppmann CD , Harrington AW , St Hillaire C , Chen ZY , Lee FS , Ginty DD ( 2010 ) . Long - distance control of synapse assembly by target - derived NGF . Neuron 67 , 422 – 434 . Shekarabi M , Moore SW , Tritsch NX , Morris SJ , Bouchard JF , Kennedy TE ( 2005 ) . Deleted in colorectal cancer binding netrin - 1 mediates cell substrate adhesion and recruits Cdc42 , Rac1 , Pak1 , and N - WASP into an intracellular signaling complex that promotes growth cone expansion . J Neurosci 25 , 3132 – 3141 . Shin N , Lee S , Ahn N , Kim SA , Ahn SG , YongPark Z , Chang S ( 2007 ) . Sorting nexin 9 interacts with dynamin 1 and N - WASP and coordinates synaptic vesicle endocytosis . J Biol Chem 282 , 28939 – 28950 . Soderling SH , Guire ES , Kaech S , White J , Zhang F , Schutz K , Langeberg LK , Banker G , Raber J , Scott JD ( 2007 ) . A WAVE - 1 and WRP signaling com - plex regulates spine density , synaptic plasticity , and memory . J Neurosci 27 , 355 – 365 . Soderling SH , Langeberg LK , Soderling JA , Davee SM , Simerly R , Raber J , Scott JD ( 2003 ) . Loss of WAVE - 1 causes sensorimotor retardation and reduced learning and memory in mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 , 1723 – 1728 . Spector I , Shochet NR , Blasberger D , Kashman Y ( 1989 ) . Latrunculins – novel marine macrolides that disrupt microfilament organization and affect cell growth : I . Comparison with cytochalasin D . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 13 , 127 – 144 .