Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 16 , 2704 – 2718 , June 2005 Relationships between EGFR Signaling – competent and Endocytosis - competent Membrane Microdomains □ D Claudia Puri , * †‡ Daniela Tosoni , †‡ § Riccardo Comai , * † Andrea Rabellino , * † Daniela Segat , * Federico Caneva , * Paola Luzzi , * † Pier Paolo Di Fiore , † § (cid:1) and Carlo Tacchetti * † * MicroScoBio Research Center , Department of Experimental Medicine , University of Genoa , 16132 Genoa , Italy ; † Italian Foundation for Cancer Research ( FIRC ) Institute of Molecular Oncology ( IFOM ) , 20139 Milan , Italy ; § Department of Experimental Oncology , European Institute of Oncology , 20141 Milan , Italy ; and (cid:1) Department of Medicine , Surgery and Dentistry , University of Milan , 20142 Milan , Italy Submitted July 16 , 2004 ; Revised March 7 , 2005 ; Accepted March 8 , 2005 Monitoring Editor : Juan S . Bonifacino Membrane microdomains , the so - called lipid rafts , function as platforms to concentrate receptors and assemble the signal transduction machinery . Internalization , in most cases , is carried out by different specialized structures , the clathrin - coated pits . Here , we show that several endocytic proteins are efﬁciently recruited to morphologically identiﬁed plasma membrane lipid rafts , upon activation of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) , a receptor tyrosine kinase . Analysis of detergent - resistant membrane fractions revealed that the EGF - dependent association of endocytic proteins with rafts is as efﬁcient as that of signaling effector molecules , such as Grb2 or Shc . Finally , the EGFR , but not the nonsignaling transferrin receptor , could be localized in nascent coated pits that almost invariably contained raft mem - branes . Thus , specialized membrane microdomains have the ability to assemble both the molecular machineries necessary for intracellular propagation of EGFR effector signals and for receptor internalization . INTRODUCTION On engagement of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) by their cognate ligands , their intrinsic kinase activity is stimulated with ensuing receptor autophosphorylation and recruit - ment / activation of the signal transduction machinery , in turn responsible for several effector functions . Concurrently , activated receptors trigger their own endocytosis , whose ultimate goal is to extinguish signaling through removal of receptors from the cell surface ( Carpenter , 2000 ) . In the case of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) the localization of the two processes is well characterized ( Joris - sen et al . , 2003 ) . Signaling occurs within specialized mem - brane microdomains , lipid rafts ( Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Maxﬁeld , 2002 ) , whereas endocytosis occurs mostly through the clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . Membrane rafts are cholesterol - and sphingolipid - rich membrane regions characterized by higher order and lower buoyant density than bulk plasma membrane ( Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Sprong et al . , 2001 ; Kusumi et al . , 2004 ) . These structures are also characterized by their insolubility in some detergents at 4°C ( DRM , detergent resistant mem - branes ; Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . Several transmembrane re - ceptors have been reported to associate with membrane rafts ( Cheng et al . , 1999 ; Krauss and Altevogt , 1999 ; Mineo et al . , 1999 ; Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Giurisato et al . , 2003 ) , including the EGFR ( Mineo et al . , 1999 ) . The association of receptors with lipid rafts is thought to be functional to the activation of signaling cascades ( Cheng et al . , 1999 ; Waugh et al . , 1999 ; Drevot et al . , 2002 ; Matveev and Smart , 2002 ; Pierce , 2002 ; Stoddart et al . , 2002 ; del Pozo et al . , 2004 ) . Accordingly , speciﬁc signaling ( Gingras et al . , 1998 ; Iwabuchi et al . , 1998 ; Michaely et al . , 1999 ; Kindzelskii et al . , 2004 ) and adaptor proteins ( e . g . , shc and grb2 ; Biedi et al . , 2003 ; Ridyard and Robbins , 2003 ; Yang et al . , 2004 ) have been found associated to rafts . However , lipid rafts are rather small , possibly con - taining only few molecules ( Prior et al . , 2003 ) , to function as stable signaling platforms ( Harder and Engelhardt , 2004 ) . Nevertheless , they are dynamic , and may diffuse ( Pralle et al . , 2000 ; Sprong et al . , 2001 ) and coalesce into larger and more stable structures , in response to signaling , forming larger “signal transducing platforms” ( Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Kusumi et al . , 2004 ; Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . These larger rafts may contribute to both signal ampliﬁcation or attenu - ation ( e . g . , by synergistic engagement of protein kinases or phosphatases with cognate substrates ; Jacobson and Di - etrich , 1999 ; Kurzchalia and Parton , 1999a ; Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Anderson and Jacobson , 2002 ; Miljan and Bremer , 2002 ) . This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 – 07 – 0596 ) on March 16 , 2005 . □ D The online version of this article contains supplemental material at MBC Online ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org ) . ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work . Address correspondence to : Carlo Tacchetti ( carlo . tacchetti @ unige . it ) . Abbreviations used : RTK , receptor tyrosine kinases ; EGFR , epider - mal growth factor receptor ; CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; CCV , clathrin - coated vesicle ; DRM , detergent - resistant membrane ; GPI , glycosyl - phosphatidyl - inositol ; HPR , horseradish peroxidase ; CT - B / HRP , HRP - labeled cholera toxin B subunit ; M (cid:1) CD , methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodex - trin ; PLAP , placental alkaline phosphatase ; Tf , transferrin ; TfR , transferrin receptor . 2704 © 2005 by The American Society for Cell Biology Raft associated receptors have been reported to follow either a non – clathrin - or a clathrin - dependent endocytic pathway ( Nichols and Lippincott - Schwartz , 2001 ; Johannes and Lamaze , 2002 ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Di Guglielmo et al . , 2003 ; Felberbaum - Corti et al . , 2003 ) . In particular , EGFR relocates into CCPs , upon EGF binding , by promoting the recruitment of endocytic proteins involved in the assem - bly of CCP ( e . g . , eps15 , AP2 , and clathrin ; Slepnev and De Camilli , 2000 ; Brodsky et al . , 2001 ; Smythe , 2002 ) . Although some evidence has been provided that these proteins are recruited to the plasma membrane ( Mineo et al . , 1999 ; Pike and Casey , 2002 ; Yamabhai and Anderson , 2002 ) , the rela - tionship between signaling - and internalization - competent compartments is far from being clear . We , therefore , endeav - ored to investigate this relationship , in the EGFR system ( Johannes and Lamaze , 2002 ; Ringerike et al . , 2002 ; Sandvig and van Deurs , 2002 ; Stoddart et al . , 2002 ; Abrami et al . , 2003 ) . Our results show that specialized membrane rafts have the ability to assemble the molecular machineries necessary for both intracellular propagation of EGFR effector signals , and for receptor internalization , and suggest that EGFR – internalizing CCPs can assemble within lipid raft platforms . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies and Cells Antibodies used were : rabbit anti - eps15 ( 577 ) , rabbit anti - horseradish perox - idase ( HRP ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , mouse anti - AP2 ( Sigma ) , mouse anti - TfR ( Zymed , San Francisco , CA ) , mouse anti - TfR ( extracellular domain ; 5E9C11 clone , ATCC , Rockville , MD ) , mouse anti - EGFR ( extracellular domain ; AB - 5 , Oncogene , San Diego , CA , and 13A9 , Genentech , San Francisco , CA ) , rabbit anti - EGFR ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) , rabbit anti - EGFR , ( Cell Signaling Technology , Beverly , MA ) , rabbit anti - calnexin ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , rabbit anti - (cid:1) 1 integrin ( kindly provided by F . Giancotti ) , mouse anti - clathrin HC ( BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) , rabbit anti - mouse ( DAKO , Glostrup , Denmark ) , rabbit anti - PLAP ( Rockland , Gilbertsville , PA ) , HRP - coupled secondary antibodies for ECL ( DAKO ) , rabbit anti - Caveolin - 1 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology or BD Biosciences ) . ProteinA / gold was from Dr . J . W . Slot ( Utrecht University , Utrecht , The Netherlands ) , rabbit anti - Grb2 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , rabbit anti - Shc ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) . Sec - ondary ﬂuorochrome - labeled antibodies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratory ( West Grove , PA ) . For EGF treatment , cells were starved in serum - free DMEM for 18 h and incubated in the presence or in the absence of EGF , ( 100 ng / ml , unless otherwise indicated ; Upstate Biotechnology , Lake Placid , NY ) . EGF stimula - tion was performed at 37°C or on ice , as indicated . In the latter case , the cells were prechilled at 0°C , in the starvation medium , for 30 min before stimula - tion . When indicated , the cells were subsequently shifted at 37°C for different lengths of time . For CT - B / HRP ( Sigma ) labeling , HeLa cells were starved in serum - free medium for 18 h and then incubated with CT - B / HRP ( Sigma ; 4 (cid:2) g / ml ) , in the presence or in the absence of EGF , for 1 h , on ice . For methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin ( M (cid:1) CD ) treatment , HeLa cells were starved in serum - free medium for 18 h , and during the last hour of starvation , incubated with ( or without ) a mixture of 10 mM M (cid:1) CD ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , 0 . 2 % bovine serum albumin , 20 mM HEPES , in serum - free medium . Residual cholesterol was measured by lysing the cells with 0 . 5 % SDS in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . Cells were then scraped off the dish and passed through a syringe with a 25 - gauge needle , to shear DNA . The enzymatic - colorimetric “Colesterolo SL” kit ( Real Time Diagnostic System , Viterbo , Italy ) , was used to estimate the amount of cholesterol present in the cell lysate , according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Electron Microscopy Ruthenium Red / Glutaraldehyde Fixation Cells were prepared for ruthenium red / glutaraldehyde ﬁxation according to previously described protocols ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Brieﬂy , HeLa cells were ﬁxed with 66 mM cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , containing 2 % glutaraldehyde , and 0 . 5 mg / ml Ruthenium red ( Fluka , Buchs , Switzerland ) at room temperature for 1 h . After washing with 150 mM cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , the cells were postﬁxed with 33 mM cacodylate buffer , containing 1 % OsO 4 , and 0 . 5 mg / ml Ruthenium red , at room temperature for 3 h . The cells were then washed with 150 mM cacody - late buffer , and processed for Epon embedding ( Polybed 812 , Polysciences , Warrington , PA ) . Pre - embedding CT - B / HRP Labeling HeLa cells were labeled with CT - B / HRP as described , ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde / 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde in PBS . The peroxidase reaction was developed with 0 . 2 mg / ml diaminobenzidine , 0 . 01 % H 2 O 2 , in PBS . Cells were washed with PBS containing 0 . 02 M glycine , scraped off the dish , centrifuged , and embedded in 12 % gelatin in PBS . Small blocks of embedded cells were incubated overnight with 2 . 3 M sucrose at 4°C , mounted on aluminum pins , and frozen in liquid nitrogen . Ultrathin cryo - sections of 100 nm were cut at (cid:1) 107°C , and picked up with 1 % methylcellu - lose in 1 . 15 M sucrose . The larger thickness of the sections , compared with the standard 60 nm , was necessary to preserve the immunoperoxidase reaction product . For double or triple immunoperoxidase / immunogold labeling , after incu - bation with gelatin 2 % in PBS , cryosections were immunogold labeled ac - cording to previously described protocols ( Confalonieri et al . , 2000 ) . Epon Pre - embedding HeLa cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 30 min , quenched with a solution of 0 . 02 % glycine in PBS , and labeled with rabbit anti - PLAP followed by protein A gold , 10 nm , for 30 min each step . Cells were then ﬁxed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer , 0 . 1 M , pH 7 . 2 , and processed for embedding in Polybed 812 ( Polysciences ) . Morphometry The morphometric analysis of immunogold and immunoper - oxidase labeling was performed at the microscope at 12 , 000 (cid:2) , on at least 20 randomly selected cell proﬁles , or on systematically sampled micrographs , depending on the target . Each experiment was repeated at least three times . For immunogold labeling , the optimal concentration of the antibodies was tested by deﬁning the background - to - signal ratio ( Rabouille , 1999 ) . In addi - tion , the ratio between speciﬁc ( labeling of compartments known to associate with the given antigen ) , and nonspeciﬁc gold staining ( labeling of compart - ments known not to associate with the given antigen ) , was considered ac - ceptable if (cid:3) 5 . The darkness ( but not the size or the contrast ) of the gold particles , dis - played in the micrographs shown in this article , has been increased by digital processing , in order to facilitate the observation in the rather low magniﬁca - tions used . Immunoﬂuorescence HeLa cells were incubated for 3 h in serum - free medium , placed on ice , and washed brieﬂy with prechilled serum free medium ( SFM , DMEM containing 20 mM HEPES , and 1 % bovine serum albumin ) . Cells were then incubated with anti - EGFR ( 13A9 antibody ) in SFM , in the presence or in the absence of EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) , 60 min at 0°C on a rocker . Cells were then washed , ﬁxed , and stained with a second - step ﬂuorochrome - labeled anti - mouse antibody . Subsequently , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS and stained with anti - AP2 (cid:1) - subunit ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , revealed by ﬂuorochrome - labeled antibody . Confocal microscopy was performed using a Leica DM IRE2 HC Fluo TCS inverted microscope ( Deerﬁeld , IL ) . For the quantization of EGFR / AP2 colocalization ( shown in Figure 1C ) , we used the “colocalization ﬁnder” plug - in of ImageJ free image analysis software ( W . Rasband , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda ; http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Images were acquired in order to display the entire plasma membrane surface adhering to the culture dish . To maximize the chance of evaluating only the plasma membrane , excluding all intracellular staining , we performed the analysis on a restricted region of the images extending 15 pixels from the edge of the cell , toward the cytoplasm . A pixel - by - pixel correlation diagram for the channel red and green of the same image was obtained after subtract - ing the background noise . For AP2 dot counting , images were taken as above , after subtracting the background noise , AP2 dots were counted on the whole area of the cell . The surface was measured in pixels with ImageJ “Analyze” command after highlighting the edge of the cells with the “Wand ( tracing ) tool . ” The area was subsequently converted into (cid:2) m 2 based on the pixel size . The number of dots was expressed as density of dots on the cell surface ( dots / (cid:2) m 2 of surface ) . For the quantitation of EGFR / clathrin colocalization and the number of CCPs , HeLa cells were transfected with dsRed - clathrin ( Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) using lipofectAMINE reagent ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , incubated for 16 h in SFM , placed on ice , and washed with prechilled SFM . Cells were then incubated with anti - EGFR ( 13A9 antibody ) in SFM , in the presence or in the absence of EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) , 60 min at 0°C on a rocker , washed , ﬁxed , and stained with an anti - mouse ﬂuorochrome - labeled antibody . The quantitative analysis of EGFR / clathrin colocalization and the density of clathrin dots / (cid:2) m 2 of surface were performed as for AP2 . A total series of 26 – 30 confocal planes ( obtained at 244 - nm steps for axial scanning , according to Nyquist sampling ) from the ventral surface to the top of the cell , were analyzed for each cell . Preparation of DRMs HeLa cells were serum starved ( 16 – 18 h ) and treated (cid:4) EGF , 0°C for 30 min . Cells were lysed on ice in TNE buffer ( 25 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , pH 8 . 5 , 1 % ) containing 1 % Triton X - 100 ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) , protease and phosphatase inhibitors ( Roche , Mannheim , Germany ) , and ho - mogenized with of a tightly ﬁtting Dounce homogenizer ( 40 strokes ) , and through a 25 - gauge needle . Lysates were brought to 40 % sucrose and over - Membrane Rafts and EGFR Endocytosis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2705 layered on a step sucrose gradient ( 5 – 35 % in TNE ) , followed by centrifugation at 190 , 000 (cid:2) g , 4°C , 18 h in a SW41 rotor ( Beckman , Fullerton , CA ) . One - milliliter fractions were harvested from the top of the gradient . Two micro - liters of fractions 2 – 11 were analyzed by dot - blot , where indicated . Nine hundred microliters of each ﬂoating fraction ( 2 – 6 ) were diluted in TNE buffer and concentrated by centrifugation at 100 , 000 (cid:2) g , 4°C , 30 min in a MLA130 rotor ( Beckman ) . Pellets were entirely resuspended in sample buffer and analyzed by Western blot . Forty microliters of each nonﬂoating fraction ( 7 – 11 ) were resuspended in sample buffer and analyzed by Western blot . RESULTS EGF Stimulation at Low Temperature Promotes CCP Assembly , but not Clathrin - coated Vesicle Budding To explore the relationships between the signaling - compe - tent and the internalization - competent compartments involved in EGFR activity and in order to better deﬁne the early events Figure 1 . EGF stimulation induces CCPs assembly at 0°C , but not CCV budding . ( A ) EM images HeLa cells ﬁxed in the presence of Ruthenium red ( RR ) . Dark staining indi - cates connection with the outer surface . Examples are shown of RR - positive clathrin - coated pits ( CP ) , and RR - negative clathrin - coated vesicles ( CV ) . Bar , 0 . 06 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Mor - phometric analysis of cells processed as in A . HeLa cells in logarithmic growth ( “Steady state” in B ) were starved in serum - free me - dium for 18 h at 37°C ( “starved” in B ) , and then transferred at 0°C for 30 min , to allow the chilling of the plate and cells . The me - dium was then removed and cells were in - cubated for 1 h with fresh medium , pre - chilled on ice , in the absence ( “1 h 0°C” in B ) , or in the presence ( “1 h EGF 0°C” in B ) of EGF . A parallel dish of cells , treated with EGF at 0°C as above , was then transferred for 2 min at 37°C , in the absence of EGF , to allow internalization of preformed clathrin - coated pits ( “1 h EGF 0°C (cid:5) 2 (cid:6) 37°C” in B ) . Morphometry performed on 6 series of 10 cell proﬁles . Data represent the average number of CPs or CVs in each series , (cid:4) SD . The CP category includes : ( i ) all RR - positive invaginated regions of the plasma mem - brane , displaying a clear morphologically identiﬁable clathrin coat associated to the inner surface ; ( ii ) clathrin - coated vesicle - like structures displaying a clear RR staining . ( C ) Double immunoﬂuorescence showing the localization of EGFR ( EGFR ) and of the (cid:1) subunit of the AP2 complex ( AP2 ) , in starved HeLa stimulated with EGF ( (cid:5) EGF ) for 1 h , at 0°C , or mock - treated at the same temperature ( (cid:1) EGF ) . The right panel ( merge ) shows the merged images . The boxed area is displayed at higher magniﬁca - tion in the inset placed at the bottom of the merge panel . Bar : ( bottom - right panel ) 7 . 6 (cid:2) m ; ( inset ) 3 . 9 (cid:2) m ; ( all other panels ) 12 . 5 (cid:2) m . ( D ) Double immunoﬂuorescence show - ing the localization of EGFR ( EGFR ) and clathrin ( dsRed - clathrin ) , in starved HeLa cells transfected with RFP - clathrin and stim - ulated with EGF ( (cid:5) EGF ) for 1 h , at 0°C , or mock treated at the same temperature ( (cid:1) EGF ) . The right panel ( merge ) shows the merged images . The boxed area is displayed at higher magniﬁcation in the inset placed at the bottom of the merge panel . Bars : 12 . 5 (cid:2) m ( (cid:1) EGF , all panels ) ; 12 . 5 (cid:2) m ( (cid:5) EGF ) ; 3 . 9 (cid:2) m ( inset ) . C . Puri et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2706 following EGFR activation , we sought for experimental condi - tions that allow dissociating the formation of CCPs from their internalization as clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCV ) . Several previous reports have suggested that CCPs can form normally at 0°C in the presence of EGF , but are not internalized ( Moore et al . , 1987 ; Beck et al . , 1992 ; Brown and Petersen , 1998 ; Jiang et al . , 2003 ; Huang et al . , 2004 ) . This contention is supported by the observations that under these conditions the lateral mobility of receptors is reduced , but not abolished ( Hillman and Schlessinger , 1982 ) , and that the reduction of the lateral diffusion of occupied receptors has been shown not to be a rate - limiting step for receptor clus - tering or internalization , neither at 37 nor at 4°C ( Schless - inger et al . , 1983 ) . We directly tested the possibility to use these conditions for our studies . By electron microscopy ( EM ) , we analyzed cells ﬁxed in the presence of Ruthenium Red ( RR ) . RR stains the cell surface and plasma membrane invaginations connected to the cell surface , but not intracel - lular membranes , distinguishing CCPs from CCVs ( Figure 1A ) . HeLa cells were starved for 18 h , prechilled on ice , and then treated with EGF , or mock - treated , at 0°C . We found that EGF stimulation at 0°C induced an approximately threefold increase in the number of CCPs ( compare the “1h 0°C” and “1h EGF 0°C” conditions in Figure 1B ) , whereas the number of CCVs remained unaltered ( Figure 1B ) . Thus , under our conditions , the molecular machinery responsible for CCP formation is functional and can be triggered by EGF stimulation . Furthermore , when the EGF - stimulated cells were transferred at 37°C for 2 min , the number of CCVs increased dramatically ( Figure 1B ) , indicating that coated pits formed at 0°C are functional and can bud into coated vesicles . Further support for the assembly of CCPs upon EGF stimulation at 0°C , came from double immunoﬂuorescence experiments . In a ﬁrst series of experiments , starved HeLa cells , were stimulated with EGF for 60 min , at 0°C , and stained with antibodies to AP2 and EGFR ( Figure 1C ) . Image analysis ( see Materials and Methods ) was performed to esti - mate the number of AP2 dots / (cid:2) m 2 of cell surface and the percent of EGFR pixels colocalizing with AP2 pixels . The analysis was performed on the plasma membrane region of the cell facing the plastic dish , in order to reduce the possible inﬂuence of changes in the 3D cell shape due to EGF treat - ment . The number of AP2 dots / (cid:2) m 2 of cell surface was found to increase 2 . 1 - fold after EGF stimulation , compared with control unstimulated cells ( 0 . 59 (cid:4) 0 . 03 vs . 0 . 28 (cid:4) 0 . 03 dots / (cid:2) m 2 , respectively ) . Similarly , we found a 1 . 9 - fold in - crease in the percent of EGFR pixels colocalizing with AP2 pixels , upon EGF stimulation , compared with unstimulated cells ( 21 . 4 (cid:4) 4 . 0 vs . 11 . 2 (cid:4) 3 . 2 % , respectively ) . These results are in line with those obtained by EM , and suggest that , at 0°C , the newly formed CCPs assemble in regions of EGFR clustering . In a second series of experiments we transfected HeLa cells with a clathrin - RFP cDNA ( Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) , and performed immunoﬂuorescence staining with antibodies to the extracellular portion of EGFR on unﬁxed , unpermeabilized cells , at 4°C ( Figure 1D ) . Under these con - ditions only the surface associated EGFR was labeled , and we found a 1 . 7 - fold increase ( from 15 . 6 (cid:4) 2 . 1 to 26 . 3 (cid:4) 5 . 9 % ) in the percentage of EGFRs colocalizing with clathrin . Fi - nally , we also performed a 3D analysis , counting the number of clathrin dots present on the entire cell surface , before and after EGF treatment . The analysis was performed on series of 26 – 30 confocal planes reconstructing each cell . The num - ber of clathrin dots / (cid:2) m 2 of cell surface was found to in - crease from 0 . 14 (cid:4) 0 . 09 to 0 . 63 (cid:4) 0 . 32 dots / (cid:2) m 2 , after EGF stimulation . EGF Stimulation at Low Temperature Reveals a Simultaneous Recruitment of Signaling and Endocytic Proteins to DRMs We next evaluated whether EGF stimulation , under condi - tions in which CCP formation can be dissociated from their internalization ( 0°C ) , could induce the recruitment of EGFR , and of two signaling adaptor proteins , i . e . , Shc and Grb2 , to DRMs . Shc and Grb2 are known to be actively recruited to rafts after ligand engagement of several receptors , including EGFR ( Biedi et al . , 2003 ; Ridyard and Robbins , 2003 ; Yang et al . , 2004 ) . Starved HeLa cells were cultured in the presence or in the absence of EGF , for 30 min at 0°C . Stimulated and control cells , were lysed with 1 % Triton X - 100 , at 4°C , and fractionated on a 5 – 40 % step sucrose gradient ( 11 fractions ; Figure 2A ) . The DRM - containing ﬂoating fractions were identiﬁed by dot - blot analysis analyzing two raft markers , an HRP conjugate of the B subunit of the cholera toxin ( CT - B / HRP ) , that speciﬁcally binds to GM1 , an abundant lipid component of membrane rafts ( Parton , 1994 ; Mobius et al . , 1999 ) , or antibodies to caveolin 1 . Fractions 4 – 6 were found positive for one or both markers ( Figure 2A , top panel ) . In these same fractions , by Western blot , we could readily detect a signiﬁcant increase in the levels of EGFR , Grb2 , and Shc upon EGF treatment ( Figure 2A , bottom panel ) , indicating that the recruitment of receptor and adap - tor proteins in raft signaling platforms is not impaired at 0°C . The speciﬁcity of the fractionization method was fur - ther validated by analyzing the distribution of two plasma membrane proteins , Placental Alkaline Phosphatase ( PLAP ) , a GPI anchor protein known to exclusively associate with DRMs ( Harder et al . , 1998 ; Lipardi et al . , 2000 ) , and (cid:1) 1 integrin , a transmembrane protein reported to partition in non - raft regions of the plasma membrane ( Cunningham et al . , 2003 ) . As an additional control we also tested the distri - bution of calnexin , a transmembrane protein reported to partition in non - raft regions of endoplasmic reticulum ( Schuck et al . , 2003 ) . As expected , we found PLAP almost exclusively associated to fractions 4 – 6 and (cid:1) 1 integrin sub - unit and calnexin associated to the non - raft fractions 7 – 11 ( Figure 2A ) . More importantly , neither of these proteins showed any change in distribution upon EGF stimulation ( Figure 2A ) . We then evaluated whether a number of endocytic pro - teins , including clathrin , the adaptor complex AP2 ( Smythe , 2002 ) , and Eps15 , are recruited to DRM upon EGF stimula - tion . In particular , Eps15 is known to redistribute to the plasma membrane , upon EGF stimulation ( Tebar et al . , 1996 ; van Delft et al . , 1997 ; Torrisi et al . , 1999 ; Confalonieri et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , there is evidence that supports the hy - pothesis that eps15 recruitment might be one of the ﬁrst events in the assembly of a pit ( van Delft et al . , 1997 ) , possibly due to its projected role in the docking of AP2 onto the plasma membrane ( Benmerah et al . , 1996 ; Tebar et al . , 1996 ; Benmerah et al . , 1999 ; Torrisi et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , eps15 represents a good marker of early events in the dynamics of coated pit formation . As shown in Figure 2A , we detected a signiﬁcant increase in the levels of the three proteins in fractions 4 – 6 , and most notably in fraction 5 , upon EGF stimulation ( see also Figure 2B and Supplemental Figure 1 for a quantitative analysis ) . Of note the ratio between DRM and soluble - fraction partition , upon EGF stimulation , was in the same order of magnitude for both endocytic and effector proteins ( Figure 2A ) . As a further control , we used the cholesterol - extracting drug M (cid:1) CD , to disrupt rafts . Under the conditions used in our studies , the treatment with M (cid:1) CD led to a cholesterol Membrane Rafts and EGFR Endocytosis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2707 extraction of (cid:7) 60 % , as determined by a colorimetric assay to measure the residual cholesterol ( unpublished data ; see Ma - terials and Methods for details ) . We evaluated the effects of M (cid:1) CD treatment on EGFR , Eps15 , AP2 , and clathrin recruit - ment to ﬂoating fractions . Starved HeLa cells , treated with M (cid:1) CD , were cultured in the presence or in the absence of EGF , at 0°C for 60 min , and compared with untreated cells by a ﬂotation assay . In the presence of M (cid:1) CD , there was no recruitment of EGFR , AP2 , clathrin , and Eps15 to ﬂoating fractions ( Figure 2B ) . As a control for the effectiveness of the M (cid:1) CD treatment , we analyzed the distribution of a known raft - associated protein , PLAP . In the M (cid:1) CD - treated cells the amount of PLAP associated to rafts was reduced compared with controls ( Figure 2B ) , consistently with previous reports ( Lipardi et al . , 2000 ) . The sum of all the above results indicates that DRMs are a site of recruitment of endocytic machinery , raising the possi - bility that they also constitute a site of formation of CCPs . Morphological Identiﬁcation of GM1 - rich Membrane Domains by Electron Microscopy The observation that active EGFR is recruited to DRM to - gether with endocytic and signaling proteins prompted us to identify and characterize morphologically these speciﬁc sites . As a marker to identify membrane rafts by EM , we Figure 2 . EGF - dependent association of ef - fector and endocytic proteins to DRMs . ( A ) Starved HeLa cells were stimulated at 0°C with EGF ( (cid:5) EGF ) or mock - treated ( (cid:1) EGF ) and processed for isolation of DRMs , as de - scribed in Materials and Methods , followed by analysis by dot - blot ( top panel ) or immu - noblot with the indicated antibodies ( bot - tom panel ) . Immunoblot , 1 / 500 of each frac - tion was spotted for dot - blot detection . Dot blot , 9 / 10 of each ﬂoating - fractions ( 2 – 6 ) and 1 / 25 of each soluble fractions ( 7 – 11 ) , respectively , were loaded onto SDS - PAGE gels for subsequent immunoblot detection of EGFR , endocytic ( Eps15 , AP2 , Clathrin ) , signaling effector ( Shc , Grb2 ) , and control proteins ( PLAP , (cid:1) 1 integrin , Calnexin ) . Floating and soluble fractions were run on parallel SDS - PAGE gels and then stained under identical conditions . ( B ) Starved HeLa cells were either treated with M (cid:1) CD ( (cid:5) M (cid:1) CD ) or mock - treated , transferred at 0°C and stimulated with EGF ( (cid:5) EGF ) , or mock - treated ( (cid:1) EGF ) . Cells were then pro - cessed for isolation of DRMs , followed by immunoblot with the indicated antibodies ( bottom panel ) , or dot - blot ( top panel ) . Loading of lanes was as in B . C . Puri et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2708 used CT - B / HRP . The speciﬁcity of the peroxidase staining for the membrane raft regions , upon labeling with CT - B / HRP , was proved through a series of tests . Starved HeLa cells were cultured at 0°C for 1 h in the presence of CT - B / HRP and EGF . The samples were then either processed ( Figure 3A ) or not processed ( Figure 3B ) to develop the HRP staining . Ultrathin cryosections were im - munogold labeled with anti - HRP antibodies ( Figure 3 , A and B ) . No difference in gold distribution between the two conditions was found ( Figure 3 , A and B ) , demonstrating Figure 3 . Speciﬁcity of CT - B / HRP to iden - tify GM1 - rich membrane domains by elec - tron microscopy . Starved HeLa cells cul - tured at 0°C for 1 h in the presence of CT - B / HRP and epidermal growth factor ( A – D ) . ( A ) Cells were processed to develop the HRP staining ( electron - dense staining underneath the plasma membrane ) , and im - munogold labeled with anti - HRP antibodies on ultrathin sections . Bar , 0 . 22 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Cells were not processed to develop the HRP staining and immunogold labeled with anti - HRP antibodies . Bar , 0 . 15 (cid:2) m . ( C ) Mor - phometry of the experiment shown in A ( n (cid:8) 40 cell proﬁles ) . [ Length of rafts ] , aver - age size of GM1 - rich regions identiﬁed by CT - B / HRP labeling , and measured in two ways : [ CT - B ( gold ) ] , distance between the ﬁrst and last gold particle in cluster labeling HRP ; [ CT - B ( HRP ) ] , distance between the two edges of the electron dense staining of the HRP reaction product revealing HRP . Values are expressed in nanometers (cid:4) SD . [ % ] indicates the percent of the total gold particles identifying HRP present on the electron - dense staining of the HRP reaction product revealing HRP , respect to the total gold present on the plasma membrane . ( D ) Preembedding immunogold labeling of HeLa cells , stimulated with epidermal growth factor , at 0°C for 1 h , with anti - PLAP antibodies . Morphometry of the PLAP / gold patches associated to the plasma membrane reveals lengths ranging from 91 to 431 nm ( mean (cid:8) 212 (cid:4) 102 ; n (cid:8) 25 ) . Bar : ( left ) 0 . 16 (cid:2) m . ( E ) Starved HeLa cells cultured at 0°C for 1 h in the presence of CT - B / HRP and epidermal growth factor . Cells were pro - cessed for the isolation of DRMs , as de - scribed in Materials and Methods , followed by dot - blot analysis of the fractions . The HRP reaction was developed to reveal the in vivo bound CT - B ( CT - B - in vivo ) , and , after strip - ping , immunostained with antibodies to caveolin 1 ( Cav - 1 ) . Membrane Rafts and EGFR Endocytosis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2709 Figure 4 . Eps15 and EGFR localize in GM1 - rich regions of the plasma membrane . ( A ) HeLa cells were treated with CT - B - HRP [ CT - B ( HRP ) ] , either in the absence ( (cid:1) EGF , left panels ) or presence ( (cid:5) EGF , right panels ) of epidermal growth factor . CT - B - HRP labeling was followed by ﬁxation and development of the peroxidase reaction . Ultrathin cryosections were then reacted with the indicated antibodies ( gold ) , to identify eps15 or EGFR . Arrowheads point to raft regions . Bar , 0 . 56 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Morphometric analysis of the experiment shown in A . Data are expressed as % of gold particles associated to CT - B ( HRP ) electron - dense patches , counted in 30 cell proﬁles under conditions of (cid:4) epidermal growth C . Puri et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2710 that the HRP reaction product did not interfere with the immunogold labeling . In addition , by morphometry , we found 96 % of the HRP / gold particles associated to the elec - tron - dense staining of the HRP reaction product ( Figure 3 , A – C ) , demonstrating that HRP staining was restricted to CT - B / HRP – labeled regions . We then determined the aver - age length of the GM - rich regions detected by either perox - idase or immunogold . We found an average value of 389 and 272 nm , respectively , for the two conditions ( Figure 3C ) , whereas the average ratio between the sizes of individual costained rafts , measured by the two methods on the same raft , was 1 . 3 (cid:4) 0 . 2 ( n (cid:8) 31 evaluated rafts ) . Thus , the spread - ing of the HRP product overestimated the dimension of a raft of only (cid:7) 15 – 20 % , on each of the end of the sectioned patch , compared with immunogold . As a further control , we performed detection of mem - brane rafts by immunogold localization of PLAP , under the same culture conditions ( Figure 3D ) . By morphometry we measured the PLAP / gold patches associated to the plasma membrane , and found values ranging from 91 to 431 nm ( mean (cid:8) 212 (cid:4) 102 nm ; n (cid:8) 25 ) , comparable to those obtained by measuring the size of the GM1 - rich plasma membrane regions identiﬁed by CT - B in vivo ( shown in Figure 3 , A – C ) . These values are compatible with those described for clustered rafts ( Kusumi et al . , 2004 ; Mayor and Rao , 2004 ; and see also the Discussion of this article ) . Finally , we tested the speciﬁcity of the CT - B / HRP staining by a biochemical method . Starved HeLa cells were cultured at 0°C for 1 h , in the presence of CT - B / HRP and EGF , lysed , and processed for the isolation of DRMs , as described above . The collected fractions were analyzed by dot - blot . The HRP reaction was developed to reveal the in vivo bound CT - B ( CT - B - in vivo , Figure 3E ) . As shown , CT - B provided to the cells in vivo , under the same conditions used for EM anal - ysis , was found exclusively bound to DRM fractions ( frac - tions 4 – 6 ; Figure 3E ) . To further demonstrate that fractions 4 – 6 are indeed DRMs , we stripped the nitrocellulose and immunostained the membrane with antibodies to caveolin 1 ( Cav - 1 , Figure 3E ) , which reacted with ﬂoating fractions . EGFR and Endocytic Proteins Are Recruited to GM1 - rich Membrane Domains upon EGFR Stimulation To evaluate whether endocytic proteins are recruited to the membrane raft platforms identiﬁed by CT - B / HRP labeling , we started our analysis with eps15 . We ﬁrst used immuno - gold to colocalize either eps15 or EGFR , on ultrathin cryo - sections of HeLa cells , with GM1 - rich domains stained by CT - B / HRP . Comparison of experiments performed in the presence and in the absence of EGF stimulation ( Figure 4A ) , revealed that in unstimulated cells ( Figure 4A , left ) , both eps15 and EGFR were about equally distributed within and without GM1 - rich regions . Conversely , after EGF treatment ( Figure 4A , right ) , there was an approximately twofold en - richment of both eps15 and EGFR in lipid rafts ( Figure 4B ) . Noteworthy , observation at low magniﬁcation , to obtain a comprehensive view of the total cell proﬁle ( unpublished data ) , revealed that only a minor fraction of the total plasma membrane proﬁle was labeled by CT - B / HRP . Thus , we evaluated the percent of the total perimeter of a cell proﬁle labeled by CT - B / HRP , and found this value to be , on aver - age (cid:7) 19 % ( n (cid:8) 10 cell proﬁles ) . This result strengthens the signiﬁcance of the twofold increase of EGFR and Eps15 observed in raft regions of the plasma membrane upon EGF stimulation . By comparing data obtained with immuno - EM ( Figure 4 , A and B ) to those obtained on DRMs ( Figure 2 ) , it is obvious that the two methods showed considerable variations in assessing the magnitude of EGFR ( and eps15 recruitment ) to raft regions . By DRM analysis , a minute fraction of all EGFR was recruited to the ﬂoating fractions , upon EGF stimula - tion . Scanning of the blots in Figure 2 revealed that (cid:7) 2 % of the EGFR pool was in DRMs after EGF treatment . Con - versely , more than 70 % of the EGFR was found in GM1 - rich regions , by immuno - EM ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . It is of note , however , that in the case of DRMs , we analyzed the entire cellular pool of EGFR , whereas in the case of immuno - EM , only plasma membrane - associated EGFR was evaluated . To resolve , at least in part , this discrepancy , we measured which fraction of the EGFR is on the plasma membrane compared with other cellular compartments . To do this , we performed a surface biotinylation approach ( see Supplemen - tal Figure 2 for details ) and found that around one - third of the total EGFR pool is present on the plasma membrane ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) . This result indicates that the re - cruitment of EGFR to fractions 4 – 6 of DRMs , once corrected for the fraction of EGFR present on the cell membrane , is even more signiﬁcant ( (cid:7) 6 % ) than what appears from the Western blots . In addition , in the experiments on DRMs , the ﬂoating fractions ( 2 – 6 ) were further concentrated by a step of ultracentrifugation before loading , whereas the soluble fractions could be loaded directly . From a series of measure - ments ( unpublished data ) , this procedure results in a vari - able loss of material , and in general of a factor of at least 2 . Although these measurements render data obtained with the two methodologies ( DRMs and immuno - EM ) more in - ternally consistent , a roughly ﬁvefold difference , between the two detection methods , still persists . This is consistent with the possibility that the two methods explore regions of the plasma membrane that are not completely overlapping . Possibly , the DRM approach is more stringent , and , under conditions of lysis with Triton X - 100 , part of the GM1 - rich regions of the plasma membrane is solubilized . Whatever the case , our data stress the need to comparatively use the two methodologies to acquire a comprehensive picture . To deﬁne whether EGFR and eps15 were recruited to the same rafts , we performed a double immunogold staining , and found that , upon EGF stimulation , CT - B / HRP - positive membrane domains colocalized with both proteins ( Figure 4C ) . We also evaluated the recruitment of other endocytic proteins to GM1 - rich membranes upon EGF stimulation . By immunogold we found that AP2 is recruited to CT - B / HRP - positive membrane domains upon EGF stimulation ( Figure Figure 4 ( cont ) . factor treatment . In parentheses the number of gold particles counted in 30 cell proﬁles , for each treatment , is indicated . Data are representative of three independent experiments . ( C ) Starved HeLa cells were treated at 0°C with CT - B - HRP , in the presence of epidermal growth factor . Ultrathin cryosections were reacted with the indicated antibodies ( gold ) . The electron - dense patches , highlighted by thick solid bars identify GM1 - rich regions [ CT - B ( HRP ) ] . Eps15 , EGFR , and CT - B colocalize in one of the two rafts ( arrowhead ) . The adjacent membrane raft , devoid of EGFR ( arrow ) , does not associate with eps15 , demonstrating the speciﬁcity of the event . Bar , 0 . 22 (cid:2) m . ( D ) Starved HeLa cells were treated at 0°C with CT - B - HRP [ CT - B ( HRP ) ] , either in the absence ( (cid:1) EGF ) or presence ( (cid:5) EGF ) of epidermal growth factor . GM1 - rich regions are indicated by arrowheads . Gold particles identify AP2 . Bar : ( (cid:1) EGF ) 0 . 56 (cid:2) m ; ( (cid:5) EGF ) 0 . 70 (cid:2) m . ( E ) AP2 and clathrin are recruited to GM1 - rich regions in epidermal growth factor – treated cells . Starved HeLa cells were treated at 0°C with CT - B / HRP , in the presence of epidermal growth factor . Ultrathin cryosections were then reacted with the indicated antibodies ( gold ) to HRP in combination with antibodies to either AP2 or Clathrin . Bar : ( left ) 0 . 20 (cid:2) m ; ( right ) 0 . 13 (cid:2) m . Membrane Rafts and EGFR Endocytosis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2711 4D ) . This result was further reinforced by double immuno - gold labeling of CT - B / HRP and either AP2 ( Figure 4E , left ) or clathrin ( Figure 4E , right ) . By this approach , we found that these structural endocytic proteins could be detected in nascent pits , which incorporated raft membranes detected by CT - B / HRP - gold , further supporting the hypothesis of their formation within membrane rafts ( Figure 4E ) . As EGFR has been suggested to localize also in caveolae , which constitute a specialized subpopulation of membrane rafts ( Parton and Simons , 1995 ; Kurzchalia and Parton , 1999b ; Nabi and Le , 2003 ) marked by the presence of caveo - lin ( Smart et al . , 1999 ) , independently of EGF stimulation ( Mineo et al . , 1999 ) , we checked whether , under our exper - imental conditions , the EGFR was recruited to caveolae , or to other raft regions of the plasma membrane ( enriched or not in caveolin ) . A triple immunogold localization , to simul - taneously detect EGFR , caveolin and GM1 ( CT - B ) , was per - formed on cells cultured in the presence or the absence of EGF at 0°C . As shown in Figure 5 , A and B , there was no signiﬁcant difference in the extent of colocalization of EGFR with caveolin and GM1 , in the two conditions . Of note , in all cases in which colocalization of the three proteins was de - tected , the staining was also associated to morphologically identiﬁable caveolae . However , there was also substantial colocalization of EGFR and GM1 , in the absence of detect - able caveolin , in ﬂat regions of the plasma membrane ( Fig - ure 5A ) , which increased dramatically upon EGF stimula - tion ( Figure 5B ) . Altogether these results indicate that , upon EGF stimula - tion , the EGFR ( and , by inference , the endocytic machinery ) are recruited to plasma membrane raft regions clearly dis - tinct from caveolae . EGFR - containing CCPs Bud from GM1 - rich Membrane Domains The recruitment in GM1 - rich membrane regions of EGFR and of the endocytic machinery necessary for CCP assembly , strongly suggested that these structures can assemble start - ing from lipid rafts , upon EGF stimulation . We sought for direct experimental conﬁrmation of this hypothesis . HeLa cells , mock - treated or EGF - treated , were labeled with CT - B / HRP and gold - labeled with either anti - EGFR or anti - TfR antibodies ( Figure 6A ) . Strikingly , almost all of the EGFR - containing pits were associated to CT - B / HRP - labeled mem - brane regions identiﬁed by the HRP reaction product ( Fig - ure 6A ) . Similar results were obtained by double immunogold labeling of CT - B / HRP and either TFR ( unpub - lished data ) or EGFR ( Figure 6B ) . Of note , in cells transferred for 2 min at 37°C , after stimulation at 0°C , EGFR and HRP / gold colocalized within CCVs . Finally , morphometry ( Fig - Figure 5 . EGFR is recruited to noncaveolar , GM1 - rich regions of the plasma membrane . Triple immunogold labeling of ultrathin cryosections of starved HeLa cells , labeled with CT - B / HRP , and incubated in the presence ( (cid:5) EGF ) , or in the absence of epidermal growth factor ( (cid:1) EGF ) . ( A ) Cryosections were triple - labeled with antibody to HRP to localize GM - 1 ( 5 nm ) , anti - caveolin ( 10 nm ) , and EGFR ( 15 nm ) . The ﬁrst two panels on the left show colocalization of the three antigens in caveolae . The rightmost panel shows colocalizaton of EGFR and GM1 in a ﬂat region of the plasma membrane Bar : ( left ) 0 . 16 (cid:2) m ; ( middle ) 0 . 15 (cid:2) m ; ( right ) 0 . 1 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Morphometric analysis of the experiment shown in A . Results show the number of 15 - nm gold particles ( identifying EGFR ) present on the plasma membrane , colocalizing with caveolin and GM1 ( EGFR (cid:5) GM1 (cid:5) Cav1 ) , only with GM1 ( EGFR (cid:5) GM1 ) , or with neither one of the other two antigens ( EGFR ) . Data are referred to 10 cell proﬁles . Of note , the triple colocalization of EGFR with GM1 and caveolin 1 was found almost exclusively within morphologically identiﬁable caveolae , whereas the EGFR colocalized with GM1 , but not with caveolin 1 , in ﬂat regions of the plasma membrane . C . Puri et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2712 Figure 6 . EGFR - containing coated pits form within membrane rafts . ( A ) Starved HeLa cells were treated at 0°C with epidermal growth factor ( or without epidermal growth factor , unpublished data ) in the presence of CT - B - HRP , followed by ﬁxation and development of the peroxidase reaction [ CT - B - ( HRP ) ] . Ultrathin cryosections were then reacted with the indicated antibodies ( gold ) . Left , EGFR ( gold ) is internalized via a coated pit stemming from a GM1 - rich region identiﬁed by CT - B ( peroxidase ) staining ( arrowheads ) ; right , TfR ( gold ) , is internalized via a coated pit stemming from a non – GM1 - rich region . Bar , 0 . 1 (cid:2) m . ( B ) HeLa cells were treated as in A and then ﬁxed ( left and center ) or treated as in A and transferred at 37°C for 2 min before ﬁxation ( right ) . Ultrathin cryosections were immunogold labeled for EGFR ( 15 nm ) and HRP ( 10 nm ) . In cells stimulated at 0°C the two antigens colocalize within discrete ﬂat regions of the plasma membrane ( right ) , and budding clathrin - coated pits ( center ) . In cells transferred for 2 min at 37°C the two antigens colocalize within clathrin - coated vesicles ( left ) . Bar : ( left ) 0 . 11 (cid:2) m ; ( middle ) 0 . 13 (cid:2) m ; ( right ) 0 . 07 (cid:2) m . ( C ) Morphometric analysis of the experiment shown in A and B . Data are expressed as the % of either EGFR - containing or TfR - containing coated pits ( n (cid:8) 60 coated pits / condition ) found associated to patches of CT - B - HRP revealed by either immunoperoxidase or immunogold . In the (cid:1) EGF samples , indicated by an asterisk , no EGFR - containing pits were detectable , due to the 18 h of starvation . The total number of CCPs labeled with TfR was similar in epidermal growth factor stimulated and nonstimulated cells , 30 and 35 , respectively ( n (cid:8) 40 cell proﬁles ) . Data are representative of three experiments . Membrane Rafts and EGFR Endocytosis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2713 ure 6C ) performed on these samples revealed that most of the EGFR - containing coated pits , in the presence of EGF , formed in regions labeled by CT - B ( 97 and 83 % in the experiment in Figure 6 , A and B , respectively ) . Conversely , TfR - containing coated pits were randomly distributed in rafts and nonrafts regions ( Figure 6C ) , independently from EGF stimulation . Thus EGFR - containing CCPs almost in - variably include raft regions . Recruitment of EGFR and Endocytic Proteins to DRMs Is Not Inﬂuenced by Dose and Temperature of EGF Stimulation All our experiments were performed by EGF stimulation at 0°C , in order to work under conditions in which the forma - tion of coated pits was dissociated from their budding , to allow an easier visualization of the events and their mor - phometric quantitation . In addition , we used high concen - trations of EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) , to elicit maximal response . A possible caveat is that the low temperature impairs the exit of EGFR from membrane rafts , forcing their internalization from these regions . Moreover , one might ask whether the observed effect is a “nonphysiological” artifact of the high EGF concentration . Thus , we performed experiments at 37°C , comparing high ( 100 ng / ml ) to low ( 1 . 5 ng / ml ) doses of EGF . In a ﬁrst series of experiments , we labeled starved HeLa cells with CT - B / HRP , and stimulated them with either 1 . 5 or 100 ng / ml EGF , for 2 min , at 37°C . Cryo - ultrathin sections were double gold - labeled with anti - EGFR and anti - HRP antibodies ( Figure 7A ) . The results showed EGFR and CT - B colocalized within discrete regions of the plasma membrane or in morphologically identiﬁed CCVs , in both conditions ( Figure 7A ) . We then evaluated the recruitment of EGFR , AP2 , clathrin , and Eps15 to ﬂoating fractions , upon stimulation of starved HeLa cells , at 37°C for 2 min , with 1 . 5 or 100 ng / ml EGF . The cells were lysed and processed for the isolation of DRMs , as described above . The DRM - containing ﬂoating fractions were identiﬁed by dot - blot analysis using CT - B / HRP . As shown in Figure 7B , all the proteins analyzed were recruited to ﬂoating fractions at 100 ng / ml EGF , demonstrating that this event is induced by EGF stimulation independently of the temperature conditions . A quantitative assessment of EGFR , Eps15 , AP2 , and clathrin in the ﬂoating fractions , normalized for the amount of PLAP , as a marker for mem - brane rafts ( see Supplemental Figure 1 ) , conﬁrmed this re - sult . However , the magnitude of the recruitment was lower with respect to the 0°C condition ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . The difference between the two conditions is most likely due to the fact that at 37°C internalization rapidly removes the receptor and the associated endocytic machinery from the plasma membrane . Finally , also under conditions of stimulation at 37°C with low amounts of EGF ( 1 . 5 ng / ml ) , EGFR , AP2 , and clathrin were enriched in the DRM fractions ( Figure 7B ) . As ex - pected , the extent of this recruitment was lower compared with the condition of stimulation with 100 ng / ml EGF ( Sup - plemental Figure 1 ) , because of the lower extent of EGFR activation . DISCUSSION The role of lipid rafts in signaling is extensively docu - mented , as they function as physical platforms to concen - trate and assemble the signal transduction machinery ( Car - penter , 2000 ; Pralle et al . , 2000 ; McPherson et al . , 2001 ) . In the case of RTKs , e . g . , EGFR , ligand - induced receptor internal - ization represents , in itself , the outcome of a signaling mech - anism , which requires the intrinsic kinase activity of the receptor ( Carpenter , 2000 ) . Thus , in principle , nothing rules out the possibility that lipid rafts , just as they assemble the transduction machinery needed for the downstream propa - gation of the signal from RTK receptors , also serve as plat - forms to recruit the necessary machinery for their endocy - tosis . Nonsignaling receptors internalized through CCPs , such as the TfR and the low - density lipoprotein receptor ( LDLR ) , are not enriched in lipid rafts ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Brown and Petersen , 1998 ) . This ﬁnding has led to the obvious conclusion that CCPs assembly must occur within the bulk of the plasma membrane . However , a number of observations are at odd with this view , pointing to a more complex situation . First , the B - cell antigen receptor ( BCR ) a non - RTK , multisubunit receptor , activates both tyrosine phosphorylation of downstream targets and recruitment of clathrin on membrane rafts ( Stoddart et al . , 2002 ) . Second , cholera and shiga toxins interact with sphingolipids that are contained in lipid rafts , yet they are internalized through CCPs ( Sandvig and van Deurs , 2002 ) . Third , the anthrax toxin receptor partitions into rafts before internalization via CCPs ( Abrami et al . , 2003 ) . Fourth , disruption of lipid rafts by cholesterol depletion , inhibits both clathrin and nonclath - rin endocytosis ( Johannes and Lamaze , 2002 ) . Finally , the exit of the EGFR from the rafts , upon EGF stimulation , has been recently questioned ( Ringerike et al . , 2002 ) . Therefore , the possibility exists that signaling receptors associated to membrane rafts , e . g . , RTKs , may speciﬁcally recruit both signaling and endocytic proteins to these membrane plat - forms . Our present results demonstrate that , in the case of the EGFR , the lipid rafts are competent for recruitment of both effector signaling molecules and endocytic machinery . Our ﬁndings are in line with those of Stoddart et al . ( 2002 ) , who demonstrated a similar situation for CCP - mediated internal - ization of the BCR . Although , we do not provide evidence in our present study that the endocytic machinery recruited to CCPs is “active , ” Stoddart et al . ( 2002 ) could show preferen - tial recruitment of tyrosine phosphorylated clathrin to mem - brane rafts . In addition , these authors showed that src - de - pendent tyrosine phosphorylation of clathrin is a crucial event for the internalization of BCR ( Stoddart et al . , 2002 ) . Similarly , phosphorylation of clathrin has been shown to be important in the internalization of EGFR ( Wilde et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , it is likely that the recruitment of the internaliza - tion machinery shown in our study may involve “active” elements , such as phosphorylated clathrin . In addition , we show here that EGFR - internalizing CCPs form preferentially from GM1 - rich regions of the plasma membrane , whereas the nonsignaling TfR is randomly internalized through CCPs that form within or without GM1 - rich regions . Thus , our results are compatible with a scenario in which a plasma membrane receptor is simply internalized from the plasma membrane location ( be it a raft or not ) in which it shows competence for interaction with the endocytic machinery . Nonsignaling receptors that are constitutively internalized , such as the TfR or the LDLR , constantly expose endocytic signals and are therefore internalized simply as a function of this property . On the other hand , EGFR , which is internal - ized in a ligand - dependent manner , triggers the assembly of the endocytic machinery , and the formation of a coated pit , in the same location in which it is activated , i . e . , in a lipid raft . Membrane rafts are dynamic entities , which can diffuse ( Pralle et al . , 2000 ; Sprong et al . , 2001 ) and coalesce into larger C . Puri et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2714 and more stable structures in response to signaling ( Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Kusumi et al . , 2004 ; Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . Current thinking holds that in resting cells rafts are small ( possibly as small as 40 nm in diameter or even less , Prior et al . , 2003 ) and unstable ( or “reserve raft” ; Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Kusumi et al . , 2004 ; Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . On stimulation , these small unstable rafts are clustered , induc - ing larger and more stable rafts , which can in turn function as effective signaling platform ( or “receptor - cluster rafts” ; Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Kusumi et al . , 2004 ; Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . Of note , it is possible that many controversies , present in the literature about the “real size” of rafts , could be due to “unintentional” cross - linking of small “reserve rafts” in resting cells , which can be caused by a wide variety of experimental manipulation ( Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Kusumi et al . , 2004 ; Mayor and Rao , 2004 ) . A similar situation might apply to our present studies , as we detected rafts of similar size in both resting cells ( without Figure 7 . EGFR recruitment and clathrin - coated pit assembly in membrane rafts are not dependent on dose and temperature of epidermal growth factor treatment . ( A ) Double immunogold labeling of HeLa cells treated with CT - B - HRP for 20 (cid:6) at 0°C and stimulated with epidermal growth factor at 37°C for 2 min ( top panels , epidermal growth factor 1 . 5 ng / ml ; bottom panels epi - dermal growth factor 100 ng / ml ) . CT - B - HRP ( 10 nm ) and anti - EGFR ( 15 nm ) colo - calize within discrete regions of the plasma membrane ( PM ) , or within clathrin coated vesicles ( CV ) . Bar : ( right panels ) 0 . 21 (cid:2) m : ( top left ) 0 . 37 (cid:2) m ; ( bottom left ) 0 . 43 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Starved HeLa cells were stimulated for 2 min at 37°C with epidermal growth factor at 100 ng / ml ( (cid:5) EGF 100 ) , or 1 . 5 ng / ml ( (cid:5) EGF 1 . 5 ) , or mock - treated ( (cid:1) EGF ) and processed for isolation of DRMs , as described in Ma - terials and Methods , followed by analysis by immunoblot with the indicated antibodies ( bottom panel ) , or dot - blot ( top panel ) with CT - B / HRP to identify GM1 . Loading of lanes was as in Figure 1 . Membrane Rafts and EGFR Endocytosis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2715 EGF ) and in EGF - stimulated cells . Especially in unstimu - lated cells the size of rafts , as detected in our experiments , exceeded that of the “reserve rafts . ” The explanation for this likely resides in the use of ﬁxatives ( for EM procedures ) or of low temperature ( used to uncouple CCP formation from their internalization in many experiments ) , in that both con - ditions are known to cause coalescence of rafts ( Kusumi et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , most likely , our morphological analysis was performed in an “artifactual” situation , in which the size of rafts ( especially in the absence of physiological clustering agents , such as EGF ) was overestimated . We note , however , that , far from being a drawback , this actually represents a “useful artifact . ” Indeed , it would be difﬁcult to determine exactly whether or not a protein is enriched ( or more stably associated ) with rafts , at the morphological level , if rafts were to be detected as entities of 40 nm in diameter . Con - versely , our data clearly show that EGFR and endocytic proteins are enriched in rafts , upon EGF stimulation , and not in other regions of the plasma membrane , and that rafts are incorporated into EGFR - containing nascent - coated pits . Of note these morphological results are precisely conﬁrmed by independent biochemical approaches on DRMs . The above considerations , and the acceptance of the concept of a clear distinction between “reserve rafts” and “receptor - clus - ter rafts , ” should also help in rationalizing the outstanding issue of whether there is sufﬁcient membrane in a raft to form a CCP . In a small “reserve raft” this would certainly not be the case ( a CCP of 90 nm of diameter would require (cid:7) 2 . 5 (cid:2) 10 4 nm 2 of membrane , vs . (cid:7) 1 . 2 (cid:2) 10 3 nm 2 available in a 40 - nm - diameter raft ) . However , a larger stabilized “re - ceptor - cluster raft” would contain enough plasma mem - brane to form a pit ( (cid:7) 5 . 7 (cid:2) 10 4 nm 2 in a raft of 270 - nm diameter , such as those that we measured ) . We note inci - dentally , that the coalescence of rafts has also been invoked as the mechanism for the formation of caveolae ( Pralle et al . , 2000 ) , a canonical raft - based internalization organelle : a caveola has an average diameter of 60 nm , corresponding to a surface of 1 . 1 (cid:2) 10 4 nm 2 , about 10 times more then a single “reserve raft” could provide . In summary , our results show that an RTK can be inter - nalized from membrane rafts , via CCPs , supporting the notion that the signaling - and the internalization - competent domains on the plasma membrane are overlapping . This conclusion explains the lack of evidence identifying an “exit - raft - into - pit” signal for EGFR , at variance with the well - characterized “move - into - raft” signal ( Yamabhai and Anderson , 2002 ) . Consequently , we propose a scenario in which EGFR endocytosis is purely a signaling event , trig - gered by the kinase activity of the receptor , and as such takes place starting from the signaling - competent domain on the plasma membrane . It has not escaped our attention that if EGFR - containing CCPs were indeed to form starting from rafts , this might , in principle , blur the currently ac - cepted distinction between the clathrin - dependent , and the clathrin - independent / raft - dependent internalization path - ways . However , a clear distinction between “topology” and “mechanism” must be made . Our present results allow to draw conclusions only on topology , i . e . , that there is only one plasma membrane compartment in which different mo - lecular machineries are recruited , to execute diverse EGFR - activated functions . These machineries , from a combined analysis of our results and of existing literature , are i ) the “effector” machinery , needed to propagate the signal down - stream , ii ) the CCP machinery , and iii ) a still ill - deﬁned series of endocytic effectors needed for the nonclathrin raft - dependent pathway . Our results , therefore , do not implicate that rafts are mechanistically “needed” to execute the clath - rin pathway . Actually , this possibility is disfavored by the fact that the TfR , which is not enriched in rafts , is internal - ized through coated pits ( this study ) . In addition , cholester - ol - blocking agents , such as nystatin or ﬁlipin , although dis - rupting nonclathrin raft - dependent internalization , do not interfere with clathrin endocytosis ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Lisanti et al . , 1993 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) , also in the case of the EGFR ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . Although further investigation is inevitably warranted , our results clearly indicate that the focus should now be moved from a topological to a functional issue . In other words , the deﬁnition of what directs the EGFR to a clathrin or to a nonclathrin raft - dependent pathway should not rely on the understanding of what retains the receptor in rafts ( for the nonclathrin pathway ) , or of what causes the receptor to exit a raft and to move into a pit , but rather on the elucidation of which endocytic machinery is recruited to the raft - resident receptor , and under which conditions , to allow internalization through one or the other pathway . In this contention , we have recently demonstrated that receptor ubiquitination couples the EGFR preferentially to the non - clathrin raft pathway ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , we showed that the EGFR undergoes distinct posttransla - tional modiﬁcations and becomes committed to different internalization routes , as a function of ligand dose and re - ceptor activation . At low EGF concentrations , the EGFR is tyrosine phosphorylated , fully competent for signaling , not ubiquitinated and its is internalized through CCPs ( Sigis - mund et al . , 2005 ) . At high EGF concentrations , the EGFR becomes ubiquitinated and shows substantial endocytosis through the nonclathrin raft pathway ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . It is thus conceivable that different posttranslational modiﬁcations , tyrosine phosphorylation ( together with en - suing unmasking of in - cis endocytic signals ) on the one hand , and ubiquitination on the other , might direct the raft - resident receptor respectively to the clathrin or the non - clathrin raft pathway . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Tom Kirchhausen for critically reviewing the manuscript and Drs . Alberto Diaspro , Mario Faretta , Giuseppe Vicidomini , and Paolo Bi - anchini for help with the confocal analysis . This work was supported by grants from AIRC ( Italian Association for Cancer Research ) , Telethon Foun - dation , European Community ( VI Framework ) , MIUR ( Italian Ministry for University and Research ) and Human Science Frontier Program , to P . P . D . F . , and from AIRC , FIRC ( Italian Foundation for Cancer Research ) , MIUR , and Telethon Foundation ( GTF03001 ) to C . T . REFERENCES Abrami , L . , Liu , S . , Cosson , P . , Leppla , S . H . , and Van Der Goot , F . G . ( 2003 ) . Anthrax toxin triggers endocytosis of its receptor via a lipid raft - mediated clathrin - dependent process . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 321 – 328 . Anderson , R . G . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2002 ) . A role for lipid shells in targeting proteins to caveolae , rafts , and other lipid domains . Science 296 , 1821 – 1825 . Beck , K . A . , Chang , M . , Brodsky , F . M . , and Keen , J . H . ( 1992 ) . Clathrin assembly protein AP - 2 induces aggregation of membrane vesicles : a possible role for AP - 2 in endosome formation . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 787 – 796 . Benmerah , A . , Bayrou , M . , Cerf - Bensussan , N . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 1999 ) . Inhibition of clathrin - coated pit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1303 – 1311 . Benmerah , A . , Begue , B . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , and Cerf - Bensussan , N . ( 1996 ) . The ear of alpha - adaptin interacts with the COOH - terminal domain of the Eps 15 protein . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 12111 – 12116 . Biedi , C . , Panetta , D . , Segat , D . , Cordera , R . , and Maggi , D . ( 2003 ) . Speciﬁcity of insulin - like growth factor I and insulin on Shc phosphorylation and Grb2 recruitment in caveolae . Endocrinology 144 , 5497 – 5503 . C . Puri et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2716 Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , and Wakeham , D . E . ( 2001 ) . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 . Brown , C . M . , and Petersen , N . O . ( 1998 ) . An image correlation analysis of the distribution of clathrin associated adaptor protein ( AP - 2 ) at the plasma mem - brane . J . Cell Sci . 111 ( Pt 2 ) , 271 – 281 . Brown , D . A . , and Rose , J . K . ( 1992 ) . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 , 533 – 544 . Carpenter , G . ( 2000 ) . The EGF receptor : a nexus for trafﬁcking and signaling . Bioessays 22 , 697 – 707 . Cheng , P . C . , Dykstra , M . L . , Mitchell , R . N . , and Pierce , S . K . ( 1999 ) . A role for lipid rafts in B cell antigen receptor signaling and antigen targeting . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1549 – 1560 . Confalonieri , S . , Salcini , A . E . , Puri , C . , Tacchetti , C . , and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2000 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of Eps15 is required for ligand - regulated , but not constitutive , endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 905 – 912 . Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . Cunningham , O . , Andolfo , A . , Santovito , M . L . , Iuzzolino , L . , Blasi , F . , and Sidenius , N . ( 2003 ) . Dimerization controls the lipid raft partitioning of uPAR / CD87 and regulates its biological functions . EMBO J . 22 , 5994 – 6003 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . del Pozo , M . A . , Alderson , N . B . , Kiosses , W . B . , Chiang , H . H . , Anderson , R . G . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Integrins regulate Rac targeting by inter - nalization of membrane domains . Science 303 , 839 – 842 . Di Guglielmo , G . M . , Le Roy , C . , Goodfellow , A . F . , and Wrana , J . L . ( 2003 ) . Distinct endocytic pathways regulate TGF - beta receptor signalling and turn - over . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 410 – 421 . Drevot , P . , Langlet , C . , Guo , X . J . , Bernard , A . M . , Colard , O . , Chauvin , J . P . , Lasserre , R . , and He , H . T . ( 2002 ) . TCR signal initiation machinery is pre - assembled and activated in a subset of membrane rafts . EMBO J . 21 , 1899 – 1908 . Felberbaum - Corti , M . , Van Der Goot , F . G . , and Gruenberg , J . ( 2003 ) . Sliding doors : clathrin - coated pits or caveolae ? Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 382 – 384 . Gingras , D . , Gauthier , F . , Lamy , S . , Desrosiers , R . R . , and Beliveau , R . ( 1998 ) . Localization of RhoA GTPase to endothelial caveolae - enriched membrane domains . Biochem Biophys . Res . Commun . 247 , 888 – 893 . Giurisato , E . , McIntosh , D . P . , Tassi , M . , Gamberucci , A . , and Benedetti , A . ( 2003 ) . T cell receptor can be recruited to a subset of plasma membrane rafts , independently of cell signaling and attendantly to raft clustering . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 6771 – 6778 . Harder , T . , and Engelhardt , K . R . ( 2004 ) . Membrane domains in lympho - cytes—from lipid rafts to protein scaffolds . Trafﬁc 5 , 265 – 275 . Harder , T . , Scheiffele , P . , Verkade , P . , and Simons , K . ( 1998 ) . Lipid domain structure of the plasma membrane revealed by patching of membrane com - ponents . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 929 – 942 . Hillman , G . M . , and Schlessinger , J . ( 1982 ) . Lateral diffusion of EGF com - plexed to its surface receptors does not account for the thermal sensitivity of patch formation and endocytosis . Biochemistry 21 , 1667 – 1672 . Huang , F . , Khvorova , A . , Marshall , W . , and Sorkin , A . ( 2004 ) . Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of EGF receptor by RNA interference . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 16657 – 16661 . Iwabuchi , K . , Handa , K . , and Hakomori , S . ( 1998 ) . Separation of “glycosphin - golipid signaling domain” from caveolin - containing membrane fraction in mouse melanoma B16 cells and its role in cell adhesion coupled with signal - ing . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 33766 – 33773 . Jacobson , K . , and Dietrich , C . ( 1999 ) . Looking at lipid rafts ? Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 87 – 91 . Jiang , X . , Huang , F . , Marusyk , A . , and Sorkin , A . ( 2003 ) . Grb2 regulates internalization of EGF receptors through clathrin - coated pits . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 858 – 870 . Johannes , L . , and Lamaze , C . ( 2002 ) . Clathrin - dependent or not : is it still the question ? Trafﬁc 3 , 443 – 451 . Jorissen , R . N . , Walker , F . , Pouliot , N . , Garrett , T . P . , Ward , C . W . , and Burgess , A . W . ( 2003 ) . EGF receptor : mechanisms of activation and signalling . Exp . Cell Res . 284 , 31 – 53 . Kindzelskii , A . L . , Sitrin , R . G . , and Petty , H . R . ( 2004 ) . Cutting edge : optical microspectrophotometry supports the existence of gel phase lipid rafts at the lamellipodium of neutrophils : apparent role in calcium signaling . J . Immunol . 172 , 4681 – 4685 . Krauss , K . , and Altevogt , P . ( 1999 ) . Integrin leukocyte function - associated antigen - 1 - mediated cell binding can be activated by clustering of membrane rafts . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 36921 – 36927 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1999a ) . Membrane microdomains and caveolae . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 424 – 431 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1999b ) . Membrane microdomains and caveolae . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 424 – 431 . Kusumi , A . , Koyama - Honda , I . , and Suzuki , K . ( 2004 ) . Molecular dynamics and interactions for creation of stimulation - induced stabilized rafts from small unstable steady - state rafts . Trafﬁc 5 , 213 – 230 . Lamaze , C . , Dujeancourt , A . , Baba , T . , Lo , C . G . , Benmerah , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2001 ) . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . Lipardi , C . , Nitsch , L . , and Zurzolo , C . ( 2000 ) . Detergent - insoluble GPI - anchored proteins are apically sorted in ﬁscher rat thyroid cells , but interfer - ence with cholesterol or sphingolipids differentially affects detergent insolu - bility and apical sorting . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 531 – 542 . Lisanti , M . P . , Tang , Z . L . , and Sargiacomo , M . ( 1993 ) . Caveolin forms a hetero - oligomeric protein complex that interacts with an apical GPI - linked protein : implications for the biogenesis of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 595 – 604 . Matveev , S . V . , and Smart , E . J . ( 2002 ) . Heterologous desensitization of EGF receptors and platelet - derived growth factor receptors by sequestration in caveolae . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C935 – C946 . Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 2002 ) . Plasma membrane microdomains . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 483 – 487 . Mayor , S . , and Rao , M . ( 2004 ) . Rafts : scale - dependent , active lipid organiza - tion at the cell surface . Trafﬁc 5 , 231 – 240 . McPherson , P . S . , Kay , B . K . , and Hussain , N . K . ( 2001 ) . Signaling on the endocytic pathway . Trafﬁc 2 , 375 – 384 . Michaely , P . A . , Mineo , C . , Ying , Y . S . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1999 ) . Polarized distribution of endogenous Rac1 and RhoA at the cell surface . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 21430 – 21436 . Miljan , E . A . , and Bremer , E . G . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of growth factor receptors by gangliosides . Sci . STKE 2002 , RE15 . Mineo , C . , Gill , G . N . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1999 ) . Regulated migration of EGF receptor from caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 30636 – 30643 . Mobius , W . , Herzog , V . , Sandhoff , K . , and Schwarzmann , G . ( 1999 ) . Intracel - lular distribution of a biotin - labeled ganglioside , GM1 , by immunoelectron microscopy after endocytosis in ﬁbroblasts . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 47 , 1005 – 1014 . Moore , M . S . , Mahaffey , D . T . , Brodsky , F . M . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1987 ) . Assembly of clathrin - coated pits onto puriﬁed plasma membranes . Science 236 , 558 – 563 . Nabi , I . R . , and Le , P . U . ( 2003 ) . Caveolae / raft - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 673 – 677 . Nichols , B . J . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2001 ) . Endocytosis without clathrin coats . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 406 – 412 . Parton , R . G . ( 1994 ) . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides ; GM1 is concentrated in caveolae . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 , 155 – 166 . Parton , R . G . , and Simons , K . ( 1995 ) . Digging into caveolae . Science 269 , 1398 – 1399 . Pierce , S . K . ( 2002 ) . Lipid rafts and B - cell activation . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 2 , 96 – 105 . Pike , L . J . , and Casey , L . ( 2002 ) . Cholesterol levels modulate EGF receptor - mediated signaling by altering receptor function and trafﬁcking . Biochemistry 41 , 10315 – 10322 . Pralle , A . , Keller , P . , Florin , E . L . , Simons , K . , and Horber , J . K . ( 2000 ) . Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma mem - brane of mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 997 – 1008 . Prior , I . A . , Muncke , C . , Parton , R . G . , and Hancock , J . F . ( 2003 ) . Direct visualization of Ras proteins in spatially distinct cell surface microdomains . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 165 – 170 . Rabouille , C . ( 1999 ) . Quantitative aspects of immunogold labeling in embed - ded and nonembedded sections . Methods Mol . Biol . 117 , 125 – 144 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Taha , B . W . , Lemeer , S . , Benmerah , A . , and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) . The AP - 2 complex is excluded from the dynamic population of plasma membrane - associated clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 47357 – 47360 . Membrane Rafts and EGFR Endocytosis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2717 Ridyard , M . S . , and Robbins , S . M . ( 2003 ) . Fibroblast growth factor - 2 - induced signaling through lipid raft - associated ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor sub - strate 2 ( FRS2 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 13803 – 13809 . Ringerike , T . , Blystad , F . D . , Levy , F . O . , Madshus , I . H . , and Stang , E . ( 2002 ) . Cholesterol is important in control of EGF receptor kinase activity but EGF receptors are not concentrated in caveolae . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 1331 – 1340 . Rothberg , K . G . , Heuser , J . E . , Donzell , W . C . , Ying , Y . S . , Glenney , J . R . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1992 ) . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 , 673 – 682 . Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2002 ) . Membrane trafﬁc exploited by protein toxins . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 1 – 24 . Schlessinger , J . , Schreiber , A . B . , Levi , A . , Lax , I . , Libermann , T . , and Yarden , Y . ( 1983 ) . Regulation of cell proliferation by EGF . CRC Crit . Rev . Biochem . 14 , 93 – 111 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , Pinney , E . , and Allard , J . ( 1994 ) . Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1217 – 1232 . Schuck , S . , Honsho , M . , Ekroos , K . , Shevchenko , A . , and Simons , K . ( 2003 ) . Resistance of cell membranes to different detergents . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 5795 – 5800 . Sigismund , S . , Voelk , T . , Puri , C . , Maspero , E . , Tacchetti , C . , Transidico , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Polo , S . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiqui - tinated cargos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2760 – 2765 . Simons , K . , and Ikonen , E . ( 1997 ) . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 . Simons , K . , and Toomre , D . ( 2000 ) . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 1 , 31 – 39 . Slepnev , V . I . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2000 ) . Accessory factors in clathrin - depen - dent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 1 , 161 – 172 . Smart , E . J . , Graf , G . A . , McNiven , M . A . , Sessa , W . C . , Engelman , J . A . , Scherer , P . E . , Okamoto , T . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Caveolins , liquid - ordered domains , and signal transduction . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7289 – 7304 . Smythe , E . ( 2002 ) . Regulating the clathrin - coated vesicle cycle by AP2 subunit phosphorylation . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 352 – 354 . Sprong , H . , van der Sluijs , P . , and van Meer , G . ( 2001 ) . How proteins move lipids and lipids move proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2 , 504 – 513 . Stoddart , A . , Dykstra , M . L . , Brown , B . K . , Song , W . , Pierce , S . K . , and Brodsky , F . M . ( 2002 ) . Lipid rafts unite signaling cascades with clathrin to regulate BCR internalization . Immunity 17 , 451 – 462 . Tebar , F . , Sorkina , T . , Sorkin , A . , Ericsson , M . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 1996 ) . Eps15 is a component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles and is located at the rim of coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 28727 – 28730 . Torrisi , M . R . , Lotti , L . V . , Belleudi , F . , Gradini , R . , Salcini , A . E . , Confalonieri , S . , Pelicci , P . G . , and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 1999 ) . Eps15 is recruited to the plasma membrane upon EGF receptor activation and localizes to components of the endocytic pathway during receptor internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 417 – 434 . van Delft , S . , Schumacher , C . , Hage , W . , Verkleij , A . J . , and van Bergen en Henegouwen , P . M . ( 1997 ) . Association and colocalization of Eps15 with adaptor protein - 2 and clathrin [ published erratum appears in J . Cell Biol . 1997 Apr 7 ; 137 ( 1 ) : 259 ] . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 811 – 821 . Waugh , M . G . , Lawson , D . , and Hsuan , J . J . ( 1999 ) . EGF receptor activation is localized within low - buoyant density , non - caveolar membrane domains . Bio - chem . J . 337 , 591 – 597 . Wilde , A . , Beattie , E . C . , Lem , L . , Riethof , D . A . , Liu , S . H . , Mobley , W . C . , Soriano , P . , and Brodsky , F . M . ( 1999 ) . EGF receptor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphorylation of clathrin , inﬂuencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake . Cell 96 , 677 – 687 . Yamabhai , M . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 2002 ) . Second cysteine - rich region of epidermal growth ; Factor receptor contains targeting information for caveo - lae / rafts . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 24843 – 24846 . Yang , N . , Huang , Y . , Jiang , J . , and Frank , S . J . ( 2004 ) . Caveolar and lipid raft localization of the growth hormone receptor and its signaling elements : impact on growth hormone signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20898 – 20905 . C . Puri et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2718