Papers CHI 2000 • 1 - 6 APRIL 2000 Joking , storytelling , artsharing , expressing affection : A field trial of how children and their social network communicate with digital images in leisure time Anu M ~ ikelli Helsinki University of Technology P . O . Box 5400 02015 HUT , Finland + 358 9 451 5041 ahmakela @ cc . hut . fi Verena Giller Manfred Tscheligi Reinhard Sefelin CURE & University of Vienna Lenaugasse 2 / 8 A - 1080 Vienna , Austria + 43 1 4277 38452 cure @ cure . at ABSTRACT Increasing use of mobile phones in leisure and communication with digital images are important and current issues in the field of telecommunications . However , little is known about how images would be used in leisure related communication . According to our experience field trials are the best way of studying it . In this paper , we describe a field ' trial case study of leisure related communication with digital images . Moreover , we discuss the advantages of conducting field trials as part of product concept design process . Keywords Product concept design , field trial , prototypes , wireless communication , digital images , children , family , leisure . INTRODUCTION People have to send and receive a huge number of messages and information to handle daily life duties like picking up children from school but also to communicate emotions and feeling to loved ones and relatives . How are these goals performed by sending digital images ? What kinds of changes will occur in people ' s communication behavior if still images carry the information of their children ' s , friends ' etc . current activities ? How is the perception of images changing ? What kinds of recommendations can be given for designing mobile applications for communicating with digital images in leisure ? Questions like these have been approached by two field trials with portable prototypes that enabled users to send and receive digital images . The focus of the field trials in Vienna ( Austria ) and Helsinki ( Finland ) was on the potential of communication with digital images over a wireless network in the everyday life of children and their Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or pat1 of this work for personal or classroonl tJse is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed thr profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI ' 2000 The Hague , Amsterdam Copyright ACM 2000 1 - 58113 - 216 - 6 / 00 / 04 . . . $ 5 . 00 social network . The main goal of these trails was to discover typical use situations of digital images in communication among an extended family , and a peer group . Major findings and results of these field trials presented in this paper were : • Images were mainly used for joking , expressing emotions and creating art • Users ' perception of images changed from memory support to the expression of current activities and feelings • Users wanted and used large sets of picture editing possibilities • The usage of images for communication purposes depended on the user ' s willingness to develop a picture language with the receiver • Images were not enough for functional communication and users did not want to carry several mobile communication devices with them . Therefore , images should provide possibility for annotation with text or audio • Further design recommendations for further development of devices for sending of digital images could be given In this paper our field trials will be described in detail . Secondly , the importance of conducting field trials as a part of user - centered product concept design process will be pointed out . The field trials were a part of product concept design done in Maypole . Maypole was a two - year European Project ( 1997 - 1999 ) within the European Initiative on Intelligent Information Interfaces ( 13 ) . The other Maypole partners were IDEO Europe , Meru Research , Netherlands Design Institute and Nokia Research Center ( see more [ 16 ] ) . 548 ~ - k . ~ llJll ~ I = iZ 2OOO CHI Letters volume 2 • issue 1 CHI 2000 • 1 - 6 APRIL 2000 Papers Today ' s Communication with Digital Images There is not much knowledge on designing applications for leisure related or informal communication . Most of the research on communication in the HCI community has concentrated on video - mediated communication at work ( e . g . , 17 , 13 ) . The focus has been on task - related communication , even though there is evidence 1 that task - unrelated " goofing around " happens and is needed at adults ' workplaces , too . The interest in task - unrelated aspects of interaction is increasing . An example is the workshop , " Towards a Framework of Interaction and Experience As It Relates to Product Design " 10 , at UPA ' 99 . There is also not much knowledge on the use of still images in communication . However , researchers and designers are more and more interested in digital cameras in consumer use . For example , Frohlich and Tallyn reported 11 a field trial of a digital camera with audio capture . They wanted to understand why and how people would record sound with their digital cameras . In our own studies done before prototype development we found out that leisure related communication with images is done more and more by publishing digital pictures on WWW . Analyzing those web - sites helped to generate ideas that were used in the following design phase of the prototypes . Field Trials A huge number of products are brought to the market with very little idea of how people will use them or whether they will use them at all . Of course , often usability tests with user involvement are made beforehand but they are , nevertheless , not useful to find answers to questions like , " How , how long , in which kind of situations etc . will users use the product and which kind of improvements seem to be reasonable for their purposes ? " Etnographic user research methods , such as Contextual Inquiry 2 and others see e . g . 18 , used at the beginning of the development process can give ideas for new concepts by describing how current technologies are used and what kind of values users have . They can not , however , forecast what completely new technology would mean to the users . The designer cannot really understand the role and the meaning of a new product concept in the user ' s life until she / he sees how the user uses the product concept in his / her own environment . For example , when mobile phones became popular in Finland developers and designers were asking whether Short Message Service ( SMS ) is needed at all , and who would use it . They expected that if it was needed it would be suitable mainly for professional use . Today , the service is very popular among many user groups including teenagers . It is used both during the office hours and leisure . In work related environments some essential findings about so called Group Support Systems ( GSS ) could be discovered by field studies 1 , 8 , 12 . However , also those studies were carried out at a stage in the design process where redesign and essential changes of functions would initiate much costs and effort . Unfortunately there seems to be rather little enthusiasm to carry out field trials to test products for leisure time communication in the field . The research is mainly limited to the investigation of network communities or " electronic villages " , like Blacksburg 4 , 5 , and to studies on the products used by people with special needs 15 . Also some exploitation of new technologies ( like digital TV , wireless LAN etc . ) has been done but the focus has mainly been on the technical realization . Product managers often try to avoid field testing of prototypes because they worry about increasing production costs and loss of time . In the following chapters we will describe a case study where " medium - fidelity " prototypes were tested in the field . The experiences we gained is hoped to be an impulse for researchers , designers , and managers working in the field of product concept design not to wait until it is too late but to start as soon as possible with the realization of tests with real users in their own environments . METHODS Development of the Concept of the Prototypes The goal of the project was the development of communication devices for children and their social networks . During the project we conducted several user studies both in Austria and Finland . Our main user group was children but members of their social network were also included in the studies . We started with focus groups and interviews that were held in the user ' s own environments . Also photo diaries and field trials of antecedent products were used to understand everyday communication of children and their social network . Then , several different product concepts were generated and evaluated by users in laboratory settings . The concepts were presented to the users with blank models , screen demos and in some cases with storyboards ( see more 14 ) . Our main discoveries from initial user studies and user evaluations done before starting the prototypes were that : • Socializing was the most important issue in leisure related communication among children . Socializing refers to a vital social activity that is not necessarily task - related . Social contacts to other individuums can be searched for emotional reasons as well 9 . • Parents ' need to communicate with their children was very functional on the one hand ( who picks up kids , where ) but has on the other hand very much to do 7 . ' ~ , ~ - - / , ~ / T / , , ~ / : gE J " S t - ~ . : : / ~ _ ~ 549 Papers CHI 2000 • 1 - 6 APRIL 2000 with trust between children and their parents . Most parents were very interested to know what their children were doing without giving them the feeling of being watched all the time . • There was a need for an application that supports group communication rather than one to one communication . • Communication with images could enable socializing better than audio or text based communication . On the basis of these findings one of the generated concepts was chosen for prototyping which enabled users to send , receive and edit digital images . Tested Prototypes The prototypes ( see Figure 1 ) which were tested during the field trials offered mainly three functions to the users : * Taking and saving of digital images . • Editing of images ; Users could change the appearance of the taken and received messages . The prototype included functions for making short , maximum 5 pictures long series ( Figure 3 and 5 ) which were enhanced with transition and sound effects . Pictures also could be manipulated by blending two pictures into one , and changing the colors of the new picture . • Sending and receiving of digital pictures ( jpg - files ) wirelessly ( over GSM ) : Images could be sent to all participants of the field studies , and every participant was able to receive pictures from the other participants . The device was a prototype and had two parts : the interface module and laptop in a rucksack to guarantee maximum portability of the prototypes ( Figure 1 and 2 ) . The functions of the prototypes were limited to pictures to ensure that the research focus keeps on communication with digital images . The possibility to use text or audio would have biased the results . It would not have been possible for researchers to fully understand the communicative potential of digital images by comparison with other media like mobile phones , pagers etc . Every sent picture was saved in a log - file on a server , which gave us the possibility to observe participants ' communication real time . This also enabled us to detect technical problems immediately , and to ask more concrete and contextual questions during the interviews . Figure 1 : The prototype Subjects The field trials were conducted at two different test sites in Helsinki and Vienna . Since there was only four weeks time to conduct the trial in both sites it was thought that it is better to have test users who were familiar with each other before the trial , and who were motivated to explore the prototypes . Two very different groups participated in the trial : a group of four chummy , Finnish boys ( 12 years old ) and a family in Vienna . The Finnish boys lived in the same neighborhood . They were classmates , and had common hobbies . The Viennese participants were two parents with four children ( two boys and two girls , 8 - 15 years old ) living together at the same place and their 70 year old grandmother living in a very different area of Vienna . Figure 2 : Finnish Boy using the prototype The prototypes were handed out to the users at both test sites for four weeks which was enough to test the usage in typical communication situations . Goal of the Field Trials As mentioned before , the aim of the field trials was to understand how digital images would be used by children and their social network in leisure related communication . The research questions of the field trials were the following : 1 . How is the perception of taking pictures changing ? 2 . What is the key motivator to use the device ? 3 . In which communication situations do users use images ? 4 . What is the special advantage for a user to have the possibility of sending images instead of text or audio messages ? 550 ~ - k . ~ ll ~ l C : HX 2 0 0 0 CHI 2000 • 1 - 6 APRIL 2000 Papers 5 . What do users want to add to their images , what do they want to remove or hide ? 6 . Which kind of pictorial communication is needed in a family and in a peer group , and what are the differences between generations ? User Research Methods The users were selected according to two criteria . At least some of them should use ( have used ) mobile communication devices before and they should be interested in figuring out new possibilities of communication . Those criteria should guarantee that subjects are capable of making subjective comparisons to mobile phones and similar devices and that they do not loose interest if there are any kind of technical problems . To ascertain if those requirements were met and to explore current communication behavior of test persons before starting the field trials intensive interviews were carried out with all participants of the field studies . After the prototypes were handed out and a usage introduction had been given to the participants , users were interviewed weekly in their own environment . These interviews were carried out partially as group and partially as single interviews whereas especially children had to be separated from their parents to guarantee valid and true answers . The interviews during the trials were based on natural user experiences , and therefore they were very concrete and contextual . That means that users could freely tell their experiences and that they were encouraged to make their own recommendations about functions they wanted to be included and which they felt were superfluous . Additionally they were motivated to report situations of usage and to detected changes in their communication behavior . The log kept from sent images in the server during the trials turned out to be a good source of user data . Researchers could understand the content of the images much better after going through them with the users . Typical use situations , and specifically advantages and drawbacks of the usage of images for the typical daily life communication were reported . MAIN RESULTS Users ' Subjective Attitudes towards Prototypes The user interface and the appearance of the prototypes were designed mainly for children older than 10 years . The design was successful in the sense that the children at that age liked the prototype and were enthusiastic to explore its possibilities . However , adults and younger children had difficulties in learning to use the prototype , and the adults thought that the design was childish . Furthermore , especially during the first days of field trials we recognised that prototypes were seen as expensive equipment that might get broken easily . This problem often arises and researchers have to consider these anxieties very carefully and develop strategies to avoid them . In our case letters guaranteeing users that they will not be held responsible for any damages and that any hardware troubles will be fixed immediately helped a lot . Older and younger ( children younger than 10 years old ) users definitely needed more help during the first days . So researchers had to make sure that all features and functions of the prototypes were understood by those users and again that their anxieties of making mistakes or of initiating any damages were relieved . During field trials all users had fun using the prototypes and also the number of images sent during the field trials did not decrease after some weeks . In both cases ( Vienna and Helsinki ) the number increased over the first two weeks and then kept stable until the end of field trials . Meaning of Photographs Changed Most of the children thought that photographing and photo albums were for older people , which is consistent with the results of Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg - Halton 6 . In their study on the most cherished objects in the home for the youngest generation photographs were the sixteenth category in order of frequency , for grandparents they were the first . Photographs were the primary tools for preserving the memory of one ' s close relations among older respondents of their study . Our field trials showed that the meaning of photographs can change among both children and older people at least when taking pictures is cheap and instant . Children started to use digital images in a completely different way than they had used traditional photographs . In general , the content of their images seemed to be pretty much like what they used to draw by themselves when not having a device for taking and editing images easily . The camera was not any more used only for capturing a special event but for illustrating everyday items and people in a funny way and for creating stories . Also the participating grandmother discovered new possibilities in photographing during the field trial in Vienna . First , she started to make series of images she had taken from her everyday items at home but later she worked mainly with the blend mode , which enabled the user to combine two pictures and created artistic images . For her the experience that images are still editable after the trigger was pressed was completely new . She spent much time ( sometimes more than two hours ) with editing her images to guarantee that they met her own artistic requirements . Key Motivator for Different User Groups The motivation to use the prototype differed very much between the user groups participating in our field studies . Whereas for children having fun before and after school with the device itself and the potential usage of it for further games was most important , for the grandmother the key motivator was the possibility of sharing feelings . ~ k $ 1Ull 551 Papers CHI 2000 • 1 - 6 APRIl . 2000 For parents who did not send as much images as the other user groups receiving of pictures that told them about current activities of their relatives was the most substantial part of the prototype ' s potential . During the field studies two major variables emerged as good predictors for using digital images for intra family communication : • Availability of time • Family orientation of communication The following Table 1 shows how those two variables were distributed among our four user groups . Time Grandparents YES Parents NO Younger Children YES ( < 10 years ) Older Children YES ( > 10 years ) Family oriented communication YES YES YES NO Table 1 . Variables predicting the intra family usage of the tested prototype for our four user groups . Note that also participants who did not meet both of those requirements still were very interested in at least receiving images for sharing other family members ' life and moods . The number of messages the children older than ten years sent to their parents was smaller than younger ones sent . This does not mean that the older children were less interested in using digital images in communication . The studies with the Finnish boy group showed that children also older than ten years sent a huge number of images to peer groups using their own image languages and codes . Their parents who often did not have the knowledge about the context of certain images would not have understood many of those images . For the parents who suffered from lack of time the possibility of receiving images and getting information about what their children currently were doing was very important . However , often they refused to use the prototype because composing meaningful images just was much more time consuming than using the mobile phone for making appointments or to make sure that everything is all right with their children . Use Situations Situation I : creating stories The children loved to create stories with series of images . The stories were fictional . They were used to joke or illustrate movie - like scenes . Creating a story was very interactive in a way that the children set up the scene for a story by themselves . They created the settings ( e . g . blood or fried chicken on a table ) and acted the situations by themselves ( e . g . the murder scene in Figure 3 ) . Most of the images used in storytelling were not edited afterwards but the Finnish boys wished that they could have had more editing possibilities , such as changing the background . Manipulation of the background would have allowed them to create easily new contexts for a story . The image stories required a lot of work , and the children were proud of their masterpieces . They shared the stories with others by showing them directly from the screen or by sending them over the network . Figure 3 . A murder scene created by two of the Finnish boys . The small picture on the left corner is the symbol of the sender . Situation 2 : expressing spirituality The possibility of image editing was a new and exiting experience for the grandmother . She could create art ( Figure 4 ) with the prototype and shared her creations with her grandchildren . " Now I understand my grandchildren playing with computer toys all the time " , she said . She wished even more ways of image editing . Figure 4 . Images created by the grandmother using the implemented modes for picture editing Situation 3 : expressing affection For the boys in Finland pets but also girls they liked from their school ( Figure 5 ) were one of their main photographing motives . Those pictures are a good example for images that can only be understood with knowledge about their special context . For us as neutral observers they were just pictures from dogs or girls . However , for the receivers they contained a big message . Situation 4 : increasing or maintaining group cohesion One of the purposes of sending images seemed to be also to maintain attractiveness of a group or attraction between group members . For example , a boy who was not an active member of the Finnish boy group when the trial 552 ~ ' k ~ ll ~ l ~ ' P = fZ I = ~ OOO CHI 2000 • I - 6 APRIL 2000 Papers started sent a lot of pictures of himself and his dog at home to the others . He also received images from other boys , and could in that way participate more in their activities . At the end of the field trial the boy had become much closer with the other boys . Also the grandmother of the family in Vienna sent images for participating in the family ' s everyday life remotely . For her the possibility of sending artistic images and images from her dog to her children and grandchildren gave her the possibility to share her life with her family without being obtrusive . Situation 5 : supporting conversation Toward the end of the field trial the boys in Helsinki additionally invented more utility uses for the device . For example , a boy needed to describe a feature of a computer game to his friend on the phone . It was difficult , and therefore , he sent a picture of the computer screen and used it as a tool of collaboration . Figure 5 . Expressing affection with a series of images Images vs . Text or Voice Messages Users used images mainly for expressing emotions , moods and humor , and for telling stories and sharing self - made art . There was hardly any usage of images for functional reasons like the arrangement of meeting points or activities etc . The reason for this is rather simple : The composition of an image which would be understood undoubtedly needed much more time than an ordinary phone call or SMS . The special language , which was used by children for communicating activities and moods , is not precise enough to guarantee clear and understandable messages . Moreover , in interviews children also said that most of their appointments are made at school and via face to face communication . Therefore their need for remote functional communication among each other is fairly small . Field studies clearly showed that images are only useful if the receiver has a clear understanding of the sender ' s daily life and the context in which the image was sent . To be sure : An image can contain much more information than a voice or text message . Nevertheless , each message must be translated by the receiver according to certain rules . In the case of text or voice messages the receivers ' " linguistic competence " [ 7 ] allows them to give meaning to other ' s " linguistic performance " . In the case of image messages senders and receivers have to produce rules of their own . However , that also means that people not belonging to the same peer group have no possibility to understand image messages or to send ones . Note that the necessity to develop a language of one ' s own also makes image communication interesting and playful . So for boys a picture of a certain girl is a clear message whereas for their parents it means almost nothing . This dealing with a secret language also encouraged the grandmother to send her artistical masterpieces and encouraged her grandchildren to uncover the mystery included and made them call her to find out more about those images . Additionally we should not forget that linguistic conventions are developing rapidly . Some years ago " : o ) " was not understood by anybody . Nowadays it is a generally agreed convention to mark nonserious sentences . The future progress of communication with digital images in leisure time will show if such a commonly accepted convention will also arise for the sending and receiving of images . For the development of a digital image communication product , nevertheless , the need to provide the possibility of annotation with a text or voice message seems unavoidable . Since images definitely are not good for the transmission of functional messages and since users ( also children ) are not willing to carry more than one wireless communication device with them the additional functions for text and voice messages will be essential . Communication with Digital Images in Family Settings In typical family settings the main incentive for communication using communication devices are functional reasons . However , also the family participating in our field trials reported typical socializing ( non - functional communication ) activities before the field studies started . However , there are rather big differences between family members concerning their needs for communication and for socializing . Sharing things with family was more important for the grandmother , the parents and the children under ten years than for the children older than ten years who were more interested in peer group values and rules . Note that for the parents , who tend to be very busy , receiving images was much more important than sending . Especially for the grandmother and the parents received images were a big chance for coming a step nearer to their children and for overcoming the barriers between generations . So e . g . during one interview the mother pointed out that she often do not have the chance to join one of her children at certain events like sport competitions etc . and that she would be extremely happy # ~ ' 1 ~ ~ - - k , ~ l ~ 553 Papers CHI 2000 • 1 - 6 APRIL 2000 to see how her child is doing at the moment . " It just would be great to see that he / she is happy " , she said . However the problem of how to encourage children to send images to their parents respectively grandparents still seems to be unsolved . Especially this problem could occur after some time of usage and habituation when the device isn ' t that cool and new anymore . The parents ' competence of solving this problem will depend on their flexibility to adopt to their children ' s image language or at least to a part of it . Nevertheless , experiences made during the field trials show that children ' s willingness to communicate with their parents e . g . by sending pictures of their current activities is much bigger than their willingness to call them . Firstly , using images it is much easier to conceal to whom one is communicating with . ( For children older than ten sometimes it is painful to contact parents during peer group activities ) . Secondly , children can control the information they are sending better and without having the feeling that they are cheating . Annoying questions like " Who is with you ? " , " Are you wearing your pullover " etc . are almost impossible to ask with images . To be sure , communication with digital images never will replace other kinds of communication means completely . It just can be a kind of completion . During the field trials typical functional communication like the request to be picked up was never done by using images , because images are too ambiguous , and the effort of production and translation too big . Design Recommendations One of the major goals of the field trials was to provide recommendations for further design of devices for communication with digital images in leisure related activities . According to the users who participated in the field trials the devices should enable users to : • Create series of images . • Edit images in various ways . The challenge is to design the interaction so that the user can edit pictures on a relative small screen as directly as possible . • Annotate image message with text or / and audio . • Store and print images . • Send and receive images also with fixed applications at home or office . Currently , web - based applications are preferred . • Share images both via wireless network and from screen . Sharing from a screen requires that the screen can be viewed from several angles . CONCLUSIONS Field trials were useful The field trials helped us to understand the possibilities of the product concept much better than any other user research we did before . On the basis of previous user studies we knew that digital images would possibly support socialization , and children enjoyed editing pictures but we did not know in which kind of situations the children and their social network would use digital images in communication . Before starting to build the prototypes the product concept was tested in the laboratory settings both in Vienna and Helsinki . The concept was presented to a pair of users with help of a blank model and screen demo . The laboratory tests gave some support for the concept but did not really give understanding on how the users would use it in their everyday life . In field trials the concept is embedded in the user ' s behavioral patterns or it creates new patterns , which is something that blank models , storyboards , and demos can only try to simulate . In our case the fact that users refused to send functional messages for the handling of typical daily life duties exemplifies that field trials are irreplaceable . Only the observation during users ' typical daily life actions showed that their answers given during user studies beforehand are not trustworthy since they just couldn ' t imagine the actual time pressure during such situations . Therefore , field trials are an important part of product concept design process . However , more research is needed on how long trials should last in order to get rid of the " honey - moon effect " of introducing new technology into the users ' life . Moreover , more case studies are needed on conducting field studies as part of product concept development processes in industry . Potentials of Communication with Digital Images The field trial results suggest that the concept of wireless communication with digital images has great possibilities in consumer markets . Already during four weeks of trial the users discovered their own ways of using the prototypes . Moreover , the usage was not occasional but happened as part of everyday patterns ( such as socializing with friends before and after school ) , or it created new patterns ( such as creating art ) . The meaning of photographing changed during the trials . Digital images were not used as memories of past events or relationships but as tools for creating playful stories , expressing affection , and creating art . The users clearly wanted to have possibility to create stories with series of images . They also liked to edit and annotate images before sending them . Sometimes the images were not sent but shared with others on the screen , which requires special qualities from the product . Some of the images became so precious that users wanted to have them stored or printed because they were piece of art or picture of someone special . Moreover , not always the mobile device was the best application to use in family settings . 554 ~ k . ~ C - I = IX ; = ' tDOtlD CHI 2000 * 1 - 6 APRIL 2000 Papers Therefore , the device should be interoperable with other everyday applications . These field trials focused on leisure . The potentials of using digital images in work environment would be interesting to study , too . The future research should not focus only on task - based activities at work but also on " goofing around " 1 at work . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Maypole partners : IDEO Europe , Meru Research , Netherlands Design Institute and Nokia Research Center . We are also grateful for Katja Battarbee , Thomas Grill , Juha Huuhtanen , Kristiina Karvonen , Pia Kurimo , Gerhard Leitner , and Aapo Puskala who participated in conducting the user studies with us . Moreover , many thanks for Professor Kari Kuutti for giving constructive feedback on our text for this paper . REFERENCES 1 . Abramis , D . J . ( 1990 ) . Play in Work . Childish Hedonism or Adult Enthusiasm ? American Behavioral Scientist , 33 ( 3 ) , 353 - 373 2 . Beyer , H . , and Holtzblatt , K . ( 1998 ) . Contextual Design . Defining Customer - Centred Systems . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . 3 . Bly , S . ( 1997 ) . Field Work : Is it product work ? Interactions , 4 ( 1 ) , 25 - 30 4 . Carroll , J . M , and Rosson M . B . ( 1996 ) . Developing the Blacksburg electronic village . Communications of the ACM , 39 ( 12 ) , 69 - 74 5 . Carroll , J . M . et al . ( 1995 ) Building a History of the Blacksburg Village . In Proceedings of Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , & Techniques , 1995 , 1 6 . Chikszentmihalyi , M . , and Rochberg - Halton , E . ( 1981 ) . The meaning of things . Domestic symbols and the self . Cambridge University Press 7 . Chomsky , N . ( 1957 ) . Syntactic Structures . Mouton , The Hague 8 . De Vrede , G , and van Wijk , W . ( 1997 ) . A field study into the organizational Application of Group Support Systems . In Proceedings of Computer Personnel Research ' 97 , ACM Press 9 . Dunbar , R . ( 1996 ) . Grooming , Gossiping and the Evolution of Language . Faber & Faber 10 . Ford , S . , and Forlizzi , J . ( 1999 ) . Towards a Framework of Interaction and Experience As It Relates to Product Design . Workshop in Usability Professional ' s Association Conference 1999 . URL : http : / / www . goodgestreet . com / UPAweb / home . html 11 . Frohlich , D . , and Tallyn , E . ( 1999 ) . AUDIOPHOTOGRAPHY : Practice and prospects . In Extended Abstracts of CH199 , ACM Press 12 . Hindus , D . et al . ( 1996 ) . Thunderwire : A field study of an audio - only media space . In Proceedings of Computer supported Cooperative Work ' 96 , ACM Press 13 . Kristoffersen , S . , and Ljungberg , F . ( 1999 ) . An Empirical Study of How People Establish Interaction : Implications for CSCW Session Management Models . In Proceedings of CHI 99 , ACM Press 14 . M / ikeRi , A . , and Battarbee , K . ( 1999 ) . Applying Usability Methods to Concept development of a Future Wireless Communication Device - Case in Maypole . In Proceexlings of 17 th International Symposium on Human Factors in Telecommunication Copenhagen , Denmark , May 4 - 7 , 1999 , 291 - 298 15 . Poulson , D . , and Richardson , S . ( 1994 ) . Developing adaptable smarter homes for elderly and visually impaired people . In Proceedings of Intemational Ergonomics Association , vol . 4 : Ergonomics and Design . Ergonomics Association 16 . Giller , V . et al . ( 1999 ) . Image makers . Interactions , 6 ( 6 ) , 12 - 15 17 . Veinott , E . S . et al . ( 1999 ) . Video Helps Remote Work : Speakers Who Need to Negotiate Common Ground Benefit from Seeing Each Other . In Proceedings of CH199 , ACM Press 18 . Wixon , D . , and Ramey , J . ( 1996 ) . Field Methods Casebook for Software Design . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . 555