Abstract - This paper shows the preliminary results of a study on exploring how to use Wiki as a research support system , with a focus on literature reviews management and research project management . A wiki was established by an Information Systems research student , who focused on e - Commerce . The Wiki included literature reviews and other related information , such as conferences and journal information . The technical issues and user experience are covered in this paper , and analysis on some wiki pages are made . The paper also addresses the issues and difficulties of writing literature reviews as suggested by some previous scholars . Based on the preliminary outcome , further research directions are suggested , and recommendations are made to researchers and wiki software developers . In the long term , the study would contribute to a clearer image of Research Support System development . Keywords - Wiki , Research Support System , Literature Review , Research project management I . INTRODUCTION While previous literature suggested the use of Wiki for educational and collaboration purpose , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] literature that provided the insight of using wikis to help to do research were not common . Some scholars suggested the concept of research support system , but the concept was not further developed despite a wide recognition of the importance of supporting the researchers . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] A major area that many researchers need support may be the writing of literature review . Previous scholars highlighted that despite a high expectation on the ability of doctoral candidates in writing literature reviews , many of the literature reviews in their dissertations were found to be unsatisfied . Some scholars have addressed the need of having more published guidance for doing the literature review . [ 2 ] We would like to study about using Wiki as a research support system that could help writing literature reviews and other processes in research . A wiki was implemented by a research student in Information Systems , with a focus on e - Commerce . The implementation was based on the suggestions of previous literature about the role of Wiki in education and research . Recommendations would be made to researchers and developers . II . RESEARCH VALUE The study would help to explain in what way Wiki can be used to support research . It would address the issue of unsatisfied literature reviews and the issue of lacking guidance for writing the literature review , which has been mentioned by different scholars . [ 2 ] Besides , given previous examples of using wikis for research were more focused on natural science , our study provides insights of using wikis for research in other fields . [ 5 ] The results may help the researchers to establish a wiki for their project , particularly in literature review management , or to establish a virtual research group , given virtual research group have become more common . [ 5 ] For wiki software developers , they can consider the recommendations in this study so that they can develop their Wiki software ( or the extensions ) to fit the need of different researchers . The study would also cover the research gap of the concepts of Research Support Systems , given most previous studies were related to the technical aspects , and focused on the computer science researches . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] III . ABOUT WIKI Wiki is an application allowing users to freely create and edit web page content by browsers , with different functions such as hyperlinks , cross - links among pages , text - formatting , and image inclusions . [ 1 ] [ 6 ] It has often been used as an education tool , or a project and team collaboration tool . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Some scholars have suggested the role of Wiki software in research collaboration in different disciplines , such as nature science , English literature , and social science . [ 5 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Such usage were usually supported by librarians and computing consultants . The librarians could assist the researchers with data management and exchange of idea , [ 5 ] while the computing consultants could help in the technical issues [ 8 ] . The said advantages of wikis facilitated the formation of virtual research teams . [ 5 ] A notable example of wiki was Confluence , which was made at Princeton University and was subscribed by different universities . [ 8 ] The high demand and popularity of wiki have fostered the need of wiki farm , which was a wiki server Wiki as a Research Support System – A Trial in Information Systems Research Cheuk Hang Au 1 1 Department of Decision Sciences and Managerial Economics , The Chinese University of Hong Kong , Shatin , Hong Kong allen . au @ link . cuhk . edu . hk 978 - 1 - 5386 - 0948 - 4 / 17 / $ 31 . 00 ©2017 IEEE 2271 allowing an instant set - up of a new remotely hosted wiki . [ 9 ] These wiki - farms could be free or commercial . [ 10 ] IV . ABOUT LITERATURE REVIEW IN RESEARCH Literature Review is a critical part of inspiring research idea , building theories and doing researches in different fields . [ 11 ] [ 12 ] By knowing what have previously done , we can find the weaknesses of previous studies and research gaps , followed by the development of research questions and topic . According to Levvy and Ellis , a meaningful literature review should not be only a summary of papers or research manuscripts but also a set of writing that ( 1 ) analyze and synthesize quality literature methodologically , ( 2 ) provide a firm foundation for a research topic , ( 3 ) provide a firm foundation for the selection of research methodology and ( 4 ) demonstrate that the research value and knowledge advancement of the studies . [ 13 ] The importance of putting different studies together for analysis and comparison has been highlighted by Creswell as well . [ 14 ] Besides , literature review , as a piece of academic writing , must be clear , with a logical structure and show a sufficient level of skills and capabilities of the author . [ 15 ] Despite the importance of literature review , [ 12 ] many research students found limited guidance for doing the literature review . Substandard literature reviews in the doctoral dissertations were commonly seen across different disciplines , [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] which might be due to the lack of formal research training . These students could not synthesize the literature , critique methodology , or explain the scholarly significance . The lack of proper literature reviews , as a result , would hinder theoretical and conceptual progress . [ 19 ] V . ABOUT RESEARCH SUPPORT SYSTEM ( RSS ) Research Support System ( RSS ) is an area wherein one can study the assistance of research activities based on computer science , information technology , and possibly web technology . [ 20 ] RSS aimed to enhance , develop and support research , and might be considered as a type of decision support systems ( DSS ) for scientists and researchers . [ 4 ] Some scholars have designed framework for research support system , [ 3 ] and have tried using Wiki as an RSS . [ 20 ] VI . METHODOLOGY A wiki has been established by an Information Systems research student , for literature review and research project management , with a research focus on e - Commerce . In general , a research student is relatively inexperienced in doing literature reviews in a manner like other academics . Given habit may play a role in technology adoption , [ 21 ] he tends to be more open to new literature review methodology and research tool . The outcome would be less affected by his previous practices . During the literature review processes , new insights were added to the wiki page of the related concepts . For research project management , the related pages included but not limited to the background , link to related theories , potential research value , research directions and information of related conferences / journals . After using the wiki sometime , some pages in the wiki were captured and analyzed . A . Choosing Wiki Software After considering the selection criteria suggested by different scholars , [ 22 ] [ 23 ] MediaWiki was used because of a few reasons . Firstly , its open - source nature allowed modifying the program code for individual need and using the program for free for non - commercial use . Secondly , MediaWiki was written in PHP . The high popularity of PHP allowed readily available assistance regarding code modification and maintenance . Thirdly , different types of database , including MySQL , PostgreSQL , SQLite are supported . Moreover , it supported more than 200 types of language on top of English . Besides , MediaWiki was one of the most popular wiki software for knowledge and information management . [ 10 ] [ 24 ] Many developers worked on developing extensions for MediaWiki and could provide support related to MediaWiki . It would allow users to develop a more customized wiki system . B . Establishing the Wiki and hosting space We rented the hosting space from a web hosting company for establishing our wiki , instead of using wiki farm , as we wanted a better control on the wiki . To minimize the technical work , we used the cPanel platform provided by the company to install MediaWiki . cPanel is a web hosting control panel that provides a graphical interface and automation tools to simplify the process of website administration . Other major web hosting control panels such as DirectAdmin also supported a quick installation of MediaWiki like cPanel . VII . PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A . Technical issues in establishment The technical issues in the establishment processes can vary in different environments . In this part , the issues with a larger likelihood to encounter are discussed . In general , the solution of many technical issues would involve modifying " LocalSettings . php " , a file that store the basic setting of the MediaWiki software , but some 2272 Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE IEEM might require more advanced settings in not only MediaWiki but also the server . The first critical issue encountered was image upload , which could not be done before manually enabling the function by editing the " Localsettings . php " . In other contexts , the file upload functions may be disabled by the server or the hosting service provider , [ 25 ] but it did not happen in our study . The second critical issue encountered was related to the Cite extension , which had to be manually enabled by modifying " LocalSettings . php " . Other technical issues were related to installing extensions of MediaWiki . There were two extensions installed , including an extension of WYSIWYG ( What - You - See - Is - What - You - Get ) editor and an extension called " MobileFrontEnd " , which provided a mobile - friendly interface when users access the wiki via the mobile device . The implementation of a mobile interface was not compulsory , but the inclusion of mobile interface in decision support systems were seen in an earlier trial of RSS implementation . [ 26 ] In general , to install the extensions , users needed to upload the source files manually , and to enable the extension by adding a few lines of code to " LocalSettings . php " . When using WYSIWYG editors , no coding is required . [ 27 ] WYSIWYG editors can support interactive typing of links and resources . [ 28 ] Nowadays , users are accustomed to WYSIWYG editors , the lack of WYSIWYG editors in Wiki can be considered as a technological barrier . [ 29 ] The WYSIWYG have been included in Fig . 1 Fig . 1 . WYSIWYG Editor B . User Experience The editing experience was quite similar to that of English Wikipedia , yet the adoption of reference source was stricter in academic writing . The system was easy and flexible to use , and little administration or technical efforts were required beyond the initial set - up . The categorization of pages was flexible , as one single page could be put into more than one category . Allowing inter - page cross - links would help users to consider the linkage between pages , and thus concepts . Within the wiki , users could easily search for the pages that they would like to access as if using the search engines such as Google . These might not be achieved if users opt to use ordinary literature management using Word documents and folders . Moreover , users could access their wiki from any computers with Internet access and a browser . No additional software was required . C . Outcome in Wiki We selected five pages for analysis , which were all literature reviews related to theories in Information Systems , with varying final length . ( 1 - E - Commerce in China , 2 – FinTech , 3 - Crowdfunding , 4 - Perceived Ease of Use , 5 - Intention to Use ) . We considered their initial length , no . of edits , final length and increment per edits . The units were in no . of characters , as reported by the wiki . Their page length after initial creation ranged from 713 to 5287 characters . After the creation , the average length increment per edit ranged from 141 . 3 to 356 . 2 characters . Among numerous edits , a few significant changes in length were found , which were due to articles partition or content relocation . Some existing content were moved to another article . Excluding the said significant changes , the average increment per edits ranged from 141 . 3 to 410 . 9 characters . Table 1 included the statistics of the chosen wiki pages , while Figure 2 showed the size changes of the selected pages , which included the significant changes due to content articles partition or content relocation . T ABLE I STATISTICS INFORMATION OF THE CHOSEN WIKI PAGES Page 1 2 3 4 5 Initial Length 5287 4214 3419 1119 713 No . of Edits 29 70 21 12 25 Final Length 13955 15571 10028 10029 10030 Average Increment per edit 298 . 9 162 . 2 314 . 7 141 . 3 356 . 2 Average increment per edit ( Excl . articles partition and relocation of content ) 298 . 9 254 . 4 410 . 9 141 . 3 149 . 1 2273 Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE IEEM Fig . 2 . Page Size Changes along the editing These figures reflected that the literature reviews in these pages were written and expanded mostly in an incremental manner . Most edits added a small portion of the content at one time , rather than a sudden addition of a large amount of content . Comparing with previous suggestions of writing short pieces first and subdividing writings into manageable sections when doing academic writings , our resulted shows that Wiki can help writing academic papers , by helping students to write short piece firstly and incrementally , thus decreasing the difficulties . [ 15 ] In " Perceived Ease of Use " , " Intention To Use " and some other pages related to some measurable concepts , the measurements items of the concepts were also be included . It would be useful for designing survey as it allowed comparing different sets of measurement items at the same time , and researchers could make the choice of adopting the measurement items more easily . Other than literature reviews , other types of pages were found , which were related to the research projects , thoughts of possible research directions , reflections on research methodology from previous readings and information of targetted and conferences for publications . Given a wide range of content in the wiki , we can conclude the potential role of wikis as research support system . VIII . IMPLICATION FOR RESEARCHERS AND WIKI SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS For researchers , the issues and experience mentioned in the above sections would support establishing wikis in a web hosting space instead of establishing in wiki - farm , so that users could better control and develop a more customized literature review management system by using different extensions . The initial effort of setting up Wiki in a web hosting space might be saved by choosing a web hosting company with a management platform like cPanel or DirectAdmin . For wiki software developers , a major implication was the need of a platform with graphical user interface for managing and installing the extensions . The technical issues suggested in the above section may not be hard for experienced users to handle , but it could be a barrier that resists others from using Wiki . The issues of technological barriers in wiki were mentioned previously [ 1 ] and should be highlighted . IX . FURTHER RESEARCH DIRECTIONS Firstly , the outcome can depend on the users ' habit of doing the literature review and using the system . Therefore , further testing in other research areas by different students can help build a more generalized image in using Wiki as a research support system . After their trials , we may use focus groups or questionnaires to collect students’ feedback , with questions based on the standard of doing literature review , suggested by previous scholars . Secondly , the wiki may help not only in doing the literature review but also in other parts of research work , which can be further validated in the future . For example , Pan and Tan previous proposed a new approach to conducting case studies and recommended a pattern of writing case study paper in Information Systems Research . [ 30 ] Similar templates or suggested patterns can be very helpful to researchers in writing papers . Wiki developers may consider developing extensions that would provide different templates , which have adopted some common academic paper patterns , for researchers to write their papers . Apart from users’ feedback , the validation of the system effectiveness may also be validated by the students’ assignment score in research methodologies courses . Finally , further research can try other existing extensions that may be helpful for researchers , thus to establish wiki as a more comprehensive and customized research support system . X . CONCLUSION This study suggested that wiki could assist the process of doing literature reviews with larger convenience and flexibility , and include other useful information such as publication targets , research project information and research methods information . The solution of some technical issues was suggested , although the issues to solve can be different , depending on the set - up environment . 2274 Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE IEEM Finally , implications for researchers and wiki software developers , as well as further research directions were provided . We expect that in the future wiki can be developed into a research support system . REFERENCES [ 1 ] C . - H . AU and W . HE , " Using Wiki for Project Collaboration – with Comparison on Facebook , " in Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and Computer Science 2014 , 2014 , vol . 3 , pp . 358 - 363 . [ 2 ] W . He and L . Yang , " Using wikis in team collaboration : A media capability perspective , " Information & Management , vol . 53 , no . 7 , pp . 846 - 856 , 2016 . [ 3 ] J . Xu , Y . Huang , and G . Madey , " A research support system framework for web datamining research : Workshop on applications , products and services of web - based support systems , " in In : The Joint International Conference on Web Intelligence ( 2003 IEEE / WIC ) and Intelligent Agent Technology , 2003 : Citeseer . [ 4 ] S . Jindal , " Research Support Systems as an Effective Web Based Information System , " Journal of Global Research in Computer Science , vol . 2 , no . 5 , pp . 102 - 106 , 2011 . [ 5 ] J . - H . Söldner , J . Haller , A . C . Bullinger , and K . M . Möslein , " Supporting Research Collaboration - On the Needs of Virtual Research Teams , " in Wirtschaftsinformatik ( 1 ) , 2009 , pp . 275 - 284 . [ 6 ] R . Raitman , L . Ngo , N . Augar , and W . Zhou , " Security in the online e - learning environment , " in Advanced Learning Technologies , 2005 . ICALT 2005 . Fifth IEEE International Conference on , 2005 , pp . 702 - 706 : IEEE . [ 7 ] R . Schroeder and M . Den Besten , " Literary sleuths online : e - Research collaboration on the Pynchon wiki , " Information , Community and Society , vol . 11 , no . 2 , pp . 167 - 187 , 2008 . [ 8 ] T . Wang , D . V . Vezenov , and B . Simboli , " Use of a Wiki - Based Software to Manage Research Group Activities , " Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship , 2014 . [ 9 ] A . Passant and P . Laublet , " Towards an interlinked semantic wiki farm , " in Proceedings of the 3rd semantic wiki workshop ( SemWiki 2008 ) , eds . C . Lange , S . Schaffert , H . Skaf - Molli , and M . Völkel . CEUR workshop proceedings , 2008 , vol . 360 , pp . 1 - 14 . [ 10 ] C . Challborn and T . Reimann , " Wiki Products : A Comparison , " International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning , vol . 6 , no . 2 , p . n2 , 2005 . [ 11 ] J . Webster and R . T . Watson , " Analyzing the past to prepare for the future : Writing a literature review , " MIS quarterly , pp . xiii - xxiii , 2002 . [ 12 ] D . N . Boote and P . Beile , " Scholars before researchers : On the centrality of the dissertation literature review in research preparation , " Educational researcher , vol . 34 , no . 6 , pp . 3 - 15 , 2005 . [ 13 ] Y . Levy and T . J . Ellis , " A systems approach to conduct an effective literature review in support of information systems research , " Informing Science : International Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 181 - 212 , 2006 . [ 14 ] J . W . Creswell , Research design : Qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods approaches . Sage publications , 2013 . [ 15 ] C . Hart , Doing a literature review : Releasing the social science research imagination . Sage , 1998 . [ 16 ] A . Alton - Lee , " A Troubleshooter ' s Checklist for Prospective Authors Derived from Reviewers ' Critical Feedback , " Teaching and Teacher Education , vol . 14 , no . 8 , pp . 887 - 90 , 1998 . [ 17 ] C . A . Grant and E . Graue , " ( Re ) viewing a review : A case history of the review of educational research , " Review of Educational Research , vol . 69 , no . 4 , pp . 384 - 396 , 1999 . [ 18 ] S . A . Campbell and D . W . Menk , " Editors’ Introduction , " Review of Educational Research , vol . 73 , no . 2 , pp . 123 - 124 , 2003 . [ 19 ] D . Shaw , " Bibliographic database searching by graduate students in language and literature : Search strategies , system interfaces , and relevance judgments , " Library & Information Science Research , vol . 17 , no . 4 , pp . 327 - 345 , 1995 . [ 20 ] A . K . Aljuaied , " A Web - based Research Support System Enhanced , " University of Regina , 2012 . [ 21 ] S . Chitungo and S . Munongo , " Extending the Technology Acceptance Model to Mobile Banking Adoption in Rural Zimbabwe " , Journal of Business Administration and Education , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 51 - 79 , 2013 . [ 22 ] L . Schwartz , S . Clark , M . Cossarin , and J . Rudolph , " Educational wikis : Features and selection criteria , " International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning , vol . 5 , no . 1 , p . n1 , 2004 . [ 23 ] S . O . Choy and K . C . Ng , " Implementing wiki software for supplementing online learning , " Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , vol . 23 , no . 2 , 2007 . [ 24 ] A . Kille , " Wikis in the workplace : how wikis can help manage knowledge in library reference services , " Libres , vol . 15 , no . 2 , 2006 . [ 25 ] W . J . Gilmore and B . Bryla , Beginning PHP and Oracle : From Novice to Professional . Apress , 2007 . [ 26 ] S . Kim , " iScholar : A mobile research support system , " Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research , University of Regina , 2013 . [ 27 ] J . J . Cronin , " Upgrading to Web 2 . 0 : An experiential project to build a marketing wiki , " Journal of Marketing Education , vol . 31 , no . 1 , pp . 66 - 75 , 2009 . [ 28 ] S . Schaffert , R . Westenthaler , and A . Gruber , " IkeWiki : A user - friendly semantic wiki , " in 3rd European Semantic Web Conference ( ESWC06 ) , 2006 . [ 29 ] B . D . Honegger , " Wikis : a rapidly growing phenomenon in the German - speaking school community , " in Proceedings of the 2005 international symposium on Wikis , 2005 , pp . 113 - 116 : ACM . [ 30 ] S . Pan and B . Tan , " Demystifying case research : A structured – pragmatic – situational ( SPS ) approach to conducting case studies " , Information and Organization , vol . 21 , no . 3 , pp . 161 - 176 , 2011 . 2275 Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE IEEM