Article Multiple CaMKII Binding Modes to the Actin Cytoskeleton Revealed by Single - Molecule Imaging Shahid Khan , 1 , * Ianina Conte , 2 Tom Carter , 3 K . Ulrich Bayer , 4 and Justin E . Molloy 5 1 Molecular Biology Consortium , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Berkeley , California ; 2 Cardiovascular and Cell Science Research Institute and 3 Cell Biology and Genetics , St . George’s University of London , London , UK ; 4 Department of Pharmacology , University of Colorado Denver , Aurora , Colorado ; and 5 The Francis Crick Institute , Mill Hill Laboratory , London , UK ABSTRACT Localization of the Ca 2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II ( CaMKII ) to dendritic spine synapses is deter - mined in part by the actin cytoskeleton . We determined binding of GFP - tagged CaMKII to tag - RFP - labeled actin cytoskeleton within live cells using total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy and single - molecule tracking . Stepwise photobleaching showed that CaMKII formed oligomeric complexes . Photoactivation experiments demonstrated that diffusion out of the evanescent ﬁeld determined the track lifetimes . Latrunculin treatment triggered a coupled loss of actin stress ﬁbers and the colocalized , long - lived CaMKII tracks . The CaMKII a ( a ) isoform , which was previously thought to lack F - actin interactions , also showed binding , but this was threefold weaker than that observed for CaMKII b ( b ) . The b E 0 splice variant bound more weakly than a , showing that binding by b depends critically on the interdomain linker . The mutations b T287D and a T286D , which mimic autophosphorylation states , also abolished F - actin binding . Autophosphorylation triggers autonomous CaMKII activity , but does not impair GluN2B binding , another important synaptic protein interaction of CaMKII . The CaMKII inhibitor tatCN21 or CaMKII mutations that inhibit GluN2B association by blocking binding of ATP ( b K43R and a K42M ) or Ca 2 þ / calmod - ulin ( b A303R ) had no effect on the interaction with F - actin . These results provide the ﬁrst rationale for the reduced synaptic spine localization of the a T286D mutant , indicating that transient F - actin binding contributes to the synaptic localization of the CaMKII a isoform . The track lifetime distributions had a stretched exponential form consistent with a heterogeneously diffusing population . This heterogeneity suggests that CaMKII adopts different F - actin binding modes , which is most easily rationalized by multiple subunit contacts between the CaMKII dodecamer and the F - actin cytoskeleton that stabilize the initial weak ( micromolar ) monovalent interaction . INTRODUCTION The calcium calmodulin - dependent kinase ( CaMKII ) is a multifunctional kinase that has a prominent role in long - term potentiation ( LTP ) ( 1 – 3 ) . The four major isoforms of vertebrate CaMKII have ~ 40 splice variants and are ex - pressed in diverse tissues ( 3 ) . Two isoforms , CaMKII a ( < a > ) and CaMKII b ( < b > ) , are dominant in the brain and their relative expression levels vary among different regions of the brain as well as during development ( 4 ) . Their relative levels also vary within individual neurons be - tween the cell body and dendritic / axonal processes ( 2 ) . CaMKII has a prominent structural role in hippocampal dendritic spines , the postsynaptic computational units for LTP . CaMKII concentrations in spines are high ( 5 ) , consis - tent with its structural role . The < b > isoform targets ab hetero - oligomers to dendritic spines by binding to the spine actin cytoskeleton ( 6 ) . Synaptic stimulation triggers CaMKII sequestration to dendritic spines and the postsyn - aptic density ( PSD ) within a few seconds of stimulation ( 7 – 10 ) . This rapid sequestration is coupled to actin polymer - ization and expansion of the stimulated spine ( 11 ) . Expan - sion is due to the direct effects of CaMKII on the actin cytoskeleton ( 12 , 13 ) as well as to indirect effects mediated by the activation of other kinases ( 14 ) . The increase in spine size persists after termination of the stimulus - induced cal - cium transient . CaMKII levels in stimulated spines are also increased due to association with the PSD , in particular , the NMDA receptor GluN2B subunit ( 15 ) and the enlarged actin cytoskeleton ( 16 ) . In the longer term , CaMKII pro - motes axonal branching and outgrowth ( 17 ) . The neuronal isoforms have highly homologous kinase and association domains , but the linker that connects these two domains is variable in sequence and length ( 1 ) . The indi - vidual subunits assemble into homo - or hetero - oligomers of variable isoform compositions , and the atomic structure of the dodecameric enzyme has been previously described Submitted December 16 , 2015 , and accepted for publication June 9 , 2016 . * Correspondence : khan @ mbc - als . org Editor : Cecile Sykes . Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 395 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 06 . 007 (cid:1) 2016 Biophysical Society . This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . ( 18 ) . The < a > and < b > isoforms form 12 subunit homo - oligomers of similar size , with one study reporting a slightly smaller < b > oligomer ( 19 ) . Calmodulin binding to the regu - latory segment relieves inhibition , and transphosphorylation activates the enzyme at < a > T286 ( T287 in the other iso - forms ) , which confers autonomous activity to the enzyme . Binding of < b > , but not < a > , to the actin cytoskeleton has been shown by various approaches , including colocali - zation , ﬂuorescence photobleaching , and pharmacological manipulations in neuronal and non - neuronal cell cultures ( 6 , 20 – 23 ) . In vitro sedimentation assays and electron micro - scopy have demonstrated the < b > - dependent formation of F - actin bundles ( 12 , 22 – 24 ) . Activation of < b > by both au - tophosphorylation and the phosphomimetic T287D muta - tion ( 22 ) abolishes actin bundling activity . Furthermore , an alternative splice variant , < b E 0 > , which has a short linker similar to that of < a > , does not bind or bundle F - actin in pull - down assays . The differences observed with the mutants in pull - down assays are consistent with co - localization in neuronal cell cultures . Pyrene ﬂuorescence measurements ( 12 ) have shown that both < a > and < b > isoforms bind globular ( G - ) actin , and < b > binds with 2 . 4 m M afﬁnity and a stoichiometry of 12 actin monomers per oligomer ( 24 ) . However , quantitative estimates of the af - ﬁnity of < b > or < a > for F - actin , or of modulation via acti - vation through stimulation or mutation , are not available . Here , we characterized the association of CaMKII with labeled F - actin in live human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) ( 25 ) by using total internal reﬂection ﬂuo - rescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) to image and track single molecules ( 26 , 27 ) . We previously exploited this approach to study motor proteins , ion channels , and G - protein - coupled receptors ( 27 – 30 ) . Here , we extended the method to measure the association of enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( eGFP ) - tagged CaMKII native and mutant pro - teins with red ﬂuorescent protein ( RFP ) - tagged actin to mark the cytoskeletal structures . Single - molecule tracking experiments have shown that actin depolymerization in - creases CaMKII mobility in dendritic spines , and revealed different , heterogeneous mobility distributions for stimu - lated versus unstimulated states ( 16 ) . We used HUVECs as a model system because they are ideal for TIRF imaging , have a deﬁned cytoskeletal architecture , and are amenable to transient transfection methods . Our measurements show that both neuronal CaMKII isoforms bind cytoskeletal actin , but with afﬁnities that differ by threefold over the ﬁrst decade range of a log - normal binding curve . Our results explain why association of < a > may have been overlooked in earlier studies , and have implications for CaMKII trans - port and cytoskeletal remodeling within neurons . MATERIALS AND METHODS All biochemicals were sourced from Sigma - Aldrich ( Poole Dorset , UK ) un - less noted otherwise . TIRFM We used a custom - built TIRF microscope workstation based on an inverted microscope ( Nikon Eclipse , TE 2000U ; Nikon , Kingston - upon - Thames , UK ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Complete details are provided in Supporting Materials and Methods in the Supporting Material . In vitro assays For use as a single ﬂuorophore calibration specimen , we immobilized GFP molecules on the surface of a microscope ﬂow cell with a GFP antibody by ﬁrst ﬁlling the ﬂow cell with a phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) solu - tion ( pH 7 . 4 ) containing 5 m g / mL ( 3 nM ) polyclonal anti - GFP antibody ( Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) as described previously ( 27 ) . This solution was left to incubate in the ﬂow cell for 5 min and then washed with PBS supplemented with 0 . 5 mg / mL bovine serum albumin to block re - gions of bare coverglass . The solution was then replaced with PBS con - taining 10 ng / mL ( 0 . 37 nM ) GFP ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) for 5 min , and unbound protein was washed out of the ﬂow cell by several washes with assay buffer ( AB (cid:2) ( 20 mM imidazole ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 50 mM KCl , 2 mM EGTA , 4 mM MgCl 2 ) ) before it was viewed by TIRFM . The mol - ecules were imaged in degassed and argon - purged AB (cid:2) supplemented with an oxygen - scavenger system consisting of 3 mg / mL glucose , 0 . 5 mg / mL catalase , 0 . 2 mg / mL glucose oxidase , and 20 mM dithiothrei - tol . Using the antibody - immobilized GFP molecules as a control sample , we measured the single ﬂuorophore intensity as a function of excitation power . The average value measured over several hundred ﬂuorophores was linear with the laser power . The mean single ﬂuorophore intensity could therefore be used as an independent internal check of excitation po - wer in subsequent experiments . Cell culture CaMKII fusion proteins tagged with monomeric eGFP ( GFP ) or photoacti - vatable eGFP ( PaGFP ) carrying the A206K mutation have been described previously ( 22 , 31 – 34 ) . The GFP tag does not interfere with kinase activity FIGURE 1 TIRF workstation . The choice of the laser excitation wave - length ( laser 1 ¼ 561 nm ; laser 2 ¼ 488 nm ) was computer controlled ; exci - tation ( green line ) and ﬂuorescence emission ( red arrow ) light paths are shown . The TIRF incident angle was adjusted by an external mirror . The microscope stage and objective lens employed piezo - positioners to control specimen position and image focus . Images were acquired with an EMCCD camera . A waveform generator set the duration , delay , and frequency of photoactivation pulses ( laser 3 ¼ 405 nm ) , also in TIRF mode . Separate , exchangeable ﬁlter cassettes were used for GFP and tRFP ﬂuorescence . Khan et al . 396 Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 or holoenzyme assembly ( 24 ) , and immunoelectron microscopy has shown that native CaMKII sequesters to the PSD of dendritic spines ( 35 ) with kinetics similar to those reported by the tagged proteins ( 22 , 36 ) . We studied the following tagged actin fusion proteins : mCherry - actin ( 37 ) , tagRFP - actin ( 38 ) , and mTurquoise2 - actin ( 39 ) . We chose tagRFP - actin ( tRFP - actin ) for its brightness , photostability , and expression level ( 40 ) . The plasmids encoding GFP - CaMKII and tRFP - actin constructs were mixed and cotransfected into primary HUVECs or Cos7 cells at 70 – 80 % conﬂu - ence , primarily by nucleofection ( Nucleofector Model 2b ; Lonza , Blackley , UK ) . Alternatively , Lipofectamine - 2000 ( Life Technologies , Paisley , UK ) transfection was used as previously described ( 41 ) . With either method , the transfection efﬁciency was typically > 50 % . The cells were plated on poly - lysine - coated dishes ( Lab - Tek chambered borosilicate , # 1 coverglass ; Nunc , Rochester , NY ) in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium with added 10 % fetal bovine serum and streptomycin ( 50 m g / mL ) . Cell culture dishes were removed from the CO 2 incubator ( Galaxy R ; Scientiﬁc Laboratory Supplies , East Riding of Yorkshire , UK ) 24 – 36 h after transfection . These incubation times were optimal for visualizing single GFP - CaMKII molecules . TIRF imaging was conducted at 25 (cid:3) C within an hour after the samples were removed from the incubator . The HUVECs we chose as a model system for most of our TIRF imag - ing experiments attach ﬁrmly to the culture dish substrate and have long ventral stress ﬁbers ( 42 ) that form oriented arrays . Other cytoskeletal substructures ( i . e . , arcs ( 43 ) and ﬁlopodia ) are also present . Although HUVECs express a variant CaMKII d 6 isoform ( 44 ) , they do not natively express the < a > or < b > isoforms found in neurons . Expression was monitored by epiﬂuorescence , and cell morphology was determined by phase contrast . In addition to morphology , we checked the integrity of the physiological state by noting an absence of CaMKII aggregation caused by high pH or calcium ( 36 ) . Single - molecule image analysis A typical experiment involved a set of cotransfections of the plasmid encod - ing tRFP - actin with a plasmid encoding a GFP - CaMKII fusion ( two dishes per CaMKII construct ; up to four constructs per experiment ) . Control dishes cotransfected with plasmids encoding tRFP - actin and GFPCaMKII b were included in each experiment to assess the viability of the primary culture . First , tRFP - actin ﬂuorescence was used to identify transfected cells , and then GFP - ﬂuorescence was recorded . Many thousands of single - particle tracks were obtained for each construct using > 12 cells from four different culture dishes and two separate experiments . Details regarding the single - particle tracking algorithm and the analytical measures used are provided in Supporting Materials and Methods . Multiple analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) and simultaneous pairwise t - tests were conducted in R ( https : / / www . r - project . org / ) as detailed in ( 45 ) . The variance was the sum of the variation within and between groups normalized by their degrees of freedom . The probability ( p - value ) that dif - ferences between populations were signiﬁcant was then computed from the F - value ( F ) . Signiﬁcant differences reported by ANOVA were then tested by means of simultaneous , pairwise t - tests with default Holm correction for multiple testing . RESULTS Our experimental study consisted of two parts , First , we used dual - color TIRFM to visualize and track ( 27 ) individ - ual GFP - tagged < a > and < b > isoforms in HUVECS , and derived their properties from population statistics and spatial colocalization with F - actin cytoskeletal structures . We then studied different mutants and pharmacological agents to understand the structural basis of CaMKII associ - ation with F - actin . Assay development Visualization of GFP molecules in control specimens and live cells We visualized antibody - immobilized GFPs at low surface density ( < 1 m m (cid:2) 2 ) using TIRFM to establish the emission intensity of individual GFP molecules under our standard imaging conditions . Individual GFPs were readily identiﬁed as discrete ﬂuorescent spots that had a diffraction - limited point spread function ( PSF ) with a characteristic spot inten - sity ( Fig . 2 A ) . The spots had a mean duration of 2 . 0 5 0 . 4 s and exhibited single - step photobleaching with a unitary in - tensity of 27 . 4 5 2 . 2 counts / pixel . Brighter spots with twofold greater intensity exhibited two - step photobleaching ( Fig . 2 B ) . Next , we obtained TIRFM video recordings of cultured HUVECs and Cos7 cells that were expressing FIGURE 2 TIRFM visualization of GFP invitro and in living cells versus GFP - CaMKII . ( A ) i : Antibody - immobilized GFP molecules ( 10 - frame averaged image ) ) . ii : Line intensity proﬁles of the four spots in ﬁeld center , top and right ( 5 standard error ( SE ) , thin line ) , and of the brighter spot ( arrow ) show the diffraction - limited size . ( B ) Intensity - versus - time records of spots shown in A ( i ) , illustrating single - step photobleaching ( i – iii ) , blink - ing behavior ( iv ) , and double - step photobleaching of the brighter spot ( v ) . The single - step modal value was 27 . 5 5 2 . 5 counts / pixel ( doubling and tripling occurs when ﬂuorophore PSFs overlap ) . ( C ) Singlevideo frame ( 50 ms exposure ) of a HUVEC expressing GFP alone , showing that motion blurring prevents single ﬂuorophore observation . ( D ) Single video frame of a HUVEC expressing GFP - CaMKII b , showing that discrete ﬂuorescent spots are now visible . CaMKII Single - Molecule Binding to F - actin Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 397 GFP . In contrast to the video recordings of antibody - immo - bilized GFP molecules , the GFP ﬂuorophores within cells could not be resolved ( Fig . 2 C ) . This was because rapid diffusive motion within the cytosol caused image blurring during the frame acquisition period , as explained below . Visualization of homomeric GFP - CaMKII b complexes in the cellular cortex In marked contrast to cell cultures expressing GFP mole - cules alone ( see above ) , single ﬂuorescent particles were visualized by TIRFM in cell cortices when GFP - tagged < b > ( henceforth termed b ) was expressed ( Fig . 2 D ) . This discrepancy can be explained by attenuation of the spot intensity by motion blurring during the 50 ms frame acquisition period ( d t ) . The attenuation factor of the computed centroid is given by the ratio of the area covered by the diffusing particle during a single video frame ¼ p ( d x ) 2 ( where d x ¼ ( 4 D . d t ) 1 / 2 , and D is the diffusion coefﬁ - cient ) and the area that captures 90 % of the object’s PSF ( here a 3 (cid:4) 3 pixel region on the camera ) ¼ 0 . 9 m m 2 . The expected lateral diffusion coefﬁcients , D Stokes , for the relevant species were computed from the diffusion equation : D Stokes ¼ k b T 6 ph a s ; ( 1 ) where Stokes radius a s ¼ ( 3M / 4 p A s ) 1 / 3 , M is the molecular mass ( kDa ) , A is Avogadro’s number , s is the protein den - sity ( 1300 kg / m 3 ) ( 46 ) , and h is the cortical viscosity ( 0 . 0032 Pa . s ) ( 47 , 48 ) . This gives an estimated D Stokes for GFP ( M ¼ 27 kDa ; a s ¼ ~ 2 nm ) of ~ 30 m m 2 s (cid:2) 1 and diffu - sive motion blurring during a 50 ms video frame of ~ 20 m m 2 . Therefore , the expected reduction in ﬂuorescence intensity ( per pixel ) is 20 / 0 . 9 , ~ 23 - fold . This explains why freely diffusing GFP molecules were not resolved at the video imaging rates . Since D Stokes varies inversely as the cube root of the molecular mass , we were also unable to resolve the GFP - < a > ( henceforth a ) mutant , which is monomeric due to deletion of the association domain ( a D 316 ) ( M ¼ 62 kDa ) and tRFP - G - actin ( M ¼ 70 kDa ) , as both exhibit a > 15 - fold estimated attenuation of spot in - tensity due to motion blurring . We were able to satisfactorily visualize b molecules because they form dodecameric com - plexes ( M ¼ 87 (cid:4) 12 ¼ 1044 kDa ) ( 18 , 49 ) . Thus , the inten - sity attenuation by motion blurring ( ~ 7 - fold ) is more than compensated for by the 12 - fold increase in intensity due to the increased number of GFPs . Decoration of actin stress ﬁbers with single GFP - CaMKII b holoenzymes We used two - color TIRFM to image b ( excited at 488 nm ) and tRFP - actin ( excited at 561 nm ) to characterize b com - plexes interacting with F - actin cortical structures . TIRFM of HUVECs transfected with t - RFP actin revealed long linear ﬁbers in the actin cortex . The morphology was consis - tent with ventral stress ﬁbers ( 42 ) , and these structures will henceforth be referred to as such . Approximately 100 video frames were averaged to enhance the relatively static ﬁbers above the background of rapidly diffusing G - actin mono - mers . The averaged tRFP - actin image was then overlaid onto TIRFM video recordings of b molecules to reveal their movement within the cytosol and their association / dissociation with the tRFP - tagged F - actin structures ( Movie S1 ) . Individual GFP - ﬂuorescent spots were identiﬁed and tracked in the video sequences to yield spatiotemporal trajectories ( 300 – 3000 per record ) of individual objects . Tracks were generated by linking centroids for successive frames . Apparent diffusion coefﬁcients ( D lat ) were com - puted from the centroid frame - to - frame displacements ( D x ) : D lat ¼ ð D x Þ 2 (cid:1) ð 4 t c Þ : ( 2 ) For free diffusion , c ¼ 1 . For conﬁned diffusion , c ¼ > 1 and the denominator preexponent ¼ < 4 . Individual tracks termi - nated when the object intensity dropped below the detection threshold due to diffusion from the excitation region ( evanescent ﬁeld ) , photobleaching , or tracking errors ( considered below ) . Superposition of the image showing all of the particle tracks obtained over one video recording ( lasting 25 s ) onto the averaged tRFP - actin image provided a measure of colocalization ( Pearson’s correlation coefﬁ - cient , P pix ) , as described in Supporting Materials and Methods . It was clear that b associated with the cortical actin ﬁbers ( Fig . 3 A ) . Dynamics of the interaction between CaMKII b and the actin cytoskeleton Automated single - particle tracking ( 27 ) was used to identify and track individual b complexes . The object tracks were characterized with the measures deﬁned in Materials and Methods . Short - lived particle trajectories ( t < 0 . 58 s ; Fig . 3 B , yellow symbols ) closely approximated Brownian motion . In contrast , the plot for longer - lived trajectories ( t > 2 . 5 s ; Fig . 3 B , blue symbols ) was nonlinear , with little increase in the mean - square deviation ( MSD ) beyond D t > 1 . 2 s . Further analysis showed that the binned subpopulation of short - lived tracks had a unimodal intensity distribution with a lower mean relative to the parent population , whereas the subpopulation of longer - lived tracks had higher intensity relative to the parent population and the intensity distribu - tion was greatly skewed toward higher values ( Fig . 3 C ) . The different subpopulation characteristics are consistent with the notion that tracks from weakly bound , more mobile molecules have a short duration and dominate the < 0 . 5 s subpopulation . In contrast , more strongly bound molecules dominate the > 2 . 5 s subpopulation , with lower average D lat . The modal intensities for both subpopulations are lower than expected for the multimeric ( 10 – 12 subunits ) tagged b holoenzymes . Thus , although at ﬁrst it may seem Khan et al . 398 Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 that the correlation between intensity and mobility differ - ences is simply due to a difference in aggregate size , it is better explained by an intensity attenuation due to motion blurring ( see above ) . To ascertain whether this was the case , we examined single spots and tracks . To test for multisubunit states , we measured stepwise changes in ﬂuorescence intensity . Spots immobilized on actin stress ﬁbers had the highest intensities , but they ex - hibited PSF - limited spatial proﬁles similar to those ob - tained for single GFP ﬂuorophores ( Fig . 2 A ) . A small subset of such spots was analyzed ( Fig . 3 D ) . The average initial intensity was ~ 8 - fold greater ( 171 . 6 5 11 . 5 counts / pixel ) than that measured for individual GFP molecules in vitro ( ~ 27 counts / pixel ) . We used a running Student’s t - test to detect signiﬁcant jumps in local mean intensity over adjacent sections of data ( Fig . S1 in the Supporting Material ) . The mean intensity drop for each stepwise change in intensity was 22 . 1 5 2 . 0 counts / pixel and the mean step duration was 2 . 6 5 0 . 4 s , which are similar to the values obtained for single GFP molecules immobi - lized in vitro ( 27 . 4 5 2 . 2 counts / pixel and 2 . 0 5 0 . 4 s ) . Many of these spots showed a severalfold greater ﬁnal in - tensity drop ( e . g . , 90 – 0 counts / pixel ( spot v ) ) relative to the 27 . 4 5 2 . 2 counts / pixel drops obtained for single GFP photobleaching . Simultaneous photobleaching of multiple ( three for spot v ) GFP ﬂuorophores is not likely . Instead , the ﬁnal intensity drops presumably report the dissociation of b holoenzymes from the ﬁbers and diffu - sion out of the evanescent ﬁeld before all their ﬂuoro - phores have bleached . Sample tracks and their MSD versus D t plots were analyzed next ( Fig . S2 ) . In addition to high intensities , the long - lived tracks had highly nonlinear MSD versus D t plots , and the MSD and D t correlation was abolished for in - tervals greater than a few frames , consistent with immobi - lization as validated by an examination of the single tracks . Centroid intensity inversely correlated with mobility in the short - lived tracks of diffusing spots , with values consistent with the motion - induced sevenfold attenuation relative to the intensity of immobilized holoenzymes . The slopes ( MSD versus D t ) of these short tracks correlated with the fraction of time during which they were mobile . Analyses of the single - spot photobleaching and single tracks show that motion blurring is responsible for the obser - ved mobility - intensity correlations in the subpopulation distributions . We conclude that the rapid decrease in the track population with time is governed predominantly by the diffusion of unbound molecules out of the evanescent ﬁeld . Filopodia kymographs support the tracking analysis Cultured HUVECs exhibit numerous ﬁlopodia , which are actin - rich tubular extensions > 2 m m long and ~ 150 nm in diameter . Some of the ﬁlopodia protruded close to the cover - slip and were visualized in our video recordings by the FIGURE 3 CaMKII b decoration of the actin cytoskeleton visualized by two - color TIRFM . ( A ) Averaged images of b ( left panel , green , 400 frames ) and tRFP - actin ( right panel , red , 100 frames ) . Mean tRFP intensity ¼ 119 5 9 counts / pixel . The bottom panels ( arrow ) show the two frames superimposed ( P pix ¼ 0 . 27 , P rand ¼ 0 . 09 5 0 . 07 ) ( left ) and the single - par - ticle tracks ( right ) accumulated over 10 s of video ( Movie S1 ) . ( B ) MSD - versus - time interval ( D t ) for the total population of tracks ( white circles ) and short - lived ( yellow circles ) and long - lived ( blue circles ) track subpop - ulations ( 5 standard deviation ( s ) ) . The initial gradient of the short - lived track data gives D lat ¼ 0 . 28 m m 2 / s , whereas that of the long - lived tracks gives 0 . 04 m m 2 / s . Total number of tracks , n ¼ 12 , 723 . ( C ) Intensity histo - grams for the short - lived track subpopulation ( yellow bars ) and long - lived track subpopulation ( blue bars ) . The asterisk ( black ) marks the region of the histogram that was used to analyze photobleaching . ( D ) Sample intensity - versus - time plots for some of the objects from the asterisk - marked region . Stepwise intensity changes as detected by Student’s t - test ( Fig . S1 ) are marked immediately below each trace to indicate sudden intensity transi - tions . The starting intensity for each spot was > 170 counts / pixel , which is ~ 8 - fold greater than the unitary GFP intensity . The green line ( in the lowest panel ) , is the two - step immobilized GFP photobleaching , redrawn from Fig . 2 B ( v ) , shown for reference . CaMKII Single - Molecule Binding to F - actin Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 399 evanescent ﬁeld excitation . This gave us the opportunity to track GFP - tagged molecules that were essentially con - strained to a single dimension independently of the depth , z , of the evanescent ﬁeld . The molecule movements were suitable for kymograph analysis . We straightened the image data by using spline ﬁts to the overall ﬁlopodial shape , and then extracted a linear strip of image pixels to form the ab - scissa in the kymograph time - series image ( Fig . S3 ) . The b complexes produced punctate images on each video frame , and their motion within the ﬁlopodium then created a pattern of vertical trajectories ( i . e . , along the ordi - nate , time axis ) . The trajectories consisted of linear , bright segments that were tilted slightly toward the cell body ( at ~ 1 . 5 m m / min ) , consistent with complexes binding tightly to actin and reporting the slow rearward ﬂow of the central F - actin bundle of the ﬁlopodium ( 50 ) . These events were interspersed with haphazard , dim trajectories as the particles dissociated from actin and diffused within the body of the ﬁlopodium . Both types of trajectories were observed for closely adjacent objects within the same ﬁlopodium over the same time window , indicating that dim trajectories result from mobility of the b complexes within the ﬁlopodium rather than movement of the ﬁlopodium relative to the glass coverslip . Our initial goal was to achieve a time - resolved character - ization of bound and free episodes of b molecules con - strained within the evanescent ﬁeld by the ﬁlopodia . However , to our surprise , the kymographs also revealed that both a and b associated with ﬁlopodial F - actin . F - actin dependence of CaMKII a and b lifetime distributions by evanescent ﬁeld ﬂuorescence photoactivation microscopy To follow up the ﬁnding that both a and b isoforms bind actin within ﬁlopodia , we examined the kinetics of ﬂuorescence decay after photoactivation of PaGFP fusion constructs within the cell cortex . A brief ﬂash of TIR laser light at 405 nm was used to activate PaGFP , and continuous illumination at 488 nm allowed the activated ﬂuorescence to be visualized . The ﬂuorescence of PaGFP alone decayed rapidly , reaching half its initial value within a single video frame ( < 50 ms ; Fig . 4 A ) . The decay was two orders of magnitude more rapid than the photobleaching rate FIGURE 4 Results from photoactivated localization microscopy TIRFM and latrunculin treatment show that both CaMKII isoforms associate with the actin cytoskeleton . ( A ) Normalized ﬂuorescence decay curves of PaGFP and PaGFP - CaMKII fusion proteins after photoactivation by a 405 nm laser ( at t ¼ 0 ) . Decay was measured as single - molecule track lifetimes . Time 0 is the time required to exceed the ﬁve - frame track duration threshold ( 0 . 24 s ) . The data were least - square ﬁtted to two exponentials ( yellow lines ) : PaGFP - a ¼ 0 . 72 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 15 . 2 5 0 . 5 t ) ) þ 0 . 28 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 0 . 35 5 0 . 07 t ) ) , n ¼ 4306 ; PaGFP - b ¼ 0 . 51 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 3 . 56 5 0 . 08 t ) ) þ 0 . 49 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 0 . 24 5 0 . 07 t ) ) , n ¼ 11 , 160 . In contrast , photoactivated PaGFP ﬂuorescence intensity measured over the image ﬁeld decayed by > 50 % within 0 . 1 s ( two frames ) . ( B ) HUVEC stress ﬁbers after 10 min ( 10’ ) treatment with latrunculin ( 5 m M ) . The top panels ( red ) show the averaged tRFP - actin images : although there is little change in the total ﬂuorescence ( 97 5 17 counts / pixel ( before latrunculin treatment ) ; 100 5 23 counts / pixel ( after latruncu - lin treatment ) ) , the ﬁbers disappear after treatment . The bottom panels show PaGFP - CaMKII a ( green ) and single - particle tracks ( white lines ( n ¼ 3777 ( 0’ ) and 1573 ( 10’ ) ) superimposed on actin ( red ) . Insets : FT spectra ( tRFP - actin ( red ) ; GFP ( green ) ) . ( C ) PaGFP - CaMKII a ﬂuorescence decay before and after latrunculin treatment . Dual exponential ﬁts : 0 . 71 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 18 . 1 5 0 . 5 t ) ) þ 0 . 29 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 0 . 39 5 0 . 01 t ) ) ( dashed yellow line ) ( 0’ ) ; 0 . 8 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 19 . 9 5 0 . 8 t ) ) þ 0 . 21 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 0 . 92 5 0 . 04 t ) ) ( dotted yellow line ) ( 10’ ) . ( D ) Fluorescence intensity decay curves of PaGFP - b at various times ( in minutes ) after addition of latrunculin ( 5 m M ) to a Cos7 cell cul - ture . Intensity was normalized to unity at t ¼ 0 s ( t 0 ) and zero at t ¼ 3 s ( t 3 ) ; ( t 3 / t 0 ) ~ 50 % . Control ﬁt ( unnormalized ) : ( 0 . 26 5 0 . 01 ) þ ( 0 . 74 5 0 . 01 ( e ( (cid:2) 0 . 28 5 0 . 01t ) ) . Fits after latrunculin treatment ( green lines ) : 0 . 58 ( e ( (cid:2) 24 . 3 t ) ) þ 0 . 42 ( e ( (cid:2) 1 . 2 ) ) ( 10’ ) ; 0 . 81 ( e ( (cid:2) 29 . 3 t ) ) þ 0 . 19 ( e ( (cid:2) 1 . 8 ) ) ( 15’ ) . Inset : Filamentous structures visualized when PaGFP - b was photoactivated in the absence of latrunculin ( 0’ ) were not observed ( 10’ ) after addition of latrunculin . Correlation coefﬁcient R 2 > 0 . 99 for all ﬁts . Khan et al . 400 Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 estimated from photobleaching of immobilized GFP mole - cules or photoactivation of ﬁxed cells ( see Materials and Methods ) . Therefore , the decay must reﬂect diffusion of the photoactivated PaGFP molecules out of the evanescent ﬁeld . The PaGFP - CaMKII fusion constructs ( PaGFP - a and PaGFP - b ) showed slower and more complex kinetics ( Fig . 4 A ) , although it was still rapid relative to photo - bleaching . Their ﬂuorescence decay could be followed by single - molecule tracking . The decay proﬁles were approximated by dual - exponential ﬁts with a 0 . 24 s offset relative to the PaGFP intensity decay due to the ﬁve - frame lifetime tracking ﬁlter . Direct image ﬁeld intensity mea - surements , analogous to those used for PaGFP but cor - rected for the offset , showed a twofold difference in the fast - component , but not the slow - component , decay . Tracks may terminate for reasons other than ﬂuorescence loss , speciﬁcally crossover of tracks of unbound particles and imperfections of the tracking algorithm ( Supporting Materials and Methods ) , that could account for the modest discrepancy . The slow components for PaGFP - a ( 1 . 9 s ) and PaGFP - b ( 3 . 0 s ) were incompatible with free diffusion . Therefore , we used latrunculin B ( latrunculin ) ( 51 ) to test whether disruption of the actin cytoskeleton affected the mobility of PaGFP - CaMKII fusion proteins . The effect of latruncu - lin on HUVEC stress ﬁbers was evident within a few mi - nutes ( Fig . 4 B ) . Before latrunculin treatment , PaGFP - a colocalized weakly , generating an anisotropic pattern that aligned with the stress - ﬁber arrays as revealed by the ellip - tical Fourier transform ( FT ) spectra of the red / green images ( red FT ( R ( maj / min ) ( major / minor axial ratio ) ) ¼ 1 . 35 , angle ¼ 16 (cid:3) 5 5 (cid:3) ) ; green FT ( R ( maj / min ) ¼ 1 . 33 , angle ¼ 24 (cid:3) 5 5 (cid:3) ) . After incubation ( 10 min ) with latrunculin , the pattern had disappeared ( FT R ( maj / min ) ¼ ~ 1 for both channels ; Fig . 4 B , insets ) . We measured the photoactivated ﬂuorescence decay kinetics at 0 and 10 min after latruncu - lin treatment . Dual - exponential ﬁts to the ﬂuorescence decrease showed that the amplitude and rate of the fast - decay component increased with time after treatment , consistent with a reduced F - actin - immobilized fraction ( Fig . 4 C ) . We repeated the experiment with PaGFP - b . Photoactivated PaGFP - b formed brightly ﬂuorescent ﬁla - mentous substructures that disappeared after latrunculin treatment . The kinetics of PaGFP - b ﬂuorescence decay also changed ( Fig . 4 D ) concomitantly with the observed structural changes . The ﬂuorescence decay after photoacti - vation revealed a substantial fast - decay component for pulses applied 5 min after latrunculin treatment . The fast component increased with incubation time , so for photoac - tivation pulses 15 min after latrunculin treatment , the decay was similar to that seen for photoactivated PaGFP - a 10 min after latrunculin treatment . The fast - component decay was consistent with the formation of a PaGFP - like inert species . Structural determinants of the CaMKII F - actin interaction Having established single - molecule imaging techniques us - ing native a and b isoforms , we next examined the GFP fu - sions of a panel of functionally signiﬁcant CaMKII mutants . The mutations are mapped onto the CaMKII structure in Fig . 5 A ( residue positions are incremented by one in the corresponding b sequence ) . The primary phosphorylation site , a T286 , is important for long - term depression ( LTD ) as well as LTP since these functions are impaired in < a T286A > mutant mice ( 52 , 53 ) and are affected or abol - ished , respectively , by overexpression of a constitutively ac - tive < a T286D > ( 54 ) . To explore its role in single - molecule binding to cytoskeletal actin , we studied the homologous b T287A and b T287D mutants ( 1 ) . Phosphorylation of the secondary sites a T305 and a T306 is known to inhibit kinase activity ( 33 ) . We compared differences among the a T286D / T305 / T306 triple mutants with both secondary sites mutated to either aspartate or alanine . Other mutations / lesions of interest were a K42M , which blocks ATP binding necessary for CaMKII activation , LTP , and spine enlargement ( 55 ) ; a A302R , which disrupts calmodulin binding and transloca - tion to the PSD ( 9 ) ; and the b E 0 splice variant , which lacks linker sequences encoded by exons I and IV ( 56 ) . Finally , we used the tatCN21 inhibitor , which competes with the NR2B NMDA receptor subunit for binding to the T - site ( 57 ) , to see whether CaMKII binding targets elicit structural changes ( 58 ) that affect F - actin association . The primary phosphorylation site mutants have dramatically different effects on F - actin binding Averaged images show that the phosphorylation - incompe - tent b T287A mutant decorates cortical actin structures ( Figs . 5 B ( i ) and S4 ) . In contrast , the b T287D videos ( Movies S2 and S3 ) show an isotropic distribution of fast - moving spots in the cell cortex that did not map onto the stress ﬁbers ( Figs . 5 B ( ii ) and S4 ) . As for b , the tracks of im - mobilized b T287A spots have initial intensities that are several multiples of individual GFP ﬂuorophores and show multistep photobleaching time courses . A rare example of a long - lived track reveals 10 steps ( Fig . 5 C ) , consistent with the intensity ratio of the immobilized b T287A spot relative to single GFP ﬂuorophores . In contrast , averaged images of the phosphomimetic b T287D mutant show no ev - idence of actin colocalization . The difference between the two mutant proteins was emphasized by an analysis of MSD versus D t plots ( Fig . 5 D ) . For b T287A , the initial slope and subsequent behavior were superimposable with results obtained using native CaMKII b . The addition of tatCN21 ( 1 m M ) had no effect on the association of b T287A with F - actin ( two different cultures , > 10 , 000 tracks ) . In contrast , the initial ( MSD versus D t ) slope for b T287D was much greater than that for b and b T287A , with virtually no ( < 7 % ) tracks of CaMKII Single - Molecule Binding to F - actin Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 401 duration longer than 0 . 4s ( þ 0 . 24 s offset ) , consistent with fast - moving objects that diffused rapidly out of the evanes - cent ﬁeld . All of the mutant isoforms showed similar single - object intensities but formed two distinct mobility groups ANOVA was used to test for signiﬁcant differences in D lat values for the panel of CaMKII mutants ( Fig . 6 A ) based on estimates of variance within and between data sets ( Table S1 ) . Variances were normalized for different degrees of freedom , and the probability , p , that differences between populations were signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 05 ) was computed . Consistent with a visual inspection of the data ( Fig . 6 A ) , the results showed two distinct groups : a low - mobility group comprised of the b proteins ( native b , b K43R , b A303R , and b T287A ) and a high - mobility group comprised of all the a isoform mutants together with b T287D and b E 0 . A similar pattern was obtained when instantaneous velocities were compared ( Fig . S5 ) . The modal , single - spot intensity values ( Fig . 6 B ) obtained across all proteins are similar and vary between 50 and 80 counts / pixel , which is four - to sixfold lower than the anticipated value for the CaMKII holoen - zyme and twofold greater than for single GFP ﬂuorophores . The similar values rule out oligomer aggregation as a possible cause of the mobility differences between species . The brighter spots seen decorating stress ﬁbers in some video frames are due to PSF overlap of closely opposed spots ; however , their tracks can be separated provided the spots are not stationary ( 27 ) . Spot intensity measurements suggest that the expression level affects only the holoen - zyme number and not the subunit stoichiometry ( Fig . S5 B ) . Disassembly is also not the cause of the interspecies mobility differences , since the distributions lack peaks for the single GFP intensity and monomeric a could not be tracked ( see ‘‘Visualization of homomeric GFP - CaMKII b complexes in the cellular cortex’’ above ) . The intensity his - tograms of b , b T287D , and a ( Fig . S5 C ) are differentiated by their skewness rather than their modes . The skewness re - ﬂects long - lived track lifetimes and results from oligomer FIGURE 5 The T287D point mutation downregulates association with the actin cytoskeleton . ( A ) Atomic structure ( PDB : 3SOA ) of rat CaMKII ( 18 ) . The positions of the mutated sites ( K42 ( yellow ) , T286 ( red ) , A302 ( peach ) , and T305 / T306 ( magenta ) ) studied ; the junction of kinase ( green ) and association ( blue ) domains where the splice E 0 linker segment would be located ; and the substrate - binding T - site ( white ) are shown in relation to the secondary - structure elements ( cartoon representation ) . ( B ) Superimposed averaged images , processed as in Fig . 3 A , show localization of single mol - ecules ( Fig . S4 ; Movies S2 and S3 ) of ( i ) the dephosphorylated mimic , b 287A ( 550 frames , P pix ¼ 0 . 29 , P rand ¼ 0 . 16 5 0 . 07 , n ¼ 6511 ) and ( ii ) the phosphomimic , b 287D ( 475 frames ( P pix ¼ 0 . 08 , P rand ¼ 0 . 0 5 0 . 08 , n ¼ 1020 ) with tRFP - actin ( red , 100 frames ) . The mean tRFP inten - sities were 105 5 6 ( b T287A ) and 213 5 75 ( b T287D ) counts / pixel . ( C ) Photobleaching proﬁle of a long - lived b 287A - GFP track ( upper black line plot ) with the corresponding t - test statistic ( t - stat ) based on a rolling , nonoverlapping 12 - frame window ( lower red line plot ) . The t - stat axis de - notes the probability that successive 12 - frame segments have the same mean . The probability threshold was set to 10 (cid:2) 5 for detection of a step change . The bars on the time axis of the upper plot mark the 10 steps iden - tiﬁed by the t - test . The mean lifetime and intensity decrease per step were 2 . 6 5 0 . 4 s and 15 . 5 counts / pixel , respectively . ( D ) Average track MSD - versus - D t plots for the b 287D and b 287A populations . The dashed line is the plot for the native b population redrawn from Fig . 3 C . Khan et al . 402 Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 immobilization on actin stress ﬁbers ( as shown in Fig . 3 , A and B ) . CaMKII dissociation from cytoskeletal actin Thus far , our analysis indicates that the track lifetimes for both b and a are biphasic , with MSD versus D t plots of the short - lived population being consistent with diffusion out of the evanescent ﬁeld ( e . g . , Figs . 3 B and 5 D ) . The photoactivation experiments in the presence and absence of latrunculin demonstrate that the population track lifetime is dramatically reduced coincidently with stress - ﬁber disas - sembly . The reduction is mainly due to loss of the long - lived population , implying that these population lifetimes are limited by dissociation from the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 4 ) . With this in mind , we used track lifetime histo - grams to estimate the bound fraction and the F - actin disso - ciation rate for different CaMKII mutants . The lifetime of the phosphomimic b T287D was taken as representative of unbound molecules , based on b T287D’s failure to decorate cytoskeletal structures ( Fig . 5 B ; Movie S3 ) and its high mobility ( Fig . 6 A ) . Consistent with this idea , the b T287D track lifetime data were also fairly monotonic with single exponential decay ( rate constant ¼ 6 . 85 s (cid:2) 1 ( 1 – 0 . 05 , R 2 ¼ 0 . 99 ) ; Fig . S6 ) . We then ﬁtted all of the other track distributions over this range to a function that assumed there was a nonbinding fraction ( i . e . , like b T287D ) and another longer - lived fraction ( A o ) that repre - sented actin - binding complexes with an unknown but slower dissociation rate ( k ) : A t ¼ A 0 (cid:3) e (cid:2) kt (cid:4) þ ð 1 (cid:2) A 0 Þ (cid:3) e (cid:2) 6 : 85 t (cid:4) : ( 3 ) The cytoskeletal actin content was assumed to be the same for all experiments , consistent with the modest variation ( 127 5 49 counts / pixel ) in the mean tRFP - actin intensities in the images ( Figs . 3 , 4 , and 5 ) . The additional information obtained from Eq . 3 is the estimate of the bound ( A 0 ) to freely diffusing pools ( 1 (cid:2) A 0 ) of molecules and of the dissociation rate , k , of molecules from the actin cytoskel - eton . The bound fraction , A o , was 0 . 22 5 0 . 02 for all strong - binding b fusion proteins ( minus b E 0 ) . A 0 was ~ 2 - fold lower for ( a ) proteins . The overall group pattern was similar to the pattern observed in the D lat analysis . The k - values were 2 . 9 s (cid:2) 1 and 1 . 3 s (cid:2) 1 , respectively , for native ( a ) and ( b ) ( Fig . S6 ) . Equation 3 would be valid over the complete ( 1 – 0 ) range only for homogeneous populations that follow single - parameter Poisson probability time distributions . This is not the case for the two populations . For the unbound pop - ulation , as represented by the b T287D proteins , the D lat value for the most mobile among them ( ~ 0 . 5 m m 2 / s ; Fig . 6 A ) was ~ 18 - fold lower than the D Stokes value calcu - lated for free - diffusing ( b ) holoenzymes ( ~ 10 m m 2 / s ; Eq . 1 ) . This discrepancy , as well as the deviation of the b T287D distribution from the single exponential ﬁt ( Fig . S4 ) , indicates hindered diffusion , although bias intro - duced by exclusion of rapidly diffusing objects by the ﬁve - frame ( 0 . 24 s ) track ﬁlter would also contribute . Power - law distributions due to hindered diffusion have been character - ized for F - actin gels in vitro ( 59 ) , as well as in vivo for membrane proteins conﬁned by the actin cortex ( 60 , 61 ) . The tRFP - actin labeling does not resolve F - actin single ﬁl - aments in the dense cortex or F - actin spacing in stress ﬁ - bers , but limits on physical entrapment may be estimated ( Supporting Materials and Methods ) to rule out this sce - nario for stress - ﬁber decoration . For the bound population , a single k will obtain only if the dissociation of CaMKII from F - actin subunits does not depend on neighboring sub - units . This is not the case , since the detachment probability of a subunit will be lower if neighboring subunits partici - pate in binding together the CaMKII holoenzymes and F - actin . FIGURE 6 Characterization of the mutant pro - teins . ( A ) Mobility ( D lat ( mean 5 SE ) ) values for the protein populations . Red bars indicate a - iso - forms ; white bars indicate b - isoforms . b T287D and b E 0 have mobility similar to that of the a pro - teins . ( B ) Mode ( 5 SE ) intensities for the native and mutant GFP - CaMKII fusion protein popula - tions . The bar colors indicate isoforms as in ( A ) . CaMKII Single - Molecule Binding to F - actin Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 403 Therefore , we replotted all of our data on log - log axes . We found that they deviated markedly from a dual - exponen - tial process once the population fraction was < 5 % ( Fig . 7 A ) . All distributions showed the same convex log - log rela - tion , consistent with a multiexponential , log - normal distri - bution of dissociation times . The initial phase of the log plots over which Eq . 3 is valid provides important estimates of the major binding modes . Nevertheless , it was clear that at longer times the data deviated from a single - parameter , two - population model , and this observation was consistent across all data sets . We compared the times required to reach 10 % of the initial amplitude ( t 1 / 10 ) between data sets ( Fig . 7 B ) to better represent the log relations . We found the same grouping of different mutants as observed in the D lat analysis . ANOVA ( Table S2 . I ) did not reveal signiﬁcant differences between the grouped ( a ) proteins , but did so when these were group - ed with b T287D , b E 0 . As expected , t 1 / 10 was lowest for b T287D ( 1 . 14 þ 0 . 02 s ) , the reference unbound state , and highest for native b ( 3 . 1 5 0 . 08 s ) . We further analyzed differences between the data sets by conducting pairwise t - tests against the b T287D reference ( Table S2 . II ) to parse out differences between group members that were not revealed by the ANOVA . The t - tests revealed a and a K2M as outliers within the weak - binding group , whereas the t 1 / 10 values measured for b E 0 and the a T286D proteins with and without second - ary phosphorylation site mutations were not signiﬁcantly different from those obtained for b T287D ( Fig . 7 B ) . We used the photoactivation data to estimate the dissoci - ation constants ( K D ) app of CaMKII for actin . These data pro - vide a more valid estimate of the actin dissociation rate , k off , since locally activated PaGFP - tagged molecules essentially only leave the evanescent ﬁeld , whereas GFP - tagged mole - cules can both exit and enter from the bulk cytoplasm ( Supporting Materials and Methods ) , resulting in a seven - fold difference in the observed decay ( Fig . 7 ) . Our t 1 / 10 decay rates for PaGFP - a ( 3 . 4 5 0 . 4 s ) and PaGFP - b ( 9 . 4 þ 0 . 2 s ) give k off ( ¼ k 10 ( ( log ( 10 ) ) / t 1 / 10 ) estimates of 0 . 68 s (cid:2) 1 and 0 . 23 s (cid:2) 1 , respectively . If we assume that the rate of actin association ( k on ) is in the middle ( 5 (cid:4) 10 5 M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 ) of the narrow ( 10 5 – 10 6 M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 ) diffu - sion - controlled range ( 62 ) applicable to high - ionic strength media such as cell cytoplasm ( 63 ) , ( K D ) app ( ¼ k off / k on ) is 0 . 5 m M for b and 1 . 4 m M for a . The estimate for b is com - parable to its measured 2 . 4 m M afﬁnity for G - actin ( 24 ) . It is consistent with the simplest scenario of a common binding surface for both G - and F - actin , although more complex sce - narios are possible ( 64 , 65 ) . DISCUSSION In this work , we used TIRFM - based single - molecule imag - ing experiments , based on dual - color and photoactivation techniques , to study the dynamics of the interactions of CaMKII isotypes with F - actin within live cultured cells . Our ability to detect micromolar - afﬁnity , weak - binding in - teractions at subsecond resolution provides information that complements classical sedimentation and gel chroma - tography assays , and leads to important new , to our knowl - edge , insights . CaMKII binding to cytoskeletal actin We conducted mutant analyses to characterize CaMKII binding to cytoskeletal actin . Substitution of the primary phosphorylated threonine residue by aspartate ( b T287D and a T286D ) abolished F - actin association for both iso - forms , whereas substitution with alanine had no effect . The a T286D mutation abrogated afﬁnity for actin and this effect was independent of mutations at the secondary phos - phorylation sites . The b T287A and b T287D data are FIGURE 7 Track lifetimes show log - normal decay . ( A ) Log - log plots of the CaMKII track lifetime distributions deviate from dual exponential ﬁts and show a downward curvature that is most evident at longer times ( i , b proteins ; ii , a proteins ) . ( B ) Histogram of rates ( k 10 ) computed from decay times to 10 % amplitude . Asterisks mark species that associate with F - actin . Khan et al . 404 Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 consistent with the idea that primary - site phosphorylation acts as a single - stage toggle switch , in line with some acti - vation scenarios ( 66 ) , to control F - actin binding afﬁnity . Consistent with this idea , the b K43R and a K42M mutations that abolish ATP binding had no effect on F - actin associa - tion . Both b and a isoforms should bind ATP in HUVECs , since the CaMKII Michaelis constant for ATP is ~ 40 m M ( 58 ) and the cytoplasmic ATP concentration is typically 2 – 5 mM ( 67 ) . In addition , the b K43R / a K42M data show that , in contrast to association with the receptor subunit GluN2B ( 68 ) , the association with CaMKII F - actin is insen - sitive to ATP binding and subsequent hydrolysis per se . Elimination of calmodulin binding by the b A303R mutation or use of the peptide inhibitor tatCN21 had no effect on F - actin association . These observations are most simply consistent with low basal Ca 2 þ and CaMKII activity within HUVECs . Finally , the splice segment that is absent in b E 0 is essential for actin binding by the b isoform , consistent with sedimentation assays ( 22 ) . Using single - molecule live - cell imaging , we built upon the initial report of stress - ﬁber decoration in ﬁxed cells ( 20 ) , which established the CaMKII - F - actin interaction . Our direct observation of actin stress - ﬁber decoration by immobilized GFP - CaMKII holoenzymes in the presence of a mobile background fraction is consistent with speciﬁc binding to F - actin and is incompatible with nonspeciﬁc entrapment based on the known stress - ﬁber architecture . This is also the case for mobility distributions in other actin - rich regions of the cell , based on the known cortical F - actin density and calculated ﬁlament mesh size ( Sup - porting Materials and Methods ) . We found no evidence for higher - order clustering of holoenzymes into larger ag - gregates that could become either entrapped within or excluded from the actin cortical network or stress ﬁbers . The multistep photobleaching behavior of static spots , along with our histogram analysis of single - object ﬂuores - cence intensities , establishes that holoenzymes of CaMKII were the predominant species analyzed in our assays . The presence of larger aggregates is further ruled out by the fact that mutations that abolish Ca 2 þ / CaM binding ( A303R ) or nucleotide binding ( K42M / K43R ) required for aggregate formation ( 36 , 69 ) did not alter the native a / b mobility and lifetime distributions . Thus , the mobility differences between the b 287D / a T286D proteins and other CaMKII species , as well as the differences between weak - and strong - binding groups analyzed in this study , can only be explained by differences in F - actin binding afﬁnity . Although the possibility of CaMKII association with other stress - ﬁber actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) cannot be eliminated , three considerations argue for direct association with F - actin . First , the ABP would need to be abundantly and uniformly distributed along the ﬁbers to be consistent with our images ( Figs . 3 A and 4 A ; Movies S1 and S2 ) . Other stress - ﬁber structural ABPs ( a - actinin and nonmuscle myosin II ) display periodic banding ( 42 ) . CaMKII binds to a - actinin ( 70 ) , but this binding is not affected by primary - site phosphorylation ( 71 ) and thus may be ruled out . Sec - ond , although activated CaMKII has multiple binding targets , there are few binding partners for inactive CaMKII ( 2 ) , which , as argued above , may be the dominant form in our HUVEC cultures . Third , the relative binding strengths of the CaMKII b mutant proteins in our measurements corre - late well with results obtained with synthetic F - actin ﬁla - ments in bundling assays ( 22 ) . In neuronal cultures , differences in dendritic arborization ( 31 ) and mobility ( 32 ) between native and mutant ( A303R and K43R ) b GFP fusion proteins have been reported , but these differences are probably due to spontaneous neuronal activity that triggers Ca 2 þ . CAM binding for CaMKII activa - tion . Hence , although we do not think that multiple binding partners play a role in our assays , they likely do so in den - dritic spines . The reported multiple CaMKII kinetic spine subpopulations ( 16 ) may also be due , in part , to multimodal interactions with the F - actin network documented in this study . Mechanisms for the log - normal bound lifetime distribution The estimated dissociation constants , ( K D ) app , for actin are on the order of micromolar for both isoforms . The weak ( micromolar ) binding of the major b mode is in the ballpark of its reported G - actin afﬁnity . The log - normal distribution of track lifetimes indicates that stronger binding modes exist in addition to the dominant initial mode . These modes may arise from engagement of a variable number of CaMKII subunits with one or more actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . S7 ) . The fact that the log - normal relation holds for both isoforms and their mutant variants is consistent with the notion that both have a common F - actin binding determinant that is more accessible in b due to its longer , more ﬂexible linker . The alternatively spliced linker re - gion encoded by exons I and IV may increase ﬂexibility between subunits comprising the multimeric complex , thereby ameliorating the geometrical mismatch between CaMKII subunits ( 72 ) and binding sites on actin ( 73 ) . The increased ﬂexibility would optimize contact at the CaMKII and F - actin binding interface and facilitate simul - taneous binding at two or more sites , thereby increasing binding avidity . This ﬂexibility could also contribute to het - erogeneous binding kinetics , as single - molecule studies indicate that proteins may exist as ﬂuctuating conforma - tional ensembles that lead to power - law distributions in enzyme - turnover experiments over the 10 (cid:2) 3 to 10 s time - scale ( 74 ) . Phosphorylation or substitution of serine / threo - nine residues within the linker may also attenuate ﬂexibility , based on differences in residue size and charge , to regulate persistent CaMKII association with F - actin ( 13 ) . The possibility that the two isoforms have distinct CaMKII Single - Molecule Binding to F - actin Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 405 binding determinants for F - actin cannot be ruled out , but we favor the idea of a common determinant as an expla - nation based on linker length , which would also account for the difference seen between b and b E 0 . Physiological implications of the log - normal binding curve The log - normal binding curve extends the concentration range for interaction with the actin cytoskeleton . It has two consequences , as described below : First , it explains why the temporal resolution of the assay determines the detection sensitivity ( Fig . S7 ) . Our ability to detect weak - binding species will decrease as the time resolution of the assay increases . The likely explanation for the inability of classical assays to resolve the weak F - actin binding of < a > is that they only detect long - lived , tight - binding states . The binding of < a > to F - actin , thus established , must have a physiological ratio - nale . Variations in isoform expression ratios occur as neurons develop . The binding ensures that CaMKII holoenzymes , predominantly composed of a subunits , can also target the actin cytoskeleton . Although the noted functional effects of a T286D mutation are thought to be mediated by a kinase activity , F - actin association may also play a role . < a T286D > has reduced synaptic lo - calization ( 75 , 76 ) even though it binds GluN2B in vitro , and loss of F - actin association could account for this effect . Second , the curve has implications for the transport of < b > down neuronal processes . in contrast to < a > , < b > is expressed only in neuronal cell bodies . Increased avidity due to binding of multiple subunits to F - actin would depend on both the concentration and geometry of F - actin , as well as the multimeric state and ﬂexibility of CaMKII . We esti - mate expression levels of 0 . 2 – 0 . 4 m M in our assays , based on the density of ﬂuorescent spots in the videos ( 2000 / 20 m m 2 image ﬁeld area ) and the 100 nm effective depth of the evanescent ﬁeld . CaMKII concentrations in neurons are severalfold higher : above ~ 10 m M holoenzyme in den - dritic spines and ~ 2 – 5 m M holoenzyme in dendritic pro - cesses ( 5 ) . In regions of the cell where the actin cytoskeleton is sparse ( i . e . , dendritic and axonal branches ( 77 ) ) , the low ( micromolar ) afﬁnity of monovalent < b > binding would minimize its association with cytoskeletal actin during transport along the long neuronal processes ( 78 ) . However , in regions where the actin cytoskeleton forms a dense three - dimensional meshwork ( i . e . , dendritic spines ) , binding via multiple subunits would be favored and < b > would be immobilized . Thus , the extended bind - ing range would facilitate unhindered transport of CaMKII along neuronal processes and sequestration at dendritic spines . Within dendritic spines , the avidity difference between the two isoforms and between < b > and < b E 0 > would in - crease , with qualitatively different effects on the spine actin cytoskeleton . High avidity mediated by a few b subunits in the ab hetero - oligomers might be sufﬁcient to stabilize the dynamic actin cytoskeleton . The < b E 0 > splice variant is expressed in immature neurons ( 21 , 31 ) when afﬁnity for F - actin , which is not required for structural remode - ling of synaptic sites , would only hinder the transport needed for targeted kinase activity . Our results provide a quantitative rationale for the fact that the expression of < b E 0 > has different physiological effects compared with that of < b > . In conclusion , using single - molecule assays , we were able to resolve CaMKII F - actin binding events on the subsecond - to - second timescale in live mammalian cells . We documented the binding of both neuronal CaMKII isoforms and measured the effect of mutations that act at different points in the CaMKII activation cycle . The behavior of the mutants establishes that binding of CaMKII to actin only occurs when CaMKII is inactive ( speciﬁcally , when it is not phosphorylated at the primary phosphorylation site ) . This is in contrast to binding of CaMKII to GluNB , which is triggered only when the kinase is active . This new , to our knowledge , infor - mation should be valuable for modeling the role of the actin cytoskeleton in CaMKII transport and synaptic localization . SUPPORTING MATERIAL Supporting Materials and Methods , seven ﬁgures , two tables , and three movies are available at http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 16 ) 30440 - 4 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS S . K . designed and performed research , analyzed data , and wrote the manu - script . I . C . performed research . T . C . contributed reagents . K . U . B . designed research , contributed reagents , and wrote the manuscript . J . E . M . designed research , analyzed data , and wrote the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Margaret Stratton for comments on the manuscript , and Dr . Gregory Mashanov for help with computer interfacing and data processing . This work was supported by grants from the Royal Society Collaborative Exchange ( grant U1175 ) , National Institutes of Health ( grant R01 - NS081248 to K . U . B . ) , Molecular Biology Consortium ( S . K . ) , Francis Crick Institute which receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK , the UK Medical Research Council , and the Wellcome Trust ( J . E . M . ) . The Univer - sity of Colorado holds the patent rights for tatCN21 , its derivatives , and its uses ( PCT / US08 / 077934 , Compositions and Methods for Improved CaMKII Inhibitors and Uses Thereof ) . K . U . B . is the owner of Neurexus Therapeutics , LLC . SUPPORTING CITATIONS References ( 79 – 85 ) appear in the Supporting Material . Khan et al . 406 Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 REFERENCES 1 . Coultrap , S . J . , and K . U . Bayer . 2012 . CaMKII regulation in informa - tion processing and storage . Trends Neurosci . 35 : 607 – 618 . 2 . Hell , J . W . 2014 . CaMKII : claiming center stage in postsynaptic func - tion and organization . Neuron . 81 : 249 – 265 . 3 . Hudmon , A . , and H . Schulman . 2002 . Neuronal CA2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II : the role of structure and autoregulation in cellular function . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 71 : 473 – 510 . 4 . Bayer , K . U . , J . Lo¨hler , . , K . Harbers . 1999 . Developmental expres - sion of the CaM kinase II isoforms : ubiquitous gamma - and delta - CaM kinase II are the early isoforms and most abundant in the developing nervous system . Brain Res . Mol . Brain Res . 70 : 147 – 154 . 5 . Otmakhov , N . , and J . Lisman . 2012 . Measuring CaMKII concentration in dendritic spines . J . Neurosci . Methods . 203 : 106 – 114 . 6 . Borgesius , N . Z . , G . M . van Woerden , . , Y . Elgersma . 2011 . b CaMKII plays a nonenzymatic role in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and learning by targeting a CaMKII to synapses . J . Neurosci . 31 : 10141 – 10148 . 7 . Dosemeci , A . , J . H . Tao - Cheng , . , T . S . Reese . 2001 . Glutamate - induced transient modiﬁcation of the postsynaptic density . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 10428 – 10432 . 8 . Shen , K . , M . N . Teruel , . , T . Meyer . 2000 . Molecular memory by reversible translocation of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein ki - nase II . Nat . Neurosci . 3 : 881 – 886 . 9 . Shen , K . , and T . Meyer . 1999 . Dynamic control of CaMKII transloca - tion and localization in hippocampal neurons by NMDA receptor stim - ulation . Science . 284 : 162 – 166 . 10 . Bayer , K . U . , and H . Schulman . 2001 . Regulation of signal transduction by protein targeting : the case for CaMKII . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 289 : 917 – 923 . 11 . Okamoto , K . , T . Nagai , . , Y . Hayashi . 2004 . Rapid and persistent modulation of actin dynamics regulates postsynaptic reorganization underlying bidirectional plasticity . Nat . Neurosci . 7 : 1104 – 1112 . 12 . Hoffman , L . , M . M . Farley , and M . N . Waxham . 2013 . Calcium - calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II isoforms differentially impact the dynamics and structure of the actin cytoskeleton . Biochemistry . 52 : 1198 – 1207 . 13 . Kim , K . , G . Lakhanpal , . , K . Okamoto . 2015 . A temporary gating of actin remodeling during synaptic plasticity consists of the interplay between the kinase and structural functions of CaMKII . Neuron . 87 : 813 – 826 . 14 . Murakoshi , H . , and R . Yasuda . 2012 . Postsynaptic signaling during plasticity of dendritic spines . Trends Neurosci . 35 : 135 – 143 . 15 . Bayer , K . U . , P . De Koninck , . , H . Schulman . 2001 . Interaction with the NMDA receptor locks CaMKII in an active conformation . Nature . 411 : 801 – 805 . 16 . Lu , H . E . , H . D . MacGillavry , . , T . A . Blanpied . 2014 . Multiple spatial and kinetic subpopulations of CaMKII in spines and dendrites as resolved by single - molecule tracking PALM . J . Neurosci . 34 : 7600 – 7610 . 17 . Tang , F . , and K . Kalil . 2005 . Netrin - 1 induces axon branching in devel - oping cortical neurons by frequency - dependent calcium signaling path - ways . J . Neurosci . 25 : 6702 – 6715 . 18 . Chao , L . H . , M . M . Stratton , . , J . Kuriyan . 2011 . A mechanism for tunable autoinhibition in the structure of a human Ca2 þ / calmodulin - dependent kinase II holoenzyme . Cell . 146 : 732 – 745 . 19 . Kanaseki , T . , Y . Ikeuchi , . , T . Yamauchi . 1991 . Structural features of Ca2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II revealed by electron mi - croscopy . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1049 – 1060 . 20 . Shen , K . , M . N . Teruel , . , T . Meyer . 1998 . CaMKIIbeta functions as an F - actin targeting module that localizes CaMKIIalpha / beta heteroo - ligomers to dendritic spines . Neuron . 21 : 593 – 606 . 21 . Lin , Y . C . , and L . Redmond . 2008 . CaMKIIbeta binding to stable F - actin in vivo regulates F - actin ﬁlament stability . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 15791 – 15796 . 22 . O’Leary , H . , E . Lasda , and K . U . Bayer . 2006 . CaMKIIbeta association with the actin cytoskeleton is regulated by alternative splicing . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 4656 – 4665 . 23 . Okamoto , K . , R . Narayanan , . , Y . Hayashi . 2007 . The role of CaMKII as an F - actin - bundling protein crucial for maintenance of dendritic spine structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 6418 – 6423 . 24 . Sanabria , H . , M . T . Swulius , . , M . N . Waxham . 2009 . betaCaMKII regulates actin assembly and structure . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 9770 – 9780 . 25 . Wong , A . J . , T . D . Pollard , and I . M . Herman . 1983 . Actin ﬁlament stress ﬁbers invascular endothelial cells invivo . Science . 219 : 867 – 869 . 26 . Mashanov , G . I . , D . Tacon , . , J . E . Molloy . 2003 . Visualizing single molecules inside living cells using total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . Methods . 29 : 142 – 152 . 27 . Mashanov , G . I . , and J . E . Molloy . 2007 . Automatic detection of single ﬂuorophores in live cells . Biophys . J . 92 : 2199 – 2211 . 28 . Hern , J . A . , A . H . Baig , . , N . J . Birdsall . 2010 . Formation and disso - ciation of M1 muscarinic receptor dimers seen by total internal reﬂec - tion ﬂuorescence imaging of single molecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 107 : 2693 – 2698 . 29 . Nenasheva , T . A . , G . I . Mashanov , . , J . E . Molloy . 2011 . Imaging in - dividual myosin molecules within living cells . Methods Mol . Biol . 778 : 123 – 142 . 30 . Nenasheva , T . A . , M . Neary , . , J . E . Molloy . 2013 . Abundance , distri - bution , mobility and oligomeric state of M 2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in live cardiac muscle . J . Mol . Cell . Cardiol . 57 : 129 – 136 . 31 . Fink , C . C . , K . U . Bayer , . , T . Meyer . 2003 . Selective regulation of neurite extension and synapse formation by the beta but not the alpha isoform of CaMKII . Neuron . 39 : 283 – 297 . 32 . Khan , S . , T . S . Reese , . , A . Shabbir . 2012 . Spatiotemporal maps of CaMKII in dendritic spines . J . Comput . Neurosci . 33 : 123 – 139 . 33 . Pi , H . J . , N . Otmakhov , . , J . Lisman . 2010 . Autonomous CaMKII can promote either long - term potentiation or long - term depression , de - pending on the state of T305 / T306 phosphorylation . J . Neurosci . 30 : 8704 – 8709 . 34 . Bayer , K . U . , E . LeBel , . , P . De Koninck . 2006 . Transition from reversible to persistent binding of CaMKII to postsynaptic sites and NR2B . J . Neurosci . 26 : 1164 – 1174 . 35 . Otmakhov , N . , J . H . Tao - Cheng , . , J . Lisman . 2004 . Persistent accu - mulation of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II in den - dritic spines after induction of NMDA receptor - dependent chemical long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 24 : 9324 – 9331 . 36 . Hudmon , A . , E . Lebel , . , P . De Koninck . 2005 . A mechanism for Ca2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II clustering at synaptic and nonsynaptic sites based on self - association . J . Neurosci . 25 : 6971 – 6983 . 37 . Subach , F . V . , G . H . Patterson , . , V . V . Verkhusha . 2009 . Photoactivat - able mCherry for high - resolution two - color ﬂuorescence microscopy . Nat . Methods . 6 : 153 – 159 . 38 . Merzlyak , E . M . , J . Goedhart , . , D . M . Chudakov . 2007 . Bright mono - meric red ﬂuorescent protein with an extended ﬂuorescence lifetime . Nat . Methods . 4 : 555 – 557 . 39 . Goedhart , J . , D . von Stetten , . , A . Royant . 2012 . Structure - guided evolution of cyan ﬂuorescent proteins towards a quantum yield of 93 % . Nat . Commun . 3 : 751 . 40 . Conte , I . L . , N . Hellen , . , T . Carter . 2016 . Interaction between MyRIP and the actin cytoskeleton regulates Weibel - Palade body trafﬁcking and exocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 129 : 592 – 603 . 41 . Khan , S . , Y . Zou , . , T . S . Reese . 2011 . Sequestration of CaMKII in dendritic spines in silico . J . Comput . Neurosci . 31 : 581 – 594 . 42 . Pellegrin , S . , and H . Mellor . 2007 . Actin stress ﬁbres . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 3491 – 3499 . 43 . Burnette , D . T . , S . Manley , . , J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2011 . A role for actin arcs in the leading - edge advance of migrating cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 371 – 381 . CaMKII Single - Molecule Binding to F - actin Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016 407 44 . Wang , Z . , R . Ginnan , . , H . A . Singer . 2010 . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II delta 6 ( CaMKIIdelta6 ) and RhoA involve - ment in thrombin - induced endothelial barrier dysfunction . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 21303 – 21312 . 45 . Dalgaard , P . 2008 . Introductory Statistics with R , 2nd ed . Springer , New York . 46 . Fischer , H . , I . Polikarpov , and A . F . Craievich . 2004 . Average protein density is a molecular - weight - dependent function . Protein Sci . 13 : 2825 – 2828 . 47 . Swaminathan , R . , C . P . Hoang , and A . S . Verkman . 1997 . Photobleach - ing recovery and anisotropy decay of green ﬂuorescent protein GFP - S65T in solution and cells : cytoplasmic viscosity probed by green ﬂuorescent protein translational and rotational diffusion . Biophys . J . 72 : 1900 – 1907 . 48 . Swaminathan , R . , S . Bicknese , . , A . S . Verkman . 1996 . Cytoplasmic viscosity near the cell plasma membrane : translational diffusion of a small ﬂuorescent solute measured by total internal reﬂection - ﬂuores - cence photobleaching recovery . Biophys . J . 71 : 1140 – 1151 . 49 . Rellos , P . , A . C . Pike , . , S . Knapp . 2010 . Structure of the CaMKII - delta / calmodulin complex reveals the molecular mechanism of CaMKII kinase activation . PLoS Biol . 8 : e1000426 . 50 . Kerber , M . L . , D . T . Jacobs , . , R . E . Cheney . 2009 . A novel form of motility in ﬁlopodia revealed by imaging myosin - X at the single - mole - cule level . Curr . Biol . 19 : 967 – 973 . 51 . Coue´ , M . , S . L . Brenner , . , E . D . Korn . 1987 . Inhibition of actin poly - merization by latrunculin A . FEBS Lett . 213 : 316 – 318 . 52 . Giese , K . P . , N . B . Fedorov , . , A . J . Silva . 1998 . Autophosphorylation at Thr286 of the alpha calcium - calmodulin kinase II in LTP and learning . Science . 279 : 870 – 873 . 53 . Coultrap , S . J . , R . K . Freund , . , K . U . Bayer . 2014 . Autonomous CaMKII mediates both LTP and LTD using a mechanism for differen - tial substrate site selection . Cell Reports . 6 : 431 – 437 . 54 . Mayford , M . , M . E . Bach , . , E . R . Kandel . 1996 . Control of memory formation through regulated expression of a CaMKII transgene . Science . 274 : 1678 – 1683 . 55 . Yamagata , Y . , S . Kobayashi , . , S . Okabe . 2009 . Kinase - dead knock - in mouse reveals an essential role of kinase activity of Ca2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IIalpha in dendritic spine enlargement , long - term potentiation , and learning . J . Neurosci . 29 : 7607 – 7618 . 56 . Brocke , L . , M . Srinivasan , and H . Schulman . 1995 . Developmental and regional expression of multifunctional Ca2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase isoforms in rat brain . J . Neurosci . 15 : 6797 – 6808 . 57 . Vest , R . S . , K . D . Davies , . , K . U . Bayer . 2007 . Dual mechanism of a natural CaMKII inhibitor . Mol . Biol . Cell . 18 : 5024 – 5033 . 58 . Raveendran , R . , S . Devi Suma Priya , . , R . V . Omkumar . 2009 . Phos - phorylation status of the NR2B subunit of NMDA receptor regulates its interaction with calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II . J . Neurochem . 110 : 92 – 105 . 59 . Schmidt , C . F . , M . Barmann , . , E . Sackmann . 1989 . Chain dynamics , mesh size and diffusive transport in networks of polymerized actin . A quasielastic light scattering and microﬂuorescence study . Macromole - cules . 22 : 3638 – 3649 . 60 . Heinemann , F . , S . K . Vogel , and P . Schwille . 2013 . Lateral membrane diffusion modulated by a minimal actin cortex . Biophys . J . 104 : 1465 – 1475 . 61 . Umemura , Y . M . , M . Vrljic , . , A . Kusumi . 2008 . Both MHC class II and its GPI - anchored form undergo hop diffusion as observed by sin - gle - molecule tracking . Biophys . J . 95 : 435 – 450 . 62 . Schlosshauer , M . , and D . Baker . 2004 . Realistic protein - protein associ - ation rates from a simple diffusional model neglecting long - range inter - actions , free energy barriers , and landscape ruggedness . Protein Sci . 13 : 1660 – 1669 . 63 . Fersht , A . 1999 . Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science . W . H . Freeman & Co . , New York . 64 . Dominguez , R . 2004 . Actin - binding proteins—a unifying hypothesis . Trends Biochem . Sci . 29 : 572 – 578 . 65 . dos Remedios , C . G . , D . Chhabra , . , N . J . Nosworthy . 2003 . Actin binding proteins : regulation of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol . Rev . 83 : 433 – 473 . 66 . Thaler , C . , S . V . Koushik , . , S . S . Vogel . 2009 . Structural rearrange - ment of CaMKIIalpha catalytic domains encodes activation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 6369 – 6374 . 67 . Sachs , J . R . 1981 . Internal potassium stimulates the sodium - potassium pump by increasing cell ATP concentration . J . Physiol . 319 : 515 – 528 . 68 . O’Leary , H . , W . H . Liu , . , K . U . Bayer . 2011 . Nucleotides and phos - phorylation bi - directionally modulate Ca2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II ( CaMKII ) binding to the N - methyl - D - aspartate ( NMDA ) receptor subunit GluN2B . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 31272 – 31281 . 69 . Vest , R . S . , H . O’Leary , and K . U . Bayer . 2009 . Differential regulation by ATP versus ADP further links CaMKII aggregation to ischemic con - ditions . FEBS Lett . 583 : 3577 – 3581 . 70 . Walikonis , R . S . , A . Oguni , . , M . B . Kennedy . 2001 . Densin - 180 forms a ternary complex with the ( alpha ) - subunit of Ca2 þ / calmod - ulin - dependent protein kinase II and ( alpha ) - actinin . J . Neurosci . 21 : 423 – 433 . 71 . Robison , A . J . , R . K . Bartlett , . , R . J . Colbran . 2005 . Differential mod - ulation of Ca2 þ / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II activity by regulated interactions with N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor NR2B sub - units and alpha - actinin . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 39316 – 39323 . 72 . Rosenberg , O . S . , S . Deindl , . , J . Kuriyan . 2006 . Oligomerization states of the association domain and the holoenyzme of Ca2 þ / CaM ki - nase II . FEBS J . 273 : 682 – 694 . 73 . Wu , Y . , and J . Ma . 2004 . Reﬁnement of F - actin model against ﬁber diffraction data by long - range normal modes . Biophys . J . 86 : 116 – 124 . 74 . Min , W . , and X . S . Xie . 2006 . Kramers model with a power - law friction kernel : dispersed kinetics and dynamic disorder of biochemical reac - tions . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 73 : 010902 . 75 . Marsden , K . C . , A . Shemesh , . , R . C . Carroll . 2010 . Selective trans - location of Ca2 þ / calmodulin protein kinase IIalpha ( CaMKIIalpha ) to inhibitory synapses . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 107 : 20559 – 20564 . 76 . Barcomb , K . , I . Buard , . , K . U . Bayer . 2014 . Autonomous CaMKII requires further stimulation by Ca2 þ / calmodulin for enhancing synap - tic strength . FASEB J . 28 : 3810 – 3819 . 77 . Xu , K . , G . Zhong , and X . Zhuang . 2013 . Actin , spectrin , and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons . Science . 339 : 452 – 456 . 78 . Adamec , R . , M . Hebert , . , R . F . Mervis . 2012 . Dendritic morphology of amygdala and hippocampal neurons in more and less predator stress responsive rats and more and less spontaneously anxious handled con - trols . Behav . Brain Res . 226 : 133 – 146 . 79 . Patterson , G . H . 2007 . Photobleaching and photoactivation of ﬂuorescent proteins for studies in cell biology . Microsc . Microanal . 13 : 294 – 295 . 80 . Schneider , C . A . , W . S . Rasband , and K . W . Eliceiri . 2012 . NIH Image to ImageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat . Methods . 9 : 671 – 675 . 81 . Manders , E . M . , F . J . Verbeek , and J . A . Aten . 1993 . Measurement of co - localization of objects in dual - colour confocal images . J . Microsc . 169 : 375 – 382 . 82 . Costes , S . V . , D . Daelemans , . , S . Lockett . 2004 . Automatic and quan - titative measurement of protein - protein colocalization in live cells . Biophys . J . 86 : 3993 – 4003 . 83 . Qian , H . , M . P . Sheetz , and E . L . Elson . 1991 . Single particle tracking . Analysis of diffusion and ﬂow in two - dimensional systems . Biophys . J . 60 : 910 – 921 . 84 . Meyer , R . K . , and U . Aebi . 1990 . Bundling of actin ﬁlaments by alpha - actinin depends on its molecular length . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 2013 – 2024 . 85 . Koestler , S . A . , K . Rottner , . , J . V . Small . 2009 . F - and G - actin con - centrations in lamellipodia of moving cells . PLoS One . 4 : e4810 . Khan et al . 408 Biophysical Journal 111 , 395 – 408 , July 26 , 2016