UbiTtention 2020 : 5th International Workshop on Smart & Ambient Notification and A ￿ ention Management Niels van Berkel Aalborg University Aalborg , Denmark nielsvanberkel @ cs . aau . dk Anja Exler Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Karlsruhe , Germany exler @ teco . edu Martin Gjoreski Jozef Stefan Institute Ljubljana , Slovenia martin . gjoreski @ ijs . si Tine Kolenik Jozef Stefan Institute Ljubljana , Slovenia tine . kolenik @ ijs . si Tadashi Okoshi Keio University Tokyo , Japan slash @ ht . sfc . keio . ac . jp Veljko Pejovic University of Ljubljana Ljubljana , Slovenia veljko . pejovic @ fri . uni - lj . si Aku Visuri University of Oulu Oulu , Finland aku . visuri @ oulu . ￿ Alexandra Voit adesso SE Dortmund , Germany alexandra . voit @ vis . uni - stuttgart . de ABSTRACT Users are increasingly confronted with a tremendous amount of information proactively and without explicit consent through noti ￿ cations from a variety of applications and services . This information load is increased due to the ubiquity of end - user ( mobile ) devices . Novel computing paradigms such as IoT and smart cities may further overload end - users , despite the clear indication from literature that human attention is limited . To counter this challenge , “attention management” , including attention representation , sensing , prediction , analysis , per - sonalization , and adaptive behavior is needed in our comput - ing systems . Following the successful UbiTtention workshop series as organised from 2016 on - wards , the UbiTtention 2020 workshop brings together researchers and practitioners from academia and industry to explore the management of human attention and noti ￿ cations across versatile devices and contexts . UbiTtention presents and elicits research to overcome information overload and overchoice – tailoring device or application behavior to user needs . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personalorclassroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforpro ￿ t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ￿ rst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speci ￿ c permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . UbiComp / ISWC ’20 Adjunct , September 12 – 16 , 2020 , Cancun , Mexico © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6869 - 8 / 19 / 09 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3341162 . 3347766 CCS CONCEPTS • Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; • Ubiquitous com - puting ; KEYWORDS Noti ￿ cations , Attention Management , Ambient Interfaces , Smart Cities , Internet of Things , Interruption Management ACM Reference Format : Niels van Berkel , Anja Exler , Martin Gjoreski , Tine Kolenik , Tadashi Okoshi , Veljko Pejovic , Aku Visuri , and Alexandra Voit . 2020 . UbiT - tention 2020 : 5th International Workshop on Smart & Ambient Noti ￿ cation and Attention Management . In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2020 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and the 2020 International Symposium on Wearable Computers ( UbiComp / ISWC ’20 Adjunct ) , September 12 – 16 , 2020 , Cancun , Mexico . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3341162 . 3347766 1 BACKGROUND Attention is one of the most precious resources we have , yet , today’s ubiquitous computing environments indiscrimi - nately exploit this resource for individual applications’ ben - e ￿ ts . Devices and services are proactively seeking our atten - tion through noti ￿ cations : visual , auditory , or tactile alerts in - tended to draw attention to events that took place outside of a user’s focus [ 8 ] . Attention grabbing is rapidly becoming inte - gral to many ubiquitous computing platforms , such as smart - phones , desktop computers , and vehicles , where noti ￿ cations are used by multiple applications and services [ 18 , 22 ] , such as social networks , email clients , or driving alert systems . UbiComp / ISWC ’20 Adjunct , September 12 – 16 , 2020 , Cancun , Mexico van Berkel et al . Despite the bene ￿ t of triggering a timely reaction , and indeed , potentially legitimate steering of a user’s attention to critical information , research has repeatedly shown that noti ￿ cations can be distracting , causing a negative e ￿ ect on task performance [ 3 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 12 , 19 ] , increasing stress [ 11 ] , and reducing wellbeing [ 10 ] . Furthermore , often used by communication platforms [ 4 , 6 , 16 , 18 ] , noti ￿ cations carry certain social expectations towards responsiveness , result - ing in added pressure to attend noti ￿ cations . Consequently , disabling noti ￿ cations , despite their known disadvantages , for many people is not an option [ 6 , 8 , 12 ] . At the core of the issue with distraction in ubiquitous computing environments lies our limited cognitive capac - ity . Di ￿ erent cognitive loads demanded by the o ￿ ine and online tasks we perform , tasks signaled by noti ￿ cations , as well as tasks performed while the noti ￿ cations are buzzing , make it challenging for the user to triage their attention e ￿ - ciently . Eventually , this leads to the problems of information overload and overchoice —in our opinion two of the most rel - evant problems in information technology for the next few decades . In the era of the Internet of Things ( IoT ) we have to handle incoming noti ￿ cations from both our personal as well as ‘other’ devices . Together with developments in smart city environments or with smart mobility , this information overload is expected to grow . Recently , we have seen an increase in novel attempts to address these problems by utilising contextual data [ 7 , 9 , 13 , 15 , 17 , 20 ] or noti ￿ cation content [ 14 , 21 ] in order to deliver noti ￿ cations at more opportune moments , the use of ambient information presentation or augmentation , or by making it easier to deal with interruptions [ 2 ] . However , signi ￿ cant Figure 1 : This alarm clock uses ambient light to softly wake up its user . We envision that it could also be used as an helpful output device for other information , e . g . , incoming phone calls or reminders . Table 1 : Overview of workshop topics . ( 1 ) Detection / prediction of users’ status around attention and noti ￿ cations , such as availability , interruptibility , attentional status and cognitive load ( 2 ) Exchange / share data , analysis and feedback on capa - bilities beyond detection and prediction ( 3 ) Versatile types of information presentation methods including ambient , peripheral , distributed and multi - modal presentation ( 4 ) Infrastructures , frameworks and tools for the develop - ment of smart attention systems ( 5 ) Strategies for attention management against emerging computing technologies , including IoT devices ( 6 ) Understanding users’ behavior and habits around noti - ￿ cations and interruption , including longer term “user engagement” and “behavior change” ( 7 ) Use of ambient representations for “big - data analysis” ( 8 ) Management of information overload in various emerging computing venues such as smart city and smart mobility challenges , especially along the lines of understanding cog - nitive load and our information processing limitations [ 1 ] , as well as devising technologies that interact with their users in adaptive multimodal ways , still remain . 2 UBITTENTION 2020 WORKSHOP In this workshop , we will bring together people from indus - try and academia who are active in the areas of attention research , context - aware and ubiquitous computing , person - alization and adaptation , and ambient and multi - modal in - teraction . The main objective of UbiTtention 2020 is to share the latest research on user attention and noti ￿ cation manage - ment in several research areas and contexts , including HCI , systems research , user studies , IoT , smart cities , smart homes , and smart vehicles ( as shown in Table 1 ) . Further , this work - shop aims to identify future research challenges , research opportunities , and applications of our research outcomes to society at large . This workshop is a follow - on from the successful Smart - tention , Please ! workshops at MobileHCI 2015 and 2016 , and the UbiTtention workshops at UbiComp 2016 , 2017 , 2018 , and 2019 1 . Last year , the UbiTtention workshop received 12 inno - vative papers and more than 35 participants on the venue of UbiComp 2018 . While the Smarttention workshops focused more on mobile noti ￿ cations , the subsequent UbiTtention workshops focus on a larger understanding of the di ￿ erent roles noti ￿ cations can play in a wide variety of computing 1 https : / / www . ubittention . org / 2019 / UbiTtention 2020 UbiComp / ISWC ’20 Adjunct , September 12 – 16 , 2020 , Cancun , Mexico Figure 2 : Discussion at the UbiTention ’17 workshop at Ubi - Comp ’17 in Mauii . Figure 3 : Audience at the UbiTention ’18 workshop at Ubi - Comp ’18 in Singapore . environments including the o ￿ ce , the home , in cars , as well as other smart environments . Relevance and impact to UbiComp : UbiTtention’s fo - cus on user attention and noti ￿ cations is related to key re - search ￿ elds of UbiComp , such as HCI , mobile computing , IoT - based services , and others , thus the workshop has sig - ni ￿ cant potential to impact and contribute to all the listed areas . In addition , past UbiComp papers represent a cornerstone of attention management research [ 1 , 13 , 15 , 22 ] , making Ubi - Comp 2020 the ideal venue for UbiTtention 2020 workshop . The impact is bidirectional , as the tradition of UbiTtention being collocated with UbiComp has resulted in a number of contributions initially presented and shaped by discussions at UbiTtention , ending up published in ACM IMWUT . Finally , UbiComp is rapidly engaging machine learning re - searchers and practitioners interested in making real - world impact . In line with this trend , UbiTtention 2020 introduces the cognitive load inference challenge ( see Section 5 ) , thus providing a collaboration platform for machine learning , ubiquitous computing , and psychology researchers . Our pre - liminary contacts with diverse research groups from academia and industry , e . g . Dr . Garbas ( Fraunhofer IIS ) , Dr . Lustrek ( In - stitute Jozef Stefan – winners of last year’s UbiComp HASCA and Emteq challenges ) , and Dr David ( Kassel University ) , who have expressed interest in participating in such a chal - lenge , point out that UbiTtention may promote UbiComp participation within a rather diverse audience . Long - term objectives : The workshop will lead to a deeper understanding of cognitive load , noti ￿ cations , and attention management . We plan to consolidate and signi ￿ cantly ex - pand an already vibrant research community formed around the previous installments of UbiTtention . More speci ￿ cally , we are already communicating with Springer publishing house about a book on the topic of attention management in ubiq - uitous computing , and UbiTtention will help us to identify cutting edge research contributions whose authors will be invited to contribute chapters to the mentioned book . 3 WORKSHOP STRUCTURE We plan UbiTtention 2020 as a full - day workshop , aiming to bring together practitioners and academics . The key parts of the workshop include : a keynote , a paper presentation session , and an open - data challenge . Previous years have demonstrated the bene ￿ ts of keynote talks that enable UbiTtention audience to gain deeper in - sights on a particular research achievement in the area of attention management . Moreover , we found that the work - shop keynote format enables a larger degree of interaction between the presenter and the audience . We will strive to have a female and / or a minority keynote . Potential candi - dates we plan to invite include Shamsi Iqbal , Gloria Mark , and Mary Czerwinski . The second part of the workshop consists of short pa - per presentations . UbiTtention does not aim to be a mini - conference , thus , the paper presentations are not a goal per se , but a means to spark discussion with the audience . The discussions serve as an early feedback and brainstorming session aimed to help presenters steer their future research endeavors . UbiTtention papers will not be selected merely on their technical quality , but the likeliness of the topic sparking discussion at the workshop . Papers describing an early - stage demo products will be especially welcome . Finally , a novel part of this year’s UbiTtention is the open - data challenge . The challenge , motivated by a discussion held at UbiTtention 2019 , where the lack of open datasets used for the evaluation of di ￿ erent approaches towards at - tention management was highlighted , enables researchers to develop and evaluate innovative solutions in the area of UbiComp / ISWC ’20 Adjunct , September 12 – 16 , 2020 , Cancun , Mexico van Berkel et al . Table 2 : The workshop will be a mixture of recent research result presentations , keynote talks , group discussions , and a presentation of winning entries for the open - data challenge . 09 : 00 – 09 : 10 Introductions 09 : 10 – 10 : 00 Keynote Lecture 10 : 00 – 10 : 30 Co ￿ ee Break 10 : 30 – 12 : 30 Paper Presentation Session 12 : 30 – 13 : 30 Lunch Break 13 : 30 – 15 : 00 Open - Data Challenge Presentations 15 : 00 – 15 : 30 Co ￿ ee Break 15 : 30 – 16 : 00 Challenge Winner Announcement 16 : 00 – 17 : 00 Wrap - up Session & Plan of Future Actions 18 : 30 – 20 : 00 Workshop Dinner cognitive load inference , one of the key sub - areas supporting attention management in ubiquitous computing . 4 WORKSHOP PAPERS Our workshop will ask for papers outlining new insights in the topics listed in Table 1 . The papers are written in the SIGCHI Extended Abstract format with a length of 4 to 6 pages and are to be included in the ACM Digital Library . Call for papers will be sent to all relevant mailing lists of several research communities , including those of UbiComp research , HCI , mobile interaction , as well as the IoT , smart city , smart home , and smart vehicle communities . Further , the call will be distributed to participants of the previous Smart - tention and UbiTtention workshops . Finally , information will also be shared on the workshop website and Facebook page . We aim for a selection of 10 - 15 workshop papers . Submis - sions will be peer - reviewed by at least two reviewers from an international PC of renowned researchers and experts . The acceptance criteria will be a mixture of relevance , nov - elty , writing , research quality , and provocativeness . With the aforementioned measures , we are con ￿ dent to attract a large number of submissions , which will allow us to assemble a high - quality workshop . 5 OPEN - DATA CHALLENGE To prevent undesirable e ￿ ects of attention grabbing at times when a user is occupied with a di ￿ cult task , ubiquitous com - puting devices should be aware of the user’s cognitive load . When humans experience a psycho - physiological load , e . g . , in the form of a demanding task , the activation of the sym - pathetic nervous system increases . The increased activation substantially speeds up certain processes within the body ( ‘ ￿ ght - or - ￿ ight’ response ) . It raises the heart rate , sweating rate , breathing rate , and blood pressure ; the pupils dilate ; the saliva ￿ ow decreases ; the heart - beats become equidis - tant ; the blood ￿ ow is restricted from the extremities , and is redirected towards the vital organs . Traditionally , these signals have been measured in highly controlled environ - ments using specialized equipment . Recently , the desire for in - situ knowledge of cognitive load has led to advances in physiological signal - based cognitive load inference using commodity devices . However , inferring cognitive load is ex - tremely challenging , especially when performed without obtrusive , expensive , and purpose - built equipment . To advance the ￿ eld of cognitive load inference in ubiqui - tous computing , we will organize a public machine learning ( ML ) challenge in which competitors can build their own ML pipelines for cognitive load inference . All ML pipelines will be trained and evaluated on the same dataset , thus enabling a systematic and comparable advancement . The dataset is the ￿ rst labelled dataset for cognitive load monitoring with a wristband and it will be fully released after the challenge . During the challenge , the participants will only have access to a labelled training subset and unlabelled test subset . The labels of the test subset will be kept in secret . The dataset was collected in a quiet , normal - temperature room while working on a PC with the wristband strapped to her non - dominant arm . Twenty participants attended these experiments . The technical details of the challenge are described in the call for participation . 6 CONCLUSION The successful UbiTtention series of workshops on user at - tention and noti ￿ cation management has provided valuable lessons both for academia and industry in the ￿ elds such as HCI , mobile computing , and IoT - based services . The dynamic development of these ￿ elds seeks for continuous and active addressing of the related research challenges and opportuni - ties . We expect that approximately 35 participants , leading UbiComp machine learning teams , and organizers who have led the community for the past ￿ ve years , will ensure that this year’s UbiTtention showcases the latest research on user attention and noti ￿ cation management , thus empowering further growth and enabling transition of this knowledge into applications that can positively impact the society . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Christoph Anderson , Isabel Hübener , Ann - Kathrin Seipp , Sandra Ohly , Klaus David , and Veljko Pejovic . 2018 . A survey of attention manage - ment systems in ubiquitous computing environments . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 2 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 2 ] Matthias Böhmer , Christian Lander , Sven Gehring , Duncan P . Brumby , and Antonio Krüger . 2014 . Interrupted by a Phone Call : Exploring Designs for Lowering the Impact of Call Noti ￿ cations for Smartphone Users . In CHI ’14 ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) . ACM . [ 3 ] Jelmer P . Borst , Niels A . Taatgen , and Hedderik van Rijn . 2015 . What Makes Interruptions Disruptive ? : A Process - Model Account of the E ￿ ects of the Problem State Bottleneck on Task Interruption and Re - sumption . In CHI ’15 ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) . ACM . UbiTtention 2020 UbiComp / ISWC ’20 Adjunct , September 12 – 16 , 2020 , Cancun , Mexico [ 4 ] Karen Church and Rodrigo de Oliveira . 2013 . What’s Up with What - sapp ? : Comparing Mobile Instant Messaging Behaviors with Tradi - tional SMS . In MobileHCI ’13 ( Munich , Germany ) . ACM . [ 5 ] Mary Czerwinski , Eric Horvitz , and Susan Wilhite . 2004 . A Diary StudyofTaskSwitchingandInterruptions . In CHI’04 ( Vienna , Austria ) . ACM . [ 6 ] Nitesh Goyal and Susan R . Fussell . 2016 . E ￿ ects of Sensemaking Translucence on Distributed Collaborative Analysis . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( San Francisco , California , USA ) ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 288 – 302 . [ 7 ] Nitesh Goyal and Susan R . Fussell . 2017 . Intelligent Interruption Man - agement Using Electro Dermal Activity Based Physiological Sensor for Collaborative Sensemaking . Proc . ACM Interact . Mob . Wearable Ubiquitous Technol . 1 , 3 , Article 52 ( Sept . 2017 ) , 21 pages . [ 8 ] Shamsi T . Iqbal and Eric Horvitz . 2010 . Noti ￿ cations and Awareness : A Field Study of Alert Usage and Preferences . In CSCW ’10 ( Savannah , Georgia , USA ) . ACM . [ 9 ] YasumasaKobayashi , TakahiroTanaka , KazuakiAoki , andKinyaFujita . 2015 . Automatic Delivery Timing Control of Incoming Email Based on User Interruptibility . In CHI EA ’15 ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) . ACM . [ 10 ] Kostadin Kushlev , Jason Proulx , and Elizabeth W Dunn . 2016 . " Silence Your Phones " Smartphone Noti ￿ cations Increase Inattention and Hy - peractivity Symptoms . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1011 – 1020 . [ 11 ] Gloria Mark , Daniela Gudith , and Ulrich Klocke . 2008 . The cost of interrupted work : more speed and stress . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 107 – 110 . [ 12 ] Gloria Mark , Stephen Voida , and Armand Cardello . 2012 . " A Pace Not Dictated by Electrons " : An Empirical Study of Work Without Email . In CHI ’12 ( Austin , Texas , USA ) . ACM . [ 13 ] Tadashi Okoshi , Julian Ramos , Hiroki Nozaki , Jin Nakazawa , Anind K . Dey , and Hideyuki Tokuda . 2015 . Reducing Users’ Perceived Men - tal E ￿ ort Due to Interruptive Noti ￿ cations in Multi - device Mobile Environments . In UbiComp ’15 ( Osaka , Japan ) . ACM . [ 14 ] Tadashi Okoshi , Kota Tsubouchi , Masaya Taji , Takanori Ichikawa , and Hideyuki Tokuda . 2017 . Attention and Engagement - Awareness in the Wild : A Large - Scale Study with Adaptive Noti ￿ cations . In PerCom ’17 ( Maui , Hawaii ) . IEEE . [ 15 ] Veljko Pejovic and Mirco Musolesi . 2014 . InterruptMe : Designing Intel - ligent Prompting Mechanisms for Pervasive Applications . In UbiComp ’14 ( Seattle , Washington ) . ACM . [ 16 ] Martin Pielot , Karen Church , and Rodrigo de Oliveira . 2014 . An In - situ Study of Mobile Phone Noti ￿ cations . In MobileHCI ’14 ( Toronto , ON , Canada ) . ACM . [ 17 ] Benjamin Poppinga , Wilko Heuten , and Susanne Boll . 2014 . Sensor - Based Identi ￿ cation of Opportune Moments for Triggering Noti ￿ ca - tions . IEEE Pervasive Computing ( 2014 ) . [ 18 ] Alireza Sahami Shirazi , Niels Henze , Tilman Dingler , Martin Pielot , Dominik Weber , and Albrecht Schmidt . 2014 . Large - scale Assessment of Mobile Noti ￿ cations . In CHI ’14 ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) . ACM . [ 19 ] Cary Stothart , Ainsley Mitchum , and Courtney Yehnert . 2015 . The attentional cost of receiving a cell phone noti ￿ cation . Journal of experimental psychology : human perception and performance ( 2015 ) . [ 20 ] Niels van Berkel , Jorge Goncalves , Peter Koval , Simo Hosio , Tilman Dingler , DenzilFerreira , andVassilisKostakos . 2019 . Context - Informed Scheduling and Analysis : Improving Accuracy of Mobile Self - Reports . In Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems ( CHI’19 ) . 51 : 1 – 51 : 12 . [ 21 ] Aku Visuri , Niels van Berkel , Tadashi Okoshi , Jorge Goncalves , and Vassilis Kostakos . 2019 . Understanding Smartphone Noti ￿ cations’ User Interactions and Content Importance . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 128 ( 2019 ) , 72 – 85 . [ 22 ] DominikWeber , AlexandraVoit , PhilippKratzer , andNielsHenze . 2016 . In - situ Investigation of Noti ￿ cations in Multi - device Environments . In Ubicomp ’16 ( Heidelberg , Germany ) . ACM .