On the move : endocytic trafﬁcking in cell migration Tanja Maritzen • Hannah Schachtner • Daniel F . Legler Abstract Directed cell migration is a fundamental process underlying diverse physiological and pathophysiological phenomena ranging from wound healing and induction of immune responses to cancer metastasis . Recent advances reveal that endocytic trafﬁcking contributes to cell migration in multiple ways . ( 1 ) At the level of chemokines and che - mokine receptors : internalization of chemokines by scavenger receptors is essential for shaping chemotactic gradients in tissue , whereas endocytosis of chemokine re - ceptors and their subsequent recycling is key for maintaining a high responsiveness of migrating cells . ( 2 ) At the level of integrin trafﬁcking and focal adhesion dynamics : endosomal pathways do not only modulate adhesion by delivering in - tegrins to their site of action , but also by supplying factors for focal adhesion disassembly . ( 3 ) At the level of extra - cellular matrix reorganization : endosomal transport contributes to tumor cell migration not only by targeting integrins to invadosomes but also by delivering membrane type 1 matrix metalloprotease to the leading edge facilitating proteolysis - dependent chemotaxis . Consequently , numerous endocytic and endosomal factors have been shown to modulate cell migration . In fact key modulators of endocytic trafﬁcking turn out to be also key regulators of cell migra - tion . This review will highlight the recent progress in unraveling the contribution of cellular trafﬁcking pathways to cell migration . Keywords Endocytosis (cid:2) Cellular motility (cid:2) Clathrin (cid:2) Chemotaxis (cid:2) Signal transduction (cid:2) Vesicular transport Introduction Diverse physiological processes ranging from embryonic development to the induction of immune responses require coordinated cell migration within the organism . In addi - tion , migratory abilities of cells also represent a determining factor in pathological settings such as metas - tasis and inﬂammatory diseases . The term cell migration comprises a number of different migration modes with different mechanistic requirements . However , in all cases cell migration is inherently a spatially organized process that begins with the polarization of the cell , for instance triggered by the encounter of a chemotactic signal . During this polarization , cells develop a distinguishable leading edge and trailing end . For this morphological polarization and the subsequent cell migration , a plethora of proteins have to be spatially segregated and conﬁned within the cell . The intracellular localization of proteins that are membrane associated either due to a membrane anchor or via binding of a membrane - associated protein depends pre - dominantly on vesicular trafﬁcking . In this review , we intend to provide a comprehensive overview of the intimate link between endocytic trafﬁc and cell migration and highlight recent progress illustrating the emerging variety of ways in which migration is shaped by endosomal trafﬁcking . Directed cell migration comprises different steps : ( 1 ) generation of an environment that provides chemotactic Konstanzer Online - Publikations - System ( KOPS ) URL : http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : bsz : 352 - 0 - 291300 Erschienen in : Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences ; 72 ( 2015 ) , 11 . - S . 2119 - 2134 https : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 015 - 1855 - 9 cues , e . g . in the form of a chemotactic gradient . ( 2 ) Sensing of this environment by the migrating cell using chemotactic and growth factor receptors that induce intracellular sig - naling cascades . ( 3 ) Generation of a polarized cell phenotype . ( 4 ) Cell protrusion by regulating the actin cy - toskeleton , often in conjunction with the establishment of adhesive structures to generate traction forces . ( 5 ) Dynamic turnover and ﬁnally disassembly of the adhesive structures , as the cell moves on . ( 6 ) Modulation of the extracellular matrix in some cases ( e . g . invasion ) . ( 7 ) Modulation of cell cell contacts in the case of cells migrating within or out of a cell sheet . Accordingly , there is a variety of ways in which endosomal trafﬁc can affect cell migration : ( 1 ) by shaping the chemotactic gradient . ( 2 ) By modulating the responsiveness to chemotactic cues through regulation of chemotactic and growth factor receptors . ( 3 ) By controlling downstream signaling and actin regulatory components . ( 4 ) By regulating the dynamics of adhesive contacts . ( 5 ) By modulating the extracellular matrix organization . These aspects will be discussed in the following sections and are illustrated in Fig . 1 . Establishing and shaping chemotactic gradients Directed cell migration is primarily governed by the cell’s ability to sense an external gradient of attracting factors of which chemokines and chemotactic growth factors repre - sent major families . Chemokines and chemotactic growth factors are both produced locally as soluble proteins , se - creted into the extracellular space and are considered to be retained there by means of basic amino acid motifs that bind to extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycans , thereby establishing immobilized gradients [ 1 ] . Based on this concept , cell migration in response to a soluble attractant is commonly referred to as ‘‘chemotaxis’’ and is distinguished from ‘‘haptotaxis’’ where cells migrate along a gradient of surface - bound attractants [ 2 ] . Although this concept has been established based on in vitro assays , it is widely ac - cepted . Two recent studies now provide direct evidence from tissues that gradients of the chemokines CXCL8 and CCL21 for attracting leukocytes are established by glycan binding [ 3 , 4 ] . Interestingly , some chemokines such as CCL2 are additionally stored locally in vesicles resembling type 2 granules that are docked on actin ﬁbers just beneath the plasma membrane of endothelial cells , and hence are not exposed at the surface and not visible [ 5 ] . However , at sites of inﬂammation vesicle - stored CCL2 is released within tight lymphocyte - endothelial synapses upon ﬁrm adhesion of effector ( but not naı¨ve ) T cells to the inﬂamed endothelium . This allows the highly selective extravasation of effector T cells expressing adhesive integrins [ 5 ] . A chemotactic gradient can also be built by modifying the activity of chemokines [ 6 ] . One way to achieve this is by truncating the N - terminus of the chemokine to increase its potency as exempliﬁed by MMP9 - mediated cleavage of CXCL8 [ 7 ] . Alternatively , MMP9 proteolytically processes CXCL12 to render it inactive [ 6 ] . Furthermore , a gradient can be established by removing the chemoattractant in a regulated manner through receptor - mediated endocytosis . The ﬁrst demonstration of such a chemokine sequestering mechanism was identiﬁed in zebraﬁsh , where the so - matically expressed scavenger receptor CXCR7 / ACKR3 sequesters CXCL12 by internalization from the tissue , permitting germ cell migration away from the chemokine sink [ 8 ] . Subsequently , the zebraﬁsh primordium was shown to generate a chemokine gradient across itself by sequestering CXCL12 locally in its rear via CXCR7 / ACKR3 while CXCL12 - producing cells at the stripe un - derneath the primordium provide the guidance cue to the migrating primordium [ 9 , 10 ] . An analogous mechanism has been recently identiﬁed for CCR7 - driven dendritic cell and lymphocyte migration in mammalian lymphoid organs [ 11 ] . Here the atypical chemokine CCRL1 / ACKR4 ex - pressed by lymphatic endothelial cells lining the ceiling of the subcapsular sinus [ 11 ] , scavenges CCL21 , which is produced by stromal cells in the T zone of lymph nodes [ 12 ] , to form the chemokine gradient . Additional atypical chemokine receptors have been described , which in con - trast to classical chemokine receptors do not transmit signals resulting in chemotaxis [ 13 ] , however , their role in generating chemokine gradients and their potential regulation by endocytosis have not yet been addressed . In addition , chemokines can be scavenged by classical signal transducing chemokine receptors during cell migration as shown for the inﬂammatory chemokine CCL2 which is internalized and removed by monocytes during chemotaxis [ 14 ] . Keeping chemotactic receptors in place The efﬁciency of cell migration is determined largely by the level of chemokine receptor expression at the plasma membrane and the receptor’s responsiveness to chemo - kines . Chemokine receptor internalization and intracellular trafﬁcking are , therefore , key for regulating cell migration . Chemokine binding enhances steady - state internalization and trafﬁcking of the receptor . Internalized receptor can then be sorted either for degradation , which is considered as stop signal , or for recycling back to the plasma mem - brane to re - participate in chemokine sensing . The major route of chemokine receptor internalization is through clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) [ 15 , 16 ] . In some cases , however , chemokine receptors may also be inter - nalized through clathrin - independent pathways mainly involving caveolae or lipid rafts [ 15 , 16 ] . Whether che - mokine receptors or atypical scavenger chemokine 2120 Shaping chemotactic gradients scavenger receptor 0 chernokine " ¥ ' chemokine receptor t signaling Fig . 1 Endocytic trafficking contributes at multiple steps for the regulation of the different processes required for cell migration . a The binding of scavenger receptors to secreted chemok : ines and the subsequent endocytosis of the receptor ligand complexes contributes to the shaping of chemotactic gradients . For details see paragraph I . b Endocytosis and subsequent recycling of growth factor receptors and chemok : ine receptors to specific sites at the leading edge counteracts lateral diffusion thereby confining the pro migratory signaling to the cell front . For detail ~ see paragraphs 2 and 3 . c Adhesive contacts between cells or between cell and extracellular matrix are regulated through the internalization of the involved adhesion molecules such a ~ E cadberins and integrins which can be 2121 Confining signaling t ! . ECM If E cadherin i - F actin I integrins / FAs ' MT MMPs : : microtubules = Dab2 I Numb / : : , p14 MP1 either routed to degradation or recycled to contact sites . In addition , vesicular traffic provides factors for the disassembly of focal adhesions as well as for the modulation of the extracellular matrix . For details see paragraph 5 and 6 . d The different modes of endocytosis appear to be polarized in distinct ways in migrating cells with caveolin mediated endocytosis being enriched at the cell rear and the cue pathway at the leading edge , while clatbrin coated pits per se do not show a strong polarization . However , certain cargo specific adaptors operating at clatbrin coated pits display a strong enrichment at the leading edge . For details see " Excursion 1 : polarization of the endocytic machinery during cell migration " receptors also exploit the newly identiﬁed endophilin - de - pendent , clathrin - independent pathway used by certain other GPCRs [ 17 ] remains to be determined . CME is ini - tiated upon chemokine binding to the receptor and its subsequent phosphorylation on serine and threonine resi - dues by G - protein - coupled receptor kinases ( GRKs ) , resulting in dissociation of the G - protein subunits from the receptor and interaction with the endocytic adaptors AP - 2 and b - arrestin . The association of the chemokine receptor with the adaptors allows its concentration in nascent cla - thrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) which further invaginate and ﬁnally undergo ﬁssion from the plasma membrane giving rise to clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) . The CCV becomes uncoated and the receptor - chemokine complex enters the early endosomal pathway . From there the chemokine re - ceptor either proceeds to late endosomes / lysosomes to be degraded or dissociates from its ligand and enters the re - cycling compartment to trafﬁc back to the plasma membrane [ 15 ] . Small GTPases of the Rab family are re - sponsible for the regulation of the intracellular trafﬁcking steps [ 18 ] . The chemokine receptor CCR7 , for instance , follows the clathrin - dependent pathway involving dynamin , Eps15 , Rab5 and early endosomal antigen - 1 ( EEA1 ) [ 19 , 20 ] . After internalization , CCR7 enters the recycling compart - ment and trafﬁcs back to the plasma membrane to actively participate in directed cell migration , whereas its ligand CCL19 is sorted to lysosomes for degradation [ 19 ] . Inter - estingly , ubiquitylation of CCR7 serves as control mechanism for receptor trafﬁcking as an ubiquitylation - deﬁcient mutant on one hand reduces the intracellular pool of CCR7 in the steady - state and , on the other hand , shows a signiﬁcant retardation in receptor recycling after ligand - mediated endocytosis , resulting in a reduced CCR7 surface pool and in inefﬁcient cell migration [ 21 ] . Chemokine receptor recycling mainly follows the slow recycling pathway mediated by Rab11 [ 15 ] . Noteworthy , overexpressing a dominant negative mutant of Rab11 or truncation mutants of Rab11 - family interacting protein 2 ( Rab11 - FIP2 ) and myosin Vb signiﬁcantly impairs CXCR2 recycling and , more importantly , hampers its re - sensitiza - tion , consequently leading to a less efﬁcient migration towards its ligand in vitro [ 22 ] . Moreover , a CXCR2 mu - tant lacking the C - terminal LLKIL motif responsible for binding to AP - 2 partially loses its internalization capacity upon chemokine binding and shows reduced migration towards CXCL8 [ 23 ] . Similarly , AP - 2 depletion dimin - ished CXCL8 - induced CXCR2 internalization , cell polarization and migration in vitro [ 23 ] . Of note , chemokine receptors are versatile in using different pathways of endocytosis and intracellular traf - ﬁcking . The best example is CXCR4 which can exploit both clathrin - dependent and independent routes for endocytosis , depending on the cellular context [ 15 ] . Re - markably , the warts , hypogammaglobulinemia , infection and myelokathexis ( WHIM ) syndrome is an immunodeﬁ - ciency disease linked to the expression of a C - terminally truncated mutant of CXCR4 . Leukocytes expressing this WHIM - mutant of CXCR4 display enhanced G - protein - dependent signaling and cell migration in response to CXCL12 in vitro , but are refractory to internalization , which is G - protein coupling independent [ 24 ] . However , opposing results in terms of the role of the CXCR4 C - terminus in regulating cell migration in vitro have been published [ 25 ] . A rigorous study from the Raz group demonstrated in vivo that in zebraﬁsh CXCR4 internal - ization is dispensable for cell motility and directional chemokine sensing , but essential for ﬁne - tuning of migra - tion allowing precise arrival of primordial germ cells [ 26 ] . Finally , CXCR4 internalization and its subsequent lysoso - mal degradation have also been reported [ 27 ] , a mechanism that is implicated in rendering cells insensitive to chemokines and hence immobile . Polarizing growth factor receptor signaling Cell migration is inﬂuenced by growth factors like platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) and keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) that bind to their respective growth factor receptors . A seminal study of border cell migration in Drosophila melanogaster revealed the importance of a spatially conﬁned localization and signaling of these receptors for directed cell migration [ 28 ] . During Drosophila oogenesis , a cluster of 6 8 somatic cells which arise from the follicular epithelium migrates between the giant nurse cells towards the oocyte . These cells owe their name to the fact that they end up on the border between nurse cells and oocyte , and are used as model system for a stereotypic collective cell migration [ 29 ] . Border cells rely on the two receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) EGFR and PVR ( PDGF and VEGF ( vascular en - dothelial growth factor ) receptor related ) , a homolog of the mammalian PDGF / VEGF receptor , as guidance receptors for their spatial orientation during directional migration toward the oocyte [ 30 , 31 ] . Loss of the proteins Cbl , an E3 ubiquitin ligase , and Sprint , a Rab5 guanosine exchange factor ( GEF ) , which are crucial regulators of EGFR and PVR endocytosis , led to severe migration defects [ 28 ] . These defects were shown to derive from the delocalization of RTK signaling , which was not restricted to the front any more . Thus endocytosis serves in this context to maintain RTKs and thereby guidance signaling spatially conﬁned to the leading edge of the border cells to enable their polar - ization and directed migration . However , border cell migration does not only require endocytosis to counteract delocalization of guidance signaling by lateral diffusion of 2122 guidance receptors , but likely also regulated trafﬁcking of RTKs through the endosomal system for their recycling to a speciﬁc region of the plasma membrane . The small GTPases Rab5 and Rab11 , which regulate early endosomal and slow recycling endosomal transport , were shown to be crucial for the polarization of guidance signaling during border cell migration [ 32 ] . In addition , a component of the exocyst complex , which is involved in targeting exocytosis to deﬁned plasma membrane sites , was reported to play a role [ 32 ] . Although it could not be established yet whether RTKs themselves are the cargo of this recycling pathway or whether it serves to localize downstream factors like Rac1 , the transport loop from the cell front to the recycling endosomal compartment and back to the leading edge is clearly crucial for maintaining polarized RTK signaling in border cells [ 32 ] . Also in the mammalian system cell migration was shown to depend on RTK endocytosis . For instance , in case of the PDGFR b , an intracellular signaling pathway was unraveled by which the Rac1 GEF DOCK4 and the GTPase dynamin2 control NIH3T3 cell migration in response to PDGF [ 33 ] . Upon ligand binding , PDGFR b becomes ty - rosine phosphorylated enabling its interaction with the adaptor protein Grb2 which recruits DOCK4 and dynamin2 resulting in receptor endocytosis and Rac activation . Like in the case of border cells [ 28 ] , blocking RTK endocytosis in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts causes impaired migration [ 33 ] . Of note , internalized PDGFR recycled via Rab11 or Rab4 positive endosomes to the surface of NHI3T3 cells [ 33 ] , whereas in human ﬁbroblasts the same receptor is pre - dominantly degraded in lysosomes [ 34 ] . Consistent with the importance of balanced PDGFR trafﬁcking for cell migration and other processes , it is subject to regulation by kinases and phosphatases . Activation of PKC a was iden - tiﬁed as critical determinant for sorting PDGFR b into a Rab4a - dependent recycling route [ 35 ] . Loss of PKC a im - paired the routing of activated PDGFR into the short recycling pathway thereby promoting its degradation , while loss of the phosphatase TC - PTP , which restricts PKC a activation , promoted Rab4a - dependent recycling of PDGFR in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) . Increased recycling of PDGFR promoted an increased chemotaxis of MEFs towards PDGF - BB [ 35 ] . Endocytosis can not only serve to spatially restrict re - ceptors and terminate their signaling , but it can also provide , in the form of endosomes , a platform for the in - tracellular signaling of receptors . This renders a tight regulation of the endocytic trafﬁcking of active receptors even more crucial for controlling their signaling . Impaired PDGFR endocytosis was in fact shown to decrease its mitogenic signaling [ 34 ] . Moreover , alternative receptor internalization and trafﬁcking routes might bring the re - ceptor into contact with distinct downstream signaling components and thus allow for selective activation of dif - ferent signaling cascades thereby promoting either migration or proliferation [ 34 ] . In addition to PDGFR , the keratinocyte growth factor receptor ( KGFR ) was shown to be endocytosed in a po - larized manner in migrating cells . The KGFR is an epithelial cell - speciﬁc splicing variant of ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 2 ( FGFR2 ) and promotes keratinocyte mi - gration upon binding to KGF / FGF7 or FGF10 ( see references in [ 36 ] ) . In migrating keratinocytes the polarized localization of this receptor at the leading edge upon ligand stimulation depended on the kinase Src and on cortactin which contribute to KGFR endocytosis and thus polariza - tion . In fact Src inhibition as well as cortactin depletion resulted in impaired KGFR internalization [ 36 ] . The EGFR was likewise reported to be internalized in a polarized manner in migrating mammalian cells . When the endocytosis of EGFR was studied in the context of chemotactic cancer cell invasion , CME was found to be polarized towards the front of the migrating breast cancer cells and to be indispensable for EGF - dependent invasion of MDA - MB - 231 cells [ 37 ] . Again , EGFR trafﬁcking is subject to regulation , and dysregulation of EGFR is in fact linked to disease progression and metastasis in many types of cancer . Ligand - stimulated EGFR internalization com - monly leads to degradation of the receptor to limit its signaling . The protein Bif - 1 , a tumor suppressor , modulates EGFR degradation and thereby chemotactic migration of breast cancer cells [ 38 ] . Loss of Bif - 1 impairs the recruit - ment of Rab7 to EGF - positive vesicles and its activation , which in turn leads to the sequestration of internalized EGF in Rab5 positive endosomes and delayed EGFR transport to lysosomes for degradation . This results in a sustained Erk1 / 2 activation in response to EGF stimulation and to in - creased chemotactic cell migration . Thus , Bif - 1 is able to suppress breast cancer cell migration by promoting EGFR degradation through the regulation of endosome maturation [ 38 ] . The protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN3 , which was reported to inhibit border cell migration [ 39 ] , likewise promotes EGFR degradation thereby inhibiting lung cancer cell migration . By dephosphorylating the endocytic factor Eps15 , PTPN3 promotes lipid raft - mediated endocytosis of EGFR leading to its lysosomal degradation [ 39 ] . In addi - tion , a screen for new regulators of EGFR endocytosis in human HBL100 breast cancer cells recently identiﬁed an - nexin A2 , an adapter protein with several interaction partners . Depletion of annexin A2 in MDA - MB - 231 cells inhibited EGFR transport beyond the early endosome , in - creased downstream signaling and promoted EGF - induced cell migration as well as lung metastasis in mice [ 40 ] . The effect of annexin A2 on EGFR endocytosis is linked to activation of the actin - severing protein coﬁlin establishing annexin A2 as a mediator of EGFR endocytic trafﬁcking 2123 and signaling in breast cancer cells via regulation of coﬁlin activation [ 40 ] . Furthermore , the Rab11 effector Rab - cou - pling protein ( RCP ) has pro - invasive effects by forming a complex with the integrin a 5 b 1 and EGFR1 and by coor - dinating their recycling [ 41 ] . EGFR - dependent signaling likely occurs partly from the plasma membrane , leading to the activation of PKB / Akt via phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) , and partly from late endosomal compartments , resulting in the activation of the Ras - MEK - ERK axis ( see references in [ 41 ] ) . RCP - dependent recycling might keep EGFR from efﬁciently reaching late endosomes thereby promoting pro - invasive PKB / Akt signaling [ 41 ] . These examples illustrate vividly the crucial role of endocytic pathways for correctly localizing growth factor receptors to enable directed migration as well as for limiting or en - hancing depending on cellular context potentially oncogenic growth factor receptor signaling . Regulating downstream signaling and actin regulatory components Cell surface receptors relay the guidance information they gather by ligand binding into the cell via diverse signaling cascades . In the context of cell migration , these cascades converge often on actin regulatory components , as the dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton forms the basis for cell migration . In the past years it has become clear that not only the guidance receptors themselves are regulated by endocytic trafﬁcking , but also a number of downstream effectors . A pivotal example is the small GTPase Rac1 which is activated by GEFs downstream of growth factor receptors . Rac stimulates nucleation pro - moting factors ( NPFs ) , that activate actin nucleators like the ARP2 / 3 complex , and is therefore crucial for the re - arrangement of the actin cytoskeleton . Also here Drosophila border cell migration served as a valuable ex - perimental system to unravel in how far endocytic trafﬁcking of Rac is needed for the spatial restriction of signaling [ 42 ] . CME and the early endosomal Rab5 GTPase were crucial for activation of Rac by growth fac - tors in line with the ﬁnding that Rac activation in fact occurs on early endosomes due to the recruitment of the Rac GEF Tiam 1 to this location . Subsequently , Rac re - cycles in an Arf6 - dependent and spatially controlled manner to the leading edge which ensures the localized induction of actin - based migratory protrusions [ 42 ] . Acti - vating Rac within the endosomal system couples this crucial step to the targeted delivery of the protein to speciﬁc plasma membrane sites and thereby limits Rac - dependent actin remodeling to the leading edge . This mechanism reinforces the theme that recycling serves as a tool to achieve the spatial conﬁnement of signaling molecules . Border cell migration requires an additional layer of spatial regulation , as the cells do not migrate independently but collectively . Here Rac signaling does not only need to be restricted to the leading edge of an individual cell , but should be speciﬁcally enriched in the leading cell . The expression of dominant negative Rab5 in border cells abolishes Rac activation which reinforces the crucial role of endocytic trafﬁcking for the regulation of Rac activity [ 43 ] . Interestingly , the expression of a dominant negative Rab11 variant caused a divergent phenotype : Instead of being conﬁned to the leading cell the signal peak for ac - tivated Rac alternated between different cells or was present in multiple cells at once [ 43 ] . Thus , Rab11 seems to regulate the polarization and persistence of Rac activity in the leading cell of a collectively migrating cell cluster and to control the spatial pattern of Rac activity across the cluster [ 43 ] . How Rab11 as an endosomal trafﬁcking pro - tein achieves this intercellular coordination of Rac activity remains a mystery for the moment . Another small GTPase whose polarized localization during cell migration was shown to depend on endocytic trafﬁcking is Cdc42 . Cdc42 is known to control cell po - larization and the direction of cell migration in chemotaxis and wound - induced migration . Like for Rac , its activation needs to be spatially restricted to the leading edge to pro - mote directed migration . In a wound - induced astrocyte migration assay dynamic Cdc42 positive vesicles were observed to move in a directed manner towards the leading edge [ 44 ] . Again Arf6 served as decisive factor for vesi - cular transport of Cdc42 and its GEF b PIX to the leading edge [ 44 ] reinforcing the notion that Arf6 controls crucial membrane transport steps in directed cell migration . Excursion 1 : polarization of the endocytic machinery during cell migration Originally the rate of endocytosis had been proposed to be higher at the cell’s trailing end to achieve polarized bulk recycling of membrane and / or adhesion molecules to the leading edge during migration [ 45 , 46 ] . However , as dis - cussed above , nowadays it is rather endocytosis at the leading edge which is regarded to be crucial for cell mi - gration by spatially restricting localization of signaling receptors . Does this mean that endocytosis itself is polar - ized to the leading edge , taking place more frequently there than at the cell rear ? Endocytosis is of course an umbrella term for different modes of internalization [ 47 ] . CME is the best - understood pathway to date . However , there are also clathrin - independent internalization routes like caveolin - mediated endocytosis or the clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) pathway [ 47 ] . The ﬁrst attempts to study the lo - calization and dynamics of CME during cell migration 2124 were made more than a decade ago by combining over - expression of ﬂuorescently tagged endocytic proteins with dual - color total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy of MDCK cells in a scratched monolayer [ 48 ] . When dividing migrating cells into a lagging , middle and leading region , Rappoport et al . observed an enrichment of clathrin , dynamin2 and transferrin in the middle and front region versus the rear of the cell . However , there was no difference between middle and front region arguing for a rather weak polarization of the endocytic machinery in the direction of cell migration [ 48 ] . The ﬁnding that CCPs per se are not speciﬁcally enriched at the leading edge is in line with the broad distribution of AP - 2 observed in migrating ECV304 cells [ 49 ] and the non - polarized uptake of the bona ﬁde CME cargo transferrin in migrating ﬁbroblasts [ 50 ] . When looking more speciﬁcally at CCP dynamics in different cell regions , the number of disappearing CCPs per area was reported to be increased in the front region [ 48 ] . However , as this number was not normalized to the total , this difference might originate from the likewise increased total number of clathrin puncta . When CCP dynamics were studied recently in 3D cell migration , clathrin appeared more dynamic in the front region of migrating cells , even though no signiﬁcant increase in the likelihood for leading edge CCPs to undergo endocytosis was found [ 37 ] . Clearly more experiments are needed to conclusively resolve the question whether CCP dynamics at the leading edge are different . However , the most striking difference between leading edge CCPs and other CCPs is in fact their com - position in terms of certain cargo - speciﬁc endocytic adaptor proteins like Numb [ 49 ] that are speciﬁcally en - riched in leading edge CCPs , likely to mediate the internalization of cell migration - related cargo proteins such as integrins . In the case of caveolin - mediated endocytosis the main component , Cav1 , has been shown to localize pre - dominantly to the cell rear during 2D migration [ 51 , 52 ] . This was conﬁrmed by ultrastructural analyses ﬁnding the typical ﬂask - like invaginated caveolae structures mainly localized at the trailing end [ 50 ] . Conversely , a strong leading edge polarization was observed for the CLIC pathway in ﬁbroblasts migrating into a scratch wound [ 50 ] . CLICs are the vesicles involved in uptake via the Cdc42 regulated clathrin - independent endocytosis mechanism [ 53 ] . This pathway involves the uptake of extracellular ﬂuid and GPI - anchored proteins and requires neither cla - thrin nor dynamin [ 53 ] . As the CLIC pathway depends on Cdc42 [ 54 ] and as Cdc42 itself is polarized to the leading edge , this might explain the strong polarization of the CLIC pathway to this site . Using proteomic approaches , Howes et al . [ 50 ] identiﬁed additional cargo proteins for the CLIC pathway such as the proteins Thy - 1 and CD44 which have functions at focal adhesions and thus imply a role for CLICs in adhesion turnover . Inhibition of the CLIC pathway in fact impaired ﬁbroblast migration into a wound . Recently , an additional clathrin - independent mode of en - docytosis has been described [ 17 ] . This fast endophilin - mediated endocytosis ( FEME ) was shown to mediate the ligand - triggered uptake of GPCRs and RTKs , such as EGFR and PDGFR , at the leading edge of cells consistent with a role in cell migration . In fact , the migration of cells depleted for all three endophilin - A proteins was strongly decreased [ 17 ] . Thus , CME , caveolin - mediated endocytosis , the CLIC pathway and FEME all seem to contribute to cell migra - tion . A recent study quantiﬁed that at least 95 % of the earliest detectable endocytic vesicles arise from CCPs [ 55 ] leaving not much room for additional contributions of other endocytic pathways to endocytic ﬂux . However , uptake was analyzed in non - migrating cells . The possibility that pro - migratory signaling might change the relative contri - bution of the different endocytic pathways to overall endocytic ﬂux has not been investigated so far . CLICs have been claimed to account for the major uptake of ﬂuid and bulk membrane in ﬁbroblasts and thus could constitute a pathway that provides rapid membrane turnover at the leading edge of migrating cells [ 50 ] . A study in Dic - tyostelium quantiﬁe d that the cellular surface area changes so substantially during cell movement that endo - / exocyto - sis is required to adjust the cell surface area to shape changes [ 56 ] . Maybe the CLIC pathway contributes to the required dynamic membrane remodeling . Excursion 2 : unexpected additional roles for trafﬁcking proteins in cell migration Recently , a number of well - characterized endocytic and endosomal proteins have been reported to promote cell migration in ways that are not directly linked to their pri - mary function in vesicular transport ( Fig . 2 ) . The ﬁrst example pertains to the just discussed regulation of Rac1 . Unexpectedly , the endocytic ﬁssion GTPase dynamin2 does not only regulate Rac1 activation indirectly due to its role in endocytosis , but also via direct binding to the Rac1 GEF Vav1 [ 57 ] . Complex formation between dynamin2 and Vav1 has proven crucial for preventing Hsc - 70 - medi - ated lysosomal degradation of Vav1 . In this manner , dynamin2 contributes to Rac1 activation independent of its function in ﬁssion , at least in cell types where Vav1 is expressed such as pancreatic tumor cells whose invasive migration is potentiated by dynamin2 - dependent stabi - lization of Vav1 [ 57 ] . Another key player of CME , clathrin itself , was reported to act independently of the endocytic machinery as a recruiting factor that localizes the ARP2 / 3 - activating WAVE complex to lamellipodial membranes 2125 2126 Fig . 2 Unexpected additional ( a ) roles for trafficking proteins in cell migration . a Additional ~ Clathrin non endocytic involvement of clathrin in cell migration as recruiter of the WAVE 0 WAVE complex complex . b Additional non endocytic role of dynamin2 in cell migration by activation of Rae ! via binding of its GEF Vav l . c Additional role for Gadkin as inhibitor of the actin nucleating ARP2 / 3 complex . d Additional non endocytic role of AP 2 in cell migration as anchor point for the microtubule acetylating enzyme exT AT ! . For details please refer to " Excursion 2 : unexpected ( c ) additional roles for trafficking proteins in cell migration " in . . . . Microtubules the main text - < > ARP2 / 3 complex • Gadkin [ P Kinesin 1 0 AP 1 [ 58 ] , thereby promoting lamellipodium formation . How ever , as clathrin does not bind to membranes , it remains enigmatic how it is recruited in the first place without the involvement of the classical endocytic recruitment factors . Finally , the main endocytic adaptor protein complex AP - 2 was demonstrated to serve a dual function by participating on one hand in endocytosis and serving on the other hand as an anchor point for acetylated microtubules [ 59 ] . Acetylation is a means of stabilizing microtubules , which are then especially found in cell protrusions and contribute to cell polarization , migration and invasion ( see references in [ 59 ] ) . Acetylation is conferred by the cx . - tubulin acetyl transferase cx . TATI which was shown to directly interact with AP - 2 . As the sites of endocytosis , the CCPs , where AP - 2 is present , are supposed to be somewhat enriched at the leading edge , linking cx . TAT to AP - 2 might ensure the polarized acetylation of microtubules towards the leading edge supporting their role in directional cell migration and invasion . Accordingly , the loss of AP - 2 results in decreased microtubule acetylation as well as reduced directionality of 2D and invasive migration [ 59 ] . Another adaptor , the AP - ( b ) " Dynamin • Vav1 • Hsc70 I : J . Rac1 ( d ) ~ Clathrin . . . . Microtubules . . . . 0 aTAT1 * Acetylation 0 AP2 ! - associated protein Gadk : in [ 60 ] , that regulates recycling endosomal traffic by linking AP - 1 positive vesicles to the microtubule - dependent motor protein kinesin 1 [ 61 ] , was likewise found to have a complementary role in cell mi gration . Gadkin binds additionally to the actin nucleator ARP2 / 3 , which is crucial for Jamellipodia formation . In the absence of activated NPFs Gadkin sequesters , the ARP2 / 3 complex on endosomal vesicles thereby inhibiting cell migration [ 62 ] . Thus , it becomes more and more common for proteins of the endocytic trafficking machinery to serve additional roles in cell migration . Regulating adhesive contacts Integrin trafficking Cells form adhesive contacts to the substratum and po tentially also to neighboring cells . These contact sites need to be dynamically turned over to allow for cell migration . This again involves endocytic trafficking . Adhesive con tacts to the substratum are generally established via focal adhesions . The ﬁrst step in focal adhesion assembly is the binding of transmembrane integrin heterodimers to extra - cellular matrix ligands such as ﬁbronectin , vitronectin , laminin or collagen . Upon ligand binding , a conformational change occurs that renders the cytosolic tail of integrins accessible for intracellular interactors leading to the re - cruitment of diverse proteins such as talin , vinculin and a - actinin that link integrins to the actin cytoskeleton which in turn allows the generation of traction forces through acto - myosin contraction . Adhesions are and have to be highly dynamic structures to enable cell migration . They generally start as small , short - lived so - called nascent adhesions which either turn over rapidly or connect to the actin cy - toskeleton and mature into larger focal complexes . These can keep growing into the still larger , often elongated focal adhesions in response to actomyosin contractile forces ( for more details see [ 63 ] ) . Mature focal adhesions couple the extracellular matrix to the intracellular actin cytoskeleton and thereby provide the necessary anchorage for cell mi - gration . They are estimated to comprise a network of about 180 protein protein interactions [ 64 ] illustrating the com - plexity of these structures . Even mature focal adhesions are still very dynamic , sliding sometimes along while the cell moves and exchanging proteins over the course of their lifetime . Finally , focal adhesions have to disassemble to allow the cell to move on . The function of integrins crucially depends on their position in the cell , respectively , on their availability at the plasma membrane , which accordingly is subject to intricate regulation . It is well - established that many integrins con - tinually and rapidly cycle between the plasma membrane and endosomal compartments . In fact , integrins are esti - mated to cycle about once every 30 min [ 65 ] . In mammals there are 24 types of integrin heterodimers composed of 18 a - and 8 b - subunits . These different integrin heterodimers can have quite divergent effects on different aspects of cell migration . Accordingly , their trafﬁcking is a highly selec - tive process distinguishing between active and inactive integrin heterodimers [ 66 ] which lets certain heterodimers cycle rapidly while others remain for longer times at the plasma membrane . As integrins are crucial for cell adhe - sion and migration , there is a wealth of literature already on their trafﬁcking . The basic principles of their transport are well understood . However , there are still many details left to resolve , as the precise trafﬁcking itinerary of individual integrins depends on several factors such as their exact heterodimer composition , their activation status , the traf - ﬁcking of other integrins and growth factor receptors , extracellular stimuli as well as the cell type . Here , we will summarize the basic principles of integrin trafﬁcking and highlight some recent progress illustrating the close con - nection between integrin functionality , endocytic transport and cell migration . For more details , we refer the reader to a number of reviews speciﬁcally dedicated to integrin trafﬁcking [ 65 , 67 70 ] . Integrins are internalized by many different pathways including CME , caveolin - dependent endocytosis and clathrin - independent pathways like macropinocytosis at circular dorsal rufﬂes ( see also table in [ 68 ] ) . CME of different types of integrins is often fa - cilitated by cargo - speciﬁc adaptors like Dab2 [ 71 ] , ARH [ 72 ] and Numb [ 49 ] . These endocytic adaptor proteins have been shown to interact with the NPxY motif in b - integrin cytoplasmic tails via their phosphotyrosine - binding do - mains . While Dab2 was reported to colocalize with integrin b 1 in CCPs that are dispersed over the cell surface , sug - gesting that it regulates bulk endocytosis of inactive integrins [ 71 ] , Numb localizes speciﬁcally to CCPs at the substratum - facing surface of the leading edge and fa - cilitates there the uptake of integrin b 1 - and b 3 - containing heterodimers [ 49 ] . Thus , different functional pools of the same integrins might employ different endocytic adaptors depending on their cellular location . At the same time the phosphorylation - dependent regulation of Numb turns this adaptor protein into a molecular switch that links integrin endocytosis to upstream signals involved in cell migration [ 73 ] . Endocytosed integrins are transported to early endo - somes where sorting into degradative or recycling pathways occurs [ 70 ] . While integrins can be routed to degradation , the majority normally recycles rapidly to the cell surface . The decision between degradation and recy - cling is inﬂuenced by proteins like sorting nexin 17 which was shown to prevent the lysosomal degradation of b 1 integrins by binding within early endosomes to their cy - toplasmic tail [ 74 ] . For recycling , integrins can employ either the short Rab4 - dependent recycling pathway or the long Rab11 - and Arf6 - dependent recycling loop which transits through the perinuclear recycling compartment [ 70 ] . By modulating the internalization and the transport itinerary of integrins , the endocytic trafﬁcking machinery can inﬂuence the composition of focal adhesions which in turn determines cell migration parameters like direction - ality . This is due to the fact that different integrins affect focal adhesion dynamics in distinct ways thus having di - verging effects on directionality . While a 5 b 1 integrins promote focal adhesion turnover and thereby random cell motility , the heterodimer a v b 3 rather suppresses focal adhesion dynamics thereby promoting directionally per - sistent migration [ 75 ] . Thus , the balance between the different integrin heterodimers has to be tightly controlled to achieve the degree of directionality adapted to the acute cellular need . The Rab4 - dependent recycling of a v b 3 in ﬁbroblasts and the activity of this integrin for instance suppresses the recycling of a 5 b 1 thereby coordinating their activities and promoting directionally persistent migration [ 70 ] . Blocking a v b 3 on the other hand promotes the as - sociation of RCP with a 5 b 1 and its RCP - dependent 2127 recycling [ 41 ] as well as random movement . As mentioned earlier , RCP also coordinates trafﬁcking of a 5 b 1 integrin and EGFR1 which leads to increased activation of the pro - invasive PKB / Akt kinase downstream of EGFR1 . Recently RacGAP1 was identiﬁed as Akt substrate in this pathway [ 76 ] , which locally suppresses Rac activity while enhanc - ing RhoA activity thereby promoting invasive migration into ﬁbronectin - containing matrices [ 76 ] . The regulation of Akt signaling via the endosomal adaptor protein APPL1 illustrates the emerging importance of subcellular com - partments as platforms for the coordination of migration - relevant signaling cascades . APPL1 decreases Src - medi - ated activation of Akt1 at the leading edge thereby impairing migration by hindering the turnover of adhesions [ 77 ] . Thus , APPL1 likely acts as scaffold for bringing to - gether signaling molecules on endosomes which allows for their regulated targeting to speciﬁc regions within the cell [ 77 ] . A further regulatory layer controlling a v b 3 versus a 5 b 1 integrin recycling is exerted by syndecan - 4 [ 78 ] . This transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan acts as a switch in the recycling of those integrins . Syndecan - 4 was shown to be phosphorylated by Src which promotes its binding to syntenin , which in turn suppresses Arf6 activity . Indeed , suppression of Arf6 activity via syndecan - 4 or by depletion of Arf6 itself resulted in increased recycling of a v b 3 to the plasma membrane at the expense of a 5 b 1 which promoted focal adhesion stabilization and direc - tionality [ 78 ] . Directional persistence is also promoted by kinesin Kif1C - mediated transport of integrins [ 79 ] , which is needed to stabilize trailing adhesions . Kif1C distributes integrin a 5 b 1 heterodimers within the cell and transports them particularly from the perinuclear recycling compart - ment to the cell tail to ensure a sufﬁcient supply for the reinforcement of rear adhesions thereby stabilizing the extended cell tail to sustainably resist traction forces . Loss of Kif1C causes the rapid and frequent retraction of the cell tail which is accompanied by changes in migration direc - tion [ 79 ] . Another microtubule - dependent motor protein which was recently identiﬁed in a screen for regulators of a 2 integrin endocytosis is the kinesin KIF15 [ 80 ] . Deple - tion of KIF15 inhibited the intracellular accumulation of a 2 integrin , which is likely due to the fact that it also induced a loss of plasma membrane - associated Dab2 , as Dab2 de - pletion mimicked KIF15 depletion [ 80 ] . Not only factors for the uptake and decision between recycling and degradation of integrins have been identiﬁed , but also proteins involved in the transport between vesi - cular compartments and in the delivery back to the plasma membrane . For trafﬁcking along the endosomal pathway and back to the cell surface vesicular membranes have to fuse with target membranes such as other vesicles or the plasma membrane . These fusion events are mediated by the zippering up of SNARE proteins present on both membranes thereby bringing the membranes in close enough contact for fusion [ 81 ] . Accordingly , SNARE proteins have been found to modulate cell migration . The SNARE SNAP29 is for instance implicated in the endo - cytic recycling of b 1 - integrin . Loss of SNAP29 caused a longer retention of b 1 integrin in intracellular compart - ments and impaired wound healing [ 82 ] . Furthermore , the SNAREs VAMP3 and syntaxin6 were revealed as crucial factors for the surface delivery of integrins in HeLa cells [ 83 ] . Loss of syntaxin6 , which is located at the trans - Golgi network , or VAMP3 , which is present on recycling endo - somes , led to the accumulation of a 3 b 1 in perinuclear recycling endosomes and thereby impaired chemotactic cell migration . Syntaxin6 und VAMP3 presumably form a SNARE complex that catalyzes vesicle fusion which is necessary for the transport of integrins from VAMP3 positive recycling endosomes to the syntaxin6 - containing trans - Golgi network , before they are delivered to the plasma membrane , thus delineating a new transport route [ 83 ] . Integrins also play an important role for lymphocyte migration , and part of the regulatory mechanism control - ling their surface distribution in lymphocytes was recently elucidated . Here , the surface delivery of the lymphocyte integrin LFA - 1 was shown to depend on Rab13 which needs to be activated by its GEF DENND1C which in turn is stimulated by phosphorylation through the kinase Mst1 [ 84 ] . Active Rab13 associates with Mst1 to deliver LFA - 1 to the leading edge , and inhibition of Rab13 reduced lymphocyte migration on the LFA - 1 ligand ICAM - 1 [ 84 ] . Finally , as an additional layer of complexity integrins are not only regulated by endocytic trafﬁcking themselves but also regulate in turn the endocytic transport of other mi - gration - relevant cargos like the above mentioned EGFR ( for details see [ 68 70 ] ) . Focal adhesion disassembly Apart from undergoing continuous exchange of protein components focal adhesions ﬁnally also have to disas - semble . As integrins are a major component of focal adhesions , their removal is an integral part of focal adhe - sion disassembly . While the protease calpain contributes to this by cleaving focal adhesion proteins like integrins and talin [ 85 ] , dynamin and CME of active b 1 integrins were also shown to be instrumental for this process [ 72 , 86 ] . Proteins of the endocytic machinery like clathrin , AP - 2 , Dab2 and dynamin2 localize to adhesion sites prior to adhesion disassembly . The importance of CME for focal adhesion disassembly is highlighted by the fact that de - pletion of dynamin2 blocks b 1 integrin internalization leading to impaired focal adhesion disassembly and con - sequently to defects in cell migration [ 86 ] . CME depends 2128 on phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) bisphosphate [ PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ] which is generated by the enzyme PIPK1 b and contributes to the recruitment of endocytic proteins like AP - 2 . Con - sistently , depletion of PIPK1 b likewise decreased internalization of active b 1 integrin , focal adhesion turn - over and migration due to the impaired recruitment of the endocytic machinery to focal adhesion sites [ 87 ] . In addition , focal adhesion disassembly has long been known to be induced by microtubules contacting focal adhesions [ 88 ] . In fact , a common focal adhesion disas - sembly assay is based on the ﬁnding that microtubule regrowth after nocodazole washout induces massive dis - assembly of focal adhesions [ 72 , 88 ] . However , the mechanism behind this observation has only recently be - come apparent . The microtubule - associated proteins CLASP1 and CLASP2 were identiﬁed as the tethering factors that actually link microtubules to focal adhesions thereby establishing a focal adhesion directed transport pathway , e . g . for the delivery and localized fusion of exocytic vesicles secreting proteases involved in extracel - lular matrix degradation [ 89 ] . Thus , microtubules may serve here to establish a local secretion pathway that fa - cilitates focal adhesion turnover by severing cell matrix connections . At the same time Schiefermeier et al . [ 90 ] identiﬁed another vesicle type using the microtubule tracks leading up to focal adhesions . They demonstrated that a pool of Rab7 positive late endosomes , which carry the p14 - MP1 ( LAMTOR2 / 3 ) complex , moves to the cell periphery along microtubules in a kinesin1 and Arl8b - dependent manner . There they speciﬁcally target focal adhesions to induce the dissociation of the protein IQGAP1 , which has been suggested to regulate cell migration . Loss of func - tional p14 - MP1 complex causes several phenotypes : a decrease in focal adhesion turnover , an accumulation of peripheral elongated focal adhesions containing elevated IQGAP1 levels , and a reduction in migration speed . De - pletion of IQGAP1 rescued the migration defect of p14 deﬁcient cells suggesting that removal of excess IQGAP1 constitutes an essential step for focal adhesion disassembly [ 90 ] . However , which role IQGAP1 actually plays at focal adhesions still needs to be determined . Moreover , it re - mains a challenge to unravel the spatiotemporal coordination of the diverse processes ( calpain - mediated proteolysis , CME of integrins , endosomally mediated dis - sociation of IQGAP1 , targeted delivery of proteases for secretion ) contributing to focal adhesion formation and disassembly . Trafﬁcking of other cell surface adhesions proteins While integrins most often take center stage , a number of additional proteins exists that mediate contacts to the ex - tracellular matrix such as syndecans and other proteoglycans like NG2 / CSPG4 which act as receptors for extracellular matrix molecules and as co - receptors for growth factors and cytokines [ 91 , 92 ] . Syndecans are re - moved from the plasma membrane by endocytosis . However , the endocytic mechanism underlying their up - take is only incompletely understood . Internalized syndecan - 2 enters like many integrins an endosomal re - cycling compartment [ 93 ] . For the exit of syndecan from perinuclear Arf6 - positive recycling endosomes , an inter - action with the PIP 2 binding protein syntenin is required [ 94 ] . NG2 , a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan acting as co - receptor for PDGFR , which has been shown to promote migration and invasion [ 91 ] , is very likely also regulated by endocytic trafﬁcking . In addition , there are those adhesion proteins that me - diate cell cell contacts . The remodeling of these contacts is pivotal during collective cell migration and relies on en - docytic trafﬁcking of the involved cell cell adhesion proteins . A well - studied example is the cadherin protein family , which plays a role in different types of cell cell contact sites such as adherens junctions and desmosomes [ 95 ] . Classic cadherins connect cells at adherens junctions via Ca 2 ? - dependent homophilic interactions between their extracellular domains . Like integrins they are linked on the intracellular side via intermediate proteins to the actin cytoskeleton . Desmosomes are built up by the non - classical cadherins desmoglein and desmocollin which are indirectly connected to intermediate ﬁlaments . As a prototypical cadherin , we will discuss E - cadherin trafﬁcking as an ex - ample . Epithelial cells are connected by E - cadherin - based adherens junctions which have to be dissolved as part of a process called epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) to allow migration . EMT is on one hand a physiological process involved in many developmental processes as well as wound healing , but on the other hand it is also intimately linked to metastasis initiation [ 96 ] . As E - cadherin is the main component of epithelial adherens junctions , its re - moval is crucial for the dissolution of epithelial cell cell contacts . While E - cadherin is also heavily regulated at the transcriptional level , its internalization and lysosomal degradation represent a very rapid means to disassemble these contacts . Cadherins are like integrins internalized via different endocytic pathways like CME , caveolin - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis ( see table in [ 97 ] ) de - pending on cell type and cellular context . CME of E - cadherin depends on its dileucine motif [ 98 ] , a sequence recognized by the endocytic adaptor AP - 2 . Access to this motif is regulated by competitive binding of p120 catenin . Depletion of p120 catenin unmasks the endocytosis motif of E - cadherin resulting in its endocytosis and accumulation in internal vesicles and concomitant dissolution of ad - herens junctions . The p120 catenin - dependent endocytosis block can be overridden by binding of the endocytic 2129 adaptor Numb to p120 catenin and its recruitment of AP - 2 [ 99 ] or by direct interaction of Numb with E - cadherin which probably prevents the binding of p120 catenin [ 100 ] . Alternatively , the interaction between p120 catenin and E - Cadherin can be abolished by Src - mediated phosphory - lation of E - Cadherin . In addition , this phosphorylation promotes the binding of Hakai , an E3 ubiquitin ligase , which promotes E - cadherin endocytosis and degradation via ubiquitylation [ 101 ] . Also phosphorylation of E - cad - herin takes place in the context of EMT [ 102 ] . In addition , E - cadherin binds the endocytic adaptor Dab2 [ 103 ] . Growth factor signaling promotes E - cadherin endocytosis additionally by activation of RIN2 , which activates Rab5 [ 104 ] , and of Arf6 , which recruits Nm23 - H1 to facilitate dynamin - mediated endocytosis [ 105 , 106 ] . Studies in Drosophila have also shown a requirement for Cdc42 , the Par6 / aPKC polarity pathway and ARP2 / 3 to maintain normal rates of E - cadherin internalization [ 107 ] . An in - teraction between E - cadherin and the type I c phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase isoform 2 splice variant ( PIPK1 c i2 ) , which links E - cadherin to the clathrin adaptor protein complex AP - 1B , seems to play a role in E - cadherin endocytosis and recycling [ 108 ] as well . In - ternalized E - cadherin can principally be targeted for lysosomal degradation or enter the recycling pathway for redelivery to the plasma membrane . The sorting decision must be tightly controlled to prevent unwanted EMT and metastasis . Mutations in the E - cadherin binding site for PIPK1 c in gastric carcinogenesis [ 109 ] highlight the im - portance of regulated E - cadherin trafﬁcking to keep cell motility in check . While the underlying regulatory layers are only incompletely understood , a number of components involved in E - cadherin degradation and recycling have been identiﬁed . E - cadherin destined for lysosomal degra - dation is transported through Rab5 and Rab7 positive endosomes . Expression of inactive mutants of Rab5 or Rab7 delays E - cadherin degradation [ 102 ] . Further , it was demonstrated that the ubiquitylation of E - cadherin is cru - cial for its sorting into the intraluminal vesicles of multi - vesicular bodies ( MVBs ) [ 101 , 102 ] . The ubiquitylation is recognized by the ESCRT - 0 complex protein Hrs which recruits ESCRT machinery to catalyze the intraluminal sorting of the ubiquitylated cargo [ 110 ] . This degradative pathway was recently shown to be promoted by association of isoform 5 splice variant of PIPKI c ( PIPKI c i5 ) with E - cadherin [ 111 ] in a phosphorylation - dependent manner . SNX5 and SNX6 were reported to associate with PIPKI c i5 and to inhibit PIPKI c i5 - mediated E - cadherin degradation . Src - induced phosphorylation of PIPKI c i5 downstream of HGF signaling impaired SNX5 binding thereby relieving the inhibition of PIPKI c i5 - driven E - cadherin degradation [ 111 ] . The exact mechanism behind this regulation remains to be determined . Thus , both PIPKI c i2 and PIPKI c i5 interact with E - cadherin and synthesize PIP 2 , but have opposite effects on E - cadherin trafﬁcking . Furthermore , Rab11 and the sorting nexin SNX1 have been implicated in E - cadherin recycling to the plasma membrane . Recently , efﬁcient E - cadherin recycling was shown to depend on the lipid raft protein reggie / ﬂotillin - 1 . Reggie / ﬂotillin1 interacts with Rab11a and SNX4 , and overexpression of constitutively active variants of these proteins rescued the E - cadherin recycling defect in reggie / ﬂotillin - 1 depleted cells arguing that reggie / ﬂotillin exerts its inﬂuence on E - cadherin recycling via these two proteins [ 112 ] . Thus , E - cadherin trafﬁcking is another example for how endocytic transport provides the organism with tools to rapidly match cellular adhesion and cellular motility exactly to its acute needs , for growing a new structure during development or preventing tumor metastasis . However , it is becoming increasingly clear that the traf - ﬁcking of the different types of adhesion molecules cannot be viewed in isolation , but is often coordinately regulated . The surface levels of cadherins and integrins for instance tend to be inversely modulated during cell migration . This is achieved via the small GTPase Rab35 which promotes the surface localization of cadherins while at the same time inhibiting Arf6 and thereby down - regulating the Arf6 - de - pendent recycling pathway for b 1 - integrins and EGFRs [ 113 ] . The inﬂuence of endocytic trafﬁcking on extracellular matrix reorganization The extracellular matrix provides on one hand the substrate for cell adhesion and traction , but on the other hand acts as physical barrier for invading cells [ 114 ] . Contact - depen - dent remodeling of the extracellular matrix hence determines rate and speed of cell migration along and through the extracellular matrix [ 115 ] . To achieve extra - cellular matrix remodeling , mesenchymal cells , such as solid tumor cells and ﬁbroblasts , have developed a strategy to pericellularly remodel and proteolytically degrade the extracellular matrix using matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) [ 114 ] . Cancer cells were shown to coordinate mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix remodeling by segregating the anterior force - generating leading edge containing integrins , F - actin and the membrane type 1 ( MT1 ) - MMP from the posterior proteolytic zone where extracellular matrix ﬁbers are cleaved [ 116 ] . Of note , the delivery of MT1 - MMP to the leading invasive pseudopods of a migrating cell is coordinated by the NPF Neural Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) [ 117 ] . N - WASP is upregulated in invasive cancer cells and pro - motes the trafﬁcking of MT1 - MMP from late endosomes to the plasma membrane where it stabilizes MMT1 - MMP via direct tethering of its cytoplasmic tail to F - actin [ 117 ] . 2130 Delivery of MT1 - MMP to the invadosome further requires the master regulators of endocytosis Rab5 and Rab4 [ 118 ] , as well as a vSNARE and VAMP7 for fusing the MT1 - MMP - containing vesicles with the plasma membrane and presumably Rab8 for exocytosis [ 119 ] . Notably , overex - pression of Rab5 in cancer cells was found to be necessary and sufﬁcient for cell invasion and tumor dissemination by enhancing MT1 - MMP driven extracellular matrix degra - dation and increasing intratumoral cell motility [ 118 ] . Finally , in vitro data provide evidence that extracellular matrix proteins , such as ﬁbronectin , collagen and frag - ments thereof , themselves are able to inﬂuence integrin recycling and regulate gene expression of MMPs ( e . g . MMP9 ) [ 67 ] thereby providing additional feed - forward signals inﬂuencing cell migration in vivo . Conclusion Cell migration involves multi - step cascades bringing about the coordinated establishment of extracellular guidance cues , the recognition and transmission of these cues by receptors , the induction of cell polarity , cell adhesion and partial detachment , and the remodeling of the extracellular matrix . These complex processes need to be tightly coor - dinated in space and time to ﬁnally enable a cell to move forward . Endocytic trafﬁcking forms not only the basis for the essential spatial segregation and conﬁnement of many molecules that contribute to cell migration , but emerges more and more as a key player in the coordination of the diverse processed by providing master regulators as well as transport routes and platforms where components of the different migration - related signaling pathways intersect . Cells possess a remarkable migratory plasticity ; they are able to adapt to numerous intra - and extracellular condi - tions and to integrate many factors to achieve the right mode of migration for a particular context . Endocytic trafﬁcking takes central stage in this dynamic adaptation process . We are only at the beginning of understanding the molecular complexity underlying and connecting the pro - cesses summarized in this review . For the future , it will be crucial not only to describe the role of different trafﬁcking proteins in cell migration , but also to unravel how deci - sions for different sorting steps are taken along a particular trafﬁcking route , which molecules intersect during vesi - cular trafﬁcking and potentially modulate each other and to integrate this information into a bigger context to under - stand how a cell will adapt its vesicular transport routes to modulate its migration mode . With the advancement of the new super resolution microscopy techniques and improved in vivo imaging of vesicles and their cargo , we will hopefully soon be able to tackle these questions and to decipher the trafﬁcking - based coordination of cell migra - tion in health and disease . Acknowledgments This work was supported by grants from the Leibniz Society to Tanja Maritzen and from the Swiss National Science Foundation ( SNF 31003A 143841 ) , the Novartis Foundation for medical biological research , the Thurgauische Stiftung fu¨r Wis senschaft und Forschung , and the Swiss State Secretariat for Education Research and Innovation to Daniel Legler . We apologize to authors whose work could not be included due to space limitations . References 1 . Majumdar R , Sixt M , Parent CA ( 2014 ) New paradigms in the establishment and maintenance of gradients during directed cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 30C : 33 40 2 . Rot A ( 1993 ) Neutrophil attractant / activation protein 1 ( inter leukin 8 ) induces in vitro neutrophil migration by haptotactic mechanism . Eur J Immunol 23 ( 1 ) : 303 306 3 . Sarris M , Masson JB , Maurin D , Van der Aa LM , Boudinot P , Lortat Jacob H , Herbomel P ( 2012 ) Inﬂammatory chemokines direct and restrict leukocyte migration within live tissues as glycan bound gradients . Current Biol CB 22 ( 24 ) : 2375 2382 4 . Weber M , Hauschild R , Schwarz J , Moussion C , de Vries I , Legler DF , Luther SA , Bollenbach T , Sixt M ( 2013 ) Interstitial dendritic cell guidance by haptotactic chemokine gradients . Science 339 ( 6117 ) : 328 332 5 . Shulman Z , Cohen SJ , Roediger B , Kalchenko V , Jain R , Gra bovsky V , Klein E , Shinder V , Stoler Barak L , Feigelson SW , Meshel T , Nurmi SM , Goldstein I , Hartley O , Gahmberg CG , Etzioni A , Weninger W , Ben Baruch A , Alon R ( 2012 ) Transendothelial migration of lymphocytes mediated by in traendothelial vesicle stores rather than by extracellular chemokine depots . Nat Immunol 13 ( 1 ) : 67 76 6 . Wolf M , Albrecht S , Marki C ( 2008 ) Proteolytic processing of chemokines : implications in physiological and pathological conditions . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 40 ( 6 7 ) : 1185 1198 7 . Van den Steen PE , Proost P , Wuyts A , Van Damme J , Opde nakker G ( 2000 ) Neutrophil gelatinase B potentiates interleukin 8 tenfold by aminoterminal processing , whereas it degrades CTAP III , PF 4 , and GRO alpha and leaves RANTES and MCP 2 intact . Blood 96 ( 8 ) : 2673 2681 8 . Boldajipour B , Mahabaleshwar H , Kardash E , Reichman Fried M , Blaser H , Minina S , Wilson D , Xu Q , Raz E ( 2008 ) Control of chemokine guided cell migration by ligand sequestration . Cell 132 ( 3 ) : 463 473 9 . Dona E , Barry JD , Valentin G , Quirin C , Khmelinskii A , Kunze A , Durdu S , Newton LR , Fernandez Minan A , Huber W , Knop M , Gilmour D ( 2013 ) Directional tissue migration through a self generated chemokine gradient . Nature 503 : 285 289 10 . Venkiteswaran G , Lewellis SW , Wang J , Reynolds E , Nicholson C , Knaut H ( 2013 ) Generation and dynamics of an endogenous , self generated signaling gradient across a migrating tissue . Cell 155 ( 3 ) : 674 687 11 . Ulvmar MH , Werth K , Braun A , Kelay P , Hub E , Eller K , Chan L , Lucas B , Novitzky Basso I , Nakamura K , Rulicke T , Nibbs RJ , Worbs T , Forster R , Rot A ( 2014 ) The atypical chemokine receptor CCRL1 shapes functional CCL21 gradients in lymph nodes . Nat Immunol 15 ( 7 ) : 623 630 12 . Link A , Vogt TK , Favre S , Britschgi MR , Acha Orbea H , Hinz B , Cyster JG , Luther SA ( 2007 ) Fibroblastic reticular cells in lymph nodes regulate the homeostasis of naive T cells . Nat Immunol 8 ( 11 ) : 1255 1265 2131 13 . Bachelerie F , Ben Baruch A , Burkhardt AM , Combadiere C , Farber JM , Graham GJ , Horuk R , Sparre Ulrich AH , Locati M , Luster AD , Mantovani A , Matsushima K , Murphy PM , Nibbs R , Nomiyama H , Power CA , Proudfoot AE , Rosenkilde MM , Rot A , Sozzani S , Thelen M , Yoshie O , Zlotnik A ( 2014 ) Interna tional Union of Pharmacology . LXXXIX . Update on the extended family of chemokine receptors and introducing a new nomenclature for atypical chemokine receptors . Pharmacol Rev 66 ( 1 ) : 1 79 14 . Volpe S , Cameroni E , Moepps B , Thelen S , Apuzzo T , Thelen M ( 2012 ) CCR2 acts as scavenger for CCL2 during monocyte chemotaxis . PLoS One 7 ( 5 ) : e37208 15 . Neel NF , Schutyser E , Sai J , Fan GH , Richmond A ( 2005 ) Chemokine receptor internalization and intracellular trafﬁcking . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 16 ( 6 ) : 637 658 16 . Borroni EM , Mantovani A , Locati M , Bonecchi R ( 2010 ) Chemokine receptors intracellular trafﬁcking . Pharmacol Ther 127 ( 1 ) : 1 8 17 . Boucrot E , Ferreira AP , Almeida Souza L , Debard S , Vallis Y , Howard G , Bertot L , Sauvonnet N , McMahon HT ( 2015 ) En dophilin marks and controls a clathrin independent endocytic pathway . Nature 517 ( 7535 ) : 460 465 18 . Stenmark H ( 2009 ) Rab GTPases as coordinators of vesicle trafﬁc . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 ( 8 ) : 513 525 19 . Otero C , Groettrup M , Legler DF ( 2006 ) Opposite fate of en docytosed CCR7 and its ligands : recycling versus degradation . J Immunol 177 ( 4 ) : 2314 2323 20 . Charest Morin X , Pepin R , Gagne Henley A , Morissette G , Lodge R , Marceau F ( 2013 ) C C chemokine receptor 7 medi ated endocytosis of antibody cargoes into intact cells . Front Pharmacol 4 : 122 21 . Schaeuble K , Hauser MA , Rippl AV , Bruderer R , Otero C , Groettrup M , Legler DF ( 2012 ) Ubiquitylation of the chemokine receptor CCR7 enables efﬁcient receptor recycling and cell migration . J Cell Sci 125 ( Pt 19 ) : 4463 4474 22 . Fan GH , Lapierre LA , Goldenring JR , Sai J , Richmond A ( 2004 ) Rab11 family interacting protein 2 and myosin Vb are required for CXCR2 recycling and receptor mediated chemotaxis . Mol Biol Cell 15 ( 5 ) : 2456 2469 23 . Raman D , Sai J , Hawkins O , Richmond A ( 2014 ) Adaptor protein2 ( AP2 ) orchestrates CXCR2 mediated cell migration . Trafﬁc 15 ( 4 ) : 451 469 24 . Lagane B , Chow KY , Balabanian K , Levoye A , Harriague J , Planchenault T , Baleux F , Gunera Saad N , Arenzana Seisdedos F , Bachelerie F ( 2008 ) CXCR4 dimerization and beta arrestin mediated signaling account for the enhanced chemotaxis to CXCL12 in WHIM syndrome . Blood 112 ( 1 ) : 34 44 25 . Roland J , Murphy BJ , Ahr B , Robert Hebmann V , Delauzun V , Nye KE , Devaux C , Biard Piechaczyk M ( 2003 ) Role of the intracellular domains of CXCR4 in SDF 1 mediated signaling . Blood 101 ( 2 ) : 399 406 26 . Minina S , Reichman Fried M , Raz E ( 2007 ) Control of receptor internalization , signaling level , and precise arrival at the target in guided cell migration . Curr Biol 17 ( 13 ) : 1164 1172 27 . Marchese A , Raiborg C , Santini F , Keen JH , Stenmark H , Benovic JL ( 2003 ) The E3 ubiquitin ligase AIP4 mediates ubiquitination and sorting of the G protein coupled receptor CXCR4 . Dev Cell 5 ( 5 ) : 709 722 28 . Jekely G , Sung HH , Luque CM , Rorth P ( 2005 ) Regulators of endocytosis maintain localized receptor tyrosine kinase signal ing in guided migration . Dev Cell 9 ( 2 ) : 197 207 29 . Rorth P ( 2002 ) Initiating and guiding migration : lessons from border cells . Trends Cell Biol 12 ( 7 ) : 325 331 30 . Duchek P , Rorth P ( 2001 ) Guidance of cell migration by EGF receptor signaling during Drosophila oogenesis . Science 291 ( 5501 ) : 131 133 31 . Duchek P , Somogyi K , Jekely G , Beccari S , Rorth P ( 2001 ) Guidance of cell migration by the Drosophila PDGF / VEGF receptor . Cell 107 ( 1 ) : 17 26 32 . Assaker G , Ramel D , Wculek SK , Gonzalez Gaitan M , Emery G ( 2010 ) Spatial restriction of receptor tyrosine kinase activity through a polarized endocytic cycle controls border cell mi gration . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 ( 52 ) : 22558 22563 33 . Kawada K , Upadhyay G , Ferandon S , Janarthanan S , Hall M , Vilardaga JP , Yajnik V ( 2009 ) Cell migration is regulated by platelet derived growth factor receptor endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 29 ( 16 ) : 4508 4518 34 . Sadowski L , Jastrzebski K , Kalaidzidis Y , Heldin CH , Hellberg C , Miaczynska M ( 2013 ) Dynamin inhibitors impair endocytosis and mitogenic signaling of PDGF . Trafﬁc 14 ( 6 ) : 725 736 35 . Hellberg C , Schmees C , Karlsson S , Ahgren A , Heldin CH ( 2009 ) Activation of protein kinase C alpha is necessary for sorting the PDGF beta receptor to Rab4a dependent recycling . Mol Biol Cell 20 ( 12 ) : 2856 2863 36 . Belleudi F , Scrofani C , Torrisi MR , Mancini P ( 2011 ) Polarized endocytosis of the keratinocyte growth factor receptor in mi grating cells : role of SRC signaling and cortactin . PLoS One 6 ( 12 ) : e29159 37 . Mutch LJ , Howden JD , Jenner EP , Poulter NS , Rappoport JZ ( 2014 ) Polarised clathrin mediated endocytosis of EGFR during chemotactic invasion . Trafﬁc 15 ( 6 ) : 648 664 38 . Runkle KB , Meyerkord CL , Desai NV , Takahashi Y , Wang HG ( 2012 ) Bif 1 suppresses breast cancer cell migration by promoting EGFR endocytic degradation . Cancer Biol Ther 13 ( 10 ) : 956 966 39 . Li MY , Lai PL , Chou YT , Chi AP , Mi YZ , Khoo KH , Chang GD , Wu CW , Meng TC , Chen GC ( 2014 ) Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN3 inhibits lung cancer cell proliferation and migration by promoting EGFR endocytic degradation . Onco gene . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2014 . 312 40 . de Graauw M , Cao L , Winkel L , van Miltenburg MH , le Devedec SE , Klop M , Yan K , Pont C , Rogkoti VM , Tijsma A , Chaudhuri A , Lalai R , Price L , Verbeek F , van de Water B ( 2014 ) Annexin A2 depletion delays EGFR endocytic trafﬁcking via coﬁlin activation and enhances EGFR signaling and metas tasis formation . Oncogene 33 ( 20 ) : 2610 2619 41 . Caswell PT , Chan M , Lindsay AJ , McCaffrey MW , Boettiger D , Norman JC ( 2008 ) Rab coupling protein coordinates recycling of alpha5beta1 integrin and EGFR1 to promote cell migration in 3D microenvironments . J Cell Biol 183 ( 1 ) : 143 155 42 . Palamidessi A , Frittoli E , Garre M , Faretta M , Mione M , Testa I , Diaspro A , Lanzetti L , Scita G , Di Fiore PP ( 2008 ) Endocytic trafﬁcking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of sig naling in cell migration . Cell 134 ( 1 ) : 135 147 43 . Ramel D , Wang X , Laﬂamme C , Montell DJ , Emery G ( 2013 ) Rab11 regulates cell cell communication during collective cell movements . Nat Cell Biol 15 ( 3 ) : 317 324 44 . Osmani N , Peglion F , Chavrier P , Etienne Manneville S ( 2010 ) Cdc42 localization and cell polarity depend on membrane traf ﬁc . J Cell Biol 191 ( 7 ) : 1261 1269 45 . Bretscher MS ( 1996 ) Moving membrane up to the front of mi grating cells . Cell 85 ( 4 ) : 465 467 46 . Palecek SP , Schmidt CE , Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF ( 1996 ) Integrin dynamics on the tail region of migrating ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Sci 109 ( Pt 5 ) : 941 952 47 . Wieffer M , Maritzen T , Haucke V ( 2009 ) SnapShot : endocytic trafﬁcking . Cell 137 ( 2 ) : 382 ( e381 383 ) 48 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM ( 2003 ) Real time analysis of clathrin mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J Cell Sci 116 ( Pt 5 ) : 847 855 49 . Nishimura T , Kaibuchi K ( 2007 ) Numb controls integrin en docytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR 3 . Dev Cell 13 ( 1 ) : 15 28 2132 50 . Howes MT , Kirkham M , Riches J , Cortese K , Walser PJ , Simpson F , Hill MM , Jones A , Lundmark R , Lindsay MR , Hernandez Deviez DJ , Hadzic G , McCluskey A , Bashir R , Liu L , Pilch P , McMahon H , Robinson PJ , Hancock JF , Mayor S , Parton RG ( 2010 ) Clathrin independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of mi grating cells . J Cell Biol 190 ( 4 ) : 675 691 51 . Grande Garcia A , del Pozo MA ( 2008 ) Caveolin 1 in cell po larization and directional migration . Eur J Cell Biol 87 ( 8 9 ) : 641 647 52 . Beardsley A , Fang K , Mertz H , Castranova V , Friend S , Liu J ( 2005 ) Loss of caveolin 1 polarity impedes endothelial cell polarization and directional movement . J Biol Chem 280 ( 5 ) : 3541 3547 53 . Kirkham M , Fujita A , Chadda R , Nixon SJ , Kurzchalia TV , Sharma DK , Pagano RE , Hancock JF , Mayor S , Parton RG ( 2005 ) Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin inde pendent early endocytic vehicles . J Cell Biol 168 ( 3 ) : 465 476 54 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S ( 2002 ) GPI anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 regulated , clathrin independent pinocytic path way . Dev Cell 2 ( 4 ) : 411 423 55 . Bitsikas V , Correa IR Jr , Nichols BJ ( 2014 ) Clathrin indepen dent pathways do not contribute signiﬁcantly to endocytic ﬂux . Elife 3 : e03970 56 . Traynor D , Kay RR ( 2007 ) Possible roles of the endocytic cycle in cell motility . J Cell Sci 120 ( Pt 14 ) : 2318 2327 57 . Razidlo GL , Wang Y , Chen J , Krueger EW , Billadeau DD , McNiven MA ( 2013 ) Dynamin 2 potentiates invasive migration of pancreatic tumor cells through stabilization of the Rac1 GEF Vav1 . Dev Cell 24 ( 6 ) : 573 585 58 . Gautier JJ , Lomakina ME , Bouslama Oueghlani L , Derivery E , Beilinson H , Faigle W , Loew D , Louvard D , Echard A , Alexandrova AY , Baum B , Gautreau A ( 2011 ) Clathrin is re quired for scar / wave mediated lamellipodium formation . J Cell Sci 124 ( Pt 20 ) : 3414 3427 59 . Montagnac G , Meas Yedid V , Irondelle M , Castro Castro A , Franco M , Shida T , Nachury MV , Benmerah A , Olivo Marin JC , Chavrier P ( 2013 ) alphaTAT1 catalyses microtubule acetylation at clathrin coated pits . Nature 502 ( 7472 ) : 567 570 60 . Maritzen T , Schmidt MR , Kukhtina V , Higman VA , Strauss H , Volkmer R , Oschkinat H , Dotti CG , Haucke V ( 2010 ) A novel subtype of AP 1 binding motif within the palmitoylated trans Golgi network / endosomal accessory protein Gadkin / gamma BAR . J Biol Chem 285 ( 6 ) : 4074 4086 61 . Schmidt MR , Maritzen T , Kukhtina V , Higman VA , Doglio L , Barak NN , Strauss H , Oschkinat H , Dotti CG , Haucke V ( 2009 ) Regulation of endosomal membrane trafﬁc by a Gadkin / AP 1 / kinesin KIF5 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 ( 36 ) : 15344 15349 62 . Maritzen T , Zech T , Schmidt MR , Krause E , Machesky LM , Haucke V ( 2012 ) Gadkin negatively regulates cell spreading and motility via sequestration of the actin nucleating ARP2 / 3 com plex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 ( 26 ) : 10382 10387 63 . Parsons JT , Horwitz AR , Schwartz MA ( 2010 ) Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 ( 9 ) : 633 643 64 . Zaidel Bar R , Geiger B ( 2010 ) The switchable integrin adhe some . J Cell Sci 123 ( Pt 9 ) : 1385 1388 65 . Caswell PT , Norman JC ( 2006 ) Integrin trafﬁcking and the control of cell migration . Trafﬁc 7 ( 1 ) : 14 21 66 . Arjonen A , Alanko J , Veltel S , Ivaska J ( 2012 ) Distinct recycling of active and inactive beta1 integrins . Trafﬁc 13 ( 4 ) : 610 625 67 . Caswell P , Norman J ( 2008 ) Endocytic transport of integrins during cell migration and invasion . Trends Cell Biol 18 ( 6 ) : 257 263 68 . Caswell PT , Vadrevu S , Norman JC ( 2009 ) Integrins : masters and slaves of endocytic transport . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 ( 12 ) : 843 853 69 . Ivaska J , Heino J ( 2011 ) Cooperation between integrins and growth factor receptors in signaling and endocytosis . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 27 : 291 320 70 . Bridgewater RE , Norman JC , Caswell PT ( 2012 ) Integrin traf ﬁcking at a glance . J Cell Sci 125 ( Pt 16 ) : 3695 3701 71 . Teckchandani A , Toida N , Goodchild J , Henderson C , Watts J , Wollscheid B , Cooper JA ( 2009 ) Quantitative proteomics identiﬁes a Dab2 / integrin module regulating cell migration . J Cell Biol 186 ( 1 ) : 99 111 72 . Ezratty EJ , Bertaux C , Marcantonio EE , Gundersen GG ( 2009 ) Clathrin mediates integrin endocytosis for focal adhesion dis assembly in migrating cells . J Cell Biol 187 ( 5 ) : 733 747 73 . Zhou P , Alfaro J , Chang EH , Zhao X , Porcionatto M , Segal RA ( 2011 ) Numb links extracellular cues to intracellular polarity machinery to promote chemotaxis . Dev Cell 20 ( 5 ) : 610 622 74 . Bottcher RT , Stremmel C , Meves A , Meyer H , Widmaier M , Tseng HY , Fassler R ( 2012 ) Sorting nexin 17 prevents lysoso mal degradation of beta1 integrins by binding to the beta1 integrin tail . Nat Cell Biol 14 ( 6 ) : 584 592 75 . Danen EH , van Rheenen J , Franken W , Huveneers S , Sonneveld P , Jalink K , Sonnenberg A ( 2005 ) Integrins control motile strat egy through a Rho coﬁlin pathway . J Cell Biol 169 ( 3 ) : 515 526 76 . Jacquemet G , Green DM , Bridgewater RE , von Kriegsheim A , Humphries MJ , Norman JC , Caswell PT ( 2013 ) RCP driven alpha5beta1 recycling suppresses Rac and promotes RhoA ac tivity via the RacGAP1 IQGAP1 complex . J Cell Biol 202 ( 6 ) : 917 935 77 . Broussard JA , Lin WH , Majumdar D , Anderson B , Eason B , Brown CM , Webb DJ ( 2012 ) The endosomal adaptor protein APPL1 impairs the turnover of leading edge adhesions to reg ulate cell migration . Mol Biol Cell 23 ( 8 ) : 1486 1499 78 . Morgan MR , Hamidi H , Bass MD , Warwood S , Ballestrem C , Humphries MJ ( 2013 ) Syndecan 4 phosphorylation is a control point for integrin recycling . Dev Cell 24 ( 5 ) : 472 485 79 . Theisen U , Straube E , Straube A ( 2012 ) Directional persistence of migrating cells requires Kif1C mediated stabilization of trailing adhesions . Dev Cell 23 ( 6 ) : 1153 1166 80 . Eskova A , Knapp B , Matelska D , Reusing S , Arjonen A , Lisauskas T , Pepperkok R , Russell R , Eils R , Ivaska J , Kaderali L , Erﬂe H , Starkuviene V ( 2014 ) An RNAi screen identiﬁes KIF15 as a novel regulator of the endocytic trafﬁcking of inte grin . J Cell Sci 127 ( Pt 11 ) : 2433 2447 81 . Jahn R , Scheller RH ( 2006 ) SNAREs engines for membrane fusion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 ( 9 ) : 631 643 82 . Rapaport D , Lugassy Y , Sprecher E , Horowitz M ( 2010 ) Loss of SNAP29 impairs endocytic recycling and cell motility . PLoS One 5 ( 3 ) : e9759 83 . Riggs KA , Hasan N , Humphrey D , Raleigh C , Nevitt C , Corbin D , Hu C ( 2012 ) Regulation of integrin endocytic recycling and chemotactic cell migration by syntaxin 6 and VAMP3 interac tion . J Cell Sci 125 ( Pt 16 ) : 3827 3839 84 . Nishikimi A , Ishihara S , Ozawa M , Etoh K , Fukuda M , Kinashi T , Katagiri K ( 2014 ) Rab13 acts downstream of the kinase Mst1 to deliver the integrin LFA 1 to the cell surface for lymphocyte trafﬁcking . Sci Signal 7 ( 336 ) : ra72 85 . Franco SJ , Rodgers MA , Perrin BJ , Han J , Bennin DA , Critchley DR , Huttenlocher A ( 2004 ) Calpain mediated proteolysis of talin regulates adhesion dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 6 ( 10 ) : 977 983 86 . Chao WT , Kunz J ( 2009 ) Focal adhesion disassembly requires clathrin dependent endocytosis of integrins . FEBS Lett 583 ( 8 ) : 1337 1343 87 . Chao WT , Ashcroft F , Daquinag AC , Vadakkan T , Wei Z , Zhang P , Dickinson ME , Kunz J ( 2010 ) Type I 2133 phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase beta regulates focal ad hesion disassembly by promoting beta1 integrin endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 30 ( 18 ) : 4463 4479 88 . Ezratty EJ , Partridge MA , Gundersen GG ( 2005 ) Microtubule induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat Cell Biol 7 ( 6 ) : 581 590 89 . Stehbens SJ , Paszek M , Pemble H , Ettinger A , Gierke S , Witt mann T ( 2014 ) CLASPs link focal adhesion associated microtubule capture to localized exocytosis and adhesion site turnover . Nat Cell Biol 16 ( 6 ) : 561 573 90 . Schiefermeier N , Schefﬂer JM , de Araujo ME , Stasyk T , Yor danov T , Ebner HL , Offterdinger M , Munck S , Hess MW , Wickstrom SA , Lange A , Wunderlich W , Fassler R , Teis D , Huber LA ( 2014 ) The late endosomal p14 MP1 ( LAMTOR2 / 3 ) complex regulates focal adhesion dynamics during cell migra tion . J Cell Biol 205 ( 4 ) : 525 540 91 . Biname F , Sakry D , Dimou L , Jolivel V , Trotter J ( 2013 ) NG2 regulates directional migration of oligodendrocyte precursor cells via Rho GTPases and polarity complex proteins . J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 33 ( 26 ) : 10858 10874 92 . Morgan MR , Humphries MJ , Bass MD ( 2007 ) Synergistic control of cell adhesion by integrins and syndecans . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 ( 12 ) : 957 969 93 . Jacquemet G , Humphries MJ , Caswell PT ( 2013 ) Role of ad hesion receptor trafﬁcking in 3D cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 ( 5 ) : 627 632 94 . Zimmermann P , Zhang Z , Degeest G , Mortier E , Leenaerts I , Coomans C , Schulz J , N’Kuli F , Courtoy PJ , David G ( 2005 ) Syndecan recycling [ corrected ] is controlled by syntenin PIP2 interaction and Arf6 . Dev Cell 9 ( 3 ) : 377 388 95 . Kawauchi T ( 2012 ) Cell Adhesion and Its Endocytic Regulation in Cell Migration during Neural Development and Cancer Me tastasis . Int J Mol Sci 13 ( 4 ) : 4564 4590 96 . Baum B , Settleman J , Quinlan MP ( 2008 ) Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states in development and disease . Semin Cell Dev Biol 19 ( 3 ) : 294 308 97 . Delva E , Kowalczyk AP ( 2009 ) Regulation of cadherin traf ﬁcking . Trafﬁc 10 ( 3 ) : 259 267 98 . Miyashita Y , Ozawa M ( 2007 ) Increased internalization of p120 uncoupled E cadherin and a requirement for a dileucine motif in the cytoplasmic domain for endocytosis of the protein . J Biol Chem 282 ( 15 ) : 11540 11548 99 . Sato K , Watanabe T , Wang S , Kakeno M , Matsuzawa K , Matsui T , Yokoi K , Murase K , Sugiyama I , Ozawa M , Kaibuchi K ( 2011 ) Numb controls E cadherin endocytosis through p120 catenin with aPKC . Mol Biol Cell 22 ( 17 ) : 3103 3119 100 . Wang Z , Sandiford S , Wu C , Li SS ( 2009 ) Numb regulates cell cell adhesion and polarity in response to tyrosine kinase sig nalling . EMBO J 28 ( 16 ) : 2360 2373 101 . Fujita Y , Krause G , Scheffner M , Zechner D , Leddy HE , Beh rens J , Sommer T , Birchmeier W ( 2002 ) Hakai , a c Cbl like protein , ubiquitinates and induces endocytosis of the E cadherin complex . Nat Cell Biol 4 ( 3 ) : 222 231 102 . Palacios F , Tushir JS , Fujita Y , D’Souza Schorey C ( 2005 ) Lysosomal targeting of E cadherin : a unique mechanism for the down regulation of cell cell adhesion during epithelial to mes enchymal transitions . Mol Cell Biol 25 ( 1 ) : 389 402 103 . Yang DH , Cai KQ , Roland IH , Smith ER , Xu XX ( 2007 ) Dis abled 2 is an epithelial surface positioning gene . J Biol Chem 282 ( 17 ) : 13114 13122 104 . Kimura T , Sakisaka T , Baba T , Yamada T , Takai Y ( 2006 ) Involvement of the Ras Ras activated Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange factor RIN2 Rab5 pathway in the hepatocyte growth factor induced endocytosis of E cadherin . J Biol Chem 281 ( 15 ) : 10598 10609 105 . Palacios F , Price L , Schweitzer J , Collard JG , D’Souza Schorey C ( 2001 ) An essential role for ARF6 regulated membrane trafﬁc in adherens junction turnover and epithelial cell migration . EMBO J 20 ( 17 ) : 4973 4986 106 . Palacios F , Schweitzer JK , Boshans RL , D’Souza Schorey C ( 2002 ) ARF6 GTP recruits Nm23 H1 to facilitate dynamin mediated endocytosis during adherens junctions disassembly . Nat Cell Biol 4 ( 12 ) : 929 936 107 . Georgiou M , Marinari E , Burden J , Baum B ( 2008 ) Cdc42 , Par6 , and aPKC regulate Arp2 / 3 mediated endocytosis to control local adherens junction stability . Current Biol CB 18 ( 21 ) : 1631 1638 108 . Ling K , Bairstow SF , Carbonara C , Turbin DA , Huntsman DG , Anderson RA ( 2007 ) Type I gamma phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase modulates adherens junction and E cadherin trafﬁcking via a direct interaction with mu 1B adaptin . J Cell Biol 176 ( 3 ) : 343 353 109 . Yabuta T , Shinmura K , Tani M , Yamaguchi S , Yoshimura K , Katai H , Nakajima T , Mochiki E , Tsujinaka T , Takami M , Hirose K , Yamaguchi A , Takenoshita S , Yokota J ( 2002 ) E cadherin gene variants in gastric cancer families whose pro bands are diagnosed with diffuse gastric cancer . Int J Cancer 101 ( 5 ) : 434 441 110 . Henne WM , Buchkovich NJ , Emr SD ( 2011 ) The ESCRT pathway . Dev Cell 21 ( 1 ) : 77 91 111 . Schill NJ , Hedman AC , Choi S , Anderson RA ( 2014 ) Isoform 5 of PIPKIgamma regulates the endosomal trafﬁcking and degradation of E cadherin . J Cell Sci 127 ( Pt 10 ) : 2189 2203 112 . Solis GP , Hulsbusch N , Radon Y , Katanaev VL , Plattner H , Stuermer CA ( 2013 ) Reggies / ﬂotillins interact with Rab11a and SNX4 at the tubulovesicular recycling compartment and func tion in transferrin receptor and E cadherin trafﬁcking . Mol Biol Cell 24 ( 17 ) : 2689 2702 113 . Allaire PD , Seyed Sadr M , Chaineau M , Seyed Sadr E , Konefal S , Fotouhi M , Maret D , Ritter B , Del Maestro RF , McPherson PS ( 2013 ) Interplay between Rab35 and Arf6 controls cargo recycling to coordinate cell adhesion and migration . J Cell Sci 126 ( Pt 3 ) : 722 731 114 . Bonnans C , Chou J , Werb Z ( 2014 ) Remodelling the extracel lular matrix in development and disease . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 ( 12 ) : 786 801 115 . Wolf K , Te Lindert M , Krause M , Alexander S , Te Riet J , Willis AL , Hoffman RM , Figdor CG , Weiss SJ , Friedl P ( 2013 ) Phy sical limits of cell migration : control by ECM space and nuclear deformation and tuning by proteolysis and traction force . J Cell Biol 201 ( 7 ) : 1069 1084 116 . Wolf K , Wu YI , Liu Y , Geiger J , Tam E , Overall C , Stack MS , Friedl P ( 2007 ) Multi step pericellular proteolysis controls the transition from individual to collective cancer cell invasion . Nat Cell Biol 9 ( 8 ) : 893 904 117 . Yu X , Zech T , McDonald L , Gonzalez EG , Li A , Macpherson I , Schwarz JP , Spence H , Futo K , Timpson P , Nixon C , Ma Y , Anton IM , Visegrady B , Insall RH , Oien K , Blyth K , Norman JC , Machesky LM ( 2012 ) N WASP coordinates the delivery and F actin mediated capture of MT1 MMP at invasive pseudopods . J Cell Biol 199 ( 3 ) : 527 544 118 . Frittoli E , Palamidessi A , Marighetti P , Confalonieri S , Bianchi F , Malinverno C , Mazzarol G , Viale G , Martin Padura I , Garre M , Parazzoli D , Mattei V , Cortellino S , Bertalot G , Di Fiore PP , Scita G ( 2014 ) A RAB5 / RAB4 recycling circuitry induces a proteolytic invasive program and promotes tumor dissemination . J Cell Biol 206 ( 2 ) : 307 328 119 . Poincloux R , Lizarraga F , Chavrier P ( 2009 ) Matrix invasion by tumour cells : a focus on MT1 MMP trafﬁcking to invadopodia . J Cell Sci 122 ( Pt 17 ) : 3015 3024 2134