Understanding the Sustained Use of Online Health Communities From a Self - Determination Perspective Yan Zhang School of Information , University of Texas at Austin , 1616 Guadalupe Street , Austin , TX 78701 . E - mail : yanz @ ischool . utexas . edu Sustained use of an information source is sometimes important for achieving an individual’s long - term goals , such as learning and self - development . It is even more important for users of online health communities because health beneﬁts usually come with sustained use . However , little is known about what retains a user . We interviewed 21 participants who had been using online diabetes communities in a sustained manner . Guided by self - determination theory , which posits that behaviors are sustained when they can satisfy basic human needs for autonomy , competence , and related - ness , we identiﬁed mechanisms that help satisfy these needs , and thus sustain users in online health commu - nities . Autonomy - supportive mechanisms include being respected and supported as a unique individual , feeling free in making choices , and receiving meaningful ratio - nales about others’ decisions . Competence - cultivating mechanisms include seeking information , providing information , and exchanging information with others to construct knowledge . Mechanisms that cultivate related - ness include seeing similarities between oneself and peers , receiving responses from others , providing emo - tional support , and forming small underground groups for closer interactions . The results suggest that , like emotions , information and small group interactions also play a key role in retaining users . System design and community management strategies are discussed based on these mechanisms . Introduction The use of sources , containers of information , is an inte - gral aspect of human information behavior ( Kuhlthau , 1999 ) and is explicitly or implicitly present in most information - seeking models ( Bates , 1989 ; Belkin , Oddy , & Brooks , 1982 ; Choo , Detlor , & Turnbull , 2000 ; Ellis , 1993 ; Kuhlthau , 1991 ; Marchionini , 1997 ; Savolainen , 1995 ; Wilson , 1999 ) . Due to the general nature of the concept , the use of sources has been operationalized differently in empirical studies , ranging from source preference and selec - tion , the intensity and frequency of usage , speciﬁc user actions ( e . g . , examining search results ) , to the cognitive processing of information ( e . g . , quality evaluation ) , and ways to access sources ( e . g . , active seeking and scanning ) . Despite the differences , most studies assume that the use of sources is a time - bounded behavior or a general preference without much contextualization . It has been widely recognized that information seeking is not a linear process with clearly delineated starting and ﬁnishing points ; rather , it is dynamic , cyclic , and ﬂowing ( Foster , 2004 ; Lin & Belkin , 2000 ; Savolainen , 2006 ) . Therefore , the use of sources also has a time dimension ; users may switch to other sources or use one source for a prolonged period of time ( Johnson & Case , 2012 ; Reimer , 1994 ; Savolainen , 2006 ) . Although the former has been cap - tured by the concept “information pathway” and examined in empirical studies ( Case , Johnson , Andrews , Allard , & Kelly , 2004 ; Zhang , 2012 ) , the latter has been less explored . In this study , we seek to enhance the current understanding of the sustained use of information sources . Speciﬁcally , we focus on investigating mechanisms that contribute to the sustained use of online health communities . Online health communities , where consumers share per - sonal accounts about their health and healthcare experi - ences , have become an important information resource , particularly for individuals with chronic conditions ( Barak , Boniel - Nissim , & Suler , 2008 ; Ziebland & Wyke , 2012 ) . About one in four Internet users ( 23 % ) living with chronic conditions , such as high blood pressure , diabetes , heart con - ditions , and cancer , use online communities ( Fox , 2011a ) . Although health outcomes are not conclusive ( Demiris , 2006 ; Eysenbach , Powell , Englesakis , Rizo , & Stern , 2004 ; Grifﬁths , Calear , & Banﬁeld , 2009 ) , participation in such communities has been found to improve users’ competence in seeking online information , their self - efﬁcacy for partici - pating in medical care , their emotional well - being , and their quality of life ( Gustafson et al . , 2001 ; Rains & Young , 2009 ; Rodgers & Chen , 2005 ; Welbourne , Blanchard , & Received November 14 , 2014 ; revisedApril 3 , 2015 ; acceptedApril 6 , 2015 © 2015 ASIS & T • Published online in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi . 23560 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY , (cid:129)(cid:129) ( (cid:129)(cid:129) ) : (cid:129)(cid:129) – (cid:129)(cid:129) , 2015 Wadsworth , 2013 ; Winzelberg et al . , 2003 ) . Additional research suggests that many of these beneﬁts come with sustained use ( Mo & Coulson , 2010 ; Rains & Young , 2009 ; Wright , 2000 ) . However , retaining users has been a major challenge for online health communities ( Nijland , van Gemert - Pijnen , Kelders , Brandenburg , & Seydel , 2011 ) . Interventions tar - geting patient education and training ( e . g . , knowledge about disease self - management ) found that , despite being favored by participants , the use of communities dwindles over time ( Glasgow , Boles , McKay , Feil , & Barrera , 2003 ; Gustafson et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , an understanding of the sustained use of online health communities is much needed for designing sustainable health information and education services that have an online community component . More broadly , the knowledge gained may also be useful for other web - based information sources that aim to retain users . Related Literature The sustained use of online health communities is a form of source usage . Therefore , this section reviews the literature on source usage in general , and then the literature on the use of online health communities . Source Usage Source usage does not have a universally agreed - upon deﬁnition . In some studies , it denotes the extent of people’s information - seeking efforts , such as the sources utilized , the frequency of searching , the types of information sought , the formats preferred , and the amount of information accessed ( Anker , Reinhart , & Feeley , 2011 ; Johnson & Case , 2012 ; Lambert & Loiselle , 2007 ; Lenz , 1984 ) . For example , Miller , Leinbach , and Brody ( 1989 ) found that patients with hypertension are more likely to visit clinics for the treatment of medical - and stress - related problems than those without . Westbrook ( 2015 ) identiﬁed the types of information that domestic violence abusers and survivors seek on social Q & A sites , including advice , binary questions , explanations , and factual information . Barsevick and Johnson ( 1990 ) found that women with a higher preference for information ask their providers more questions when undergoing colposcopy . In some studies , source usage refers to users’ cognitive processing of information , such as the evaluation of infor - mation quality , relevance , and utility ( Anker et al . , 2011 ; Johnson & Case , 2012 ) . For example , Baker ( 1996 ) studied the use of informational pamphlets by women with multiple sclerosis and found that those who preferred infor - mation rated the pamphlets as more relevant than those who had less preference for information , regardless of the nature of the information . Feufel and Stahl ( 2012 ) studied the cognitive strategies of older adults when searching online for health information and found that skilled web users search to inform themselves , whereas less - skilled users search to conﬁrm their health - related opinions . Zhang ( 2012 ) found that during health information searching , users perform cognitive activities such as building mental models of a condition or a treatment , testing hypotheses about diagnoses by comparing symptoms with one’s own , and comparing content across sources to validate informa - tion . Studies also have examined users’ cognitive biases in searching for health information online , such as the base - rate fallacy and availability bias , which often lead to an irrational escalation of concerns about one’s condition and inaccurate decision - making ( Lau & Coiera , 2009 ; White , 2013 ) . In other studies , source usage denotes information - seeking modes , patterns , or strategies ( Johnson & Case , 2012 ) . For example , McKenzie ( 2003 ) identiﬁed four information - seeking modes by studying the information - seeking behavior of women pregnant with twins : ( a ) active seeking ( actively asking questions or performing searches ) , ( b ) active scanning ( semidirected browsing or scanning within sources ) , ( c ) nondirected monitoring ( serendipitously encountering information ) , and ( d ) obtaining information by proxy ( viz . , through an intermediary ) . Studying HIV patients’ information acquisition and sharing , Veinot ( 2009 ) identiﬁed ﬁve interpersonal information - seeking patterns : ( a ) joint seeking ( collaboratively seeking information together from various sources ) , ( b ) tag - team seeking ( people with shared information needs looking separately for infor - mation via various sources ) , ( c ) exposure ( people not actively seeking information but being exposed to it by others ) , ( d ) opportunity ( under socially opportune condi - tions created through interaction , one network member seeking information from another by asking questions or requesting documents ) , and ( e ) legitimation ( one network member asking another for help with validating the quality of information from various sources ) . Despite the differences in deﬁnitions of source usage , studies on this topic share a commonality . That is , most of them focus on one information search episode ( e . g . , cogni - tive activities in interacting with the web for a speciﬁc task ) , or on habitual patterns ( e . g . , consulting the web before seeing a doctor ) , while largely ignoring the role that time plays in source usage . Information seeking can be iterative and prolonged , particularly when users attempt to fulﬁll complex or long - term goals ( Foster , 2004 ; Kuhlthau , 1993 ; Savolainen , 2006 , 2008 ; Solomon , 1997 ; Sonnenwald & Iivonen , 1999 ; Vakkari , 2003 ) , such as completing an essay , understanding one’s nutritional needs , or keeping abreast of the latest diabetes treatments . Therefore , source usage has a temporal dimension . Recognizing the dynamic nature of source usage , Johnson , Case , Andrews , Allard , and Johnson ( 2006 ) proposed the concept of information pathways to describe an individual’s movement along a chain of sources over time in pursuit of information relating to a problem . Guided by this concept , Zhang ( 2012 ) studied users’ infor - mation pathways in searching for speciﬁc health problems , ﬁnding that users consult , on average , four sources for a health concern , and that more accessible sources ( e . g . , the web and social ties ) are more likely to be used during the 2 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi early stages of the search , whereas less accessible but higher quality sources ( e . g . , doctors ) are more likely to be con - sulted at a later stage . The temporality of source usage is also manifested in the sustained use of one source over time . Studies on media use in the 1990s touched on this theme . For example , Reimer ( 1994 ) found that most Swedes read local newspapers on a regular basis , mainly motivated by a feeling of attachment and belonging to the community . However , limited attention has been paid to the sustained use of other types of sources . Being able to engage and retain users is a goal for many content - driven websites , such as news websites , web search engines , and information portals ( e . g . , the National Library of Medicine’s online resources ) . Sustained use is even more important for social media because their existence , growth , and long - term success are built upon users’ participation , contributions , and collaboration ( Eysenbach , 2008 ) . Sus - tained use of one source could also be important for users’ ability to achieve long - term goals , such as learning and self - development . Particularly in the case of online health communities , continued participation ( even in the passive form of lurking ) is necessary for the construction of social relationships that are instrumental in attaining beneﬁts such as receiving personalized suggestions from peers , gaining expertise in managing everyday life challenges , receiving meaningful emotional support , and developing a sense of belonging ( Nonnecke , Andrews , & Preece , 2006 ; Preece , 2000 ; Rodgers & Chen , 2005 ; Wang , Kraut , & Levine , 2012 ) . Thus , we studied users’ sustained use of online health communities , focusing on what retains them in this medium . In the next section , we provide a review of existing studies of consumers’ use of online health communities . Use of Online Health Communities Online health communities have become a popular and readily accessible source of information for consumers . These communities can be hosted on different technological platforms , ranging from traditional newsgroups and bulletin boards to recent microblogging , social Q & A , and social networking sites . These platforms offer different user inter - action experiences , but essentially they all enable consumers with similar health concerns or purposes to network with one another , participate in discussions , and collaborate on problem solving ( Eysenbach , 2008 ; Preece , 2000 ) . People initially turn to online health communities for different reasons , including easy access ( Cline & Haynes , 2001 ) , recommendations from healthcare providers ( Massimi , Bender , Witteman , & Ahmed , 2014 ) , emotional support ( Newman , Lauterbach , Munson , Resnick , & Morris , 2011 ) , learning about other patients’ experiences ( Massimi et al . , 2014 ) , ﬁlling information gaps in patient - provider commu - nication ( Rubenstein , 2012 ) , and broadcasting health infor - mation ( De Choudhury , Morris , & White , 2014 ) . An initial visit to an online health community does not guarantee continued participation . Modeling the evolution of an online melanoma community during an 8 - year period , Durant , McCray , and Safran ( 2010 ) found that users’ par - ticipation was short lived , with only 47 % being active longer than a day and 6 % active for more than a year . Analyzing two large online diabetes communities , Chomutare , Arsand , and Hartvigsen ( 2012 ) found that the two communities were very dynamic and volatile . Participants often actively engaged for periods of less than a year , typically immedi - ately following the diagnosis . What keeps users in online health communities differs from the initial reasons motivating them to be there ( Massimi et al . , 2014 ) . Current studies mainly focus on understanding the impact of the type of support ( particularly emotional and informational support ) that users receive on their stay . They tend to agree that emotional support acts as the major motivation for continual user engagement . For example , Wang et al . ( 2012 ) examined the association between users’ length of membership and the types and amount of social support they received in an online cancer community and found that the more emotional support one was exposed to , the lower the risk of dropping out . Several qualitative studies corroborated this ﬁnding , suggesting that the main reasons for participants’ remaining were sharing tears and laughter , escaping social isolation , and maintain - ing friendships with peers ( Høybye , Johansen , & Tjørnhøj - Thomsen , 2005 ; Massimi et al . , 2014 ; Rodgers & Chen , 2005 ) . Socioemotional motivations were also identiﬁed as key to active participation ( i . e . , posting ) , a behavior related but not equivalent to sustained use ( Butler , Sproull , Kiesler , & Kraut , 2007 ) . For example , van Uden - Kraan , Drossaert , Taal , Seydel , and van de Laar ( 2008 ) found that posters , as opposed to lurkers , were more likely to visit online health communities for social reasons , such as curiosity about how peers were doing and others’ expectations for them to be there . Welbourne et al . ( 2013 ) found that motivations for socioemotional support ( e . g . , empathy and comfort ) were associated with the greater posting of support , whereas motivations relating to information ( e . g . , medical advice and health - related facts ) were associated with receiving support . Several studies also report that emotional factors , speciﬁ - cally altruism and the satisfaction associated with sharing expertise , directly contribute to active posting ( California Healthcare Foundation , 2008 ; Massimi et al . , 2014 ; Wineﬁeld , 2006 ) . Compared with that of emotional support , the role of informational support in keeping users in online health com - munities is less conclusive . Wang et al . ( 2012 ) found that informational support satisﬁed only members’ short - term information needs and did not have as strong an effect as emotional support on user commitment in an online cancer community . However , Massimi et al . ( 2014 ) reported that some of their participants stayed for the information that the communities had to offer , even though emotionally they were ready to pull away ; some participants quit at one point , but became active again when they encountered the same medical event once again ( e . g . , becoming pregnant or losing a loved one ) . JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 3 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi The review suggests that most existing studies attribute the continued use of online health communities to socioemotional motivations and some to informational moti - vations . However , little is known about the speciﬁc mecha - nisms that contribute to the realization of the effect , so that limited insight can be gained about how to create opportu - nities to retain users . There is also a lack of understanding of whether other factors may also contribute to sustained use . Thus , in this study we focus on investigating the mecha - nisms contributing to users’ sustained use of online diabetes communities . Theoretical Framework and Research Questions We adopted self - determination theory ( SDT ) as the theo - retical lens to guide our inquiry . Deci and Ryan ( 2008 , 2013 ) developed SDT in an attempt to understand what sustains a behavior . They observed that external reinforcement and environmental contingencies are powerful inﬂuences on behavior and behavioral change ( e . g . , learning , smoking , or medication compliance ) , but , in many instances , behavior reverts to the previous state when contingencies are removed . Thus , they concluded that internal factors also inﬂuence whether a behavior can be sustained ( Simons - Morton , McLeroy , & Wendel , 2011 ) . As a result , SDT emphasizes intrinsic motivations , motivations derived from one’s personal needs and interests ( Ryan & Deci , 2000 ) . SDT assumes that every person has three basic psycho - logical needs : autonomy , competence , and relatedness ( Deci & Ryan , 2008 ) . Autonomy refers to feeling that one’s behavior is voluntary ; that is , one acts for intrinsic reasons , rather than for external or controlling reasons ( Sheldon , Ryan , & Reis , 1996 ) . Competence refers to “feeling effective in one’s ongoing interactions with the social environment to achieve their goals and desired outcomes , and experiencing opportunities to exercise and express one’s capacities” ( Deci & Ryan , 2013 , p . 7 ) . Relatedness refers to “feeling connected to others , to caring for and being cared for by those others , to having a sense of belongingness both with other individuals and with one’s community . ” It reﬂects “the homonomous aspect of the integrative tendency of life , the tendency to connect with and be integral to and accepted by others” ( Deci & Ryan , 2013 , p . 7 ) . Satisfaction of these basic needs is presumed to result in optimal functioning and psychological well - being , whereas frustration in achieving these needs can lead to poor psy - chological well - being and dissatisfaction with life . There - fore , the needs for autonomy , competence , and relatedness are intrinsic motivations . Behaviors that help fulﬁll these needs are intrinsically motivated , and the performance of such behaviors is considered to be self - determined . When a behavior is self - determined , SDT postulates that people will engage in related activities “freely” and that the behavior can be sustained by “the experiences of interest and enjoy - ment” ( Deci & Ryan , 2013 , p . 10 ) . Following this line of thinking , we postulate that to sustain the behavior of using online health communities , the behavior has to be self - determined . More speciﬁcally , it needs to be able to help people gain autonomy and compe - tence in coping with diseases and to satisfy their need to be related to others ( as shown in Figure 1 ) . Therefore , to under - stand what sustains the use of online health communities , we explored the following speciﬁc research questions : 1 . How do users achieve autonomy in online health communities ? 2 . How do they gain competence in online health communities ? 3 . How do they gain relatedness in online health communities ? Research Methods Research Context : Online Diabetes Communities We focused on online communities on diabetes , a common but complex chronic disease increasing at alarming rates around the world ( Lam & LeRoith , 2012 ) . Some 25 . 8 million people in the United States ( 8 . 3 % ) , and many more around the world are afﬂicted by diabetes , making it the ﬁfth leading cause of death worldwide ( World Health Organization , 2006 ) and the seventh in the United States ( CDC , 2011 ) . The minimum daily regimen for managing diabetes includes monitoring blood glucose levels and estimating nutritional intake . For patients with type 1 diabetes , the tasks also include dosing with insulin multiple times per day ( Ho , O’Connor , & Mulvaney , 2014 ) . Successful management of diabetes requires continuous , even lifelong , attention from patients or caregivers ( McKay , Glasgow , Feil , Boles , & Barrera , 2002 ) . With the emergence of social media , diabe - tes patients are increasingly seeking information and emo - tional support from peer patients in various forms of online communities . The number of such communities is growing , as well as their size , with some having thousands , or even millions , of members ( Shrank et al . , 2011 ) . Therefore , online diabetes communities provide a natural context for studying the sustained use of information sources . Data Collection : Semistructured Interviews Semistructured interviews were used to collect the data . Recruiting messages were posted to a number of online FIG . 1 . Conceptual framework . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] 4 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi diabetes communities and a university - wide listserv . To show an interest in participation , an individual was required to ﬁll out an online questionnaire reporting demographic and basic community usage information ( e . g . , what communities they used and the length and frequency of the usage ) , and indicating the preferred method for interviewing ( face - to - face , by Skype , or by phone ) . Seventy - four individuals com - pleted the questionnaire . We reviewed the responses and excluded those who seemed not to be serious users . Because the focus of the study was sustained use , we also excluded those who had used online communities for less than a year . The choice of a 1 - year cutoff point was informed by prior studies indicating that only a small portion of users would stay in an online health community for more than a year ( Chomutare et al . , 2012 ; Durant et al . , 2010 ) . Of the quali - ﬁed participants , some did not respond to our interview requests ; some were not able to work out an interview schedule ; and one could not participate due to deteriorating health . As a result , 21 respondents made up the sample who participated in interviews . The interview guidelines were constructed based on our earlier research on users’ information behavior on a Face - book diabetes group ( Zhang , He , & Sang , 2013 ) , with the aim of prompting participants to construct , from their own perspective , authentic accounts of their experiences with online health communities . The guidelines were divided into four sections . The ﬁrst section asked for basic information about community usage , including what community or com - munities the participants had used , when they started , why they chose these communities , how they typically used them , and why they stayed there . The second section con - tained questions concerning information - seeking behaviors , including what information they paid attention to , how they looked for and evaluated information , how they used the information gained , and whether they contributed informa - tion , and if so , under what conditions . The third section contained questions concerning emotional support , includ - ing whether the participants expressed emotion and sought emotional support , what their motivations were , and how they reacted to other people’s emotions . The fourth section asked about participants’ interactions with peers , including whether they had ofﬂine interactions with peers , what they perceived as appropriate and inappropriate behaviors , and what they valued the most about the communities . Before each interview , we gave participants a brief intro - duction to the study and asked for their oral consent to participate . All of the interviews took place between January and May 2013 . Four were conducted face - to - face in a private lab on campus and the remainder by phone . The interviews lasted from 40 minutes to 2 hours . Each partici - pant was compensated with a $ 20 Amazon gift card . Data Analysis Answers to the demographic questionnaire were imported to SPSS ( Chicago , IL ) for descriptive statistical analysis . The interviews were transcribed , imported to Nvivo 10 . 0 ( QSR International , Melbourne , Australia ) and analyzed using the thematic content analysis method ( Zhang & Wildemuth , 2009 ) . The top - level categories were the three basic human needs deﬁned by self - determination theory : autonomy , competence , and relatedness ( Ryan & Deci , 2000 ) . Under each need , subcategories were constructed , based on the deﬁnition of the need and a review of the literature to represent mechanisms supporting the attainment of the need . As a result , three mechanisms were identiﬁed under autonomy as autonomy - supportive : providing a mean - ingful rationale for why a behavior is being recommended , acknowledging the behaver’s perspective , and conveying opportunities to choose and minimizing control ( Cordova & Lepper , 1996 ; Deci , Eghrari , Patrick , & Leone , 1994 ; Williams , 2004 ) . Two mechanisms were identiﬁed as sup - porting the development of competence : seeking informa - tion to improve one’s ability to deal with current problems and providing information to peers to express and exercise one’s knowledge and expertise ( Ryan & Deci , 2004 ) . Two mechanisms were identiﬁed as enhancing relatedness : caring for others and being cared for by others ( Baumeister & Leary , 1995 ; Ryan & Deci , 2004 ) . At the same time , an inductive approach was employed to identify additional categories and subcategories from the data . An open coding process was followed , and constant comparison was performed in the coding process ( Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ) . During this process , the categories identiﬁed , based on deﬁnitions and the literature , were modiﬁed when necessary to better reﬂect users’ behavior in the speciﬁc context of online diabetes communities . To better under - stand implicit or unstated meanings and assumptions , memos were written in Nvivo 10 to record the researcher’s understanding of , and ideas about , emergent themes ( Miles , Huberman , & Saldaña , 2013 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) . To improve coding validity , a second coder , a trained graduate research assistant , coded 20 % of the interview transcripts , and agreement reached 90 . 6 % . The discrepancies were resolved by discussion . Results Participants’ Characteristics Of the 21 participants , the majority were White females who had at least some college education . Their ages varied widely , with the average being 47 . The majority ( 76 . 2 % ) were patients diagnosed with type 1 diabetes or insulin dependence . Their average time since diagnosis was 23 . 5 years . Most of them considered their own condition to be serious or very serious , but believed that they could control diabetes by understanding it better ( shown in Table 1 ) . The remainder of the participants ( 23 . 8 % ) were caregivers . All were mothers with children with type 1 diabetes . Basic Characteristics of Participants’ Use of Online Health Communities The participants reported using a total of nine communi - ties , with several of them using multiple communities at the JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 5 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi same time . The length of the usage ranged from 1 . 5 to 16 years . Most participants ( 66 . 7 % ) used the communities on a daily basis , but 52 . 4 % of them spent less than 10 minutes for each visit . All of the participants used desktop or laptop computers to access online communities , and 57 . 1 % reported having used mobile devices as well ( Table 2 ) . Mechanisms for Gaining Autonomy Being autonomous means that one is doing what one wants to be doing , that the behavior is volitional , and that choices can be made freely ( Reeve , 2004 ) . Participants talked not only about conditions under which they felt autonomous but also about their efforts to make communi - ties autonomy - supportive . Taken together , three mecha - nisms were identiﬁed as cultivating one’s autonomy in managing diabetes : ( a ) being respected and supported as a unique individual , ( b ) feeling free to make choices and not be pressed by others , and ( c ) receiving meaningful rationales about how others had made their decisions . Being Respected and Supported as a Unique Indi - vidual . “YMMV” ( your mileage may vary ) was a term used frequently in some communities . As one participant explained , it refers to the fact that “no two diabetics are the same and no two days are the same with any diabetic . ” For this same reason , participants expected understanding and support from peers , and did not want to be judged or attacked based on something they had done or said . Reciprocally , when they provided advice to peers , they would acknowledge the uniqueness of others’ situations by stating , for example , “This is , you know , what happened to me . ” Nine participants ( 42 . 9 % ) in the study explicitly men - tioned this practice . Feeling Free to Make Choices and Not Be Pressed By Others . Ten participants ( 47 . 6 % ) talked about the impor - tance of having the freedom to make choices . Most of them recognized that “with diabetes there is not one correct way of doing anything” and that there were “different beliefs about managing and treating diabetes . ” They wanted to be informed about how others do things—for example , use pumps or deal with exercises—but not be pressed to accept one way as the only way to handle diabetes , even if such advice came from authoritative ﬁgures , such as doctors or the American Diabetes Association . For example , one par - ticipant commented when she attempted to get her daughter a tubeless pump : [ I changed doctors because ] they wanted to control every aspect of our lives . They didn’t believe that I could have insight or some guidance of my own . [ . . . ] They felt it was a committee decision in their department of what pump my child should be on and if my child should switch pumps . Receiving Meaningful Rationales About Decisions . One participant expressed appreciation for receiving a detailed explanation of why she should or should not do certain things . Such explanations not only helped her clear up uncertainties , but also were constructive , providing her with rationales for doing things one way or another . Speciﬁcally , the participant commented : TABLE 1 . Participants’ demographics , health status , and health beliefs . Sex Female : 17 Male : 4 Age Range : 22 – 83 years ( mean = 46 . 5 , SD = 15 . 6 ) Race Whites : 20 Not disclosed : 1 Education Some college : 5 College graduate : 9 Graduate or professional school : 7 Internet experience Range : 10 – 25 years ( mean = 17 . 3 , SD = 4 . 0 ) Health status Diagnosed with type 1 : 15 Diagnosed with type 2 , but now dependent on exogenous insulin : 1 Caregivers : 5 How long since diagnosis ( among 15 diagnosed , one missing data ) Range : 1 . 5 – 58 years ( mean = 23 . 5 ; SD = 16 . 5 ) Perceptions of disease severity ( among 15 diagnosed , one missing data ) Very serious : 6 Serious : 4 Neutral : 4 Can control diabetes by understanding it better ( among 15 diagnosed , one missing data ) Strongly believe : 9 Believe : 5 TABLE 2 . Use of online communities . Online communities reported being used by the participants American Diabetes Association’s online communities : 1 Brave buddies : 1 Children with diabetes : 4 Facebook groups : 2 Insulin pumpers : 9 Insulinpumperforums . com : 1 TuDiabetes : 4 JDRF’s online communities : 1 AYahoo ! Group : 1 Years of usage Range : 1 . 5 – 16 years ( mean = 8 . 7 , SD = 4 . 7 ) Frequency of usage Several times a day : 7 Once a day : 7 A few times a week : 4 A few times a month : 3 Time spent on each visit Less than 5 minutes : 4 5 – 10 minutes : 7 11 – 20 minutes : 4 21 – 30 minutes : 4 More than 30 minutes : 2 Technology platform for accessing online communities Desktop or laptop computers : 21 Mobile devices , including smartphones and tablets : 12 Note : The numbers refer to the number of participants . 6 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Sometimes I use my infusion sets [ for more ] than 3 days . [ . . . ] There have been some people who said that they wear their infusion sets for 5 days , but the majority on the group say that they [ cannot ] . But anyways , my infusion sets don’t work that well , and the group explained why the infusion sets don’t work that well that long , whereas [ my ] doctor said you really shouldn’t wear it because you might get infected , the groups actually went into depth and explained why . Mechanisms for Gaining Competence Competence is one’s feeling of effectiveness in achieving one’s goals and desired outcomes , as well as the feeling of having opportunities to exercise and express one’s capaci - ties . It is obvious that knowledge and skills are central to competence . Three major mechanisms for gaining compe - tence were identiﬁed : ( a ) seeking information to educate and empower oneself , ( b ) providing information to exercise and express one’s knowledge and expertise , and ( c ) exchanging information with others to construct knowledge . The three mechanisms are illustrated in Figure 2 . Seeking Information to Educate and Empower Oneself . Participants primarily sought information to tackle emerging challenges , but they also sought informa - tion to prepare for potential future events . In both cases , they were selective about information . Focusing on the current situation . Living with diabetes is an ongoing journey , and challenges can occur at any time . The majority of the participants ( 90 . 5 % ) reported that coping with emerging medical and everyday life challenges was the major motivation for information seeking . The most - sought medical information related to the use of medical devices , including insulin pumps ( e . g . , insulin dosages , the functions of new pumps , and tips for using pumps ) , infusion sets ( e . g . , why they kept coming off and where the infusion sites should be ) , and glucose monitors ( e . g . , how others handled similar problems with a device , how to make the sensor work longer , and what were others’ experiences with a particular brand of monitor ) . Other widely sought medical information was about medical tests , diagnoses , treatments , and emergencies . For example , a mother asked her community whether her daughter was misdiagnosed as type 2 . Another mother asked whether she should get her daughter off a prescribed medication . The most - requested information concerning everyday life was information related to healthy behaviors . For example , how to gradually quit smoking , how to control blood sugar levels while exercising , and how to better control one’s emotions . Handling social relationships was another everyday life topic that frequently drew questions . For example , a mother asked her community what to do when a high school teacher told her daughter not to check her blood sugar in class , for fear it might scare other students . The third most popular everyday life topic was traveling . Some examples of questions are : “Is there my type of insulin in Brazil ? ” “When do you change your pump’s time when there are time differences ? ” and “Can an insulin pump be worn when going through the new airport security ? ” Keeping the future in mind . Many participants ( 66 . 7 % ) also expressed deep interest in seeking information about or for the future , with the intention of becoming informed , prepared , or proactive . The topic that interested most par - ticipants was new developments in medical devices and treatments . For instance , participants sought information about new models of continuous glucose monitoring systems ( CGMS ) and insulin pumps , about when the U . S . Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) would approve more advanced models of the CGMS , about a pump that had been on the market in Europe or in Japan , and about new medications , clinical trials , and potential cures . Several par - ticipants expressed an interest in keeping up with changes in FIG . 2 . Mechanisms through which users of online health communities gain a sense of competence . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 7 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi policies , so that they could adjust their disease management accordingly . For example , one participant followed up on reports of upcoming changes in Medicare’s coverage on supplies and was making plans to switch test strips and other supplies , if necessary . A couple of participants also expressed an interest in keeping updated about funding for diabetes research . Looking into the future was also reﬂected in participants’ ( 42 . 9 % ) interest in reading about others’ experience with situations they might encounter in the future . For example , one mother started paying attention to information about college drinking and its impact on diabetes when her son ( with diabetes ) was about to go to college . Another partici - pant followed others’ experiences with brands of insulin different from his own , in case he might have to switch to one or some of them later . Being selective about information . Participants ( 66 . 7 % ) reported paying special attention to information quality , practicality , and currency . For quality , they often evaluated information based on their own knowledge or experience ; for example , one participant said : Recently , one of the groups was talking about . . . somebody posted an article about the cure was in sight . Or , the artiﬁcial pancreas was , it was just a hoax and it wasn’t really real or it wouldn’t work , because I’ve experienced the trials and partici - pated in 3 different trials for the artiﬁcial pancreas . They also used other quality evaluation strategies , includ - ing looking for information sources , checking the creden - tials of people who posted information ( their profession , history of posting , or whether or not they had ﬁrst - hand experience ) , and cross - validating with other searches on the web . In addition , several participants reported assessing the content of messages by examining if it was logical and backed up by careful research , and if it explained things well . In terms of practicality , participants expected messages to convey technical and actionable information about how others had handled their problems , so that they could have tangible guidelines to follow . For example , one participant commented : I do read [ people’s blood sugar levels ] , [ but ] I probably look more at “I took 5 units over , my blood sugar was over 120 . ” I’m more concerned about what people are doing more than “at this moment , I was this blood sugar . ” For currency , participants expected to read the most current information about pumps , therapies , or research on diabetes . Providing Information to Exercise One’s Expertise . Pro - viding information mainly refers to answering peers’ questions . The majority of the participants ( 85 . 7 % ) had provided feedback to peers , and almost all of them emphasized that they did so because they felt conﬁdent about their knowledge of a subject . For example , one participant talked about providing information about child care : I have a college - age child . [ . . . ] so I wrote about [ things like ] taking the SAT exam , how you have to get special privileges for your diabetic child , or what happens when they apply for a driver’s license , and step by step processes . Another participant was proud of her current status as a mentor in the community : Now I’m more of a mentor to others that are newly diagnosed and going through things , [ and I help answer posts ] , for instance , “my child is going through this difﬁculty at school” and “the nurse won’t allow Glucozone . ” Exchanging Information to Construct Knowledge . Brain - storming or trouble - shooting with others on problems of mutual interest ( e . g . , controlling A1C levels ) was reported by several participants to be an effective means of constructing knowledge , and subsequently , of developing competence . Such conversations often began in online com - munities and then were taken to more private channels like email , phone , or face - to - face meetings . For example , one participant stated : Once in a while , depending on the topic , like I was having trouble with my infusion site . I have been trying my leg because I took injections in them for so long I have a lot of the atrophy kind of and . . . so . I know at one point one of the people said email me off - list and let’s trouble shoot this . So I had a few times where I have done that . All we do is that we post on the community but we’ll say well you don’t mind if I email you off - list , meaning , we just do it directly rather than through [ the community ] and I have done that . [ . . . ] We just wanted to go back and forth between what we were going through . Mechanisms for Gaining Relatedness Relatedness refers to one’s need to feel connected to others in a warm , positive , and respectful manner . Four mechanisms for gaining relatedness were identiﬁed : ( a ) seeing similarities between oneself and peers , ( b ) receiving responses from peers , which could be emotional or informa - tional , ( c ) providing emotional support to others , and ( d ) forming underground groups . These mechanisms are depicted in Figure 3 . Seeing Similarities Between Oneself and Peers . Simple awareness of the existence of many others who are battling with the same disease and facing similar challenges relieved participants’ sense of isolation . Their sense of relatedness grew stronger when more speciﬁc similarities were per - ceived . These similarities can be classiﬁed into ﬁve catego - ries , shown in Table 3 . 8 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Medical similarities were mentioned by the greatest number of participants ( 71 . 4 % ) . Among these similarities , the most emphasized was being type 1 . Because of the dominating status of type 2 diabetes , and because of the differences in causes , treatment , and management between type 1 and type 2 , as well as the stigma associated with type 2 diabetes , type 1 participants wanted to be differentiated from those with type 2 diabetes . Thus , they expressed an interest in communities that focused on type 1 only and perceived such communities to be more relevant and appli - cable . For example , one participant commented : I like Insulin Pumpers , because it is all type 1 or at least insulin dependent people , so that if I’m on a list or a general online diabetes community , most diabetics are type 2 , you know 90 % are type 2 and that really doesn’t apply to me . I don’t need weight control ; I don’t need to things like that I just don’t need . So it’s much better to go on a targeted , like Insulin Pumpers , something that is targeted really to me . Other medical similarities that interested the participants included health status ( e . g . , whether someone had kidney problems ) , medical history ( e . g . , age when diagnosed ) , and equipment ( whether they were using the same brand of glucose monitor ) . The second most - mentioned type of similarity was related to demographics , including age , gender , and geographic loca - tion . For example , one female participant observed : There are so many differences between females and males with diabetes . A lot of it is emotional . [ . . . ] I think the more speciﬁc you can get—again , just using my situation , trying to see what’s relevant to me . That’s really important . Lifestyle mattered , particularly for those who were active . Because being active requires an individual to dili - gently monitor blood sugar levels and to manage food intake and insulin dosage , reading about how others handled the same challenges helped participants to relate to one another . Similarity in social roles was important for several par - ticipants , particularly caregivers . Three out of ﬁve of them talked about their eagerness to connect to others who also had children with type 1 diabetes . One parent’s comment vividly illustrated this feeling : I felt isolated and I didn’t know anybody else that had a child with type 1 diabetes . And I felt alone , isolated ; I didn’t know what I was doing . There was just no support out there at all . When I found [ Children with Diabetes ] I felt like I struck gold . It was just amazing . The other similarity that could foster a sense of related - ness was cognitive similarity , that is , whether peers were FIG . 3 . Mechanisms through which users of online health communities gain a sense of relatedness . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] TABLE 3 . Similarities that cultivate relatedness . Category Speciﬁc similarity No . of participants Medical – Being type 1 – Similar health status – Medical history – Using the same brand of glucose monitor 15 ( 71 . 4 % ) Demographic – Age – Gender – Geographic location 11 ( 52 . 4 % ) Lifestyle – Diet – Active lifestyle – Same insurance 4 ( 19 . 0 % ) Social role – Caregivers ( parents for children with type 1 diabetes ) 3 ( 14 . 3 % ) Cognitive – Writing understandable , ﬁt one’s reading level – Writing carefully and the texts are logical and rigorous 2 ( 9 . 5 % ) JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 9 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi “like - minded . ” One participant reported feeling more related to those whose posts suited his / her reading level , and another felt more afﬁliated with those who wrote logically and rigorously and would back up their statements with extensive research . Receiving Responses From Peers . Failures to respond to posts would lead to frustration and a feeling of wasted time and would thereafter distance participants from the commu - nity . Thus , the second mechanism for cultivating relatedness was to receive responses from peers , which could be emo - tional or informational . Receiving warm emotional support from peers . Posts that provide emotional support , particularly those with warm , positive , supportive , reassuring , and constructive tones , were comforting and capable of bringing people closer to one another . For example , one of the participants was still deeply touched , 16 years later , by the supportive faxes and phone calls that she received from peers when she was hospitalized for a major surgery , and over the years , she maintained connections with these individuals , whom she called “really interesting , smart , fun , and real” people . Receiving peers’ personal stories and experiences . Compared with emotions , receiving information is equally , if not more , powerful in cultivating relatedness . Almost all of the participants expressed an interest in hearing peers’ personal stories , experiences , and opinions , particularly from those in similar life situations . In contrast to published medical studies , participants felt that it was easier to connect to peers’ experiences , and they assigned higher credibility to such information . For example , one participant reported refuting doctors’ opinions about a prescription drug , based on his own experience and the experiences of many others with the drug . Paying Attention to Others’ Feelings and Providing Emo - tional Support to Others . Building relatedness is a nego - tiation process that requires the efforts of all of the parties involved ( Levine & Moreland , 1994 ) . As a matter of fact , mutual reliance and respect are at the heart of relatedness ( Baard , 2004 ) . Thus , the third mechanism for cultivating relatedness was paying attention to others’ feelings and offering emotional support to others . Simply paying atten - tion to others’ emotional expressions fostered relatedness by making participants feel that they were not alone on the journey of battling diabetes and that there were people they could relate to . About 60 % of the participants reported paying attention to peers’ feelings , and the majority of those went further , offering sympathy , approval , or encourage - ment to peers . Forming “Underground” Groups : Interactions Beyond Community Boundaries . The fourth mechanism for build - ing relatedness was the formation of small “underground” groups . A few participants reported moving conversations beyond online communities to more private and rich media , such as email and phone . Some even traveled by air to meet peers in person or set up regular outings when they were living in the same area . Several participants also reported adding close peers to their Facebook networks as a way to maintain relationships . These small underground groups were generally formed on the basis of similar life situations , such as facing similar challenges , having the same kind of insurance , or living in the same geographic area . Discussion In this study , we interviewed 21 participants who had been using online diabetes communities in a sustained manner and examined mechanisms that contribute to their stay in these communities . Time is an important dimension in information behavior , affecting not only users’ informa - tion needs , search tasks , emotional and cognitive states , and perceptions of relevance but also their use of sources ( Bates , 1989 ; Bruce , 1994 ; Kuhlthau , 1991 ; Lin & Belkin , 2000 ; Savolainen , 2006 ; Sonnenwald & Iivonen , 1999 ; Spink , Wilson , Ford , Foster , & Ellis , 2002 ; Vakkari & Hakala , 2000 ) . One manifestation of the temporality of source usage is the sustained use of one source over a period of time . Understanding sustained use is meaningful because it is a form of information behavior that is important for the real - ization of users’ long - term goals , such as learning and self - development . Engaging users’ continual involvement is also in line with the goal of many content - driven websites . However , knowledge about what factors sustain users’ inter - ests in a source and motivate them to continue to engage with it remains limited . Thus , one contribution of this study is to call attention to the time dimension of the use of information sources , particularly the sustained use of one source . Our investigation was guided by the self - determination theory , which posits that , in order to be sustainable , a behav - ior must be self - determined , that is , be able to satisfy the basic human needs for autonomy , competence , and related - ness . In adopting this theoretical lens , we made the assump - tion that users continue to stay in online communities , an information and communication medium , because these communities satisfy their need for autonomy , competence , and relatedness . Thus , mechanisms that support the satisfac - tion of the three basic needs were designated as mechanisms that contribute to sustained use . The adoption of SDT as a theoretical lens is a strength of the study . A range of empirical studies has demonstrated that the psychological processes addressed by SDT , speciﬁ - cally the fulﬁllment of autonomy , competence , and related - ness , are key to the maintenance of health behavior and the improvement of quality of life . Furthermore , they mediate the success of many e - health interventions ( Pingree et al . , 2010 ; Ryan , Patrick , Deci , & Williams , 2008 ) . Thus , exam - ining the sustained use of online health communities in light of SDT enhances the chances of identifying the mechanisms 10 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi that are effective for keeping users in online health commu - nities , and furthermore , enhances the likelihood of success of any design implications derived from them . In the remain - der of this section , we discuss our ﬁndings , their implica - tions , and the limitations of the study and directions for future research . Mechanisms Contributing to the Sustained Use of Online Health Communities We identiﬁed a number of mechanisms that may contrib - ute to the retention of users in online health communities . Because the current literature examines the use of online health communities mostly in relation to emotional and informational support , for the purpose of discussion we further categorized the mechanisms into emotion - related , information - related , and interaction - related , as shown in Table 4 . Consistent with prior studies ( Høybye et al . , 2005 ; Wang et al . , 2012 ) , our results indicate that emotional support , regardless of whether it was received or provided , is an important factor associated with continued stay in an online health community . It works by cultivating relatedness among people and a sense of belonging to the community . Adding to the current understanding , our results further indi - cate that explicit emotional support is not the only channel that sustained users . Implicit emotional support , including recognizing each participant as a unique individual who may have a different health status , face different challenges , and have different needs , and making one feel free in making choices , can also help . The implicit emotional support retains users by cultivating a sense of autonomy in their decision making concerning disease management . Compared with those for emotional support , the results concerning the contribution of informational support to sus - tained use are less consistent in the literature ( Massimi et al . , 2014 ; Nambisan , 2011 ; Rubenstein , 2015 ; Wang et al . , 2012 ) . Our results suggest that information is equally , if not more important than emotion in the context of diabetes management . It contributes to the satisfaction of all three basic needs . First , information that details the rationales behind decisions ( e . g . , the use of infusion sets and the selec - tion of a diet for an active lifestyle ) enables users to gauge the effectiveness of a solution for themselves , and thus cul - tivates autonomy in disease management . Second , information - related activities , including seeking information , providing information , exchanging informa - tion , and constructing knowledge with peers can cultivate a sense of competence in managing the disease , by helping users gain or exercise knowledge and skills . The interviews revealed that sustained users are diligent information seekers . They seek information not only to solve emergent problems ( Wilson , 1981 ) , but also to fulﬁll anticipated needs ( Bruce , 2005 ) . For some , seeking information has even become an everyday practice that satisﬁes their personal interest in keeping abreast of developments in diabetes research and treatment ( Savolainen , 2008 ) . Sustained users are also prudent information seekers . They evaluate infor - mation not only through peripheral processing , such as checking the credibility of the communicator , but also through central processing by exerting great issue - relevant thinking , including evaluating content against one’s per - sonal experience , examining the strength of arguments , and triangulating with other sources . According to the elaborated likelihood model ( ELM ) , such issue - relevant thinking is an indication that these users not only perceive health problems as highly relevant issues , but also have sufﬁcient subject knowledge to process issue - relevant information ( Petty & Cacioppo , 1986 ) . Third , information can foster a sense of relatedness among users . Two types of such information were identiﬁed . One is information about demographics , medical conditions , lifestyles , or the social roles of a poster . When a reader saw similarities in a poster , a sense of relatedness grew . This is not surprising , as human beings tend to associate and bond with similar others ( McPherson , Smith - Lovin , & Cook , 2001 ) . The other type of relatedness - fostering information is personal stories and experiences . Users often felt that TABLE 4 . Mechanisms supporting the achievement of autonomy , competence , and relatedness ( organized in relation to emotion , information , and interaction ) . Autonomy Competence Relatedness Emotion – Being respected and supported as a unique individual – Feeling free to make choices and not be pressed by others – Receiving warm emotional support from peers – Paying attention to others’ feelings and providing emotional support to others Information – Receiving meaningful rationales about others’ decisions – Seeking information • Focusing on the current situation • Keeping the future in mind • Being selective about information – Providing information – Exchanging information to construct knowledge – Seeing similarities between oneself and peers – Receiving peers’ personal stories and experiences Interaction – Exchanging information to construct knowledge – Forming underground groups JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 11 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi narratives from peers were more personable and easier to connect to and associate with than general medical evidence . Besides the exchange of emotions and information , we found that the form of user interaction may also inﬂuence the sustained use of online health communities . Speciﬁcally , our results suggest that , in online health communities , “underground” group interactions can encourage sustained use . They were referred to as “underground” groups because the members often know one another in an online commu - nity but extend their conversations and activities outside the community . Two types of such groups were identiﬁed . One type consists of groups formed by users facing similar prob - lems ( e . g . , A1C levels and insurance ) and wanting to troubleshoot together . Problem solving tends to be the major goal , and activities often involve exchanging information , constructing knowledge , and experimenting to ﬁnd solu - tions . Such groups are often short lived , dissolving after the problems were solved . The other type consists of groups formed by users who have similar concerns or interests , or located in the same geographic area . They may be together to solve a speciﬁc problem , but socializing is also a major purpose . Such groups tend to last longer , and members maintain their friendships through richer media ( e . g . , phone calls and face - to - face meetings ) or media that support a higher level of social presence ( e . g . , Facebook ) . Implications for the Design of Online Communities for Health Promotion Being autonomous and competent in managing health conditions , and being connected with similar others are basic needs of people with health - related concerns . Design - ing for such basic human needs could enhance the chances of a system’s success ( Pingree et al . , 2010 ) . The following discussion examines design implications based on the mechanisms identiﬁed in this study that help fulﬁll each need . Supporting autonomy . Three mechanisms were identiﬁed as autonomy - supportive : being respected and supported as a unique individual , feeling free to make choices and not be pressed by others , and receiving meaningful rationales about others’ decisions . To realize the former two mechanisms , managers of an online health community can promote a culture that respects everyone as a unique individual , and one that does not press users to accept one way as the best way to do something . For example , managers can become role models by showing respect to users when interacting with them and reinforcing such behaviors by praising those who behave this way ; they can post , or encourage users to post , educational materials that highlight the idiosyncratic nature of disease management ; they also can coach or ban users who do not show proper respect to others and ﬁlter out inappropriate posts . To realize the latter mechanism , com - munity managers can encourage users to provide rationales for their decisions ( e . g . , about diet choices and exercise routines ) . For example , managers can provide templates that help users furnish information that others can relate to easily and make suggestions that are easy to interpret , because often users are willing to provide information but are unaware of what information is most useful to other people . Managers also can periodically collect posts that explain the posters’ decisions or detail actionable items and place them in a repository where all users can access them when they need to . Supporting the development of competence . Three mecha - nisms were identiﬁed as helping to construct competence : seeking information , providing information , and exchanging information with others to construct knowledge . Sustained users are diligent information seekers , attending to both current problems and potential future needs . Also , they are prudent about the information they receive , using various strategies to evaluate it . These ﬁndings suggest that sus - tained users treat their communities as a place not only to seek and exchange information but also to gain the knowl - edge needed to perform critical , issue - relevant evaluations of information and to prepare for the future . It follows that communities need to support not only effective access to information for problem solving but also effective learning for knowledge gain . To support learning , content is key . Attention should be paid to content coverage , quality , and interactivity . To ensure coverage and quality , one strategy is to link credible external sources on various subjects ( e . g . , diets , reviews of medical devices , and new developments in medical research ) to the community ( Nambisan , 2011 ; Zhang & Sun , 2015 ) . Another strategy is to capitalize on existing content by building a repository to systematically archive and curate messages that offer valuable content and that have attracted wide inter - est from users . Effective interactive functions can also engage users in learning . Our results suggest that ( a ) to support searching for potential future needs , communities can allow users to save interested messages or tag such messages using subject keywords ; ( b ) to encourage users to provide information , communities can allow users to respond to messages without having to register or sign in and can provide templates to lower users’ cognitive load on structuring information ; and ( c ) to support small group inter - actions , communities can provide interactive tools that enable users to collectively troubleshoot particular problems and construct knowledge . Cultivating relatedness . Four mechanisms were identiﬁed as cultivating relatedness among users : seeing similarities between oneself and peers , receiving responses ( emotional support or personal stories ) from peers , providing emotional support to peers , and forming “underground” groups . To make ﬁnding similar others easier , communities can imple - ment structured proﬁles that encourage users to list basic demographic and medical information , and provide search tools that allow users to search for others based on param - eters of interest ( e . g . , lifestyle and the brand of glucose monitor ) . To ensure that users receive meaningful responses 12 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi and to make providing emotional support easier , as men - tioned above , communities can lower the barrier for users to post . At the same time , managers can pay more attention to posts that receive no responses and determine whether they need to intervene . Moreover , managers can periodically collect messages that contain personal stories and archive them in a repository for easy access . To support “under - ground” groups and help users to form them more efﬁciently , tools can be offered to support private commu - nication among group members . Limitations and Directions for Future Research One limitation of this study is that our sample was a convenience sample . Almost all of the participants ( 21 in total ) were White , highly educated ( all had at least some college education ) , and technology savvy ( all had used the internet for at least 10 years ) . All patient participants per - ceived their conditions to be serious or very serious and believed , or strongly believed , that they could control the disease by understanding it better . Moreover , because of the recruitment procedure , the participants were all active and persistent information seekers . All of these factors could have inﬂuenced the results and conclusions of the study . A survey of a representative sample of users of online health communities is therefore needed to validate and complete the results . The commonalities among participants in terms of their socioeconomic status , perceptions of health status , and self - efﬁcacy in managing their health conditions , however , also suggest that future studies may investigate the impact of these factors on the sustained use of online health commu - nities , particularly because these three factors consistently show signiﬁcant inﬂuence on people’s likelihood of engag - ing in health - promoting behaviors ( Becker , 1974 ; Champion & Skinner , 2008 ; Fox , 2011b ; Smith , 2011 ) . Two other indi - vidual factors also merit further research : preference for information and the need for cognition . Participants in this study were diligent and prudent information seekers . Dili - gence , which was manifested in their attentiveness to infor - mation that was useful not only for the present but also for the future , matched a key characteristic of monitors , people who are inclined to collect as much information as possible in threatening medical situations ( Miller , 1987 ) . Prudence , manifested in their attentiveness to the quality of informa - tion and their ability to evaluate it using issue - relevant think - ing , was consistent with the characteristics of people with a need for cognition , a trait that reﬂects an individual’s incli - nation to engaging in effortful cognitive activities ( Cacioppo & Petty , 1982 ) . The other limitation of the study is that we investigated only the use of online diabetes communities , so some mechanisms and design implications may be speciﬁc to the diabetes context , particularly type 1 diabetes . In future studies , it may be worthwhile to also include the contexts of other chronic condition , such as heart disease , cancer , and asthma . To further enhance our understanding of the sustained use of sources , it may also be worthwhile to examine users’ use of information sources other than online health communities . Conclusion Sustained use of an information source is important for the achievement of an individual’s long - term goals , such as learning and self - development . It is even more important in the context of online health communities , because health beneﬁts often come with sustained use . However , limited attention has been paid to this information behavior , and knowledge about what retains people in an information source in general , and in online health communities in par - ticular , remains limited . This study represents an attempt to enhance our knowledge of this subject . Interviewing 21 long - term users of online diabetes communities , we identi - ﬁed speciﬁc mechanisms that contribute to their sustained stay in these communities . Consistent with the existing lit - erature , our results indicate that emotional factors are impor - tant in retaining users . Emotion - related mechanisms , including feeling respected and supported as a unique indi - vidual , and not being pressed by others in decision making , help to cultivate users’ autonomy in disease management . Mechanisms such as receiving emotional support , reading others’ emotional expressions , and provid - ing emotional support to peers help to cultivate a sense of relatedness . This qualitative study also highlights the importance of information in retaining users in online health communities . First , information that details the rationales behind a deci - sion in disease management helps to cultivate users’ autonomy in managing their own conditions . Second , information - related actions , including seeking , providing , and exchanging information , and brainstorming with others , are critical in cultivating users’ competence . Sustained users were diligent and prudent information seekers . Third , infor - mation that reveals similarities among users helps to culti - vate a sense of relatedness among users . This study also found that small group interactions may help to retain users , as such interactions can cultivate com - petence by supporting brainstorming and collective problem solving , and can cultivate relatedness by supporting the for - mation of stronger ties , closer relationships , and more pro - longed communications . These ﬁndings suggest that , to retain users , the designers and managers of online health communities should foster a culture that respects individual users and their decisions , make the communities an effective learning environment ( by building a repository of rich and high - quality information and providing effective interactive functions that support learning ) , and support small group communications . Acknowledgments The author sincerely thanks the participants for their con - tributions to this study and Dan He for her assistance with data collection and analysis . JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 13 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi References Anker , A . E . , Reinhart , A . M . , & Feeley , T . H . ( 2011 ) . Health information seeking : A review of measures and methods . Patient Education and Counseling , 82 ( 3 ) , 346 – 354 . Baard , P . P . ( 2004 ) . Intrinsic need satisfction in organizations : A motiva - tional basis of success in for - proﬁt and not - for - proﬁt settings . In E . L . Deci & R . M . Ryan ( Eds . ) , Handbook of self - determination research ( pp . 255 – 275 ) . Rochester , NY : University of Rochester Press . Baker , L . M . ( 1996 ) . Astudy of the nature of information needed by women with multiple sclerosis . Library & Information Science Research , 18 ( 1 ) , 67 – 81 . Barak , A . , Boniel - Nissim , M . , & Suler , J . ( 2008 ) . Fostering empowerment in online support groups . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 ( 5 ) , 1867 – 1883 . Barsevick , A . M . , & Johnson , J . E . ( 1990 ) . Preference for information and involvement , information seeking and emotional responses of women undergoing colposcopy . Research in Nursing & Health , 13 ( 1 ) , 1 – 7 . Bates , M . J . ( 1989 ) . The design of browsing and berrypicking techniques for the online search interface . Online Information Review , 13 ( 5 ) , 407 – 424 . Baumeister , R . F . , & Leary , M . R . ( 1995 ) . The need to belong : Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 117 ( 3 ) , 497 – 529 . Becker , M . H . ( 1974 ) . The health belief model and personal health behavio . Health Education Monographs , 2 ( 4 ) , 324 – 473 . Belkin , N . J . , Oddy , R . N . , & Brooks , H . M . ( 1982 ) . ASK for information retrieval : Part I . background and theory . Journal of Documentation , 38 ( 2 ) , 61 – 71 . Bruce , H . ( 2005 ) . Personal anticipated information need . Information Research , 10 ( 3 ) , 232 . Retrieved from http : / / www . informationr . net / ir / 10 - 3 / paper232 . html Bruce , H . W . ( 1994 ) . A cognitive view of the situational dynamism of user - centered relevance estimation . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 45 ( 3 ) , 142 – 148 . Butler , B . , Sproull , L . , Kiesler , S . , & Kraut , R . ( 2007 ) . Community effort in online groups : Who does the work and why ? In S . Weisband & L . Atwater ( Eds . ) , Leadership at a distance : Research in technologically supported work ( pp . 171 – 194 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Cacioppo , J . T . , & Petty , R . E . ( 1982 ) . The need for cognition . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 42 ( 1 ) , 116 – 131 . California Healthcare Foundation . ( 2008 ) . The wisdom of patients : Health care meets online social media . Retrieved from http : / / www . chcf . org / ∼ / media / MEDIA % 20LIBRARY % 20Files / PDF / H / PDF % 20HealthCareSocialMedia . pdf Case , D . O . , Johnson , J . D . , Andrews , J . E . , Allard , S . L . , & Kelly , K . M . ( 2004 ) . From two - step ﬂow to the Internet : The changing array of sources for genetics information seeking . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 55 ( 8 ) , 660 – 669 . CDC . ( 2011 ) . 2011 National Diabetes Fact Sheet . Retrieved from http : / / www . cdc . gov / diabetes / pubs / factsheet11 . htm Champion , V . L . , & Skinner , C . S . ( 2008 ) . The health belief model . In K . Glanz , B . K . Rimder , & K . Viswanath ( Eds . ) , Health behavior and health education : Theory , research , and practice ( pp . 45 – 65 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Chomutare , T . , Arsand , E . , & Hartvigsen , G . ( 2012 ) . Temporal community structure patterns in diabetes social networks . In Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining ( pp . 745 – 750 ) . Washington , DC : IEEE . Choo , C . W . , Detlor , B . , & Turnbull , D . ( 2000 ) . Information seeking on the Web : An integrated model of browsing and searching . First Monday , 5 ( 2 ) . Retrieved from http : / / ﬁrstmonday . org / article / view / 729 / 638 Cline , R . J . W . , & Haynes , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Consumer health information seeking on the Internet : The state of the art . Health Education Research , 16 ( 6 ) , 671 – 692 . Cordova , D . I . , & Lepper , M . R . ( 1996 ) . Intrinsic motivation and the process of learning : Beneﬁcial effects of contextualization , personalization , and choice . Journal of Educational Psychology , 88 ( 4 ) , 715 – 730 . De Choudhury , M . , Morris , M . R . , & White , R . W . ( 2014 ) . Seeking and sharing health information online : Comparing search engines and social media . In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 1365 – 1376 ) . New York : ACM . Deci , E . L . , & Ryan , R . M . ( 2008 ) . Self - determination theory : A mac - rotheory of human motivation , development , and health . Canadian Psychology / Psychologie Canadienne , 49 ( 3 ) , 182 – 185 . Deci , E . L . , & Ryan , R . M . ( 2013 ) . The handbook of self - determination research ( 1st ed . ) . Rochester , NY : University of Rochester Press . Deci , E . L . , Eghrari , H . , Patrick , B . C . , & Leone , D . R . ( 1994 ) . Facilitating internalization : The self - determination theory perspective . Journal of Personality , 62 ( 1 ) , 119 – 142 . Demiris , G . ( 2006 ) . The diffusion of virtual communities in health care : Concepts and challenges . Patient Education and Counseling , 62 ( 2 ) , 178 – 188 . Durant , K . T . , McCray , A . T . , & Safran , C . ( 2010 ) . Modeling the temporal evolution of an online cancer forum . In Proceedings of the First ACM International Health Informatics Symposium ( pp . 356 – 365 ) . New York : ACM . Ellis , D . ( 1993 ) . Modeling the information - seeking patterns of academic researchers : Agrounded theory approach . Library Quarterly , 63 ( 4 ) , 469 – 486 . Eysenbach , G . ( 2008 ) . Medicine 2 . 0 : Social networking , collaboration , participation , apomediation , and openness . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 10 ( 3 ) , e22 . Retrieved from http : / / www . jmir . org / 2008 / 3 / e22 / Eysenbach , G . , Powell , J . , Englesakis , M . , Rizo , C . , & Stern , A . ( 2004 ) . Health related virtual communities and electronic support groups : Sys - tematic review of the effects of online peer to peer interactions . BMJ ( Clinical Research Ed . ) , 328 ( 7449 ) , 1166 . Feufel , M . A . , & Stahl , S . F . ( 2012 ) . What do web - use skill differences imply for online health information searches ? Journal of Medical Internet Research , 14 ( 3 ) , e87 . Retrieved from http : / / www . jmir . org / 2012 / 3 / e87 / Foster , A . ( 2004 ) . A nonlinear model of information - seeking behavior . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol - ogy , 55 ( 3 ) , 228 – 237 . Fox , S . ( 2011a ) . Peer - to - peer healthcare . Retrieved from http : / / www . pewinternet . org / ∼ / media / / Files / Reports / 2011 / Pew _ P2PHealthcare _ 2011 . pdf Fox , S . ( 2011b ) . The social life of health information : Pew Internet & American Life Project . Retrieved from http : / / www . pewinternet . org / ﬁles / old - media / Files / Reports / 2011 / PIP _ Social _ Life _ of _ Health _ Info . pdf Glaser , B . , & Strauss , A . ( 1967 ) . The discovery of grounded theory : Strat - egies for qualitative research . Chicago , IL : Aldine Transaction . Glasgow , R . E . , Boles , S . M . , McKay , H . G . , Feil , E . G . , & Barrera , M . , Jr . ( 2003 ) . The D - Net diabetes self - management program : Long - term implementation , outcomes , and generalization results . Preventive Medi - cine , 36 ( 4 ) , 410 – 419 . Grifﬁths , K . M . , Calear , A . L . , & Banﬁeld , M . ( 2009 ) . Systematic review on Internet Support Groups ( ISGs ) and depression ( 1 ) : Do ISGs reduce depressive symptoms ? Journal of Medical Internet Research , 11 ( 3 ) , e40 . Retrieved from http : / / www . jmir . org / 2009 / 3 / e40 / Gustafson , D . H . , Hawkins , R . , Pingree , S . , McTavish , F . , Arora , N . K . , Mendenhall , J . , . . . Salner , A . ( 2001 ) . Effect of computer support on younger women with breast cancer . Journal of General Internal Medi - cine , 16 ( 7 ) , 435 – 445 . Gustafson , D . H . , Hawkins , R . P . , Boberg , E . W . , McTavish , F . , Owens , B . , Wise , M . , . . . Pingree , S . ( 2002 ) . CHESS : 10 years of research and development in consumer health informatics for broad populations , including the underserved . International Journal of Medical Informatics , 65 ( 3 ) , 169 – 177 . Ho , Y . - X . , O’Connor , B . H . , & Mulvaney , S . A . ( 2014 ) . Features of online health communities for adolescents with type 1 diabetes . Western Journal of Nursing Research , 36 ( 9 ) , 1183 – 1198 . Høybye , M . T . , Johansen , C . , & Tjørnhøj - Thomsen , T . ( 2005 ) . Online inter - action . Effects of storytelling in an Internet breast cancer support group . Psycho - Oncology , 14 ( 3 ) , 211 – 220 . Johnson , J . D . , & Case , D . O . ( 2012 ) . Health information seeking . NewYork : Lang . 14 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Johnson , J . D . E . , Case , D . O . , Andrews , J . , Allard , S . L . , & Johnson , N . E . ( 2006 ) . Fields and pathways : Contrasting or complementary views of information seeking . Information Processing & Management , 42 ( 2 ) , 569 – 582 . Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1991 ) . Inside the search process : Information seeking from the user’s perspective . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 42 ( 5 ) , 361 – 371 . Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1993 ) . A principle of uncertainty for information seeking . Journal of Documentation , 49 ( 4 ) , 339 – 355 . Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1999 ) . The role of experience in the information search process of an early career information worker : Perceptions of uncer - tainty , complexity , construction , and sources . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 50 ( 5 ) , 399 – 412 . Lam , D . W . , & LeRoith , D . ( 2012 ) . The worldwide diabetes epidemic . Current Opinion in Endocrinology & Diabetes and Obesity , 19 ( 2 ) , 93 – 96 . Lambert , S . D . , & Loiselle , C . G . ( 2007 ) . Health information - seeking behav - ior . Qualitative Health Research , 17 ( 8 ) , 1006 – 1019 . Lau , A . Y . S . , & Coiera , E . W . ( 2009 ) . Can cognitive biases during consumer health information searches be reduced to improve decision making ? Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 16 ( 1 ) , 54 – 65 . Lenz , E . R . ( 1984 ) . Information seeking : A component of client decisions and health behavior . ANS . Advances in Nursing Science , 6 ( 3 ) , 59 – 72 . Levine , J . M . , & Moreland , R . L . ( 1994 ) . Group socialization : Theory and research . European Review of Social Psychology , 5 ( 1 ) , 305 – 336 . Lin , S . - J . , & Belkin , N . J . ( 2000 ) . Modeling multiple information seeking episodes . In Proceedings of the ASIS Annual Meeting ( pp . 133 – 147 ) . Marchionini , G . ( 1997 ) . Information seeking in electronic environments . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Massimi , M . , Bender , J . L . , Witteman , H . O . , & Ahmed , O . H . ( 2014 ) . Life transitions and online health communities : Reﬂecting on adoption , use , and disengagement . In Proceedings of the CSCW ′ 14 ( pp . 1491 – 1501 ) . New York : ACM . McKay , H . G . , Glasgow , R . E . , Feil , E . G . , Boles , S . M . , & Barrera , M . , Jr . ( 2002 ) . Internet - based diabetes self - management and support : Initial out - comes from the Diabetes Network project . Rehabilitation Psychology , 47 ( 1 ) , 31 – 48 . McKenzie , P . J . ( 2003 ) . A model of information practices in accounts of everyday - life information seeking . Journal of Documentation , 59 ( 1 ) , 19 – 40 . McPherson , M . , Smith - Lovin , L . , & Cook , J . M . ( 2001 ) . Birds of a feather : Homophily in social networks . Annual Review of Sociology , 27 ( 1 ) , 415 – 444 . Miles , M . B . , Huberman , A . M . , & Saldaña , J . ( 2013 ) . Qualitative data analysis : A methods sourcebook ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Miller , S . M . ( 1987 ) . Monitoring and blunting : Validation of a questionnaire to assess styles of information seeking under threat . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 52 ( 2 ) , 345 – 353 . Miller , S . M . , Leinbach , A . , & Brody , D . S . ( 1989 ) . Coping style in hyper - tensive patients : Nature and consequences . Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 57 ( 3 ) , 333 – 337 . Mo , P . K . H . , & Coulson , N . S . ( 2010 ) . Empowering processes in online support groups among people living with HIV / AIDS : A comparative analysis of “lurkers” and “posters . ” Computers in Human Behavior , 26 ( 5 ) , 1183 – 1193 . Nambisan , P . ( 2011 ) . Information seeking and social support in online health communities : Impact on patients’ perceived empathy . Journal of theAmerican Medical InformaticsAssociation : JAMIA , 18 ( 3 ) , 298 – 304 . Newman , M . W . , Lauterbach , D . , Munson , S . A . , Resnick , P . , & Morris , M . E . ( 2011 ) . It’s not that I don’t have problems , I’m just not putting them on facebook : Challenges and opportunities in using online social net - works for health . In Proceedings of the CSCW 2011 ( pp . 341 – 350 ) . New York : ACM . Nijland , N . , van Gemert - Pijnen , J . E . W . C . , Kelders , S . M . , Brandenburg , B . J . , & Seydel , E . R . ( 2011 ) . Factors inﬂuencing the use of a web - based application for supporting the self - care of patients with type 2 diabetes : A longitudinal study . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 13 ( 3 ) , e71 . Retrieved from http : / / www . jmir . org / 2011 / 3 / e71 / Nonnecke , B . , Andrews , D . , & Preece , J . ( 2006 ) . Non - public and public online community participation : Needs , attitudes and behavior . Elec - tronic Commerce Research , 6 ( 1 ) , 7 – 20 . Petty , R . E . , & Cacioppo , J . T . ( 1986 ) . Communication and persuasion : Central and peripheral routes to attitude change . New York : Springer - Verlag . Pingree , S . , Hawkins , R . , Baker , T . , duBenske , L . , Roberts , L . J . , & Gustafson , D . H . ( 2010 ) . The value of theory for enhancing and under - standing e - health interventions . American Journal of Preventive Medi - cine , 38 ( 1 ) , 103 – 109 . Preece , J . ( 2000 ) . Online communities : Designing usability and supporting socialbilty ( 1st ed . ) . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Rains , S . A . , & Young , V . ( 2009 ) . A meta - analysis of research on formal computer - mediated support groups : Examining group characteristics and health outcomes . Human Communication Research , 35 ( 3 ) , 309 – 336 . Reeve , J . ( 2004 ) . Self - determination theory applied to educational settings . In E . L . Deci & R . Ryan ( Eds . ) , Handbook of self - determination research ( pp . 183 – 203 ) . Rochester , NY : University of Rochester Press . Reimer , B . ( 1994 ) . the most common of practices . On mass media use in late modernity . Stockholm : Almqvist & Wiksell International . Rodgers , S . , & Chen , Q . ( 2005 ) . Internet community group participation : Psychosocial beneﬁts for women with breast cancer . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 10 ( 4 ) . Rubenstein , E . L . ( 2012 ) . “Things my doctor never told me” : Bridging information gaps in an online community . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 49 ( 1 ) , 1 – 10 . Rubenstein , E . L . ( 2015 ) . “They are always there for me” : The convergence of social support and information in an online breast cancer community . Advance online publication . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology . doi : 10 . 1002 / asi . 23263 Ryan , R . , & Deci , E . L . ( 2004 ) . Overview of self - determination theory : An organismic dialectical perspective . In E . L . Deci & R . M . Ryan ( Eds . ) , Handbook of self - determination research . Rochester , NY : University of Rochester Press . Ryan , R . M . , & Deci , E . L . ( 2000 ) . Self - determination theory and the facili - tation of intrinsic motivation , social development , and well - being . American Psychologist , 55 ( 1 ) , 68 – 78 . Ryan , R . M . , Patrick , H . , Deci , E . L . , & Williams , G . C . ( 2008 ) . Facilitating health behavior change and its maintenance : Interventions based on self - determination theory . European Health Psychologists , 10 , 2 – 5 . Savolainen , R . ( 1995 ) . Everyday life information seeking : Approaching information seeking in the context of “way of life . ” Library & Informa - tion Science Research , 17 ( 3 ) , 259 – 294 . Savolainen , R . ( 2006 ) . Time as a context of information seeking . Library & Information Science Research , 28 ( 1 ) , 110 – 127 . Savolainen , R . ( 2008 ) . Everyday information practices : A social phenom - enological perspective . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press . Sheldon , K . M . , Ryan , R . , & Reis , H . T . ( 1996 ) . What makes for a good day ? Competence and autonomy in the day and in the person . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 22 ( 12 ) , 1270 – 1279 . Shrank , W . H . , Choudhry , N . K . , Swanton , K . , Jain , S . , Greene , J . A . , Harlam , B . , & Patel , K . P . ( 2011 ) . Variations in structure and content of online social networks for patients with diabetes . Archives of Internal Medicine , 171 ( 17 ) , 1589 – 1591 . Simons - Morton , B . , McLeroy , K . R . , & Wendel , M . L . ( 2011 ) . Behavior theory in health promotion practice and research ( 1st ed . ) . Sudbury , MA : Jones & Bartlett Learning . Smith , D . ( 2011 ) . Health care consumer’s use and trust of health informa - tion sources . Journal of Communication In Healthcare , 4 ( 3 ) , 200 – 210 . Solomon , P . ( 1997 ) . Discovering information behavior in sense making . I . Time and timing . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 48 ( 12 ) , 1097 – 1108 . Sonnenwald , D . H . , & Iivonen , M . ( 1999 ) . An integrated human information behavior research framework for information studies . Library & Infor - mation Science Research , 21 ( 4 ) , 429 – 457 . JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 15 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Spink , A . , Wilson , T . D . , Ford , N . , Foster , A . , & Ellis , D . ( 2002 ) . Information - seeking and mediated searching . Part 1 . Theoretical framework and research design . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 53 ( 9 ) , 695 – 703 . Strauss , A . C . , & Corbin , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Basics of qualitative research : Tech - niques and procedures for developing grounded theory ( 2nd ed . ) . Thou - sand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications . van Uden - Kraan , C . F . , Drossaert , C . H . C . , Taal , E . , Seydel , E . R . , & van de Laar , M . A . F . J . ( 2008 ) . Self - reported differences in empowerment between lurkers and posters in online patient support groups . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 10 ( 2 ) , e18 . Retrieved from http : / / www . jmir . org / 2008 / 2 / e18 / Vakkari , P . ( 2003 ) . Task - based information searching . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology ( ARIST ) , 37 , 413 – 464 . Vakkari , P . , & Hakala , N . ( 2000 ) . Changes in relevance criteria and problem stages in task performance . Journal of Documentation , 56 ( 5 ) , 540 – 562 . Veinot , T . C . ( 2009 ) . Interactive acquisition and sharing : Understanding the dynamics of HIV / AIDS information networks . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 60 ( 11 ) , 2313 – 2332 . Wang , Y . - C . , Kraut , R . , & Levine , J . M . ( 2012 ) . To stay or leave ? The relationship of emotional and informational support to commitment in online health support groups . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Confer - ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( pp . 833 – 842 ) . New York : ACM . Welbourne , J . L . , Blanchard , A . L . , & Wadsworth , M . B . ( 2013 ) . Motivations in virtual health communities and their relationship to community , con - nectedness and stress . Computers in Human Behavior , 29 ( 1 ) , 129 – 139 . Westbrook , L . ( 2015 ) . Intimate partner violence online : Expectations and agency in question and answer websites . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 66 ( 3 ) , 599 – 615 . White , R . ( 2013 ) . Beliefs and biases in web search . In Proceedings of the 36th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop - ment in Information Retrieval ( pp . 3 – 12 ) . New York : ACM . Williams , G . C . ( 2004 ) . Improving patients’ health through supporting the autonomy of patients and providers . In E . L . Deci & R . M . Ryan ( Eds . ) , Handbook of self - determination research ( pp . 233 – 254 ) . Rochester , NY : University of Rochester Press . Wilson , T . D . ( 1981 ) . On user studies and information needs . Journal of Documentation , 37 ( 1 ) , 3 – 15 . Wilson , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Models in information behaviour research . Journal of Documentation , 55 ( 3 ) , 249 – 270 . Wineﬁeld , H . R . ( 2006 ) . Support provision and emotional work in an Inter - net support group for cancer patients . Patient Education and Counseling , 62 ( 2 ) , 193 – 197 . Winzelberg , A . J . , Classen , C . , Alpers , G . W . , Roberts , H . , Koopman , C . , Adams , R . E . , . . . Taylor , C . B . ( 2003 ) . Evaluation of an internet support group for women with primary breast cancer . Cancer , 97 ( 5 ) , 1164 – 1173 . World Health Organization . ( 2006 ) . Deﬁnition and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and intermediate hyperglycaemia . Retrieved from http : / / www . who . int / diabetes / publications / diagnosis _ diabetes2006 / en / index . html Wright , K . ( 2000 ) . Perceptions of on - line support providers : An examina - tion of perceived homophily , source credibility , communication and social support within on - line support groups . Communication Quarterly , 48 ( 1 ) , 44 – 59 . Zhang , Y . ( 2012 ) . Consumer health information searching process in real life settings . In Proceedings of the 75thAnnual Conference of theAmeri - can Society for Information Science & Technology ( ASIST ′ 12 ) . Zhang , Y . , & Sun , Y . ( 2015 ) . Users’ link sharing behavior in an online health community . Information Research , 20 ( 1 ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . informationr . net / ir / 20 - 1 / isic2 / isic35 Zhang , Y . , & Wildemuth , B . M . ( 2009 ) . Qualitative analysis of content . In B . Wildemuth ( Ed . ) , Applications of social research methods to ques - tions in information and library science ( pp . 308 – 319 ) . Westport , CT : Libraries Unlimited . Zhang , Y . , He , D . , & Sang , Y . ( 2013 ) . Facebook as a platform for health information and communication : A case study of a diabetes group . Journal of Medical Systems , 37 ( 3 ) , 1 – 12 . Ziebland , S . , & Wyke , S . ( 2012 ) . Health and illness in a connected world : How might sharing experiences on the internet affect people’s health ? Milbank Quarterly , 90 ( 2 ) , 219 – 249 . 16 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi