Biochem . J . ( 2004 ) 382 , 13 – 25 ( Printed in Great Britain ) 13 REVIEW ARTICLE Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks Roger J . DALY 1 Cancer Research Program , Garvan Institute of Medical Research , 384 Victoria St , Sydney , NSW 2010 , Australia Cortactin was ﬁrst identiﬁed over a decade ago , and its initial characterization as both an F - actin binding protein and v - Src sub - strate suggested that it was likely to be a key regulator of actin rearrangements in response to tyrosine kinase signalling . The recent discovery that cortactin binds and activates the actin related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex , and thus regulates the formation of branched actin networks , together with the identiﬁcation of mul - tiple protein targets of the cortactin SH3 domain , have revealed diverse cellular roles for this protein . This article reviews current knowledge regarding the role of cortactin in signalling to the actin cytoskeleton in the context of these developments . Key words : actin - related protein ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex , cell motility , endocytosis , Src , suppressor of cAMP receptor ( SCAR ) / WASP family verprolin homologous ( WAVE ) , Wiskott – Aldrich syn - drome protein ( WASP ) . INTRODUCTION Dynamic actin networks perform a critical role in a variety of cellular processes requiring plasma membrane remodelling or intracellularmovementofvesiclesorparticles [ 1 – 4 ] . Forexample , lamellipodia are thin , sheet - like protrusive structures formed at the leading edge of migrating cells , and consist of a lattice - like meshwork of actin ﬁlaments . Membrane rufﬂes are closely related structures which form on the dorsal surface of cells or if non - adherent lamellipodia fold back over the dorsal surface . Filopodia are thin , cylindrical projections consisting of bundled , crosslinked actin ﬁlaments . Formation of these structures at the leading edge of cells , together with coordinated retraction of the tail - end , are fundamental to cell motility [ 1 , 2 ] . The underlying cytoskeletal reorganization is regulated by Rho family GTPases , with the Rac subfamily promoting membrane rufﬂing and the formation of la - mellipodia , Cdc42 - like GTPases stimulating the extension of ﬁlo - podia , and Rho proteins regulating actomyosin contractility [ 2 , 5 ] . In addition , the actin cytoskeleton is implicated in the membrane remodelling and vesicle movement involved in endocytosis [ 3 ] , and speciﬁc pathogens utilize branched actin networks to form ‘comet tails’ which drive intracellular motility [ 4 ] . Actin polymerization can be initiated by the uncapping of actin ﬁlaments to expose their barbed ends , severing of ﬁlaments to create new barbed ends or de novo nucleation by the actin re - lated protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex [ 6 ] . The latter plays a major role in the rapid induction of cortical actin polymerization involved in plasma membrane remodelling , as well as the formation of actin structures that regulate vesicle and pathogen motility . The activ - ity of the Arp2 / 3 complex can be stimulated by actin nucleation promoting factors ( NPFs ) . Two important classes of NPFs are WASP ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ) and SCAR / WAVE ( suppressor of cAMP receptor / WASP family verprolin homo - logous ) proteins , which provide a link between Cdc42 and Rac activation respectively , and stimulation of actin nucleation [ 7 ] . As described in this review , cortactin also possesses NPF activity and serves to link a variety of cellular proteins to the Arp2 / 3 complex , and hence dynamic actin networks . CORTACTIN CHARACTERISTICS : AN OVERVIEW Structure Human , rodent and avian cortactins exhibit a conserved molecular architecture and high sequence similarity [ 8 – 11 ] . The N - terminal region of approx . 90 amino acids lacks clear structural determin - ants , but harbours a stretch of 21 – 22 amino acids rich in acidic residues , and is designated the N - terminal acidic domain ( NTA ) ( Figure1 ) [ 12 ] . Asdescribedinmoredetaillater , theNTAcontains a conserved tryptophan - containing motif ( DDW in cortactin ) , which is characteristic of NPFs such as WASP , N - WASP ( neural WASP ) , SCAR / WAVE proteins , yeast myosin - I homologues and Listeria ActA that interact with the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 7 , 12 ] . This is followed by 6 . 5 tandem copies of a 37 amino acid repeat . Secondary structure predictions suggest that these tandem repeats exhibit a helix – turn – helix structure . In the rat , two additional iso - forms of cortactin exist , cortactin B ( lacking the sixth repeat ) and cortactin C ( lacking the ﬁfth and sixth repeats ) [ 11 ] . Correspond - ing human isoforms ( SV1 - cortactin and SV2 - cortactin respect - ively ) have recently been characterized ; these are derived by alternative mRNA splicing of exons 10 and 11 of the human gene encoding cortactin , designated EMS1 [ 13 ] . Although the cor - tactin - typerepeatsareconservedininvertebratecortactins , Droso - phila cortactin only contains 4 tandem copies [ 14 , 15 ] . The repeats Abbreviations used : Abp1 , actin - binding protein 1 ; Arp , actin - related protein ; ADF - H , actin depolymerizing factor homology ; CCND1 , cell cycle regul - atory protein cyclin D1 ; CD2AP , CD2 - associated protein ; CortBP1 , cortactin binding protein 1 ; EC MLCK , endothelial cell myosin light - chain kinase ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; EHEC , enterohaemorrhagic Escherichiacoli ; EPEC , enteropathogenic E . coli ; EVH1 , Ena VASP homology 1 ; Fgd1 , faciogenital dysplasia 1 ; GBD , GTPase binding domain ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; GK ( AP ) , guanylate kinase ( associated protein ) ; HGF , hepatocyte growth factor ; Hip1R , Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 - related ; HP , helical and proline - rich ( region ) ; HS1 , haemato - poieticlineagecell - speciﬁcprotein1 ; MEK , MAPkinase / ERKkinase ; NMDA , N - methyl - D - aspartate ; NPF , nucleationpromotingfactor ; NTA , N - terminalacidic ( domain ) ; PAK , p21 - activated kinase ; PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor ; PDZ , PSD - 95 / Dlg / ZO - 1 ; PIP2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 bisphosphate ; PSD , post - synaptic density ; SCAR , suppressor of cAMP receptor ; SH , Src homology ; WASP , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; N - WASP , neural WASP ; WAVE , WASP family verprolin homologous ; WCA , WH2 - central – acidic region ; WH , WASP homology ; WIP , WASP - interacting protein ; ZO - 1 , zonnula occludens 1 . 1 email r . daly @ garvan . org . au c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 14 R . J . Daly Figure 1 Structure of cortactin and other nucleation promoting factors Schematicrepresentationofthedomainstructureofmammaliancortactin , HS1 , WASP , N - WASP and SCAR / WAVE1 , yeast Abp1p and Myo1p and ListeriaAct A , drawn approximately to scale . A gap is inserted into the catalytic motor domain of Myo1p ( white box ) . A , acidic domain ; B , basicregion ; C , centralregion ; GB , GTPasebindingdomain ; H , helicaldomain ; P , proline - rich domain ; SHD , SCAR homology domain ; W , WASP homology 2 region . are followed by an α - helical domain of approx . 50 amino acids , a less well - conserved region which is rich in proline , serine and threonine residues , and a C - terminal Src homology ( SH3 ) domain . Hydrodynamic and electron microscopy studies have deter - mined that cortactin is a monomeric , asymmetric , elongated mol - ecule with a length of 220 – 290 Å ( 1 Å = 0 . 1 nm ) [ 16 ] . However , both vertebrate and invertebrate cortactins migrate as a doublet separated by 5 kDa upon SDS / PAGE , and exhibit a marked re - tardation in electrophoretic mobility relative to the molecular masses predicted from their primary sequence , which is likely to be due to the presence of the proline - rich domain . For example , vertebrate cortactins , which have predicted relative molecular masses of 61 – 63 kDa , migrate as 80 and 85 kDa bands , often designated as p80 and p85 [ 8 , 10 ] . The two bands are likely to represent different conformational states , as a single band is ob - served when SDS / PAGE is performed in the presence of 5 M urea [ 17 ] . Deletion of the α - helical and proline - rich domains , but not the SH3 domain , results in migration as a single band , indicating that the structural determinants contributing to these two states reside in the former two regions [ 18 ] . Two other proteins exhibit related domain arrangements to cortactin ( Figure 1 ) . HS1 ( haematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ) is composed of the same types of protein modules , but contains only 3 . 5 cortactin - type repeats [ 19 ] . HS1 also exhibits close sequence similarity in the NTA , repeat and SH3 regions ( 68 % , 69 % and 77 % amino acid similarity respectively , for the murine proteins ) . In contrast , murine actin - binding protein 1 ( mAbp ) 1 / SH3P7 lacks cortactin - type repeats , possessing an ADF - H ( actin depolymerizing factor homology ) domain at its N - terminus , but contains the C - terminal succession of α - helical , proline - rich and SH3 domains [ 20 ] . Notably , the SH3 domains of murine cortactin and mAbp1 are closely related ( 68 % amino acid similarity ) . Tissue expression proﬁle In the mouse , cortactin mRNA transcripts are detected in a wide range of tissues , but not in the whole spleen , splenic B cells or plasma cells [ 21 ] ; however , murine megakaryocytes and platelets contain high levels of cortactin protein [ 22 ] , and cortactin ex - pression is also increased upon differentiation of chicken mono - cytes into osteoclasts [ 23 ] . Immunohistochemical studies of human tissues suggest a role for cortactin in the formation and regulation of actin - based structures . Strong cortactin staining is detected in the apical surfaces of polarized epithelium , such as the terminal web of small bowel epithelium , in other cell types with actin - rich microvilli , and in cells with actin - based contractile activity , such as the smooth muscle of the blood vessels and vis - ceral walls [ 24 ] . In contrast with cortactin , HS1 is expressed only in haematopoietic lineages [ 19 ] . Importantly , increased expression of cortactin occurs in several types of human cancer and in tumour - derived cell lines . The human gene encoding cortactin , EMS1 , localizes to chromosome 11q13 , a region commonly ampliﬁed in squamous carcinomas of the head and neck , lung and oesophagus , and carcinomas of the liver , bladder and breast [ 25 , 26 ] . In primary breast , and head and neck cancers , and in cell lines derived from these malign - ancies , overexpression of EMS1 is generally linked to gene ampliﬁcation [ 27 – 30 ] . However , increased expression of EMS1 / cortactin mRNA in the absence of corresponding gene ampli - ﬁcation has been reported in bladder tumours [ 31 ] and murine plasmacytoma cells [ 21 ] . Interestingly , 15 % of breast cancer patientsexhibitahumoralimmuneresponseagainstcortactin [ 32 ] , which is consistent with the frequency of EMS1 ampliﬁcation , and hence cortactin overexpression , in this cancer type [ 33 ] . Protein isoforms generated by alternative mRNA splicing often display different tissue expression proﬁles , and this is also the case for the human cortactin variants [ 13 ] . Cortactin SV2 is only ex - pressed at signiﬁcant levels in frontal cerebrum , but SV1 cortactin transcripts are detectable in a range of carcinoma cell lines and normal tissues . In testis , for example , SV1 transcripts predominate over those encoding full - length cortactin . Molecular interactions The NTA region is sufﬁcient to directly bind the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 12 ] , and mutation of both acidic residues , or the tryptophan , in the DDW motif abolishes Arp2 / 3 binding [ 34 ] . Chemical cross - linking studies have demonstrated that the NTA region binds the Arp3 subunit of the complex [ 16 ] . Binding studies using a recombinant NTA region and puriﬁed Arp2 / 3 , determined a K d of approx . 1 µ M , indicating an afﬁnity 5 - fold lower than the Arp2 / 3 - interacting region [ WASP homology ( WH ) 2 - central – acidic region ( WCA ) ; Figure 1 ] from the well - characterized NPF N - WASP [ 12 , 34 ] . Early studies revealed subcellular co - localization of cortactin with F - actin in cortical structures , and treatment of cells with the microﬁlament - disrupting agent cytochalasin D led to co - aggre - gation of these molecules [ 8 , 35 ] . Co - sedimentation assays con - ﬁrmed that cortactin was indeed an F - actin - binding protein , with a K d of 0 . 4 µ M , and localized this activity to the repeat region [ 35 ] . Importantly , unlike certain other NPFs ( e . g . N - WASP ) , cortactin does not bind G - actin [ 35 ] . Removal of repeat 4 from full - length cortactin eliminates F - actin binding , identifying a requirement for this sub - domain , but the presence of a single adjacent repeat in N - terminal or C - terminal deletion mutants ( i . e . repeat 3 or repeat 5 ) is required for efﬁcient binding [ 12 ] . Supporting a role for ﬂanking repeats in this interaction , rat cortactins B and C , and human cortactin SV2 , bind F - actin with a lower afﬁnity [ 11 , 13 ] . Cortactin binds along the sides of F - actin ﬁlaments [ 11 ] . c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks 15 Table 1 Characteristics of cortactin SH3 domain - binding proteins The ‘Evidence’ column lists the experimental approaches used to conﬁrm the interaction . Amino acids in the binding site that match the cortactin SH3 binding consensus are underlined . Two binding sites were identiﬁed on Dynamin 2 and CD2AP . In the case of the latter , the second site at amino acid 392 is a lower afﬁnity site . The binding motifs on CortBP1 and CBP90 are predicted based upon deletion analysis and similarity to the consensus sequence . CBP90 , cortactin - binding protein of 90 kDa ; Co - IP , co - immunoprecipitation ; DZO - 1 , Drosophilazonnula occludens 1 ; N . D . , not determined ; Y2H , yeast two hybrid analysis . Protein Class Evidence Cellular role Binding site ( consensus + PP (cid:2) PXKP ) Reference CortBP1 / Shank2 Scaffold Y2H Organization of transmembrane protein 946 KPPVPPKP 80 GST pull - down complexes , particularly at PSD Co - IP Co - localization CBP90 Unknown GST overlay and pull - down Unknown 539 PPPIPPKKP 11 DZO - 1 Scaffold Y2H Organization of transmembrane protein 1194 KPVPPPKP * 14 Co - IP complexes at cellular tight junctions Co - localization Dynamin 2 Mechano - chemical GST overlay and pull - down Vesicle ﬁssion in receptor - 826 PPQIPSRP † 86 GTPase Co - IP mediated endocytosis 849 APAAPSRP † Co - localization Cortical actin rearrangement CD2AP Adaptor / scaffold GST pull - down and overlay Endocytosis and downregulation of growth 381 KPAAPQVP * 79 Co - IP factor receptors 392 KPTAPTKA * Co - localization Organization of transmembrane receptor complexes Fgd1 Cdc42 GEF Y2H Cortical actin organization 158 KPQVPPKP * 40 GST overlay Mutated in faciogenital dysplasia Co - localization Co - IP N - WASP NPF GST pull - down and overlay Effector in Cdc42 - regulated actin nucleation N . D . 85 Co - IP Filopodia formation Co - localization WIP Adaptor Y2H Regulates N - WASP NPF activity N . D . 73 GST pull - down Yeast homologue Vrp1p regulates Co - IP actin dynamics Co - localization * Binding site conﬁrmed by site - directed mutagenesis . † Binding site determined by phosphopeptide competition . The ability of cortactin to crosslink actin is controversial . Huang et al . [ 17 ] reported that incubation of recombinant cortactin with F - actin markedly enhanced sedimentation of the latter upon centrifugation , and resulted in the formation of bundle - like structures , as determined by electron microscopy . Determination of the crosslinking activity of human cortactin variants revealed that SV1 has relatively low activity , while SV2 has none [ 13 ] . In contrast , while rat cortactin can crosslink F - actin , both the B and C isoforms lack this activity [ 11 ] . However , the mechanism whereby cortactin might perform this function is unclear , as it is a monomeric protein [ 16 ] , and only contains one F - actin binding site [ 12 ] . Furthermore , other workers have failed to detect F - actin crosslinking or bundling activity for cortactin [ 15 , 36 ] . The fourth repeat of cortactin also contains a cluster of basic amino acid residues which represent a putative binding site for PIP2 ( phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 bisphosphate ) [ 37 ] . Pre - incubation of cortactin with PIP2 inhibited the ability of cortactin to crosslink actin ﬁlaments , which may be related to competition for F - actin binding . Interestingly , HS1 contains a putative PIP2 - binding site in each of its 3 repeats , and binds PIP2 with a higher afﬁnity [ 37 ] . Considering the C - terminal half of the molecule , the role of the cortactin helical domain is unknown , whereas , as described in the next section , one function of the proline - rich region is to me - diate interaction with speciﬁc tyrosine kinases . As with the NTA region , our understanding of the role of the most C - terminal pro - tein module found in cortactin , the SH3 domain , has progressed greatly in recent years . Screening of a peptide phage display library identiﬁed the consensus binding motif for the cortactin SH3 domain as + PP (cid:2) PXKPXWL ( where + and (cid:2) denote basic and aliphatic residues respectively ) [ 38 ] . Multiple naturally oc - curring cortactin SH3 domain targets have now been identiﬁed , and are summarized , along with their molecular characterist - ics and functional roles , in Table 1 . Reﬂecting the close simi - larityofthecortactinandAbp1SH3regions , severalcortactinSH3 targets [ dynamin 2 , faciogenital dysplasia 1 ( Fgd1 ) and cortactin binding protein 1 ( CortBP1 ) / Shank 2 ] also bind the mAbp1 SH3 domain [ 39 – 41 ] . The cellular functions of particular cortactin - containing protein complexes are discussed in more detail later in this review . Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin Cortactin was ﬁrst identiﬁed by virtue of its tyrosine phosphoryl - ation in v - Src - transformed cells [ 8 ] , and a large body of sub - sequent work implicated c - Src in tyrosine phosphorylation of this protein in response to a variety of physiological or pathogenic stimuli , including FGF - 1 stimulation [ 9 , 42 ] , integrin - mediated cell adhesion and spreading [ 43 ] , and invasion of epithelial cells by the bacterium Shigella ﬂexneri [ 44 ] . This area has been re - viewed in detail previously [ 15 ] . An elegant demonstration of the role of c - Src in cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was pro - vided by studies on ﬁbroblasts deﬁcient for Csk , a negative c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 16 R . J . Daly regulator of Src family kinases . Cortactin is hyperphosphorylated on tyrosine residues in Csk − / − cells , but normal phosphorylation is restored in cells deﬁcient for both Csk and Src [ 45 ] . In support of Src phosphorylating cortactin directly , the two proteins co - immunoprecipitate in a variety of cellular systems [ 42 , 46 , 47 ] , and Src phosphorylates murine cortactin in vitro on three sites ( Tyr 421 , Tyr 466 and Tyr 482 ) , which are also the major sites of phos - phorylation in v - Src transformed cells [ 48 ] . In a recent study , use of phosphospeciﬁc antibodies has demonstrated that mutation of Tyr 421 to phenylalanine prevents the phosphorylation of Tyr 466 [ 49 ] . This suggests a processive phosphorylation model in which phosphorylation of Tyr 421 by Src creates a binding site for the Src SH2 domain . Binding of Src to cortactin is then followed by phosphorylation of Tyr 466 and possibly other sites . Three other kinases strongly implicated in cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation also belong to the non - receptor - type subgroup . These are Fyn ( during melanoma cell migration ) [ 50 ] , Syk ( in platelet shape change ) [ 51 ] and Fer ( in PDGF - stimulated ﬁbro - blasts ) [ 52 ] . Furthermore , a signalling pathway involving Fer activation downstream of Fyn results in cortactin phosphorylation in response to osmotic shock [ 53 ] , and this pathway is also activ - ated by F - actin depolymerization in response to treatment of cells with latrunculin B [ 54 ] . Activation of Fer in response to hypertonicity or actin depolymerization leads to phosphorylation of the same cortactin tyrosine residues regulated by Src [ 53 , 54 ] . Finally , tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in response to hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) stimulation of A431 cells may be directly mediated by the HGF / MET receptor [ 55 ] . Cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation may serve a variety of func - tions . One role is to provide binding sites for speciﬁc signalling proteins with SH2 domains , e . g . Src family kinases and Nck [ 46 ] , which may regulate the cellular functions performed by cortactin , or act as effectors in this regard . Also , tyrosine phosphorylation may alter the conformational state of the protein , since the major Src phosphorylation sites reside within the proline - rich region , which may act as a ‘hinge’ separating the repeat region and SH3 domain . This may then modify interactions with other proteins . This is supported by two observations . First , digestion of cortactin by calpain in vitro is markedly enhanced by prior phosphory - lation by Src , suggesting that Src - mediated phosphorylation induces conformational changes that increase the efﬁciency of proteolytic cleavage [ 56 ] . Second , interaction of cortactin with EC MLCK ( endothelial cell myosin light - chain kinase ) is enhanced by prior incubation of cortactin with Src [ 57 ] . A further role for cortactin phosphorylation is provided by the observation of Zhan and co - workers that this modiﬁcation modestly inhibits the F - actin binding activity of cortactin and strongly reduces its F - actin crosslinking activity [ 17 ] . A similar effect of Src on the latter parameter was also reported by Bourguignon et al . [ 58 ] . This suggests a negative regulatory role which may regulate the ﬂexibility and / or turnover of actin networks . However , the ability of cortactin to crosslink actin ﬁlaments has been disputed [ 15 , 36 ] . Serine / threonine phosphorylation of cortactin Cortactin isolated from a variety of cell types exhibits phosphoryl - ation on serine and threonine residues , and this can be enhanced by EGF ( epidermal growth factor ) or vanadate treatment [ 8 , 18 , 47 ] . Increases in phosphorylation on these residues accompanies a mobility shift of cortactin upon SDS / PAGE , from p80 to p85 [ 18 , 47 ] . In HEK293 cells , conversion of p80 into p85 upon EGF treatment or cell detachment is blocked by the MEK ( MAP kinase / ERK kinase ) inhibitor PD98059 , and expression of constitutively active MEK is sufﬁcient to stimulate the conversion , indicating that kinases downstream of MEK regulate this process [ 18 ] . However , the basal levels of p85 in serum - starved cells are insensitive to MEK inhibition , indicating that MEK - independent pathways also contribute to cortactin phosphorylation . Deletion of the combined helical and proline - rich ( HP ) regions prevented the mobility shift and cortactin phosphorylation , and tryptic phos - phopeptide mapping highlighted the ERKs as potential HP region kinases , with two consensus ERK phosphorylation sites ( Ser 405 and Ser 418 ) as likely targets [ 18 ] . Phosphorylation of the latter residue in cortactin has been conﬁrmed by mass spectrometry ( D . K . Lynch , S . Cordwell and R . J . Daly , unpublished results ) . Studies on thrombin - induced lamellipodial spreading in plate - lets have implicated a second serine / threonine kinase in cortactin regulation , the Rac / Cdc42 effector PAK ( p21 - activated kinase ) [ 59 ] . Thrombin stimulation of platelets leads to activation of Rac / Cdc42 and PAK , and co - localization of Rac and cortactin in cortical regions . Interestingly , cortactin and PAK co - immuno - precipitate from resting platelets but dissociate upon thrombin stimulation , which may contribute to the observed redistribution of cortactin . PAK can also phosphorylate recombinant cortactin in vitro , although the regulated sites are not known . Finally , although cortactin binds directly to EC MLCK , it has not been reported whether it acts as a substrate for this enzyme [ 57 ] . THE ROLE OF CORTACTIN IN DENDRITIC ACTIN NUCLEATION BY THE Arp2 / 3 COMPLEX Regulation of actin polymerization by the Arp2 / 3 complex Since the formation of new actin ﬁlaments from pure actin mono - mers is unfavourable , cells require a molecular apparatus to drive de novo actin nucleation . This function is provided by the Arp2 / 3 complex , an evolutionarily - conserved assembly of seven sub - units : two actin - related proteins , Arp2 and Arp3 , and ﬁve other polypeptides , designated ARPC1 - 5 [ 7 ] . In isolation , the Arp2 / 3 complex has a low actin - nucleating activity , but , as described in the next section , this can be enhanced by binding to speciﬁc NPFs . Importantly , the activity of an NPF – Arp2 / 3 assembly can be stimulated further by binding to the side of an existing or ‘mother’ actin ﬁlament , so that nucleation is coupled to branching . This results in the formation of actin networks exhibiting characteristic ‘Y - branches’ at an angle of 70 ◦ ; a process termed dendritic actin nucleation [ 7 , 60 ] . Regulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by NPFs The structure of a selection of Arp2 / 3 activators is shown schematically in Figure 1 . All of these proteins contain an acidic ( A ) region which contributes to binding and activating the Arp2 / 3 complex and harbours a conserved tryptophan - containing motif with the consensus sequence DDW [ 7 , 61 ] . In the WASP / SCAR family , the A region is preceded by one or two WH2 motifs which bind monomeric actin , and a central ( C ) region . The latter also contributes to Arp2 / 3 complex interaction and activation . A WASP / SCAR fragment , consisting of the WCA regions , is sufﬁcient to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex , with maximal activation occurring when both the Arp2 / 3 complex and an actin monomer are bound . Actin ﬁlaments enhance binding of WCA to Arp2 / 3 complex and actin nucleation , thus favouring the formation of branched actin networks [ 7 ] . Although related in certain structural characteristics , the mode of regulation of WASP / N - WASP and SCAR proteins differs , being based upon auto - inhibition and the presence of associated proteins ( trans - inhibition ) respectively . The observation that N - WASP requires both GTP – Cdc42 and PIP2 for full activation [ 7 ] has led to a model in which auto - inhibition is mediated by binding of the C and A regions to c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks 17 Figure 2 Comparison of N - WASP and cortactin regulation in response to growth factor receptor activation Upon receptor activation ( gold jagged arrows ) , the auto - inhibited conformation of N - WASP is released by binding of Cdc42 – GTP and PIP2 to the GTPase binding and basic regions respectively , allowing Arp2 / 3 complex activation . Binding of speciﬁc SH3 domain - containing adaptors ( e . g . Grb2 ) can further stimulate NPF activity . In contrast , cortactin is not auto - inhibited in the basal state , and is translocated in a Rac - dependent manner to the cell periphery upon growth factor stimulation , where it functions to either co - activate Arp2 / 3 with other NPFs or to stabilize actin branchpoints formedfollowingthe transientassociation ofNPFswith theArp2 / 3complex . Theactivity ofcortactin towardsthe Arp2 / 3complexcanbemodulatedbybindingofspeciﬁcproteinsto its SH3domain . For example , dynamin 2 and WIP enhance NPF activity by inducing dimerization , or by providing actin monomers respectively . Recruitment of Fgd1 provides a potential mechanism for crosstalk with Cdc42 / N - WASP . Phosphorylation of cortactin on tyrosine and / or serine / threonine residues may induce a conformational change and regulate intermolecular interactions . In the case of tyrosine phosphorylation , this may inhibit F - actin binding or crosslinking , and hence the rigidity or turnover of actin networks . the GBD and basic domain respectively . Binding of GTP – Cdc42 to the GBD and PIP2 to the basic region then induces release from the inactive conformation ( Figure 2 ) [ 7 , 62 ] . Tyrosine phosphoryl - ationwithintheGBDandserinephosphorylationattheC / Aregion border also regulate WASP NPF activity [ 63 , 64 ] . In contrast with WASP / N - WASP , SCAR / WAVE proteins are not auto - inhibited , and although they are activated downstream of Rac , they do not appear to interact directly with this G - protein , as predicted by the absence of a GBD ( GTPase binding domain ) [ 7 ] . Evidence for a trans - inhibition model for SCAR / WAVE regulation is that WAVE1 can be puriﬁed in an inactive complex with four other proteins , PIR121 / Sra1 , Nck - associated protein ( NAP ) 125 , HSPC300 and Abl - interactor 2 ( Abi2 ) [ 65 ] . Incubation of the complex with either GTP – Rac or Nck results in disassembly and release of active WAVE1 / HSPC300 . However , an alternative mode of activation has been proposed whereby the adaptor IRSp53 directly links activated Rac to WAVE proteins [ 66 ] . Interestingly , WASP / SCAR proteins can directly recruit regul - ators of speciﬁc Rho family GTPases . For example , WAVE - 1 recruits WRP , a Rac GTPase - activating protein [ 67 ] , and binding of N - WASP to the endocytic protein intersectin - 1 enhances the GEF ( guanine nucleotide exchange factor ) activity of the latter protein towards Cdc42 [ 68 ] . Consequently , this scaffolding function of WASP / SCAR proteins is used to generate multiprotein complexes with built - in capacity for enhancement or termination of NPF activity . As described later in this review , an interesting parallel is the recruitment of the Cdc42 GEF Fgd1 by cortactin [ 40 ] . Since Cdc42 does not regulate cortactin directly , this sug - gests that crosstalk may exist between different classes of NPFs . Regulation of actin nucleation and branching by cortactin Initial attempts to detect effects of cortactin on actin polymeriz - ation failed , as these assays were performed with a relatively low concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex ( 10 nM ) [ 12 ] . However , when a 10 - fold higher concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex was used , cortactin decreased the half - time to reach a steady state of actin polymerization and also enhanced the rate of actin polymerization [ 34 , 36 ] . Although these effects were relatively weak when com - pared with a WCA fragment from N - WASP , cortactin could fur - ther enhance WCA - stimulated actin polymerization . Weaver et al . [ 36 ] reported a synergistic effect on the formation of new actin barbed ends . Also , cortactin increased actin ﬁlament branching in the presence of Arp2 / 3 complex , and cortactin and WCA enhancedthisprocessinasynergisticmanner . Importantly , stimul - ation of actin polymerization by cortactin required the presence of both the NTA and repeat regions required for binding Arp2 / 3 complex and F - actin respectively . Consistent with this , cortactin SV2 , which binds F - actin more weakly than SV1 , exhibits lower activity towards the Arp2 / 3 complex in actin polymerization assays [ 13 ] . Uruno et al . [ 34 ] further demonstrated that mutation of either the acidic residues or the tryptophan in the DDW motif , both required for Arp2 / 3 complex binding , abrogated cortactin NPF activity . This indicated a novel mode for activation of actin polymerization ; in contrast with WASP / SCAR proteins , cortactin binds F - actin rather than G - actin , and the afﬁnity of this interaction is approx . 20 - fold higher than that for Arp2 / 3 - F - actin binding [ 34 ] . SinceassociationwithF - actinisrequiredforoptimal activation of Arp2 / 3 complex [ 7 ] , a key aspect of the mechanism c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 18 R . J . Daly Figure 3 Different models for Arp2 / 3 complex activation by N - WASP and cortactin AssociationwithN - WASPandthesideofanactinﬁlamentactivatestheArp2 / 3complex . Forsimplicity , WCAisshownbindingtoArp2andArp3 , althoughitalsocontactsARPC1 . Furtherstimulation of actin nucleation has been proposed to occur in one of two modes . ( 1 ) Co - activation by N - WASP and cortactin . WCA remains in contact with Arp2 ( and ARPC1 ) , but the cortactin NTA displaces WCA and binds Arp3 . ( 2 ) A sequential model . N - WASP is displaced by cortactin which has acquired a higher afﬁnity for the activated Arp2 / 3 complex at the branch site . This results in the formation of a stable complex for dendritic nucleation . whereby cortactin acts as an NPF is its ability to promote the association of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin ﬁlaments . A similar mechanism has been proposed for Abp1p , which binds to actin ﬁlaments via its ADF - H domain [ 69 ] . However , an additional aspect of cortactin function towards actin networks is that it stabilizes ﬁlament branch points and hence inhibits debranching and disassembly [ 36 ] . How could additive or synergistic enhancement of Arp2 / 3 ac - tivation be observed with a combination of cortactin and N - WASP WCA , if both activators bind the Arp2 / 3 complex , and a single acidic region in both cortactin and WCA is implicated in bind - ing ? One group have addressed this question by a chemical crosslinking approach [ 16 ] . This revealed that the cortactin NTA interacts with the Arp3 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex , while WCA associates with Arp3 , Arp2 and ARPC1 , and that a ternary complex of Arp2 / 3 - WCA – NTA could form . Furthermore , saturat - ing amounts of NTA ( which in the absence of the repeat region binds , but does not activate Arp2 / 3 ) did not inhibit Arp2 / 3 activ - ation by WCA . These studies suggest that cortactin and N - WASP can act in concert to regulate the Arp2 / 3 complex , with cortactin bridging Arp3 and F - actin , and N - WASP interacting with Arp2 and ARPC1 ( Figure 3 ) . However , it has recently been reported that full - length cortactin can stimulate actin nucleation in the presence of a saturating concentration of glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) – WCA , with a half maximal stimulation observed at 20 nM cortactin [ 70 ] . Similarconcentrationsofcortactinwerealsoableto displace recombinant N - WASP WCA from the Arp2 / 3 complex , but only when the assay was performed in the presence of actin polymerization . These results have led to a model in which cortactin acquires a higher afﬁnity for Arp2 / 3 by virtue of an inter - action with both Arp2 / 3 and F - actin at the branching site [ 70 ] , and sequential binding of N - WASP and cortactin to the Arp2 / 3 complex occurs ( Figure 3 ) . This model is more consistent with the distinct localization of N - WASP and cortactin in the actin comet tail induced by intracellular pathogens . Here , N - WASP is situated at the junction of the pathogen and the tail , where actin assembly is initiated , while cortactin is distributed throughout the comet tail and hence the established actin network [ 70 , 71 ] . A similar differential distribution of the two proteins is also observed in actin tails associated with intracellular vesicle - like particles [ 72 ] . Unlike WASP / SCAR proteins , the NPF activity of cortactin does not appear to be inhibited by intra - or inter - molecular inter - actions , and although phosphorylation represents a likely modul - atory mechanism , this has yet to be demonstrated . However , cortactin NPF activity can be regulated by the recruitment of SH3 domain - binding partners ( Figure 2 ) . The addition of WIP ( WASP - interacting protein ) to pyrene actin polymerization assays in - creases actin nucleation in the presence of cortactin and Arp2 / 3 complex , while it has no effect on the ability of cortactin to inhibit debranching [ 73 ] . Since WIP contains a G - actin binding WH2 module [ 74 ] , while cortactin does not bind actin monomers [ 35 ] , WIP could enhance actin polymerization by cortactin – Arp2 / 3 complex by provision of G - actin for incorporation into new ﬁlaments . Additionally , WIP could stabilize ﬁlaments against depolymerization [ 74 ] . Furthermore , dynamin 2 regulates actin polymerization by cortactin - Arp 2 / 3 complex in a biphasic man - ner , with a modest enhancement of actin nucleation occurring at molar ratios of dynamin : cortactin of < 1 : 1 , and inhibition at higher molar ratios [ 75 ] . The recent ﬁnding that dimerization of cortactin markedly enhances its NPF activity [ 76 ] may provide an explanation for these observations . Since dynamin multimerizes at low concentrations [ 77 ] , this is likely to promote cortactin dimerization . However , the formation of higher - order oligomers with increasing dynamin 2 concentrations may ultimately inhibit cortactin activity towards the Arp2 / 3 complex . In support of this model , the addition of dynamin 2 to actin polymerization assays containing cortactin and Arp2 / 3 complex , induces bundling of actin ﬁlaments [ 75 ] . This mechanism for regulation of cortactin activity may be relevant to other binding proteins that dimerize or oligomerize e . g . CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) [ 78 , 79 ] and CortBP1 / Shank 2 [ 80 , 81 ] . Finally , the cortactin - interacting pro - tein EC MLCK markedly inhibits the ability of cortactin to promote Arp2 / 3 - stimulated actin polymerization , although the underlying mechanism is unclear [ 57 ] . c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks 19 CELLULAR ROLES OF CORTACTIN IN NORMAL AND DISEASE STATES Cortical actin organization Strong immunostaining for cortactin is observed in membrane rufﬂes and lamellipodia in a variety of adherent cell types , includ - ing ﬁbroblasts , aortic smooth muscle cells , endothelial cells and human carcinoma cells of different origins [ 10 , 35 , 79 , 82 ] . Cortactin is also implicated in cortical actin arrangements in neuronal cells , since it localizes to the growth cones of developing hippocampal neurons [ 80 ] and is required for the formation of dendritic spines [ 83 ] . In addition to these protrusive structures , certain cell types also form podosomes , which are specialized cell - substratum adhesion sites consisting of tubular invaginations of the plasma membrane surrounded by a columnar sheath of actin cytoskeleton [ 84 ] . Cortactin co - localizes with F - actin at these structures in Src - transformed cells [ 8 , 84 , 85 ] and in carcinoma cells with EMS1 gene ampliﬁcation [ 10 ] . Microinjection of the cortactin SH3 domain inhibits podosome formation in Src - trans - formed cells [ 85 ] , which may reﬂect its interaction with N - WASP [ 85 ] or dynamin 2 [ 84 , 86 ] . In Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts , activation of Rac is required for platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) - or PMA - induced trans - location of cortactin from the cytoplasm to the cell cortex , and is also sufﬁcient to drive this process [ 82 ] . Importantly , both the NTA region and the fourth cortactin repeat , and hence the ability to bind to both the Arp2 / 3 complex and F - actin , are required for Rac - induced cortical localization of this protein [ 12 ] . Similar ﬁndings were reported for Rac - dependent translocation of cortactin to the cell periphery in response to osmotic stress [ 87 ] , and Rac also stimulates cortical accumulation of the related pro - tein mAbp1 [ 20 ] . Interestingly , tyrosine phosphorylation of the major Src phosphorylation sites in cortactin requires cortical targeting , and is also dependent on Rac activation [ 49 ] . Since activation of Rac directs Src to membrane rufﬂes and lamellipodia [ 88 ] , this GTPase regulates the coordinated movement of both cortactin and a tyrosine kinase intimately involved in its regulation to speciﬁc sites of dynamic cortical actin reorganization . Cortactin , and its associated proteins , perform several functions at the cell cortex relating to remodelling of the plasma membrane and the underlying actin cytoskeleton . As described previously , one role of cortactin within lamellipodia / rufﬂes is presumably to enhance the formation of branched actin networks ( via interaction with Arp2 / 3 complex ) and / or stabilize those formed by the activity of the Rac - stimulated NPF SCAR . However , cortactin also re - cruits speciﬁc binding proteins to cortical regions of the cell via its SH3 domain . For example , cortactin mediates PDGF - stimulated translocationofdynamin2tomembranerufﬂes [ 86 ] andthesepro - teins also co - localize in transient ‘waves’ on the dorsal surface of growth - factor - stimulated cells , which , via disassembly of F - actin networks , provide more pliable regions of the cell cortex which facilitate lamellipodial protrusion [ 89 ] . However , although dyn - amin 2 binding regulates the NPF activity of cortactin , and the dynamin 2 - cortactin complex alters the organization of actin ﬁlaments at a lipid interface [ 75 ] , the exact role ( s ) of this assembly in wave formation and membrane protrusion is unclear [ 90 ] . Also , binding to the cortactin SH3 domain may contribute to the locali - zation of both Fgd1 [ 40 ] and WIP [ 73 ] to the cell cortex . Both of these proteins play a positive role in Cdc42 - dependent ﬁlopodia formation , the former by virtue of its GEF activity towards Cdc42 [ 91 ] , the latter due to its interaction with N - WASP [ 74 ] . Consequently , these proteins may function together with cortactin to regulate cortical actin rearrangements , which is supported by the observation that co - expression of cortactin and WIP in cells enhances the formation of membrane protrusions [ 73 ] . Importantly , the formation of Rac - induced lamellipodia is required for cell motility [ 2 ] . Consistent with this , cortactin over - expression enhances migration of both ﬁbroblasts [ 92 ] and endothelial cells [ 48 ] in vitro , and the ﬁrst genetic analysis of cortactin function , performed in Drosophila , has identiﬁed a role for this protein in border cell migration during oogenesis [ 93 ] . Importantly , the ability of cortactin to promote migration of human endothelial cells requires the presence of the major sites of Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation [ 48 ] , and a cortactin phosphorylation - deﬁcient mutant can function in a dominant - negative manner to inhibit motility [ 48 , 55 ] . Therefore , Src family kinases may contribute to cell migration by phosphorylating cortactin . In support of this model , enhanced cell motility cor - relates with activation of this signalling pathway in a variety of cell culture systems , including FGF - 1 - stimulated ﬁbroblasts [ 94 ] , hyaluronic acid - treated ovarian cancer cells [ 58 ] , and murine melanoma cell lines with different metastatic potential [ 50 ] . Src - cortactin signalling is also implicated in N - syndecan - regulated neurite formation in N18 neuroblastoma cells [ 95 ] and in the formationofactin - richstructurestermedringcanalsin Drosophila [ 93 ] . Association with transmembrane protein complexes Cortactin also provides an indirect link between speciﬁc trans - membrane receptors and the underlying actin cytoskeleton . This often occurs via ligation of the cortactin SH3 domain to sub - membranous scaffolding proteins ( Figure 4 ) . The ﬁrst cortactin SH3 target identiﬁed , CortBP1 [ 80 ] , was subsequently character - ized as a splice variant of Shank 2 , a member of a protein family which also contains Shank 1 and Shank 3 [ 81 ] . The cortactin SH3 module binds to a region of Shank 2 harbouring a proline - rich motif which bears close similarity to the consensus - binding motif for this SH3 domain [ 80 ] ( Table 1 ) . This motif is also present in Shank 3 but not Shank 1 [ 81 ] . Shank 2 is predominantly expressed in brain , while Shank 3 is widely expressed [ 81 ] . The best - characterized role for Shank proteins is in the assembly of receptor clusters at the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) of excitatory synapses [ 81 , 96 ] . Shank PDZ ( PSD - 95 / Dlg / ZO - 1 ) domains bind to speciﬁc C - terminal sequence motifs in guanylate kinase associated proteins ( GKAPs ) , which in turn bind the GK domain of PSD - 95 ( Figure 4 ) . The latter tethers the complex to speciﬁc transmembrane proteins . For example , the ﬁrst two PDZ domains can bind the C - termini of the NMDA ( N - methyl - D - aspartate ) receptor . In addition , the Shank PDZ domains can also bind directly to particular receptors e . g . the type 2 somatostatin receptor , and the group 1 metabotropic receptors mGluR1a and mGluR5 . An additional Shank - binding partner is Homer , which can bind via its EVH1 ( Ena VASP homology 1 ) domain to one of the proline - rich regions of Shank proteins . Since the Homer EVH1 domain also binds to mGluR1a and 5 , as well as inositol triphosphate receptors , and Homer proteins can dimerize via a C - terminal coiled - coil domain , a Homer dimer can link speciﬁc receptors to Shanks . Furthermore , the latter can crosslink other Shank - binding partners ( e . g . PSD - 95 – NMDA receptors ) to Homer - associated receptors [ 81 , 96 ] ( Figure 4 ) . The theme of cortactin recruitment to scaffolding protein com - plexes is further developed by its binding to ZO - 1 ( zonnula occludens 1 ) , a protein with similar molecular architecture to PSD - 95 , which localizes to adherens junctions in Drosophila and to epithelial tight junctions in mammals [ 14 , 97 , 98 ] . The latter are intercellular junctions formed at the apical end of the lateral membrane which restrict the diffusion of molecules between the apical and basolateral membrane compartments and which also regulate epithelial paracellular permeability [ 98 ] . A direct c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 20 R . J . Daly Figure 4 Cellular roles for cortactin Several roles are consistent with a model in which cortactin binds speciﬁc protein complexes via its SH3 domain and links them to the Arp2 / 3 complex and hence dynamic actin networks . ( A ) Organization of transmembrane receptor complexes at the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) , via binding to Shank 2 . CC , coiled - coil domain ; Pro , proline - rich region ; SAM , sterile α - motif domain . ( B ) Receptor - mediated endocytosis via binding to dynamin 2 and CD2AP . PH , pleckstrin homology domain ; RF , ring ﬁnger domain ; U , ubiquitin . interaction between the cortactin SH3 domain and ZO - 1 was ﬁrst demonstrated using the Drosophila proteins [ 14 ] , and the binding site in Drosophila ZO - 1 exhibits similarity to the consensus sequence ( Table 1 ) . However , GST pull - down and co - immuno - precipitation experiments indicate that mammalian cortactin and ZO - 1 also interact [ 14 ] ( D . K . Lynch , S . C . Winata and R . J . Daly , unpublished results ) . The association of human cor - tactin and ZO - 1 at tight junctions is also consistent with the c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks 21 immunohistochemical localization of cortactin to the terminal web in human small bowel epithelium [ 24 ] . As with Shank proteins , ZO - 1 can interact directly with transmembrane recep - tors . Thus , the GK and acidic regions of ZO - 1 bind to occludin [ 99 ] while the ﬁrst PDZ domain binds the C - termini of claudins [ 100 ] . Occludin and claudins both contain four trans - membrane regions and assemble into heteropolymers , acting as critical determinants of tight junction structure and as regulators of paracellular diffusion [ 98 ] . The role of the ZO - 1 – cortactin interaction in structural organization of tight junctions is unclear . Interestingly , cortactin contributes to the formation of another type of cell – cell junction , the adherens junction , formed upon homophilic binding of E - cadherin molecules on juxtaposed cells . This type of cell – cell contact is critical for tissue organization in developing and adult organisms [ 101 ] . Nascent E - cadherin contacts are converted into stable zones of adhesion through co - operation between the cadherins and the underlying actin cyto - skeleton [ 102 ] . In MDCK cell monolayers , cortactin localizes to E - cadherin - based cell – cell contacts , and cortactin is recruited along with the Arp2 / 3 complex to the extending outer margins of cadherin - based lamellipodia [ 103 ] . Importantly , inhibition of cortactin function reduced cadherin - based lamellipodia form - ation , altered cell morphology and prevented accumulation of E - cadherin and β - catenin at cell – cell contacts . Together , these data indicate that cortactin plays a role in the actin re - organiz - ation required for the formation of stable cadherin - based contact zones . Although cortactin and E - cadherin co - immunoprecipitate from cells exhibiting homophilic E - cadherin ligation , the underly - ing mechanism is not clear . However , given the role of Rac in regulating cortactin localization [ 82 ] , and in signalling down - stream of E - cadherin [ 104 ] , this GTPase may play a role in regulating complex formation . Roles in endocytosis and vesicle trafﬁcking Genetic studies in yeast have demonstrated a functional link between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton , and in higher or - ganisms cell biological and biochemical evidence supports a role for actin polymerization in most endocytic pathways [ 3 ] . Actin polymerization could regulate a variety of steps during endocytosis , including membrane invagination and ﬁssion and the movement of endocytic vesicles via the formation of actin ‘comet’ tails [ 105 ] . One link between cortactin and endocytosis is its SH3 domain - mediated binding to dynamin 2 , a mechanochemical GTPase with a well - characterized role in membrane severing during endocytic vesicle formation ( Figure 4 ) [ 86 , 106 ] . Electron microscopy has revealed that cortactin distributes in a ring around the base of the clathrin coat in invaginating coated pits , in a similar manner to dynamin 2 . Furthermore , microinjection of anti - cortactin anti - bodies , or expression of the cortactin SH3 domain in cells , demon - strated that cortactin is required for efﬁcient receptor - mediated , but not ﬂuid - phase , endocytosis [ 107 ] . Interestingly , addition of dynamin 2 to a mixture of cortactin , Arp2 / 3 complex and PIP2 vesicles led to vesicle aggregation and the association of these aggregates with loose bundles of actin ﬁlaments , and addition of GTP altered the organization of actin ﬁlaments associated with the lipid aggregates [ 75 ] . Thus a cortactin – dynamin 2 complex can regulate the organization of actin ﬁlaments associated with membranes . It should be noted that Abp1 , which is structurally similar to cortactin , also binds to dynamin , and co - localizes with dynamin and endocytic coat components in punctate spots at the cortex of growth factor - stimulated ﬁbroblasts [ 39 ] . Furthermore , overexpression of the Abp1 SH3 domain blocks transferrin uptake , indicating similar roles for Abp1 and cortactin in re - gulating receptor - mediated endocytosis . A second mechanism whereby cortactin is recruited to the endocytic machinery is via binding to the scaffolding protein CD2AP ( Figure 4 ) [ 79 ] . Upon EGF stimulation of cells , cortactin is transiently recruited into a molecular complex containing the EGFR , c - Cbl , CD2AP and endophilin , and co - localization of the EGFR , CD2AP and cortactin can be demonstrated in mem - brane rufﬂes . In a similar complex formed around the CD2AP - related protein CIN85 ( Cbl - interacting protein of 85 kDa ) , endo - philin is thought to promote membrane invagination , while c - Cbl ubiquitylates the receptor , providing a signal for lysosomal sorting and receptor degradation [ 108 ] . Whether cortactin binds CD2AP in other cellular contexts , for example in T - cells , where CD2AP associates with the CD2 adhesion molecule [ 109 ] , or in podocytes , where it binds nephrin and podocin [ 110 , 111 ] , is currently unknown . Recently , studies on the role of Hip1R ( Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 - related ) , which links clathrin cages to actin ﬁlaments [ 112 ] , have revealed an unsuspected interplay between Hip1R and cortactin during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In cells in which Hip1R expression was suppressed by RNAi ( RNA interference ) , unusual actin structures , such as tails and rings , accumulated at the cell cortex , and these structures were enriched for components of both the actin polymerization and endocytic machineries [ 113 ] . Electron microscopy studies revealed that these structures were tethered to the cell membrane . Thus Hip1R depletion results in the accumulation of actin ﬁlaments at coated pits that do not allow vesicle release . Importantly , concomitant suppression of cortactin inhibited the formation of these cortical structures . This provides further evidence for a functional role for cortactin - stimulated actin polymerization in receptor - mediated endocytosis , but indicates that Hip1R may somehow negatively regulate this process to ensure a transient and productive interaction between coated pits and actin during vesicle internalization . In addition to playing a role during vesicle internalization , cortactin has also been localized to actin tails associated with both endosomes [ 114 ] and with vesicle - like structures , possibly ﬂuid - phase pinosomes , induced by expression of activated ADP - ribosylation factor , ARF6 [ 72 ] . These actin structures presumably contribute to vesicle propulsion in a similar manner to the actin comet tails associated with certain intracellular patho - gens . Cortactin is localized throughout the tail , whereas N - WASP is situated at the junction of the tail and vesicle , and cortactin does not appear to be tyrosine phosphorylated within these structures [ 72 , 115 ] . Roles in cellular entry and cytoplasmic movement of pathogens Cortactin contributes to two mechanisms underlying cellular in - fection by speciﬁc pathogens . First , the reorganization of the cortical actin cytoskeleton that occurs upon pathogen attachment and entry . For example , cortactin is recruited to the F - actin - rich ‘pedestals’ formed upon attachment of enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( EPEC and EHEC respect - ively ) , and upon EPEC infection , co - immunoprecipitates with the intimin receptor ( Tir ) , a virulence factor translocated into the host cell by the bacteria [ 116 , 117 ] . A functional role for cortactin in the formation of these structures was demonstrated by the inhibition of F - actin accumulation at the bacterial adherence site in cells expressing a truncated cortactin lacking the NTA and repeat regions [ 117 ] . Cortactin also localizes to the cellular protrusions which form the ‘entry structure’ responsible for Shigella ﬂexneri uptake by cells [ 44 ] and to the interaction site between Cryptosporidium parvum and host cells [ 118 ] . The c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 22 R . J . Daly requirement for cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation varies depend - ing on the pathogen , probably reﬂecting the different modes of cellularinfectionandhencetypesofactinreorganizationinvolved . Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin occurs upon infection of cells with Shigella [ 44 , 119 ] , vaccinia virus [ 120 ] and Crypto - sporidium [ 118 ] . Inhibition of Src activity , and hence cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation , decreases Shigella and Cryptospor - idium invasion , implicating a Src - cortactin pathway in this in - fectious process [ 118 , 119 ] . In the case of Cryptosporidium infection , this was conﬁrmed by expressing a tyrosine phosphoryl - ation - defective cortactin mutant in host cells , which reduced parasite invasion [ 118 ] . In contrast , cortactin tyrosine phosphoryl - ation does not occur upon EPEC or EHEC infection , and accum - ulation of cortactin at the bacterial adherence sites is unaffected by the Src family kinase inhibitor PP1 [ 116 ] . Also , although cortactin localizes to the bacterial vacuole formed upon infection of epithelial cells with Chlamydia trachomatis , enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in infected cells is not detected [ 121 ] . The second mechanism whereby cortactin contributes to infec - tion is in the formation of actin tails which are used by pathogens for movement within and between cells . Thus cortactin has been localized to the ‘rocketing’ or ‘comet’ tails produced by intra - cellular Listeria monocytogenes [ 15 ] , Shigella [ 70 ] and vaccinia virus particles [ 71 ] . Actin networks in these tails have a similar dendritic organization to those in lamellipodia , with the Arp2 / 3 complex localized to Y - junctions [ 122 ] . Cortactin localizes with the Arp2 / 3 complex throughout the tail , whereas N - WASP is restricted to the pathogen - tail interface [ 70 , 71 , 123 ] . Interestingly , vaccinia - induced tails do not stain with anti - phosphotyrosine antibodies , suggesting that cortactin is not tyrosine phosphoryl - ated in this setting [ 124 ] . Roles in tumour progression As described earlier in this review , cortactin is overexpressed in several human cancers , usually due to gene ampliﬁcation ; how - ever , it is important to note that the 11q13 amplicon , where the cortactin - encoding EMS1 gene localizes , is large and contains several known or potential oncogenes [ 26 ] . Consequently , EMS1 is not the only target of 11q13 ampliﬁcations . In particular , CCND1 , encoding the cell cycle regulatory protein cyclin D1 , is situated within this chromosomal region . The contribution of particular 11q13 subregions has been investigated in several large studies on breast cancer patients which indicate that there are four ‘cores’ of gene ampliﬁcation within the 11q13 locus , and that CCND1 and EMS1 are the best candidates to ‘drive’ ampliﬁcation of their respective cores [ 26 ] . In support of independent roles for EMS1 and CCND1 in breast cancer , a study of 961 breast cancer patients revealed that approx . 7 % of patients exhibited EMS1 ampliﬁcation in the absence of increases in CCND1 copy number , and that EMS1 and CCND1 ampliﬁcation were not correlated [ 33 ] . Furthermore , in contrast with CCND1 , which appeared to play a role in oestrogen receptor - positive disease , EMS1 ampliﬁcation was associated with an increased risk of relapse and death in patients with oestrogen receptor - negative tumours . More recently , EMS1 ampliﬁcation , unlike that of CCND1 , was determined to be an independent predictor of death from head and neck cancer [ 125 ] , suggesting that cortactin overexpression also contributes to disease progression in this cancer type . How might cortactin promote tumour progression ? The role of cortactin in regulating the formation of actin - based structures intimately associated with cell motility [ 35 , 82 ] , its localization to podosome - like structures in transformed cells [ 8 , 10 , 84 , 85 ] , and the enhancement of cell migration upon cortactin overexpression [ 48 , 92 ] are all consistent with a role in cancer cell invasion and metastasis . Two studies on the breast cancer cell line MDA - MB - 231 , which exhibits a motile , invasive phenotype in vitro , support this hypothesis . In these cells , cortactin localizes to in - vadopodia , ﬁlopodia - like protrusions into the extracellular matrix which are associated with matrix - degrading proteolytic activity [ 126 ] . A role for cortactin in the formation of these structures is supported by the inhibition of matrix degradation at cell - sub - stratum contact sites by microinjection of an anti - cortactin antibody . Moreover , overexpression of cortactin in these cells increases transendothelial invasion in vitro and the formation of bone metastases following intracardiac injection into nude mice , in a manner dependent upon cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation [ 127 ] . Consequently , there is strong evidence that cortactin functions in the relatively late stages of disease progression to promote tumour cell dissemination . However , the presence of EMS1 gene ampliﬁcation in primary tumours may indicate that cortactin overexpression provides a proliferative advantage in the earlystagesoftumourdevelopment [ 128 ] . Althoughsuchaneffect was not observed in studies on cultured NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts [ 92 ] or on MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells grown in vitro or as tumours innudemice [ 127 ] , thispossibilityshouldnotbediscounted , given cortactin’s multiple cellular roles . SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVES It is now clear that the modular nature of cortactin enables coupl - ing of two key biochemical properties , the ability to nucleate and stabilize Arp2 / 3 - generated dendritic actin networks and SH3 domain - mediatedtargetingtospeciﬁcproteincomplexes . Thishas been exploited by the cell to link a variety of proteins with diverse functions to dynamic actin assemblies . However , more insight is required into how cortactin functions in combination with other NPFs to regulate the Arp2 / 3 complex in vivo , and how this leads to the generation of different cytoskeletal structures . Also , despite the marked tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in response to speciﬁc stimuli , the role of this modiﬁcation is still unclear , while from both a mechanistic and functional standpoint , cortactin serine / threonine phosphorylation is even more poorly understood . Finally , the roles of cortactin during tumour progression , and how these are affected by other signalling pathways upregulated in particular cancers ( e . g . those initiated by speciﬁc receptor tyrosine kinases ) are likely to prove fruitful avenues of research . R . J . D . is supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia and the Cancer Council New South Wales . REFERENCES 1 Lauffenburger , D . A . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell ( Cambridge , Mass . ) 84 , 359 – 369 2 Ridley , A . J . ( 2001 ) Rho GTPases and cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2713 – 2722 3 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 – 332 4 Fehrenbacher , K . , Huckaba , T . , Yang , H . - C . , Boldogh , I . and Pon , L . ( 2003 ) Actin comet tails , endosomes and endosymbionts . J . Exp . Biol . 206 , 1977 – 1984 5 Burridge , K . and Wennerberg , K . ( 2004 ) Rho and Rac take center stage . Cell ( Cambridge , Mass . ) 116 , 167 – 179 6 Pollard , T . , Blanchoin , L . and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Ann . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 7 Higgs , H . N . and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) Regulation of actin ﬁlament network formation through Arp2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 8 Wu , H . , Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1991 ) Identiﬁcation and characterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60 src substrate . Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 , 5113 – 5124 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks 23 9 Zhan , X . , Hu , X . , Hampton , B . , Burgess , W . H . , Friesel , R . and Maciag , T . ( 1993 ) Murine cortactinisphosphorylatedinresponsetoﬁbroblastgrowthfactor - 1ontyrosineresidues late in the G1 phase of the BALB / c 3T3 cell cycle . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 24427 – 24431 10 Schuuring , E . , Vernoeven , E . , Litvinov , S . and Michalides , R . J . A . M . ( 1993 ) The product of theEMS1gene , ampliﬁed and overexpressed in human carcinomas , is homologous to a v - srcsubstrate and is located in cell - substratum contact sites . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 2891 – 2898 11 Ohoka , Y . and Takai , Y . ( 1998 ) Isolation and characterization of cortactin isoforms and a novel cortactin - binding protein , CBP90 . Genes to Cells 3 , 603 – 612 12 Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 13 van Rossum , A . G . S . H . , de Graaf , J . H . , Schuuring - Scholtes , E . , Kluin , P . M . , Fan , Y . - X . , Zhan , X . , Moolenaar , W . H . and Schuuring , E . ( 2003 ) Alternative splicing of the actin binding domain of human cortactin affects cell migration . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 45672 – 45679 14 Katsube , T . , Takahisa , M . , Ueda , R . , Hashimoto , N . , Kobayashi , M . and Togashi , S . ( 1998 ) Cortactin associates with the cell – cell junction protein ZO - 1 in bothDrosophila and mouse . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 29672 – 29677 15 Weed , S . A . and Parsons , J . T . ( 2001 ) Cortactin : coupling membrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 20 , 6418 – 6434 16 Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . - L . , Parsons , J . T . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) Interaction of cortactin and N - WASP with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 17 Huang , C . , Ni , Y . , Wang , T . , Gao , Y . , Haudenschild , C . C . and Zhan , X . ( 1997 ) Down - regulation of the ﬁlamentous actin cross - linking activity of cortactin by src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13911 – 13915 18 Campbell , D . H . , Sutherland , R . L . and Daly , R . J . ( 1999 ) Signaling pathways and structural domains required for phosphorylation of EMS1 / cortactin . Cancer Res . 59 , 5376 – 5385 19 Kitamura , D . , Kaneko , H . , Miyagoe , Y . , Ariyasu , T . and Watanabe , T . ( 1989 ) Isolation and characterization of a novel human gene expressed speciﬁcally in the cells of the hematopoietic lineage . Nucleic Acids Res . 17 , 9367 – 9379 20 Kessels , M . M . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2000 ) Association of mouse actin - binding protein 1 ( mAbp1 / SH3P7 ) , a src kinase target , with dynamic regions of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in response to Rac1 activation . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 393 – 412 21 Miglarese , M . R . , Mannion - Henderson , J . , Wu , H . , Parsons , J . T . and Bender , T . P . ( 1994 ) The protein tyrosine kinase substrate cortactin is differentially expressed in murine B lymphoid tumors . Oncogene 9 , 1989 – 1997 22 Zhan , X . , Haudenschild , C . C . , Ni , Y . , Smith , E . and Huang , C . ( 1997 ) Upregulation of cortactin expression during the maturation of megakaryocytes . Blood 89 , 457 – 464 23 Hiura , K . , Lim , S . , Little , S . P . , Lin , S . and Sato , M . ( 1995 ) Differentiation dependent expression of tensin and cortactin in chicken osteoclasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 30 , 272 – 284 24 Wu , H . and Montone , K . T . ( 1998 ) Cortactin localization in actin - containing adult and fetal tissues . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 46 , 1189 – 1191 25 Schuuring , E . ( 1995 ) The involvement of the 11q13 region in human malignancies : cyclinD1andEMS1are two candidate oncogenes – a review . Gene 159 , 83 – 96 26 Ormandy , C . J . , Musgrove , E . A . , Hui , R . , Daly , R . J . and Sutherland , R . L . ( 2003 ) Cyclin D1 , EMS1 and 11q13 ampliﬁcation in breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res . Treat . 78 , 323 – 335 27 Schuuring , E . , Verhoeven , E . , Mooi , W . and Michalides , R . ( 1992 ) Identiﬁcation and cloning of two overexpressed genes , U21B31 / PRAD1andEMS1within the ampliﬁed chromosome 11q13 region in human carcinomas . Oncogene 7 , 355 – 361 28 Patel , A . M . , Incognito , L . S . , Schechter , G . L . , Wasilenko , W . J . and Somers , K . D . ( 1996 ) Ampliﬁcation and expression of EMS - 1 ( cortactin ) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines . Oncogene 12 , 31 – 35 29 Campbell , D . , deFazio , A . , Sutherland , R . and Daly , R . ( 1996 ) Expression and tyrosine phosphorylation of EMS1 in human breast cancer cell lines . Int . J . Cancer 68 , 485 – 492 30 Hui , R . , Ball , J . R . , Macmillan , R . D . , Kenny , F . S . , Prall , O . W . J . , Campbell , D . H . , Cornish , A . L . , McClelland , R . A . , Daly , R . J . , Forbes , J . F . , Blamey , R . W . , Musgrove , E . A . , Robertson , J . F . R . , Nicholson , R . I . and Sutherland , R . L . ( 1998 ) EMS1 gene expression in primary breast cancer : relationship to cyclin D1 and oestrogen receptor expression and patient survival . Oncogene 17 , 1053 – 1059 31 Bringuier , P . P . , Tamimi , Y . , Schuuring , E . and Schalken , J . ( 1996 ) Expression of cyclin D1 and EMS1 in bladder tumours ; relationship with chromosome 11q13 ampliﬁcation . Oncogene 12 , 1747 – 1753 32 Lagarkova , M . A . , Boitchenko , V . E . , Mescheryakov , A . A . , Kashkarova , U . A . and Nedospasov , S . A . ( 2000 ) Human cortactin as a putative cancer antigen . Oncogene 19 , 5204 – 5207 33 Hui , R . , Campbell , D . H . , Lee , C . S . L . , McCaul , K . , Horsfall , D . J . , Musgrove , E . A . , Daly , R . J . , Seshadri , R . and Sutherland , R . L . ( 1997 ) EMS1ampliﬁcation can occur independently ofCCND1orINT2ampliﬁcation at 11q13 and may identify different phenotypes in primary breast cancer . Oncogene 15 , 1617 – 1623 34 Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , Fan , Y . - X . , Egile , C . , Li , R . , Mueller , S . C . and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 259 – 266 35 Wu , H . and Parsons , J . ( 1993 ) Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60 src substrate , is a ﬁlamentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 1417 – 1426 36 Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Current Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 37 He , H . , Watanabe , T . , Zhan , X . , Huang , C . , Schuuring , E . , Fukami , K . , Takenawa , T . , Kumar , C . C . , Simpson , R . J . and Maruta , H . ( 1998 ) Role of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in Ras / Rac - induced disruption of the cortactin - actomyosin II complex and malignant transformation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 3829 – 3837 38 Sparks , A . B . , Rider , J . E . , Hoffman , N . G . , Fowlkes , D . M . , Quilliam , L . A . and Kay , B . K . ( 1996 ) Distinct ligand preferences of Src homology 3 domains from Src , Yes , Abl , Cortactin , p53bp2 , PLC γ , Crk and Grb2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 1540 – 1544 39 Kessels , M . M . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . , Drubin , D . G . and Qualmann , B . ( 2001 ) Mammalian Abp1 , a signal - responsive F - actin - binding protein , links the actin cytoskeleton to endocytosis via the GTPase dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 351 – 366 40 Hou , P . , Estrada , L . , Kinley , A . W . , Parsons , J . T . , Votjek , A . B . and Gorski , J . L . ( 2003 ) Fgd1 , the Cdc42 GEF responsible for Faciogenital Dysplasia , directly interacts with cortactin and mAbp1 to modulate cell shape . Hum . Mol . Genet . 12 , 1981 – 1993 41 Qualmann , B . , Boeckers , T . M . , Jeromin , M . , Gundelﬁnger , E . D . and Kessels , M . M . ( 2004 ) Linkage of the actin cytoskeleton to the postsynaptic density via direct interactions of Abp1 with the ProSAP / Shank family . J . Neurosci . 24 , 2481 – 2495 42 Zhan , X . , Plourde , C . , Hu , X . , Friesel , R . and Maciag , T . ( 1994 ) Association of ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor - 1 with c - Src correlates with association between c - Src and cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 20221 – 20224 43 Vuori , K . and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1995 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation of p130Cas and cortactin accompanies integrin - mediated cell adhesion to extracellular matrix . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 22259 – 22262 44 Dehio , C . , Prevost , M . C . and Sansonetti , P . J . ( 1995 ) Invasion of epithelial cells by Shigellaﬂexneriinduces tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by a pp60c - src - mediated signalling pathway . EMBO J . 14 , 2471 – 2482 45 Thomas , S . M . , Soriano , P . and Imamoto , A . ( 1995 ) Speciﬁc and redundant roles of src and Fyn in organizing the cytoskeleton . Nature ( London ) 376 , 267 – 271 46 Okamura , H . and Resh , M . D . ( 1995 ) p80 / 85 cortactin associates with the Src SH2 domain and colocalizes with v - Src in transformed cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 26613 – 26618 47 van Damme , H . , Brok , H . , Schuuring - Scholtes , E . and Schuuring , E . ( 1997 ) The redistribution of cortactin into cell - matrix contact sites in human carcinoma cells with 11q13 ampliﬁcation is associated with both overexpression and post - translational modiﬁcation . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 7374 – 7380 48 Huang , C . , Liu , J . L . , Haudenschild , C . C . and Zhan , X . ( 1998 ) The role of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in the locomotion of endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 25770 – 25776 49 Head , J . A . , Jiang , D . , Li , M . , Zorn , L . J . , Schaefer , E . M . , Parsons , J . T . and Weed , S . A . ( 2003 ) Cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation requires Rac1 activity and association with the cortical actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 3216 – 3229 50 Huang , J . , Asawa , T . , Takato , T . and Sakai , R . ( 2003 ) Cooperative roles of Fyn and cortactin in cell migration of metastatic murine melanoma . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 48367 – 48376 51 Gallet , C . , Rosa , J . P . , Habib , A . , Lebret , M . , Levy - Toledano , S . and Maclouf , J . ( 1999 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin associated with Syk accompanies thromboxane analogue - induced platelet shape change . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 23610 – 23616 52 Craig , A . W . B . , Zirngibl , R . , Williams , K . , Cole , L . - A . and Greer , P . A . ( 2001 ) Mice devoid of Fer protein - tyrosine kinase activity are viable and fertile but display reduced cortactin phosphorylation . Mol . Cell Biol . 21 , 603 – 613 53 Kapus , A . , Di Ciano , C . , Sun , J . , Zhan , X . , Kim , L . , Wong , T . W . and Rotstein , O . D . ( 2000 ) Cell volume - dependent phosphorylation of proteins of the cortical cytoskeleton and cell – cell contact sites . The role of Fyn and Fer kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 32289 – 32298 54 Fan , L . , Di Ciano - Oliveira , C . , Weed , S . A . , Craig , A . W . B . , Greer , P . A . , Rotstein , O . D . and Kapus , A . ( 2004 ) Actin depolymerization - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin : the role of Fer kinase . Biochem . J . 380 , 581 – 591 55 Crostella , L . , Lidder , S . , Williams , R . and Skouteris , G . G . ( 2001 ) Hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor induces phosphorylation of cortactin in A431 cells in a Src kinase - independent manner . Oncogene 20 , 3735 – 3745 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 24 R . J . Daly 56 Huang , C . , Tandon , N . , Greco , N . , Ni , Y . , Wang , T . and Zhan , X . ( 1997 ) Proteolysis of platelet cortactin by calpain . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 19248 – 19252 57 Dudek , S . M . , Birukov , K . G . , Zhan , X . and Garcia , J . G . N . ( 2002 ) Novel interaction of cortactin with endothelial cell myosin light chain kinase . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 298 , 511 – 519 58 Bourguignon , L . Y . W . , Zhu , H . , Shao , L . and Chen , Y . - W . ( 2001 ) CD44 interaction with c - Src kinase promotes cortactin - mediated cytoskeleton function and hyaluronic acid - dependent ovarian tumor cell migration . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 7327 – 7336 59 Vidal , C . , Geny , B . , Melle , J . , Jandrot - Perrus , M . and Fontenay - Roupie , M . ( 2002 ) Cdc42 / Rac1 - dependent activation of the p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) regulates human platelet lamellipodia spreading : implication of the cortical - actin binding protein cortactin . Blood 100 , 4462 – 4469 60 Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) SCAR , A WASP - related protein , activates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 3739 – 3744 61 Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . - L . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Opinion Cell Biol . 15 , 23 – 30 62 Caron , E . ( 2002 ) Regulation of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein and related molecules . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 82 – 87 63 Torres , E . and Rosen , M . K . ( 2003 ) Contingent phosphorylation / dephosphorylation provides a mechanism of molecular memory in WASP . Mol . Cell 11 , 1215 – 1227 64 Cory , G . O . C . , Cramer , R . , Blanchoin , L . and Ridley , A . J . ( 2003 ) Phosphorylation of the WASP - VCA domain increases its afﬁnity for the Arp2 / 3 complex and enhances actin polymerization by WASP . Mol . Cell 11 , 1229 – 1239 65 Eden , S . , Rohatgi , R . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2002 ) Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature ( London ) 418 , 790 – 793 66 Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane rufﬂing . Nature ( London ) 408 , 732 – 735 67 Soderling , S . H . , Binns , K . L . , Wayman , G . A . , Davee , S . M . , Ong , S . H . , Pawson , T . and Scott , J . D . ( 2002 ) The WRP component of the WAVE - 1 complex attenuates Rac - mediated signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 970 – 975 68 Hussain , N . K . , Jenna , S . , Glogauer , M . , Quinn , C . C . , Wasiak , S . , Guipponi , M . , Antonarakis , S . E . , Kay , B . K . , Stossel , T . P . , Lamarche - Vane , N . and McPherson , P . S . ( 2001 ) Endocytic protein intersectin - 1 regulates actin assembly via Cdc42 and N - WASP . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 927 – 932 69 Goode , B . L . , Rodal , A . A . , Barnes , G . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2001 ) Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the actin ﬁlament binding protein Abp1p . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 627 – 634 70 Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Li , Y . , Smith , N . and Zhan , X . ( 2003 ) Sequential interaction of actin - related proteins 2 and 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex with Neural Wiscott – Aldrich syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and cortactin during branched actin ﬁlament network formation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 26086 – 26093 71 Zettl , M . and Way , M . ( 2001 ) New tricks for an old dog ? Nat . Cell . Biol . 3 , E74 – E75 72 Schafer , D . A . , D’Souza - Schorey , C . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2000 ) Actin assembly at membranes controlled by ARF6 . Trafﬁc 1 , 892 – 903 73 Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Bissonette , E . , Cooper , J . A . andParsons , J . T . ( 2003 ) CortactininteractswithWIPinregulatingArp2 / 3activationand membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 , 384 – 393 74 Martinez - Quiles , N . , Rohatgi , R . , Anton , I . M . , Medina , M . , Saville , S . P . , Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Takenawa , T . , Hartwig , J . H . , Geha , R . S . and Rarnesh , N . ( 2001 ) WIP regulates N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization and ﬁlopodium formation . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 484 – 491 75 Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) Dynamin 2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Current Biol . 12 , 1852 – 1857 76 Kim , K . , Hou , P . , Gorski , J . L . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2004 ) Effect of Fgd1 on cortactin in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin assembly . Biochemistry 43 , 2422 – 2427 77 Muhlberg , A . B . , Warnock , D . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) Domain structure and intramolecular regulation of dynamin GTPase . EMBO J . 16 , 6676 – 6683 78 Kirsch , K . H . , Georgescu , M . - M . , Ishimaru , S . and Hanafusa , H . ( 1999 ) CMS : an adapter molecule involved in cytoskeletal rearrangements . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 6211 – 6216 79 Lynch , D . K . , Winata , S . C . , Lyons , R . J . , Hughes , W . E . , Lehrbach , G . M . , Wasinger , V . , Corthals , G . , Cordwell , S . and Daly , R . J . ( 2003 ) A cortactin - CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) complex provides a novel link between epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21805 – 21813 80 Du , Y . , Weed , S . A . , Xiong , W . - C . , Marshall , T . D . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1998 ) Identiﬁcation of a novel cortactin SH3 domain - binding protein and its localization to growth cones of cultured neurons . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 5838 – 5851 81 Boeckers , T . M . , Bockmann , J . , Kreutz , M . R . and Gundelﬁnger , E . D . ( 2002 ) ProSAP / Shank proteins – a family of higher order organizing molecules of the postsynaptic density with an emerging role in human neurological disease . J . Neurochem . 81 , 903 – 910 82 Weed , S . A . , Du , Y . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1998 ) Translocation of cortactin to the cell periphery is mediated by the small GTPase Rac1 . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2433 – 2443 83 Hering , H . and Sheng , M . ( 2003 ) Activity - dependent redistribution and essential role of cortactin in dendritic spine morphogenesis . J . Neurosci . 23 , 11759 – 11769 84 Ochoa , G . - C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Kim , W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . , Baron , R . and De Camilli , P . ( 2000 ) A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 – 389 85 Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . and Takenawa , T . ( 2002 ) Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix insrc - transformed ﬁbroblasts . Cancer Res . 62 , 669 – 674 86 McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . and Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell . Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 87 Di Ciano , C . , Nie , Z . , Szaszi , K . , Lweis , A . , Urono , T . , Zhan , X . , Rotstein , O . D . , Mak , A . and Kapus , A . ( 2002 ) Osmotic stress - induced remodeling of the cortical cytoskeleton . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 , C850 – C865 88 Timpson , P . , Jones , G . E . , Frame , M . C . and Brunton , V . G . ( 2001 ) Coordination of cell polarization and migration by the Rho family GTPases requires Src tyrosine kinase activity . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1836 – 1846 89 Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 90 Orth , J . D . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 91 Nagata , K . - I . , Driessens , M . , Lamarche , N . , Gorski , J . L . and Hall , A . ( 1998 ) Activation of G1 progression , JNK mitogen - activated protein kinase , and actin ﬁlament assembly by the exchange factor FGD1 . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 15453 – 15457 92 Patel , A . S . , Schechter , G . L . , Wasilenko , W . J . and Somers , K . D . ( 1998 ) Overexpression of EMS1 / cortactin in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts causes increased cell motility and invasion invitro . Oncogene 16 , 3227 – 3232 93 Somogyi , K . and Rorth , P . ( 2004 ) Cortactin modulates cell migration and ring canal morphogenesis during Drosophila oogenesis . Mech . Dev . 121 , 57 – 64 94 Liu , J . , Huang , C . and Zhan , X . ( 1999 ) Src is required for cell migration and shape changes induced by ﬁbroblast growth factor 1 . Oncogene 18 , 6700 – 6706 95 Kinnunen , T . , Kaksonen , M . , Saarinen , J . , Kalkkinen , N . , Peng , H . B . and Rauvala , H . ( 1998 ) Cortactin - Src kinase signaling pathway is involved in N - syndecan - dependent neurite outgrowth . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 10702 – 10708 96 Kreienkamp , H . - J . ( 2002 ) Organization of G - protein - coupled receptor signalling complexes by scaffolding proteins . Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 2 , 581 – 586 97 Gonzalez - Mariscal , L . , Betanzos , A . and Avila - Flores , A . ( 2000 ) MAGUK proteins : structure and role in the tight junction . Sem . Cell Devel . Biol . 11 , 315 – 324 98 Matter , K . and Balda , M . S . ( 2003 ) Signalling to and from tight junctions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 225 – 236 99 Fanning , A . S . , Jameson , B . J . , Jesaitis , L . A . and Anderson , J . M . ( 1998 ) The tight junction protein ZO - 1 establishes a link between the transmembrane protein occludin and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 29745 – 29753 100 Itoh , M . , Furuse , M . , Morita , K . , Kubota , K . , Saitou , M . and Tsukita , S . ( 1999 ) Direct binding of three tight junction - associated MAGUKs , ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 and ZO - 3 , with the C - termini of claudins . J . Cell . Biol . 147 , 1351 – 1363 101 Yap , A . , Brieher , W . M . and Gumbiner , B . M . ( 1997 ) Molecular and functional analysis of cadherin - based adherens junctions . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 , 119 – 146 102 Vasioukhin , V . , Bauer , C . , Yin , M . and Fuchs , E . ( 2000 ) Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell – cell adhesion . Cell ( Cambridge , Mass . ) 100 , 209 – 219 103 Helwani , F . M . , Kovacs , E . M . , Paterson , A . D . , Verma , S . , Ali , R . G . , Fanning , A . S . , Weed , S . A . and Yap , A . S . ( 2004 ) Cortactin is necessary for E - cadherin - mediated contact formation and actin reorganization . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 899 – 910 104 Kovacs , E . M . , Ali , R . G . , McCormack , A . J . and Yap , A . S . ( 2002 ) E - cadherin homophilic ligation directly signals through Rac and PI3 - kinase to regulate adhesive contacts . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 6708 – 6718 105 Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . and Kelly , R . B . ( 2000 ) Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 106 McNiven , M . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . and Yoon , Y . ( 2000 ) The dynamin family of mechanoenzymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 107 Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks 25 108 Marmor , M . D . and Yarden , Y . ( 2004 ) Role of protein ubiquitylation in regulating endocytosis of receptor tyrosine kinases . Oncogene 23 , 2057 – 2070 109 Dustin , M . L . , Olszowy , M . W . , Holdorf , A . D . , Li , J . , Bromley , S . , Desai , N . , Widder , P . , Rosenberger , F . , van der Merwe , P . A . , Allen , P . M . and Shaw , A . S . ( 1998 ) A novel adapter protein orchestrates receptor patterning and cytoskeletal polarity in T - cell contacts . Cell ( Cambridge , Mass . ) 94 , 667 – 677 110 Shih , N . - Y . , Li , J . , Cotran , R . , Mundel , P . , Miner , J . H . and Shaw , A . S . ( 2001 ) CD2AP localizes to the slit diaphragm and binds to nephrin via a novel C - terminal domain . Am . J . Pathol . 159 , 2303 – 2308 111 Schwarz , K . , Simons , M . , Reiser , J . , Saleem , M . A . , Faul , C . , Kriz , W . , Shaw , A . S . , Holzman , L . B . and Mundel , P . ( 2001 ) Podocin , a raft - associated component of the glomerular slit diaphragm , interacts with CD2AP and nephrin . J . Clin . Invest . 108 , 1621 – 1629 112 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . , Warren , R . A . , Kessels , M . M . , Keen , J . H . , Heuser , J . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2001 ) The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1209 – 1223 113 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . , Zhang , C . X . , Carreno , S . , Barroso , C . , Heuser , J . E . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2004 ) RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing resukts in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 1666 – 1679 114 Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . and Rauvala , H . ( 2000 ) Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4421 – 4426 115 Taunton , J . , Rowning , B . A . , Coughlin , M . L . , Wu , M . , Moon , R . T . , Mitchison , T . J . and Larabell , C . A . ( 2000 ) Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 116 Cantarelli , V . V . , Takahashi , A . , Akeda , Y . , Nagayama , K . and Honda , T . ( 2000 ) Interaction of enteropathogenic or enterohemorrhagicEscherichiacoliwith HeLa cells results in translocation of cortactin to the bacterial adherence site . Infect . Immun . 68 , 382 – 386 117 Cantarelli , V . V . , Takahashi , A . , Yanagihara , I . , Akeda , Y . , Imura , K . , Kodama , T . , Kono , G . , Sato , Y . , Iida , T . and Honda , T . ( 2002 ) Cortactin is necessary for F - actin accumulation in pedestal structures induced by enteropathogenicEscherichiacoliinfection . Infect . Immun . 70 , 2206 – 2209 118 Chen , X . M . , Huang , B . Q . , Splinter , P . L . , Cao , H . , Zhu , G . , McNiven , M . A . and LaRusso , N . F . ( 2003 ) Cryptosporidiumparvuminvasion of biliary epithelia requires host cell tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin via c - Src . Gastroenterol . 125 , 216 – 228 119 Dumenil , G . , Olivo , J . C . , Pellegrini , S . , Fellous , M . , Sansonetti , P . J . and Tran Van Nhieu , G . ( 1998 ) Interferon α inhibits a Src - mediated pathway necessary for Shigella - induced cytoskeletal rearrangements in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1003 – 1012 120 Frischknecht , F . , Moreau , V . , Rottger , S . , Gonﬁoni , S . , Reckmann , I . , Superti - Furga , G . and Way , M . ( 1999 ) Actin - based motility of vaccinia virus mimics receptor tyrosine kinase signalling . Nature ( London ) 401 , 926 – 929 121 Fawaz , F . S . , van Ooij , C . , Homola , E . , Mutka , S . C . and Engel , J . N . ( 1997 ) Infection with Chlamydiatrachomatisalters the tyrosine phosphorylation and / or localization of several host cell proteins including cortactin . Infect . Immun . 65 , 5301 – 5308 122 Cameron , L . A . , Svitkina , T . M . , Vignjevic , D . , Theriot , J . A . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr . Biol . 11 , 130 – 135 123 Egile , C . , Loisel , T . P . , Laurent , V . , Li , R . , Pantaloni , D . , Sansonetti , P . J . and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella ﬂexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1319 – 1332 124 Frischknecht , F . , Cudmore , S . , Moreau , V . , Reckmann , I . , Rottger , S . and Way , M . ( 1999 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation is required for actin - based motility of vaccinia but notListeria orShigella . Curr . Biol . 9 , 89 – 92 125 Rodrigo , J . P . , Garcia , L . A . , Ramos , S . , Lazo , P . S . and Suarez , C . ( 2000 ) EMS1 gene ampliﬁcation correlates with poor prognosis in squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck . Clin . Cancer Res . 6 , 3177 – 3182 126 Bowden , E . T . , Barth , M . , Thomas , D . , Glazer , R . I . and Mueller , S . C . ( 1999 ) An invasion - related complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKC µ associates with invadopodia at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Oncogene 18 , 4440 – 4449 127 Li , Y . , Tondravi , M . , Liu , J . , Smith , E . , Haudenschild , C . C . , Kaczmarek , M . and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) Cortactin potentiates bone metastasis of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res . 61 , 6906 – 6911 128 Bernards , R . and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2002 ) Metastasis genes : a progression puzzle . Nature ( London ) 418 , 823 Received 5 May 2004 / 8 June 2004 ; accepted 9 June 2004 Published as BJ Immediate Publication 9 June 2004 , DOI 10 . 1042 / BJ20040737 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society