INSIGHTS I M A G E S : M . P O W N A LL E T . A L . science . org SCIENCE By Timothy J . Stasevich 1 and Hiroshi Kimura 2 H ow promoters and enhancers acti - vate genes , and how they commu - nicate to facilitate transcription , are unknown . The main transcrip - tional RNA polymerase , called RNA polymerase II ( RNA Pol II ) , was originally thought to travel along a linear stretch of DNA . However , evidence gath - ered over the years paints a more complex picture , in which enhancer and promoter DNA recruit RNA Pol II and genes to larger superstructures , sometimes referred to as transcription factories , hubs , or conden - sates ( 1 – 4 ) . The precise organization of these superstructures remains elusive , leav - ing many questions unanswered . On page 92 of this issue , Pownall et al . ( 5 ) describe a new form of expansion microscopy they call ChromExM , which they used to expand chromatin in zebrafish embryos to visual - ize transcription at high resolution . This expanded view provides evidence that pro - moters and enhancers come together dur - ing gene activation , only to be “kicked” apart soon after . ChromExM modifies PanExM ( 6 ) —a tech - nique to iteratively expand the full proteome using an entangled hydrogel mesh—to spe - cifically expand chromatin 16 - fold . For this , ChromExM uses a mesh that is optimized for catching and fluorescently labeling DNA - bound biomolecules such as histones , the major protein constituent of chromatin . Confocal imaging was used to visualize the labels , achieving a net spatial resolution of ~ 15 nm compared with the standard opti - cal resolution of ~ 200 nm ( see the figure ) . Pownall et al . also used stimulated emis - sion depletion super - resolution microscopy to further zoom in on fluorescently labeled histones in the expanded zebrafish embryos , achieving a resolution of ~ 3 nm . Chromatin forms a complex polymer , so it was unclear if chromatin architecture would be preserved after expansion . Although one previous study suggested that isotropic ex - pansion is possible ( 7 ) , other studies have demonstrated substantial artifacts after ex - pansion ( 8 ) . To test the ability of ChromExM to preserve chromatin architecture , Pownall et al . developed a method to optically etch equidistant parallel lines into chromatin . The lines remained essentially equidistant and parallel after expansion . They also con - firmed that finer chromatin ultrastructure is preserved after expansion by comparing in vitro clusters of nucleosomes , which are basic units of chromatin consisting of DNA and histones , imaged with electron micros - copy and ChromExM . During the maternal – zygotic transition stages , when zygotic transcription is ac - tivated in a subset of genes , Pownall et al . observed that highly expressed microRNA gene clusters had hundreds of active RNA Pol II molecules arranged in a line . The authors also saw similar strings of RNA Pol II at nonspecific loci scattered across the nuclei . They interpreted each string as RNA Pol II molecules arranged in single file , generating nascent RNAs from a sin - gle gene . These strings are reminiscent of the RNA Pol II convoys that are predicted from models of transcription imaging in live cells ( 9 ) . Previously , nascent RNAs have been observed arranged along string - like loops , but only in extremely long genes ( 10 ) . Occasionally the strings observed by Pownall et al . were branched , suggesting multiple intertwined genes , indicative of a transcription factory or hub . In total , there were around 800 RNA Pol II strings per nucleus . Pownall et al . also observed ~ 30 larger “macroclusters” of RNA Pol II per nu - cleus , some connected to RNA Pol II strings , similar to the large and transient RNA Pol II clusters observed in living cells ( 3 , 11 ) . Intriguingly , the macroclusters were sometimes filled with clusters of the tran - scription factor Nanog , but those clusters were physically distinct from the RNA Pol II clusters , suggesting that they bind to dif - ferent sections of DNA . Pownall et al . hy - pothesized that those DNA elements were promoters and enhancers that were in close proximity before active RNA production by elongation . To test this hypothesis , they blocked elongation using an RNA Pol II in - hibitor . This led to a significant reduction in the number of RNA Pol II strings , a closer association between Nanog and RNA Pol II , and an increase in RNA Pol II at promoters . These data indicate that there is an increase in transient enhancer – promoter contact when transcription factors cluster together but transcription is not activated ( 12 ) . This expanded view of transcription provides further support for the “kiss and run” model ( 3 ) , where promoters and en - hancers make transient contact to activate 26 7 JULY 2023 • VOL 381 ISSUE 6653 MOLECULAR BIOLOGY An expanded view of transcription A new method expands chromatin to provide detailed images of transcription sites 1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Colorado State University , Fort Collins , CO , USA . 2 Cell Biology Center , Institute of Innovative Research , Tokyo Institute of Technology , Yokohama , Japan . Email : tim . stasevich @ colostate . edu ; hkimura @ bio . titech . ac . jp PERSPECTIVES A fluorescent probe for DNA is used to visualize the nuclei from two different zebrafish embryos . The embryo on the right has undergone the ChromExM expansion process , providing a much more detailed view . 2 m m 50 m m 0707PS _ 17359448 . indd 26 6 / 29 / 23 5 : 04 PM SCIENCE science . org 7 JULY 2023 • VOL 381 ISSUE 6653 27 PLANT BIOLOGY M aintaining asymmetry in cell division Promoting asymmetric division through microtubule dynamics establishes cell fate genes . Furthermore , given that elongation inhibition led to an increase in promoter – enhancer association ( kissing ) , Pownall et al . refine the model to “kiss and kick” to emphasize the active role elongation seems to be playing in separating promoters and enhancers . If elongation truly kicks apart enhancers and promoters , then the kick provides a simple explanation for why tran - scription would occur in well - defined bursts . The existence of this kick is supported by other observations . Phosphorylation of RNA Pol II at the onset of elongation can convert the association of RNA Pol II from transcription initiation factor condensates to splicing factor condensates , which are required for the processing of transcripts to mRNA ( 4 ) . Indeed , transcription coactiva - tors on enhancers and elongating RNA Pol II are physically separated ( 13 , 14 ) . Looking ahead , it will be important to devise more direct tests of the kiss and kick model by imaging specific promoters and enhancers during ChromExM . This could be done by combining ChromExM with techniques for in situ labeling of endoge - nous DNA elements . This experiment would help establish whether the macroclusters observed by Pownall et al . correspond to a specific set of genes or if they represent a stage that all activated genes pass through . Other questions should also be addressed . For example , can the RNA Pol II strings be seen in most genes without ChromExM , and what are their dynamics in live cells ? It is also unknown how these findings relate to the three - dimensional organization of the genome , including chromatin domains and their stability , and whether these fea - tures are specific to developing embryos . In contrast to the early embryo—which has a rapid cell cycle and thus a robust transcrip - tion program that is executed in a short space of time—enhancer – promoter contact might not be so critical in somatic cells ( 15 ) . Ultimately , it is exciting to see experiments beginning to converge on a unified model for transcriptional activation . j REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . F . J . Iborra , A . Pombo , D . A . Jackson , P . R . Cook , J . Cell Sci . 109 , 1427 ( 1996 ) . 2 . M . Mir et al . , Genes Dev . 31 , 1784 ( 2017 ) . 3 . W . - K . Cho et al . , Science 361 , 412 ( 2018 ) . 4 . Y . E . Guo et al . , Nature 572 , 543 ( 2019 ) . 5 . M . E . Pownall et al . , Science 381 , 92 ( 2023 ) . 6 . O . M’Saad , J . Bewersdorf , Nat . Commun . 11 , 3850 ( 2020 ) . 7 . E . L . Faulkner et al . , J . Cell Sci . 135 , jcs259009 ( 2022 ) . 8 . I . Kubalová et al . , Chromosome Res . 28 , 355 ( 2020 ) . 9 . K . Tantale et al . , Nat . Commun . 7 , 12248 ( 2016 ) . 10 . S . Leidescher et al . , Nat . Cell Biol . 24 , 327 ( 2022 ) . 11 . L . S . Forero - Quintero et al . , Nat . Commun . 12 , 3158 ( 2021 ) . 12 . K . Kuznetsova et al . , Curr . Biol . 33 , 164 ( 2023 ) . 13 . J . Li et al . , Cell 178 , 491 ( 2019 ) . 14 . H . Ohishi et al . , Nat . Commun . 13 , 7672 ( 2022 ) . 15 . J . P . Karr et al . , Genes Dev . 36 , 7 ( 2022 ) . 10 . 1126 / science . adi8187 By C amila Goldy and Marie - Cécile Caillaud I n multicellular organisms , cell division contributes to the generation of special - ized cells . In walled organisms such as plants , the orientation of the division plane by which two daughter cells sepa - rate is of special importance because cells are embedded in a matrix and cannot relocate . To define the future cell division zone before mitosis , plants have evolved a specific structure called the preprophase band ( PPB ) , which is composed of micro - tubules . In the context of asymmetric cell division , a polar domain is established at the plasma membrane to allow the differ - entiation of one of the daughter cells while maintaining a stem cell population . How plant cells establish the polar domain re - mains enigmatic . On page 54 of this issue , Muroyama et al . ( 1 ) reveal that a polarized destabilization of microtubules demarcates a region of the plant cell as incompat - ible with microtubule PPB establishment , thereby orienting asymmetric cell division and guiding the development of stomata ( pores for gas exchange ) . During leaf development , stomata are produced in the surface cell layer by itera - tive asymmetric cell divisions . This process involves the conversion of a subset of pro - todermal cells into meristemoid mother cells that divide asymmetrically to produce two daughter cells of unequal volumes . The small daughter cell becomes a meristemoid , which ultimately produces guard cells sur - rounding the stomatal pore while the larger daughter cell [ the stomatal lineage ground cell ( SLGC ) ] further divides asymmetrically . The daughter cells of the SLGC eventually differentiate into puzzle - shaped epider - mal cells ( pavement cells ) while maintain - ing a controlled amount of meristemoids ( 2 ) . During this process , a plasma mem - brane – associated polarity crescent defined by BREAKING OF ASYMMETRY IN THE STOMATAL LINEAGE ( BASL ) and BREVIS RADIX family ( BRXf ) proteins is formed and maintained throughout asymmetric cell division ( 3 ) . The orientation of the subsequent asymmetric cell division , de - fined by the BASL - BRXf polarity crescent , is tightly controlled to enforce the “one - cell spacing rule , ” which ensures that stomata do not directly touch , thus optimizing gas exchange during photosynthesis while min - imizing water loss ( 4 ) . To address the long - standing question of how the orientation of asymmetric divisions is determined and maintained , Muroyama et al . used stomatal lineage formation in Arabidopsis thaliana as a model . They showed that the cortical division zone ( a landmark for the site of future division ) and the microtubule PPB cannot form within the BASL - BRXf polarity crescent . This result agrees with earlier reports showing that the localization of BASL - BRXf is polarized be - fore PPB formation when cortical division zone components are initially recruited to the cortex ( 5 – 7 ) . Within asymmetrically dividing cells in the leaf epidermis , the de - fault state for cell division orientation ap - pears to be the shortest wall ( requiring the least energy consumption ) . However , when the shortest path conflicts with the one - cell spacing rule , these rules need to be broken . The authors report that the polarized BASL - BRXf domain is required to override default division patterns during formative asym - metric divisions and that this is altered in basl mutants . Reciprocally , the establish - ment of the microtubule PPB is required for stomatal patterning . In a mutant that no longer forms the microtubule PPB , the division plane often bisects the BASL - BRXf polarity crescent , leading to aberrant cell fate in the resulting daughter cells . How does the BASL - BRXf polar domain influence PPB positioning ? Using time - lapse imaging in planta , Muroyama et al . demonstrate that the BASL - BRXf polar domain locally depletes cortical microtu - bules from the plasma membrane . There , the BASL - BRXf polar domain induces mi - crotubule plus - end depolymerization rather than physically preventing microtubule po - lymerization into the domain per se . Based on these results , the authors conclude that polarization - mediated destabilization of the Laboratoire Reproduction et Développement des Plantes , Université de Lyon , ENS de Lyon , UCB Lyon 1 , CNRS , INRAe , Lyon , France . Email : marie - cecile . caillaud @ ens - lyon . fr 0707PS _ 17359448 . indd 27 6 / 29 / 23 5 : 04 PM