Neuron Article Sonic Hedgehog Guides Axons through a Noncanonical , Src - Family - Kinase - Dependent Signaling Pathway Patricia T . Yam , 1 , 2 , 5 Se´bastien D . Langlois , 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 Steves Morin , 1 , 6 and Fre´de´ric Charron 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , * 1 Molecular Biology of Neural Development , Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montre´al ( IRCM ) , Montreal , QC H2W 1R7 , Canada 2 Department of Medicine , University of Montreal , Montreal , QC H3T 3J7 , Canada 3 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology 4 Division of Experimental Medicine 5 Program in Neuroengineering McGill University , Montreal , QC H3A 2T5 , Canada 6 These authors contributed equally to this work * Correspondence : frederic . charron @ ircm . qc . ca DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2009 . 03 . 022 SUMMARY Sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) plays essential roles in devel - opmental events such as cell fate speciﬁcation and axon guidance . Shh induces cell fate speciﬁcation through canonical Shh signaling , mediated by tran - scription . However , the mechanism by which Shh guides axons is unknown . To study this , we devel - oped an in vitro assay for axon guidance , in which neurons can be imaged while responding to a deﬁned gradient of a chemical cue . Axons of dissociated commissural neurons placed in a Shh gradient turned rapidly toward increasing concentrations of Shh . Consistent with this rapid response , we showed that attraction by Shh does not require transcription . Instead , Shh stimulates the activity of Src family kinase ( SFK ) members in a Smoothened - dependent manner . Moreover , SFK activity is required for Shh - mediated guidance of commissural axons , but not for induction of Gli transcriptional reporter activity . Together , these results indicate that Shh acts via a rapidly acting , noncanonical signaling pathway to guide axons . INTRODUCTION Nervous system development involves multiple steps , including the generation and speciﬁcation of neuron cell fates in the correct positions in the embryo , followed by the projection of axons from neurons to their targets , and then the formation , reﬁnement , and maturation of synaptic connections . During spinal cord development , neuron cell fates are speciﬁed by gradients of bone morphogenetic proteins ( BMPs ) and Sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) . BMPs , secreted by the roofplate , and Shh , secreted by the notochord and ﬂoorplate cells , form comple - mentary gradients along the dorso - ventral axis of the neural tube , specifying the identity of various neuron types in the spinal cord ( Dessaud et al . , 2008 ) . The cell identity speciﬁed by Shh depends on the concentration of Shh the cell is exposed to , i . e . , the position of the cell along the Shh gradient . After cell fate speciﬁcation has occurred , commissural neurons , located in the dorsal part of the developing spinal cord , send their axons ventrally toward the ﬂoorplate . Commissural axons navigate toward the ﬂoorplate as a result of multiple guidance cues . They are initially repelled by a gradient of BMP produced by the roofplate cells ( Augsburger et al . , 1999 ; Butler and Dodd , 2003 ) , and are subsequently attracted by gradients of netrin - 1 ( Kennedy et al . , 1994 ; Seraﬁni et al . , 1994 ) and Shh ( Charron et al . , 2003 ) produced by the ﬂoorplate cells . Thus , the morphogen Shh mediates both cell fate speciﬁcation and axon guidance in the developing nervous system , two distinct cellular processes ( Charron and Tessier - Lavigne , 2005 ) . Cell fate speciﬁcation by Shh results from signaling by the canonical Shh signaling pathway . In this pathway , binding of Shh to the receptor Patched ( Ptc ) relieves inhibition of the transmembrane protein Smoothened ( Smo ) , an activator of the pathway ( Dessaud et al . , 2008 ) . The transmembrane proteins Boc and Cdo are coreceptors for Shh , and synergize with Ptc in binding to Shh and help enhance pathway activation ( Tenzen et al . , 2006 ) . Smo activation then leads to downstream signaling events that ultimately activate the Gli family of transcription factors . Cell fate speciﬁcation results from Gli - dependent tran - scription , the output of canonical Shh signaling ( Dessaud et al . , 2008 ) . While it has recently been established that the coreceptor Boc is also required for Shh - mediated axon guidance ( Okada et al . , 2006 ) , the intracellular signaling events involved and whether Gli - dependent transcription is also required for Shh - mediated axon guidance are unknown . Other axon guidance cues , such as netrins and semaphorins , act by inducing local changes at the growth cone . Gradient detection by the growth cone results in polarized remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton and the growth cone turning up ( or down ) the gradient ( Dickson , 2002 ) . Neither the cell body nor transcriptional activity is required for growth cone turning toward netrin or semaphorin ( Campbell and Holt , 2001 ; Ming et al . , 2002 ) . In the case of Shh , it could guide axons via the canonical Shh signaling pathway or through an alternative pathway acting locally at the growth cone . How the canonical Shh signaling Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 349 Figure 1 . Development of an In Vitro Assay for Axon Guidance using the Dunn Chamber ( A and B ) Topview ( A ) and side view ( B ) of aDunn chamber . Cells are cultured on acoverslip , which is theninverted over the chamber . Theouter wellis ﬁlled with mediacontainingthechemoattractant , whiletheinnerwellisﬁlledwithcontrolmedia . Agradientformsovertheannularbridgebydiffusionofthechemoattractant from the outer to the inner well . ( C ) Formation and stability of the gradient . 0 . 83 mg / ml tetramethylrhodamine - labeled 40 kDa dextran was placed in the outer well and the gradient across the bridge was monitored by time - lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy . The concentration of the dextran is proportional to its ﬂuorescence signal . The gradient rapidly becomes linear ( upper ) and remains stable for at least 9 hr ( lower ) . ( D ) Growing DRG neurons do not change their trajectories in a control gradient of buffer containing BSA . In a NGF gradient ( 25 ng / ml NGF in the outer well ) , they turn toward increasing concentrations of NGF . All images have been rotated so that the gradient increases along the y axis . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway 350 Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . pathway , which signals retrograde to the nucleus , might direct polarized cytoskeletal assembly at the growth cone in a spatially deﬁned manner , is unclear . Here we show that Shh guides commissural axons in a transcriptionally independent manner . Furthermore , we ﬁnd that Shh rapidly activates Src family kinases ( SFKs ) in the growth cone and that SFK activity is required for Shh - mediated axon guidance . Together , these results indicate that Shh guides axons through a rapidly acting , SFK - dependentsignalingpathwayandthusidentifyanoncanon - ical pathway for Shh activity . RESULTS Development of an In Vitro Axon Guidance Assay for Mammalian Neurons To investigate the molecular mechanism of Shh in axon guid - ance , we developed an axon guidance assay that functioned over short time scales ( 1 – 2 hr ) in commissural neurons and could acutely inhibit transcription or other signaling pathways without affecting cell fate . Existing collagen gel explant assays ( e . g . , Ebendal and Jacobson , 1977 ; Seraﬁni et al . , 1994 ) were not suit - able since they require 1 – 2 days to perform , and many of them typically measure preferential growth , rather than direct turning , toward a guidance cue . The pipette turning assay ( Gundersen and Barrett , 1979 ; Lohof et al . , 1992 ) does measure turning in response to a local gradient of chemoattractant in (cid:2) 1 hr . However , this assay has been optimized for Xenopus neurons , whereas many neurons isolated from mammals grow episodi - cally , with long periods of no net growth . Thus the pipette turning assay , where only one axon can be interrogated at a time , is inefﬁcient for mammalian neurons since each axon has a high probability of remaining stationary and therefore unable to respond to the cue . In addition , it is difﬁcult to attain high repro - ducibility in the gradient formed from the pipette ( Pujic et al . , 2008 ) . Hence , we chose to develop an in vitro assay for axon guidance using the Dunn chamber , where many neurons can be imaged simultaneously as they respond to a deﬁned gradient of a guidance cue . The Dunn chamber ( Zicha et al . , 1991 ) is a device that gener - ates a stable gradient lasting many hours and has been used to study chemotaxis ( e . g . , Wells and Ridley , 2005 ) and long - term axon growth from chick neurons ( Maden et al . , 1998 ) . In the Dunn chamber , there are two concentric annular wells ( Figure 1A ) ; the outer well is usually ﬁlled with media containing the chemoattractant , and the inner well is ﬁlled with control media . Agradientisformedthroughdiffusionofthechemoattrac - tant from the outer to the inner well , over a bridge region of substantially smaller volume than the inner and outer wells ( Figure 1B ) ( Zicha et al . , 1991 ) . Dissociated neurons are cultured on a coverslip such that axons have already outgrown , and the coverslip is then inverted over the Dunn chamber . Axons posi - tioned over the bridge region , where the gradient is formed , can be directly imaged responding to the gradient ; multiple axons around the bridge can be imaged at the same time . Since we wanted to image neurons at multiple positions on a heated , moving stage , we ﬁrst veriﬁed gradient formation and stability in our system . Using a tetramethylrhodamine - labeled 40 kDa dextran , we showed that the gradient always monotonically increased across the bridge , from the inner to the outer well ; rapidly became linear ( (cid:2) 20 – 30 min ) ; and remained stable for at least 9 hr ( Figure 1C ) , consistent with previous reports ( Zicha et al . , 1991 ) . To test whether the Dunn chamber generated gradients of guidance cues that axons could respond to , we placed neurons isolated from rat dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) into the Dunn chamber . Because we cannot measure turning of axons that are not growing , we only analyzed axons with net extension during the 1 . 5 hr observation period . In a control gradient of buffer containing bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) ( the vehicle for nerve growth factor [ NGF ] ) , the direction of axonal growth remained unchanged ( Figure 1D upper , Movie S1 [ available online ] ) . In contrast , when the neurons were placed in a gradient of 25 ng / ml NGF , a concentration that induces biased axon outgrowth from collagen gel explants ( Rosoff et al . , 2004 ) , the axons turned up the gradient ( Figure 1D , Movie S2 ) . Even axons that were initially oriented almost against the NGF gradient direc - tion were able to turn toward the gradient ( Figure 1D lower , Movie S3 ) . To measure the extent of turning , we tracked the initial position ( t = 0 hr ) of the distal 10 m m of the axon , followed by the position of the growth cone every 4 min over 1 . 5 – 2 hr to obtain the trajec - tory of the axon . All trajectories were translated and rotated such that the direction of the gradient always increased in the y direc - tion and all initial axon segments began at ( 0 , 0 ) . Visual examina - tion of the trajectories showed that in the control gradient , the direction of axon growth did not deviate substantially from the initial direction , whereas in the NGF gradient , many trajectories showed a bias toward growing up the gradient ( Figure 1E ) . To further quantify this , we measured the initial angle , deﬁned as the angle between the initial orientation of the axon and the gradient , and the angle turned , deﬁned as the angle between the initial and ﬁnal trajectories of the axon ( positive for turns up the gradient ; negative for turns down the gradient ) ( Figure 1F ) . Scatter plots of these angles showed that for the control gradient , no net turning occurred ; the angle turned varied around 0 (cid:3) ( Figure 1G ) . In the NGF gradient , there was a signiﬁcant bias toward positive angles turned , i . e . , chemoattraction , for axons not already oriented toward the gradient , i . e . , initial angle > 20 (cid:3) ( 17 . 9 (cid:3) ± 5 . 6 (cid:3) , p = 0 . 0041 for angles turned compared to the control , initial angle > 20 (cid:3) ) ( Figure 1G and H ) . These results provided us with proof of principle that the Dunn chamber can be used to observe and measure axon turning . ( E ) Trajectoryplotsofasampleof19axonsinacontrol ( left ) or25ng / mlNGF ( right ) gradient . Alltrajectorieshavebeenrotatedsothatthegradientincreasesalong the y axis . The initial axon position is shown in black and the axon growth over 1 . 5 hr is colored according to the angle turned . ( F ) Deﬁnitionoftheinitialangle , a , theanglebetweentheinitialaxonpositionandthegradient ; andangleturned , b , theanglebetweenthevectorsrepresentingthe initial and ﬁnal position of the axon . b > 0 (cid:3) for turns up the gradient . ( G ) Scatter plot of the angle turned versus the initial angle for DRG axons in a control and 25 ng / ml NGF gradient . ( H ) The mean angle turned ( ±SEM ) for axons in a control and 25 ng / ml NGF gradient , for initial angles > 20 (cid:3) . p = 0 . 0041 ; unpaired t test . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 351 B A C D H G F E I J Figure 2 . Commissural Axons Turn up a Shh Gradient in the Dunn Chamber Assay ( A ) Formation and stability ofaShhgradient . Alexa Fluor 488 - labeledShhwasplaced inthe outerwell andthe gradient across the bridgewasmonitoredbytime - lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy . The gradient rapidly becomes linear ( left ) and remains stable over 9 hr ( right ) . ( B ) The axons of commissural neurons do not change direction in a control gradient of buffer containing BSA . In a Shh gradient ( 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh in the outer well ) , axons turn toward increasing concentrations of Shh . All images have been rotated so that the gradient increases along the y axis . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway 352 Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . Shh Induces Robust Turning of Commissural Axons In Vitro We then applied the Dunn chamber axon guidance assay to dissociated rat commissural neurons in a gradient of Shh . To evaluateShhgradientformationintheDunnchamber , welabeled Shh with a ﬂuorophore ( Alexa Fluor 488 ) and placed it in the outer well . The Shh gradient rapidly became linear ( (cid:2) 15 – 20 min ) and remained stable over the duration of our experiments ( Figure 2A ) . Commissural neurons exposed to a control gradient of buffer containing BSA ( the vehicle for Shh ) in the Dunn chamber continued to grow with no change from their initial direction ( Figure 2B upper , Movie S4 , Figure 2C upper ) . When placed in a Shh gradient , commissural axons turned up the gradient ( Fig - ure 2B , Movies S5 and S6 ) and the axon trajectories exhibited a bias up the Shh gradient ( Figure 2C lower ) . We measured the response of commissural axons to Shh gradients from 25 ng / ml to 1 . 6 m g / ml in the outer well . With the control gradient , there was no net turning , with the angle turned varying around 0 (cid:3) ( (cid:4) 0 . 04 (cid:3) ± 3 . 4 (cid:3) ) . Signiﬁcant turning up the Shh gradient occurred with0 . 1 m g / ml ( 17 . 6 (cid:3) ±2 . 9 (cid:3) ) and0 . 4 m g / ml ( 16 . 5 (cid:3) ±6 . 2 (cid:3) ) Shhinthe outer well ( p = 0 . 0001 and p = 0 . 0125 , respectively ) ( Figures 2D and 2E ) , with a weak , but not statistically signiﬁcant bias toward attraction at 25 ng / ml and 1 . 6 m g / ml Shh ( Figures 2D and 2E ) . Turning up a Shh gradient was observed over a wide range of initialangles , andinmostcases , turningwasmorerobustatlarger initial angles , i . e . , when the initial orientation of the axon had a larger deviation from the applied gradient . Given the robust response of the axons to a gradient of 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh , we chose to use this concentration for further studies . At0 . 1 m g / mlShh , axonturningwasrobustovertime , withsignif - icant turning observed after 1 . 5 , 2 , and 2 . 5 hr ( Figure S1 available online ) . Furthermore , the turning of commissural axons toward Shh was notassociated with changesin cell fate , as we observed no change in the expression of DCC and LH2 , two commissural neuron markers , upon Shh treatment ( Figure S2 ) . This is consis - tent with previous experiments demonstrating that the guidance activity of Shh does not depend on spinal cord repatterning or induction of cell fate changes ( Charron et al . , 2003 ) . We chose to perform our experiments for a 2 hr period , over which the axons had grown on average (cid:2) 20 m m . To investigate whether the variation in Shh concentration across the bridge ( from the inner to the outer well ) inﬂuenced the degree of turning , we examined whether the position along the bridge correlated with the angle turned . We found that the angle turned was inde - pendent of the position along the bridge ( Figure 2F ) . Moreover , there was no difference between the net axon extension over 2 hr in the 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient compared to the control gradient ( Figure 2G ) and the amount of axon growth was independent of the orientation of the direction of growth relative to the Shh gradient ( Figure 2H ) . Hence a Shh gradient did not stimulate commissural axon growth in vitro , consistent with previous studies demonstrating that Shh is not a growth - promoting factor for commissural axons ( Charron et al . , 2003 ) . However , the rate of axon growth could still inﬂuence the degree of turning , so we analyzed the angle turned versus the net extension . There was no correlation between the angle turned and the net extension ( Figure 2I ) . Furthermore , when the population was divided into two groups ( faster 50 % and slower 50 % ) around the median extension , both populations had signiﬁcant turning up the Shh gradient compared to the control ( p = 0 . 0022 and p = 0 . 0008 for the faster and slower populations , respectively ) , and they were not signiﬁcantly different from each other ( p = 0 . 9510 ) ( Figure 2J ) . Together , these results demonstrate that commis - sural axons in the Dunn chamber assay can respond to Shh over various positions along the gradient , at various incident and growth angles , and independently of growth rates . We used this robust in vitro assay to assess further the molec - ular mechanism of axon guidance by Shh . Inhibition of Smo by addition of SANT - 1 , a Smo inhibitor , to the neurons prior to appli - cation of the Shh gradient abolished axon turning up the Shh gradient ( Figure 3C ) . Quantiﬁcation of the angles turned showed that neurons in the presence of SANT - 1 , exposed to a Shh gradient , were not signiﬁcantly different from the control ( p = 0 . 6652 ) ( Figures 3D and 3E ) and showed no net turning . This is consistent with previous evidence that Smo is required for Shh - mediated axon guidance ( Charron et al . , 2003 ) and provides further support that our in vitro assay for Shh - mediated axon guidance recapitulates what has been demonstrated using other assays . Shh - Mediated Guidance of Commissural Axons Is Rapid and Independent of Transcriptional Activity Using our short - term in vitro assay for Shh - mediated axon guid - ance , we measured the time it took for commissural axons to begin turning up the Shh gradient . Since commissural axons , like most mammalian neurons , grow episodically , we measured the time for an axon to begin to re - orient toward the gradient after the start of axon growth , for those axons which turned > 30 (cid:3) . The median time to begin turning was surprisingly short , only 8 min , and for some axons , there was no delay between the start of axon turning and the start of axon growth ( Figure 3A ) . This rapid induction of growth cone turning suggested that Shh - mediated ( C ) Trajectory plots of a sample of 19 axons in a control ( upper ) or 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh ( lower ) gradient . All trajectories have been rotated so that the gradient increases along the y axis . The initial axon position is shown in black and the axon growth over 2 hr is colored according to the angle turned . ( DandE ) Scatterplotsoftheangleturnedversusinitialangle ( D ) andthemeanangleturned ( ±SEM ) forinitialangles > 20 (cid:3) ( E ) , forcommissuralaxonsingradientsof 0 – 1 . 6 m g / ml Shh in the outer well . Optimal attraction up the Shh gradient occurs at 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh . p values are for angles turned compared to the control , initial angle > 20 (cid:3) ; unpaired t test . * p < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 0001 . ( F ) The angle turned in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient does not depend on the position of the neuron across the bridge . ( G ) Axons in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient have the same net extension as axons in a control gradient ( p = 0 . 9968 ; unpaired t test ) . ( H ) The net extension of axons in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient does not depend on the angle , relative to the Shh gradient , at which it is growing . ( I ) The angle turned in a gradient of 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh is independent of the net extension of the axon . ( J ) The mean angle turned ( ±SEM ) for initial angles > 20 (cid:3) in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient , for the faster 50 % and slower 50 % of the population , are not signiﬁcantly different ( p = 0 . 951 ; unpaired t test ) . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 353 A B D C E F G H I Figure 3 . Shh - Mediated Axon Guidance Does Not Require Transcriptional Activity ( A ) Shh induces rapid growth cone turning . Time for a growth cone to commence turning ( after start of axon growth ) in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient , for those axons which turned > 30 (cid:3) , is shown ; horizontal line is the median , 8 min . ( B ) Mean ( ±SD ) transcriptional activity in commissural neurons measured by 3 H - uridine incorporation into RNA . Both DRB and actinomycin D ( Act D ) inhibit tran - scriptional activity in a dose - dependent manner . ( C ) Commissural neurons in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient , in the presence of bath - applied SANT - 1 ( 50 ng / ml ) , DRB ( 100 m M ) , or actinomycin D ( 0 . 5 m g / ml ) . Inhibition of Smo activity by SANT - 1 inhibits Shh - mediated turning . In contrast , axons in the presence of DRB and actinomycin D can still turn up a Shh gradient . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway 354 Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . axon guidance may indeed be independent of transcription . To test this hypothesis , we inhibited transcriptional activity in commissural neurons using 5 , 6 - dichlorobenzimidazole riboside ( DRB ) and actinomycin D , which inhibit transcription via two different mechanisms . At the highest concentration of each drug that we could use without toxic effects , we inhibited tran - scription in primary neuron cultures by 93 . 6 % for DRB ( 0 . 1 m M ) and 97 . 6 % for actinomycin D ( 0 . 5 m g / ml ) ( Figure 3B ) , and at this concentration of actinomycin D , we observed no changes in the neuron cell fate ( Figure S2 ) . Addition of these transcriptional inhibitors to the neurons 40 min prior to the application of the Shh gradient did not inhibit the ability of the axons to turn up a Shh gradient ( Figure 3C ) . Quantitation of the response to Shh in the presence of of DRB and actinomycin D ( Figures 3D and 3E ) revealed signiﬁcant turning for both DRB ( p = 0 . 024 compared to control ) and actino - mycin D ( p = 0 . 0013 compared to control ) . Furthermore , the turning observed in the presence of the transcriptional inhibitors was indistinguishable from that of Shh alone ( p = 0 . 9629 and p = 0 . 2757 for DRB and actinomycin D , respectively , compared to Shh alone ) . Therefore , Shh - mediated axon guidance was maintained in the presence of transcriptional inhibition . That Shh - mediated axon guidance does not require gene transcrip - tion is consistent with the short response time of axon turning to Shh ( Figure 3A ) , and also implies that transcriptional activity through the Gli - family of transcription factors is not required for this process . We then speciﬁcally tested the role of Gli proteins in Shh - medi - ated axon guidance by expression of Gli3R , a Gli construct that acts as a dominant repressor of Gli proteins and inhibits Gli - mediated transcription ( Persson et al . , 2002 ) . Gli3R expression does not affect dorsal - most markers ( including markers for commissural neurons ) in the developing spinal cord ( Meyer and Roelink , 2003 ) . We expressed Gli3R in the dorsal region of spinal cord explants and used the spinal cord explant turning assay ( Figure 3F ; Okada et al . , 2006 ) to assess the ability of commissural neurons expressing Gli3R to turn toward a source of Shh secreted by COS cells . In control GFP - expressing explants cultured with control COS cells , commissural axons projected along the dorso - ventral axis toward the ﬂoorplate ( Figures 3G and 3H left ) . In the presence of a source of Shh secreted by COS cells , commissural axon trajectories deviated toward the Shh COS cells ( Figure 3H middle ) . When Gli3R was coelectroporated with GFP , commissural axons still turned toward Shh ( Figure 3H right ) . Quantiﬁcation of the angle turned by commissural axons in the explants ( Figure 3F ) showed that commissural axons expressing either GFP or GFP + Gli3R both signiﬁcantly turned toward the source of Shh ( p < 0 . 001 and p < 0 . 001 , respectively ) , with no difference between the degree of turning of commissural neurons expressing GFP or GFP + Gli3R ( Figure 3I ) . This demonstrates that inhibition of the tran - scriptional activity of Gli family members by Gli3R has no effect on the ability of commissural neurons to respond to Shh and that Gli - mediated transcription is not required for chemoattrac - tion by Shh . Therefore , Shh must mediate its axon guidance effects through an alternative , noncanonical signaling pathway . Shh Activates Src Family Kinases SFKs can mediate signaling between receptor activation and downstream cytoskeletal regulators involved in growth cone turning ( Liu et al . , 2007 ; Robles et al . , 2005 ; Suter and Forscher , 2001 ) and have been implicated in the guidance of axons by eph - rins / Ephs ( Knoll and Drescher , 2004 ; Palmer et al . , 2002 ) and netrin - 1 ( Li et al . , 2004 ; Liu et al . , 2004 ; Meriane et al . , 2004 ) . We hypothesized that SFKs might also play a role in commissural axon guidance by Shh . We ﬁrst tested whether precrossing commissural axons express active SFK members , which are characterized by phosphorylation at Y418 . Immunostaining of spinal cord cross - sections with an antibody against phospho - SFK ( Y418 ) revealed that phospho - SFK colocalized with Tag - 1 , a marker for precrossing commissural axons ( Figure 4A ) . This indicates that Tag - 1 + precrossing commissural axons express active SFKs . Dissociated commissural neurons also expressed phospho - SFKs , as assessed by immunostaining ( Figure 4B ) . Notably , phospho - SFK was present in the growth cone , and the level of phospho - SFK staining in growth cone ﬁlopodia increased after treatment of the neurons with 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh ( Figure 4B ) , the same Shh concentration that induces commissural axon turning . Quantiﬁcation of the phospho - SFK levels in growth cone ﬁlopo - dia of commissural neurons treated with uniform levels of Shh showed that both 0 . 1 and 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh signiﬁcantly induced endogenous phospho - SFK levels ( p < 0 . 01 and p < 0 . 01 , respec - tively ) ( Figure 4C ) . To test whether the increase in phospho - SFK levels correlated with an increase in kinase activity , we measured the kinase activity of Src and Fyn , two SFK members that are highly expressed in commissural neurons . There was a signiﬁ - cant ( p < 0 . 01 ) increase in the kinase activity of both Src and Fyn when commissural neurons were stimulated with 0 . 1 and 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh ( Figure 4D ) . This induction was rapid ( 10 min ) , ( DandE ) Scatterplotsoftheangleturnedversusinitialangle ( D ) andmeanangleturned ( ±SEM ) forinitialangles > 20 (cid:3) ( E ) ; pvaluesareforanglesturnedcompared to the control , initial angle > 20 (cid:3) ; * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ; unpaired t test . Axon turning up a Shh gradient is not perturbed by DRB or actinomycin D and was indis - tinguishable from turning in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient alone . ( F ) Measurement of angle turned in the spinal cord explant turning assay . Expression vectors are coelectroporated with a GFP expression vector into the dorsal region of spinal cord explants , which are then cocultured with control COS cells or COS cells expressing Shh for 40 hr . The angle turned is measured by the deviation of the axon trajectory from the dorso - ventral axis of the explant toward the COS cells . ( G ) Overview of a spinal cord explant electroporated with GFP and cocultured with control COS cells . The axons are not attracted by the COS cells and maintain a dorso - ventral trajectory . ( H ) Inhibition of Gli transcriptional activity by Gli3R does not inhibit commissural axon turning toward Shh . Commissural axons expressing GFP turn toward Shh - expressing COS cells ( middle ) , and axons expressing GFP + Gli3R turn equally well toward Shh - expressing COS cells ( right ) . ( I ) Quantiﬁcation of the angle turned ( ±SEM ) of the commissural axons in explants . NeuronsexpressingGFP or Gli3R + GFP bothturn toward Shh ( p < 0 . 001 ) and arenotsigniﬁcantlydifferentfromeachother ( p > 0 . 05 ) ; one - wayANOVAwithTukey’sposttest , * * * p < 0 . 001 . Sixexplantswerequantiﬁedpercondition ; minimum 10 axons measured per explant . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 355 Figure 4 . Shh Activates Src Family Kinases ( A ) Phosphorylated SFK ( Y418 ) is present in Tag - 1 + precrossing commissural axons . Mouse E11 . 5 spinal cord cross - sections were immunostained with anti - phospho - SFK ( Y418 ) ( left ) and anti - Tag - 1 ( middle ) . ( B and C ) Dissociated commissural neurons were vehicle stimulated or stimulated with 0 . 1 or 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh for 30 min , and then ﬁxed and immunostained with anti - phospho - SFK ( Y418 ) . ( B ) Shh stimulation leads to an increase in phospho - SFK in ﬁlopodia ( arrows ) . ( C ) Mean relative levels ( ±SEM ) of phospho - SFK ﬂuo - rescenceincontroland Shh - stimulated ﬁlopodia . Theaveragephospho - SFK ﬂuorescence signalwasmeasuredforeachﬁlopodiumand normalizedtothemean ﬁlopodial ﬂuorescence signal in vehicle - stimulated commissural neurons . 2027 ﬁlopodia were measured in three independent experiments , with a minimum of 60 ﬁlopodia per condition in each experiment . 0 . 1 and 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh signiﬁcantly stimulate phospho - SFK levels in commissural growth cone ﬁlopodia ( one - way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post test , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway 356 Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . consistent with the rapid turning of commissural axons up Shh gradients . Thus , the increase in SFK phosphorylation observed locally in the growth cone in response to Shh correlated with an increase in the kinase activity of Src and Fyn . The Shh - mediated increase in Src and Fyn activity was abol - ished by SANT - 1 , indicating that Smo activity is required for Shh induction of Src and Fyn kinase activity ( Figure 4E ) . To test whether Boc , a Shh coreceptor required for commissural axon guidance ( Okada et al . , 2006 ) , is necessary for induction of SFK activity , we used COS cells , in which Boc expression is below the detection threshold by western blot . In these cells , Shh treat - mentalone doesnotactivateSFKs , asassessedby westernblot - ting for phospho - SFK . However , when Boc is expressed , robust activation of SFKs occurs in response to Shh ( Figure 4F ) . This suggests that Boc expression can potentiate Shh - mediated SFK activation . Together , our results show that Shh activates SFKs and that this depends on the activity of Smo and Boc . Further - more , inhibition of transcriptional activity by actinomycin D had noeffect ontheinduction ofSrcor Fynactivity byShh ( Figure 4E ) . Therefore , SFK activation by Shh is independent of transcription , consistent with SFKs acting downstream of Shh in a transcrip - tion - independent signaling pathway . To test whether activation of SFKs by Shh might play an instructive role for Shh - mediated axon guidance , we examined whether a Shh gradient induces a polarized distribution of acti - vated SFKs in the growth cone . Dissociated commissural neurons were exposed to a Shh gradient in a Dunn chamber for 35 min , and then immunostained for phospho - SFK . The phos - pho - SFK distribution in the growth cone was classiﬁed relative to the direction of the gradient : uniform , uniform phospho - SFK across the growth cone ; proximal , increased phospho - SFK staining on the growth cone side facing higher Shh levels ; distal , increased phospho - SFK staining on the growth cone side facing lower Shh levels ( Figure 4G ) . Growth cones in a control gradient were evenly distributed across all categories—proximal , distal , and uniform phospho - SFK distributions ( Figure 4H ) . This is consistent with growth cones in control gradients showing some variation in angle turned , but no net turning . In contrast , in a Shh gradient , there was a clear bias ( over 50 % of growth cones ) foraproximaldistributionofphospho - SFK , i . e . , increased phospho - SFK on the side of the growth cone exposed to higher Shh levels ( Figures 4G and 4H ) . This suggests that an external Shh gradient induces an asymmetrical distribution of phospho - SFK in the growth cone , with increased phospho - SFK activation on the side of the growth cone exposed to higher Shh levels , consistent with SFKs acting downstream of Shh to direct growth cone turning . We then tested whether asymmetrical SFK activity can in fact direct commissural axon turning . Dissociated commissural neurons exposed to a PP2 gradient ( an SFK inhibitor ) in the Dunn chamber turned down the gradient , away from high PP2 concentrations toward low PP2 concentrations , whereas a control gradient of PP3 , a chemically related analog of PP2 that does not inhibit SFK activity , had no effect ( Figures 4I – 4K ) . This suggests that modulation of SFK activity can direct growth cone turning of commissural neurons , with the side of the growth cone with relatively higher SFK levels dictating the direction in which the growth cone will turn . Src Family Kinase Activity Is Required for Shh - Mediated Axon Guidance To determine whether SFK activity is required for Shh - mediated axon guidance , we inhibited SFK activity in neurons with PP2 and exposed them to a Shh gradient in our Dunn chamber assay . Neurons in a bath of PP2 did not turn in response to Shh , main - tainingastraighttrajectory , andtheanglesturnedwerenotsignif - icantly different from those of the control ( p = 0 . 541 ) ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . PP3 , an inactive analog of PP2 , had no effect on Shh - mediated guidance , with axons still able to turn toward Shh ( p = 0 . 8742 compared with Shh gradient alone ) ( Figures 5A and 5C ) . To further conﬁrm the requirement for SFKs in Shh - mediated axon guidance , we inhibited the activity of all SFK members by expression of C - terminal Src Kinase ( Csk ) , a negative regu - lator of SFKs . Csk inhibits the catalytic activity of SFKs by phos - phorylation of Y527 , which is conserved in all SFK family members . SFKs are the only known targets of Csk , and this degree of speciﬁcity is retained even when Csk is highly overex - pressed ( Superti - Furga et al . , 1993 ) . Expression of a Csk - GFP fusion protein in dissociated commissural neurons blocked the ability of commissural axons to turn up a Shh gradient , whereas control neurons expressing GFP alone could turn up a Shh gradient ( Figure 5D ) . Quantiﬁca - tion of the angles turned conﬁrmed that Csk expression abol - ished the ability of commissural axons to turn up a Shh gradient ( D ) Commissural neurons were stimulatedwith 0 . 1 or 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh for 10 or 30 min and protein extractswere immunoprecipitated with antibodiesto Src or Fyn . The kinase activity of the immunoprecipitates was measured . Src and Fyn kinase activity are signiﬁcantly stimulated by 0 . 1 and 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh ( one - way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post test , * * p < 0 . 01 ) . ( E ) Induction of Src and Fyn activity by Shh requires Smo activity , but not transcriptional activity . Commissural neurons were stimulated with 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh for 30 min in the presence or absence of SANT - 1 or actinomycin D , and Src and Fyn kinase activity was measured ( ±SEM ) . Shh stimulation of Src and Fyn kinase activity was inhibited by SANT - 1 , but not actinomycin D ( one - way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post test , * * p < 0 . 01 compared to unstimulated control ) . ( F ) COS cells transfected with GFP or Boc - GFP expression vectors and stimulated with 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh for 30 min . Cells were lysed and phospho - SFK ( Y418 ) was detected by western blot ( upper ) . Boc expression stimulates phospho - SFK induction by Shh . Phospho - SFK levels were normalized to actin and quantiﬁed from ﬁve experiments ( mean ± SEM , lower ) . p = 0 . 0017 ; repeated - measures ANOVA with Dunnett’s post test , * * p < 0 . 01 compared to unstimulated control . ( G ) Dissociated commissural neurons were exposed to a 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh gradient for 35 min in the Dunn chamber , and then ﬁxed and immunostained with anti - phospho - SFK ( Y418 ) . Phospho - SFK distribution was classiﬁed according to the distribution in the growth cone relative to the Shh gradient . ( H ) A 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh gradient induces a bias in the phospho - SFK distribution , with a greater proportion of growth cones having higher phospho - SFK on the proximal side . p = 0 . 0017 , chi - square test . ( I ) Dissociated commissural neurons in a PP2 ( 0 . 8 m M ) or PP3 ( 0 . 8 m M ) gradient in the Dunn chamber . Axons turn away from high concentrations of the SFK inhibitor PP2 , whereas PP3 , an inactive analog of PP2 , had no effect . ( J and K ) Scatter plots of the angle turned versus initial angle ( J ) and mean angle turned ( ±SEM ) for initial angles 0 (cid:3) – 160 (cid:3) ( K ) show that commissural axons turn toward low concentrations of PP2 ( p = 0 . 0019 , initial angle 0 (cid:3) – 160 (cid:3) ; unpaired t test ) . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 357 20 µ m Shh Shh 0 h PP2 PP3 0 h 1 . 5 h A ng l e t u r n e d ( ° ) Initial angle 0 . 1 µ g / ml Shh gradient + PP2 1 h a tt r ac t i on r e pu l s i on n = 107 p = 0 . 541 B A I 30 60 90 120 150 180 - 120 - 90 - 60 - 30 0 30 60 90 120 C SANT - 1 ( ng / ml ) - - - - Shh PP2 ( µ M ) - - 0 . 8 0 . 2 - + + + PP3 ( µ M ) - - - - - - + - - + 0 . 2 0 . 8 150 - + - R e l a t i ve G li - r e p o r t e r ac t i v i t y 0 1 2 3 1 h 1 . 5 h M ea n a ng l e t u r n e d ( ° ) + 0 . 1 µ g / ml Shh - PP2 PP3 Control * * ns 0 5 10 15 20 S hh C O S GFP Csk + GFP Csk - GFP G 0 15 30 45 M ea n a ng l e t u r n e d ( ° ) Shh COS GFP Csk - GFP Csk + GFP * * S hh C O S S hh C O S 50 µ m 30 60 90 120 150 180 - 120 - 90 - 60 - 30 0 30 60 90 120 30 60 90 120 150 180 - 120 - 90 - 60 - 30 0 30 60 90 120 20 µ m D Shh Shh A ng l e t u r n e d ( ° ) a tt r ac t i on r e pu l s i on Initial angle Initial angle E n = 36 n = 44 p = 0 . 0207 * F p = 0 . 0207 * - 10 - 5 0 5 10 15 20 M ea n a ng l e t u r n e d ( ° ) + 0 . 1 µ g / ml Shh GFP Csk - GFP 0 h 1 . 5 h 1 h 0 h 1 . 5 h 1 h 0 . 1 µ g / ml Shh gradient GFP 0 . 1 µ g / ml Shh gradient Csk - GFP H GFP Csk - GFP Figure 5 . Src Family Kinases Are Required for Shh - Mediated Axon Guidance ( A ) Axons of dissociated commissural neurons in a 0 . 1 m g / ml Shh gradient in a Dunn chamber , in the presence of bath - applied PP2 ( 0 . 2 m M ) or PP3 ( 0 . 2 m M ) . Inhibition of SFK activity by PP2 inhibits Shh - mediated turning . PP3 did not inhibit the ability of axons to turn up a Shh gradient . ( B and C ) Scatter plots of the angle turned versus initial angle ( B ) and mean angle turned ( ± SEM ) for initial angles > 20 (cid:3) ( C ) show that PP2 inhibits commissural axon turning toward Shh ( p = 0 . 514 , for angles turnedcompared tothecontrol , initialangle > 20 (cid:3) ; unpaired ttest ) . Axonturning up aShh gradient is notperturbed by PP3 ( p = 0 . 8742 compared to Shh alone , initial angle > 20 (cid:3) ; unpaired t test ) . * p < 0 . 05 . ( D ) Commissural neurons were electroporated with expression vectors for GFP ( upper ) or Csk - GFP ( lower ) . Neurons expressing GFP turn up a Shh gradient , whereas neurons expressing Csk - GFP , an inhibitor of SFKs , do not turn up the gradient . ( EandF ) Scatterplotsoftheangleturnedversusinitialangle ( E ) andmeanangleturned ( ±SEM ) forinitialangles > 20 (cid:3) ( F ) showthatCsk - GFPinhibits commissural axon turning toward Shh ( p = 0 . 0207 , for angles turned compared to the GFP control , initial angle > 20 (cid:3) ; unpaired t test ) . ( G ) SpinalcordexplantselectroporatedwithvectorsexpressingGFP ( left ) , Csk + GFP ( middle ) , andCsk - GFP ( fusionprotein ) ( right ) andcoculturedwithCOScells expressingShhfor40hr . CommissuralaxonsexpressingGFPturntowardShh , butcommissuralaxonsexpressingCsk + GFPorCsk - GFPdonotturntowardShh . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway 358 Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . ( p = 0 . 0207 compared with the GFP control ) ( Figures 5E and 5F ) , with neurons expressing Csk - GFP showing no net turning . In the spinal cord explant turning assay , Csk expression either in combination with a GFP expression plasmid ( Csk + GFP ) or as a fusion protein ( Csk - GFP ) also signiﬁcantly ( p < 0 . 05 and p < 0 . 05 , compared toGFPalone ) inhibitedtheabilityofcommissural axons to turn toward Shh secreted by COS cells ( Figures 5G and 5H ) . Together these results indicate that inhibition of SFK activity by addition of PP2 or expression of Csk abolishes the ability of commissural axons to turn up a Shh gradient in our in vitro Dunn chamber chemoattraction assay and in the spinal cord explant assay , and strongly argue that SFK activity is required for Shh - mediated axon guidance . This identiﬁes SFKs as down - stream mediators of Shh signaling in axon guidance . To determine whether SFKs are required for canonical Shh - dependent transcriptional activity , we tested the effect of SFK inhibition on the activity of a Gli transcriptional reporter . SFK inhi - bition by PP2 did not affect Shh induction of Gli - luciferase reporter activity ( Figure 5I ) , even at concentrations higher than that used for inhibition of Shh - mediated axon turning . As a control , Smo inhibition with SANT - 1 did prevent induction of Gli - luciferase reporter activity , consistent with the requirement for Smo in canonical Shh signaling . This suggests that SFKs do not play a role in canonical Shh signaling , consistent with the lack of canonical - Shh - signaling - related phenotypes in SFK mutant mice ( Kuo et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , SFKs appear to act downstream of Shh in axon guidance , but not in canonical Shh signaling to the Gli family of transcription factors . DISCUSSION This study establishes the existence of a transcription - indepen - dent Shh signaling pathway that mediates axon guidance through activation of SFKs , which we propose act locally at the growth cone ( Figure 6B ) . This contrasts with canonical Shh signaling in cell fate speciﬁcation , where binding of Shh to Ptc and Boc / Cdo activates Smo and leads to activation of the Gli family of transcription factors and Gli - dependent transcription ( Figure 6A ) , resulting in global changes in the cell ( Dessaud et al . , 2008 ) . In axon guidance , Shh acts by binding to its recep - tors Boc and Ptc , which then activate Smo ( Charron et al . , 2003 ; Okada et al . , 2006 ) . This leads to activation of the SFKs Src and Fyn in the growth cone in a graded manner . We propose that the graded activation of SFKs in response to a Shh gradient medi - ates changes in the growth cone cytoskeleton and turning of the axon up the gradient ( Figure 6B ) . Through this pathway , Shh gradients can elicit a rapid and spatially polarized response locally within the growth cone , without retrograde signaling to elicit transcription in the nucleus . SFKs can regulate cytoskeleton rearrangement , growth cone dynamics , and ﬁlopodial dynamics ( Liu et al . , 2007 ; Robles et al . , 2005 ; Suter and Forscher , 2001 ) . We show in commissural neurons that an asymmetric distribution of SFK activity can elicit a turning response , with growth cones turning toward the side with higher SFK activity . This is consistent with previous work in Xenopus neurons showing that a local reduction in SFK activity on one side of a growth cone can promote repulsive turning ( Robles et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , graded SFK activity can mediate axon turning . We also showed that SFK activity rapidly increases in response to Shh and that this increase can be detected locally in the growth cone via changes in the level of phospho - SFK . Furthermore , an extrinsic Shh gradient induces an asymmetric distribution of activated SFKs in the growth cone , with higher SFK activity on the side of the growth cone exposed to higher Shh concentrations . Together , these data support an instructive role for SFKs in Shh - mediated axon guidance , since a Shh gradient can stimulate SFK activation in a graded manner , and graded SFK activity can mediate growth cone turning . ( H ) Quantiﬁcationoftheangleturned ( ±SEM ) fromthespinalcordexplant turningassayshowsthatinhibitionofSFKsbyeitherCsk + GFPorCsk - GFPinhibitsthe turning of commissural neurons toward Shh ( one - way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post test , * p < 0 . 05 ) . ( I ) PP2 does not affect Shh induction of Gli - luciferase activity . Cells were pretreated with PP2 , PP3 , or SANT - 1 prior to addition of 0 . 2 m g / ml Shh . Gli - luciferase activity ( mean ± SEM ) was measured after 20 hr , relative to the basal luciferase activity in the presence of DMSO or PP2 . A B Figure 6 . Canonical and Noncanonical Shh Signaling Pathways ( A ) Shh speciﬁes the cell fate of neural progenitors in the spinal cord through the canonical Shh signaling pathway , where transcriptional regula - tion by the Gli family of transcription factors leads to cell fate speciﬁcation . The position of the cell in the gradient determines the speciﬁc cell fate . ( B ) After cell fate speciﬁcation has occurred , the Shh gradient acts as a chemoattractant to guide the axons of commissural neurons to the ventral midline . Shh mediates its axon guidance effects throughanoncanonical , transcriptionallyindepen - dent pathway . Noncanonical Shh signaling is mediated by the Src family kinases ( SFKs ) in the growth cone , which may regulate the cytoskeletal remodeling necessary for growth cone turning . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 359 In chick , Shh repels postcrossing commissural axons , sug - gesting that Shh guides commissural axons not only before but also after they have crossed the midline ( Bourikas et al . , 2005 ) . This is not mediated by Smo or Ptc1 , but rather by Hhip , which is expressed transiently by chick commissural neurons during the time when their axons turn longitudinally ( Bourikas et al . , 2005 ) . It remains to be determined whether Shh also guides postcrossing commissural axons in mammals and whether this effect is mediated by Hhip . In addition to commissural axon guid - ance , Hedgehog ( Hh ) signaling also plays important roles in other motility processes such as Drosophila germ cell migration ( Desh - pande et al . , 2001 ) , oligodendrocyte precursor migration ( Mer - chan et al . , 2007 ) , and guidance of retinal ganglion cell axons ( Kolpak et al . , 2005 ; Sanchez - Camacho and Bovolenta , 2008 ; Trousse et al . , 2001 ) . Although all these processes require Smo , they are unlikely to be explained by transcriptional effects of the Hh pathway ( Charron and Tessier - Lavigne , 2005 ) and therefore might also be mediated by a noncanonical Hh signaling pathway that possibly requires SFK activity . While we demonstrated that members of this noncanonical Shh pathway are the SFKs Src and Fyn , screens for genes involved in vertebrate and invertebrate canonical Hh signaling using Hh - responsive transcriptional reporters have identiﬁed neither Src nor Fyn as components of the canonical Hh signaling pathway ( Lum et al . , 2003 ; Nybakken et al . , 2005 ; Varjosalo et al . , 2008 ) . That SFKs have not been identiﬁed by these screens as acting downstream of Shh probably reﬂects the assays used , which are transcriptional reporter assays performed over 24 – 48 hr . Together with the lack of canonical - Shh - signaling - related phenotypes in SFK mutant mice ( Kuo et al . , 2005 ) , this suggests that SFKs do not play a role in canonical Shh signaling . A critical tool that enabled us to study the short - term effects of Shh on the guidance of commissural neurons was the in vitro axon guidance assay we developed using the Dunn chamber . Existing collagen - based explant assays ( Ebendal and Jacobson , 1977 ; Seraﬁni et al . , 1994 ) , in which an explant is cultured a short distance from cells expressing a chemical cue for at least 24 hr , cannot distinguish between outgrowth - promoting versus guid - ance effects on axons . One previous usage of the Dunn chamber to study the response of chick neurons to gradients of retinoic acid also exposed the neurons to the chemical cue for a long period of (cid:2) 18 hr ( Maden et al . , 1998 ) , and because exposure to the gradient commenced prior to neurite outgrowth , random outgrowth together with subsequent turning was measured , comparable to the methodology of collagen gel / explant outgrowth experiments . The spinal cord explant turning assay , where spinal cord explants are cultured adjacent to cells secreting a chemical cue ( Kennedy et al . , 1994 ) , does measure a reorientation of axon paths within an explant . However , this assay hasonly been applied tothe study ofcommissural neurons in spinal cord explants and the gradient of the chemical cue cannot be quantiﬁed . Furthermore , explant - based assays typi - cally require exposure of the explants to the chemical cue for 24 – 48 hr . Other recently developed assays do use deﬁned gradi - ents of substrate - bound guidance cues such as ephrins ( von Philipsborn et al . , 2006 ) or deﬁned gradients printed into collagen ( Rosoff et al . , 2004 ) , but these measure differential growth rather than turning . Therefore , until now , the assays available to study axon turning in response to acute exposure to deﬁned gradients ofdiffusibleguidancecueshavebeenlimitedtothepipetteassay . With our axon guidance assay , many neurons can be imaged in parallel as they respond to a gradient in a short time period , and multiple conditions can be performed on the same day ( > 20 neurons per condition ) , a higher throughput than is usually achieved with the pipette assay and one that is under more deﬁned and controlled gradient conditions ( Pujic et al . , 2008 ) . Since the axons have outgrown prior to the application of the gradient , this enabled us to measure speciﬁcally the turning of axons in response to the gradient . Using this assay , we found that commissural neurons responded to a Shh gradient over a wide range of incident angles and were able to turn up Shh gradients with a slope between 1 % – 10 % per 10 m m , within the range of slopes generated by the pipette assay of 5 % – 10 % per 10 m m ( Lohof et al . , 1992 ; Zheng et al . , 1994 ) . The assay is also broadly applicable to mammalian neurons , allowing us to study the speciﬁc neuron type that is guided by Shh , in contrast to a mixed population of Xenopus spinal neurons ( Charron et al . , 2003 ) , and should be widely applicable to the study of other neuronal types and other guidance molecules . With our assay , we found that the axon turning response to Shh was bell - shaped , with optimal turning at 0 . 1 – 0 . 4 m g / ml Shh . Interestingly , the biased outgrowth of DRG axons to a NGF gradient ( Rosoff et al . , 2004 ) also has a bell - shaped response . One possible explanation for these observations is receptor saturation . A gradient is normally perceived via differen - tial receptor occupation across a growth cone . However , if the absolute concentration is too high ( even in the presence of a gradient ) , the receptors are saturated and the growth cone can no longer perceive a gradient . Consistent with this , mathe - matical models of axon guidance predict that the turning response to varying concentrations of a guidance cue is bell - shaped , with a peak around the K d of the guidance cue / receptor interaction ( Xu et al . , 2005 ) . The Shh gradient in the developing ventral spinal cord elicits cell fate speciﬁcation and axon guidance . In vitro experiments suggest that the Shh concentrations able to elicit cell fate spec - iﬁcation range from 0 . 5 nM ( for V0 interneuron induction ) to 4 nM ( for V3 interneuron induction ) ( Dessaud et al . , 2008 ) . Although it remains unknown whether equivalent concentrations operate to control ventral fates in vivo , it is interesting to note that in vitro , similar concentrations of Shh act in axon guidance : in our assay , the Shh concentration in the outer well that gave the most robust turning response was 5 nM ( 0 . 1 m g / ml ) . At this concentration , (cid:2) 80 % of neurons in the Dunn chamber are exposed to Shh concentrations between 0 . 5 – 4 . 5 nM , which is very similar to the concentration range for inducing neural progenitor differentiation ( Dessaud et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , although the canonical and the noncanonical Shh signaling pathways use different signal transduction mechanisms , they can be acti - vated by similar concentrations of Shh . The identiﬁcation of a noncanonical Shh signaling pathway playing a role in cytoskeleton remodeling is reminiscent of the identiﬁcation , over the past few years , of noncanonical Wnt and BMP signaling pathways ( Semenov et al . , 2007 ; Taylor and Wrana , 2008 ) . Before the identiﬁcation of these noncanonical signaling pathways , all of the functions of Wnts and BMPs Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway 360 Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . were thought to be transcriptional . Recently , it has been demon - strated that BMPs can signal through Lim kinase 1 and ADF / Co - ﬁlin to control axon guidance , dendritogenesis , and synaptic stability , showing that noncanonical BMP signaling pathways account for these BMP effects ( Eaton and Davis , 2005 ; Lee - Hoe - ﬂich et al . , 2004 ; Wen et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , the discovery of noncanonical Wnt signaling pathways opened the door to the discovery of many roles for Wnt signaling in polarized cellular events , which are often involved in the regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics , such as planar cell polarity . Therefore , the identiﬁca - tion of a noncanonical Shh signaling pathway , similarly to the recent identiﬁcation of noncanonical Wnt and BMP signaling pathways , might advance our understanding of additional Shh functions that are not mediated by the canonical Shh pathway . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Reagents Recombinant human sonic hedgehog ( C24II ) amino terminal peptide was purchased from R & D Systems ( Minneapolis , MN ) . The pharmacological reagents DRB ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , actinomycin D ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , SANT - 1 ( Calbiochem ) , PP2 ( Calbiochem ) , and PP3 ( Calbiochem ) were added to cells 40 min prior to stimulation with Shh or 30 min prior to Dunn chamber assembly for the axon guidance assay . The Csk and Csk - GFP expression vectors were a kind gift from U . Drescher ( Knoll and Drescher , 2004 ) . The Gli3R and Bcl2 expression vectors were kind gifts from J . Briscoe ( Cayuso et al . , 2006 ) . Primary DRG and Commissural Neuron Culture All animal work was performed in accordance with the Canadian Council on Animal Care Guidelines . DRG neurons were prepared from rat E13 . 5 – 14 DRGs and cultured in DMEM / F - 12 supplemented with 2 % B27 , 10 mM HEPES , and 1 – 10 ng / ml NGF . Commissural neurons were prepared from the dorsal ﬁfth of E13 rat neural tubes and plated in Neurobasal supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated FBS and 2 mM L - glutamine . After (cid:2) 21 hr , the medium was changed to Neurobasal supplemented with 2 % B27 and 2 mM L - glutamine . See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for further details . Dunn Chamber Axon Guidance Assay and Analysis For Dunn chamber axon guidance assays , primary neurons were grown on appropriately coated square # 3D coverslips ( Erie Scientiﬁc , Portsmouth , NH ) atlowdensity . The Dunnchamberassembly protocol wasadapted from Zicha et al . ( 1997 ) and Wells and Ridley ( 2005 ) . After Dunn chamber assembly , time - lapse phase contrast images were acquired for a minimum of 2 hr . The angle turned was deﬁned as the angle between the original direction of the axon and a straight line connecting the base of the growth cone from the ﬁrst to the last time point of the assay period ( Figure 1F ) . See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for complete details . Spinal Cord Explant Turning Assays Explant turning assays were performed as previously described ( Charron et al . , 2003 ; Okada et al . , 2006 ) using expression vectors for GFP + Bcl2 , GFP + Bcl2 + Gli3R , GFP , Csk + GFP , or Csk - GFP . See Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures for details . Immunostaining and Western Blotting Embryo sections were immunostained with anti - Src ( pY418 ) phosphospeciﬁc antibody ( Biosource , Camarillo , CA ) and anti - Tag - 1 4D7 ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) . Dissociated rat commissural neurons were immu - nostained with anti - Src ( pY418 ) phosphospeciﬁc antibody , anti - DCC ( R & D Systems ) , and anti - LH2 ( akind gift from T . Jessell ) . Anti - Src ( pY418 ) phospho - speciﬁc antibody ( Cell Signaling Technology , Danvers , MA ) and anti - actin antibody ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) were used to probe the western blots . See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details . In Vitro Kinase Assay Invitrokinaseassayswereperformedonprimarycommissuralneuroncultures ( 6 3 10 6 cells ) (cid:2) 45 hr after plating . Neurons were treated with Shh in the pres - ence or absence of SANT - 1 or actinomycin D and cells were then lysed . Src or Fyn was immunoprecipitated in IP buffer ( 50 mM Tris [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , and 0 . 1 % NP40 ) for 2 hr at 4 (cid:3) C . Src or Fyn kinase activity in the immunoprecipitates wasmeasured withaSrc kinase assay kit ( 17 - 131 ) , which measures incorporation of [ g - 32 P ] ATP into a substrate peptide , according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Upstate , Lake Placid , NY ) . The amount of incorporated radioactivity was measured by a scintillation counter . SUPPLEMENTAL DATA The supplemental data for this article include experimental procedures , two ﬁgures , and six movies and can be found at http : / / www . neuron . org / supplemental / S0896 - 6273 ( 09 ) 00247 - 5 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank S . Rodrigues and T . E . Kennedy for advice on commissural neuron culture ; J . M . Pham and P . J . Fabre for valuable assistance with commissural neuroncultureandimmunostaining ; andJ . Cardin , A . Daigneault , andJ . Barthe for expert technical assistance . We are grateful to C . Jolicoeur , M . Cayouette , J . R . Chan , T . J . Kao , A . Kania , J . P . Gratton , J . Briscoe , T . Jessell , U . Drescher , andA . Veilletteforprovidingreagents . The4D7antibodywasobtainedfromthe Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank developed under the auspices of the NICHDandmaintainedbyTheUniversityofIowa . WethankA . Yaronforcritical comments on the manuscript and D . R . Colman for his support . This work was supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research ( CIHR ) , thePeterLougheedMedicalResearchFoundation , theMcGillPrograminNeu - roengineering , the Fonds de Recherche en Sante´ du Que´bec ( FRSQ ) , and the Canada Foundation for Innovation ( CFI ) . Accepted : March 17 , 2009 Published : May 13 , 2009 REFERENCES Augsburger , A . , Schuchardt , A . , Hoskins , S . , Dodd , J . , and Butler , S . ( 1999 ) . BMPs as mediators of roof plate repulsion of commissural neurons . Neuron 24 , 127 – 141 . Bourikas , D . , Pekarik , V . , Baeriswyl , T . , Grunditz , A . , Sadhu , R . , Nardo , M . , and Stoeckli , E . T . ( 2005 ) . Sonic hedgehog guides commissural axons along the longitudinal axis of the spinal cord . Nat . Neurosci . 8 , 297 – 304 . Butler , S . J . , and Dodd , J . ( 2003 ) . A role for BMP heterodimers in roof plate - mediated repulsion of commissural axons . Neuron 38 , 389 – 401 . Campbell , D . S . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2001 ) . Chemotropic responses of retinal growth cones mediated by rapid local protein synthesis and degradation . Neuron 32 , 1013 – 1026 . Cayuso , J . , Ulloa , F . , Cox , B . , Briscoe , J . , and Marti , E . ( 2006 ) . The Sonic hedgehog pathway independently controls the patterning , proliferation and survival of neuroepithelial cells by regulating Gli activity . Development 133 , 517 – 528 . Charron , F . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 2005 ) . Novel brain wiring functions for classical morphogens : a role as graded positional cues in axon guidance . Development 132 , 2251 – 2262 . Charron , F . , Stein , E . , Jeong , J . , McMahon , A . P . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 2003 ) . The morphogen sonic hedgehog is an axonal chemoattractant that collaborates with netrin - 1 in midline axon guidance . Cell 113 , 11 – 23 . Deshpande , G . , Swanhart , L . , Chiang , P . , and Schedl , P . ( 2001 ) . Hedgehog signaling in germ cell migration . Cell 106 , 759 – 769 . Dessaud , E . , McMahon , A . P . , and Briscoe , J . ( 2008 ) . Pattern formation in the vertebrate neural tube : a sonic hedgehog morphogen - regulated transcrip - tional network . Development 135 , 2489 – 2503 . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc . 361 Dickson , B . J . ( 2002 ) . Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance . Science 298 , 1959 – 1964 . Eaton , B . A . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2005 ) . LIM Kinase1 controls synaptic stability downstream of the type II BMP receptor . Neuron 47 , 695 – 708 . Ebendal , T . , and Jacobson , C . O . ( 1977 ) . Tissue explants affecting extension and orientation of axons in cultured chick embryo ganglia . Exp . Cell Res . 105 , 379 – 387 . Gundersen , R . W . , andBarrett , J . N . ( 1979 ) . Neuronalchemotaxis : chickdorsal - root axons turn toward high concentrations of nerve growth factor . Science 206 , 1079 – 1080 . Kennedy , T . E . , Seraﬁni , T . , de la Torre , J . R . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 1994 ) . Netrinsarediffusiblechemotropicfactorsforcommissuralaxonsintheembry - onic spinal cord . Cell 78 , 425 – 435 . Knoll , B . , and Drescher , U . ( 2004 ) . Src family kinases are involved in EphA receptor - mediated retinal axon guidance . J . Neurosci . 24 , 6248 – 6257 . Kolpak , A . , Zhang , J . , and Bao , Z . Z . ( 2005 ) . Sonic hedgehog has a dual effect onthegrowthofretinalganglionaxonsdependingonitsconcentration . J . Neu - rosci . 25 , 3432 – 3441 . Kuo , G . , Arnaud , L . , Kronstad - O’Brien , P . , andCooper , J . A . ( 2005 ) . Absenceof Fyn and Src causes a reeler - like phenotype . J . Neurosci . 25 , 8578 – 8586 . Lee - Hoeﬂich , S . T . , Causing , C . G . , Podkowa , M . , Zhao , X . , Wrana , J . L . , and Attisano , L . ( 2004 ) . Activation of LIMK1 by binding to the BMP receptor , BMPRII , regulatesBMP - dependentdendritogenesis . EMBOJ . 23 , 4792 – 4801 . Li , W . , Lee , J . , Vikis , H . G . , Lee , S . H . , Liu , G . , Aurandt , J . , Shen , T . L . , Fearon , E . R . , Guan , J . L . , Han , M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Activation of FAK and Src are receptor - proximal events required for netrin signaling . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1213 – 1221 . Liu , G . , Beggs , H . , Jurgensen , C . , Park , H . T . , Tang , H . , Gorski , J . , Jones , K . R . , Reichardt , L . F . , Wu , J . , and Rao , Y . ( 2004 ) . Netrin requires focal adhesion kinase and Src family kinases for axon outgrowth and attraction . Nat . Neuro - sci . 7 , 1222 – 1232 . Liu , G . , Li , W . , Gao , X . , Li , X . , Jurgensen , C . , Park , H . T . , Shin , N . Y . , Yu , J . , He , M . L . , Hanks , S . K . , et al . ( 2007 ) . p130CAS is required for netrin signaling and commissural axon guidance . J . Neurosci . 27 , 957 – 968 . Lohof , A . M . , Quillan , M . , Dan , Y . , and Poo , M . M . ( 1992 ) . Asymmetric modula - tion of cytosolic cAMP activity induces growth cone turning . J . Neurosci . 12 , 1253 – 1261 . Lum , L . , Yao , S . , Mozer , B . , Rovescalli , A . , Von Kessler , D . , Nirenberg , M . , and Beachy , P . A . ( 2003 ) . IdentiﬁcationofHedgehogpathwaycomponentsbyRNAi in Drosophila cultured cells . Science 299 , 2039 – 2045 . Maden , M . , Keen , G . , and Jones , G . E . ( 1998 ) . Retinoic acid as a chemotactic molecule in neuronal development . Int . J . Dev . Neurosci . 16 , 317 – 322 . Merchan , P . , Bribian , A . , Sanchez - Camacho , C . , Lezameta , M . , Bovolenta , P . , and de Castro , F . ( 2007 ) . Sonic hedgehog promotes the migration and prolif - eration of optic nerve oligodendrocyte precursors . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 36 , 355 – 368 . Meriane , M . , Tcherkezian , J . , Webber , C . A . , Danek , E . I . , Triki , I . , McFarlane , S . , Bloch - Gallego , E . , and Lamarche - Vane , N . ( 2004 ) . Phosphorylation of DCC by Fyn mediates Netrin - 1 signaling in growth cone guidance . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 687 – 698 . Meyer , N . P . , and Roelink , H . ( 2003 ) . The amino - terminal region of Gli3 antag - onizes the Shh response and acts in dorsoventral fate speciﬁcation in the developing spinal cord . Dev . Biol . 257 , 343 – 355 . Ming , G . L . , Wong , S . T . , Henley , J . , Yuan , X . B . , Song , H . J . , Spitzer , N . C . , and Poo , M . M . ( 2002 ) . Adaptation in the chemotactic guidance of nerve growth cones . Nature 417 , 411 – 418 . Nybakken , K . , Vokes , S . A . , Lin , T . Y . , McMahon , A . P . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2005 ) . A genome - wide RNA interference screen in Drosophila melanogaster cells for new components of the Hh signaling pathway . Nat . Genet . 37 , 1323 – 1332 . Okada , A . , Charron , F . , Morin , S . , Shin , D . S . , Wong , K . , Fabre , P . J . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , andMcConnell , S . K . ( 2006 ) . Bocisareceptorforsonichedgehog in the guidance of commissural axons . Nature 444 , 369 – 373 . Palmer , A . , Zimmer , M . , Erdmann , K . S . , Eulenburg , V . , Porthin , A . , Heumann , R . , Deutsch , U . , and Klein , R . ( 2002 ) . EphrinB phosphorylation and reverse signaling : regulation by Src kinases and PTP - BL phosphatase . Mol . Cell 9 , 725 – 737 . Persson , M . , Stamataki , D . , te Welscher , P . , Andersson , E . , Bose , J . , Ruther , U . , Ericson , J . , and Briscoe , J . ( 2002 ) . Dorsal - ventral patterning of the spinal cord requires Gli3 transcriptional repressor activity . Genes Dev . 16 , 2865 – 2878 . Pujic , Z . , Giacomantonio , C . E . , Unni , D . , Rosoff , W . J . , and Goodhill , G . J . ( 2008 ) . Analysis of the growth cone turning assay for studying axon guidance . J . Neurosci . Methods 170 , 220 – 228 . Robles , E . , Woo , S . , and Gomez , T . M . ( 2005 ) . Src - dependent tyrosine phos - phorylation at the tips of growth cone ﬁlopodia promotes extension . J . Neuro - sci . 25 , 7669 – 7681 . Rosoff , W . J . , Urbach , J . S . , Esrick , M . A . , McAllister , R . G . , Richards , L . J . , and Goodhill , G . J . ( 2004 ) . A new chemotaxis assay shows the extreme sensitivity of axons to molecular gradients . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 678 – 682 . Sanchez - Camacho , C . , and Bovolenta , P . ( 2008 ) . Autonomous and non - autonomous Shh signalling mediate the invivo growthand guidance of mouse retinal ganglion cell axons . Development 135 , 3531 – 3541 . Semenov , M . V . , Habas , R . , Macdonald , B . T . , and He , X . ( 2007 ) . SnapShot . Noncanonical Wnt Signaling Pathways . Cell 131 , 1378 . Seraﬁni , T . , Kennedy , T . E . , Galko , M . J . , Mirzayan , C . , Jessell , T . M . , and Tess - ier - Lavigne , M . ( 1994 ) . The netrins deﬁne a family of axon outgrowth - promoting proteins homologous to C . elegans UNC - 6 . Cell 78 , 409 – 424 . Superti - Furga , G . , Fumagalli , S . , Koegl , M . , Courtneidge , S . A . , and Draetta , G . ( 1993 ) . Csk inhibition of c - Src activity requires both the SH2and SH3 domains of Src . EMBO J . 12 , 2625 – 2634 . Suter , D . M . , and Forscher , P . ( 2001 ) . Transmission of growth cone traction force through apCAM - cytoskeletal linkages is regulated by Src family tyrosine kinase activity . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 427 – 438 . Taylor , I . W . , and Wrana , J . L . ( 2008 ) . SnapShot : The TGFbeta pathway interac - tome . Cell 133 , 378 . e1 . Tenzen , T . , Allen , B . L . , Cole , F . , Kang , J . S . , Krauss , R . S . , and McMahon , A . P . ( 2006 ) . ThecellsurfacemembraneproteinsCdoandBocarecomponentsand targets of the Hedgehog signaling pathway and feedback network in mice . Dev . Cell 10 , 647 – 656 . Trousse , F . , Marti , E . , Gruss , P . , Torres , M . , and Bovolenta , P . ( 2001 ) . Control of retinal ganglion cell axon growth : a new role for Sonic hedgehog . Develop - ment 128 , 3927 – 3936 . Varjosalo , M . , Bjo¨rklund , B . , Cheng , F . , Syva¨nen , H . , Kivioja , T . , Kilpinen , S . , Sun , Z . , Kallioniemi , O . , Stunnenberg , H . G . , He , W . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Application of active and kinase - deﬁcient kinome collection for identiﬁcation of kinases regulating Hedgehog signaling . Cell 133 , 537 – 548 . von Philipsborn , A . C . , Lang , S . , Loeschinger , J . , Bernard , A . , David , C . , Lehnert , D . , Bonhoeffer , F . , andBastmeyer , M . ( 2006 ) . Growthconenavigation in substrate - bound ephrin gradients . Development 133 , 2487 – 2495 . Wells , C . M . , and Ridley , A . J . ( 2005 ) . Analysis of cell migration using the Dunn chemotaxis chamber and time - lapse microscopy . Methods Mol . Biol . 294 , 31 – 41 . Wen , Z . , Han , L . , Bamburg , J . R . , Shim , S . , Ming , G . L . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2007 ) . BMP gradients steer nerve growth cones by a balancing act of LIM kinase and Slingshot phosphatase on ADF / coﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 107 – 119 . Xu , J . , Rosoff , W . J . , Urbach , J . S . , and Goodhill , G . J . ( 2005 ) . Adaptation is not required to explain the long - term response of axons to molecular gradients . Development 132 , 4545 – 4552 . Zheng , J . Q . , Felder , M . , Connor , J . A . , and Poo , M . M . ( 1994 ) . Turning of nerve growth cones induced by neurotransmitters . Nature 368 , 140 – 144 . Zicha , D . , Dunn , G . A . , and Brown , A . F . ( 1991 ) . A new direct - viewing chemo - taxis chamber . J . Cell Sci . 99 , 769 – 775 . Zicha , D . , Dunn , G . , and Jones , G . ( 1997 ) . Analyzing chemotaxis using the Dunn direct - viewing chamber . Methods Mol . Biol . 75 , 449 – 457 . Neuron Axon Guidance by Shh via a Noncanonical Pathway 362 Neuron 62 , 349 – 362 , May 14 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Inc .