Review ARticle https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 018 - 0142 - z 1 Department of Molecular Medicine ( DMM ) , University of Padua School of Medicine , Padua , Italy . 2 IFOM – The FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology , Milan , Italy . * e - mail : piccolo @ bio . unipd . it F undamental aspects of cell behaviour in living organisms— morphogenesis , collective migration and self - organization— are not genetically encoded but are emergent properties of cells interconnected within a tissue network . Furthermore , most disease states either do not have a genetic origin , or , as is the case in cancer , are preceded or accompanied by a corruption of the tissue environ - ment that fuels aberrant cell behaviour 1 , 2 . Our current knowledge of signalling pathways regulating gene expression , proliferation and fate decisions does not fully account for these emergent properties , failing to explain how these events are exquisitely localized in living tissues . Understanding the spatio - temporal control of cell behaviour thus requires incorporation of information on how structural and architectural complexity of tis - sues is transmitted to their constituent cells . YAP and TAZ , two highly related transcriptional regulators ( hereafter referred to as YAP / TAZ ) , sense how cells perceive them - selves and their tissue environment and communicate with it . YAP / TAZ activity in a cell is under direct control of its shape and polarity , which is in turn dictated by the cytoskeletal structure 3 . Further , the tensional state and organization of the cytoskeleton reflect the local pattern of geometrical and mechanical strains associated with the position of the cell within the global three - dimensional ( 3D ) tissue architecture and surrounding stromal composition 4 , 5 . These inputs are essentially physical , and include the pattern of forces emanat - ing from the cell’s attachment to other cells as well as the topology and rigidity of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) 6 . YAP / TAZ convert such inputs into gene expression signatures and coherent , context - dependent biological responses 3 , 7 . The structural features of a cell must also be linked to its metab - olism and its responsiveness to other environmental cues , such as morphogen signals and nutrient availability . For example , epithelial budding starts with localized distortion in the shape of a few cells preceding their proliferation , suggesting that localized changes in mechanics can determine the response to mitogens 8 . Notably , cells respond to mechanical stresses by adjusting composition and fine 3D organization of the surrounding ECM , and by reorganizing cell – cell adhesion . Thus , inward directed forces ( generated by cytoskeletal con - tractility ) , deformation of organelles and external forces ( pulling from ECM rigidity , other cells or fluid flow ) are always in perfect balance 5 , 6 . Here , we review recent data providing an emerging picture in which YAP / TAZ serve as a nexus orchestrating the interplay between cellular mechanics , metabolism and developmental sig - nalling cascades , allowing for cell and context - specific responses . We also discuss the possibility that the YAP / TAZ transcriptional program may be devoted to the instalment of positive feedback systems promoting YAP / TAZ - mediated mechanical and metabolic signalling . Through such mechanisms YAP / TAZ shape organs dur - ing development , forge self - organization phenomena and adapt cell behaviour to tissue needs , as in tissue repair or regeneration . When elements of this control fail or are imbalanced , abnormal YAP / TAZ activation causes multiple diseases , including fibrosis , cancer and atherosclerosis 3 . Finally , we outline some exciting open issues in the burgeoning field of YAP / TAZ regulation and biology . YAP / TAZ sense and respond to biomechanical signals In order to harmonize their behaviour to the surrounding mechani - cal niches , cells must translate external cues into signalling conduits that impact gene expression , a process referred to as mechano - transduction 4 . Mechanotransduction starts with the ability of cells to probe the physical features of the microenvironment through integrins and other adhesive proteins , and to counterbalance extracellular forces by adjusting their own tensional state through actomyosin contractility and organization of the F - actin cytoskel - eton 4 . For years , these models left unaddressed the question of how mechanical instructions are executed in the nucleus through specific transcription factors ( TFs ) . Strikingly , recent discoveries are converging on a model in which multiple types of mechanical inputs in a variety of cellular settings rely on the regulation of two transcriptional regulators , YAP and TAZ ( reviewed in 3 , 9 ) . Note that here we depict YAP and TAZ as equivalent proteins , this is based on their structural similarities and genetic redundancy in a host of experimental conditions and biological functions . However , these proteins display different phenotypes in individual mouse knockout lines 10 , 11 , and dissecting individual functions from overlapping ones is an open issue for the field . YAP / TAZ activity is regulated by the conformation and ten - sion of the F - actin cytoskeleton , which in turn depend primarily on the substrate to which cells adhere . Indeed , cells spread when plated on large and stiff substrates ; in these conditions , they display high ROCK - and non - muscle - myosin - II - driven cytoskeletal ten - sion ultimately turning on YAP / TAZ . Conversely softer or smaller substrates , imposing cell rounding and reduced adhesive area , YAP / TAZ upstream signals and downstream responses Antonio Totaro 1 , Tito Panciera 1 and Stefano Piccolo 1 , 2 * Cell behaviour is strongly influenced by physical , mechanical contacts between cells and their extracellular matrix . We review how the transcriptional regulators YAP and TAZ integrate mechanical cues with the response to soluble signals and meta - bolic pathways to control multiple aspects of cell behaviour , including proliferation , cell plasticity and stemness essential for tissue regeneration . Corruption of cell - environment interplay leads to aberrant YAP and TAZ activation that is instrumental for multiple diseases , including cancer . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 888 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY cause cytoplasmic retention and inhibition of YAP / TAZ ( refs 12 , 13 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Importantly , this is an evolutionarily conserved mecha - nism , shared by multiple cell types , attesting the generality of YAP / TAZ mechanotransduction 3 , 7 . Indeed , a potent means to induce YAP / TAZ activity is raising F - actin reorganization and stress fibre formation by experimental depletion of capping and severing pro - teins , such as Cofilin - 1 and CapZ ( ref . 13 ) . Different sub - pools of F - actin can , however , have opposite roles on YAP / TAZ activity as in highly polarized cell cultures , where contraction of the apical cir - cumferential actin belt is required to inhibit YAP / TAZ ( ref . 14 ) . This phenomenon possibly involves the formation of an apical F - actin network by the spectrin family of scaffolding proteins . Indeed , depletion of spectrins results in aberrant YAP / TAZ nuclear local - ization in Drosophila wing , ovary follicle cells and Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells , possibly due to abnormal restructur - ing of F - actin into basal stress fibres 15 , 16 . The finding that molecular components of focal adhesions ( FAs ) , namely integrins , focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) and Src , are required for YAP / TAZ activity is consistent with the fact that the degree of cell distortion and spreading are key signals impinging on the arrangement of the F - actin cytoskeleton and YAP / TAZ activity ( Fig . 1 ) . The relationship between cell shape , F - actin and YAP / TAZ activity impacts hepatic stellate cell conversion to myofibroblasts during liver fibrosis 17 – 19 , proliferation of basal layer skin keratino - cytes 20 , 21 , activation and proliferation of cancer associated fibro - blasts 22 , self - renewal and chemoresistance of breast cancer stem cells ( CSCs ) induced by glucocorticoids 23 , the atherogenic effect of disturbed blood flow on endothelial cells 24 , 25 and post - damage intestinal regeneration 26 . Mechanistically , YAP / TAZ activation by integrin - dependent FA formation may be linked to the activation of the Rho guani - dine exchange factor β - PIX , the small GTPase Rac1 and its effector p - 21 activated kinase ( PAK ) ( refs 27 , 28 ) , which are known F - actin modulators , suggesting a role for integrin - dependent cytoskel - etal modifications in mechanical regulation of YAP / TAZ ( Fig . 1 ) . Moreover , Yes / Src family proteins directly phosphorylate YAP to promote YAP transcriptional activity 21 , 29 . Still unclear , however , is to what extent Src impacts on YAP / TAZ function directly , through phosphorylation , rather than indirectly , through its effects on the cytoskeleton . Intriguingly , the dynamic formation of FAs is itself influenced by substrate stiffness . Indeed , a molecular clutch model for FAs implies that sufficient substrate stiffness is required for integrin - bound talins to unfold and expose a vinculin - binding domain to promote full FA maturation and YAP / TAZ nuclear accu - mulation 30 . This suggests that FA components might not only be required for adhesion to the substrate but can act as mechanotrans - ducing units 31 ( Fig . 1 ) . Notably , the main YAP - regulating mecha - nosensitive adhesive platforms are those exerting the highest force , that is the β 1 - integrin clusters more proximal to the nucleus con - necting F - actin filaments to the nuclear lamina , but not the periph - eral FAs , which appear inconsequential for YAP / TAZ regulation 32 . Altogether , it appears that YAP / TAZ regulation is not guided by the total levels of F - actin but its subcellular organization , fine structure , tension and , likely , resistance offered by molecular struts within the cytoskeleton ( such as microtubules 33 and , potentially , interme - diate filaments ) , and by the whole nucleus . Therefore , YAP / TAZ mechanotransduction differs profoundly from actin regulation of myocardin - related transcription factor ( MRTF ) family , a sensor of F - actin / G - actin ratio that binds directly to free , nuclear G - actin in a manner that inhibits its association with its DNA - binding partner serum response factor ( SRF ) 34 . Integrin signalling is critical for modulation of YAP / TAZ activ - ity in 3D , and relevant to instruct differentiation of cultured skel - etal stem cells and to drive proliferation of malignant cells 13 , 35 . Yet , regulation of YAP / TAZ in normal , primary epithelial cells , growing within physiological matrices as organoids , requires an additional level of complexity . When intestinal organoids are cultured in non - deformable 3D hydrogels of defined stiffness and composition , YAP / TAZ are induced at high stiffness , triggering proliferation of stem cells , but only transiently 26 , 36 . As the organoid expands , YAP / TAZ are turned off , possibly as an effect of increased cell crowding , causing loss of stemness and organoid demise . In contrast , when the hydrogel is designed to be physically plastic—allowing its proteo - lytic degradation by metalloproteases—fate plasticity and self - orga - nization emerge . Under these conditions , YAP / TAZ activity remains localized at the tip of the organoid’s crypt - like budding protrusions , a location characterized by elevated cellular strain where YAP / TAZ preserve the intestinal stem cells of the organoid 36 . Similarly , skeletal stem cells require the activity of matrix metalloproteinase MMP14 to remodel the surrounding collagen matrix in order to form inte - grin clustering , raising F - actin cytoskeletal tension that ultimately results in YAP / TAZ activation 35 . What determines the spatial speci - ficity of crypt formation in developing organoids remains mysteri - ous . Is it stochastic variegation in the Matrigel hydrogel ? Or is it intrinsic to cell heterogeneity within the organoids , for example arising from differential MMP expression ? It must be noted , however , that cell spreading can lead to YAP / TAZ activation independently of the formation of FAs ( ref . 33 ) . Signalling by diverse ECM components can trigger YAP / TAZ activ - ity in different tissue types . For example , in the neonatal mouse heart , the ECM proteoglycan Agrin binds the dystrophin – glyco - protein complex ( DGC ) and induces YAP nuclear accumulation , promoting cardiomyocyte proliferation 37 – 39 ( Fig . 1 ) . Mechanical signalling by Agrin also regulates hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) cells , in which Agrin is bound by the receptors LRP4 – MUSK to enhance integrin - β 1 – FAK1 signalling and YAP / TAZ mechano - transduction 40 . Other membrane - bound proteins , which are not necessarily adhesion molecules , can transduce mechanical signals to YAP / TAZ , as the Ca 2 + ion channel Piezo1 in human neural stem cells ( NSCs ) , which is activated when NSCs are experiencing a stiff substrate , resulting in YAP / TAZ activation 41 . A major open question in the field is how , mechanistically , sig - nalling information generated by the F - actin cytoskeleton turns YAP / TAZ subcellular localization and activity on or off . One pos - sibility is that angiomotin family proteins ( AMOTs ) act as mechani - cal mediators between F - actin structures and YAP / TAZ . AMOTs directly bind and potentially inhibit YAP / TAZ ( ref . 42 ) . Moreover , AMOTs interact with F - actin in a manner mutually exclusive with their YAP / TAZ association 43 . However , validation of AMOTs as mechanotransducers and bona fide YAP / TAZ inhibitors is lacking 44 . The nucleus itself can act as a mechanosensitive subcellular com - partment by means of the interaction between F - actin and the LINC protein complex , as extensively reviewed elsewhere 45 . Recent work has proposed that YAP / TAZ entry in the nucleus occurs by increas - ing permeability of nuclear pores through LINC - regulated nuclear stretching ( Fig . 1 ) 46 . At the same time , disruption of F - actin anchor - ing to LINC causes a global collapse of the stress fibres spanning the nucleus , with ensuing YAP / TAZ inhibition 32 . Cell polarity regulates YAP / TAZ through Hippo signalling The Hippo pathway is an evolutionary conserved kinase cascade initially uncovered by genetic screens for tissue overgrowth mutants in Drosophila melanogaster 47 – 51 . The core of the mammalian Hippo pathway is composed of a two - kinase module in which the mamma - lian STE20 - like kinase 1 ( MST1 ) and MST2 ( orthologues of Hippo in Drosophila ) , in cooperation with their binding partner SAV1 , phosphorylate and activate large tumour suppressor 1 ( LATS1 ) and LATS2 ( orthologues of Warts in Drosophila ) . In turn , activated LATS proteins , aided by the co - factor MOB - 1 , directly phosphory - late YAP / TAZ and inhibit their activity through cytoplasmic reten - tion and protein degradation 52 ( Fig . 2a ) . Alternatively to the MST1 / 2 pathway , members of the MAPK4K family of mitogen - activated NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 889 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY protein kinases phosphorylate and activate LATS , resulting in YAP / TAZ inhibition 53 , 54 . A potent upstream inducer of the Hippo pathway is Merlin , which serves as scaffold for the core Hippo kinase module at cell – cell junctions in epithelial cells 55 , 56 . Indeed , epithelial architecture , with the engagement of cell – cell junctions and apicobasal polarity , is a strong inhibitor of YAP / TAZ activity . ECM Actomyosin High resistance High tension ECM Low cell mechanics High cell mechanics Low resistance Low tension YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ Nucleus NPC ‘closed’ NPC ‘open’ Nesprin ECM SUN YAP TAZ YAPTAZ ROCK RHO RHOGEFs FAK FAK Vinculin Talin Actomyosin ECM RAC1 β PIX PAK SRC SRC β β β α α α Actomyosin ECM Dystrophin Laminin Agrin Dystroglicancomplex a c b Fig . 1 | Biomechanical signal transduction to YAP / TAZ . a , Cells respond to ECM rigidity by adjusting their tensional state through integrin - mediated cell – ECM adhesions . Low ECM resistance corresponds to reduced adhesion and focal adhesion maturation , low actomyosin contractility and YAP / TAZ inactivation by , as yet , unclear cytoplasmic or nuclear inhibitors ( brown ring ) . b , High ECM resistance favours integrin clustering and intracellular tension , disabling YAP / TAZ mechanically - regulated inhibitory mechanisms ( red cross ) , allowing for YAP / TAZ function . c , The F - actin cytoskeleton integrates mechanical strain arising from cell – ECM and cell – cell adhesions . These physical inputs are transduced into YAP / TAZ function . YAP / TAZ activation is mediated by release of YAP / TAZ from inhibitors but also entails modulation of YAP / TAZ nuclear – cytoplasmic shuttling . The F - actin cytoskeleton impacts on the mechanics and shape of the nucleus through nesprin and SUN complexes , favouring YAP / TAZ nuclear entry by inducing nuclear deformation and increased permeability of the NPC . Left inset shows schematic representation of the signalling cascade that triggers actomyosin deposition and contractility at integrin - mediated focal adhesions . Right inset shows ECM components laminin and agrin signalling to the actomyosin cytoskeleton through the dystroglycan – dystrophin complex . β PIX , PAK - interacting exchange factor beta ; NPC , nuclear pore complex ; RhoGEFs , Rho guanidine nucleotide exchange factors ; ROCK , Rho - associated protein kinase ; SUN , SUN domain - containing protein . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 890 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY Mechanistically , cell polarity is associated with the membrane localization of Scribble , which serves as scaffold for a MST – LATS – TAZ complex that favours YAP / TAZ inhibition 57 . Other polarity proteins also impact on YAP / TAZ function , such as the apical crumbs complex ( CRB ) that binds to YAP / TAZ and favours their cytoplasmic localization 58 ( Fig . 2a ) . Loss of cell polarity is a general β - TrCP Loss of polarity Hippo OFF G α s Hippo ON G α 12 / 13 G α q / 11 G α 12 / 13 TEAD Wnt OFF Wnt ON FZ D MAP4Ks MAP4Ks LATS1 / 2 LATS1 / 2 MOB1 AMPK AMPK Energystress Proteasomaldegradation CRUMBS GPCRs NF2 FZD LRP5 / 6 YAP / TAZ activating / permissive inputs ( e . g . Mechanotransduction , Wnt ) YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ SCRIBBLE P P SAV 1 MST1 / 2 MST1 / 2 P YAPTAZ P 14 . 3 . 3 14 . 3 . 3 TEAD TEAD TCF / LEF TCF / LEF TEAD PKC ζ TIAM1 Degradation Degradation GSK3 β - cat YAPTAZ P P PPP β - TrCP APC Axin WIPWIP WIP Wnt ligand lipidation GSK3 β - cat β - cat YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ APC β - cat β - TrCP Axin APC β - cat Wnt SCD1 RHO Axin MVB a b Fig . 2 | YAP / TAZ regulation by Hippo and Wnt signalling . a , Schematic representation of the upstream components that activate the core module of the Hippo pathway , composed by the kinases MST1 / 2 and LATS1 / 2 . The ‘Hippo ON’ state ( left ) results in YAP / TAZ phosphorylation with ensuing proteasomal degradation and / or cytoplasmic sequestration . In the ‘Hippo OFF’ state ( right ) YAP / TAZ are set free of inhibitory phosphorylations ; in the presence of other YAP / TAZ inducing / permissive extrinsic or intrinsic signals , YAP / TAZ activity is unleashed . b , YAP / TAZ – Wnt signalling interplay . The destruction complex is a multiprotein machine at the core of the canonical Wnt pathway , controlling the intracellular levels of β - catenin . In the ‘Wnt OFF’ state ( left ) , YAP / TAZ associate with axin , to be incorporated in the destruction complex together with β - catenin . As such , the complex restrains both β - catenin and YAP / TAZ activity regulating their sequestration and / or degradation in the cytoplasm . In the presence of a ‘Wnt ON’ state ( right ) , the destruction complex is inhibited as axin and GSK3 bind to Wnt receptors , LRP5 / 6 , that being internalized into multi - vesicular bodies . Disassembly of the complex by Wnt ligands abolishes both β - catenin and YAP / TAZ cytosolic inhibition , triggering their nuclear accumulation and consequent activation of transcriptional responses 81 . The role of the destruction complex as checkpoint coordinating YAP / TAZ activity has been further corroborated by recent reports , including the findings that : SCD1 activity promotes the secretion of active ( that is , lipid - modified ) Wnt ligands , leading to YAP / TAZ activation 86 ( right ) ; cytosolic TIAM1 is incorporated in the destruction complex to promote β - TrCP - dependent YAP / TAZ degradation and sequestration 87 ( left ) ; actin regulator WIP stabilizes YAP / TAZ proteins by inhibiting internalization of the destruction complex in MVBs 85 ( right ) ; and tumour suppressor PKC ζ associates with the destruction complex to inhibit YAP nuclear localization 88 ( left ) . AMPK , AMP - activated protein kinase ; β - cat : β - catenin ; β - TrCP , beta - transducin repeat containing protein ; FZD , Frizzled ; GSK3 , glycogen synthase kinase 3 ; LRP5 / 6 : low - density lipoprotein receptor - related protein 5 / 6 ; MAP4K , MAP kinase kinase kinase kinase ; MVB , multi - vesicular body ; MST , mammalian Ste20 - like kinase ; NF2 , neurofibromatosis type 2 ; PKC ζ , protein kinase C , zeta ; SAV1 , Salvador 1 ; SCD1 , stearoyl - CoA - desaturase 1 ; WIP , WASP - interacting protein . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 891 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY feature of epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) , a change in cell morphology associated with changes in cell fate and acquisition of stemness traits . Consistently , YAP / TAZ are activated by EMT and are required downstream to confer cancer stem cell attributes 57 , 59 . The Hippo cascade is a prime input for YAP / TAZ activity and the first mechanism discovered for YAP / TAZ regulation . Therefore ‘Hippo signalling’ is often used as a surrogate term for ‘YAP / TAZ activity’ . This would seem incorrect , both because the Hippo cascade regulates downstream effectors other than YAP / TAZ ( ref . 60 ) , and because the Hippo pathway might not be the main player of YAP / TAZ - modulation in diverse physiological and pathological settings . In fact , there are several LATS - independent cases of YAP / TAZ reg - ulation , including mechanotransduction , RhoGTPase signalling , inflammation and metabolism 12 , 13 , 21 , 61 – 72 . Worth noting is that , in mammary gland , lung , heart , kidney , pancreas , epidermis and ner - vous system—tissues in which tumour emergence is associated with high YAP / TAZ activity—genetic depletion of Hippo pathway com - ponents does not result in tumour formation 61 , 69 , 73 – 77 . This highlights how a combination of events , Hippo - dependent and - independent , must accumulate to activate YAP / TAZ above the threshold required for tumorigenesis 7 . Moreover , direct phosphorylation of YAP by LATS may not be sufficient to inhibit YAP nuclear accumulation : YAP phosphorylation on the prime LATS - target residue S127 does not prevent YAP nuclear localization 78 ; inhibition of nuclear export results in nuclear accumulation of phosphorylated YAP ( refs 12 , 79 ) ; and mechanical deformation of the nucleus can modulate subcel - lular localization of YAP in a phosphorylation - independent man - ner 46 . That said , although cell mechanics can regulate YAP / TAZ in a manner uncoupled from their phosphorylation by LATS1 / 2 , LATS1 / 2 kinase activity can also be modulated by F - actin levels and contribute to YAP / TAZ mechanotransduction 13 , 33 , 80 , 81 . We thus envision Hippo signalling as one segment of a broader framework of molecular events by which the cell structure acts as overarching determinant of YAP / TAZ function . The reader may refer to other reviews for a more detailed discussion on this topic 9 , 81 . Wnt – YAP / TAZ signalling Besides their roles as effectors of the Hippo and mechanotrans - duction pathways , YAP / TAZ are also biochemical and transcrip - tional mediators of Wnt signalling , providing a mechanistic link to the observed overlap between Wnt and YAP / TAZ biology . At the core of the canonical Wnt pathway , the destruction complex is a multi - protein machinery that controls intracellular levels of β - catenin , but is also a critical checkpoint coordinating both β - catenin and YAP / TAZ activity 7 , 81 ( Fig . 2b ) . Strikingly , in the mouse small intestine , YAP / TAZ are not only massively activated by inactivation of destruction complex components ( as in adeno - matous polyposis coli ( Apc ) mutant cells ) but are also essential for the pro - tumorigenic effects of aberrant Wnt signalling 82 – 84 . Similarly , YAP / TAZ mediate the effects of Wnt signalling to pro - mote proliferation and tumorigenesis of CSCs ( refs 62 , 82 , 85 – 89 ) , to regulate differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs , ref . 62 ) and to sustain the intestinal crypt regeneration of organoids in vitro or after tissue damage in vivo 26 , 36 , 82 , 88 . Notably , cytoplasmic YAP / TAZ favour the recruitment of β - transducin repeats - containing protein ( β - TRCP ) to the destruc - tion complex , and as such facilitate β - catenin degradation 82 ( Fig . 2b ) . Therefore , YAP / TAZ nuclear translocation , induced by mechanical signals or Hippo inactivation , can lead to β - catenin nuclear local - ization 74 , 82 , 90 , 91 . This suggests a coherent regulation of YAP / TAZ and β - catenin that explains why activation of the Hippo pathway , by controlling YAP / TAZ cytosolic localization , also restrains Wnt – β - catenin signalling 81 . Moreover YAP / TAZ can inhibit Wnt signal - ling by inhibiting Dishevelled ( DVL ) 92 , 93 . β - catenin itself is also regulated by mechanical cues 94 . This mechanism raises the possi - bility that mechanical regulation of YAP / TAZ and β - catenin may be connected . Indeed , in epithelial monolayers , mechanical strains induce nuclear translocation of YAP followed by that of β - catenin , collectively leading to transcriptional activation required for cycle re - entry 95 . Finally , an additional layer of interconnection between YAP / TAZ and β - catenin occurs on chromatin as detailed in Table 1 . In addition to the canonical Wnt – β - catenin pathway , activa - tion of the Wnt – FZD / ROR pathway promotes YAP / TAZ signal - ling required for cell migration and osteogenic differentiation , acting through G protein alpha subunits ( G α ) 12 / 13 – RhoGTPases ( ref . 96 ) ( Fig . 2b ) . Metabolic control of YAP / TAZ A number of reports indicate a close connection between glu - cose homeostasis and YAP / TAZ activity 97 . Glucose availability has recently been found to sustain YAP / TAZ activity by feeding the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway ( HBP ) . Mechanistically , high levels of glucose lead to production of uridine diphosphate N - acetylglucosamine ( UDP – GlcNAc ) resulting in increased YAP O - GlcNAcylation , which can stabilize YAP protein levels 98 , 99 . Moreover , phosphofructokinase 1 ( PFK1 ) , responsible for the most rate - limiting step of the glycolytic cascade , promotes the YAP / TAZ transcriptional program by stabilizing their interaction with TEA domain ( TEAD ) transcription factors 64 . A metabolic shift from oxidative respiration to aerobic glycolysis , the ‘Warburg effect’ , is a hallmark of cancer . Under these conditions , glycation of Hsp90 impairs its chaperone activity on LATS1 ulti - mately contributing to YAP / TAZ activation 100 . On the other hand , shortage of glucose availability inhibits YAP / TAZ activity , mainly through activation of the cellular energy sensor AMP - activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) , which in turn regulates YAP / TAZ activity through multiple parallel phosphorylation events , either directly or through LATS1 ( ref . 97 ) . Collectively , these studies suggest that the increased glucose consumption supporting cell proliferation in can - cer cells also sustains a pro - tumorigenic transcriptional program through YAP / TAZ . Metabolism of lipids through the mevalonate / cholesterol bio - synthetic pathway is linked to the regulation of YAP / TAZ by pro - moting proliferation and migration of mammalian cells or tissue overgrowth in Drosophila embryos . Mechanistically , mevalonic acid sustains YAP / TAZ activity through the production of geranyl - geranyl - pyrophosphate , which is covalently attached to the RhoA - GTPase and required for membrane localization and activation of this protein . In turn , membrane active RhoA activates YAP / TAZ in a LATS1 / 2 - independent manner 71 , 101 . The mTOR pathway represents a prototypical mechanism for control of cell size and proliferation in response to nutrients , growth factors and cellular energy levels 102 . The mTORC1 kinase complex sustains YAP / TAZ activity , in a model of perivascular epithelioid tumours , by inhibiting the autophagosome - dependent lysosomal degradation of YAP protein in response to nutrient avail - ability 103 . Moreover , the mTORC2 kinase complex can activate YAP / TAZ through inhibitory phosphorylation of AMOT proteins 104 , or MST1 ( ref . 105 ) , although the physiological relevance of this activity remains unknown . YAP / TAZ regulation by gPCr signalling Several metabolic regulators , hormones and growth factors act as extracellular signals through different classes of G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) that , in turn , are able to induce or repress YAP / TAZ activity 52 , 97 . Specifically , stimulation of G α - coupled receptors by multiple ligands , including lysophospholipids sphingosine 1 - phos - phate ( S1P ) , lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) , thrombin , oestrogens and acetylcholine , results in YAP / TAZ activation through promotion of a RhoGTPase - regulated F - actin cytoskeleton , in a manner that is either LATS1 / 2 - dependent or independent 52 , 66 , 80 , 97 . Conversely , G α - coupled GPCR signalling elicited by glucagon or epinephrine NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 892 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY represses YAP / TAZ activity through cAMP / PKA - dependent inhibi - tion of RhoA - GTPase ( refs 80 , 106 ) ( Fig . 2a ) . Constitutive YAP / TAZ activation by aberrant expression of GPCRs , or by genetic mutations affecting their associated heterotri - meric G - proteins , is implicated in the malignant promotion of uveal melanoma 107 , skin basal - cell carcinoma 108 and in sarcomas associ - ated with Kaposi herpesvirus ( KSHV ) 109 . Crosstalk with growth factor and inflammatory signalling YAP / TAZ are interconnected with signalling pathways initiated by soluble growth factors through reciprocal mechanisms of regula - tion . As reviewed elsewhere , these include transforming growth fac - tor beta ( TGF - β ) , bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) , Hedgehog ( Hh ) and epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) pathways 52 . Following intestinal injury , during which inflammation contributes to cell proliferation 110 , the release of interleukin ( IL ) - 6 and IL - 11 activates YAP / TAZ - dependent proliferation in the intestinal crypt . Mechanistically , interleukin - mediated glycoprotein130 ( gp130 ) signalling induces the activation of Src family kinases ( SFKs ) that trigger YAP activity by direct tyrosine phosphorylation 72 . Moreover , increased YAP / TAZ activity can upregulate gp130 signalling through a transcriptional mechanism that results in an amplification loop , as observed during tumour growth initiated by APC loss 111 . TAZ also regulates the differentiation of CD4 + T helper 17 ( T H 17 ) cells ( a pro - inflammatory subset ) and promotes the expression of T H 17 cell – associated genes , including IL - 17A ( ref . 112 ) . This may be rel - evant for colorectal cancer ( CRC ) , as high levels of IL - 17A and T H 17 cells in the tumour microenvironment promote CRC progression 113 . Controlling YAP / TAZ in the nucleus Following nuclear translocation , YAP / TAZ elicit their biological functions mainly by regulating gene transcription through their association with the DNA - binding TEAD 1 – 4 family members 114 – 116 . Genome - wide , the mammalian complex of YAP or TAZ with TEAD ( YAP / TAZ – TEAD ) is directly recruited to promoter regions of a minority of YAP / TAZ targets , as most associations to chromatin occur at distant enhancers that contact their cognate promoters through DNA looping 115 . Enhancer - bound YAP / TAZ – TEAD com - plexes regulate gene transcription by inducing p300 - dependent acet - ylation at lysine 27 of histone H3 ( H3K27ac ) 114 , through recruitment of the Mediator complex and induction of transcriptional elongation through the pause release of RNA polymerase II ( ref . 116 ) ( Fig . 3a ) . On DNA , YAP / TAZ – TEAD usually act in combination with other TFs bound at neighbouring cis - regulatory elements . Analysis of ChIP - seq data revealed that the activator protein - 1 ( AP - 1 ) TFs are recruited on a large set of enhancers bound by YAP / TAZ – TEAD . This allows synergistic cooperation to control tumour proliferation , migration and invasion , to drive epigenetic reprogramming of cancer cells into a stably chemoresistant state and regulate bone metabolism 115 , 117 – 119 . Other TFs acting in combi - nation with YAP / TAZ on the cis - regulatory elements of individual genes are listed in Table 1 ( for example , runt - related transcription factor 2 ( RUNX2 ) ) 120 , 121 , which also includes work on the potential role of YAP / TAZ as transcriptional repressors . YAP / TAZ can interact with nuclear proteins that compete with their association with TEAD . Vgl - like - 4 ( VGLL4 ) counteracts YAP / TAZ - dependent tumour growth by disrupting their interaction with TEAD in gastric , lung and breast cancer 122 – 124 . Notably , VGLL proteins can also serve as binding partners to TEAD , alternative to YAP / TAZ , promoting anchorage independent growth and cell proliferation . The structural determinants of this association were recently reported in ref . 125 . Another example of a nuclear inhibitor is T - lymphoma invasion and metastasis - inducing protein 1 ( TIAM1 ) , which prevents the interaction between TEAD and YAP / TAZ in the nucleus ( probably by sequestering YAP / TAZ ) , thereby inhibiting migration and invasion of CRC cancers 87 . YAP / TAZ downstream genes and effector pathways Sustained cell proliferation is probably one of the best - character - ized YAP / TAZ - dependent biological responses . Mechanistically , YAP / TAZ stimulate cell proliferation by controlling the expression of genes directly involved in the cell cycle , such as proteins involved in DNA replication and repair , cyclins and their regulators , mitotic kinases and factors required for completion of mitosis 115 , 126 – 128 . Moreover , YAP / TAZ indirectly control cell proliferation through the induction of transcriptional regulators of the cell cycle 115 , 128 ( Fig . 3b ) . Intriguingly , Myc - dependent transcription requires the recruitment of YAP to MYC / TEAD - loaded promoters , potentially amplifying the effects of YAP / TAZ on cell proliferation 129 . Thus , MYC - driven transcription is substantially a YAP / TAZ - driven gene expression program . This expands the long - neglected chromatin layer as a pivotal element of the integration of YAP / TAZ with other oncogenic or lineage - specific transcription factors . YAP / TAZ fur - ther control the expression of CTGF , CYR61 , AXL and anti - apop - totic genes of the Bcl2 and IAP families . These targets may support YAP / TAZ - driven chemoresistance 130 – 132 and protection against apoptosis 7 , 133 . In some experimental contexts , YAP may display poorly understood tumour suppressive responses . Intriguingly , individual cells retaining elevated YAP levels undergo apoptosis when they are no longer enmeshed into a YAP - supporting micro - environment 134 . Similar tumour suppressive responses exist in colorectal cancer 92 . Exciting evidence in Drosophila suggests that part of the tumour suppressive effects of YAP are connected to ‘cell competition’ phenomena 135 . Whether cell competition occurs in adult mammalian tissues and , if so , in a YAP / TAZ - regulated man - ner , remains unknown . YAP / TAZ also activate a transcriptional program required for cardiomyocyte protection from reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) generated after cardiac injury and ischemic damage 136 , 137 . In these conditions , active YAP fosters cardiomyocyte survival and partial heart regeneration , either by cooperating with TEAD – PITX2 to regulate the expression of a large subset of PITX2 targets 137 , or by using FOXO1 as DNA - binding platform to induce the expression of antioxidant genes 136 . As outlined above , several metabolic pathways can regulate YAP / TAZ . In response , YAP / TAZ activation reprograms cell metabolism to sustain massive cell proliferation . Mechanistically , YAP / TAZ modify metabolism through direct transcriptional regulation of glycolysis enzymes 138 – 140 , HBP ( ref . 99 ) , glutamine metabolism and nucleotide biosynthesis 141 , 142 . In addition , YAP / TAZ can induce the breast cancer anti - oestrogen resistance 4 ( BCAR4 ) long non - coding RNA , leading to upregulation of the glycolytic PFKFB3 enzyme 140 , supporting YAP / TAZ transcriptional responses 64 . Furthermore , YAP / TAZ upregulation through EphA2 – RhoA – ROCK signalling is connected to raised glutamine metabolism 142 . YAP / TAZ activate mTOR signalling by promoting the tran - scription of several regulators of the mTOR pathway , such as the mTORC1 activator Ras homologue enriched - in - brain ( RHEB ) , required for proliferation of transient - amplifying ( TA ) cells dur - ing tissue renewal of mouse incisors 68 ; the L - type amino acid trans - porter 1 ( LAT1 ) , which enhances amino acid uptake and consequent mTORC1 activation 143 ; and the microRNA miR29 , which inhibits PTEN translation and PI3K - mediated activation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 kinases 144 . However , large gaps remain in our understand - ing of the potential overlap between Hippo , mTOR and YAP / TAZ in the control of cell and organ size . YAP / TAZ impact on Notch Work in various cellular contexts has revealed the importance of functional and molecular connections between YAP / TAZ and Notch signalling 145 . YAP / TAZ - dependent regulation of Notch ligands in one cell triggers activation of Notch signalling in neighbouring cells . For example , YAP / TAZ - induced JAG1 expression activates Notch NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 893 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY signalling to promote differentiation of neural crest progenitors into smooth muscle cells during arterial wall development 146 . Moreover , contraction of muscle fibres triggers YAP mechanotransduction to induce JAG2 and turn on Notch signalling in neighbouring satellite cells , preventing their differentiation 147 . Besides inducing Notch activity in trans ( non - cell autono - mously ) , YAP / TAZ - driven expression of Notch ligands can pro - tect cells endowed with the highest YAP / TAZ levels from receiving Notch signalling , so called ‘cis - inhibition’ 148 . Indeed epidermal pro - genitors are maintained in an undifferentiated state by mechanical IntegrinsFa docking proteins Stretched MSCs Cardiomyocyteregeneration Myofibroblasts in liver fibrosis Lung branching morphogenesis Endothelial cells during vessel sprouting Activated CAFs Breast cancer cells Integrin - β 1 Arhgef17BcamS1pr2Nuak2 Cytoskeletalregulatorygenes Diaph3Myl9Anln Laminin - 511 α 5 subunit F - actin regulatory proteins DGC components AATG GG - TGAGT AC Pol - II TSS AP - 1 Enhancer a c g h i d e f b Cell - cycle - associated TFs MYC FOSL1 MYBL1 ETS1 Cyclin - regulatory genes CDC25A - C CDC20 CDKN1A - B Cytokinesis DNA replication Replication origin Other mitotis - associated genes AURKA - B BUB1 PLK1 BUB3 CENPs CDCA8 Kinesins Other ORC - associated genes CDC7 GINS1 - 2 MCM10 Replication fork Lagging strand Leading strand MCMComplex KIF14KIF20BKIF23 Cyclins CDK1 CyclinB CDK1 CyclinA CDK2 CyclinA CDK4 / 6 CyclinD G 1 G 2 M S ORC CDC6 MCM2 - 7 TOP2A Pol ε Pol α TEAD YAPTAZ TEAD YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ TEAD YAPTAZ YAPTAZ YAPTAZ TEAD YAPTAZ TEAD YAPTAZ TEAD YAPTAZ GINS MCM10 Fig . 3 | YAP / TAZ nuclear activities and positive feedback mechanisms . a , Active YAP / TAZ in the nucleus bind preferentially to TEAD co - transcription factors at cognate TEAD / AP - 1 binding sequences . Complexes formed by YAP / TAZ with TEAD are , in most cases , at enhancer regions distal to the TSS , at which Pol - II is activated by chromatin looping . b , YAP / TAZ promote cell cycle progression by directly activating the transcription of different genes required for DNA replication , mitosis and checkpoint progression , and indirectly by activating the transcription of other master transcription factors , as indicated . YAP / TAZ direct transcriptional target genes are shown in red . c – i , Schematic representation of different physio - pathological and developmental conditions in which the YAP / TAZ transcriptional program leads to the instalment of a positive mechanical feedback . c , mechanically activated MSCs 153 ; d , regenerating cardiomyocytes 38 ; e , activated myofibroblasts during liver fibrosis 17 ; f , lung branching morphogenesis 154 ; g , endothelial cells during vascular development 155 , 156 ; h – i , activated CAFs and breast cancer cells 22 , 157 . AP - 1 , activator protein 1 ; FA , focal adhesions ; MCM , mini chromosome maintenance ; Pol - II , RNA polymerase II ; Pol α , DNA polymerase alpha ; Pol ε , DNA polymerase epsilon ; TSS , transcription start site . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 894 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY activation of YAP / TAZ that upregulate DLL1 , JAG2 and DLL3 ligands , resulting in cell - autonomous cis - inhibition of Notch sig - naling 149 . Thus the structural features of the microenvironment are translated into dynamic changes of YAP / TAZ activity to orchestrate spatial control of self - renewal versus differentiation of stem cells . Another exciting discovery is that YAP mechanotransduc - tion , feeding on Notch signalling , is at the center of the enigmatic somitic ‘segmentation clock’ ( periodic waves of gene function that travel through the presomitic mesoderm ) 150 . It appears that what regulates this oscillatory system are the extensive biomechanical changes occurring in cells exiting gastrulation ( including collective movement and compaction ) patterning YAP activity and leading to repression of Notch ( ref . 151 ) . The influence of YAP / TAZ on cell mechanics In light of the overarching role of cell mechanics in controlling YAP / TAZ activity , it should be mentioned that an important subset of the YAP / TAZ transcriptional program is devoted to the install - ment of a positive feedback loop that promotes F - actin remodelling and high mechanical signalling that further supports YAP / TAZ activity . Such a feedback mechanism is illustrated by the medaka fish hirame mutant , in which a loss - of function mutation of YAP causes flattening of the entire fish body , due to impaired develop - ment of actomyosin - mediated tissue tension 152 . Further , ChIP - seq analysis on MSCs cultured on substrates of different rigidities has revealed that mechanically activated YAP / TAZ can enhance the assembly of FA complexes by directly promoting the transcription of integrins and FA docking proteins 153 ( Fig . 3c ) . During cardio - myocyte regeneration , YAP / TAZ directly promote expression of F - actin regulatory proteins and adhesion molecules , including components of the DGC ( ref . 38 ) ( Fig . 3d ) . During liver fibrosis , YAP / TAZ promote the sustained expression of integrin - β 1 by acti - vated myofibroblasts 17 ( Fig . 3e ) . Conditional YAP knockout in mice impairs branching morpho - genesis of the lung , where a number of YAP / TAZ targets modulate actomyosin contractility 154 ( Fig . 3f ) . YAP / TAZ also crosstalk with vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) during angiogenesis . During vascular development , cytoskeletal rearrangement of Table 1 | YAP / TAZ cooperation with transcription factors TF Cis - regulatory element Biological role and tissue context Transcriptional effect references YAP / TAZ – TeAD cooperation with other transcription factors AP - 1 Enhancer Tumour proliferation , migration and invasion ( A549 , HCT116 , SK - N - SH , ECC1 , MDA - MB - 231 ) ; chemoresistance ; bone metabolism Activation 115 , 117 – 119 PITX2 Enhancer / Promoter Mouse myocardial regeneration following ischemic injury ( P2 mouse ventricle ) Activation 137 NICD / RBPJ Enhancer Trophoectoderm lineage specification in mouse blastocyst Activation 162 ZEB1 Promoter Breast cancer aggressiveness ( MDA - MB - 231 ) Activation 163 ICD – ERBB4 ND Breast cancer cell migration Activation 164 E2F Promoter Cell cycle progression ( S2R + ) ; PDAC proliferation ( Kras G12D - driven pancreatic tumours and primary cell cultures ) Activation 126 , 128 MYC Promoter Cell cycle entry and cell proliferation ( 3T9MycER fibroblasts ) Activation 129 SNAIL / SLUG Promoter Osteoprogenitors proliferation ( SSC - derived osteoblast progenitors ) Activation 120 p65 Promoter Breast cancer cell migration ( MCF7 ) Activation 139 NuRD complex Enhancer Mesoderm specification of hESCs ( hESC ) Inhibition 165 Promoter Epithelial cell growth and migration ( MCF - 10A ) Inhibition 166 , 167 Promoter Maintenance / preservation of smooth muscle mesenchymal progenitors ( C3H10T1 / 2 ) Inhibition 168 SMADs Enhancer Mesoderm specification of hESCs ( hESC ) Inhibition 165 YAP / TAZ cooperation with DNA binding platforms RUNX2 Promoter Osteogenic differentiation ( SSC - derived osteoblast progenitors ; C2C12 ) Activation 120 , 121 p73 Promoter DNA - damage - induced apoptosis ( HCT119 , HEK293 ) Activation 169 , 170 p53 mutant Promoter Cancer cell proliferation ( MDA - MB - 468 ) Activation 171 FOXO1 Promoter Myocardial response to ischemic injury ( H9C2 ) Activation 136 NICD / RBPJ Enhancer Embryonic differentiation of neural crest precursors ( MDA - 231 ) Activation 146 β - catenin / TCF Promoter / ND Heart development ( E14 . 5 hearts ) Activation 74 β - catenin / TBX5 Promoter Cancer cell line pro - survival genes ( HuTu80 ) Activation 29 The biological model in which the ChIP experiments were performed is indicated in brackets , when available . ND , not determined ; hESC , human embryonic stem cell ; PDAC , pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ; SSC , skeletal stem cells ; ZEB1 , zinc finger E - box - binding homeobox 1 ; ICD - ERBB4 , Erb - b2 receptor tyrosine kinase 4 intracellular domain ; E2F , E2 factor ; NuRD , nucleosome remodelling deacetylase ; SMADs , small mother against decapentaplegic ; NICD / RBPJ , notch intracellular cleaved domain / recombination signal - binding protein 1 for immunoglobulin kappa J region ; TCF , T - cell factor ; TBX5 , T - box 5 . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 895 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY endothelial cells induced by VEGF triggers activation of YAP / TAZ , which feeds back on cytoskeletal gene expression to sus - tain endothelial remodelling and ensure correct VEGF receptor trafficking 155 , 156 ( Fig . 3g ) . Another ‘inside - out’ positive feedback loop is found in breast - cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) , in which YAP / TAZ directly promote the expression of modulators of F - actin contractility . Increased contractility fosters the deposition of fibrous collagen that , by enhancing ECM stiffness , sustains YAP / TAZ activity in both CAFs and epithelial cancer cells 22 ( Fig . 3h ) . In breast cancer cells , expression of TAZ can induce cancer stem cell properties 57 but also sustain its own activity by inducing transcription of lam - inin 511 , a pro - YAP / TAZ ECM component 157 ( Fig . 3i ) . In cancer cell lines , YAP / TAZ – TEAD and AP - 1 cooperate to activate Dock proteins , a family of small GTPases that regulate Rac1 and Cdc42 to drive cytoskeletal organization , cell adhesion and motility 117 . Future outlook Interest in YAP / TAZ biology and regulation was initially inspired by pioneering work on the Hippo cascade and its roles in control - ling organ size and tumorigenesis . Subsequently , we learned that the Hippo kinase cassette is a segment of a broader framework in which YAP / TAZ are regulated by the structural features of cells and tissues in a Hippo - dependent and - independent manner . New data have shed light on the molecular mechanisms by which YAP / TAZ act as sensors and effectors of the cell’s behaviour in a tissue context . A model is emerging in which cytoskeletal organization , reflecting tissue - level mechanical forces , serves as an overarch - ing determinant of YAP / TAZ activation . In turn , through feed - back and crosstalk mechanisms , YAP / TAZ impact a variety of cellular events , from growth factor responsiveness to metabolism . Here , we have attempted to integrate data from different model systems to offer a comprehensive picture , but it should be noted that the relevance of each step might be different in distinct cells and in vivo conditions . YAP / TAZ activation can endow cell plas - ticity , reprogramming primary , genetically normal differentiated cells into their corresponding tissue - specific stem or progenitor cells 158 . There are obvious implications for regenerative medicine , but many questions remain . What are the constituents of this pro - gram ? What are the partner transcription factors by which YAP / TAZ operate in various histotypes ? Are these tissue - specific or universal ? What are the downstream genes ? Can we use YAP / TAZ to epigenetically explore the so - far enigmatic self - renewal proper - ties of stem cells ? Furthermore , the mechanisms by which YAP / TAZ are regulated by cell mechanics remain poorly understood . YAP / TAZ mechano - transduction can be independent from LATS , yet LATS itself can be regulated by F - actin , potentially reinforcing the mechanotransduction pathway . Moreover , the Hippo pathway feeds back on cytoskeletal organization by directly phosphorylating cytoskeletal components 43 , 159 . However , it is unclear how this interplay is orchestrated . The Hippo pathway has additional targets other than YAP / TAZ , including regulation of chromosome segregation , the spindle checkpoint , p53 , hormonal receptors and immune cell function 60 , 160 . Ironically , it is still unclear whether YAP / TAZ are instrumental or dispensable for the organ size control that made the Hippo pathway famous . Finally , YAP / TAZ activation is instrumental for both cancer and regeneration . The essential role of YAP / TAZ in the emer - gence of solid tumours resembles the ‘transcriptional addiction’ phenomenon observed in cancer cells , describing the dispropor - tional use of enhancer elements 7 , 161 It is currently unclear whether the knowledge outlined in this Review can be used to combat excess YAP / TAZ activity in cancer . Addressing these issues might have immediate clinical implications for an anti - YAP / TAZ - based cancer therapy . Received : 16 March 2018 ; Accepted : 14 June 2018 ; Published online : 26 July 2018 references 1 . Bissell , M . J . & Hines , W . C . Why don’t we get more cancer ? A proposed role of the microenvironment in restraining cancer progression . Nat . Med . 17 , 320 – 329 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Hu , B . et al . Multifocal epithelial tumors and field cancerization from loss of mesenchymal CSL signaling . Cell 149 , 1207 – 1220 ( 2012 ) . 3 . Panciera , T . , Azzolin , L . , Cordenonsi , M . & Piccolo , S . Mechanobiology of YAP and TAZ in physiology and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 758 – 770 ( 2017 ) . 4 . Vogel , V . & Sheetz , M . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 – 275 ( 2006 ) . 5 . DuFort , C . C . , Paszek , M . J . & Weaver , V . M . Balancing forces : architectural control of mechanotransduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 308 – 319 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Humphrey , J . D . , Dufresne , E . R . & Schwartz , M . A . Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 802 – 812 ( 2014 ) . 7 . Zanconato , F . , Cordenonsi , M . & Piccolo , S . YAP / TAZ at the Roots of Cancer . Cancer Cell 29 , 783 – 803 ( 2016 ) . 8 . Huang , S . & Ingber , D . E . The structural and mechanical complexity of cell - growth control . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 131 – 138 ( 1999 ) . 9 . Gaspar , P . & Tapon , N . Sensing the local environment : actin architecture and Hippo signalling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 31 , 74 – 83 ( 2014 ) . 10 . Makita , R . et al . Multiple renal cysts , urinary concentration defects , and pulmonary emphysematous changes in mice lacking TAZ . Am . J . Physiol . Ren . Physiol . 294 , 542 – 553 ( 2008 ) . 11 . Morin - Kensicki , E . M . et al . Defects in yolk sac vasculogenesis , chorioallantoic fusion , and embryonic axis elongation in mice with targeted disruption of Yap65 . Mol . Cell Biol . 26 , 77 – 87 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Dupont , S . et al . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 183 ( 2011 ) . 13 . Aragona , M . et al . A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 154 , 1047 – 1059 ( 2013 ) . 14 . Furukawa , K . T . , Yamashita , K . , Sakurai , N . & Ohno , S . The epithelial circumferential actin belt regulates YAP / TAZ through nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of Merlin . Cell Rep . 20 , 1435 – 1447 ( 2017 ) . 15 . Deng , H . et al . Spectrin regulates Hippo signaling by modulating cortical actomyosin activity . eLife 4 , e06567 ( 2015 ) . 16 . Fletcher , G . C . et al . The Spectrin cytoskeleton regulates the Hippo signalling pathway . EMBO J . 34 , 940 – 954 ( 2015 ) . 17 . Martin , K . et al . PAK proteins and YAP - 1 signalling downstream of integrin beta - 1 in myofibroblasts promote liver fibrosis . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12502 ( 2016 ) . 18 . Caliari , S . R . et al . Stiffening hydrogels for investigating the dynamics of hepatic stellate cell mechanotransduction during myofibroblast activation . Sci . Rep . 6 , 21387 ( 2016 ) . 19 . Lachowski , D . et al . Substrate rigidity controls activation and durotaxis in pancreatic stellate cells . Sci . Rep . 7 , 2506 ( 2017 ) . 20 . Elbediwy , A . et al . Integrin signalling regulates YAP and TAZ to control skin homeostasis . Development 143 , 1674 – 1687 ( 2016 ) . 21 . Li , P . et al . α E - catenin inhibits a Src - YAP1 oncogenic module that couples tyrosine kinases and the effector of Hippo signaling pathway . Genes . Dev . 30 , 798 – 811 ( 2016 ) . 22 . Calvo , F . et al . Mechanotransduction and YAP - dependent matrix remodelling is required for the generation and maintenance of cancer - associated fibroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 637 – 646 ( 2013 ) . 23 . Sorrentino , G . et al . Glucocorticoid receptor signalling activates YAP in breast cancer . Nat . Commun . 8 , 14073 ( 2017 ) . 24 . Wang , L . et al . Integrin - YAP / TAZ - JNK cascade mediates atheroprotective effect of unidirectional shear flow . Nature 540 , 579 – 582 ( 2016 ) . 25 . Nakajima , H . et al . Flow - dependent endothelial YAP regulation contributes to vessel maintenance . Dev . Cell 40 , 523 – 536 ( 2017 ) . 26 . Yui , S . et al . YAP / TAZ - dependent reprogramming of colonic epithelium links ECM remodeling to tissue regeneration . Cell Stem Cell 22 , 35 – 49 ( 2018 ) . 27 . Sabra , H . et al . β 1 integrin - dependent Rac / group I PAK signaling mediates YAP activation of Yes - associated protein 1 ( YAP1 ) via NF2 / merlin . J . Biol . Chem . 292 , 19179 – 19197 ( 2017 ) . 28 . Sero , J . E . & Bakal , C . Multiparametric analysis of cell shape demonstrates that β - PIX directly couples YAP activation to extracellular matrix adhesion . Cell Syst . 4 , 84 – 96 ( 2017 ) . 29 . Rosenbluh , J . et al . β - Catenin - driven cancers require a YAP1 transcriptional complex for survival and tumorigenesis . Cell 151 , 1457 – 1473 ( 2012 ) . 30 . Elosegui - Artola , A . et al . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 540 – 548 ( 2016 ) . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 896 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY 31 . Plotnikov , S . V . , Pasapera , A . M . , Sabass , B . & Waterman , C . M . Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ECM - rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration . Cell 151 , 1513 – 1527 ( 2012 ) . 32 . Shiu , J . - Y . , Aires , L . , Lin , Z . & Vogel , V . Nanopillar force measurements reveal actin - cap - mediated YAP mechanotransduction . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 262 – 271 ( 2018 ) . 33 . Zhao , B . et al . Cell detachment activates the Hippo pathway via cytoskeleton reorganization to induce anoikis . Genes . Dev . 26 , 54 – 68 ( 2012 ) . 34 . Foster , C . T . , Gualdrini , F . & Treisman , R . Mutual dependence of the MRTF - SRF and YAP - TEAD pathways in cancer - associated fibroblasts is indirect and mediated by cytoskeletal dynamics . Genes . Dev . 31 , 2361 – 2375 ( 2017 ) . 35 . Tang , Y . et al . MT1 - MMP - dependent control of skeletal stem cell commitment via a β 1 - integrin / YAP / TAZ signaling axis . Dev . Cell 25 , 402 – 416 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Gjorevski , N . et al . Designer matrices for intestinal stem cell and organoid culture . Nature 539 , 560 – 564 ( 2016 ) . 37 . Xin , M . , Olson , E . N . & Bassel - Duby , R . Mending broken hearts : cardiac development as a basis for adult heart regeneration and repair . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 529 – 541 ( 2013 ) . 38 . Morikawa , Y . et al . Actin cytoskeletal remodeling with protrusion formation is essential for heart regeneration in Hippo - deficient mice . Sci . Signal . 8 , ra41 ( 2015 ) . 39 . Bassat , E . et al . The extracellular matrix protein agrin promotes heart regeneration in mice . Nature 547 , 179 – 184 ( 2017 ) . 40 . Chakraborty , S . et al . Agrin as a mechanotransduction signal regulating YAP through the Hippo pathway . Cell Rep . 18 , 2464 – 2479 ( 2017 ) . 41 . Pathak , M . M . et al . Stretch - activated ion channel Piezo1 directs lineage choice in human neural stem cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 16148 – 16153 ( 2014 ) . 42 . Zhao , B . et al . Angiomotin is a novel Hippo pathway component that inhibits YAP oncoprotein . Genes . Dev . 25 , 51 – 63 ( 2011 ) . 43 . Mana - Capelli , S . , Paramasivam , M . , Dutta , S . & McCollum , D . Angiomotins link F - actin architecture to Hippo pathway signaling . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 1676 – 1685 ( 2014 ) . 44 . Piccolo , S . , Dupont , S . & Cordenonsi , M . The biology of YAP / TAZ : hippo signaling and beyond . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 1287 – 1312 ( 2014 ) . 45 . Kirby , T . J . & Lammerding , J . Emerging views of the nucleus as a cellular mechanosensor . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 373 – 381 ( 2018 ) . 46 . Elosegui - Artola , A . et al . Force triggers YAP nuclear entry by regulating transport across nuclear pores . Cell 171 , 1397 – 1410 ( 2017 ) . 47 . Xu , T . , Wang , W . , Zhang , S . , Stewart , R . A . & Yu , W . Identifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics : the Drosophila lats gene encodes a putative protein kinase . Development 121 , 1053 – 1063 ( 1995 ) . 48 . Justice , R . W . , Zilian , O . , Woods , D . F . , Noll , M . & Bryant , P . J . The Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferation . Genes . Dev . 9 , 534 – 546 ( 1995 ) . 49 . Tapon , N . et al . salvador Promotes both cell cycle exit and apoptosis in Drosophila and is mutated in human cancer cell lines . Cell 110 , 467 – 478 ( 2002 ) . 50 . Harvey , K . F . , Pfleger , C . M . & Hariharan , I . K . The Drosophila Mst ortholog , hippo , restricts growth and cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis . Cell 114 , 457 – 467 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Wu , S . , Huang , J . , Dong , J . & Pan , D . hippo encodes a Ste - 20 family protein kinase that restricts cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in conjunction with salvador and warts . Cell 114 , 445 – 456 ( 2003 ) . 52 . Meng , Z . , Moroishi , T . & Guan , K . - L . Mechanisms of Hippo pathway regulation . Genes . Dev . 30 , 1 – 17 ( 2016 ) . 53 . Li , Q . et al . The conserved misshapen - warts - Yorkie pathway acts in enteroblasts to regulate intestinal stem cells in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 31 , 291 – 304 ( 2014 ) . 54 . Meng , Z . et al . MAP4K family kinases act in parallel to MST1 / 2 to activate LATS1 / 2 in the Hippo pathway . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8357 ( 2015 ) . 55 . Lallemand , D . , Curto , M . , Saotome , I . , Giovannini , M . & McClatchey , A . I . NF2 deficiency promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by destabilizing adherens junctions . Genes . Dev . 17 , 1090 – 1100 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Yin , F . et al . Spatial organization of Hippo signaling at the plasma membrane mediated by the tumor suppressor Merlin / NF2 . Cell 154 , 1342 – 1355 ( 2013 ) . 57 . Cordenonsi , M . et al . The Hippo transducer TAZ confers cancer stem cell - related traits on breast cancer cells . Cell 147 , 759 – 772 ( 2011 ) . 58 . Varelas , X . et al . The Crumbs complex couples cell density sensing to Hippo - dependent control of the TGF - β - SMAD pathway . Dev . Cell 19 , 831 – 844 ( 2010 ) . 59 . Diepenbruck , M . et al . Tead2 expression levels control the subcellular distribution of Yap and Taz , zyxin expression and epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 1523 – 1536 ( 2014 ) . 60 . Furth , N . & Aylon , Y . The LATS1 and LATS2 tumor suppressors : beyond the Hippo pathway . Cell Death Differ . 24 , 1488 – 1501 ( 2017 ) . 61 . Schlegelmilch , K . et al . Yap1 acts downstream of α - catenin to control epidermal proliferation . Cell 144 , 782 – 795 ( 2011 ) . 62 . Azzolin , L . et al . Role of TAZ as mediator of Wnt signaling . Cell 151 , 1443 – 1456 ( 2012 ) . 63 . Das , A . , Fischer , R . S . , Pan , D . & Waterman , C . M . YAP Nuclear localization in the absence of cell - cell contact is mediated by a filamentous actin - dependent , myosin II - and phospho - YAP - independent pathway during extracellular matrix mechanosensing . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 6096 – 6110 ( 2016 ) . 64 . Enzo , E . et al . Aerobic glycolysis tunes YAP / TAZ transcriptional activity . EMBO J . 34 , 1349 – 1370 ( 2015 ) . 65 . Gailite , I . , Aerne , B . L . & Tapon , N . Differential control of Yorkie activity by LKB1 / AMPK and the Hippo / Warts cascade in the central nervous system . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 5169 – 5178 ( 2015 ) . 66 . Feng , X . et al . Hippo - independent activation of YAP by the GNAQ uveal melanoma oncogene through a trio - regulated rho GTPase signaling circuitry . Cancer Cell 25 , 831 – 845 ( 2014 ) . 67 . Mo , J . - S . et al . Cellular energy stress induces AMPK - mediated regulation of YAP and the Hippo pathway . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 500 – 510 ( 2015 ) . 68 . Hu , J . K . - H . et al . An FAK - YAP - mTOR signaling axis regulates stem cell - based tissue renewal in mice . Cell Stem Cell 21 , 91 – 106 ( 2017 ) . 69 . Reginensi , A . et al . Yap - and Cdc42 - dependent nephrogenesis and morphogenesis during mouse kidney development . PLoS Genet . 9 , e1003380 ( 2013 ) . 70 . Silvis , M . R . et al . α - Catenin is a tumor suppressor that controls cell accumulation by regulating the localization and activity of the transcriptional coactivator Yap1 . Sci . Signal . 4 , ra33 ( 2011 ) . 71 . Sorrentino , G . et al . Metabolic control of YAP and TAZ by the mevalonate pathway . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 357 – 366 ( 2014 ) . 72 . Taniguchi , K . et al . A gp130 - Src - YAP module links inflammation to epithelial regeneration . Nature 519 , 57 – 62 ( 2015 ) . 73 . Chen , Q . et al . A temporal requirement for Hippo signaling in mammary gland differentiation , growth , and tumorigenesis . Genes . Dev . 28 , 432 – 437 ( 2014 ) . 74 . Heallen , T . et al . Hippo pathway inhibits Wnt signaling to restrain cardiomyocyte proliferation and heart size . Science 332 , 458 – 461 ( 2011 ) . 75 . Lavado , A . et al . Tumor suppressor Nf2 limits expansion of the neural progenitor pool by inhibiting Yap / Taz transcriptional coactivators . Development 140 , 3323 – 3334 ( 2013 ) . 76 . Lin , C . , Yao , E . & Chuang , P . - T . A conserved MST1 / 2 - YAP axis mediates Hippo signaling during lung growth . Dev . Biol . 403 , 101 – 113 ( 2015 ) . 77 . George , N . M . , Day , C . E . , Boerner , B . P . , Johnson , R . L . & Sarvetnick , N . E . Hippo signaling regulates pancreas development through inactivation of Yap . Mol . Cell Biol . 32 , 5116 – 5128 ( 2012 ) . 78 . Wada , K . - I . , Itoga , K . , Okano , T . , Yonemura , S . & Sasaki , H . Hippo pathway regulation by cell morphology and stress fibers . Development 138 , 3907 – 3914 ( 2011 ) . 79 . Ren , F . , Zhang , L . & Jiang , J . Hippo signaling regulates Yorkie nuclear localization and activity through 14 - 3 - 3 dependent and independent mechanisms . Dev . Biol . 337 , 303 – 312 ( 2010 ) . 80 . Yu , F . - X . et al . Regulation of the Hippo - YAP pathway by G - protein - coupled receptor signaling . Cell 150 , 780 – 791 ( 2012 ) . 81 . Codelia , V . A . , Sun , G . & Irvine , K . D . Regulation of YAP by mechanical strain through Jnk and Hippo signaling . Curr . Biol . 24 , 2012 – 2017 ( 2014 ) . 82 . Azzolin , L . et al . YAP / TAZ incorporation in the β - catenin destruction complex orchestrates the Wnt response . Cell 158 , 157 – 170 ( 2014 ) . 83 . Cai , J . , Maitra , A . , Anders , R . A . , Taketo , M . M . & Pan , D . β - Catenin destruction complex - independent regulation of Hippo - YAP signaling by APC in intestinal tumorigenesis . Genes . Dev . 29 , 1493 – 1506 ( 2015 ) . 84 . Gregorieff , A . , Liu , Y . , Inanlou , M . R . , Khomchuk , Y . & Wrana , J . L . Yap - dependent reprogramming of Lgr5 + stem cells drives intestinal regeneration and cancer . Nature 526 , 715 – 718 ( 2015 ) . 85 . Gargini , R . et al . WIP drives tumor progression through YAP / TAZ - dependent autonomous cell growth . Cell Rep . 17 , 1962 – 1977 ( 2016 ) . 86 . Noto , A . et al . Stearoyl - CoA - desaturase 1 regulates lung cancer stemness via stabilization and nuclear localization of YAP / TAZ . Oncogene 36 , 4573 – 4584 ( 2017 ) . 87 . Diamantopoulou , Z . et al . TIAM1 antagonizes TAZ / YAP both in the destruction complex in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus to inhibit invasion of intestinal epithelial cells . Cancer Cell 31 , 621 – 634 ( 2017 ) . 88 . Llado , V . et al . Repression of intestinal stem cell function and tumorigenesis through direct phosphorylation of β - catenin and Yap by PKC ζ . Cell Rep . 10 , 740 – 754 ( 2015 ) . 89 . Oudhoff , M . J . et al . SETD7 controls intestinal regeneration and tumorigenesis by regulating Wnt / β - Catenin and Hippo / YAP signaling . Dev . Cell 37 , 47 – 57 ( 2016 ) . 90 . Imajo , M . , Ebisuya , M . & Nishida , E . Dual role of YAP and TAZ in renewal of the intestinal epithelium . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 7 – 19 ( 2015 ) . 91 . Nowell , C . S . et al . Chronic inflammation imposes aberrant cell fate in regenerating epithelia through mechanotransduction . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 168 – 180 ( 2016 ) . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 897 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY 92 . Barry , E . R . et al . Restriction of intestinal stem cell expansion and the regenerative response by YAP . Nature 493 , 106 – 110 ( 2013 ) . 93 . Varelas , X . et al . The Hippo pathway regulates Wnt / beta - catenin signaling . Dev . Cell 18 , 579 – 591 ( 2010 ) . 94 . Broders - Bondon , F . , Nguyen Ho - Bouldoires , T . H . , Fernandez - Sanchez , M . - E . & Farge , E . Mechanotransduction in tumor progression : The dark side of the force . J . Cell Biol . http : / / doi . org / gdjfsz ( 2018 ) . 95 . Benham - Pyle , B . W . , Pruitt , B . L . & Nelson , W . J . Cell adhesion . Mechanical strain induces E - cadherin - dependent Yap1 and β - catenin activation to drive cell cycle entry . Science 348 , 1024 – 1027 ( 2015 ) . 96 . Park , H . W . et al . Alternative Wnt Signaling Activates YAP / TAZ . Cell 162 , 780 – 794 ( 2015 ) . 97 . Santinon , G . , Pocaterra , A . & Dupont , S . Control of YAP / TAZ activity by metabolic and nutrient - sensing pathways . Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 289 – 299 ( 2016 ) . 98 . Peng , C . et al . Regulation of the Hippo - YAP pathway by glucose sensor O - GlcNAcylation . Mol . Cell 68 , 591 – 604 ( 2017 ) . 99 . Zhang , X . et al . The essential role of YAP O - GlcNAcylation in high - glucose - stimulated liver tumorigenesis . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15280 ( 2017 ) . 100 . Nokin , M . - J . et al . Methylglyoxal , a glycolysis side - product , induces Hsp90 glycation and YAP - mediated tumor growth and metastasis . eLife 5 , 260 ( 2016 ) . 101 . Wang , Z . et al . Interplay of mevalonate and Hippo pathways regulates RHAMM transcription via YAP to modulate breast cancer cell motility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 89 – 98 ( 2013 ) . 102 . Saxton , R . A . & Sabatini , D . M . mTOR signaling in growth , metabolism , and disease . Cell 168 , 960 – 976 ( 2017 ) . 103 . Liang , N . et al . Regulation of YAP by mTOR and autophagy reveals a therapeutic target of tuberous sclerosis complex . J . Exp . Med . 211 , 2249 – 2263 ( 2014 ) . 104 . Artinian , N . et al . Phosphorylation of the Hippo pathway component AMOTL2 by the mTORC2 kinase promotes YAP signaling , resulting in enhanced glioblastoma growth and invasiveness . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 19387 – 19401 ( 2015 ) . 105 . Sciarretta , S . et al . mTORC2 regulates cardiac response to stress by inhibiting MST1 . Cell Rep . 11 , 125 – 136 ( 2015 ) . 106 . Yu , F . - X . et al . Protein kinase A activates the Hippo pathway to modulate cell proliferation and differentiation . Genes . Dev . 27 , 1223 – 1232 ( 2013 ) . 107 . Yu , F . - X . et al . Mutant Gq / 11 promote uveal melanoma tumorigenesis by activating YAP . Cancer Cell 25 , 822 – 830 ( 2014 ) . 108 . Iglesias - Bartolome , R . et al . Inactivation of a G α ( s ) - PKA tumour suppressor pathway in skin stem cells initiates basal - cell carcinogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 793 – 803 ( 2015 ) . 109 . Liu , G . et al . Kaposi sarcoma - associated herpesvirus promotes tumorigenesis by modulating the Hippo pathway . Oncogene 34 , 3536 – 3546 ( 2015 ) . 110 . Karin , M . & Clevers , H . Reparative inflammation takes charge of tissue regeneration . Nature 529 , 307 – 315 ( 2016 ) . 111 . Taniguchi , K . et al . YAP - IL - 6ST autoregulatory loop activated on APC loss controls colonic tumorigenesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 114 , 1643 – 1648 ( 2017 ) . 112 . Geng , J . et al . The transcriptional coactivator TAZ regulates reciprocal differentiation of TH17 cells and Treg cells . Nat . Immunol . 18 , 800 – 812 ( 2017 ) . 113 . West , N . R . , McCuaig , S . , Franchini , F . & Powrie , F . Emerging cytokine networks in colorectal cancer . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 15 , 615 – 629 ( 2015 ) . 114 . Stein , C . et al . YAP1 exerts its transcriptional control via TEAD - mediated activation of enhancers . PLoS . Genet . 11 , e1005465 ( 2015 ) . 115 . Zanconato , F . et al . Genome - wide association between YAP / TAZ / TEAD and AP - 1 at enhancers drives oncogenic growth . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 1218 – 1227 ( 2015 ) . 116 . Galli , G . G . et al . YAP drives growth by controlling transcriptional pause release from dynamic enhancers . Mol . Cell 60 , 328 – 337 ( 2015 ) . 117 . Liu , X . et al . Tead and AP1 coordinate transcription and motility . Cell Rep . 14 , 1169 – 1180 ( 2016 ) . 118 . Shaffer , S . M . et al . Rare cell variability and drug - induced reprogramming as a mode of cancer drug resistance . Nature 546 , 431 – 435 ( 2017 ) . 119 . Zhao , L . et al . YAP1 is essential for osteoclastogenesis through a TEADs - dependent mechanism . Bone 110 , 177 – 186 ( 2018 ) . 120 . Tang , Y . , Feinberg , T . , Keller , E . T . , Li , X . - Y . & Weiss , S . J . Snail / Slug binding interactions with YAP / TAZ control skeletal stem cell self - renewal and differentiation . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 917 – 929 ( 2016 ) . 121 . Hong , J . - H . et al . TAZ , a transcriptional modulator of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation . Science 309 , 1074 – 1078 ( 2005 ) . 122 . Zhang , W . et al . VGLL4 functions as a new tumor suppressor in lung cancer by negatively regulating the YAP - TEAD transcriptional complex . Cell Res . 24 , 331 – 343 ( 2014 ) . 123 . Zhang , Y . et al . VGLL4 selectively represses YAP - dependent gene induction and tumorigenic phenotypes in breast cancer . Sci . Rep . 7 , 6190 ( 2017 ) . 124 . Jiao , S . et al . A peptide mimicking VGLL4 function acts as a YAP antagonist therapy against gastric cancer . Cancer Cell 25 , 166 – 180 ( 2014 ) . 125 . Pobbati , A . V . , Chan , S . W . , Lee , I . , Song , H . & Hong , W . Structural and functional similarity between the Vgll1 - TEAD and the YAP - TEAD complexes . Structure 20 , 1135 – 1140 ( 2012 ) . 126 . Nicolay , B . N . , Bayarmagnai , B . , Islam , A . B . M . M . K . , Lopez - Bigas , N . & Frolov , M . V . Cooperation between dE2F1 and Yki / Sd defines a distinct transcriptional program necessary to bypass cell cycle exit . Genes . Dev . 25 , 323 – 335 ( 2011 ) . 127 . Mizuno , T . et al . YAP induces malignant mesothelioma cell proliferation by upregulating transcription of cell cycle - promoting genes . Oncogene 31 , 5117 – 5122 ( 2012 ) . 128 . Kapoor , A . et al . Yap1 activation enables bypass of oncogenic Kras addiction in pancreatic cancer . Cell 158 , 185 – 197 ( 2014 ) . 129 . Croci , O . et al . Transcriptional integration of mitogenic and mechanical signals by Myc and YAP . Genes . Dev . 31 , 2017 – 2022 ( 2017 ) . 130 . Schoumacher , M . & Burbridge , M . Key roles of AXL and MER receptor tyrosine kinases in resistance to multiple anticancer therapies . Curr . Oncol . Rep . 19 , 19 ( 2017 ) . 131 . Lai , D . , Ho , K . C . , Hao , Y . & Yang , X . Taxol resistance in breast cancer cells is mediated by the hippo pathway component TAZ and its downstream transcriptional targets Cyr61 and CTGF . Cancer Res . 71 , 2728 – 2738 ( 2011 ) . 132 . Lin , C . - H . et al . Microenvironment rigidity modulates responses to the HER2 receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor lapatinib via YAP and TAZ transcription factors . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 3946 – 3953 ( 2015 ) . 133 . Johnson , R . & Halder , G . The two faces of Hippo : targeting the Hippo pathway for regenerative medicine and cancer treatment . Nat . Rev . Drug . Discov . 13 , 63 – 79 ( 2013 ) . 134 . Su , T . et al . Two - signal requirement for growth - promoting function of Yap in hepatocytes . eLife 4 , 1060 ( 2015 ) . 135 . Suijkerbuijk , S . J . E . , Kolahgar , G . , Kucinski , I . & Piddini , E . Cell competition drives the growth of intestinal adenomas in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 26 , 428 – 438 ( 2016 ) . 136 . Shao , D . et al . A functional interaction between Hippo - YAP signalling and FoxO1 mediates the oxidative stress response . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3315 ( 2014 ) . 137 . Tao , G . et al . Pitx2 promotes heart repair by activating the antioxidant response after cardiac injury . Nature 534 , 119 – 123 ( 2016 ) . 138 . Wang , W . et al . AMPK modulates Hippo pathway activity to regulate energy homeostasis . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 490 – 499 ( 2015 ) . 139 . Gao , Y . et al . TNF α - YAP / p65 - HK2 axis mediates breast cancer cell migration . Oncogenesis 6 , e383 ( 2017 ) . 140 . Zheng , X . et al . LncRNA wires up Hippo and Hedgehog signaling to reprogramme glucose metabolism . EMBO J . 36 , 3325 – 3335 ( 2017 ) . 141 . Cox , A . G . et al . Yap reprograms glutamine metabolism to increase nucleotide biosynthesis and enable liver growth . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 886 – 896 ( 2016 ) . 142 . Edwards , D . N . et al . The receptor tyrosine kinase EphA2 promotes glutamine metabolism in tumors by activating the transcriptional coactivators YAP and TAZ . Sci . Signal . 10 , eaan4667 ( 2017 ) . 143 . Hansen , C . G . , Ng , Y . L . D . , Lam , W . - L . M . , Plouffe , S . W . & Guan , K . - L . The Hippo pathway effectors YAP and TAZ promote cell growth by modulating amino acid signaling to mTORC1 . Cell Res . 25 , 1299 – 1313 ( 2015 ) . 144 . Tumaneng , K . et al . YAP mediates crosstalk between the Hippo and PI ( 3 ) K – TOR pathways by suppressing PTEN via miR - 29 . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 1322 – 1329 ( 2012 ) . 145 . Totaro , A . , Castellan , M . , Di Biagio , D . & Piccolo , S . Crosstalk between YAP / TAZ and Notch signaling . Trends Cell Biol . 28 , 560 – 573 ( 2018 ) . 146 . Manderfield , L . J . et al . Hippo signaling is required for Notch - dependent smooth muscle differentiation of neural crest . Development 142 , 2962 – 2971 ( 2015 ) . 147 . Esteves de Lima , J . , Bonnin , M . - A . , Birchmeier , C . & Duprez , D . Muscle contraction is required to maintain the pool of muscle progenitors via YAP and NOTCH during fetal myogenesis . eLife 5 , 3593 ( 2016 ) . 148 . Guruharsha , K . G . , Kankel , M . W . & Artavanis - Tsakonas , S . The Notch signalling system : recent insights into the complexity of a conserved pathway . Nat . Rev . Genet . 13 , 654 – 666 ( 2012 ) . 149 . Totaro , A . et al . YAP / TAZ link cell mechanics to Notch signalling to control epidermal stem cell fate . Nat . Commun . 8 , 1 – 13 ( 2017 ) . 150 . Hubaud , A . & Pourquié , O . Signalling dynamics in vertebrate segmentation . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 709 – 721 ( 2014 ) . 151 . Hubaud , A . , Regev , I . , Mahadevan , L . & Pourquié , O . Excitable dynamics and Yap - dependent mechanical cues drive the segmentation clock . Cell 171 , 668 – 682 ( 2017 ) . 152 . Porazinski , S . et al . YAP is essential for tissue tension to ensure vertebrate 3D body shape . Nature 521 , 217 – 221 ( 2015 ) . 153 . Nardone , G . et al . YAP regulates cell mechanics by controlling focal adhesion assembly . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15321 ( 2017 ) . 154 . Lin , C . et al . YAP is essential for mechanical force production and epithelial cell proliferation during lung branching morphogenesis . eLife 6 , 14665 ( 2017 ) . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 898 Review ARticle NATure Cell BiologY 155 . Kim , J . et al . YAP / TAZ regulates sprouting angiogenesis and vascular barrier maturation . J . Clin . Invest . 127 , 3441 – 3461 ( 2017 ) . 156 . Wang , X . et al . YAP / TAZ orchestrate VEGF signaling during developmental angiogenesis . Dev . Cell 42 , 462 – 478 ( 2017 ) . 157 . Chang , C . et al . A laminin 511 matrix is regulated by TAZ and functions as the ligand for the α 6B β 1 integrin to sustain breast cancer stem cells . Genes . Dev . 29 , 1 – 6 ( 2015 ) . 158 . Panciera , T . et al . Induction of expandable tissue - specific stem / progenitor cells through transient expression of YAP / TAZ . Cell Stem Cell 19 , 725 – 737 ( 2016 ) . 159 . Lucas , E . P . et al . The Hippo pathway polarizes the actin cytoskeleton during collective migration of Drosophila border cells . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 875 – 885 ( 2013 ) . 160 . Du , X . et al . Hippo / Mst signalling couples metabolic state and immune function of CD8 α + dendritic cells . Nature 558 , 141 – 145 ( 2018 ) . 161 . Bradner , J . E . , Hnisz , D . & Young , R . A . Transcriptional addiction in cancer . Cell 168 , 629 – 643 ( 2017 ) . 162 . Rayon , T . et al . Notch and hippo converge on Cdx2 to specify the trophectoderm lineage in the mouse blastocyst . Dev . Cell 30 , 410 – 422 ( 2014 ) . 163 . Lehmann , W . et al . ZEB1 turns into a transcriptional activator by interacting with YAP1 in aggressive cancer types . Nat . Commun . 7 , 10498 ( 2016 ) . 164 . Haskins , J . W . , Nguyen , D . X . & Stern , D . F . Neuregulin 1 - activated ERBB4 interacts with YAP to induce Hippo pathway target genes and promote cell migration . Sci . Signal . 7 , ra116 ( 2014 ) . 165 . Beyer , T . A . et al . Switch enhancers interpret TGF - β and Hippo signaling to control cell fate in human embryonic stem cells . Cell Rep . 5 , 1611 – 1624 ( 2013 ) . 166 . Kim , M . , Kim , T . , Johnson , R . L . & Lim , D . - S . Transcriptional co - repressor function of the hippo pathway transducers YAP and TAZ . Cell Rep . 11 , 270 – 282 ( 2015 ) . 167 . Valencia - Sama , I . et al . Hippo component TAZ functions as a co - repressor and negatively regulates Δ Np63 transcription through TEA domain ( TEAD ) transcription factor . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 16906 – 16917 ( 2015 ) . 168 . Cotton , J . L . et al . YAP / TAZ and Hedgehog coordinate growth and patterning in gastrointestinal mesenchyme . Dev . Cell 43 , 35 – 47 ( 2017 ) . 169 . Strano , S . et al . The transcriptional coactivator Yes - associated protein drives p73 gene - target specificity in response to DNA Damage . Mol . Cell 18 , 447 – 459 ( 2005 ) . 170 . Levy , D . , Adamovich , Y . , Reuven , N . & Shaul , Y . Yap1 phosphorylation by c - Abl is a critical step in selective activation of proapoptotic genes in response to DNA damage . Mol . Cell 29 , 350 – 361 ( 2008 ) . 171 . Di Agostino , S . et al . YAP enhances the pro - proliferative transcriptional activity of mutant p53 proteins . EMBO Rep . 17 , 188 – 201 ( 2015 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank all members of the S . P . laboratory for discussion . This work is supported by AIRC Special Program Molecular Clinical Oncology ‘5 per mille’ , by an AIRC PI - Grant to S . P . , and by Epigenetics Flagship project CNR - MIUR grants to S . P , and from a donation in memoriam of Liana Simonutti . This project has received funding from the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme ( grant agreement No . 670126 - DENOVOSTEM ) . Author contributions All authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article ( researching data for article , substantial contribution to discussion of content , writing , review and editing of the manuscript before submission ) . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Correspondence should be addressed to S . P . Publisher’s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . NATure Cell BiologY | VOL 20 | AUGUST 2018 | 888 – 899 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 899