The cellular demand for the splicing of precursor mes - senger RNAs ( pre - mRNAs ) is enormous . Typical human genes have eight introns , and each intron provokes the de novo assembly of a spliceosome 1 , 2 . It takes only one RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) , one set of 5 ʹ end capping enzymes and one 3 ʹ end cleavage and polyadenylation complex to transcribe the pre - mRNA and to process its 5ʹ and 3ʹ ends , whereas multiple spliceosomes are necessary to remove introns from the pre - mRNA body . Nascent RNA is mostly spliced during transcription elong - ation 3 . The number of spliceosomes that simultane ously act on a given transcript is unknown . However , we can infer that RNA sequence and secondary structure con - tinuously change with the progress of both transcription and splicing . The recent observation that splicing is often com - pleted as soon as the intron emerges from Pol II 4 , 5 invites us to consider mechanisms that can affect co - transcriptional splicing efficiency . In this Review , we discuss the minimal distances along the pre - mRNA that are required for each spliceosome assembly stage , and how transcription elongation dynamics and RNA folding may influence the identification of the introns and splicing catalysis . We evaluate how other co - transcriptional events — 5ʹ end capping , RNA modifi - cations and 3ʹ end processing — assist in intron and exon identification . Although the spliceosome and splicing catalysis are highly conserved , higher eukaryotes have degenerate splice sites and a larger , more complex pool of splicing factors . This enables variable splicing outcomes , including frequent alternative splicing . We illustrate how the core transcription and processing machineries can be modulated to obtain different splicing outcomes . Importantly , splicing stimulates other processes — most notably , transcription itself 6 – 13 — suggesting that the spliceo some has other direct or indirect activities beyond intron removal . We propose that the intricate coordin - ation between DNA , RNA sequence and structure , and the transcription and processing machineries ensures highly efficient and regulated co - transcriptional mRNA processing , and that this coordination may be achieved partly by concentrating all of the involved components in subnuclear membrane - less compartments . Gene architecture and pre - mRNA splicing The transcription start site ( TSS ) marks the 5ʹ end of the first exon , and the poly ( A ) site ( PAS ) marks the 3ʹ end of the last exon ( FIG . 1a ) . Exon – intron organization prov - ides important additional landmarks for the alignment of signals and activities , such as Pol II density , chro - matin modifications , and RNA sequence and structure elements . Mammalian genes are longer than yeast genes , primarily because they contain more and longer introns 14 . Nevertheless , several aspects of gene architecture are con - served from yeast to humans . For example , the last exon is almost always the longest . Moreover , intron structure is similar across evolution : the GU and AG dinucleotides , which are contained in short and conserved sequences known as splice sites , define the 5ʹ and 3ʹ intron bound - aries , respectively ( FIG . 1a ) . A third sequence , the branch - point sequence ( BPS ; see below ) , is 18 – 40 nucleotides upstream of the 3ʹ splice site ( 3ʹSS ) 15 – 18 . In metazoans , 1 Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut 06520 , USA . 2 Present address : Department of Biology , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 , USA . * These authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence to K . M . N . karla . neugebauer @ yale . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 63 Published online 9 Aug 2017 5 ʹ end capping The addition of an untemplated guanosine to the 5’ end of an RNA polymerase II transcript followed by its methylation at the N7 position . Capping protects the mRNA 5 ʹ end from endonucleases . 3 ʹ end cleavage and polyadenylation Endonucleolytic cleavage that defines the 3 ʹ ends of RNA polymerase II transcripts by cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor ( CPSF ) and other factors , followed by the addition of non - templated poly ( A ) tails by poly ( A ) polymerase . Splicing and transcription touch base : co‑transcriptional spliceosome assembly and function Lydia Herzel 1 , 2 * , Diana S . M . Ottoz 1 * , Tara Alpert 1 and Karla M . Neugebauer 1 Abstract | Several macromolecular machines collaborate to produce eukaryotic messenger RNA . RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) translocates along genes that are up to millions of base pairs in length and generates a flexible RNA copy of the DNA template . This nascent RNA harbours introns that are removed by the spliceosome , which is a megadalton ribonucleoprotein complex that positions the distant ends of the intron into its catalytic centre . Emerging evidence that the catalytic spliceosome is physically close to Pol II in vivo implies that transcription and splicing occur on similar timescales and that the transcription and splicing machineries may be spatially constrained . In this Review , we discuss aspects of spliceosome assembly , transcription elongation and other co‑transcriptional events that allow the temporal coordination of co‑transcriptional splicing . RNA PROCESSING AND MODIFICATIONS R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | OCTOBER 2017 | 637 © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . the sequence between the BPS and the 3ʹSS contains a polypyrimidine tract 19 , which helps to identify the 3ʹSS during spliceosome assembly 2 . Despite the nucleotide sequence conservation of these sites , intron ends and their differential usage are difficult to define computa - tionally 20 . Therefore , most intron ends are annotated from empirical data , such as cDNA sequencing . Pre - mRNA splicing is a two - step transesterification reaction that has been extensively characterized in vitro 2 . The substrates for splicing catalysis are the 5ʹSS , the BPS and the 3ʹSS 21 , 22 ( FIG . 1b ) . In the first step ( step I ) , the 2ʹOH of the BPS adenosine carries out a nucleophilic attack on the 5ʹSS guanosine , yielding a 5ʹ exon with a free 3ʹOH and a branched intron lariat that is attached to the 3ʹ exon . In the second step ( step II ) , the 3ʹOH of the 5ʹ exon attacks the first nucleotide downstream of the 3ʹSS guanosine , releasing ligated 5ʹ exon−3ʹ exon and the excised intron lariat . How this chemistry is accom - plished in the context of the growing nascent RNA polymer can be considered in light of recent data on co - transcriptional splicing and spliceosome assembly . Spliceosome assembly on nascent RNA The building blocks for spliceosome assembly include five U - rich small nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( snRNPs ) , which are named after their small nuclear RNA ( snRNA ) component : U1 , U2 , U4 , U5 and U6 . The snRNPs coordin ate dynamic base pairing between the different snRNAs and between snRNAs and the pre - mRNA to obtain secondary and tertiary RNA structures that define the spliceosome catalytic centre . Protein complexes such as the nineteen complex ( NTC ) , nineteen - related ( NTR ) , retention and splicing complex ( RES ) and other non - snRNP proteins participate in spliceosome assem - bly and function 23 . For a complete list of spliceosomal components , see REF . 24 . Although splicing catalysis does not require ATP per se , essential ATPases assist the con - formational transitions during assembly by establishing and rearranging RNA – RNA , RNA – protein and protein – protein interactions 25 . The current view is that the spliceo some positions elements within the pre - mRNA , including 5ʹSSs and 3ʹSSs , for the splicing reaction . Co‑transcriptional spliceosome assembly . In vitro splicing in cellular and nuclear extracts has revealed how snRNPs associate and are released from pre - synthesized pre - mRNAs . This has led to the formulation of a spliceo - some assembly model in which the spliceosome tran - sitions through sequential assembly stages 2 , 23 , 25 . In this model , the first stages of spliceosome assembly involve the identification of the 5ʹ and 3ʹ ends of the intron , fol - lowed by spliceosome maturation , spliceosome activ - ation and splicing catalysis ( FIG . 1b ) . Spliced RNA is then released , the spliceosome is disassembled and recycled , and the intron lariat is debranched and degraded 2 , 23 . Spliceosome components and assembly are generally conserved in eukaryotes . The ~ 90 core proteins are con - served between the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevi - siae and human spliceosomes , although the number of human spliceosome proteins ( ~ 175 ) is twofold higher compared with yeast 26 . Because alternative splicing is GU 5 ′ 5 ′ exon A Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology U G A E A B B act B * C C * P Splicednascent RNA a b 5 ′ 5 ′ exon 3 ′ exon 5 ′ 5 ′ 5 ′ exon AG GU 5 ′ 5 ′ exon GU 5 ′ 5 ′ exon GU A A 5 ′ GU 5 ′ 5 ′ exon GT A AG 5 ′ SS 3 ′ SS BPS 5 ′ exon TSS PAS Spliceosomeassembly stages TTS Activation Activation Step II Step I Maturation Assembly Release Assembly 5 ′ 5 ′ exon 3 ′ ex U1 snRNP Branchpoint sequence recognition factors U2 snRNP U4 / U6•U5 tri - snRNP U2 , U5 , U6 snRNPs Pol II catalyticcentre DNA 3 ′ exon Pol II CTD U G A 5 ′ exon AG A U G A AG U4snRNP U G A A G ILS NascentRNA DNA 5 ′ exon A BBP Figure 1 | Yeast gene architecture and co‑transcriptional spliceosome assembly . a | Typical architecture of a budding yeast gene that contains one intron . The transcription start site ( TSS ) , poly ( A ) site ( PAS ) and transcription termination site ( TTS ) are shown ; for simplicity , only one of each site is represented . b | Co‑transcriptional recruitment of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( snRNPs ) and splicing . The recruitment of U1 snRNP and the yeast branchpoint sequence ( BPS ) recognition factors ( branchpoint binding protein ( BBP ) and Mud2 ) results in complex E . U2 snRNP recruitment and the concomitant displacement of BBP results in complex A . Upon recruitment of the U4 / U6•U5 tri‑snRNP complex B is formed . The subsequent release of the U1 and U4 snRNPs converts complex B into mature B act , which contains the U2 , U5 and U6 snRNPs . Catalytic activation ( red star ) yields complex B * . Step I catalysis produces complex C , which contains the 5 ʹ exon and the branched intron lariat−3 ʹ exon . Step II , which is catalysed by activated complex C * , produces complex P , which contains the ligated 5 ʹ exon−3 ʹ exon and the excised intron lariat . Spliced nascent RNA and intron lariat spliceosome ( ILS ) are then released . The 3 ʹ end of the nascent RNA lies in the catalytic centre of RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) . The hatch marks on each nascent RNA replace the much longer sequence of the intron between the 5 ʹ SS and the BPS . CTD , carboxy‑terminal domain ; SS , splice site . R E V I E W S 638 | OCTOBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nascent RNA RNA that is tethered to DNA by any elongating RNA polymerase . Gene architecture The ensemble of cis - regulatory , coding and non - coding elements of a gene , including length , position and sequence . Ultraviolet ( UV ) crosslinking UV irradiation - induced covalent bonds that link amino acids with nucleic acids . extremely rare in budding yeast , this organism has been widely used as a model for identifying the basic prin - ciples of spliceosome function and assembly . Although this Review is guided by findings in budding yeast , we highlight numerous roles of metazoan proteins in these processes . Chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) - based experiments showed that spliceosomal components accumulate around splice sites following their tran - scription ( Supplementary information S1 ( box ) ) . For example , U1 snRNP ChIP signals increase immedi - ately downstream of the exon – intron boundary 27 – 30 . This in vivo observation supports the stepwise spliceo - some assembly model that was derived from bio - chemistry ( FIG . 1b ) . Studies in multiple laboratories and in many species indicate that splicing is mainly co - transcriptional 3 . Recently , single - molecule sequencing of nascent RNA from yeast showed that splicing cataly - sis occurs when Pol II has transcribed 26 – 129 nucleo - tides downstream of the 3ʹSS 4 , 5 . These data suggest that spliceo some assembly , splicing catalysis and transcrip - tion elongation occur at similar rates . In such a model , the progress of transcription and spliceosome assem - bly are interwoven , raising the question of how many nucleo tides downstream of the 5ʹSS , BPS and 3ʹSS need to be transcribed for spliceosome assembly and catalysis . Commitment to splicing . The first step of spliceosome assembly is the formation of commitment complex E ( FIG . 1b ) . The U1 snRNP binds to the 5ʹSS , and splicing factor 1 ( SF1 ) and U2 auxiliary factor ( U2AF ) establish RNA – protein interactions with the BPS and the poly - pyrimidine tract at the 3ʹ end of the intron . Mammalian U2AF65 ( also known as U2AF2 ) binds to Pol II in the early transcription stages and is delivered to nascent RNA as soon as a few nucleotides have emerged from the enzyme 31 . In vivo ultraviolet ( UV ) crosslinking experiments have shown that the binding of yeast U1 snRNP protein components is highest ~ 17 nucleotides downstream of the 5ʹSS 32 . This suggests that U1 snRNP contacts addi - tional nucleotides around the 5ʹSS via RNA – protein interactions , in addition to base pairing its snRNA with the 5ʹSS 23 . The UV crosslinking signal of the branch - point binding protein ( BBP ; the yeast orthologue of SF1 ) peaks on the BPS , whereas Mud2 ( the yeast homo - logue of U2AF65 ) crosslinks along the entire intron 32 . These observations suggest that the transcription of the 5ʹSS , BPS and the few downstream nucleotides is necessary to trigger spliceosome assembly in yeast ( FIG . 1b ) . Gene - specific distances between the 5ʹSS and the BPS , and thus the different time intervals between the emergence of the BPS from Pol II relative to the 5ʹSS , could influence the kinetics of commitment complex E formation to different degrees . Assembly of a catalytically active spliceosome . Complex E is converted into the pre - spliceosome ( com - plex A ) once BBP dissociates and U2 snRNA base pairs with the BPS . The BPS adenosine bulges out of the BPS – U2 duplex and will carry out the nucleophilic attack on the 5ʹSS during step I . Recruitment of the tri - snRNP that contains U4 , U6 and U5 results in complex B for - mation 33 – 36 ( FIG . 1b ) . Conformational rearrangements of RNA – RNA and RNA – protein interactions , the recruit - ment or stabilization of protein complexes , such as NTC , NTR and RES , and the release of U1 and U4 snRNPs result in spliceosome maturation into the activated com - plex B act ( REF . 26 ) ( FIG . 1b ) . In vitro studies have shown that yeast B act assembles on pre - mRNAs that lack the 3ʹSS , indicating that only the BPS is required for this assembly stage 26 , 37 , 38 . B act contains the catalytic centre that is formed by the interactions between U2 – U6 and the pre - mRNA , but the spliceosome is not catalytically active 39 , 40 . UV crosslinking of purified yeast B act complex revealed that the SF3a and SF3b complexes of the U2 snRNP directly contact the pre - mRNA upstream and downstream of the BPS 37 , 41 . Recent cryo - electron micro - scopy ( cryo - EM ) structures of yeast B act have shown that the BPS is occluded by components of SF3b and that it is kept ~ 50 Å away from the catalytic centre 39 , 40 . The ATPase Prp2 triggers the conversion of B act into the cata lytically active complex B * by destabilizing SF3a and SF3b , thereby exposing the BPS adenosine 37 , 40 . A stretch of 23 – 33 nucleotides downstream of the BPS is necessary and sufficient for Prp2 action 37 ( TABLE 1 ) . Conversion into B * and step I catalysis do not require the 3ʹSS AG dinucleo tide in yeast or in mammalian extracts 37 , 38 , 42 . In a co - transcriptional context , these observations suggest that step I catalysis can , in principle , take place as soon as a short stretch of ~ 30 nucleotides downstream of BPS emerges from Pol II . The presence of the 3ʹSS in this stretch of nucleotides is not necessary for step I . Table 1 | Estimation of spatial constraints on RNA processing Process Processing substep Location on pre‑mRNA Minimal distance from processing site ( nt ) * Experimental system Organism Refs 5 ʹ end capping NA 5 ʹ end ~ 20 In vivo Budding yeast 53 , 127 RNA editing NA Gene specific < 60 In vivo Mammals 109 Splicing Step I BPS < 40 In vitro Budding yeast 37 Step II 3 ʹ SS < 40 In vivo Budding yeast 4 mRNA release Splice junction ~ 20 In vitro Budding yeast 45 3 ʹ end cleavage NA PAS < 200 In vivo Budding yeast 186 , 187 BPS , branchpoint sequence ; NA , not applicable ; nt , nucleotides ; PAS , poly ( A ) site ; SS , splice site . * Distances along the pre‑mRNA required to start RNA processing . In vivo distance values reflect the amount of transcribed RNA required for the listed processing event ; in vitro distance values refer to minimal RNA lengths required by ATPases to trigger these reactions . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | OCTOBER 2017 | 639 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Rearrangements preceding step II . Complex C , which is formed following step I catalysis , contains the 5ʹ exon and intron lariat−3ʹ exon intermediates ( FIG . 1b ) . The U5 snRNA base pairs with the 5ʹ exon , thereby retain - ing it in the active site . The U6 snRNA interacts with the branched 5ʹSS , and the U2 snRNA immobilizes the intron lariat 43 , 44 . UV crosslinking experiments have shown that , upon step I catalysis , the major U5 snRNP protein Prp8 binds to the pre - mRNA downstream of the BPS , near the 3ʹSS , implying that further conforma - tional changes are necessary for the subsequent step 41 . Complex C stimulates the ATPase activity of Prp16 , which rearranges the catalytic site from step I to step II conformation , leading to the formation of activated complex C * ( REFS 45 , 46 ) . Recent cryo - EM structures of this complex have revealed a major rearrangement of the branched adenosine and the BPS – U2 snRNA duplex , and have suggested that the vacated space caused by this reorganiza tion in the catalytic centre contributes to 3ʹSS localization to the catalytic site 47 – 49 . The first AG dinucleo tide encountered downstream of the BPS docks in the active site 21 , 50 . This is known as the ‘first AG rule’ , and is consistent with a co - transcriptional spliceosome assembly model , in which this AG dinucleotide is the first to be transcribed and , therefore , is favoured for recognition by the spliceosome . However , exceptions to the first AG rule have been observed . For example , if the dinucleotide is located closer than 10 nucleotides downstream of the BPS or if it is buried in secondary structures , then it is not efficiently recognized and is skipped 51 , 52 . Alternative 3ʹSS selection is frequent in metazoans ; how the spliceosome skips 3ʹSSs that are favourably positioned relative to the BPS is unclear . Step II catalysis and post‑splicing dynamics . Step II catalysis , in which the 3ʹOH of the 5ʹ exon attacks the first residue of the 3ʹ exon , produces the post - spliceosome ( complex P ) , which is associated to the ligated 5ʹ exon−3ʹ exon nascent RNA and the excised intron lariat ( FIG . 1b ) . In yeast , the earliest step II products have been observed when Pol II transcribes < 40 nucleo - tides downstream of the 3ʹSS 4 ( TABLE 1 ) . In light of pos - sible crosstalk between Pol II and the spliceosome , it is interesting to consider how much RNA is protected by Pol II and the spliceo some and thus how close the two machines may be during co - transcriptional splicing . On the one hand , 15 nucleotides of nascent RNA are buried in the Pol II exit channel 53 . On the other hand , ~ 20 nucleotides downstream of the 3ʹSS are likely embed - ded in the spliceo some , because Prp22 ( an ATPase with splicing fidelity and disassembly functions ) requires a segment of 13 – 23 nucleotides downstream of the splice junction 45 . The sum of these nucleotides ( ~ 35 ) and recent measurements of Pol II position at the completion of step II ( < 40 nt downstream ) highlight the close proximity of the spliceosome to Pol II ( FIG . 1b ) ( TABLE 1 ) . The obser - vation that Prp22 can be crosslinked by UV irradiation to the 3ʹ exon downstream of the splice junction only after step II completion 45 suggests that further transcription is necessary for mRNA release ( FIG . 1b ) . Finally , the ATPase Prp43 disassembles the intron lariat spliceosome ( ILS ) into the intron lariat and the spliceosomal components , which are then recycled for further rounds of splicing 54 . Transcription and splicing interactions Spliceosome assembly and catalysis require the recog - nition of the splice sites and BPS on the nascent tran - script . How is this achieved ? Two main aspects define the co - transcriptional selection of splice sites and the BPS . First , only a subset of these sequences is present on the nascent RNA at a given time because of ongoing transcription . This restricts the choice of sites available to the spliceosome . Transcription rate determines the portion of the transcript that is available for inspection by the spliceosome , such that faster transcription rates may provide longer stretches of nascent RNA sequence . Interestingly , Pol II elongation rates are faster over introns than over exons 55 , 56 . Second , both DNA and RNA undergo different folding states and modifications , and they exhibit dynamic protein - binding profiles that influence transcription rate , accessibility of splice sites and BPS , as well as splicing factor recruitment . Local differences in post - translational modifications ( PTMs ) of the Pol II carboxy - terminal domain ( CTD ) and chromatin environment influence transcription rates and nascent RNA processing dynamics . For example , the histone 2A variant H2A . Z promotes efficient pre - mRNA splicing of introns with non - consensus splice sites in both budding and fission yeast 57 , 58 . The exten - sive crosstalk between splicing , transcription and other nuclear machineries can be appreciated by considering the multitude of reported genetic and physical inter - actions between them , which we summarize in FIG . 2 ( see also Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . Phosphorylation dynamics of the Pol II CTD . Changes in PTMs of the Pol II CTD mirror and influence the different phases of transcription and nascent RNA processing , owing to the interaction of the CTD with factors that regulate transcription , mRNA processing and downstream steps such as mRNA export 11 , 59 , 60 . CTD - modifying enzymes often have additional cellular targets , thereby integrating the CTD into a greater net - work of gene expression 59 . The CTD consists of repeats of almost the same seven amino acids Tyr1 - Ser2 - Pro3 - Thr4 - Ser5 - Pro6 - Ser7 ( 26 repeats in yeast and 52 in humans 61 , 62 ) , which are mainly modified by phosphoryl - ation of Ser2 , Ser5 , Ser7 , Thr4 and Tyr1 ( REFS 63 – 65 ) ( FIG . 3a ) . Pol II is differentially modified at the start and the end of transcription units . In budding yeast , Ser5 and Ser7 phosphorylation ( Ser5P and Ser7P ) occurs early , during transcription initiation and early elong - ation along the first exon , whereas Ser2 , Thr4 and Tyr1 phosphorylation occurs later , during the transcription of the second exon and transcription termination ( FIG . 3a ) . PTM transitions have recently been mapped to tran - scription pause positions along yeast gene bodies and , in particular , to 3ʹSSs , consistent with changes in Pol II elongation rate around intron – exon boundaries 66 , 67 . In well - spliced yeast genes , the relative abundance of ‘early’ CTD PTMs decreases over the intron , whereas ‘late’ PTMs begin to increase at the 3ʹSS ( FIG . 3b ) . R E V I E W S 640 | OCTOBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology U 1 U 2 A t r i B B a c t C P U 1 U 2 A t r i B B a c t C P Spliceosome complexes and small nuclear ribonucleoproteins C h r o m a t i n m o d i ﬁ e r D e c a y E x p o r t C h r o m a t i n r e m o d e ll i n g T r a n s c r i p t i o n P r o c e ss i n g Relative number of reported interactions 0 2 4 8 10 6 Max Non - spliceosomal complexes involved in nuclear gene expression Nucleosomal protein complex Genetic interactions Physical interactions Nuclear exosome complex RNA degradation complex TRAMP complex THO complex Sac3p / Thp1p complex Transcription export complex Nuclear cap - binding protein CBC complex Decapping enzyme complex mRNA guanylyl transferase ( capping complex ) mRNA cleavage factor complex ( CFI ) mRNA cleavage and polyadenylation speciﬁcity factor complex Chz1p / Htz1p / Htb1p complex Chromatin accessibility complex ISW1b complex SWI / SNF complex Ino80p complex HIR complex Swr1p complex RNA polymerase I upstream activating factor complex CURI complex GCR complex Ume6p / Ime1p complex Rtg1p / Rtg3p complex Carboxy - terminal domain protein kinase complex Ino2p / Ino4p basic helix−loop−helix heteromeric complex DNA - directed RNA polymerase II complex Ada2p / Gcn5p / Ada3 transcription activator complex CCAAT - binding factor complex Transcription factor TFIID complex Transcription factor TFIIF complex Cdc73p – Paf1p complex DNA - directed RNA polymerase I complex Mediator complex Lge1p – Bre1p complex RENT complex NuA3 histone acetyltransferase complex Histone deacetylase complex SLIK ( SAGA - like ) complex SAGA complex COMPASS complex Histone H2A phosphatase complex Rpd3S complex Ume6p – Ime1p complex Rpd3L complex Set3p complex NuA4 histone acetyltransferase complex Figure 2 | Crosstalk of the assembling spliceosome with nuclear gene expression machineries . The crosstalk of the components of the small nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( snRNPs ) and the different spliceosome assembly stages with nuclear gene expression factors and complexes is underlined by a multitude of genetic and physical interactions . Genetic and physical interactions that involve core splicing factors of Saccharomyces cerevisiae were obtained from the Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets ( BioGRID ) . Protein complex annotations were derived from the CYC2008 yeast proteins catalogue 182 and the Spliceosome Database 24 . Only predominantly nuclear complexes that are involved in chromatin biology , transcription and RNA‑related nuclear processes were considered 183 ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . The grey scale reflects the number of reported interactions between spliceosomal and non‑spliceosomal complex subunits . The number of reported interactions is adjusted to the number of reported non‑spliceosomal complex subunits . A minimum of two reports for the same interaction was required . Overall , chromatin‑modifying and chromatin‑ remodelling complexes display predominantly genetic interactions . Fewer reports exist of physical interactions , with the exception of core spliceosomal complexes ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) and the 5 ʹ and 3 ʹ end processing machineries . In line with mechanistic studies ( see the main text ) , specific genetic interactions have been reported between the cap‑binding complex ( CBC ) and some spliceosomal complexes , but an extensive physical interaction network ( possibly mediated through the nascent RNA ) has been mapped with all spliceosomal complexes . The full non‑spliceosomal complex and protein names are given in Supplementary information S3 ( table ) . Tri , tri‑snRNP ; U1 , U1 snRNP ; U2 , U2 snRNP . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | OCTOBER 2017 | 641 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . In addition to the Pol II CTD , the entire transcrip - tion elongation machinery and the nascent RNA itself interact with proteins , forming RNP complexes . Many of these proteins belong to complexes that are involved in mRNA 5ʹ end capping , splicing , 3ʹ end processing , editing , folding , nuclear export and decay , and bind to specific transcript regions , such as untranslated regions , introns and exons 32 , 68 , 69 . For example , in higher eukar - yotes , tetrameric heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleo - protein C ( hnRNPC ) binds to introns in nascent RNA and organizes long intronic sequences for splicing 70 . During intron transcription , U1 snRNP is recruited to the 5ʹSS , and U2 snRNP levels begin to increase at the 3ʹSS , paralleling the transition from early to late CTD PTMs 32 ( FIG . 3a ) . Nevertheless , the relationship between specific Pol II CTD PTM profiles and nascent RNA processing events is far from being understood . Some profiles are different between species , such as that of Tyr1P between yeast and humans 60 , 65 , 71 , or between different studies in the same species ( FIG . 3a ) . Combinations of different PTMs can occur on the same CTD , albeit rarely within the same repeat 72 , 73 . Finally , even moderate increases in PTM levels over the gene body may be important for gene expression regulation . For example , although the Ser5P levels are highest at the beginning of transcription units , a link between this PTM and splicing has been found in both yeast and humans 66 , 74 . Pronounced peaks of Ser5P and Pol II levels are observed at the 5ʹSSs of alternatively included exons compared with excluded exons 74 , 75 . The characterization of isolated RNP complexes associ ated with specific CTD PTM profiles helps to define the dynamic nascent RNP interactome 66 . In yeast , all interactomes of the phosphorylated residues , except that of Thr4P , are enriched for splicing factors , which is consistent with the general trend of Thr4P increasing towards gene ends 64 , 66 ( FIG . 3a ) . The combination of inter - actome analyses with analyses of the activity of these transient macro molecular assemblies will be crucial for the study of co - transcriptional processes , including spliceosome assembly , activity and disassembly ( FIG . 3b ; see Supplementary information S1 ( box ) ) . Data integra - tion using computational modelling approaches , such as machine learning , will help to rationalize Pol II CTD phosphorylation patterns and to identify gene regions that are important for successful transcription and RNA pro - cessing , in addition to the known gene landmarks such as the splice sites . This will hopefully disentangle the causes and the consequences of different CTD profiles along genes 67 . Transcription rates are affected by gene architecture and chromatin features . The transcription rate can influence splice site identification by the spliceosome . Current models suggest that different local rates of transcription elongation can influence the time frame between the syn - thesis of sequential splice sites , thereby possibly modulat - ing RNA folding or the interactions with RNA - binding proteins 10 . The synthesis of RNA by Pol II occurs with an average elongation rate of 1 – 4 kb per minute 55 , 56 , 76 . However , Pol II can transiently pause , stall or termin - ate prematurely 55 , 56 . Pol II elongation rate is influenced by a multitude of factors , such as the underlying DNA sequence , nucleosome position and histone modifica - tions , which affect local chromatin structure , the activity of elongation factors , and the folding and processing of the nascent RNA 55 , 77 . For example , the balance between histone acetylation and methylation in neuronal cells is a determinant of transcription rate and associated splicing patterns 78 . The positioning of nucleosomes relative to TSSs , tran - scription termination sites ( TTSs ) , exons and introns helps to define gene architecture 79 – 82 ( FIG . 4a ) . Conversely , Figure 3 | Patterns of RNA polymerase II C‑terminal domain phosphorylation , small nuclear ribonucleoprotein binding and splicing along an average intron‑containing budding yeast gene . a | Comparison of RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) carboxy‑terminal domain ( CTD ) phosphorylation profiles and small nuclear ribonucleoprotein ( snRNP ) binding profiles from different studies . Heatmap of average CTD phosphorylation profiles ( top ) normalized to total Pol II profiles ( the total Pol II profile was not available for REF . 66 ) for the 50 % of intron‑containing genes with the highest snRNP signal over terminal exons ( snRNP data are from REF . 30 and Pol II CTD data are from REFS 63 – 67 ) . In most data sets , Ser5 and Ser7 phosphorylation is most abundant in the first exon and in the intron ( most budding yeast genes contain one intron ) , whereas phosphorylation of the other CTD repeat residues is high over the terminal exon and / or the poly ( A ) site ( PAS ) , pointing to a transition in CTD phosphorylation profiles around the 3 ʹ splice sites ( 3 ʹ SSs ) . Note that the data sets differ in experimental procedure ( chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) – chip , ChIP‑Nexus , ultraviolet ( UV ) crosslinking and analysis of cDNAs ( CRAC ) ) and the antibodies used . A heatmap of average U1 and U2 snRNPs binding profiles ( data are from REFS 30 , 66 ) ( bottom ) for the same intron‑containing genes illustrates stepwise co‑transcriptional spliceosome assembly . b | Schematic of step II splicing kinetics in yeast 4 and hypothetical step I splicing kinetics . The kinetics of the spliceosome assembly stages — the transition from B complexes ( including B , B act and B * ) to C complexes during step I , and the transition from C complexes ( including C and C * ) to P during step II — have not yet been determined . Hypothetical splicing assembly stage transitions and global CTD phosphorylation changes are indicated by the colour gradient . A , branch adenosine ; TSS , transcription start site . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology 66306630 66 66676364646367 646367 65 67 6467 Ser5P Max Min Step II Step I ? S p l i c i n g A AG GT E ? A ? B ? C ? P ? S p l i c e o s o m e a ss e m b l y s t a g e s E A B , C P Min Max CTD phosphorylations snRNPs Ser7P Ser2P Tyr1P Thr4P U2 U1 Refs CTD phosphorylations a b Exon ExonTSS 5 ′ SS 3 ′ SS PAS DNA R E V I E W S 642 | OCTOBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . nucleosome phasing seems to be facilitated by the inher - ent exon – intron primary structure ( such as elevated GC content in exons ) , by the sequence elements that are required for pre - mRNA splicing 79 , 80 , 82 and by the local activity of chromatin remodellers 80 , 83 . Intriguingly , the median length of internal exons in the human genome is 137 bp , which is very close to the 147 bp that are wrapped around a nucleosome 14 ( FIG . 4a ) . The correlation between the length of internal exons and the nucleosomal DNA could be explained by the observation that evolutionarily recent intron generation events in the alga Micromonas pusilla occurred upon the preferential integration of DNA transposons into nucleosome spacer regions 81 . Nucleosomes can interfere with transcription pro - gression 67 , 84 – 87 . Consistent with nucleosome phasing over exons , slower transcription elongation has been measured over exonic sequences 75 , 86 , 88 . This is suggested by high Pol II density close to the nucleosome centre in all genes 67 , 85 . The histone tails of nucleosomes that are positioned over exons can be enriched for PTMs that may facilitate exon definition by affecting the recruit - ment of splicing factors , as well as the transcription process itself 8 , 89 – 92 ( FIG . 2 ) . Slow passing of the transcrip - tion machinery through nucleosomes may facilitate the relocation of splicing factors and regulators from the chromatin template to Pol II or to the nascent RNA . Splicing‑dependent Pol II pausing . Recent studies have implicated the splicing process in transcriptional pausing . For example , pausing at terminal exons was detected in efficiently spliced genes in yeast 93 . Upon splicing inhib - ition , either by introducing a temper ature - sensitive mutant allele of the RNA helicase Prp5 , or by introducing mutations in the BPS or the U2 snRNA , the Pol II ChIP signal increases on introns , suggesting the activ ation of a transcription elongation checkpoint to allow spliceosome assembly 94 . Discrete pauses have been mapped to 5ʹSSs and 3ʹSSs 66 , 75 , 95 ( FIG . 4a ) . How does Pol II pausing specifi - cally relate to intron – exon boundary identification and spliceosome assembly ? The extent to which splicing - related pausing occurs and a mechanistic understanding of this process are still elusive . When Pol II pauses at the 3ʹSS , the intron 3ʹ end , including the poly pyrimidine tract , is still in its catalytic centre or exit channel and Figure 4 | Gene architecture , chromatin features and nascent RNA properties influence co‑transcriptional splicing . a | The length of typical internal exons ( grey boxes ) is comparable to the DNA that is wrapped around a nucleosome . Nucleosome positioning relative to the transcription start site ( TSS ) , transcription termination site ( TTS ) and , to a lesser extent , exons helps to define the boundaries of these elements , providing a platform for crosstalk between chromatin , transcription and splicing . Less stable nucleosomes at introns are indicated with dashed outlines . For simplicity , only one TSS , poly ( A ) site ( PAS ) and TTS are depicted . The zoomed‑in section shows that RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) transcription rates change along introns ( black lines with grey nucleosomes ) and exons ( grey lines with yellow nucleosomes ) from high rates to low rates . A sleeping Pol II represents pausing events at splice sites ( AG and GT ) . Post‑translational modifications ( PTMs ) on histone tails influence transcription and splicing . b | RNA secondary structures and RNA‑binding proteins can modulate the availability of splice sites and branchpoint sequences . The splicing machinery cannot identify sites that are concealed in secondary structures or that are bound by inhibitory proteins . Pol II transcription rate and local RNA folding contribute to site accessibility . CTD , carboxy‑terminal domain ; snRNP , small nuclear ribonucleoprotein . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology DNA DNA TSS PAS TTS Transcription a G U A G A G Z Z Z Z Z Z A G A G A G b GU A AG AG G U 5 ′ Shorteneddistance DNA Pol II Histone tail PTMs Nucleosome U1 snRNP Inhibitoryprotein Branchpoint sequence recognition factors U2 snRNP A G GT AG Concealed splice sites Exposed splice sites CTD Nascent RNA Nascent RNA R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | OCTOBER 2017 | 643 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . SR proteins RNA - binding proteins with long repeats of arginine ( Arg ) and serine ( Ser ) residues that are involved in the regulation of alternative splicing and other steps of gene expression . is not yet available for splicing 31 . How does pausing at the 3ʹSS relate to spliceosome assembly ? The distance between the BPS and the 3ʹSS in most introns might allow assembly to proceed during pausing . Pol II pause release can be aided by transcription elong ation factors , such as transcription factor IIS ( TFIIS ) 85 . In addition , splicing factors may stimulate transcription progress . Interestingly , the shift of U2AF65 from Pol II to the nascent RNA was suggested to stimulate transcription elongation 31 , 96 . Explaining the prevalence and functional importance of Pol II pausing around 3ʹSSs and the gen - eral change of Pol II elongation rate over exons is crucial for understanding how transcription elongation and nascent RNA splicing are intertwined 12 . The development of new single - nucleotide - resolution single - molecule sequencing strategies that monitor splicing intermedi - ates offers promising new avenues of investigation 74 , 85 ( Supplementary information S1 ( box ) ) . Nascent RNA folding and RNA modifications influence splicing . Nascent RNA folds into secondary structures that affect its subsequent processing . The propensity for RNA folding directly depends on sequence - specific fold - ing rates , transcription elongation rates and the rate of proteins binding to the RNA 97 , 98 ( FIG . 4b ) . RNA second - ary structures can conceal or expose the 5ʹSSs , BPSs and 3ʹSSs , which are consequently ignored or readily recognized by the splicing machinery 99 , 100 . By conceal - ing or exposing alternative cis - acting elements , second - ary structures may have a role in alternative splicing 52 ( FIG . 4b ) . The splicing machinery may recognize splicing targets on nascent RNA before the RNA has time to fold into a secondary structure 100 . Similarly , RNA - binding proteins may influence the transient folding of nascent RNA and , therefore , may modulate the timing of splice site exposure to the splicing machinery 99 . For example , hairpins with a small loop readily fold after transcrip - tion , thereby concealing the splice site that is contained in their stem . By contrast , the folding of hairpins with bigger loops takes longer , allowing longer splice site exposure to the splicing machinery and / or to regulatory RNA - binding proteins 101 . Changes in transcription elongation rates influence nascent RNA folding and so may affect splice site selec - tion 97 , 100 . Intramolecular hairpins that sequester the 5ʹSS , BPS or 3ʹSS inhibit splicing both in vitro and in vivo 101 – 103 ( FIG . 4b ) . The inhibitory effects increase with hairpin stabil ity 102 . Conversely , secondary structures can increase the recognition efficiency of true splice sites by mask - ing cryptic ones 51 , 52 ( FIG . 4b ) . Interestingly , a systematic analysis in yeast showed that true 3ʹSSs are usually more accessible than cryptic ones 52 . Finally , secondary struc - tures that form between the 5ʹSS and the BPS or between the BPS and the 3ʹSS without directly sequestering them may positively influence splicing by shortening the phys - ical distance between these cis - acting elements and thus may help the spliceosome to bridge them 52 , 104 ( FIG . 4b ) . Modifications that alter the chemical properties of RNA , such as base modifications and substitutions , may also affect splicing by altering local RNA second - ary structures or the binding sites for the splicing machinery 105 . Nucleotide substitution through RNA editing is widespread in metazoa 106 , 107 and occurs co - transcriptionally 108 , 109 . Nucleotides can be edited as close as ~ 55 nucleotides upstream of the 3ʹ end of nascent RNAs , in the Pol II catalytic centre , suggesting that the introduction of these modifications may be very rapid 109 ( TABLE 1 ) . All 12 types of nucleotide editing have been identified on endogenous transcripts 107 , 109 . A - to - I ( adeno - sine to inosine , which is recognized as a guanosine by cellu lar machineries ) is the most abundant modifica - tion 107 and is catalysed by adenosine deaminase acting on RNA ( ADAR ) . ADAR can act on double - stranded RNA substrates that form through base pairing between exonic and intronic sequences , pointing towards coupling between editing and splicing 110 . It is possible that the splicing of these introns is delayed owing to occupancy of the 5ʹSS by ADAR . ADAR2 directly alters the splicing of its own pre - mRNA by introducing an alternative 3ʹSS . Moreover , the Pol II CTD is required for efficient edit - ing 111 . The glutamate receptor subunit B ( GluRB ; also known as GluR2 ) pre - mRNA contains edited sites that are close to the 5ʹSSs 112 . In vitro , the editing and splicing of these sites on pre - synthesized GluRB pre - mRNA are mutually exclusive . However , such mutual exclusion is not observed in vivo , suggesting that transcription coordin ates the editing and splicing machineries that act on these sites to ensure that both can take place 112 . Transient local RNA folding is likely to have a role in this coordination . Thus , changes in secondary structures that are induced upon RNA editing may conceal or expose the splice sites , resulting in alternative splicing 113 . Strategies for splice site identification The complexity of gene architecture varies between phyla 114 , 115 , requiring different mechanisms to identify splice sites . Metazoan splice sites are short and poorly conserved , in contrast to budding yeast splice sites 23 . This implies that the spliceosome might encounter fre - quent ‘incorrect’ splice sites along the transcripts , or at least a multiplicity of splice sites from which to choose 116 . The high complexity of metazoan gene architecture requires strategies to identify bona fide splice sites and lends itself to various means of pre - mRNA splicing regu lation , including alternative splicing 116 . In metazoa , accurate splice site selection depends on short conserved sequences , known as splicing regulatory elements ( SREs ) , that reside in introns or exons 117 , 118 . Regulatory proteins , such as SR proteins and hnRNPs , specifically bind to SREs and influence splice site recognition and / or spliceosome assembly 116 . Productive or unproductive interactions between SRE - binding proteins and the spliceosomal machinery generally depend on the location of the SREs relative to the splice sites , underscoring a large regulatory potential 116 ( FIG . 5 ) . Intron and exon definition . How are introns and exons recognized by the spliceosome ? In vertebrates , intron length varies from a few hundred nucleotides to several thousand nucleotides , and the median length of internal exons is approximately 137 nucleotides 114 . Surrounding the internal exon , the 3ʹSS of the upstream intron and R E V I E W S 644 | OCTOBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . the 5ʹSS of the downstream intron pair across the exon , thereby committing the upstream intron to splicing through an ‘exon definition’ mechanism 119 , 120 ( FIG . 5 ) . By contrast , transcripts in lower eukaryotes usually con - tain introns that are shorter than 250 nucleotides ( REF . 114 ) . In this case , a 5ʹSS pairs with the downstream 3ʹSS of the same intron , and splicing is triggered through an ‘intron definition’ mechanism 121 ( FIG . 1 ) . In exon definition , a splice site mutation causes exon skipping , whereas in intron definition it causes intron retention 121 , 122 . Thus , exon and intron definition mechanisms explain the different phenotypes of single splice site inactivation in vertebrates and in lower eukaryotes 119 . Intron definition fits with the stepwise co - transcrip - tional spliceosome assembly model discussed above . In vivo , yeast complexes E and A assemble onto the 5ʹSS and BPS 32 , suggesting that the BPS rather than the 3ʹSS is required for splicing commitment ( FIG . 1b ) . Indeed , bud - ding yeast lack an obvious homologue of U2AF35 , which binds to the 3ʹSS AG dinucleotide in the mammalian com - plex E . In vitro , transcripts with one short intron are also spliced upon intron definition 119 , and the AG dinucleotide is not necessary for step I catalysis 38 , 42 . These observations suggest that transcription of the 5ʹSS and the BPS may be sufficient for splicing commitment following intron defin - ition ( FIG . 1b ) . In higher eukaryotes , in which splicing is triggered by exon definition , U2AF35 bound to the 3ʹSS participates in splicing commitment together with the U1 snRNP bound to the downstream 5ʹSS 23 , 119 ( FIG . 5 ) . This inverted order of identification of intronic elements may partly account for the slower splicing rates that are found in higher eukaryotes 5 . Nascent RNA 5ʹ end capping and the definition of the first exon . Splicing of the first intron depends on first exon definition 119 . First exon boundaries consist of the 7 - methylguanosine ( m 7 G ) cap structure at the 5ʹ end of the transcript and the 5ʹSS of the first intron ( FIG . 5 ) . The capping enzyme adds the m 7 G cap to the 5ʹ end of all Pol II - transcribed RNAs when the nascent RNA is less than 20 nucleotides in length 53 , 123 – 127 ( TABLE 1 ) . The nuclear cap - binding complex ( CBC ) serves as a plat - form for interacting with factors that are involved in RNA processing 128 . In vitro , CBC enhances the splicing of the first intron , suggesting that it contributes to first exon definition 119 , 123 , 129 . In vivo , CBC directly interacts with tri - snRNP protein components and its depletion impairs both U1 snRNP and tri - snRNP recruitment to the pre - mRNA 28 , 130 , 131 . Genetic interactions were observed between the yeast CBC , U1 snRNP proteins and BBP , suggesting that CBC functions in the formation of complex E 132 ( FIG . 2 ) . Tri - snRNP recruitment by CBC was proposed to mediate U1 snRNP association and the consequent identification of the first 5ʹSS 130 . Nevertheless , all spliceosomal complexes physically interact to some degree with the CBC , either directly or indirectly through the nascent RNA ( FIG . 2 ) . Nascent RNA 3ʹ end processing and the definition of the last exon . Splicing of the last intron depends on terminal exon definition 119 . The 3ʹSS of the last intron and the PAS set the terminal exon boundaries 133 ( FIG . 5 ) . The PAS , the nearby AU - rich sequences and other cis - elements on the nascent RNA are bound by the cleavage and polyadenyl ation complex ( CPA ) . It is not currently Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology First exon Tri - snRNP recruitment First exon GU First exon Internal exon Exon A PY AG Exon Terminal exon CPA is recruited to Pol II CTD PAS transcription allows last exon deﬁnition Last exon Last exon GU Exon U2 snRNP Cappingenzyme Phosphorylation U4 / U6•U5 tri - snRNP Cap SRE Splicing factor CPA CTD CBC Pol II DNA GU 5 ′ end capping CBC recruitment U1 snRNP recruitment 3 ′ SS allows for branchpoint sequence recognition 5 ′ SS transcription allows exon deﬁnition U2 snRNP recruitment U1 snRNP PAS A PY AG A PY AG A PY AG A PY AG Branchpoint sequence recognition factors Figure 5 | First , internal and terminal exon definition . As a prerequisite to first exon definition , the capping enzyme that is bound to the phosphorylated RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) carboxy‑terminal domain ( CTD ) adds a cap to the 5 ʹ end of the nascent RNA . The cap‑binding complex ( CBC ) recruits the U4 / U6•U5 tri‑small nuclear ribonucleoprotein ( snRNP ) and mediates the association of the U1 snRNP with the first 5 ʹ splice site ( SS ) . In internal exon definition , the transcription of an internal 3 ʹ SS and the downstream 5 ʹ SS triggers the recruitment of the U1 snRNP , the branchpoint sequence recognition factors ( splicing factor 1 ( SF1 ) , U2AF65 and U2AF35 ) and the U2 snRNP . Splicing factors facilitate or inhibit exon definition by binding to splicing regulatory elements ( SREs ) , leading to alternative splicing . As a prerequisite to terminal exon definition , the cleavage and polyadenylation complex ( CPA ) interacts with the poly ( A ) site ( PAS ) , phosphorylated Pol II CTD and the splicing machinery , aiding 3 ʹ SS identification . In addition , the splicing machinery helps CPA recruitment onto the PAS . A , branch adenosine ; PY , polypyrimidine tract . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | OCTOBER 2017 | 645 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Intrinsically disordered regions Protein regions that contain little amino acid diversity and appear to lack well - defined secondary and tertiary structures . Speckles Membrane - less subnuclear granules that are enriched in splicing factors , particularly the SR proteins . Cajal bodies Membrane - less subnuclear compartments ( 2 – 4 per cell ) that are the sites of small nuclear RNA modification and small nuclear ribonucleoprotein assembly . Cajal bodies are not the sites of splicing . P‑bodies Membrane - less cytoplasmic compartments that are involved in mRNA turnover . Lampbrush chromosomes Giant meiotic chromosomes that are formed in oocyte nuclei owing to the looping of chromosomal regions that are highly transcribed and coated with nascent RNA . known how far transcription proceeds past the PAS before 3ʹ end cleavage takes place ( TABLE 1 ) . However , the PAS is required for termination , and its elimination leads to transcription readthrough 134 – 136 . PAS elimin - ation also results in the specific inhibition of last intron splicing , indicating that 3ʹ end processing contributes to ter minal exon defin ition 137 , 138 . The U2 snRNP , U2AF65 and cleavage and poly adenylation specificity factor ( CPSF ; a component of the CPA ) functionally and phys - ically interact ( FIG . 2 ) ; this supports a model in which the PAS triggers the removal of the last intron by facilitating spliceo some assembly 139 – 142 . Splicing and the regulation of 3ʹ end processing is recipro cal , as the inactivation of the terminal 3ʹSS inhibits 3ʹ end processing and tran - scription termination 137 – 139 , 143 , 144 . The splicing and 3ʹ end processing machineries seem to serve as recruitment platforms , as the physical presence of the two machiner - ies is sufficient for coupling between splicing and 3ʹ end processing , and neither catalytic activity is required for the regulation of the complementary process 138 , 139 , 144 , 145 . Indeed , artificially induced cleavage of the nascent RNA impairs splicing and 3ʹ end processing in vitro 138 . In vivo , the Pol II CTD stimulates coupling between splicing and 3ʹ end processing 146 . Taken together , these observations suggest that coupling between splicing and 3ʹ end pro - cessing can determine whether splicing occurs before transcription termination 142 . The molecular mechanisms of 3ʹ end processing involve components of the splicing machinery . The mammal ian U1 snRNP component U1 70k directly inter - acts with poly ( A ) polymerase , a component of the CPA , and inhibits polyadenylation 147 . In vivo , functional inhib - ition of U1 snRNP inhibits splicing and causes premature 3ʹ end processing 148 . Interestingly , U1 snRNP is much more abundant than all other spliceosomal snRNPs 149 , and this may reflect its role in protecting nascent RNA from premature 3ʹ end processing . In such a model , the U1 snRNP binds to nascent RNA at frequent cryptic 5ʹSSs and suppresses the activity of adjacent cryptic PASs 148 . The relative abundance of PASs and U1 binding sites on transcripts may modulate premature tran scription termination . Indeed , upstream antisense transcripts are enriched in PASs but depleted of U1 recognition sites , and their expression is efficiently suppressed 150 . Changes in transcript and U1 snRNP abundance ratios result in changes in alternative PAS selection , and consequently modulate transcript length 151 . Overall , the PAS and CPA have a major role in defining the last exon and thus the 3ʹSS for last intron removal . In addition , splicing aids 3ʹ end processing by preventing the recruitment of the CPA to cryptic PASs . 3D organization of gene expression The 3D chromatin conformation can enable cross - talk between different mRNA processing machineries . Similar to promoters that associate with distant enhanc - ers 152 , gene ends may loop over long distances . Gene looping occurs when the transcription initiation and termination machineries juxtapose TSSs and TTSs 153 , 154 . Gene looping may regulate transcriptional output and may provide promoter directionality by depositing termin ation factors close to the promoter , which can lead to the termination of upstream antisense tran - scripts 155 ( FIG . 6a ) . In yeast , introns can further enhance looping by bridging the 5ʹSS with the TSS and the 3ʹSS with the PAS 156 . It is tempting to speculate that loop - ing may facilitate splice site usage in subsequent rounds of transcription by promoting the efficient recycling of splicing factors . It remains to be seen how widespread this phenom enon is and how spliceosome assembly and catalysis contribute to gene looping . Co - transcriptional splicing presupposes that spliceo - some components are in the vicinity of the transcribed regions and are readily available for spliceosome assem - bly and splicing catalysis . Live cell - imaging experiments have measured diffusion constants in the order of 0 . 2 – 0 . 8 μm 2 s −1 for snRNPs , as well as other RNPs 157 . This slow rate of diffusion , which is ~ 100 times slower than free diffusion in water 158 , has been attributed to transient interactions with binding partners such as pre - mRNA 157 . An alternative explanation is that splicing factors dwell at sites of transcription owing to liquid – liquid phase separation ( LLPS ) . Such phase transitions are favoured by proteins with intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) and RNA - binding domains 159 – 163 . Proteins with IDRs are found to be enriched in membrane - less compart - ments that are formed by LLPS , for example , SR pro - teins in nuclear speckles and coilin in Cajal bodies 159 . Approximately 18 polypeptides in the B complex harbour IDRs that are similar to SR proteins 164 . Interestingly , IDRs of several mammalian hnRNP isoforms are encoded by alternative exons ; depending on exon inclusion , the resulting hnRNP isoform can promote multi - hnRNP assemblies that affect alternative splicing of target tran - scripts 165 . Members of the Fox1 family of RNA - binding proteins ( Rbfox ) can undergo higher - order interactions with the large assembly of splicing regulators ( LASR ) complex via a Tyr - rich low - complexity region , which is required for splicing regulation by Rbfox 166 . We suggest that spliceosomal components could be greatly concen - trated at transcription sites as a consequence of LLPS ( FIG . 6a ) . There are four reasons to suspect that this might be the case . First , snRNPs can reside in nuclear compart - ments that are formed by LLPS ; they assemble from pre - cursors and are highly concentrated in Cajal bodies 167 . Second , the Pol II CTD has been shown to undergo LLPS , owing to its low complexity and intrinsically disordered structure 60 , 168 , and it was recently proposed that CTD LLPS may be important for transcription initiation 60 . Third , the low - complexity protein FUS mediates interac - tions between Pol II and the U1 snRNP 169 , 170 , potentially promoting the recruitment of U1 to the first 5ʹSS . Fourth , yeast and human chromatin , transcription and spliceo - some proteins have a strong tendency to disorder , simi - lar to proteins of P - bodies and nucleolar proteins that are known to undergo LLPS 171 ( FIG . 6b ; see Supplementary information S3 ( table ) ) . Intriguingly , the visualization of lampbrush chromosomes reveals numerous active gene loops that take on droplet - like morphologies , suggesting the local occurrence of LLPS during gene expression 172 . Thus , LLPS may facilitate local high concentrations of spliceosomal components at transcription sites , thereby R E V I E W S 646 | OCTOBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . creating mini ature nuclear bodies at each active gene ( FIG . 6a ) ; similar phase transition phenomena have been suggested to explain transcription regulation by super - enhancers 163 . This scenario may explain how unprocessed transcripts are retained at sites of transcription 173 – 175 and how particu lar splicing isoforms predomin ate in a given cell or for a given gene 176 , 177 . For example , the same pool of splicing regulators could be reused in multi ple rounds of splicing . Spliceosome dis assembly could also take place in this sequestered environ ment , while the mature messenger ribonucleoprotein ( mRNP ) is prepared for nuclear export . Conclusions and perspectives Coupling 5ʹ end capping , splicing and 3ʹ end processing to transcription ensures the formation of a fully pro - cessed mRNA that is ready for export and translation . In this Review , we rationalize how these individual steps are coordinated at the transcription unit . Delaying , pre - venting or enhancing splice site recognition may modu - late splicing outcome , leading to mature mRNA isoforms with diverse cellular fates 178 – 181 . We highlight links between splicing outcome and transcription dynamics , nucleosome positioning and RNA folding . Spliceosome proteins interact with proteins that are involved in tran - scription and nuclear RNA processing , and extensive crosstalk and regulation are promoted by protein – protein interactions between different machineries ( FIG . 2 ) . Recent cryo - EM structures have visualized spliceo - some assembly complexes and have revealed new con - formational details 34 – 36 , 39 , 40 , 43 , 44 , 47 – 49 . The joint structural analysis of interfaces between splicing complexes and the transcription and processing machineries , and the use of high - resolution nascent RNA sequencing for the analy - sis of individual processing steps , have the potential to reveal new aspects of the coordination between these large nuclear machines . Finally , the precise quantifica - tion of local protein and RNA abundance and RNA – protein interactions , as well as the visualization of the dynamics along transcription units , will help in formu - lating new models of gene expression regulation , such as the recently invoked LLPS mechanism . Figure 6 | Higher‑order organization of the gene expression machineries . a | The nucleus and cytoplasm contain membrane‑less compartments , known as bodies , such as the nucleolus , Cajal bodies , histone locus bodies , speckles and P‑bodies . Such bodies form through liquid – liquid phase separation ( LLPS ) and are often linked to the transcription of specific genes , for example , ribosomal DNA ( rDNA ) in the nucleolus , small nuclear RNA ( snRNA ) genes in Cajal bodies and histone genes in histone locus bodies . We propose that looped and actively transcribed genes ( genes w , x , y and z ) are also likely to form nuclear bodies . b | Spliceosome proteins , particularly chromatin and transcription‑associated proteins , are predicted to have a similar proportion of unstructured protein regions to those of other groups of proteins that are known to be involved in LLPS , as shown in the cumulative representation of the complete proteome and the protein groups associated with specific Gene Ontology terms ( cellular component : P‑body , nucleolus , chromatin ( binding ) ; biological process : DNA‑templated transcription , mRNA splicing via spliceosome and transport ) . The data were downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database ( Supplementary information S3 ( table ) ) . The cumulative fraction of proteins ( y axis ) is given in association with the percentage of amino acids per protein that have a high probability of being in a disordered region ( x axis ) , according to predictions by IUPred 184 , 185 . Whereas 50 % of transport proteins and the entire proteome contain 7 % or fewer amino acids with a high tendency to form disordered regions , 50 % of the P‑body , nucleolar or chromatin and transcription‑associated proteins contain 25 – 30 % of such amino acids . The median fraction of amino acid disorder tendency for spliceosomal proteins is 16 % . Medians are represented by light grey lines . CBC , cap‑binding complex ; CPA , cleavage and polyadenylation complex ; Pol I , RNA polymerase I . C y t o s o l G e n e x Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Nucleolus N u c l e u s Cajal body P - body a b 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 25 50 75 100 Amino acids with a high disorder tendency ( % ) F r a c t i o n o f p r o t e i n s Pol I Speck le G e n e w Histone locus body rDNA Histone genes U snRNA genes FUS P - body NucleolusChromatinDNA - templated transcription mRNA splicing via spliceosome Complete proteome Transport G e n e y G e n e z CBC CPA Initiationmachinery R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | OCTOBER 2017 | 647 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 1 . Sakharkar , M . K . , Perumal , B . , S . , Sakharkar , K . R . & Kangueane , P . An analysis on gene architecture in human and mouse genomes . In Silico Biol . 5 , 347 – 365 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Wahl , M . C . , Will , C . L . & Lührmann , R . The spliceosome : design principles of a dynamic RNP machine . Cell 136 , 701 – 718 ( 2009 ) . 3 . Brugiolo , M . , Herzel , L . & Neugebauer , K . M . Counting on co‑transcriptional splicing . F1000 Prime Reports 5 , 9 ( 2013 ) . 4 . Carrillo Oesterreich , F . et al . Splicing of nascent RNA coincides with intron exit from RNA polymerase II . Cell 165 , 372 – 381 ( 2016 ) . Shows a tight match between progress in transcription and splicing completion in vivo . 5 . Alpert , T . , Herzel , L . & Neugebauer , K . M . Perfect timing : splicing and transcription rates in living cells . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . RNA 8 , e1401 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Carrillo Oesterreich , F . , Bieberstein , N . & Neugebauer , K . M . Pause locally , splice globally . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 328 – 335 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Bieberstein , N . I . , Carrillo Oesterreich , F . , Straube , K . & Neugebauer , K . M . First exon length controls active chromatin signatures and transcription . Cell Rep . 2 , 62 – 68 ( 2012 ) . 8 . Braunschweig , U . , Gueroussov , S . , Plocik , A . M . , Graveley , B . R . & Blencowe , B . J . Dynamic integration of splicing within gene regulatory pathways . Cell 152 , 1252 – 1269 ( 2013 ) . 9 . Moehle , E . A . , Braberg , H . , Krogan , N . J . & Guthrie , C . Adventures in time and space : splicing efficiency and RNA polymerase II elongation rate . RNA Biol . 11 , 313 – 319 ( 2014 ) . 10 . Naftelberg , S . , Schor , I . E . , Ast , G . & Kornblihtt , A . R . Regulation of alternative splicing through coupling with transcription and chromatin structure . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 84 , 165 – 198 ( 2015 ) . 11 . Custódio , N . & Carmo‑Fonseca , M . Co‑transcriptional splicing and the CTD code . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 51 , 395 – 411 ( 2016 ) . 12 . Saldi , T . , Cortazar , M . A . , Sheridan , R . M . & Bentley , D . L . Coupling of RNA polymerase II transcription elongation with pre‑mRNA splicing . J . Mol . Biol . 428 , 2623 – 2635 ( 2016 ) . 13 . Wallace , E . & Beggs , J . Extremely fast and incredibly close : co‑transcriptional splicing in budding yeast . RNA 23 , 601 – 610 ( 2017 ) . 14 . Lander , E . S . et al . International human genome sequencing consortium . Nature 409 , 860 – 921 ( 2001 ) . 15 . Gould , G . M . et al . Identification of new branch points and unconventional introns in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . RNA 22 , 1522 – 1534 ( 2016 ) . 16 . Qin , D . , Huang , L . , Wlodaver , A . , Andrade , J . & Staley , J . P . Sequencing of lariat termini in S . cerevisiae reveals 5’ splice sites , branch points , and novel splicing events . RNA 22 , 237 – 253 ( 2016 ) . 17 . Mercer , T . R . et al . Genome‑wide discovery of human splicing branchpoints . Genome Res . 25 , 290 – 303 ( 2015 ) . 18 . Taggart , A . J . et al . Large‑scale analysis of branchpoint usage across species and cell lines . Genome Res . 27 , 639 – 649 ( 2017 ) . 19 . Mount , S . M . A catalogue of splice junction sequences . Nucleic Acids Res . 10 , 459 – 472 ( 1982 ) . 20 . Lim , L . & Burge , C . A computational analysis of sequence features involved in recognition of short introns . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 11193 – 11198 ( 2001 ) . 21 . Reed , R . & Maniatis , T . Intron sequences involved in lariat formation during pre‑mRNA splicing . Cell 41 , 95 – 105 ( 1985 ) . 22 . Moore , M . , Query , C . & Sharp , P . in The RNA World ( eds Gesteland , R . F . & Atkins , J . F . ) 303 – 357 ( Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , 1993 ) . 23 . Will , C . L . & Lührmann , R . Spliceosome structure and function . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a003707 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Cvitkovic , I . & Jurica , M . S . Spliceosome database : a tool for tracking components of the spliceosome . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , D132 – D141 ( 2013 ) . 25 . Cordin , O . & Beggs , J . D . RNA helicases in splicing . RNA Biol . 10 , 83 – 95 ( 2013 ) . 26 . Fabrizio , P . et al . The evolutionarily conserved core design of the catalytic activation step of the yeast spliceosome . Mol . Cell 36 , 593 – 608 ( 2009 ) . 27 . Kotovic , K . M . , Lockshon , D . , Boric , L . & Neugebauer , K . M . Cotranscriptional recruitment of the U1 snRNP to intron‑containing genes in yeast . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 5768 – 5779 ( 2003 ) . 28 . Görnemann , J . , Kotovic , K . M . , Hujer , K . & Neugebauer , K . M . Cotranscriptional spliceosome assembly occurs in a stepwise fashion and requires the cap binding complex . Mol . Cell 19 , 53 – 63 ( 2005 ) . 29 . Lacadie , S . A . & Rosbash , M . Cotranscriptional spliceosome assembly dynamics and the role of U1 snRNA : 5’ss base pairing in yeast . Mol . Cell 19 , 65 – 75 ( 2005 ) . 30 . Tardiff , D . F . , Lacadie , S . A . & Rosbash , M . A genome‑wide analysis indicates that yeast pre‑ mRNA splicing is predominantly posttranscriptional . Mol . Cell 24 , 917 – 929 ( 2006 ) . Analyses co‑transcriptional recruitment of U snRNPs onto nascent RNA . 31 . Újvári , A . & Luse , D . S . Newly Initiated RNA encounters a factor involved in splicing immediately upon emerging from within RNA polymerase II . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 49773 – 49779 ( 2004 ) . 32 . Baejen , C . et al . Transcriptome maps of mRNP biogenesis factors define pre‑mRNA recognition . Mol . Cell 55 , 745 – 757 ( 2014 ) . Systematic mapping of the binding sites of several factors involved in mRNP biogenesis on yeast transcripts . 33 . Rigo , N . , Sun , C . , Fabrizio , P . , Kastner , B . & Lührmann , R . Protein localisation by electron microscopy reveals the architecture of the yeast spliceosomal B complex . EMBO J . 34 , 3059 – 3073 ( 2015 ) . 34 . Nguyen , T . H . et al . Cryo‑EM structure of the yeast U4 / U6 . U5 tri‑snRNP at 3 . 7 Å resolution . Nature 530 , 298 – 302 ( 2016 ) . 35 . Nguyen , T . H . et al . The architecture of the spliceosomal U4 / U6 . U5 tri‑snRNP . Nature 523 , 47 – 52 ( 2015 ) . 36 . Wan , R . et al . The 3 . 8 Å structure of the U4 / U6 . U5 tri‑snRNP : insights into spliceosome assembly and catalysis . Science 351 , 466 – 475 ( 2016 ) . 37 . Liu , H . L . & Cheng , S . C . The interaction of Prp2 with a defined region of the intron is required for the first splicing reaction . Mol . Cell . Biol . 32 , 5056 – 5066 ( 2012 ) . 38 . Rymond , B . C . & Rosbash , M . Cleavage of 5’ splice site and lariat formation are independent of 3’ splice site in yeast splicing . Nature 317 , 735 – 737 ( 1985 ) . 39 . Yan , C . , Wan , R . , Bai , R . , Huang , G . & Shi , Y . Structure of a yeast activated spliceosome at 3 . 5 Å resolution . Science 353 , 905 – 911 ( 2016 ) . 40 . Rauhut , R . et al . Molecular architecture of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae activated spliceosome . Science 353 , 1399 – 1405 ( 2016 ) . Cryo‑EM structure of the B act complex , revealing details of spliceosome active site conformation before step I catalysis and suggesting that conformation rearrangement is needed for catalysis . 41 . Schneider , C . et al . Dynamic contacts of U2 , RES , Cwc25 , Prp8 and Prp45 proteins with the pre‑mRNA branch‑site and 3’ splice site during catalytic activation and step 1 catalysis in yeast spliceosomes . PLoS Genet . 11 , e1005539 ( 2015 ) . Evaluates direct interactions between splicing proteins and pre‑mRNA at different stages of spliceosome assembly . 42 . Ruskin , B . & Green , M . Role of the 3’ splice site consensus sequence in mammalian pre‑mRNA splicing . Nature 317 , 732 – 734 ( 1985 ) . 43 . Wan , R . , Yan , C . , Bai , R . , Huang , G . & Shi , Y . Structure of a yeast catalytic step I spliceosome at 3 . 4 Å resolution . Science 353 , 895 – 904 ( 2016 ) . 44 . Galej , W . P . et al . Cryo‑EM structure of the spliceosome immediately after branching . Nature 537 , 197 – 201 ( 2016 ) . 45 . Schwer , B . A conformational rearrangement in the spliceosome sets the stage for Prp22‑dependent mRNA release . Mol . Cell 30 , 743 – 754 ( 2008 ) . 46 . Ohrt , T . et al . Molecular dissection of step 2 catalysis of yeast pre‑mRNA splicing investigated in purified system . RNA 19 , 902 – 915 ( 2013 ) . 47 . Yan , C . , Wan , R . , Bai , R . , Huang , G . & Shi , Y . Structure of a yeast step II catalytically activated spliceosome . Science 355 , 149 – 155 ( 2017 ) . Cryo‑EM structure of C * complex , revealing details of spliceosome active site conformation before step II catalysis and suggesting that conformation rearrangement is needed for catalysis . 48 . Fica , S . M . et al . Structure of a spliceosome remodelled for exon ligation . Nature 542 , 377 – 380 ( 2017 ) . 49 . Bertram , K . et al . Cryo‑EM structure of a human spliceosome activated for step 2 of splicing . Nature 542 , 318 – 323 ( 2017 ) . 50 . Smith , C . , Chu , T . & Nadal‑Ginard , B . Scanning and competition between AGs are involved in 3’ splice site selection in mammalian introns . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 4939 – 4952 ( 1993 ) . 51 . Gahura , O . , Hammann , C . , Valentová , A . , Puta , F . & Folk , P . Secondary structure is required for 3’ splice site recognition in yeast . Nucleic Acids Res . 39 , 9759 – 9767 ( 2011 ) . 52 . Meyer , M . , Plass , M . , Peréz‑Valle , J . , Eyras , E . & Vilardell , J . Deciphering 3’ss selection in the yeast genome reveals an RNA thermosensor that mediates alternative splicing . Mol . Cell 43 , 1033 – 1039 ( 2011 ) . Analyses the role of RNA secondary structure in 3 ʹ SS selection . 53 . Martinez‑Rucobo , F . W . et al . Molecular basis of transcription‑coupled pre‑mRNA capping . Mol . Cell 58 , 1079 – 1089 ( 2015 ) . 54 . Fourmann , J . B . et al . Dissection of the factor requirements for spliceosome disassembly and the elucidation of its dissociation products using a purified splicing system . Genes Dev . 27 , 413 – 428 ( 2013 ) . 55 . Kwak , H . & Lis , J . T . Control of transcriptional elongation . Annu . Rev . Genet . 47 , 483 – 508 ( 2013 ) . 56 . Jonkers , I . & Lis , J . T . Getting up to speed with transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 167 – 177 ( 2015 ) . 57 . Neves , L . T . et al . The histone variant H2A . Z promotes efficient cotranscriptional splicing in S . cerevisiae . Genes Dev . 31 , 702 – 717 ( 2017 ) . 58 . Nissen , K . E . et al . The histone variant H2A . Z promotes splicing of weak introns . Genes Dev . 31 , 688 – 701 ( 2017 ) . 59 . Zaborowska , J . , Egloff , S . & Murphy , S . The pol II CTD : new twists in the tail . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 23 , 771 – 777 ( 2016 ) . 60 . Harlen , K . M . & Churchman , L . S . The code and beyond : transcription regulation by the RNA polymerase II carboxy‑terminal domain . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 263 – 273 ( 2017 ) . 61 . Allison , L . , Moyle , M . , Shales , M . & Ingles , C . Extensive homology among the largest subunits of eukaryotic and prokaryotic RNA polymerases . Cell 42 , 599 – 610 ( 1985 ) . 62 . Corden , J . , Cadena , D . , Ahearn , J . & Dahmus , M . A unique structure at the carboxyl terminus of the largest subunit of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 82 , 7934 – 7938 ( 1985 ) . 63 . Kim , H . et al . Gene‑specific RNA polymerase II phosphorylation and the CTD code . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1279 – 1286 ( 2010 ) . 64 . Mayer , A . et al . Uniform transitions of the general RNA polymerase II transcription complex . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1272 – 1278 ( 2010 ) . 65 . Mayer , A . et al . CTD tyrosine phosphorylation impairs termination factor recruitment to RNA polymerase II . Science 336 , 1723 – 1725 ( 2012 ) . 66 . Harlen , K . M . et al . Comprehensive RNA polymerase II interactomes reveal distinct and varied roles for each phospho‑CTD residue . Cell Rep . 15 , 2147 – 2158 ( 2016 ) . Analyses phospho‑specific Pol II C‑terminal domain interactomes by mass spectrometry . 67 . Milligan , L . et al . Strand‑specific , high‑resolution mapping of modified RNA polymerase II . Mol . Syst . Biol . 12 , 874 ( 2016 ) . Identifies distinct Pol II C‑terminal domain PTMs associated with transcription initiation , and early and late elongation . 68 . Singh , G . , Pratt , G . , Yeo , G . W . & Moore , M . J . The clothes make the mRNA : past and present trends in mRNP fashion . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 84 , 325 – 354 ( 2015 ) . 69 . Müller‑McNicoll , M . & Neugebauer , K . M . How cells get the message : dynamic assembly and function of mRNA‑protein complexes . Nat . Rev . Genet . 14 , 275 – 287 ( 2013 ) . 70 . König , J . et al . iCLIP reveals the function of hnRNP particles in splicing at individual nucleotide resolution . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 909 – 915 ( 2010 ) . 71 . Descostes , N . et al . Tyrosine phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II CTD is associated with antisense promoter transcription and active enhancers in mammalian cells . eLife 3 , e02105 ( 2014 ) . 72 . Schüller , R . et al . Heptad‑specific phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II CTD . Mol . Cell 61 , 305 – 314 ( 2016 ) . 73 . Suh , H . et al . Direct analysis of phosphorylation sites on the Rpb1 C‑terminal domain of RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell 61 , 297 – 304 ( 2016 ) . 74 . Nojima , T . et al . Mammalian NET‑seq reveals genome‑ wide nascent transcription coupled to RNA processing . Cell 161 , 526 – 540 ( 2015 ) . R E V I E W S 648 | OCTOBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 75 . Mayer , A . et al . Native elongating transcript sequencing reveals human transcriptional activity at nucleotide resolution . Cell 161 , 541 – 554 ( 2015 ) . 76 . Veloso , A . et al . Rate of elongation by RNA polymerase II is associated with specific gene features and epigenetic modifications . Genome Res . 24 , 896 – 905 ( 2014 ) . 77 . Nedelcheva‑Veleva , M . N . et al . The thermodynamic patterns of eukaryotic genes suggest a mechanism for intron – exon recognition . Nat . Commun . 4 , 2101 ( 2013 ) . 78 . Schor , I . E . , Fiszbein , A . , Petrillo , E . & Kornblihtt , A . R . Intragenic epigenetic changes modulate NCAM alternative splicing in neuronal differentiation . EMBO J . 32 , 2264 – 2274 ( 2013 ) . 79 . Tilgner , H . et al . Nucleosome positioning as a determinant of exon recognition . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 996 – 1001 ( 2009 ) . 80 . Schwartz , S . , Meshorer , E . & Ast , G . Chromatin organization marks exon – intron structure . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 990 – 995 ( 2009 ) . 81 . Huff , J . T . , Zilberman , D . & Roy , S . W . Mechanism for DNA transposons to generate introns on genomic scales . Nature 538 , 533 – 536 ( 2016 ) . Explains the correlation between internal exon length and nucleosome DNA length . 82 . Beckmann , J . & Trifonov , E . Splice junctions follow a 205‑base ladder . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 2380 – 2383 ( 1991 ) . 83 . Venkatesh , S . & Workman , J . L . Histone exchange , chromatin structure and the regulation of transcription . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 178 – 189 ( 2015 ) . 84 . Weber , C . M . , Ramachandran , S . & Henikoff , S . Nucleosomes are context‑specific , H2A . Z‑modulated barriers to RNA polymerase . Mol . Cell 53 , 819 – 830 ( 2014 ) . Describes the effects of nucleosomes on transcription elongation dynamics in vivo . 85 . Churchman , L . S . & Weissman , J . S . Nascent transcript sequencing visualizes transcription at nucleotide resolution . Nature 469 , 368 – 373 ( 2011 ) . Describes the NET‑seq method , which enables the analysis of transcription elongation dynamics at high resolution . 86 . Kwak , H . , Fuda , N . , Core , L . J . & Lis , J . T . Precise maps of RNA polymerase reveal how promoters direct initiation and pausing . Science 339 , 950 – 953 ( 2013 ) . Describes the PRO‑seq assay , which enables the analysis of transcription elongation dynamics at high resolution . 87 . Voong , L . N . et al . Insights into nucleosome organization in mouse embryonic stem cells through chemical mapping . Cell 167 , 1555 – 1570 . e15 ( 2016 ) . 88 . Fuchs , G . , Hollander , D . , Voichek , Y . , Ast , G . & Oren , M . Cotranscriptional histone H2B monoubiquitylation is tightly coupled with RNA polymerase II elongation rate . Genome Res . 24 , 1572 – 1583 ( 2014 ) . 89 . Luco , R . F . & Misteli , T . More than a splicing code : integrating the role of RNA , chromatin and non‑coding RNA in alternative splicing regulation . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 21 , 366 – 372 ( 2011 ) . 90 . Kfir , N . et al . SF3B1 association with chromatin determines splicing outcomes . Cell Rep . 11 , 618 – 629 ( 2015 ) . 91 . Hnilicová , J . et al . Histone deacetylase activity modulates alternative splicing . PLoS ONE 6 , e16727 ( 2011 ) . 92 . Herissant , L . et al . H2B ubiquitylation modulates spliceosome assembly and function in budding yeast . Biol . Cell 106 , 126 – 138 ( 2014 ) . 93 . Carrillo Oesterreich , F . , Preibisch , S . & Neugebauer , K . M . Global analysis of nascent RNA reveals transcriptional pausing in terminal exons . Mol . Cell 40 , 571 – 581 ( 2010 ) . 94 . Chathoth , K . T . , Barrass , J . D . , Webb , S . & Beggs , J . D . A splicing‑dependent transcriptional checkpoint associated with prespliceosome formation . Mol . Cell 53 , 779 – 790 ( 2014 ) . 95 . Alexander , R . D . , Innocente , S . A . , Barrass , J . D . & Beggs , J . D . Splicing‑dependent RNA polymerase pausing in yeast . Mol . Cell 40 , 582 – 593 ( 2010 ) . 96 . Újvári , A . & Luse , D . S . RNA emerging from the active site of RNA polymerase II interacts with the Rpb7 subunit . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 13 , 49 – 54 ( 2006 ) . 97 . Lai , D . , Proctor , J . R . & Meyer , I . M . On the importance of cotranscriptional RNA structure formation . RNA 19 , 1461 – 1473 ( 2013 ) . 98 . Liu , S . R . , Hu , C . G . & Zhang , J . Z . Regulatory effects of cotranscriptional RNA structure formation and transitions . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . RNA 7 , 562 – 574 ( 2016 ) . 99 . Buratti , E . & Baralle , F . E . Influence of RNA secondary structure on the pre‑mRNA splicing process . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 10505 – 10514 ( 2004 ) . 100 . Warf , M . B . & Berglund , J . A . Role of RNA structure in regulating pre‑mRNA splicing . Trends Biochem . Sci . 35 , 169 – 178 ( 2010 ) . 101 . Eperon , L . , Graham , I . , Griffiths , A . & Eperon , I . Effects of RNA secondary structure on alternative splicing of pre‑mRNA : is folding limited to a region behind the transcribing RNA polymerase ? Cell 54 , 393 – 401 ( 1988 ) . 102 . Goguel , V . , Wang , Y . & Rosbash , M . Short artificial hairpins sequester splicing signals and inhibit yeast pre‑mRNA splicing . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 6841 – 6848 ( 1993 ) . 103 . Deshler , J . & Rossi , J . Unexpected point mutations activate cryptic 3’ splice sites by perturbing a natural secondary structure within a yeast intron . Genes Dev . 5 , 1252 – 1263 ( 1991 ) . 104 . Charpentier , B . & Rosbash , M . Intramolecular structure in yeast introns aids the early steps of in vitro spliceosome assembly . RNA 2 , 509 – 522 ( 1996 ) . 105 . Nilsen , T . Internal mRNA methylation finally finds functions . Science 343 , 1207 – 1208 ( 2014 ) . 106 . Reenan , R . Molecular determinants and guided evolution of species‑specific RNA editing . Nature 434 , 409 – 413 ( 2005 ) . 107 . Peng , Z . et al . Comprehensive analysis of RNA‑seq data reveals extensive RNA editing in a human transcriptome . Nat . Biotechnol . 30 , 253 – 260 ( 2012 ) . 108 . Rodriguez , J . , Menet , J . S . & Rosbash , M . Nascent‑ seq indicates widespread cotranscriptional RNA editing in Drosophila . Mol . Cell 47 , 27 – 37 ( 2012 ) . 109 . Wang , I . X . et al . RNA – DNA differences are generated in human cells within seconds after RNA exits polymerase II . Cell Rep . 6 , 906 – 915 ( 2014 ) . Shows that RNA nucleotides can be edited as soon as they emerge from Pol II . 110 . Rieder , L . E . & Reenan , R . A . The intricate relationship between RNA structure , editing , and splicing . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 23 , 281 – 288 ( 2012 ) . 111 . Laurencikiene , J . , Källman , A . M . , Fong , N . , Bentley , D . L . & Öhman , M . RNA editing and alternative splicing : the importance of co‑transcriptional coordination . EMBO Rep . 7 , 303 – 307 ( 2006 ) . 112 . Bratt , E . & Öhman , M . Coordination of editing and splicing of glutamate receptor pre‑mRNA . RNA 9 , 309 – 318 ( 2003 ) . 113 . Solomon , O . et al . Global regulation of alternative splicing by adenosine deaminase acting on RNA ( ADAR ) . RNA 19 , 591 – 604 ( 2013 ) . 114 . Hawkins , J . A survey on intron and exon lengths . Nucleic Acids Res . 16 , 9893 – 9908 ( 1988 ) . 115 . Deutsch , M . & Long , M . Intron – exon structures of eukaryotic model organisms . Nucleic Acids Res . 27 , 3219 – 3228 ( 1999 ) . 116 . Wang , Z . & Burge , C . B . Splicing regulation : from a parts list of regulatory elements to an integrated splicing code . RNA 14 , 802 – 813 ( 2008 ) . 117 . Zhang , X . H . ‑F . , Leslie , C . & Chasin , L . Dichotomous splicing signals in exon flanks . Genome Res . 15 , 768 – 779 ( 2005 ) . 118 . Barash , Y . et al . Deciphering the splicing code . Nature 465 , 53 – 59 ( 2010 ) . 119 . Berget , S . Exon recognition in vertebrate splicing . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 2411 – 2414 ( 1995 ) . 120 . Robberson , B . , Cote , G . & Berget , S . Exon definition may facilitate splice site selection in RNAs with multiple exons . Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 , 84 – 94 ( 1990 ) . 121 . Talerico , M . & Berget , S . Intron definition in splicing of small Drosophila introns . Mol . Cell . Biol . 14 , 3434 – 3445 ( 1994 ) . 122 . Sterner , D . , Carlo , T . & Berget , S . Architectural limits on plit genes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 15081 – 15085 ( 1996 ) . 123 . Izaurralde , E . et al . A nuclear cap binding protein complex involved in pre‑mRNA splicing . Cell 78 , 657 – 668 ( 1994 ) . 124 . Izaurralde , E . et al . A cap‑binding protein complex mediating U snRNA export . Nature 376 , 709 – 712 ( 1995 ) . 125 . Rottman , F . , Shatkin , A . & Perry , R . Sequences containing methylated nucleotides at the 5’ termini of messenger RNAs : possible implications in processing . Cell 3 , 197 – 199 ( 1974 ) . 126 . Ramanathan , A . , Robb , G . B . & Chan , S . H . mRNA capping : biological functions and applications . Nucleic Acids Res . 44 , 7511 – 7526 ( 2016 ) . 127 . Rasmussen , E . & Lis , J . T . In vivo transcriptional pausing and cap formation on three Drosophila heat shock genes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 7923 – 7927 ( 1993 ) . 128 . Gonatopoulos‑Pournatzis , T . & Cowling , V . H . Cap‑binding complex ( CBC ) . Biochem . J . 457 , 231 – 242 ( 2014 ) . 129 . Konarska , M . M . , Padgett , R . & Sharp , P . A . Recognition of cap structure in splicing in vitro of mRNA precursors . Cell 38 , 731 – 736 ( 1984 ) . 130 . Pabis , M . et al . The nuclear cap‑binding complex interacts with the U4 / U6 . U5 tri‑snRNP and promotes spliceosome assembly in mammalian cells . RNA 19 , 1054 – 1063 ( 2013 ) . Shows an association between the cap‑binding complex and snRNPs . 131 . Lewis , J . , Izaurralde , E . , Jarmolozski , A . , McGuigan , C . & Mattaj , I . A nuclear cap‑binding complex facilitates association of U1 snRNP with the cap‑proximal 5’ splice site . Genes Dev . 10 , 1683 – 1698 ( 1996 ) . 132 . Qiu , Z . R . , Chico , L . , Chang , J . , Shuman , S . & Schwer , B . Genetic interactions of hypomorphic mutations in the m7G cap‑binding pocket of yeast nuclear cap binding complex : an essential role for Cbc2 in meiosis via splicing of MER3 pre‑mRNA . RNA 18 , 1996 – 2011 ( 2012 ) . 133 . Proudfoot , N . J . Transcriptional termination in mammals : stopping the RNA polymerase II juggernaut . Science 352 , 1291 – 1300 ( 2016 ) . 134 . Connelly , S . & Manley , J . L . A functional mRNA polyadenylation signal is required for transcription termination by RNA polymerase II . Genes Dev . 2 , 440 – 452 ( 1988 ) . 135 . Logan , J . , Falck‑Pedersen , E . , Darnell , J . & Shenk , T . A poly ( A ) addition site and a downstream termination region are required for efficient cessation of transcription by RNA polymerase II in the mouse β maj ‑globin gene . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 84 , 8306 – 8310 ( 1987 ) . 136 . Whitelaw , E . & Proudfoot , N . α ‑Thalassemia caused by a poly ( A ) site mutation reveals that transcriptional termination is linked to 3 ʹ end processing in the human α 2 globin gene . EMBO J . 5 , 2915 – 2922 ( 1986 ) . 137 . Cooke , C . , Hans , H . & Alwine , J . Utilization of splicing elements and polyadenylation signal elements in the coupling of polyadenylation and last‑intron removal . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 4971 – 4979 ( 1999 ) . 138 . Rigo , F . & Martinson , H . G . Functional coupling of last‑ intron splicing and 3 ʹ ‑end processing to transcription in vitro : the poly ( A ) signal couples to splicing before committing to cleavage . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 849 – 862 ( 2008 ) . 139 . Kyburz , A . , Friedlein , A . , Langen , H . & Keller , W . Direct interactions between subunits of CPSF and the U2 snRNP contribute to the coupling of pre‑mRNA 3 ʹ end processing and splicing . Mol . Cell 23 , 195 – 205 ( 2006 ) . 140 . Millevoi , S . et al . A novel function for the U2AF 65 splicing factor in promoting pre‑mRNA 3 ʹ ‑end processing . EMBO Rep . 3 , 869 – 874 ( 2002 ) . 141 . Vagner , S . , Vagner , C . & Mattaj , I . The carboxyl terminus of vertebrate poly ( A ) polymerase interacts with U2AF 65 to couple 3 ʹ ‑end processing and splicing . Genes Dev . 14 , 403 – 413 ( 2000 ) . 142 . Kaida , D . The reciprocal regulation between splicing and 3 ʹ ‑end processing . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . RNA 7 , 499 – 511 ( 2016 ) . 143 . Dye , M . & Proudfoot , N . J . Terminal exon definition occurs cotranscriptionally and promotes termination of RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell 3 , 371 – 378 ( 1999 ) . 144 . Davidson , L . & West , S . Splicing‑coupled 3 ʹ end formation requires a terminal splice acceptor site , but not intron excision . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , 7101 – 7114 ( 2013 ) . Shows that early stages of spliceosome assembly are sufficient to couple splicing to 3’ end processing . 145 . Bento Martins , S . et al . Spliceosome assembly is coupled to RNA polymerase II dynamics at the 3 ʹ end of human genes . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 1115 – 1123 ( 2011 ) . 146 . Bird , G . , Zorio , D . A . & Bentley , D . L . RNA polymerase II carboxy‑terminal domain phosphorylation is required for cotranscriptional pre‑mRNA splicing and 3 ʹ ‑end formation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 8963 – 8969 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 18 | OCTOBER 2017 | 649 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 147 . Gunderson , S . , Polycarpou‑Schwarz , M . & Mattaj , I . U1 snRNP inhibits pre‑mRNA polyadenylation through a direct interaction between U1 70K and poly ( A ) polymerase . Mol . Cell 1 , 255 – 264 ( 1998 ) . 148 . Kaida , D . et al . U1 snRNP protects pre‑mRNAs from premature cleavage and polyadenylation . Nature 468 , 664 – 668 ( 2010 ) . Shows that U1 snRNP protects the transcriptome by suppressing premature cleavage and polyadenylation from cryptic poly ( A ) sites . 149 . Baserga , S . & Steitz , J . in The RNA World ( eds Gesteland , R . F . & Atkins , J . F . ) 359 – 381 ( Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , 1993 ) . 150 . Almada , A . E . , Wu , X . , Kriz , A . J . , Burge , C . B . & Sharp , P . A . Promoter directionality is controlled by U1 snRNP and polyadenylation signals . Nature 499 , 360 – 363 ( 2013 ) . 151 . Berg , M . G . et al . U1 snRNP determines mRNA length and regulates isoform expression . Cell 150 , 53 – 64 ( 2012 ) . 152 . Li , W . , Notani , D . & Rosenfeld , M . G . Enhancers as non‑coding RNA transcription units : recent insights and future perspectives . Nat . Rev . Genet . 17 , 207 – 223 ( 2016 ) . 153 . El Kaderi , B . , Medler , S . , Raghunayakula , S . & Ansari , A . Gene looping is conferred by activator‑ dependent interaction of transcription initiation and termination machineries . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 25015 – 25025 ( 2009 ) . 154 . Mukundan , B . & Ansari , A . Srb5 / Med18‑mediated termination of transcription is dependent on gene looping . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 11384 – 11394 ( 2013 ) . 155 . Agarwal , N . & Ansari , A . Enhancement of transcription by a splicing‑competent intron is dependent on promoter directionality . PLoS Genet . 12 , e1006047 ( 2016 ) . 156 . Moabbi , A . M . , Agarwal , N . , El Kaderi , B . & Ansari , A . Role for gene looping in intron‑mediated enhancement of transcription . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 8505 – 8510 ( 2012 ) . Shows that introns help gene looping and hence transcription in yeast . 157 . Huranová , M . et al . The differential interaction of snRNPs with pre‑mRNA reveals splicing kinetics in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 75 – 86 ( 2010 ) . 158 . Phair , R . & Misteli , T . High mobility of proteins in the mammalian nucleus . Nature 404 , 604 – 609 ( 2000 ) . 159 . Courchaine , E . M . , Lu , A . & Neugebauer , K . M . Droplet organelles ? EMBO J . 35 , 1603 – 1612 ( 2016 ) . 160 . Kwon , I . et al . Poly‑dipeptides encoded by the C9orf72 repeats bind nucleoli , impede RNA biogenesis , and kill cells . Science 345 , 1139 – 1145 ( 2014 ) . 161 . He , C . et al . High‑resolution mapping of RNA‑binding regions in the nuclear proteome of embryonic stem cells . Mol . Cell 64 , 416 – 430 ( 2016 ) . Identifies and characterizes new protein domains , and unannotated and / or disordered regions that interact with RNA . 162 . Castello , A . et al . Comprehensive identification of RNA‑binding domains in human cells . Mol . Cell 63 , 696 – 710 ( 2016 ) . 163 . Hnisz , D . , Shrinivas , K . , Young , R . A . , Chakraborty , A . K . & Sharp , P . A . A . Phase separation model for transcriptional control . Cell 169 , 13 – 23 ( 2017 ) . 164 . Neugebauer , K . M . , Stolk , J . A . & Roth , M . B . A conserved epitope on a subset of SR proteins defines a larger family of pre‑mRNA splicing factors . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 899 – 908 ( 1995 ) . 165 . Gueroussov , S . et al . Regulatory expansion in mammals of multivalent hnRNP assemplies that globally control alternative splicing . Cell 170 , 324 – 339 ( 2017 ) . 166 . Ying , Y . et al . Splicing activation by RBfox requires self‑aggregation through its tyrosine‑rich domain . Cell 170 , 312 – 323 ( 2017 ) . 167 . Machyna , M . , Neugebauer , K . M . & Stane˘k , D . Coilin : the first 25 years . RNA Biol . 12 , 590 – 596 ( 2015 ) . 168 . Kwon , I . et al . Phosphorylation‑regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to fibrous polymers of low‑ complexity domains . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 ( 2013 ) . 169 . Yu , Y . & Reed , R . FUS functions in coupling transcription to splicing by mediating an interaction between RNAP II and U1 snRNP . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 8608 – 8613 ( 2015 ) . 170 . Sun , S . et al . ALS‑causative mutations in FUS / TLS confer gain and loss of function by altered association with SMN and U1‑snRNP . Nat . Commun . 6 , 6171 ( 2015 ) . 171 . Radó‑Trilla , N . & Albà , M . Dissecting the role of low‑complexity regions in the evolution of vertebrate proteins . BMC Evol . Biol . 12 , 155 ( 2012 ) . 172 . Callan , H . Lampbrush Chromosomes Vol . 36 ( Springer‑Verlag Berlin Heidelberg , 1986 ) . 173 . Custódio , N . , Vivo , M . , Antoniou , M . & Carmo‑Fonseca , M . Splicing‑ and cleavage‑ independent requirement of RNA polymerase II CTD for mRNA release from the transcription site . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 199 – 207 ( 2007 ) . 174 . Custódio , N . et al . Inefficient processing impairs release of RNA from the site of transcription . EMBO J . 18 , 2855 – 2866 ( 1999 ) . 175 . Bhatt , D . M . et al . Transcript dynamics of proinflammatory genes revealed by sequence analysis of subcellular RNA fractions . Cell 150 , 279 – 290 ( 2012 ) . 176 . Tress , M . L . , Abascal , F . & Valencia , A . Alternative splicing may not be the key to proteome complexity . Trends Biochem . Sci . 42 , 98 – 110 ( 2017 ) . 177 . Tilgner , H . et al . Comprehensive transcriptome analysis using synthetic long‑read sequencing reveals molecular co‑association of distant splicing events . Nat . Biotechnol . 33 , 736 – 742 ( 2015 ) . 178 . Taliaferro , J . M . et al . Distal alternative last exons localize mRNAs to neural projections . Mol . Cell 61 , 821 – 833 ( 2016 ) . 179 . Floor , S . N . & Doudna , J . A . Tunable protein synthesis by transcript isoforms in human cells . eLife 5 , e10921 ( 2016 ) . 180 . Berkovits , B . D . & Mayr , C . Alternative 3 ʹ UTRs act as scaffolds to regulate membrane protein localization . Nature 522 , 363 – 367 ( 2015 ) . 181 . Gowda , N . et al . Cytosolic splice isoform of Hsp70 nucleotide exchange factor Fes1 is required for the degradation of misfolded proteins in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 1210 – 1219 ( 2016 ) . 182 . Pu , S . , Wong , J . , Turner , B . , Cho , E . & Wodak , S . J . Up‑to‑date catalogues of yeast protein complexes . Nucleic Acids Res . 37 , 825 – 831 ( 2009 ) . 183 . Huh , W . et al . Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast . Nature 425 , 686 – 691 ( 2003 ) . 184 . Dosztányi , Z . , Csizmók , V . , Tompa , P . & Simon , I . IUPred : web server for the prediction of intrinsically unstructured regions of proteins based on estimated energy content . Bioinformatics 21 , 3433 – 3434 ( 2005 ) . 185 . Dosztányi , Z . , Csizmók , V . , Tompa , P . & Simon , I . The pairwise energy content estimated from amino acid composition discriminates between folded and intrinsically unstructured proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 347 , 827 – 839 ( 2005 ) . 186 . Birse , C . , Minvielle‑Sebastia , L . , Lee , B . , Keller , W . & Proudfoot , N . J . Coupling termination of transcription to messenger RNA maturation in yeast . Science 280 , 298 – 301 ( 1998 ) . 187 . Baejen , C . et al . Genome‑wide analysis of RNA polymerase II termination at protein‑coding genes . Mol . Cell 66 , 38 – 49 ( 2017 ) . Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to H . Herzel and K . Reimer for com‑ ments on the manuscript . This work was supported in part by NIH R01GM112766 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences ( to K . M . N . ) and by T32GM007223 ( to T . A . ) . Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the US National Institutes of Health . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . DATABASES CYC2008 : http : / / wodaklab . org / cyc2008 / Saccharomyces Genome Database : http : / / www . yeastgenome . org Spliceosome Database : http : / / spliceosomedb . ucsc . edu / Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets ( BioGRID ) : https : / / thebiogrid . org FURTHER INFORMATION IUPred : http : / / iupred . enzim . hu / SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( box ) | S2 ( table ) | S3 ( table ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 650 | OCTOBER 2017 | VOLUME 18 www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .