I N T R O D U C T I O N T O T H E S P E C I A L I S S U E O N V I D E O A S A R E S E A R C H A N D D E S I G N T O O L WENDY E . MACKAY DEBORAH G . TATAR It is our pleasure to present the following collection of papers about the use of video as a tool for research and design . As costs drop and both video and computers become more prevalent , people are finding new uses for video to support their work . Yet most video work in the CI - II community has been done in isolation . Video users have not had a forum in which to present , share , or learn from each other ' s work . No books are available nor are there courses that teach about the effective use of video in human - computer interaction research or design . This special issue of the SIGCHI Bulletin is an initial attempt to bring together a sample of work done in the field . The papers discuss tools , research methodologies , design strategies , theoretical concerns , and basic information about using video . They are not exhaustive , nor perhaps even fully representative , but we believe they provide a useful look at a variety of works in progress . We hope that this issue will be the first of a series of activities and publications that encourage the exchange of ideas and techniques , as video becomes an essential tool for CHI research and user interface design . This issue began with a panel at CI - II ' 88 , organized by Wendy Mackay , including Deborah Tatar , Lucy Suclunan , Marilyn Mantei and Raymonde Guindon . We had all used video in different ways in our different research activities and were interested in comparing and contrasting the techniques . The " Video as Research Data " panel generated a great deal of interest and convinced us that we should pursue the topic further . We approached acm / SIGCHI with a proposal to conduct a limited attendance workshop , entitled " Video as a Research and Design Tool " . Although we received over 70 requests , we could only accommodate 25 people . The papers submitted by these twenty five participants were bound and distributed to all attendees . We then spent two very intense days presenting our work to each other and discussing a wide range of topics . This was followed by a well - attended special interest group at CHI ' 89 , which gave some of the participants of the workshop a chance to get together again and others a chance to participate in the sharing of ideas about the uses of video . Based on the response to these events , we were asked to edit the papers presented at the workshop and submit them for this special issue of the SIGCHI Bulletin . The papers represent a cross - section of people from major labs , academia , and industry , with participants from the United States , Canada , and England . Several levels of approach are represented here . For some , video ' s flexibilities , limitations , promise , and idiosyncrasies are central and defining . For others , it has become an intrinsic component of their work process , not the origin of the work , but currently inseparable from its execution . For yet others , video is a resource , simply providing one of several means to an end . Within these approaches and levels of interest , we find a wealth of positions , some explicit and some implicit . For some , video is important because it deviates from the real world ; for others , because it captures significant portions of it . Some capitalize on the difference between the creator and the user of videotape . Others distinguish between the people behind and in front of the camera . While tool design seems SIGCHI Bulletin October 1989 48 Volume 21 , Number 2 inextricably linked to the analytic approach , certain kinds of video editing features are universally desired . Ethical Issues The papers represent diverse , creative and sometimes conflicting views about video . Yet , there are also common themes , some apparent in the papers and some apparent only during the workshop . Among the most interesting and surprising of these common themes is the issue of ethics . Even though some of the papers present the work as clear and straightforward , almost all of the authors spoke of their struggles with difficult ethical issues during the workshop . Traditional human factors studies go to great lengths to disguise the identity of subjects . In contrast , much of the work presented here capitalizes on those aspects of video which make subject identity impossible to disguise . For example , they use video ' s persuasive power to show others a phenomenon or they rely on video ' s permanence to engage groups in the examination of the data . In some cases , voices may be disguised or some kind of video masking may he done , but this does not suffice if researchers are looking at qualities of speech or gaze . An important ethical issue arises from the fact that videotapes are often made for one purpose and subsequently used for another . A major concern is that even when researchers obtain a subject ' s consent , it is not always clear that the subject understands the implications of that consent . Thus , how do researchers ensure that they have obtained " informed consent " ? In a word that is continually growing smaller , we cannot rely on the idea that no one in an audience will know the people on the tape . A small but interesting example is the recent trend to display videotapes submitted to conferences into conferee rooms over the hotel cable TV channel . Suddenly , the tape has a much broader and more focused audience than it had when it was merely displayed on a video monitor in a small , designated area . While this may be beneficial for the researcher , it may cause problems for colleagues who have agreed to be subjects . Note that we must also consider how to protect the researcher or designer , who can be seriously hurt by unexpected changes in the permitted conditions of the use of video . Our colleagues who use video in related disciplines , such as broadcast news and documentary film - making , have dealt with many of these issues . However , it is also clear that members of the CHI community use video in unique ways and must develop ethical guidelines that are suited to those endeavors . Bulletin Organization These papers do not fall into clear categories , partly because the authors have multi - faceted interests in video , partly because the research and design paradigms diverge and overlap and partly because video itself is not a unitary phenomenon . For example , one can talk about the intnnsic properties of video as the medium itself , or as the world it represents . One motivation for using video might be to make design decisions while another might be to understand principles of group interaction . The use of video in these two cases might look very similar or dramatically different . We began the workshop with a brainstorming session that led to the creation of four groups : design , analysis , tools , and communication / presentation . Each group prepared a zession for the entire workshop , consisting of presentations by individuals within the group and the leading of a discussion on the topic . This led to interesting discussions among people with fundamentally different perspectives . We have chosen to organize the papers differently for this issue of the SIGCHI Bulletin , based on the following four categoties : video as a communication medium , study and management of video , quantitative emphasis , and qualitative emphasis . The first group discusses how video can be used for communication and presents an innovative set of applications . The second group describes different approaches for examining and managing video , for both research and design purposes . The third group is interested in providing quantitative analyses of events . The fourth group emphasizes qualitative analyses and explores philosophical issues related to the use of video . Although no linear organization does justice to the diversity of the uses of video represented here , we believe these categories better reflect the common approaches and main concems of the authors . We have identified the papers by the authors who attended the workshop , as listed below . Certain key aspects of eadt paper are listed below , to help compare and contrast them . The introductions to each section further explore the relationships among the papers . Enjoyt 1 . Video as a communication medium : Nagi Kodali Herbert Armstrong Laurie Vertelney Steve Harrison ( Experience , teach ) ( Show , teach ) ( Show , design ) ( Experience , design ) 2 . Study and management of video : Wendy Mackay Randy Trigg Renate Roske - Hofstrand Ben Rubin Brian Michon Mark Chow ( Research , annotation ) ( Research , design ) ( Research , annotation ) ( Editing , annotation ) ( Design , video data ) ( Capture , presentation ) 3 . Quantitative emphasis : Margaret Shaffer Sue Kennedy Marjorie Horton Lisa Neal ( Pair , statistics ) ( Pair , clips ) ( Group ) ( Individual ) SIGCHI Bulletin October 1989 49 Volume 21 , Number 2 4 . Qualitative emphasis : Austin Henderson Deborah Tatar Bob Anderson Christina Allen Ricki Goldman - Segall ( Design , methods ) ( Theory , design ) ( Theory , design ) ( Design , methods ) ( Storytelling , research ) Acknowledgements We would like to thank Peter Orbeton , for his enthusiastic support of this publication , and the SIGCHI 1987 - 1988 Executive Committee for their support of the workshop . We would also like to thank the participants in the workshop , who gave us new views of video and provided a fascinating set of discussions . Finally , we would like to encourage those of you who use video in your work to share your ideas and contribute to a growing body of knowledge about the use of video as a tool for research and design . S1GCHI Bulletin October 1989 50 Volume 21 , Number 2