Cell , Vol . 112 , 453 – 465 , February 21 , 2003 , Copyright  2003 by Cell Press Review Cellular Motility Driven by Assembly and Disassembly of Actin Filaments to decipher . Recent excitement in the motility field is focused on a convergence of structural , biochemical , genetic , and theoretical studies which have , for the first Thomas D . Pollard 1 , * and Gary G . Borisy 2 , * 1 Department of Cellular , Molecular , and Developmental Biology time , provided a coherent , semi - quantitative model for Yale University the molecular mechanism of protrusion of lamellae and New Haven , Connecticut 06520 how cells might respond to external signals . 2 Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology Actin filaments are , by mass , the dominant structural Northwestern University component of the lamellipodium and , indeed , actin is School of Medicine the most abundant protein in many eukaryotic cells . Chicago , Illinois 60611 The filaments are double helical polymers of globular subunits all arranged head - to - tail to give the filament a molecular polarity ( Figure 2 ) . Based on the arrowhead pattern created by decoration with myosin , one end is Motile cells extend a leading edge by assembling a called the barbed end and the other the pointed end . branched network of actin filaments that produces This polarity is key to the mechanism of actin assembly physical force as the polymers grow beneath the in cells . The barbed end is favored for growth and actin plasma membrane . A core set of proteins including filaments in cells are strongly oriented with respect to actin , Arp2 / 3 complex , profilin , capping protein , and the cell surface , barbed ends outward ( Small et al . , ADF / cofilin can reconstitute the process in vitro , and 1978 ) . Accordingly , when permeabilized cells are pro - mathematical models ofthe constituent reactions pre - vided with fluorescent actin subunits , they add to dict the rate of motion . Signaling pathways converging barbed ends at the leading edge of the lamellum ( Sy - on WASp / Scar proteins regulate the activity of Arp2 / 3 mons and Mitchison , 1991 ; Chan et al . , 2000 ) . complex , which mediates the initiation of new fila - Marking experiments , by photoactivating caged - fluo - ments as branches on preexisting filaments . After a rescent actin ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1991 ) showed that brief spurt of growth , capping protein terminates the infastmovingcells , likefishepidermalkeratocytes , actin elongation of the filaments . After filaments have aged filaments remain stationary whilethe cell advances , thus by hydrolysis of their bound ATP and dissociation of demonstrating that protrusion of the leading edge oc - the (cid:1) phosphate , ADF / cofilin proteins promote deb - cursconcomitantlywithpolymerizationofactin . Alterna - ranching and depolymerization . Profilin catalyzes the tively , if a cell is stationary , like disc - shaped sea urchin exchange of ADP for ATP , refilling the pool of ATP - coelomocytes , actin filaments assemble at the margin actin monomers bound to profilin , ready for elon - of the cell and move away from the edge ( Wang , 1985 ; gation . Edds , 1993 ; Henson et al . , 1999 ) , reflecting the same relationship to the cell surface as in locomotion . More commonly , as in fibroblasts , actin polymerization is Directional motility is a fundamental cellular process transformed partially into protrusion and partially into essential for embryonic development , wound healing , retrograde flow ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1992 ; Lin and immune responses , and development of tissues . For Forscher , 1995 ) . Analysis of single actin molecules example , wiring the human brain requires the laying tagged with green fluorescent protein revealed that fi - down of about 1 million miles of neurites , all proceeding broblasts incorporate actin into filaments not only at through the crawling motility of growth cones . The motil - the margin of the cell , but also throughout the leading ity mechanism is ancient , with key molecular compo - lamella ( Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ) . Rapid fading nentsfunctionallyconservedbetweenprotozoaandver - offluorescent - actinmarks ( TheriotandMitchison , 1991 ) , tebrates , thus dating its origin to more than 1 billion fluorescent speckle microscopy ( Salmon et al . , 2002 ) , years ago . Almost universally , crawling motility involves and single molecule fluorescence microscopy ( Wata - a cycle of four steps : protrusion of the leading edge nabe and Mitchison , 2002 ) show that actin filaments at ( Figure 1 ) , adhesion to the substratum , retraction of the the leading edge turn over on a time scale of tens of rear , and de - adhesion . Remarkably , directional motility seconds , recycling subunits for subsequent polymer - is not only manifest by intact cells but seems to be an ization . autonomous property of the leading lamellum , the part Amazingly , intracellular “rocketing” motility first dis - of the cellular cortex , also called a lamellipodium , that covered for Listeria ( Tilney et al . , 1992 ) shows a similar expands forward as the cell moves . Lamellar fragments coupling of movement and actin polymerization ( Theriot ofkeratocytes , whichlacknuclei , centrosomes , microtu - et al . , 1992 ) . Listeria recruits the motility machinery from bules , and most organelles , nevertheless retain the the cytoplasm of infected cells to aid in its attempts property of directional motility ( Euteneuer and Schliwa , to infect neighboring cells without subjecting itself to 1984 ) ; ( Verkhovsky et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , the capacity of immune surveillance . It is now appreciated that not only the motility machine to self - organize represents a “mo - bacteria , but also viruses ( Frischknecht et al . , 1999 ) , lecular autopilot , ” the rules for which we are challenged endosomes ( Merrifield et al . , 1999 ) , and endogenous vesicles ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) employ actin - polymeriza - tion for intracellular motility . * Correspondence : thomas . pollard @ yale . edu ( T . D . P . ) , g - borisy @ northwestern . edu ( G . G . B . ) Thus , the simplest view is that protrusive motility pro - Cell454 Figure 1 . Light and Electron Micrographs of Motile Keratocytes ( Top left ) Overlays of two series of phase contrast micrographs taken at intervals of 15 s showing the motility of a keratocyte and a keratocyte cytoplast . ( Top middle ) Fluorescence micrograph of a keratocyte stained with rhodamine phalloidin to label the actin filaments . ( Top right ) TransmissionelectronmicrographofakeratocytepreparedbyTritonextractioninphalloidin , fixation , criticalpointdrying , andmetalshadowing . Detailof regionshownbelowwith thethreezonesof actinfilamentorganization labeled ( micrographsprovidedby TanyaSvitkina , Northwestern University School of Medicine ) . The schematic diagram indicates the locations of key proteins . The curves ( actin subunits per unit time ) indicate actin filament assembly ( red ) as reflected by imaging of single GFP - actin molecules ( Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ) and disassembly ( blue ) as adapted from quantitative analysis ( Mogilner and Edelstein - Keshet , 2002 ) . Areas under curves were made equal to denote steady state . ceeds by a treadmilling - type reaction—addition of sub - elongate barbed ends at 110 subunits ( 0 . 3 (cid:1) m ) per sec - ond . The ratio of the rate constants for dissociation units at the barbed end and loss of subunits at the pointed end . The insufficiency of such a simple view and association ( k (cid:2) / k (cid:3) ) is the dissociation equilibrium constant for subunit binding at the end of a polymer , can be better understood after considering some basic actin biochemistry . also known as the critical concentration . All actin above the critical concentration polymerizes , leaving the criti - cal concentration of subunits exchanging with the end Basic Actin Biochemistry Spontaneous assembly of pure actin monomers is unfa - of the polymer . For the physiologically relevant species , Mg - ATP actin , the critical concentration is lower at the vorable owing to the instability of actin dimers and tri - mers , but once started , filaments grow rapidly ( Figure barbed end ( 0 . 1 (cid:1) M ) than at the pointed end ( 0 . 7 (cid:1) M ) . As a consequence , the steady - state concentration of 2 ) . Subunitadditionatthebarbedendisdiffusionlimited , meaning that the rate of growth is determined by the monomers in ATP is slightly above the critical concen - tration at the barbed end and below that at the pointed rate that subunits collide with the end . About 2 % of such collisions are oriented correctly for binding ( Drenckhahn end . Mg - ATP bound in a deep cleft in actin stabilizes the and Pollard , 1986 ) . The rate of elongation is directly proportional to the concentration of monomers in the molecule but is not required for polymerization per se ( De La Cruz et al . , 2000a ) . Instead , hydrolysis of ATP by solution with a rate constant for the barbed end of 11 (cid:1) M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 ( Pollard , 1986 ) . Thus , 10 (cid:1) M actin monomers polymerized actin and dissociation of the (cid:4) - phosphate Review455 Figure 2 . Actin FilamentElongation , ATP Hy - drolysis , and Phosphate Dissociation The EM shows an actin filament seed decor - ated with myosin heads and elongated with ATP - actin . The association rate constants haveunitsof (cid:1) M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 . Dissociationratecon - stantshaveunitsofs (cid:2) 1 . Theratioofthedisso - ciation rate constant to the association rate constantgivesK , thedissociationequilibrium constant withunits of (cid:1) M . Notethat the equi - librium constants for ATP - actin differ at the two ends , giving rise to slow steady state treadmilling . HydrolysisofATPboundtoeach subunitisfast , butdissociationofthe (cid:4) phos - phate is very slow . Modified from original art - work by Graham Johnson in “Cell Biology” by T . D . Pollard and W . C . Earnshaw , W . B . Saunders , 2002 . appear to be an internal timer that indicates the age of doubt , many other proteins participate in the process , but for purposes of simplicity , we will concentrate on afilament andtriggersprocessesthat disassembleactin filaments in cells . ATP hydrolysis is irreversible ( Carlier these core proteins ( Figure 3 ) . et al . , 1988 ) and fast with a half time of about 2 s ( Blan - choin and Pollard , 2002 ) . Phosphate dissociation is A Quantitative Hypothesis to Explain the Properties of the Leading Edge much slower with a half time of 350 s ( Carlier and Panta - loni , 1986 ) , so ADP - P i - actin is a relatively long - lived in - The behavior of the actin filament network at the leading edge poses several key questions . How do actin fila - termediate in freshly assembled filaments . Every known property of ADP - P i actin is identical to ATP - actin . ADP - ments grow fast ? How do cells initiate and terminate the growth of new filaments ? How do actin filaments actin subunits dissociate faster from the barbed end than ATP - actin subunits , but both ATP - and ADP - actin push forward the membrane at the leading edge ? How are proteins in the actin filament network recycled ? How dissociate slowly at the pointed end ( Pollard , 1986 ) . A consequence of these kinetic constants is that in the do environmental and internal signals control these re - actions ? Answers to these questions are provided in steady state , ATP - actin associates at the barbed end andADP - actindissociatesfromthepointedend , leading this review by the dendritic nucleation / array treadmilling hypothesis ( Figure 3 ) . Cells contain a pool of unpolymer - to very slow treadmilling of subunits from the barbed end to the pointed end , which has now been visualized ized actin monomers bound to profilin and sequestering proteins such as thymosin - (cid:5) 4 . New filaments arise when directly by fluorescence microscopy ( Fujiwara et al . , 2002b ) . ATP hydrolysis in the filament is essential to signaling pathways activate nucleation - promoting factors such members of the WASp / Scar family of proteins . ( The maintain treadmilling . The key point related to cellular motility is that pure first family member discovered , WASp , is the product of the gene mutated in a human bleeding disorder and actin filaments , at steady state in vitro under physiologi - cal ion conditions but in the absence of regulatory pro - immunodeficiency , Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome [ Rengan et al . , 2000 ] ) . Active nucleation - promoting factors then teins , treadmill very slowly whereas cells can advance quickly . In the steady - state , growth at the barbed end stimulate Arp2 / 3 complex to initiate a new filament as a branch on the side of an existing filament . Fed by is limited by dissociation at the pointed end , which is (cid:1) 0 . 2 s (cid:2) 1 , which corresponds to 0 . 04 (cid:1) m / min , in contrast actin - profilin from the subunit pool , new branches grow rapidly and push the membrane forward . Each filament to keratocytes or “rocketing” microbes , which can move at 10 (cid:1) m / min , more than two orders of magnitude faster . grows only transiently , since capping proteins terminate growth . Actin subunits in this branched network hydrolyze Therefore , regulatory proteins are required to explain the physiological behavior . their bound ATP quickly but dissociate the (cid:4) - phosphate slowly . Dissociation of (cid:4) - phosphate initiates disassem - Cells are endowed with a rich variety of actin binding proteins , falling into more than 60 classes ( Pollard , bly reactions by inducing debranching and binding of ADF / cofilin , which , inturn , promotesseveringanddisso - 1999 ) . Actin and a limited subset of actin binding pro - teins can reconstitute bacterial motility in a purified sys - ciation of ADP - subunits from filament ends . Profilin is the nucleotide exchange factor for actin , catalyzing ex - tem ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . These proteins are actin , ADF / cofilin ( Bamburg et al . , 1999 ) , capping protein ( Cooper change of ADP for ATP and returning subunits to the ATP - actin - profilin pool , ready for another cycle of as - and Schafer , 2000 ) , Arp2 / 3 complex ( Pollard and Beltz - ner , 2002 ) , an activator of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Weaver et sembly . In addition to their role in recycling actin sub - units during steady state movement , ADF / cofilins may al . , 2003 ) , and profilin ( Schluter et al . , 1997 ) . Without Cell456 Figure 3 . Dendritic Nucleation / Array Treadmilling Model for Protrusion of the Leading Edge ( 1 ) Extracellular signals activate receptors . ( 2 ) The associated signal transduction pathways produce active Rho - family GTPases and PIP2 that ( 3 ) activate WASp / Scar proteins . ( 4 ) WASp / Scar proteins bring together Arp2 / 3 complex and an actin monomer on the side of a preexisting filament to form a branch . ( 5 ) Rapid growth at the barbed end of the new branch ( 6 ) pushes the membrane forward . ( 7 ) Capping protein terminates growth within a second or two . ( 8 ) Filaments age by hydrolysis of ATP bound to each actin subunit ( white subunits turn yellow ) followed by dissociation of the (cid:4) phosphate ( subunits turn red ) . ( 9 ) ADF / cofilin promotes phosphate dissociation , severs ADP - actin filaments and promotes dissociation of ADP - actin from filament ends . ( 10 ) Profilin catalyzes the exchange of ADP for ATP ( turning the subunits white ) , returning subunits to ( 11 ) the pool of ATP - actin bound to profilin , ready to elongate barbed ends as they become available . ( 12 ) Rho - family GTPases also activate PAK and LIM kinase , which phosphorylates ADF / cofilin . This tends to slow down the turnover of the filaments . ( Redrawn from a figure in Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . Reprinted with permission from the Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure , Volume 29 , copyright 2000 by Annual Reviews , www . annualreviews . org . also help to initiate protrusions by severing filaments to sion is required . Proteins that bind actin monomers and other proteins that cap filamentends cooperate to main - expose barbed ends for elongation ( Zebda et al . , 2000 ) . tain the pool of unpolymerized actin . In this model , an individual actin filament does not The first mechanism is association of ATP - actin treadmill in the sense of simultaneous growth at one monomers with a small protein called profilin . Profilin end and shortening at the other . A filament is born as binds the barbed end of an actin monomer , allowing a branch point and grows at its barbed end while its actin - profilin to elongate barbed ends of filaments at pointed end is capped at the branch ; the filament be - rates similar to free actin monomers but blocking bind - comes capped at its barbed end , debranches and short - ingtofilamentpointends . Profilinalsoinhibitsspontane - ens after being severed . Thus , the actin filament array ous nucleation of actin filaments . All eukaryote cells as a whole treadmills by reproducing itself at the cell appear to express profilin . In amoeba , the concentration front while dismantling itself some distance from the of profilin and its affinity for actin are sufficient to ac - leading edge . count for the entire pool of unpolymerized actin mono - mers ( Kaiser et al . , 1999 ; Vinson et al . , 1998 ) . Profilin How Do Actin Filaments Grow Fast ? also binds proline - rich sequences in proteins such as Since therate ofactin filamentelongation isproportional formins , VASP , and N - WASP . Ability to bind both actin to the concentration of subunits , this question is equiva - and poly - L - proline are essential for viability , at least in lent to asking how cells maintain a pool of polymeriza - fungi ( Lu and Pollard , 2001 ) and for actin assembly in tion - ready actin at a high concentration . The maximum extracts ( Yang et al . , 2000 ) . rates of cellular protrusion or rocketing motility require The second mechanism is association of ATP - actin a concentration of polymerization - competent subunits monomers with thymosin - (cid:5) 4 , a small protein of 43 resi - at least one hundred times the critical concentration for dues . The pool of unpolymerized actin in human plate - pure actin filaments . In addition to maintaining a pool lets and leukocytes exceeds the concentration of pro - of subunits sufficient to sustain fast protrusion in the filin , but sufficient thymosin - (cid:5) 4 is present to make up steadystate , cells alsokeepapoolof subunitsinreserve the difference ( Safer and Nachmias , 1994 ; De La Cruz et al . , 2000b ) . However , sequestering actin monomers in the event that explosive or non - steady - state protru - Review457 Figure 4 . Ribbon Model of the Crystal Structure of Bovine Arp2 / 3 Complex The inactive structure from the crystal has the actin - related proteins , Arp2 and Arp3 , separated too far to initiate a new filament . The model on the rightshows a hypothetical conformation with theArps positioned like two subunitsin an actin filament . Sucha conformation is proposed to be stabilized by binding of nucleation promoting factors and to the side of an actin filament . The new actin filament is proposed to grow toward the southwest form the barbed ends of the Arps ( modified from Robinson et al . , 2001 ) . Reprinted with permission from Robinson et al . , 2001 . Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science . with thymosin - (cid:5) 4 creates a problem , namely thymosin - existing filaments , uncapping existing filaments , or de novo nucleation ( Condeelis , 1993 ; Zigmond , 1996 ) . De (cid:5) 4 blocks all actin assembly reactions including nucle - ation and growth at both ends . The solution is competi - novo creation of new barbed ends is now considered to be the dominant mechanism in the leading edge ( Zig - tion between profilin and thymosin - (cid:5) 4 for binding actin . Both proteins exchange on and off actin on a sub - sec - mond , 1996 ) , but contributions from severing and un - capping should not be neglected . In particular , ADF / ond time scale , but profilin binds actin monomers tighter than thymosin - (cid:5) 4 . This allows profilin to maintain a pool cofilin severing proteins appear to contribute to poly - merization in vertebrate cells ( Zebda et al . , 2000 ) , and of actin ready to elongate barbed ends , while thymosin - (cid:5) 4 holds the rest of the monomers in reserve . Some uncapping of gelsolin - capped filaments occurs during the polymerization of actin that follows activation of lower eukaryotes , including fungi , lack genes for thy - mosin - (cid:5) 4 and apparently survive without this second platelets ( Falet et al . , 2002 ) . Although supported by indi - rect evidence , analysis of de novo nucleation lagged actin buffering system . Rapid growth at barbed ends would deplete the un - until recently , owing to the lack of a cellular factor to promote formation of barbed ends . Discovery that the polymerized actin pool , resulting in progressively slower elongation . At steady state , two mechanisms , which are Arp2 / 3 complex has this activity refocused the field and generated an explosion of research . More recently , for - discussed in more detail in subsequent sections , com - pensate for this depletion . One mechanism is capping mins have emerged as a second cellular factor capable of initiating new actin filaments ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ; of many barbed ends , which effectively reduces the rate of drawdown on the pool . The second is mediated by Sagot et al . , 2002 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky et al . , 1994 ) is a stable ADF / cofilin proteins , which accelerate actin depolymeri - zation and thus replenish the monomer pool . Together assembly of two actin - related proteins , Arp2 and Arp3 , with five novel subunits ( Figure 4 ) . Found in all parts with profilin ( and thymosin - (cid:5) 4 in higher eukaryotes ) , ADF / cofilin and capping of barbed ends allow cells to of eukaryote phylogeny , Arp2 / 3 complex is present at remarkably high concentrations , almost 10 (cid:1) M in the maintain a high concentration of unpolymerized actin far from equilibrium . This pool sustains high rates of cytoplasm of human leukocytes ( Higgs et al . , 1999 ) , for example . A crystal structure of inactive Arp2 / 3 complex filament elongation at the steady state and is available to add explosively to barbed ends when they become ( Robinson et al . , 2001 ) revealed that the p34 ARPC2 and p20 ARPC4 subunits form the core of the complex , available . Thus , to a large extent , regulation of polymer - ization reduces to regulation of the availability of free anchoring the two Arps , thep40 ARPC1 (cid:5) - propeller sub - unit , and two novel (cid:6) - helical subunits , p21 ARPC 3 and barbed ends . p16 ARPC5 . This form of the complex is inactive , be - cause the two Arps are too far apart to form the first Initiation and Termination of the Growth of New Filaments two subunits of a new actin filament . Biochemical and microscopic experiments estab - In principle , cells might produce new barbed ends by any or all of three hypothetical mechanisms : severing lished that the Arp2 / 3 complex caps pointed ends and Cell458 and reconstitution experiments established that these C - terminal VCA domains of WASp / Scar proteins from protozoa , fungi , and animals all activate actin filament nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 1999 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ; Egile et al . , 1999 ) . Since actin filaments are coacti - vators of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Panta - loni et al . , 2000 ) , the reaction proceeds autocatalytically with newly formed actin filaments promoting the initia - tion of subsequent generations of filaments . The relative contributions of nucleation - promoting factors and pre - existing filaments to activation of Arp2 / 3 complex have not yet been sorted out . Rapidly emerging biochemical and genetic evidence established the existence of additional nucleation - pro - Figure 5 . Domain Organization and Regulation of WASp moting factors for Arp2 / 3 complex ( Weaver et al . , 2003 ) . Linear model with identified domains and examples of interacting Vertebrate cortactin also binds ( Weed et al . , 2000 ) and ligands . Proposed activation mechanism . WASp and N - WASP are activates ( Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 ) Arp2 / 3 intrinsically autoinhibited by the interaction of the GTPase binding complex , as well as stabilizing branches . A fungal pro - domain ( GBD ) with the C region . Interaction of the basic region , tein called Abp1p has some some similar features GBD and proline - rich domain with Cdc42 , PIP2 , and SH3 domain ( Goode et al . , 2001 ) . Fungal myosin - I genes acquired a proteins ( such as Nck and Grb2 ) free the C - terminal VCA domain C - terminal A domain soon after the divergence of fungi to interact with an actin monomer and Arp2 / 3 complex to initiate fromanimals . Myosin - Ifrombothbuddingyeast ( Lechler an actin filament branch . et al . , 2000 ; Evangelista et al . , 2000 ) and fission yeast ( Lee et al . , 2000 ) bind Arp2 / 3 complex , and the tail of initiates growth in the barbed direction as 70 (cid:7) branches fission yeast myosin - I activates Arp2 / 3 complex . Ge - ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) identical to the actin filament netic interactions and biochemical analysis show that branches at the leading edge of the fish keratocyte ( Svit - these myosin - Is have overlapping functions with the kina et al . , 1997 ) ( Figure 1 ) . The correspondence of yeast WASp homologs and verprolin in regulating actin branching structures in situ and in vitro extended be - assembly . The budding yeast homolog of Eps15 , Pan1p , yond their morphological appearance . Polarity experi - also activates Arp2 / 3 complex ( Duncan et al . , 2001 ) . ments with myosin S1 decoration indicated that barbed Mechanistic studies show that WASp / Scar proteins ends in lamellipodia were numerous near the leading cooperate with Arp2 / 3 complex and actin filaments to edge ( Small et al . , 1978 ) , but pointed ends were involved stimulate formation of new barbed ends ( Blanchoin et in end to side junctions with the sides of other filaments , al . , 2000a ; Higgs et al . , 1999 ; Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ; resulting in y - shaped branches ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . Marchand et al . , 2001 ; Zalevsky et al . , 2001b ; Amann Immunogold labeling with antibodies to components of and Pollard , 2001 ) , linking nucleation and branching . the Arp2 / 3 complex showed that the complex was lo - The C - terminal VCA domains of WASp / Scar proteins are cated at the branch of the y junctions ( Svitkina and constitutively active for activating Arp2 / 3 complex . This Borisy , 1999 ) , as predicted if the complex functioned as nucleation - promoting activity depends on a verprolin a nucleator of polymerization and remained bound to homology domain ( V ; also called a WASp homology , the pointed end . The complex links the branch to the WH - 2 domain ) that binds an actin monomer ( Miki and side of the mother filament in two - dimensional recon - Takenawa , 1998 ) and a terminal acidic ( A ) domain that structions from electron micrographs ( Volkmann et al . , binds Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ) . A 2001 ) . Structural analysis of comet tails ( Cameron et al . , connecting sequence ( C ) , originally named cofilin - 2001 ) revealed a similar branched actin filament system homology sequence in spite of little sequence homology with pointed ends and Arp2 / 3 complex at the branch and no structural homology , contributes to binding both points . Thus , the supramolecular organization of both actin and Arp2 / 3 complex ( Marchand et al . , 2001 ) . VCA lamellipodia and comet tail motility systems is fully con - domains are not folded compactly until they bind an sistent with the in vitro results and the concept that actin monomer and / or Arp2 / 3 complex ( Marchand et al . , the Arp2 / 3 complex functions as a nucleator of actin 2001 ) . VCA binds actin monomers and Arp2 / 3 complex filaments upon preexisting actin filaments , i . e . , dendritic with submicromolar affinity in rapidly reversible equilib - nucleation . ria ( Marchand et al . , 2001 ) . Actin filaments enhance VCA As purification of Arp2 / 3 complex improved , its nucle - bindingtoArp2 / 3complex , sofromthermodynamiccon - ation activity declined , and it is now accepted that the siderations , VCA binding to Arp2 / 3 complex is expected complex itself is intrinsically inactive , dependent upon to enhance the affinity of the complex for the side of an extrinsic activators . The first established activator of actin filament . One hypothesis to explain these results Arp2 / 3 complex was ActA ( Welch et al . , 1998 ) , a surface is that VCA and actin interactions both favor a compact protein of Listeria and the only gene product required conformation of Arp2 / 3 complex with Arp3 and Arp2 for the bacterium to usurp a cell’s actin system to form juxtaposed like two subunits in an actin filament ( Figure a comet tail ( Kocks et al . , 1992 ; Smith et al . , 1995 ) . Yeast 4 ) , readyto initiate anew filament ( Robinson etal . , 2001 ) . two - hybrid screens and biochemical binding assays re - This is supported by the finding that VCA can be chemi - vealed that the C termini of WASp / Scar proteins ( Figure cally crosslinked to ARPC1 , Arp2 , and Arp3 ( Zalevsky et al . , 2001a ; Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . 5 ) bind Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ) , Review459 Bringing together an actin monomer with Arp2 and high density ( 100 / (cid:1) m of leading edge ) ( Abraham et al . , 1999 ) . Pure actin filaments in vitro are long and flexible . Arp3 on the side of an actin filament is postulated to form a stable trimer that acts as the nucleus to generate Long , flexible filaments cannot sustain a pushing force without buckling . Cells overcome this problem by creat - a branch , which grows in the barbed direction . A point mutation ina Wiskott - Aldrichsyndrome patientrevealed ing a dense array of short - branched filaments ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ; Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . Branches are an additional activation step after the assembly of Arp2 / 3 complex , VCA , and actin , which may be rate often separated by less than 100 nm , presumably as a result of tightly coupled nucleation and crosslinking of limiting for nucleation ( Marchand et al . , 2001 ) . The pro - cess underlying this activation step may be hydrolysis actin filaments at the leadingedge . Such coupling would allow nascent filaments to push against the membrane of ATP bound to one or both Arps ( Le Clainche et al . , 2001 ; Dayel et al . , 2001 ) . The mechanism by which Liste - immediately after formation and provide the structural basis for polymerization - driven protrusion . Because of ria ActA activates Arp2 / 3 complex appears to be similar to WASP / Scar VCA in spite of limited sequence homol - the dendritic nucleation pattern and the 70 (cid:7) angle be - tween branches , filaments are not oriented perpendicu - ogy ( Skoble et al . , 2000 ; Zalevsky et al . , 2001a ) . Under optimal activation conditions , each Arp2 / 3 complex nu - lar to the leading edge . Rather , they are distributed over a range of angles , the most favored being (cid:8) 35 (cid:7) with cleates the formation of a single branch . Pantaloni et al . ( 2000 ) proposed that branches form preferentially respect to the normal to the leading edge ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . on the barbed ends of actin filaments , but real time microscopyshowsthatmostbranchesformonthesides Given the numerous filament barbed ends at the lead - ing edge , how does polymerization actually generate a of preexisting filaments ( Amann and Pollard , 2001 ; Iche - tovkin et al . , 2002 ; Fujiwara et al . , 2002a ) with newly pushing force ? All models require the polymerizing actin to be cross linked in some way or to be anchored to polymerized filaments favored over older filaments . Filaments grow until they are capped . Heterodimeric the substratum ; otherwise , the force of polymerization woulddrivethefilamentsrearwardinsteadofthesurface capping protein ( called CapZ in muscle ) is an ubiquitous barbed end capping protein ( Cooper and Schafer , 2000 ) . forward . A major crosslinking component is likely to be the Arp2 / 3 complex itself but also supplemented by Its concentration in the cytoplasm ( about 1 (cid:1) M ) and the rate constant for binding barbed ends accounts for other crosslinkers , since cells lacking the crosslinking protein filamin have unstable lamellae ( Cunningham et cappingwithahalftimeofabout1s ( Schaferetal . , 1996 ) . Growth for about 1 s at 0 . 3 (cid:1) m per second accounts al . , 1992 ) . A problem for polymerization models is to understand approximately for the lengths of branches observed at the leading edge ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . Gelsolin is an - howasubunitcanelongateafilamentabuttingasurface . A solution to this problem is the “elastic Brownian other barbed end capping protein in higher eukaryotes ( Sun et al . , 1999 ) . ratchet” model ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) , which envis - ages the actin filament as a spring - like wire , which is Capping may appear counterproductive , since it an - tagonizes elongation of barbed ends , the driving force constantly bending because of thermal energy . In fact , direct observation of “vibrating” branched filaments in for motility . However , capping makes two important contributions to actin - driven motility . First , capping pro - vitro ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000a ) suggests a Young’s modu - lus equivalent to that of rigid plastic ( Gittes et al . , 1993 ) . tein limits the lengths of the growing branches . Although this requires constant initiation of new filaments , short When bent away from the surface , a subunit can “squeeze” in , lengthening the filament . The restoring filaments are stiffer than long filaments and therefore more effective at pushing on the membrane . Second , force of the filament straightening against the surface delivers the propulsive force . From the measured stiff - capping controls where actin filaments “push . ” Since only those barbed ends in contact with the lamellipodial ness of actin filaments , Mogilner and Oster ( 1996 ) calcu - lated that the length of the “pushing” actin filament ( that surface are effective in generating propulsive force , global capping of barbed ends avoid nonproductive is , the “free” length beyond the last crosslinking point ) must bequite short , inthe range 30 – 150 nm . Beyond this consumption of actin subunits elsewhere in the cell ( Cooper and Schafer , 2000 ) and funnels subunits from length , thermal energy is taken up in internal bending modes of the filament , and pushing is ineffective . These diverse points of disassembly to a limited number of growing barbed ends ( Carlier and Pantaloni , 1997 ) . considerations are important because they imply a re - quirement for the cell to balance the relative rates of Local factors may inhibit capping and favor persistent growth of barbed ends pushing productively against the branching , elongation , and capping . Theoretical calcula - tions ( Mogilner and Edelstein - Keshet , 2002 ) suggest that inner surface of the plasma membrane . Phosphatidyl - inositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate displaces gelsolin ( Janmey the cell “tunes” these parameters to obtain rapid motility and thatit uses negativefeedback from cappingto regu - and Stossel , 1987 ) and capping protein ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) from barbed ends . The GTPase Cdc42 may also late the number of barbed ends close to optimal levels . VASP may play such a regulatory role since it antago - helpbarbedendstoescapecapping ( Huangetal . , 1999 ) . VASP is a candidate inhibitor of capping , since it local - nizes capping and its depletion leads to shorter fila - ments , while its targeting to the plasma membrane leads izes to the extreme leading edge and antagonizes inter - action of capping protein with barbed ends ( Bear et al . , to longer filaments that push inefficiently ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . 2002 ) . How Does Actin Push the Membrane Forward ? Remodeling of the Branched Actin Filament Network The network of short , branched filaments at the leading The leading lamellum of motile cells is a thin ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 (cid:1) m ) , sheet - like protrusion filled with actin filaments at edge is generally narrow , less than 1 (cid:1) m deep under the Cell460 plasma membrane ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . Further and do not depolymerize them , so ATP hydrolysis and phosphate dissociation are postulated to regulate actin from the membrane , all of the filaments are long and filament disassembly ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ) . unbranched ( Small et al . , 1978 ) . Given the rate of move - Since ATP hydrolysis is fast , irreversible , and not ment ( 0 . 2 (cid:1) m per second ) and the width of the zone of known to be affected by any actin binding protein , phos - branched filaments , these branched filaments must be phate release is the most attractive candidate for a timer remodeled into long , unbranched filaments in about 5 s . for depolymerization . However , spontaneous phos - The first step in this remodeling process must be disso - phate release is slower than actin filament turnover in ciation of branches from the sides of their mother fila - vivo . Although ADF / cofilins have a low affinity for ADP - P i ments . actin filaments , they promote phosphate dissociation Phosphate release from the subunits in the branch ( Blanchoin and Pollard , 1999 ) . Physiological concentra - appears to be a prerequisite for debranching ( Blanchoin tions of ADF / cofilin accelerate phosphate dissociation , et al . , 2000b ) . After newly polymerized actin subunits so that it keeps pace with elongation and ATP hydro - hydrolyze their bound ATP , the (cid:4) phosphate dissociates lysis . with a half time of 6 min ( Carlier , 1987 ) . The half time The driving force for depolymerization is the higher for new branches to dissociate from their mother filament affinity of ADF / cofilin for ADP - actin monomers than is also 6 min . ADF / cofilins accelerate both phosphate dis - ADP - actin filaments , but the pathway of disassembly sociation and debranching , while phalloidin or BeF 3 slow has been difficult to pin down . Binding of ADF / cofilins both reactions . Phosphate dissociation from branches to ADP - actin filaments changes the twist of the actin weakens the attachment of the pointed end of the fila - helix ( McGough et al . , 1997 ) and promotes severing of ment to Arp2 / 3 complex and promotes debranching . the filaments into short segments ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ; Once free of the Arp2 / 3 complex cap on their pointed Maciver et al . , 1998 ; Blanchoin and Pollard , 1999 ; Iche - end , debranched actin filaments can anneal with fila - tovkin et al . , 2000 ) . Severing is important , since the bulk ments with free barbed ends ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000b ) , rate of disassembly is proportional to the concentration perhaps contributing to the formation of the long , un - of free filament ends . The Aip1 family of proteins appear branched filaments found beyond the highly branched to promote severing by ADF / cofilin since they block network at the leading edge ( Figure 1 ) . In cells , capping barbed ends and inhibit annealing , the reverse of the ofbarbedendsmightinhibitannealing , buttropomyosin , severing reaction ( Okada et al . , 2002 ) . ADF / cofilins also which localizes to the deeper part of the lamella ( Des - promote disassembly of ADP - actin monomers bound to Marais et al . , 2003 ) allows annealing even in the pres - ADF / cofilin ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) . Attention has focused ence of gelsolin , a high - affinity barbed end capping on dissociation of ADF / cofilin - ADP - actin from pointed protein ( Nyakern - Meazza et al . , 2002 ) . A similar effect of ends , but dissociation from barbed ends should also tropomyosin on filaments capped with capping protein , be considered since ADP - actin dissociates much faster might explain how the branched network of capped fila - from barbed ends than pointed ends ( Pollard , 1986 ) . On ments can be remodeled rapidly by annealing . On the the other hand , capping proteins may preclude barbed other hand , the protein cortactin binds both actin fila - end dissociation in cells . One can imagine that these ments and Arp2 / 3 complex and stabilizes branches disassembly events involve a certain element of chance , ( Weaver et al . , 2001 , 2002 ) . Much remains to be learned with some short branches surviving as segments of long about the mechanism of this rapid , dramatic remodeling filaments , while others being lost , owing to disassembly of leading edge filaments in cells . ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1991 ; Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ) . Much important work remains to be done on the Recycling of Proteins in the Actin Filament Network disassembly mechanisms both in vitro and in live cells . Since the cell is a bounded compartment , rapid poly - One unresolved puzzle is how ADF / cofilins can depo - merization of actin filaments cannot continue for long lymerize filaments with bound tropomyosin , which without being balanced by rapid depolymerization . Lo - blocks ADF / cofilin binding and inhibits depolymeriza - comoting keratocytes and the rocketing motility of mi - tion ( Nishida et al . , 1984 ; Maciver et al . , 1991 ) . crobes are dramatic examples of rapid actin turnover . Tight binding of ADF / cofilin might trap ADP - actin The keratocyte moves its body length ( 10 (cid:1) m ) in about monomers , but profilin reenters the cycle at this point 1 min , which requires complete turnover of the entire as a nucleotide exchange factor for actin ( Mockrin and actin network within that time . In dramatic contrast to Korn , 1980 ; Vinson et al . , 1998 ) . Profilin competes with the rapid turnover of cellular actin filaments , pure actin ADF / cofilin forbinding ADP - actinand promotesdissoci - filaments are intrinsically stable , undergoing only slow ation of ADP . Owing to the higher concentration of ATP subunit exchange reactions at their ends and slow sub - in living cells and its higher affinity for actin than ADP , unit flux ( 0 . 04 (cid:1) m / min ) through the polymer at steady nucleotide - free actin preferentially binds ATP . Profilin state . Regulatory proteins must account for this differ - binds ATP - actin more tightly than ADF / cofilin , thus re - ence . Most attention has focused on ADF / cofilins , an turning the ATP - actin monomer to its polymerization ubiquitous family of small proteins that bind ADP - actin ready state ( Rosenblatt et al . , 1995 ) . filaments and promote their disassembly ( Bamburg et Disassembly of actin filaments by ADF / cofilin , includ - al . , 1999 ) . ADF / cofilin also stimulates the turnover of ing debranching , severing , and depolymerization , all fol - Listeria comet tails ( Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ; Carlier et al . , low inevitably after phosphate dissociation from the fila - 1997 ) . ADF / cofilins concentrate just behind the leading ments . Phosphate dissociation by ADF / cofilin sets the edge of rapidly moving cells , where ADP - actin filaments tempo , so that the concentration of active ADF / cofilin are expected to occur ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . ADF / is a crucial variable . LIM - kinase ( Yang et al . , 1998 ; Arber et al . , 1998 ) controls the activity of most ADF / cofilins cofilinsbindonlyweaklytoATPorADP - P i actinfilaments Review461 by phosphorylation of a serine near the N terminus . This vesicles containing PIP 2 and prenylated GTP - Cdc42 ( Higgs and Pollard , 2000 ) . PIP 2 and GTP - Cdc42 cooper - phosphoserine blocks interactions of ADF / cofilins with ADP - actin filaments and monomers without changing ate to overcome autoinhibition of WASp and N - WASP . Requiring two signaling inputs of different natures is the atomic structure ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000c ) . A specific phosphatase called slingshot activates ADF / cofilin by attractive , because it may make the WASp / N - WASP transduction mechanism sensitive to coincident signals removing the inhibitory phosphate ( Niwa et al . , 2002 ) . Rho - family GTPases activate LIM - kinase indirectly via ( Prehoda et al . , 2000 ) . SH3 domains of the adaptor pro - teins Grb2 ( Carlier et al . , 2000 ) and Nck ( Rohatgi et al . , PAK ( Edwards et al . , 1999 ) . The consequences of acti - vating and inactivating ADF / cofilin are likely to be com - 2001 ) bind the poly - proline rich domain of N - WASP and cooperate with PIP 2 to overcome the autoinhibition of plicated . On one hand , Rho - family GTPases promote actin polymerization in two ways—activating nucleation N - WASP . Similarly , profilin binding to the proline rich domain cooperates with Cdc42 to activate N - WASP by Arp2 / 3 complex and inhibiting depolymerization by ADF / cofilins . On the other hand , activation of severing ( Yang et al . , 2000 ) . Scar / WAVE was proposed to transmit signals from by ADF / cofilin ( for example by dephosphorylation ) may jump - start the extension of a leading edge following activated Rac to stimulate formation of lamellipodia , although no direct interaction between Rac and WAVE stimulation ( for example with EGF ) by providing barbed ends for elongation ( Zebda et al . , 2000 ; Ichetovkin et was found ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Full - length Scar / WAVE proteins are intrinsically active with respect to stimulat - al . , 2002 ) . Growth of these new ends might push forward directly or provide fresh filaments that are favored for ing Arp2 / 3 complex ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ) but can be inhibited by a complex of four other proteins ( Eden et branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . al . , 2002 ) . Membrane bound Rac - GTP overcomes this inhibition by dissociating the inhibitory proteins from Regulation of Leading Edge Assembly Scar / WAVE . A substrate for insulin receptor , IRSp53 , and Disassembly by Extrinsic Factors binds activated Rac to WAVE2 ( Miki et al . , 2000 ) . Some cells are spontaneously motile and little is known Given that membrane bound GTPases , a membrane about the intrinsic factors driving the extension of la - lipid , and SH3 adaptor proteins that associate with acti - mella . Much more is known about how environmental vated receptor tyrosine kinase cooperate to activate cuesguidecellstowardattractantsandawayfromrepel - WASp / N - WASP and Scar / WAVE and given that rapidly lents . Examples include the attraction of white blood growing filaments are secondary activators of Arp2 / 3 cells to bacterial peptides and chemokines and of the complex , new filaments most likely arise at sites where slime mold Dictyostelium to cAMP . Chemoattractants existing filaments push against the inner surface of the activate a variety of receptors including seven - helix re - plasma membrane . This would account for the localized ceptors and receptor tyrosine kinases . A remarkable expansion of the branched network against the plasma feature of these signaling systems is their ability to con - membrane . However , no direct evidence at the cellular vert a shallow spatial gradient of attractant into a steep level yet supports the details of this hypothesis . gradient of signals inside the cell ( Bourne and Weiner , After initiating a new branch near the membrane , the 2002 ) . fate of WASp / N - WASP and Scar / WAVE is unclear . The Given the low nucleating activity of pure Arp2 / 3 com - nucleation - promotingfactorsare presumedtobebound plex , nucleation - promoting factors appear to drive the atleast transientlytotheir activatorsonthe innersurface whole actin assembly - disassembly system . This feature oftheplasmamembrane . However , activatedWASpand focuses attention on how external stimuli are converted N - WASP also bind Arp2 / 3 complex and thus might have into signals that regulate nucleation - promoting factors some tendency to associate with the actin network . ( Figure 5 ) . WASp and N - WASP are intrinsically inactive , Since ActA can promote nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex owing to strong autoinhibition , which is overcome by whileremainingattachedto Listeria , WASp / NandWASP signaling molecules including Rho - family GTPases , are speculated to dissociate from Arp2 / 3 complex PIP 2 , profilin , and the SH3 domain proteins Grb2 and shortlyafter abranch forms . Therapid rateof VCAdisso - Nck ( reviewed by Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) . Extensive ciation from both actin and Arp2 / 3 complex ( Marchand biochemicalandstructuraldatasupportsthehypothesis et al . , 2001 ) is consistent with this idea . Cortactin can that N - terminal domains of WASp and N - WASP autoin - bind Arp2 / 3 complex simultaneously with VCA and is hibit the constitutive nucleation - promoting activity of proposed to stabilize the branch after dissociation of the C - terminal VCA domain ( Kim et al . , 2000 ; Miki and WASp / N - WASP ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . Takenawa , 1998 ) . An NMR structure ( Kim et al . , 2000 ) Rho - familyGTPasesalsoinfluencethedisassemblyof clearly defines the interaction between GBD and the C actin filaments . The Rho - family GTPase Rac stimulates motif in VCA . Strong autoinhibition is important given p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) to activate LIM kinase ( Ed - the high concentrations of some of these proteins , such wards et al . , 1999 ) to phosphorylate ADF / cofilin . This as 10 (cid:1) M WASp in human neutrophils ( Higgs and Pol - inactivates ADF / cofilin and should tend to prolong the lard , 2000 ) . A basic sequence and a GTPase binding lifetime of newly formed actin filaments . Thus , activating domain ( GBD ) bind intramolecularly to VCA ( Higgs and small GTPases stimulates both formation and stabiliza - Pollard , 2000 ; Kim et al . , 2000 ; Rohatgi et al . , 2000 ; tion of new filaments . Rohatgi et al . , 2001 ; Prehoda et al . , 2000 ) . Membrane - associated PIP 2 and GTP - Cdc42 compete with VCA for binding to the basic / GBD region , freeing VCA to activate Key Features of the Protrusion Process The system is poised far from equilibrium with a high Arp2 / 3 complex . Micrographs of the reaction products show dense arrays of actin filaments surrounding lipid concentration of unpolymerized actin maintained by a Cell462 and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , combination of profilin and capping of filament barbed 509 – 521 . ends . This system is ready to respond explosively when Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Mechanism of interaction of new barbed ends are created . Extracellular stimuli such Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / cofilin ) with actin filaments . J . Biol . as chemoattractants trigger transduction pathways that Chem . 274 , 15538 – 15546 . generate spatially restricted accumulations of signaling Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2002 ) . Hydrolysis of bound ATP by molecules associated with the plasma membrane in - polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not cludingRho - familyGTPases , PIP 2 , andSH3adaptorpro - profilin . Biochemistry 41 , 597 – 602 . teins . Individually and cooperatively , these molecules Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . , Higgs , H . N . , Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , activate nucleation - promoting factors including WASp , D . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000a ) . Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASp / Scar N - WASP , and Scar / WAVE , making them available to ac - proteins . Nature 404 , 1007 – 1011 . tivate in turn Arp2 / 3 complex . Active Arp2 / 3 complex Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000b ) . Interaction of binds the side of filaments and initiates a branch that ADF / cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and profilin in remod - grows rapidly in the barbed direction . Growing filaments elingof branchedactinfilament networks . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1273 – 1282 . push the plasma membrane forward until they are Blanchoin , L . , Robinson , R . C . , Choe , S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000c ) . capped . The filaments then age automatically by hydro - Phosphorylation of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / cofilin ) blocks lysis of bound ATP and dissociation of the (cid:4) phosphate . interaction with actin without a change in atomic structure . J . Mol . ADF / cofilins accelerate phosphate release , the rate - lim - Biol . 295 , 203 – 211 . iting step . After phosphate release , branches dissociate Bourne , H . R . , and Weiner , O . ( 2002 ) . A chemical compass . Nature from Arp2 / 3 complex and their mother filament and be - 419 , 21 . come targetsfor severingand depolymerizationby ADF / Cameron , L . A . , Svitkina , T . M . , Vignjevic , D . , Theriot , J . A . , andBorisy , cofilins . G . G . ( 2001 ) . Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr . Biol . 11 , 130 – 135 . Many intriguing mysteries still remain to be solved . Carlier , M . F . ( 1987 ) . Measurement of Pi dissociation from actin - We still do not know the identity of the intrinsic signals filaments following ATP hydrolysis using a linked enzyme assay . that cells use to stimulate actin assembly in the absence Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 143 , 1069 – 1075 . of external signals . No pathway from a chemoattractant Carlier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1986 ) . Direct evidence for ADP - Pi - or repellent has been fully mapped and characterized F - actin as the major intermediate in ATP - actin polymerization . Rate dynamically . Integration of signals from multiple signal - of dissociation of Pi from actin filaments . Biochemistry 25 , 7789 – ing pathways at the level of WASp / Scar proteins is an 7792 . attractive concept that needs fuller documentation , es - Carlier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Control of actin dynamics in pecially the physical arrangement of signaling molecules , cell motility . J . Mol . Biol . 269 , 459 – 467 . actin filaments , and Arp2 / 3 complex on the inner surface Carlier , M . F . , Pantaloni , D . , Evans , J . A . , Lambooy , P . K . , Korn , E . D . , of the plasma membrane . Remodeling of the branched and Webb , M . R . ( 1988 ) . The hydrolysis of ATP that accompanies actin polymerization is essentially irreversible . FEBS Lett . 235 , network and recycling of all of the proteins is far from 211 – 214 . understood . The relation ( if any ) of dendritic nucleation Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , to motility of particular cells , especially growth cones , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depolymerizing remains to be proven . We also have yet to learn how factor ( ADF / cofilin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implica - bundles of actin filaments in filopodia and microvilli form tion in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . and grow . Carlier , M . F . , Nioche , P . , Broutin - L’Hermite , I . , Boujemaa , R . , Le Clainche , C . , Egile , C . , Garbay , C . , Ducruix , A . , Sansonetti , P . J . , Acknowledgments and Pantaloni , D . ( 2000 ) . Grb2 links signalling to actin assembly by enhancing interaction of neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein We thank John Cooper ( Washington University Medical School ) and ( N - WASP ) with actin - related - protein ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex . J . Biol . Tatyana Svitkina ( Northwestern University Medical School ) for criti - Chem . 275 , 21946 – 21952 . cal reading of the manuscript . Supported by NIH Grants GM26338 Chan , A . Y . , Bailly , M . , Zebda , N . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . to TDP and GM62431 to GGB . ( 2000 ) . Role of cofilin in epidermal growth factor - stimulated actin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 531 – 542 . References Condeelis , J . ( 1993 ) . Life at the leading edge : the formation of cell protrusions . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 , 411 – 444 . Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . , and Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) . Cooper , J . A . , and Schafer , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Control of actin assembly Theactin - basednanomachineattheleadingedgeofmigratingcells . and disassembly at filament ends . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 97 – 103 . Biophys . J . 77 , 1721 – 1732 . Cunningham , C . C . , Gorlin , J . B . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , Hartwig , J . H . , Amann , K . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Direct real - time observation Janmey , P . A . , Byers , H . R . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 1992 ) . Actin - binding of actin filament branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex using total protein requirement for cortical stability and efficient locomotion . internalreflectionmicroscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 15009 – Science 255 , 325 – 327 . 15013 . Dayel , M . J . , Holleran , R . D . , andMullins , D . M . ( 2001 ) . Arp2 / 3complex requires hydrolyzable ATP for nucleation of new actin filaments . Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynam - Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 14871 – 14876 . ics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , De La Cruz , E . M . , Mandinova , A . , Steinmetz , M . O . , Stoffler , D . , Aebi , 805 – 809 . U . , andPollard , T . D . ( 2000a ) . Polymerizationandstructureofnucleo - tide - free actin filaments . J . Mol . Biol . 295 , 517 – 526 . Bamburg , J . R . , McGough , A . , and Ono , S . ( 1999 ) . Putting a new twist on actin : ADF / cofilins modulate actin dynamics . Trends Cell De La Cruz , E . M . , Ostap , E . M . , Brundage , R . A . , Reddy , K . S . , Biol . 9 , 364 – 370 . Sweeney , H . L . , andSafer , D . ( 2000b ) . Thymosin - beta ( 4 ) changesthe conformation and dynamics of actin monomers . Biophys . J . 78 , Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , 2516 – 2527 . Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins DesMarais , V . , Ichetovkin , I . , Condeelis , J . , and Hitchcock - DeGreg - Review463 ori , S . E . ( 2003 ) . Spatial regulation of actin dynamics : a tropomyosin - dictyosteliumcofilinbuttodifferentextents . CellMotil . Cytoskeleton 45 , 293 – 306 . free , actin - rich compartment at the leading edge . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4649 – 4660 . Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2002 ) . Cofilin produces newly polymerized actin filaments that are preferred for dendritic Drenckhahn , D . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) . Elongation of actin fila - nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 79 – 84 . ments is a diffusion - limited reaction at the barbed end and is accel - erated by inert macromolecules . J . Biol . Chem . 261 , 12754 – 12758 . Janmey , P . A . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 1987 ) . Modulation of gelsolin func - tion by phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate . Nature 325 , 362 – 364 . Duncan , M . C . , Cope , M . J . , Goode , B . L . , Wendland , B . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2001 ) . Yeast Eps15 - like endocytic protein , Pan1p , activates Kaiser , D . A . , Vinson , V . K . , Murphy , D . B . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . the Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 687 – 690 . Profilin is predominantly associated with monomeric actin in Acan - thamoeba . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3779 – 3790 . Edds , K . T . ( 1993 ) . Effects of cytochalasin and colcemid on cortical flow in coelomocytes . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 26 , 262 – 273 . Kim , A . S . , Kakalis , L . T . , Abdul - Manan , N . , Liu , G . A . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2000 ) . Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott - Eden , S . , Rohatgi , R . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . , and Kirschner , Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 , 151 – 158 . M . W . ( 2002 ) . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nu - cleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 , 790 – 793 . Kocks , C . , Gouin , E . , Tabouret , M . , Berche , P . , Ohayon , H . , and Cossart , P . ( 1992 ) . L . monocytogenese induced actin assembly re - Edwards , D . C . , Sanders , L . C . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1999 ) . quires the actA gene product , a surface protein . Cell 68 , 521 – 531 . Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc4242 GTPase signalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 253 – 259 . Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Carlier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , C . ( 2001 ) . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein Egile , C . , Loisel , T . P . , Laurent , V . , Li , R . , Pantaloni , D . , Sansonetti , is linked to enhanced binding of ATP to Arp2 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , P . J . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Activation of the CDC42 effector 46689 – 46692 . N - WASP by the Shigella flexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucle - ation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J . Cell Lechler , T . , Shevchenko , A . , and Li , R . ( 2000 ) . Direct involvement of Biol . 146 , 1319 – 1332 . yeast type I myosins in Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 363 – 373 . Euteneuer , U . , andSchliwa , M . ( 1984 ) . Persistent , directionalmotility of cells and cytoplasmic fragments in the absence of microtubules . Lee , W . L . , Bezanilla , M . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Fission yeast myo - Nature 310 , 58 – 61 . sin - I , Myo1p , stimulates actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and shares functions with WASp . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 789 – 800 . Evangelista , M . , Klebl , B . M . , Tong , A . H . , Webb , B . A . , Leeuw , T . , Leberer , E . , Whiteway , M . , Thomas , D . Y . , and Boone , C . ( 2000 ) . A Lin , C . H . , and Forscher , P . ( 1995 ) . Growth cone advance is inversely role for myosin - I in actin assembly through interactions with Vrp1p , proportional to retrograde F - actin flow . Neuron 14 , 763 – 771 . Bee1p , and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 353 – 362 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Falet , H . , Hoffmeister , K . M . , Neujahr , R . , Italiano , J . E . , Stossel , T . P . , Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using Southwick , F . S . , and Hartwig , J . H . ( 2002 ) . Importance of free actin pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . filament barbed ends for Arp2 / 3 complex function in platelets and Lu , J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Profilin binding to poly - L - proline fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 16782 – 16787 . and actin monomers along with ability to catalyze actin nucleotide Frischknecht , F . , Moreau , V . , Rottger , S . , Gonfloni , S . , Reckmann , exchange is required for viability of fission yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , I . , Superti - Furga , G . , and Way , M . ( 1999 ) . Actin - based motility of 1161 – 1175 . vaccinia virus mimics receptor tyrosine kinase signalling . Nature Machesky , L . M . , and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related 401 , 926 – 929 . Wiskott - AldrichsyndromeproteinWASPregulatetheactincytoskel - Fujiwara , I . , Suetsugu , S . , Uemura , S . , Takenawa , T . , and Ishiwata , eton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 – 1356 . S . ( 2002a ) . Visualization and force measurement of branching by Machesky , L . M . , Atkinson , S . J . , Ampe , C . , Vandekerckhove , J . , and Arp2 / 3 complex and N - WASP in actin filament . Biochem . Biophys . Pollard , T . D . ( 1994 ) . Purification of a cortical complex containing Res . Commun . 293 , 1550 – 1555 . two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by affinity chroma - Fujiwara , I . , Takahashi , S . , Tadakuma , H . , Funatsu , T . , and Ishiwata , tography on profilin agarose . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 107 – 115 . S . ( 2002b ) . Microscopic analysis of polymerization dynamics with Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , D . M . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , individual actin filaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 666 – 673 . L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a WASp - Gittes , F . , Mickey , B . , Nettleton , J . , and Howard , J . ( 1993 ) . Flexural related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / rigidity of microtubules and actin filaments measured from thermal 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 – 3744 . fluctuations in shape . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 923 – 934 . Maciver , S . K . , Zot , H . G . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1991 ) . Characterization Goode , B . L . , Rodal , A . A . , Barnes , G . , andDrubin , D . G . ( 2001 ) . Activa - of actin filament severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba caste - tion of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the actin filament binding protein llanii . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 1611 – 1620 . Abp1p . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 627 – 634 . Maciver , S . K . , Pope , B . J . , Whytock , S . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 1998 ) . The Henson , J . H . , Svitkina , T . M . , Burns , A . R . , Hughes , H . E . , MacPart - effect of two actin depolymerizing factors ( ADF / Cofilins ) on actin land , K . J . , and Nazarian , R . ( 1999 ) . Two components of actin - based filament turnover : pH sensitivity of F - actin binding by human ADF , retrogradeflowinseaurchincoelomocytes . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4075 – butnotofAcanthamoebaactophorin . Eur . J . Biochem . 256 , 388 – 397 . 4090 . Maly , I . V . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) . Self - organization of a propulsive Higgs , H . N . , andPollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Wiskott - Aldrichsyndromepro - actin network as an evolutionary process . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . tein ( WASp ) activation of Arp2 / 3 complex : effects of phosphatidyl - USA 98 , 11324 – 11329 . inositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1311 – 1320 . Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . , Pollard , T . D . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2001 ) . Higgs , N . H . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of actin filament Interaction of WASp / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 network formation through Arp2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse complex . , Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 76 – 82 . array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Cofilin Higgs , H . N . , Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Influence of the changesthetwistofF - actin : implicationsforactinfilamentdynamics Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) C terminus and Arp2 / 3 and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . complex on actin polymerization . Biochemistry 38 , 15212 – 15222 . Merrifield , C . J . , Moss , S . E . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , Giese , G . , Huang , M . , Yang , C . , Schafer , D . A . , Cooper , J . A . , Higgs , H . N . , and Wunderlich , I . , and Almers , W . ( 1999 ) . Endocytic vesicles move at Zigmond , S . H . ( 1999 ) . Cdc42 - induced actin filaments are protected the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 . from capping protein . Curr . Biol . 9 , 979 – 982 . Miki , H . , and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) . Direct binding of the verprolin - homology domain in N - WASP to actin is essential for cytoskeletal Ichetovkin , I . , Han , J . , Pang , K . M . , Knecht , D . A . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Actin filaments are severed by both native and recombinant reorganization . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 243 , 73 – 78 . Cell464 Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) . WAVE , a novel Rohatgi , R . , Nollau , P . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , and Mayer , B . J . ( 2001 ) . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergisti - WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 – 6941 . cally activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 26448 – 26452 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenaka , T . ( 2000 ) . Rosenblatt , J . , Peluso , P . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1995 ) . The bulk of IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the unpolymerized actin in Xenopus egg extracts is ATP - bound . Mol . regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 – 735 . Biol . Cell 6 , 227 – 236 . Mockrin , S . C . , and Korn , R . D . ( 1980 ) . Acanthamoeba profilin inter - Rosenblatt , J . , Agnew , B . J . , Abe , H . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Mitchison , acts with G - actin to increase the rate of exchange of actin - bound T . J . ( 1997 ) . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin ( XAC ) is re - adenosine 5 (cid:9) - triphosphate . Biochemistry 19 , 5359 – 5362 . sponsible for the turnover of actin filaments in Listeria monocyto - Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin poly - genes tails . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1323 – 1332 . merization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . Rozelle , A . L . , Machesky , L . M . , Yamamoto , M . , Driessens , M . H . , In - Mogilner , A . , and Edelstein - Keshet , L . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of actin sall , R . H . , Roth , M . G . , Luby - Phelps , K . , Marriott , G . , Hall , A . , and Yin , dynamics in rapidly moving cells : a quantitative analysis . Biophys . H . L . ( 2000 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - J . 83 , 1237 – 1258 . based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 – 320 . of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high - affinity pointed end Safer , D . , andNachmias , V . T . ( 1994 ) . Betathymosinsasactinbinding capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . peptides . Bioessays 16 , 473 – 479 . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 . Sagot , I . , Rodal , A . A . , Moseley , J . , Goode , B . L . , and Pellman , D . Nishida , E . , Maekawa , S . , and Sakai , H . ( 1984 ) . Cofilin , a protein in ( 2002 ) . An actin nulceation mechanism mediated by Bni 1 and Pro - porcine brain that binds to actin filaments and inhibits their interac - filin . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 626 – 631 . tions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry 23 , 5307 – 5313 . Salmon , W . C . , Adams , M . C . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2002 ) . Niwa , R . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Takeichi , M . , Mizuno , K . , and Uemura , Dual - wavelength fluorescent speckle microscopy reveals coupling T . ( 2002 ) . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of of microtubule and actin movements in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell 108 , 233 – 246 . 158 , 31 – 37 . Nyakern - Meazza , M . , Narayan , K . , Schutt , C . E . , and Lindberg , U . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Dynamics of ( 2002 ) . Tropomyosinandgelsolincooperateincontrollingthemicro - cappingproteinandactinassemblyinvitro : uncappingbarbedends filament system . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 28774 – 28779 . by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 . Okada , K . , Blanchoin , L . , Abe , H . , Chen , H . , Pollard , T . D . , and Bam - Schluter , K . , Jockusch , B . M . , and Rothkegel , M . ( 1997 ) . Profilins as burg , J . R . ( 2002 ) . Xenopus actin interacting protein 1 ( XAip1 ) en - regulators of actin dynamics . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1359 , 97 – 109 . hances cofilin fragmentation of filaments by capping filament ends . Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2000 ) . Three regions J . Biol . Chem . , in press . withinActApromoteArp2 / 3complex - mediatedactinnucleationand Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . , and Carlier , M . F . Listeria monocytogenes motility . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 527 – 538 . ( 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed ends : func - Small , J . V . , Isenberg , G . , and Celis , J . E . ( 1978 ) . Polarity of actin at tional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 385 – 391 . the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature 272 , 638 – 639 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and Smith , G . A . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Asymmetric ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2747 – distribution of the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein is required 2754 . and sufficient to direct actin - based motility . Mol . Microbiol . 17 , Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Introductiontoactinandactin - bindingproteins . 945 – 951 . In Guidebook to the Cytoskeletal and Motor Proteins , Second Edi - Sun , H . Q . , Yamamoto , M . , Mejillano , M . , and Yin , H . L . ( 1999 ) . Gel - tion , T . Kreis and R . Vale , eds . ( New York : Oxford University Press ) , solin , multifunctional actin regulatory protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , pp . 3 – 11 . 33179 – 33182 . Pollard , T . D . , and Beltzner , C . C . ( 2002 ) . Structure and function of Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 12 , 768 – 774 . depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and tread - Pollard , T . D . , and Earnshaw , W . C . ( 2002 ) . Cell Biology ( New York : milling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – W . B . Saunders ) . 1026 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Biophysics of Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . , and Borisy , G . G . actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . ( 1997 ) . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal kera - Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . tocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 – 415 . Prehoda , K . E . , Scott , J . A . , Mullins , R . D . , and Lim , W . A . ( 2000 ) . Inte - gration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the Symons , M . H . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) . Control of actin polymer - N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 , 801 – 806 . ization in live and permeabilized fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 503 – 513 . Pruyne , D . , Evangelista , M . , Yang , C . , Bi , E . , Zigmond , S . , Bretscher , A . , and Boone , C . ( 2002 ) . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucle - Theriot , J . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) . Actin microfilament dynam - ics in locomoting cells . Nature 352 , 126 – 131 . ation and barbed end association . Science 297 , 612 – 615 . Theriot , J . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1992 ) . Comparison of actin and Rengan , R . , Ochs , H . D . , Sweet , L . I . , Keil , M . L . , Gunning , W . T . , La - cellsurfacedynamicsinmotilefibroblasts . J . CellBiol . 119 , 367 – 377 . chant , N . A . , Boxer , L . A . , and Omann , G . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin cytoskeletal functionisspared , butapoptosisisincreased , inWASpatienthema - Theriot , J . A . , Mitchison , T . J . , Tilney , L . G . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1992 ) . topoetic cells . Blood 95 , 1283 – 1292 . The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocyto - gene s equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature 357 , 257 – 260 . Robinson , R . C . , Turbedsky , K . , Kaiser , D . , Higgs , H . , Marchand , J . B . , Choe , S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 Tilney , L . G . , DeRosier , D . J . , and Tilney , M . S . ( 1992 ) . How Listeria complex . Science 294 , 1660 – 1661 . exploits host cell actin to form its own cytoskeleton . I . Formation of a tail and how that tail might be involved in movement . J . Cell Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , Biol . 118 , 71 – 81 . T . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , Fan , X . , Egile , C . , Li , R . , Mueller , S . C . , assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 . and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 259 – 266 . Rohatgi , R . , Ho , H . - Y . H . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2000 ) . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bispho - Verkhovsky , A . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Self - polar - ization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Curr . Biol . 9 , 11 – 20 . sphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1299 – 1310 . Review465 Vinson , V . K . , De La Cruz , E . M . , Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . Interactions of Acanthamoeba profilin with actin and nucleotides bound to actin . Biochemistry 37 , 10871 – 10880 . Volkmann , N . , Amann , K . J . , Stoilova - McPhie , S . , Egile , C . , Winter , D . C . , Hazelwood , L . , Heuser , J . E . , Li , R . , Pollard , T . D . , and Hanein , D . ( 2001 ) . Structure of Arp2 / 3 complex in its activated state and in actin filament branch junctions . Science 293 , 2456 – 2459 . Wang , Y . ( 1985 ) . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living fibroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 597 – 602 . Watanabe , N . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2002 ) . Single - molecule speckle analysis of actin filament turnover in lamellipodia . Science 295 , 1083 – 1086 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Par - sons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabi - lizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 . Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 . Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . - L . , and Copper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 23 – 30 . Weed , S . A . , Kariginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 . Welch , M . D . , Rosenblatt , J . , Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 1998 ) . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin filament nucleation . Science 281 , 105 – 108 . Winter , D . , Lechler , T . , and Li , R . ( 1999 ) . Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr . Biol . 9 , 501 – 504 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Na - ture 393 , 809 – 812 . Yang , C . , Huang , M . , DeBiasio , J . , Pring , M . , Joyce , M . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . , and Zigmond , S . H . ( 2000 ) . Profilin enhances Cdc42 - induced nucleation of actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1001 – 1012 . Yarar , D . , To , W . , Abo , A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 1999 ) . The Wiskott - Aldrichsyndrome proteindirectsactin - basedmotility bystimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 9 , 555 – 558 . Zalevsky , J . , Grigorova , I . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2001a ) . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the Listeria ActA protein : ActA binds two actin monomers and three subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 3468 – 3475 . Zalevsky , J . , Lempert , L . , Kranitz , H . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2001b ) . DifferentWASPfamilyproteins stimulatedifferentARP2 / 3complex - dependent actin - nucleating activities . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1903 – 1913 . Zebda , N . , Bernard , O . , Bailly , M . , Welti , S . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin abolishes EGF - inducedactinnucleationattheleadingedgeandsubsequence lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1119 – 1127 . Zigmond , S . H . ( 1996 ) . Signal transductionand actin filament organi - zation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 66 – 73 .