CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA On Being Iterated : The Affective Demands of Design Participation Paul Dourish 1 , Christopher Lawrence 2 , Tuck Wah Leong 2 , and Greg Wadley 3 1 University of California , Irvine 2 University of Technology Sydney 3 University of Melbourne Irvine , CA 92697 , USA Ultimo , NSW 2007 , Australia Parkville , VIC 3010 , Australia jpd @ ics . uci . edu { christopher . lawrence , tuckwah . leong } greg . wadley @ unimelb . edu . au @ uts . edu . au ABSTRACT Iteration is a central feature of most HCI design methods , creating as it does opportunities for engagements with stakeholder groups . But what does iteration demand of those groups ? Under what conditions do iterative engagements arise , and with what stakes ? Building on experiences with Aboriginal Australian communities , and drawing on feminist and decolonial thinking , we examine the nature of iteration for HCI and how it frames encounters between design and use , with a focus on the affective dimension of engagement in iterative design processes . Author Keywords Participation ; iteration ; user - centered design ; cultural computing ; feminist theory ; postcolonial theory ; decolonial theory . CSS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; • Human - centered computing ~ HCI design and evaluation methods ; • Software and its engineering ~ Software development methods INTRODUCTION HCI and other engineering - oriented disciplines tend towards a utilitarian and pragmatic attitude towards methods . Methods , in this view , are regarded rather unproblematically as tools and as means towards ends . To the extent that ethical , social , or political questions arise in HCI projects , they arise not primarily around means but around ends – around contexts of system use , settings of deployment , or sites of technological encounter [ 12 , 25 , 29 , 30 , 77 ] . One of the conversations that feminist and postcolonial scholars have sought to open up , though , is precisely that of method . If methods are means to generate and validate knowledge , then the knowledge products ( including research findings , theories , and artifacts ) of HCI are conditioned by Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA . © 2020 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376545 the methods that we adopt . In turn , then , the conditions of possibility of those methods are the conditions of possibility of HCI knowledge . Scrutinizing the foundations of methods , then , is crucial to understanding the limits and potentials of our practices . So , feminist studies of methods have examined how questions of polyvocality and ambiguity might be seen from different methodological stances , how bodies and politics and histories are made visible or suppressed within particular methodological frames , and how methods frame the actions and practices of those who employ them [ 31 , 46 ] . Similarly , postcolonial studies of methods examine the historically - constituted power structures within which those methods are embedded , what sorts of social relations between different groups they enact , and the questions of portability , authority , authenticity , and locality that underlie different methodological frameworks . In her book Decolonizing Methodologies , Maori scholar Linda Smith [ 63 ] unpacks some of the history of appropriation , misrepresentation , and violence that characterized colonial knowledge practices , opening her discussion by noting that “the word itself , ‘research’ , is one of the dirtiest words in the indigenous world’s vocabulary” . From this she proceeds to set out both the opportunities for and obstacles to an indigenous - owned research agenda with an emphasis on its methods and practices . In this paper , we draw on these traditions to turn our attention to HCI’s methods and examine their preconditions , demands , and commitments . In particular , we take up the idea that methods frame the encounters amongst researchers , designers , and users , and we ask what kinds of enframing they enact and with what consequences . This is a long - term project and one paper can take only a first step . We begin here , then , with the concept of iteration as a component of many methodological approaches . BACKGROUND The context for our discussion of these questions is ThisMyMob , an Australian Research Council - funded project developing a mobile - phone based communication and networking platform designed for and with Aboriginal communities in urban and rural Australia [ 39 , 40 ] . ( “Mob” is a term of Aboriginal Australian English that generically refers to a coherent group of people and more specifically Paper 418 Page 1 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA identifies a family group , tribal group , or language group . ) The design of ThisMyMob is motivated and shaped by a range of concerns , including problems of harassment and racial violence in mainstream social media platforms , challenges to mental health for Aboriginal youth , and the problems of community connection following decades of forced resettlement and separation for Aboriginal Australian communities . ThisMyMob is conceived of as an open - ended platform for content creation and information sharing amongst communities which places Aboriginal identity at the center of the experience . Developed in response to growing incidences of racial violence online and a crisis of indigenous youth mental health , ThisMyMob adopts the interactive patterns of social networking apps but in ways that place indigenous identity at the center , connecting people not just to each other , but to their mobs – giving cultural identity a central place within the interaction . ThisMyMob provides information and media sharing and browsing and communication facilities in a way that emphasizes collectivity and group identity , based around different “mobs” of which different individual user are members . The design of ThisMyMob has been influenced by prior studies both in computer - mediated communication and in engagement with indigenous communities , but has also been developed in conversation , consultation , and collaboration with community , including Bard and Noongar peoples in Western Australia , Tiwi in the Northern Territory , Gunditjmara in Victoria , Eora in New South Wales , and the Jumbunna Institute at UTS . It has been developed and deployed over the last three years . In common with most HCI research projects , ThisMyMob adopted an iterative design strategy in which this community consultation and participation was central . We sought to ensure that our design efforts were responsive to specific needs and concerns expressed by community participants and hoped that this would contribute towards a smooth process of adoption . Early mid - project assessments , though , were disappointing and prompted us to reflect on the assumptions that had motivated our approach . Some of the challenges that we faced in the early stages of the experience with ThisMyMob were both understandable and anticipated . The problem of generating critical mass , for instance , is a well - known issue for collaboration and social platforms [ 45 , 56 ] . Since the primary attraction in using a social platform is the presence of other people , early adopters often find themselves in a somewhat barren social landscape , with few others to talk with and little by way of user - generated content to motivate participation ( e . g . [ 37 , 55 ] ) . Problems of this sort – as well as the conventional difficulties in building systems to work effectively out of controlled laboratory circumstances and of providing technical support for a widely dispersed user population with a small research team – are not in themselves surprising . However , our theoretical orientation has prompted us to examine the ways that the broader conceptualization not of this project but of engaged software development efforts are configured , and whether there may be aspects of this configuration that are conditioned particularly by the context of indigenous communities . As noted , as both an infrastructure and a project , ThisMyMob addresses pressing questions for indigenous communities . At the same time , on an analytic level , it draws on recent conversations on postcolonial and decolonial approaches to computational design – efforts to understand contemporary technological agendas in terms of their historical contexts , including sites of origin , patterns of power and influence , and hegemony ( e . g . [ 3 , 8 , 20 , 33 ] ) . We should make clear here that “postcolonial” , in the sense in which it is deployed here , is not meant to imply that colonial relations no longer obtain , but rather that colonialism has entered a different phase . “Postcolonial” does not mean “after colonial” ; it means instead , perhaps , “next colonial” , highlighting precisely that colonial conditions persist , albeit in novel ways . Our exploration of methodological questions here is firmly situated in this conversation , asking how specific ways of working and ways of knowing are embedded in the processes and procedures by which interactive experiences are produced , and how an emancipatory approach might reconfigure them . This position is often labeled as “decolonial” rather than “postcolonial” , in order to highlight the explicit effort to dismantle ongoing infrastructures of colonialism , to repatriate indigenous property and forms of knowing – a political project rather than simply a cultural - historical one . We should also note that , while much of this paper is concerned with a critique of methods seen through the lens of an encounter between Western knowledge practices and indigenous communities , we do not take an essentializing view of indigeneity [ 65 ] . Aboriginal Australian experiences spans rural and urban spaces , coastal and central regions , as well as a range of orientations towards traditional practice distributed across a continent . As Clifford [ 13 ] details , indigeneity is a claim in flux across the world , and John and Jean Comaroff [ 14 ] explore the ways in which it can be deployed to many different ends . Neither do we subscribe to a notion of “cultures” as bounded or whole [ 34 ] . That said , our experience with ThisMyMob has led us to closely examine the ways in which HCI and other user - centered design methods move in the world and the conditions of their effectiveness . Before proceeding , a note on our own subject positions is relevant . The first author is a British / American academic with a long - term affiliation with Australian academia and who first became involved in research with Aboriginal Australians over ten years ago . The second author is an Aboriginal researcher , a Noongar man , and the instigator and chief investigator of ThisMyMob ; he has an extensive history of research into public health concerns with Aboriginal communities and is now studies technology and educational matters in a faculty of engineering . The third Paper 418 Page 2 CHI 2020 Paper author is a Malaysian Australian academic with a research practice in interaction design , and also teaching within computer science and engineering . The fourth author is a European Australian academic based at the University of Melbourne ; he was another early designer in ThisMyMob and has conducted research with Aboriginal and other marginalized communities throughout Australia , with a particular focus on mental health . We came to this project , then , with a mix of experiences in both design and indigenous research and a complex web of identities and connections to community . This paper is not primarily about ThisMyMob although it is grounded in our experience with that research effort . Rather , in what follows , we explore a series of related elements – rooted in particular in the notion of iteration – that apply broadly across methods in HCI and in related areas of user - centered design . Inspired by our reflections on ThisMyMob , and turning to postcolonial and feminist cultural theory for explanatory frames , we examine the conditions that shape both our uptake of methods and the contexts of their use . A Note on Terminology Considerable debate surrounds the appropriate terminology to refer to Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders , compounded by ways that the terms have been appropriated and deployed in recent political arguments . Most Aboriginal Australians identify primarily with the names of their own mobs , like Noongar , Arrernte , or Yolngu , rather than generic settler terms like “indigenous” . In this paper , we use tribal names when we can , use the term “Aboriginal” to refer to categories that affect Aboriginal Australians , and use “indigenous” when we speak more generally of indigenous peoples in Australia and beyond . ITERATION A newcomer to HCI might be surprised by the diversity of methods that practitioners and researchers claim as part of their toolkits [ 52 ] . Giving students a grounding in HCI methods means exposing them to an array of methods , including scenario - based design , personas , wireframing , paper prototyping , Wizard of Oz techniques , speculative design , participatory workshops , living labs , and ethnographic approaches . From one point of view , then , HCI is remarkably fragmented in the ways in which it goes about its work . That is not to say , though , that there are not some common themes that underlie these different methods and the ways in which they are put to work as part of interactive systems research . One of these central themes is iteration . If there is one practice that is characteristic of HCI design , it is its commitment to iteration and to a cycle of prototyping , testing , and re - design in order to work towards solutions that are effective in fitting with user and community needs . Images such as that in figure 1 are staples of HCI texts . Iteration as a strategy is by no means original to HCI ; Fred Brooks’ classic accounts of systems engineering in The Mythical Man Month [ 10 ] and No Silver Bullet [ 11 ] both CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA explore the themes of rapid prototyping and iterative design and others such as Naumann and Jenkins [ 51 ] make similar proposals . However , at this point it is a sine qua non of HCI research and development . Figure 1 : The generic iterative loop ( from [ 61 ] ) . Given this centrality , it may seem foolish , even outlandish , to challenge the effectiveness of iteration , and indeed that is not quite our goal here . Rather , we want to examine its conditions . The question that occupies is here is , what does iteration demand of its users ? If iteration is central to how we , as HCI researchers , engage with users , how is iteration perceived from the other side ? What shapes the conditions under which iteration is effective ? And what limits to iteration as a methodological framework might we encounter ? So rather than reading iteration from the perspective of the designer , we read it from the perspective of the design participant . From that point of view , the practice of iteration comprises , at its most basic , a laying - in - front of users ( or their proxies ) something that is not - quite - ready . It asks that people take the time to explore something that may nor may not be “ready for prime time” or which embodies only in embryo those features and functions that we hope may be of value . Iteration , then , demands a good deal of its audience . Iteration demands patience . Iteration demands forbearance . Iteration demands an acceptance of the not - quite and the not - yet . Iteration demands hope and a commitment to investment now for benefit down the line . Iteration demands that people accept a down - payment now on a debt to be settled later . And iteration demands that people recognize that small steps lead to future benefits . Iteration demands and requires all of this of users or participants in research investigations . Moving to an only slightly more abstract level of description , then , we might say that what iteration demands of users is that they have the stability to invest time and effort without immediate benefit , that they be hopeful about the future , and that they trust in promises made by people in power . Paper 418 Page 3 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA The question we might ask , then , is : are these reasonable things to expect of indigenous communities ? Or , phrased differently , how do these demands arise in the specific historical contexts of indigenous peoples’ relations with centers of colonial power ? One might argue that indigenous communities in Australia and elsewhere have always been embedded in processes of iterative design . Those processes are not simply those of the creation of new sorts of technological artifacts , but also the iterative design of health care delivery , of employment schemes , of housing provision , of public education , of relations to the land , of systems of surveillance and management , and of conditions of existence . The delivery of services that are not adequate to the task is an all - too familiar experiences for Aboriginal Australian communities ( c . f . [ 5 , 57 ] ) . To participate in an iterative design process , then , is to be told , “here’s something that doesn’t yet quite work ; let’s try this for now and then we’ll see about making it better” . When one places this request in the context of the historical particularities of the Aboriginal experience in Australia , it takes on a quite different tenor than it might in design discourses . What we might talk about as a prototype might from other perspectives be called a stop - gap , a compromise , or simply an inadequate offering . The promise of iteration might similarly be seen as yet - another case of postponed satisfaction . In these settings , then , what iteration demands of its users is that they put to one side the entire history of their encounters with the power structures of settler colonialism . Again , the question for HCI researchers is whether this request is a reasonable one to make . In design circles , iteration is often framed in the language of the “minimum viable product” [ 48 ] , but such a notion seems deeply problematic when applied to , say , public education or health - care provision . The question arises then why it should be any more acceptable in the area of technology design . The very unboundedness of the iterative cycle captured in diagrams like that in figure 1 is also a consideration here . Simply put , it’s one thing to turn up once with something that doesn’t quite work ; it’s something quite different to do so repeatedly . Progress from the perspective of designers is not the same as progress from the perspective of potential users or community advisors , and indeed , repeated failures to achieve imagined goals on the part of designers can often undermine the credibility of community liaisons within their own communities . To the extent that iterative cycles require that we must often ask participants to bracket their expectations and to focus attention on those elements that have been sites of design activity , ignoring other elements that do not work , iteration demands a suspension of disbelief that might work for designers but may not be plausible or achievable for others . In this context , too , iteration demands of participants politeness where exasperation may be quite warranted . When we think , then , of the resources upon which design processes call , we need to include within those the affective resources involved . Raymond Williams [ 71 ] used the term “structures of feeling” to draw attention to the affective dimension of ideology . This concept connects political , economic , and historical circumstances to the felt experience of everyday life . It directly confronts the idea that ideology is encountered only ever externally but emphasizes instead how it is internalized and felt . The notion of structure of feeling provides us with a useful point of entry for thinking about iteration as a structural relation between designers and user communities . It opens up for us the question of what structures of feeling attend the iterative processes and how those vary across sites . Illuminating the question of what iteration demands by identifying the affective dimension of those demands , it helps us identify aspects of the settings in which iteration is a productive mode of engagement – and those in which it may not be . One particularly relevant element here is the suturing of iterative methods to notions of failure , and in particular to the idea of failure as valuable . The merit of failure has become something of a Silicon Valley mantra , and in turn this has been adopted as a key notion underlying the idea that iteration is fundamental in the technological encounter ( e . g . [ 35 , 61 ] ) . It seems appropriate to ask what undergirds this celebration of failure , especially when it is promulgated in particular by people whose life histories are characterized by success – in school and in higher education , in the labour market and on the venture capital scene , and in corporate careers [ 4 ] . When failure is re - examined in terms of structures of feeling – as a way in which ideology and power arise as felt experience – then we may come to quite different conclusions about how it frames encounters with user communities or participant co - designers . Designers may regard failure as a waypoint towards success , but such optimism is not always available to those with whom we work . PARTICIPATION If iteration is one of the key characteristics of user - centered design , then participation is surely its mirror . Iterative engagement requires participation from more than simply the design team ; it requires also participation , and participation over time , from communities and their representatives . In a collection provocatively entitled Participation : The New Tyranny [ 15 ] , development scholars examine the conditions and practices of participation in aid and development processes . As in user - centered design , a recognition had come about in development efforts that working in collaboration with and fostering participative engagements with local communities was central to the long - term effectiveness of development efforts ; solutions “parachuted in” or “thrown over the wall” from afar were unlikely to succeed . The analogy to user - centered - ness as a foundation of HCI design efforts should be clear . That said , the essays collected in that volume highlight the complexity of Paper 418 Page 4 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA participation . Who participates , and under what circumstances ? How are they authorized to speak for others ? How voluntary is “participation” when developers with plans , technologies , and funds arrive on the scene ? Is participation perceived in similar frames by those on either side of the development efforts ? It is a well - observed anthropological nostrum , for example , that people who act as “key informants” for ethnographic projects often occupy marginal positions within the communities in which the ethnographic work is sited ; indeed , their very marginal or ambiguous status may be what allows them to play this role at all [ 75 ] . We argued above that it is important to recognize the historical continuities of particular moments of methodological encounter , and that “iteration , ” to the extent that it requires a making - do , seems to continue a history of just such partial satisfaction . So too , then , with participation when viewed through this lens . If , as James Scott [ 60 ] argues , non - participation , partial participation , and halting participation are traditional means by which the powerless seek to throw sand into the machinery of their oppression , then one is again required to ask whether participation is a reasonable request , and how it should be “read” across the range of actors involved ( especially when , as designers , we are committed to questions of justice , autonomy , and self - determination ) . One need not only turn to sites of indigenous co - design to see these issues at work . In her book On Being Included , feminist cultural scholar Sara Ahmed [ 1 ] explores the consequences and burdens of the ways in which institutions respond to issues of systemic under - representation , inequity , and differential service . Echoing to an extent Marcuse’s [ 44 ] discussion of “repressive tolerance” , Ahmed notes that “Inclusion could be read as a tool of governance” [ 1 : 163 ] . Further , as she lays out , the burdens of responding to the ways in which institutions have failed members of particular groups tend to fall unevenly on the shoulders of exactly those who have been under - served . It falls to women to initiate , monitor , and manage programs to address gender disparities ; it falls to people of colour to serve in institutional roles that address racial disparities . Indigenous people will be asked to serve in those administrative and institutional roles that defend and promote indigenous interests . The institution , in these circumstances , essentially delegates to minority groups its responsibilities to protect their interests . As Ahmed notes , these roles are generally unpaid , and tend also to place people in opposition to institutional norms ( because it is precisely those norms that are to be challenged ) . In other writing , Ahmed refers to this as the condition of the “feminist killjoy” [ 2 ] – that is , the problem of being charged by the institution to be the person who needs to point out those occasions on which institutional action fails to live up to institutional aspirations . This is , as she notes , not only uncompensated labor , but also an emotional burden ; a way in which one’s identity is used to place one in opposition to institutional practice , marking out one’s difference even as the institution ostensibly seeks to erase or overcome that difference . We can identify at least three related challenges here for HCI practice and for related processes of engaged and participative design . The first concerns the way that the relationship between individuals and communities is imagined . If the argument of intersectional feminism is that one must attend to the multiple forms of marginalization that people can experience simultaneously ( gender , ethnicity , socio - economic status , sexual orientation , and more ) and in different configurations , then we can also read this inversely as arguing against the expectation that one can represent or speak for entire groups . This is not a question of “representative - ness” . It is not a statistical argument but a political one that requires that we acknowledge not only the problems of speaking on other’s behalves , but also of the burdens of being tasked to do so . The second concerns the way that participative approaches make demands of communities and individuals and essentially delegate the responsibility of understanding domains of use . User - centered design approaches have , of course , sought to displace the idea that developers can simply develop “for themselves” and then distribute the results of their labors to others . That said , we need to recognize that participatory approaches do not constitute developers or development organizations taking on for themselves the responsibility to understand the lifeworlds of others , but rather delegate that responsibility to others , and ask them to work to identify needs , formulate requirements , and undertake translation work . The third speaks to the irony of the burden that is placed on members of underserved communities in the attempt to redress these historical imbalances . This is a burden in terms of time and effort but also a burden of emotional labor . The emotional labor lies to an extent in the burdens of hopefulness to which we alluded earlier , and the investment in the notion of improvement that goes along with it , but also potentially to the way that participation marks a status apart from the conditions of everyday life , with all that that may imply . TEMPORALITIES AND TENSE We have argued for the importance of setting methodological commitments in historical contexts . The temporalities of methods go beyond , though , their connections to prior modes of inquiry and encounter . They speak too to the ways in which relationships to the future are made and how those are related to other temporalities . As Elizabeth Povinelli argues : In Australia , most Indigenous men and women living in the rural north are used to being the locus of social experimentation , and the nodal point of a national anxiety organized around free and collective agency projected onto their ways of life . They are used to hearing government officials – who themselves continually change as governments replace Paper 418 Page 5 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA governments – announce rivers of money and infrastructure that subsequently turn into a dirty trickle by the time it reaches them . They are used to hearing that their harms in their present lives should be bracketed . They are used to being aggressively abandoned within a temporal horizon of a future perspective : a future from whose perspective their present suffering has already been mourned and buried . [ 54 : 61 ] . The weariness of which Povinelli writes is a consequence of the forms of iteration that we have already discussed . What we as researchers perceive as the start of an iterative design process may not seem that way to indigenous communities , for whom it may in fact be essentially the continuation of an iterative process with a history of tens or indeed hundreds of years . The delight in novelty that is so characteristic of HCI and other forms of engineering design often blinds practitioners to the historical contexts in which they themselves are working . What is perhaps more relevant here is the way in which present and future are incorporated into the process . As Povinelli notes , it is not just that present suffering is erased in this encounter , but that it is treated as “mourned and buried , ” which also absolves those engaged in future - oriented efforts from the need to examine and account for how current conditions came about ( as Ferguson [ 24 ] also discussed in the context of development ) . If , in Simon’s [ 62 ] oft - quoted formulation , to design is to “devise courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones” , then design’s concern is bracketed by the present and immediate future ; historical trajectories are outside of its scope . However , they are never out of scope for those with whom we are working . As Povinelli observed , “tense functions as a technology of power” [ 54 : 75 ] . Design imagines its futures as breaks from the past ; when bound up in longer cycles of iteration , indigenous communities can recognize that what is on offer is “more of the same” . Anthropologist Arturo Escobar , whose work is discussed in more detail below , speaks both of the “futuring” and “de - futuring” at work in traditional design contexts [ 23 ] . “Futuring” here involves the conjuring of alternative worlds as spaces of possibility , but also a distancing from the problems of the present as relevant topics of concern . “De - futuring” , on the other hand , speaks to the agency of different groups in both imagining and enacting futures ; in Escobar’s accounts of encounters between global capital and indigenous groups in Latin America , de - futuring typically takes the form of a loss of autonomy , agency , and control on the part of those groups to determine their own futures . In the case of Aboriginal Australians , these issues take on a heightened significance . Aboriginal temporalities emphasize connection and continuity rather than the epochal disjunctions characteristic of modernity . This is what Deborah Bird Rose [ 58 ] captures with the phrase “the long transitive moment” ; the idea that “interventions” or “innovations” in Aboriginal affairs , including those surrounding putatively “new” materials such as digital technologies , are encountered by Aboriginal people not as marking a separation from the past but in continuity with it . DECOLONIZING DESIGN Lately , a number of conversations have developed at the intersection of design , development , and cultural inquiry . Efforts under the label of “decolonial design” have sought to identify and address the cultural legacies embedded in design processes , while other writers have found , in design , a potential way out of contemporary problems of disempowerment and neglect [ 3 ] . One thinker whose work we find especially useful here is Arturo Escobar , whose book , Designs for the Pluriverse , turns to design in order to address problems of the marginalization and disempowerment of indigenous peoples [ 23 ] . ( Amongst many contributors to decolonial thinking , including Smith [ 63 ] , Mignolo and Walsh [ 47 ] , de la Cadena and Blaser [ 16 ] , and Parreñas [ 53 ] , we focus here particularly on Escobar for the connections to design practice that he lays out . ) Escobar draws inspiration from the Zapatista slogan , “A world where many worlds fit” , in order to argue that the challenge for design is to create spaces of autonomy and plurality rather than homogenization . Escobar is an anthropologist with a background in development studies and a particular focus on the struggles of indigenous peoples in Latin America . In contrast to Escobar’s prior writings , Pluriverse focuses in particular on how “design” might offer to these communities a new set of tools for formulating responses to globalization . In his thinking on design , he is most directly in conversation with scholarship in “transition design” , such as that offered by Tony Fry ( e . g . [ 26 ] ) , Cameron Tonkinwise ( e . g . [ 66 ] ) , and Ezia Manzini ( e . g . [ 43 ] ) , although he also engages in passing with some work that originated in HCI ( e . g . [ 17 ] , [ 34 ] ) as well as Winograd and Flores’ [ 72 ] influential work . For Escobar , design can frame alternatives to the individualizing effects of contemporary capitalism and to the ways in which it enmeshes people in homogenizing global systems . The alternatives that he hopes that design can sustain are autonomy ( in the sense of self - determination ) for indigenous peoples based on an understanding of what he calls “radical interdependence , ” a commitment to community - scale collectivity . To those of us familiar with arguments in critical HCI , Escobar’s position may seem disconcertingly optimistic . To the extent that the work of critical HCI has been to open up conversations about the limits of design ( e . g . [ 18 ] ) and the broader contexts of encounters between people and technology [ 7 ] , the anthropological embrace of design is unexpected . It appears at first glance to embrace the sort of technological solutionism that many of us have been attempting to undermine , the “throw - an - app - at - it” approach that presents Silicon Valley as savior , and social and political change as an engineering problem [ 50 ] . As one works Paper 418 Page 6 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA through his cases , though , one comes to a different conclusion . First , to the extent that Escobar adopts an optimistic position towards the counter - hegemonic potential of design ( and he certainly does ) , it is very much as an alternative to the poverty of traditional development projects – the sorts of project that have been the focus of Escobar’s prior scholarly analysis ( e . g . [ 21 , 22 ] ) . Design seems to offer a “reset button” that can reconfigure the relationship between indigenous communities and their futures , and here , the fact that design has its origins in modernist projects of industrial capitalism is perhaps seen as advantageous because it provides a warrant for the application of design approaches ( and perhaps a Trojan Horse via which alternatives to contemporary capitalism can be introduced ) . Second , Escobar’s cases make clear that his interest in design is perhaps less about its artifacts and more about its processes . Design , for Escobar , allows an opening up of alternatives and a space for deliberation in a structure that incorporates voices that might otherwise be silenced . Indeed , the specific design cases he explores focus more on the way in which deliberative and consultative processes are shaped by communities rather than on the creation of artifacts or engineering interventions . Design , here , focuses on the figuring of alternatives and the spaces within which they can become viable as futures . Third , Escobar is quite clear that there are limits to what we can expect of design or any other singular approach : Autonomous design can be considered as a response to the urge for innovation and for the creation of new forms of life arising out of the struggles , forms of counterpower , and life projects of politically activated relational ontologies . This is , indeed , too much to place at the doorstep of any given theoretico - political imaginary . To restate , what is at stake here is not so much , or not only , how things are but how things can be . [ 23 : 189 ] Escobar’s optimism about design is not untrammeled , then , nor is it naïve ; he recognizes that both in principle and in practice , there are limits to the emancipatory potential of design projects . Nonetheless , and returning to the question of optimism , he proposes that we think aspirationally about the potential for design to be framed in such a way that it can resist , redirect , or overturn the globalist and industrial contexts from which it has sprung and create a new space of engagement . DISCUSSION An emerging body of literature seeks to connect decolonial thinking and design , as represented for example by a recent special issue of the journal Design and Culture [ 59 ] . In an article in that issue , Aboriginal Australian researchers caution that Aboriginal knowledge , situated as it is in country and connections to land and landscape , may sit uncomfortably with the decontextualized practices of design , particular as those are manifest in the academy [ 49 ] . There are echoes here of prior critiques of Western academic encounters with Aboriginal knowledge practice ( e . g . [ 70 ] ) . Further , we are deeply conscious of Tuck and Yang’s [ 67 ] critique , leveled under the banner “Decolonization is not a metaphor . ” Their concern is with “the ease with which the language of decolonization has been superficially adopted into education and other social sciences , supplanting prior ways of talking about social justice , critical methodologies , or approaches which decenter settler perspectives . ” Instead , they argue , “Decolonization brings about the repatriation of Indigenous land and life ; it is not a metaphor for other things we want to do to improve our societies and schools . ” We take these concerns seriously ; within the context of ThisMyMob , we explore elsewhere the concept of ‘digital land rights’ which motivates our project and highlights its framing in terms of sovereignty , authority , and self - determination for Aboriginal Australians [ 39 ] . Within our discussion here , though , we take our lead from decolonial studies exploring how research methods and practices are themselves deeply ideological [ 63 ] . This is pertinent in particular ways for indigenous people but is certainly not limited to them , and many of the considerations that have motived us here apply also with other under - served and delegitimized groups ( c . f . [ 41 ] ) , including in the participatory design ( e . g . [ 74 ] ) and action research ( e . g . [ 33 ] ) traditions . Because we have wanted to focus on the major power imbalances at work in these projects , and because we feel that it is for them that these issues are most acute , we have in this paper addressed primarily the affective demands of design participation for indigenous people , and particularly the Aboriginal Australian communities with which we have been working . However , it is certainly the case that these design practices , and iteration in particular , also place affective demands on designers . The short - term nature of research funding creates an institutional structure within which people are often forced into relatively short - term encounters with indigenous communities and find themselves in an instrumental relationship with which they may not feel comfortable . Similarly , the experience over time of a series of projects each of which , most likely , effects change only in relatively marginal ways , similarly shapes the affective encounter . Echoing Ahmed’s discussions earlier , we note the particular difficulties for indigenous members of research teams , faced with complicated and potentially uncomfortable boundaries to navigate . Indeed , it is such experiences that make clear why new ways of thinking about methods are so necessary . STAYING WITH THE TROUBLE How can this exploration reframe our thinking in engaging in design projects ? Certainly , one overarching question is whether design is , in fact , the right mode of engagement [ 6 ] . Drawing on Escobar’s strategic optimism , though , we are inclined towards retaining a design stance , albeit perhaps in Paper 418 Page 7 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA a way that reframes and reshapes what design might be . It may be that , to paraphrase one arch - colonialist , design is the worst system of intervention we know , except for all the others . Donna Haraway [ 32 ] speaks of the importance of “staying with the trouble” – an approach that rejects both “a comic faith in technofixes” and the position that “there’s no sense in trying to make anything better” [ 32 : 3 ] . Haraway insists that we not recoil from problematic encounters but rather maintain our engagement despite ( and with attention to ) the issues that they raise . These issues are often framed in terms of difference and of resources . The “difference” view is captured in studies of “cross - cultural design” , whose practitioners address themselves to the cultural biases of traditional design languages and seek out ways to frame productive encounters between different cultural groups ( e . g . [ 27 , 36 , 68 ] ) . The “resource” view focuses on how design practices can accommodate participants who are resource - limited in some way – perhaps bandwidth , perhaps language or literacy skills , perhaps financial stability ( e . g . [ 28 , 64 , 69 ] ) . Each of these positions has been subject to significant critique , of course ( e . g . [ 33 , 42 , 76 ] ) , and much work in Participatory Design has explored ways of reconfiguring design relations in light of disparities of power ( e . g . [ 9 , 73 ] ) , but they remain common framings . We propose here a different framing – one that focuses on the historical and political contexts within which HCI projects arise . In the spirit of “staying with the trouble , ” at least four troubles present themselves . First , our discussion emphasizes that HCI ( or user - centered design ) is not a space apart . That is , although as researchers we are disciplined to have particular boundaries to our inquiries and domains of action – human - computer interaction , public health , telecommunications engineering , or whatever – we cannot pretend that these boundaries actually exist as features of the experience of people in the world . While as researchers we imagine ourselves to be living at the cutting edge and doing things that are always “new” , we are not the first people to arrive in the communities where we work , and likely not the last either . If we see our design engagements as continuing rather than as redressing a long history of engagements with at best very mixed outcomes then we come to see our work in a very different light . And indeed , taking a user - centered point of view , how could we possibly not see our projects that way ? Second , and as an elaboration of our prior point , we need to undertake our work with an acknowledgment of the cycles in which we are embedded . This applies at different scales . At the large scale , we need to be able to understand how HCI projects arise within a pattern of reformatory engagement and restructured futures , but especially within a pattern of periodic engagement within longer periods of neglect and abandonment . At the smaller scale , and reflecting a point raised in the quote from Elizabeth Povinelli’s work above , if government officials and policymakers have changed with a rapidity that has made it difficult to sustain policy engagements , we may need to think about how and whether we can engage at the granularity of short - term research grants and time - limited PhD programs . ( Clare Land [ 38 ] similarly notes the problems for indigenous activists of the white allies who come and go . ) Third , and this is a broader conversation in which our disciplines are engaged , we need to be able to recognize the limits and directions to portability of methods across times and spaces . By limits , we refer to the conditions that must hold for a method to be effective , and the variability in those conditions . By directions , we mean the places where methods tend to arise and the specific flows that they follow . Dourish and Mainwaring [ 20 ] caution against the logic of center / periphery , and indigenous encounters are marbled through with notions of “remote” - ness ( although , when sitting on the Dampier Peninsula , it’s Sydney that seems pretty remote , never mind Silicon Valley ) . Acknowledging the problematic and repeated patterns of these flows is a key step towards reconfiguring them . Fourth , we need to examine our priorities and claims to legitimacy [ 19 ] . This begins perhaps by acknowledging that , ironically enough , as a simple matter of grammar , the user is not at the center of user - centered design ; rather , design is . It may be more user - centered or less user - centered , but design is the unquestioned element . This simple grammatical observation speaks directly to the systems of valuation by which HCI research is measured and which may be called into question when we acknowledge the competing interests and needs of those different groups brought together in design encounters . One cannot be user - centered if one is busy being design - centered . CONCLUSIONS The questions we raise here are , or should be , uncomfortable ones , and in that same spirit , none of the responses here are necessarily comforting . We have presented no formulae for transcendent success . Indeed , the search for formulae of this sort – neatly packaged “take - home messages” that can fit within ever - shrinking conference presentation slots , results that can be generated within the annual cycles of research production and promotion , and outputs that are legible within familiar disciplinary frames – is part of the problem that we have set out to diagnose . These all signal a priority to do research on “our” terms . Funding cycles , professional development , publication schedules , and curricular demands are ( or at least seem ) unavoidable but we should be conscious of how they then manifest themselves within our research activities themselves . What might an HCI be whose primary commitment to the communities it serves overrides a commitment to conventional research production ? Does that , in the words of one of our reviewers , “mean restructuring HCI research as we know it” ? Our goal here is not to offer a way out of the conundrums , and our own response within ThisMyMob is a work in progress . Further , none of the options we have offered for Paper 418 Page 8 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA rethinking our position imply doing radically different things . But they all imply doing what we do in quite different ways and with different sensitivities in mind , and with a revised consciousness of our responsibilities and the conditions of participation – for ourselves and for those with whom we work . Taking our cue from Escobar and his perspective on design as a form of political engagement , what we might conclude requires more thought and attention in HCI is what we might call “design relations” – the forms of sociality engendered by , mobilized through , and reformulated within design practice and methodological procedures like iteration . When design relations , rather than design per se , become central in our processes , opportunities can emerge for reconfiguring how research serves the needs of the communities with which it is in conversation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our deepest debts of thanks are to those from the Bard , Noongar , Tiwi , Gunditjmara , and Eora peoples , as well as contributors from the Jumbunna Institute , who participated in our design studies . Joel Fredericks , Cat Kutay , and Aimee Woods have been key contributors to the project . We are also grateful to Nicola Bidwell , Stacy Branham , Ann Light , Carl DiSalvo , Frank Vetere , and the reviewers for thoughtful feedback on earlier drafts of this paper . The work described here has been supported in part by the Australian Research Council under Discovery Indigenous award IN170100030 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ahmed , S . 2012 . On Being Included : Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 2 ] Ahmed , S . 2017 . Living a Feminist Life . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 3 ] Ali , S . M . 2016 . A Brief Introduction to Decolonial Design . ACM XRDS , 22 ( 4 ) , 16 - 21 . [ 4 ] Ames , M . 2019 . The Charisma Machine : The Life , Death and Legacy of One Laptop Per Child . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 5 ] Bailie , R . S . and Runcie , M . J . 2001 . Household infrastructure in aboriginal communities and the implications for health improvement . Medical Journal of Australia , 175 ( 7 ) , 363 - 366 . [ 6 ] Baumer , E . and Silberman , M . 2011 . When the Implication is Not to Design ( Technology ) . Proc . ACM Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 2011 ( Vancouver , BC ) , 2271 - 2274 . [ 7 ] Bardzell , J . and Bardzell , S . 2015 . The User Reconfigured : On Subjectivities of Information . Proc . Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference : Critical Alternatives , 133 - 144 . [ 8 ] Bidwell , N . 2016 . Decolonising HCI and Interaction Design Discourse : Some considerations in planning AfriCHI . ACM XRDS , 22 ( 4 ) , 22 - 27 . [ 9 ] Brereton , M . and Buur , J . 2008 . New Challenges for design participation in the era of ubiquitous computing . Co - Design , 4 ( 2 ) , 101 - 113 . [ 10 ] Brooks , F . 1975 . The Mythical Man - Month : Essays on Software Engineering . Addison - Wesley . [ 11 ] Brooks , F . 1986 . No Silver Bullet – Essence and Accident in Software Engineering . Proceedings of the IFIP Tenth World Computing Conference , 1069 - 1076 . Amsterdam , NL : Elsevier Science B . V . [ 12 ] Bruckman , A . , Karahalios , K . , Kraut , R . , Shehan Poole , E . , Thomas , J . and Yardi , S . 2010 . Revisiting research ethics in the facebook era : Challenges in emerging CSCW research . in Adjunct Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ACM , Savannah , GA . [ 13 ] Clifford , J . 2013 . Returns : Becoming Indigenous in the Twenty - First Century . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . [ 14 ] Comaroff , J . and Comaroff , J . 2009 . Ethnicity , Inc . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . [ 15 ] Cooke , B . and Kothari , U . 2001 . Participation : The New Tyranny ? Zed Books . [ 16 ] De la Cadena , M . and Blaser , M . ( Eds ) . 2018 . A World of Many Worlds . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 17 ] DiSalvo , C . 2012 . Adversarial Design . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 18 ] Dourish , P . 2018 . The Allure and the Paucity of Design : Cultures of Design and Design in Culture . Human - Computer Interaction . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2018 . 1469410 . [ 19 ] Dourish , P . 2019 . User Experience as Legitimacy Trap . Interactions , 26 ( 6 ) , 46 - 49 . [ 20 ] Dourish , P . and Mainwaring , S . 2012 . Ubicomp ' s Colonial Impulse . Proc . ACM Conf . Ubiquitous Computing Ubicomp 2012 ( Pittsburgh , PA ) , 133 - 142 . [ 21 ] Escobar , A . 1995 . Encountering Development : The Making and Unmaking of the Third World . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . [ 22 ] Escobar , A . 1988 . Power and Visibility : Development and the Invention and Management of the Third World . Cultural Anthropology , 3 ( 4 ) , 428 – 443 . [ 23 ] Escobar , A . 2018 . Designs for the Pluriverse : Radical Interdependence , Autonomy , and the Making of Worlds . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 24 ] Ferguson , J . 1994 . The Anti - Politics Machine : Developed , Depoliticization , and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho . Minneapolis , MN : University of Minnesota Press . [ 25 ] Fiesler , C . , Young , A . , Peyton , T . , Bruckman , A . , Gray , M . , Hancock , J . , and Lutters , W . 2015 . Ethics for Studying Online Sociotechnical Systems in a Big Data Paper 418 Page 9 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA World . Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , ACM , 289 – 292 [ 26 ] Fry , T . 2012 . Becoming Human by Design . London , UK : Bloomsbury . [ 27 ] Goyal , N . , Miner , W . , and Nawathe , N . 2012 . Cultural differences across governmental website design . Proc . 4th international conference on Intercultural Collaboration ( ICIC ' 12 ) , 149 - 152 . [ 28 ] Gupta , N . , Medhi - Thies , I . , Ferreira , P . , O ' Neill , J . , and Cutrell , E . 2015 . KrishiPustak : A Social Networking System for Low - Literate Farmers . Proc . 18th ACM Conference Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ' 15 Companion ) , 45 - 48 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2685553 . 2702683 [ 29 ] Haggerty , K . 2004 . Ethics Creep : Governing Social Science Research in the Name of Ethics . Qualitative Sociology , 27 ( 4 ) . 391 - 414 . DOI : 10 . 1023 / B : QUAS . 0000049239 . 15922 . a3 [ 30 ] Hancock , J . 2015 . The Facebook Study : A Personal Account of Data Science , Ethics and Change . in Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , ACM , 1 - 1 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2697078 [ 31 ] Harding , S . ( Ed ) . 1998 . Feminism and Methodology . Bloomington , IN : Indiana University Press . [ 32 ] Haraway , D . 2016 . Staying with the Trouble : Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 33 ] Hayes , G . 2011 . The Relationship of Action Research to Human - Computer Interaction . ACM Trans . Computer - Human Interaction TOCHI , 18 ( 3 ) , 20pp . [ 34 ] Irani , L . , Vertesi , J . , Dourish , P . , Philip , K . , and Grinter , R . 2010 . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . Proc . ACM Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 2010 ( Atlanta , GA ) , 1311 - 1320 . [ 35 ] Juul , J . 2013 . The Art of Failure : An Essay on the Pain of Playing Video Games . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 36 ] Kyriakoullis , L . and Zaphiris , P . 2016 . Culture and HCI : A Review of Recent Cultural Studies in HCI and Social Networks . Universal Access in the Information Society , 15 ( 4 ) , 629 - 642 . [ 37 ] Lampe , C . , Wash , R . , Velasquez , A . and Ozkaya , E . 2010 . Motivations to participate in online communities . Proc . ACM Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 2010 ( Atlanta , GA ) , 1927 – 1936 . [ 38 ] Land , C . 2015 . Decolonizing Solidarity : Dilemmas and Directions for Supporters of Indigenous Struggles . London : Zed Books . [ 39 ] Lawrence , C . 2018 . Digital Land Rights : Co - designing Technologies with Indigenous Australians . The Conversation . https : / / theconversation . com / digital - land - rights - co - designing - technologies - with - indigenous - australians - 99751 [ 40 ] Leong , T . W . , Lawrence , C . and Wadley , G ( 2019 ) Designing for Diversity in Aboriginal Australia : Insights from a national technology project , in OZCHI ' 19 Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction , Fremantle , WA . [ 41 ] Light , A . , Wakeford , T . , Egglestone , P . , and Rogers , J . 2011 . Research on an Equal Footing ? A UK Collaborative Inquiry into Community and Academic Knowledge . Proc . Embracing Indigenous Knowledge Systems , Windhoek , Namibia . [ 42 ] Lindtner , S . , Bardzell , S . , and Bardzell , J . 2018 . Design and Intervention in the Age of “No Alternative , ” Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human - Computer Interaction - CSCW , Vol . 2 , Article No . 109 , November , 2018 [ 43 ] Manzini , E . 2015 . Design , When Everybody Designs : An Introduction to Design for Social Innovation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 44 ] Marcuse , H . 1965 . Repressive Tolerance . In Robert Paul Wolff , Barrington Moore , Jr . , and Herbert Marcuse , ( Eds ) , A Critique of Pure Tolerance , 95 - 137 , Boston , MA : Beacon Press , 95 - 137 . [ 45 ] Markus , M . L . 1981 . Toward a " critical mass " theory of interactive media : Universal access , interdependence and diffusion . Communication Research , 14 ( 5 ) , 491 . [ 46 ] McPherson , T . 2018 . Feminist in a Software Lab : Difference and Design . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . [ 47 ] Migolo , W . and Walsh , C . 2018 . On Decoloniality : Concept , Analytics , Praxis . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 48 ] Mookg , D . R . 2012 . Minimum Viable Product and the Importance of Experimentation in Technology Startups . Technology Innovation Management Review , 2 ( 3 ) , 23 - 26 . [ 49 ] Moran , C . , Harrington , G . , and Sheehan , N . 2018 . On Country Learning . Design and Culture , 10 ( 1 ) , 71 - 79 . [ 50 ] Morozov , E . 2013 . To Save Everything , Click Here : The Folly of Technological Solutionism . New York , NY : Public Affairs . [ 51 ] Naumann , J . D . and Jenkins , A . M . 1982 . Prototyping : the new paradigm for systems development . MIS Quarterly , 29 - 44 . [ 52 ] Olson , J . and Kellogg , W . ( Eds . ) 2014 . Ways of Knowing in HCI . Springer . Paper 418 Page 10 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 53 ] Parreñas , Juno Salazar . 2018 . Decolonizing Extinction : The Work of Care in Orangutan Rehabilitation . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 54 ] Povinelli , E . 2011 . Economies of Abandonment : Social Belonging and Endurance in Late Liberalism . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 55 ] Preece , J . 2002 . Supporting Community and Building Social Capital . Communications of the ACM , 45 ( 4 ) , 36 - 39 . [ 56 ] Raban , D . , Moldovan , M . , and Jones , Q . 2010 . An empirical study of critical mass and online community survival . Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 71 – 80 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1718918 . 1718932 [ 57 ] Rennie , E . , Crouch , A . , Thomas , J . , and Taylor , P . 2010 . Beyond public access ? Reconsidering broadband for remote Indigenous communities . Communication , Politics & Culture , 43 ( 1 ) , 48 - 69 . [ 58 ] Rose , D . 2004 . Reports from a Wild Country : Ethics for Decolonisation . Sydney , NSW : UNSW Press . [ 59 ] Schultz , T . , Abdulla , D . , Ansari , A . , Canli , E . , Keshavarz , M . , Kiem , M . , Prado de O . Martins , L . , and Vieira de Oliveira , Pß . 2018 . Editors’ Introduction , Design and Culture , 10 : 1 , 1 - 6 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 17547075 . 2018 . 1434367 [ 60 ] Scott , J . 1985 . Weapons of the Weak : Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . [ 61 ] Sharp , J . and Macklin , C . 2019 . Iterate : Ten Lessons in Design and Failure . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 62 ] Simon , H . 1969 . Sciences of the Artificial . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 63 ] Smith , L . T . 1999 . Decolonizing Methodologies : Research and Indigenous Peoples . Zed Books . [ 64 ] Sudar , S . and Anderson , R . 2015 . DUCES : A Framework for Characterizing and Simplifying Mobile Deployments in Low - Resource Settings . Proc . 2015 Annual Symposium on Computing for Development ( DEV ' 15 ) , 23 - 30 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2830629 . 2830653 [ 65 ] Taylor , A . 2011 . Out There . Proc . ACM Conf . Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 2011 , 685 - 694 . [ 66 ] Tonkinwise , C . 2015 . Transition Design – From and To What ? Design Philosophy Papers , 13 ( 1 ) , 85 - 92 . [ 67 ] Tuck , E . and Yang , W . Decolonization is Not a Metaphor . Decolonization : Indigeneity , Education , and Society , 1 ( 1 ) , 1 - 40 . [ 68 ] Vatrapu , R . and Suthers , D . 2010 . Cultural influences in collaborative information sharing and organization . Proc . 3rd international conference on Intercultural collaboration ( ICIC ' 10 ) , 161 - 170 . [ 69 ] Vempala , S . , Chopra , N . , Rajagopal , A . , Nkengasong , J . , and Akuro , S . 2016 . C4G BLIS : Health Care Delivery via Iterative Collaborative Design in Resource - constrained Settings . Proc . Eighth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( ICTD ' 16 ) , Article 21 , 11 pages . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2909609 . 2909657 [ 70 ] Verran , H . 2002 . A Postcolonial Moment in Science Studies : Alternative Firing Regimes of Environmental Scientists and Aboriginal Landowners . Social Studies of Science , 32 ( 5 - 6 ) , pp . 729 – 762 . [ 71 ] Williams , R . 1977 . Marxism and Literature . Oxford University Press . [ 72 ] Winograd , T . and Flores , F . 1987 . Understanding Computers and Cognition : A New Foundation for Design . New York , NY : Addison - Wesley . [ 73 ] Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Chivuno - Kuria , S . , Kampuire , G . , Bidwell , N . , and Blake , E . 2010 . Being Participated : A Community Approach . Proc . Participatory Design Conference PDF 2010 ( Sydney , Australia ) , 1 - 10 . [ 74 ] Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Bidwell , N . , and Blake , E . 2012 . Community Consensus : Design Beyond Participation . Design Issues , 28 ( 3 ) , 89 - 100 . [ 75 ] Wong , P . 2019 . Biographies of a Sociological Type : “Marginal Men” in the Establishment of “Middle American” Anthropology . Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology , published online 20 August . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jlca . 12430 [ 76 ] Wong - Villacres , M . , Arkaeep Kumar , A . , Vishwanath , A . , Karusala , N . , DiSalvo , B . , and Kumar , N . 2018 . Designing for Intersections . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 45 - 58 . [ 77 ] Zimmer , M . 2010 . “But the data is already public” : on the ethics of research in Facebook . Ethics and information technology , 12 ( 4 ) . 313 - 325 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s10676 - 010 - 9227 - 5 Paper 418 Page 11