Gibberellin DELLA signaling targets the retromer complex to redirect protein trafficking to the plasma membrane Yuliya Salanenka a , Inge Verstraeten a , Christian Löfke b , Kaori Tabata a , Satoshi Naramoto c , Matou š Glanc a , d , and Ji (cid:1) rí Friml a , 1 a Institute of Science and Technology Austria , 3400 Klosterneuburg , Austria ; b Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology , 1030 Vienna , Austria ; c Department of Biomolecular Sciences , Graduate School of Life Sciences , Tohoku University , 980 - 8577 Sendai , Miyagi , Japan ; and d Department of Experimental Plant Biology , Faculty of Science , Charles University , 12844 Prague , Czech Republic Edited by Natasha V . Raikhel , Center for Plant Cell Biology , Riverside , CA , and approved January 30 , 2018 ( received for review January 9 , 2018 ) The plant hormone gibberellic acid ( GA ) is a crucial regulator of growth and development . The main paradigm of GA signaling puts forward transcriptional regulation via the degradation of DELLA tran - scriptional repressors . GA has also been shown to regulate tropic responses by modulation of the plasma membrane incidence of PIN auxin transporters by an unclear mechanism . Here we uncovered the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which GA redirects protein trafficking and thus regulates cell surface functionality . Photoconver - tible reporters revealed that GA balances the protein traffic between the vacuole degradation route and recycling back to the cell surface . Low GA levels promote vacuolar delivery and degradation of multiple cargos , including PIN proteins , whereas high GA levels promote their recycling to the plasma membrane . This GA effect requires compo - nents of the retromer complex , such as Sorting Nexin 1 ( SNX1 ) and its interacting , microtubule ( MT ) - associated protein , the Cytoplasmic Linker - Associated Protein ( CLASP1 ) . Accordingly , GA regulates the subcellular distribution of SNX1 and CLASP1 , and the intact MT cytoskeleton is essential for the GA effect on trafficking . This GA cellular action occurs through DELLA proteins that regulate the MT and retromer presumably via their interaction partners Prefoldins ( PFDs ) . Our study identified a branching of the GA signaling path - way at the level of DELLA proteins , which , in parallel to regulating transcription , also target by a nontranscriptional mechanism the retromer complex acting at the intersection of the degradation and recycling trafficking routes . By this mechanism , GA can redi - rect receptors and transporters to the cell surface , thus coregulat - ing multiple processes , including PIN - dependent auxin fluxes during tropic responses . gibberellin | DELLA | polar auxin transport | microtubules | vesicle trafficking B ecause plants have a sessile lifestyle , they constantly need to adapt to a changing environment . Through hormonal sig - naling , environmental cues can be integrated and developmental programs are modified accordingly . Increasing evidence supports the idea that the signaling crosstalk between different hormonal pathways , rather than specific activity of a single hormone , de - termines the final signaling outcome ( 1 , 2 ) . Auxin and gibberellic acid ( GA ) are prominent growth regula - tors , and their signaling pathways positively interact in the regula - tion of cell expansion and tissue differentiation ( 3 ) . In roots , auxin promotes GA responses via the degradation of major components of the GA pathway , namely , DELLA transcriptional repressors ( 4 ) , and via transcriptional activation of GA biosynthesis ( 5 ) . On the other hand , DELLAs have been proposed to negatively reg - ulate polar auxin transport ( PAT ) by a multistep inhibition of the transcription of PIN auxin transporters ( 6 ) . Moreover , during gravitropic responses , GA regulates the transcription of the indole - 3 - acetic acid 19 / MASSAGU2 repressor of auxin signaling ( 7 ) . Notably , the developmental output of the auxin pathway can also be modulated by the GA effect on the abundance of PIN transporters ( 8 , 9 ) that are important for the formation and maintenance of the developmentally crucial local auxin gradients and maxima ( 10 , 11 ) . Generally , GA - deficient conditions lead to increased vacuolar trafficking and reduced incidence of PINs at the plasma membrane ( PM ) ( 8 , 9 ) . Conversely , high GA levels inhibit PIN vacuolar de - livery and promote PIN incidence at the PM ( 9 ) . The precise mechanism of PIN trafficking to the vacuole and its regulation is unclear , but it depends on sorting nexin ( SNX1 ) components as - sociated with the retromer complex ( 12 ) . A direct association be - tween SNX1 and CLASP1 ( one of MT - associated proteins ) suggests that cortical MT - decorating CLASP1 increases the resi - dency time of SNX - positive vesicles close to the PM to promote recycling of cargos back to the PM ( 13 ) . PIN trafficking regulation by GA appears to be developmentally relevant , e . g . , during root gravitropic bending , which is regulated by GA signaling and during which asymmetric GA distribution has been detected ( 9 ) . Here we show that GA regulates the cell surface incidence of proteins by specifically targeting the SNX1 - mediated switch be - tween vacuolar trafficking and recycling to the PM . This reveals a cellular mechanism , by which GA controls auxin transport - mediated development and other cell surface - based regulations . Results and Discussion GA Modulates the Balance Between Vacuolar Trafficking and Exocytosis . To dissect the cellular GA - targeted processes that regulate PIN levels at the PM , we used the photoconvertible pPIN2 : : PIN2 - Significance This study identifies and outlines a nontranscriptional branch of the canonical GA signaling pathway that redirects protein traffic from the vacuolar degradation route to the plasma membrane . As a result , the amount of receptors and transporters , such as PIN transporters for the plant hormone auxin , is functionally regulated at the cell surface . The identified branching occurs at the level of DELLA proteins that , besides transcriptional regu - lation , also target the microtubule ( MT ) network and protein trafficking . In this work , we provide multiple lines of evidence that DELLA proteins act via their interacting partners Prefoldins and that a downstream MT / CLASP1 module regulates the ac - tivity of the retromer complex that directs protein trafficking at the intersection of the vacuolar and recycling pathways . Author contributions : Y . S . , C . L . , and J . F . designed research ; Y . S . , I . V . , K . T . , S . N . , and M . G . performed research ; Y . S . analyzed data ; and Y . S . and J . F . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - NoDerivatives License 4 . 0 ( CC BY - NC - ND ) . See Commentary on page 3521 . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : jiri . friml @ ist . ac . at . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1721760115 / - / DCSupplemental . Published online February 20 , 2018 . 3716 – 3721 | PNAS | April 3 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 14 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1721760115 Dendra line . The irreversible conversion of the Dendra fluorochrome from green to red allowed us to follow the subcellular fate of the already present PIN2 in GA - deficient and GA - treated conditions . Conceptually , GA can enhance PIN levels at the PM by ( i ) inhib - iting PIN endocytosis , ( ii ) promoting its exocytosis , or ( iii ) inhibiting PIN vacuolar delivery and degradation . In the nonphotoconverted situation , a GA synthesis inhibitor , paclobutrazol ( PAC ) ( 14 ) , strongly decreased the total PIN2 - Dendra signal , whereas GA treatment rapidly reverted this ef - fect ( Fig . 1 A – D ) . Therefore , PIN2 - Dendra reacted identically to PAC and GA treatments as PIN2 - GFP , the regulation of which by GA has been verified both by microscopy ( Fig . S1 A – D ) and Western blot analysis ( Fig . S1 E – H ) . However , when PIN2 - Dendra was photoconverted into its red form and its depletion from the PM was followed , the decrease in the red signal over time was not affected by PAC pretreatment ( Fig . 1 E – H and O ) , suggesting that PIN2 internalization from the PM is not affected by GA availability and , thus , that the observed PIN2 depletion from the PM in GA - deficient conditions ( 8 ) is not due to en - hanced PIN2 endocytosis . To assess the alternative scenario of GA promoting exocytosis , we photoconverted PIN2 - Dendra and monitored the green signal recovery at the PM , which reflects the delivery of de novo synthesized PIN2 - Dendra proteins ( Fig . 1 Q ) . Notably , in GA optimal conditions , the green signal intensity in - creased up to 40 % within 5 h ( Fig . 1 I , J , and O ) . On the contrary , in PAC - treated roots , the recovery was severely inhibited , reach - ing only ∼ 5 % ( Fig . 1 K , L , and O ) . GA treatment was sufficient to revert the PAC effect and to recover the green PIN2 - Dendra at the PM ( Fig . 1 M , N , and P ) . Treatment with Brefeldin A ( BFA ) , an established inhibitor for PIN delivery to the PM ( 15 , 16 ) , had no obvious effect on PAC - and GA - modulated PIN2 recovery at the PM ( Fig . S2 A – D and G ) . This illustrates a BFA - insensitive delivery of newly synthesized PIN2 to the apical membranes of root epidermis cells , consistent with previous studies ( 17 , 18 ) . Next , we confirmed the PIN2 - Dendra observations by the fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) and live im - aging of PIN2 - mCherry . The PIN2 - mCherry fluorescence was al - most completely bleached in the whole cellular region , so that the signal recovery indicated predominantly the delivery of de novo synthesized PIN2 . As shown for PIN2 - Dendra , PAC treatment decreased the PM PIN2 - mCherry recovery with a concomitantly increased vacuolar delivery ( Fig . S2 E , F , and H – K ) . In summary , the photoconversion and FRAP experiments revealed that GA - deficient conditions have little effect on PIN2 endocytosis but lead to a strong inhibition of PIN2 delivery to the PM and trafficking redirection to the vacuole . GA treat - ment is sufficient to completely revert this effect by inhibiting vacuolar targeting and recovering PIN2 at the PM . This suggests that GA signaling targets processes balancing PIN2 vacuolar trafficking and its recycling back to the PM . Nontranscriptional GA Mechanism Regulates Trafficking of Multiple Cargoes . We performed several experiments to confirm that GA increases PIN2 delivery to the PM but not through the regulation of PIN2 transcription or protein synthesis ( Fig . S3 ) . Quantitative reverse transcription PCR ( qRT - PCR ) showed that PIN2 transcrip - tion was not influenced by PAC or GA treatments ( Fig . S3 A and B ) . Moreover , real - time recording of PIN2 promoter activity ( in pPIN2 : : NLS - GFP roots ) showed no differences between mock , PAC , and PAC + GA treatments ( Fig . S3 C – E ) . PIN2 promoter activity - independent action of GA was confirmed by the obser - vation that PIN2 and PIN1 distributions in estradiol - inducible and 35S - driven lines were regulated by GA in a similar way as protein fusions under their native promoters ( Fig . S3 H – K ) . Furthermore , PIN2 - GFP levels were monitored microscopically following GA and PAC cotreatments with cycloheximide ( CHX ) , an inhibitor of pro - tein synthesis . Whereas CHX significantly decreased the level of PIN2 at the PM , PAC treatment led to an additional drop in PIN2 abundance , which was reversed by GA even in the presence of CHX ( Fig . S3 G and F ) . These observations confirm that not only GA regulates PIN abundance independently of transcription but also that the GA effect itself utilizes a nontranscriptional mechanism . To test the specificity of these GA effects on PIN proteins , we examined vacuolar targeting of different cargo proteins in GA - deficient conditions . The vacuolar degradation increased not only for PIN2 but also for several other PM proteins , such as Boron transporter 1 ( BOR1 ) , Brassinosteroid insensitive 1 ( BRI1 ) , P - glycoprotein 19 ( PGP19 ) , and PM intrinsic protein 1 ; 4 ( PIP1 ; 4 ) ( Fig . S4 A – I ) . These findings are not consistent with previous obser - vations that GA did not visibly affect PM stability of AUX1 , PGP19 , and PIP2 ( 9 ) . This discrepancy might be explained by a different evaluation method : GA effect on the PM proteins abundance ( 9 ) versus the dark - visualized protein vacuolar delivery , which seems to be more sensitive ( 12 ) . Using the dark conditions or concanamycin A treatment , we detected a pronounced PIN2 vacuolar degradation following PAC treatment , which was reversed by GA ( Fig . S4 J – O ) . A E F Q G H O P B C D I K L N M J Fig . 1 . GAeffectsonPIN2 vacuolartraffickingand exocytosis . ( A – C ) Decrease of total PIN2 - Dendra signal at PM in seedlings pretreated with 1 μ M paclo - butrazol ( PAC ) for 1 d ( B ) that was rescued by 50 μ M GA treatment for 4 h ( C ) compared with nontreated seedlings ( A ) . ( D ) PIN2 - Dendra signal quantifica - tion . A rectangular region of interest ( ROI ) at the PM was used for PM signal intensity quantification , and the PM signal was measured in 16 epidermal cells , including trichoblasts and atrichoblasts in eight individual roots . ( E – H ) Photoconversion of PIN2 - Dendra into its red form induced by illuminating the region of interest and the depletion of the red signal over time followed in nontreated seedlings ( E and F ) versus seedlings pretreated with 1 μ M PAC ( G and H ) . Note the increased PIN2 - Dendra vacuolar delivery in PAC - treated samples ( G ) . ( I – N ) Green signal recovery at the PM after photoconversion reflects the delivery of de novo synthesized protein in nontreated seedlings ( I and J ) , pretreated with 1 μ M PAC ( K and L ) , and treated with 50 μ M GA for 5 h after 1 μ M PAC pretreatment ( M and N ) . Note the faster accumulation of de novo PIN2 at the PM in seedlings untreated versus PAC treatment ( I and J ) and treated with GA ( M and N ) . ( O and P ) Decrease in PIN2 - Dendra red signal and increase in the green signal 5 h after photoconversion , reflecting the rate of endocytosis and exocytosis , respectively . The percentage of the increase in the green signal intensity was measured after 5 h , revealing the exocytosis rate in untreated epidermal cells versus 1 μ M PAC treated ( O ) and roots pretreated with 1 μ M PAC and followed by 50 μ M GA treatment ( P ) . Note the increase in the exocytosis rate of PIN2 in roots upon GA application . ( Q ) Schematic rep - resentation of PIN2 - Dendra red internalization reflects the rate of endocytosis and delivery of a newly synthesized green PIN2 - Dendra to the PM linked to the exocytosis rate . ( Scale bar : 10 μ m . ) Salanenka et al . PNAS | April 3 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 14 | 3717 P L A N T B I O L O G Y S EE C O MM E N T A RY Similar differences in vacuolar accumulation of cargo proteins like BOR1 or PGP19 were observed despite the absence of obvious dif - ferences in abundance at the PM ( Fig . S4 A , B , F , and G ) . qRT - PCR for these proteins in identical conditions showed no significant dif - ference in mRNA levels following PAC or GA treatment , with the exception of PIP1 ; 4 ( Fig . S5 ) . These results imply a nontranscriptional mechanism of GA regulation of the balance between vacuolar trafficking and recycling back to the PM of multiple PM cargoes . Gibberellin Targets the Retromer Complex for Trafficking Modulation . The evolutionarily conserved retromer complex that functions at the interface of exocytosis / recycling and vacuolar trafficking me - diates the recovery of proteins from the vacuolar degradation pathway back to the recycling pathway ( 19 ) . As shown previously ( 20 , 21 ) , SNX1 and other components of the retromer complex are involved in PIN protein sorting from the prevacuolar com - partment to make them again available for recycling to the PM ( 12 ) . To test whether SNX1 - dependent protein retrieval is re - quired for GA action on PIN2 trafficking , we analyzed the GA sensitivity of snx1 mutants . In PAC - pretreated snx1 - 1 seedling roots , GA application was largely ineffective to restore PIN2 - GFP levels at the PM ( Fig . 2 A – D , Q , and R ) . Moreover , snx1 - 1 seedlings were less sensitive to the application of PAC because we observed a less pronounced decrease of the total PM PIN2 in the snx1 - 1 mutant in comparison with the control ( Fig . S6 A – D , G , and H ) . Similar observations were made in the protein affected trafficking 3 ( pat3 ) mutant defective in the VACUOLAR PRO - TEIN SORTING35A ( VPS35A ) , another subunit of the retromer complex ( 21 ) . Also in pat3 - 3 roots , GA was unable to restore PIN2 - GFP incidence at the PM ( Fig . S7 A , B , and E ) , confirming the importance of the retromer function for GA effect on PIN trafficking . However , in mutants generally defective in vacuolar trafficking and function , such as pat4 ( 22 ) , the sensitivity to GA was not affected ( Fig . S7 C – E ) . This observation together with pre - viously shown GA - insensitive PIN2 accumulation in Wortmannin bodies ( 9 ) indicates that the GA regulation of the PM protein accumulation is not due to decreased transit into prevacuolar compartments of PIN2 but is regulated more upstream and spe - cifically requires the retromer complex components . In addition , we observed a pronounced GA effect on SNX1 - positive endosomal compartments . PAC treatments resulted in the appearance of abnormally enlarged SNX1 - GFP bodies , dis - tinct from the punctuated SNX1 - GFP – labeled endosomes ( Fig . 2 G – O ) ; however , the total number of SNX1 - GFP endosomes was not significantly changed ( Fig . 2 P ) . Prolonged PAC treat - ments led to an increased cytosolic SNX1 - GFP signal ( Fig . S7 F and G ) . GA application resulted in reduced numbers of these abnormal endosomes ( Fig . S7 H and I ) . Overall , it has been common to observe in one root treated with PAC both patterns — cells with enlarged SNX1 - GFP endosomes and the cells with SNX1 - GFP in the cytosol . Western blots of root samples con - firmed a decrease of SNX1 - GFP protein in the membrane ( mi - crosomal ) fraction following PAC treatment ( Fig . 2 I ) . When other markers for the endosomal compartments , such as VHA - GFP or FYVE - GFP , were studied , no such effects occurred ( Fig . S7 J – M ) , which hinted at a more specific GA effect on the retromer - related compartments . The observations that mutants defective specifically in retromer components are insensitive to GA in terms of regulation of traf - ficking together with GA effects on the SNX1 - labeled endo - membranes suggest that GA targets the retromer or related components to balance vacuolar trafficking and PM delivery . Gibberellin Effect on Trafficking Requires CLASP1 Activity . The MT - associated protein CLASP1 has been shown to interact directly with SNX1 and this interaction is important for retromer - mediated trafficking regulation ( 13 ) . Therefore , we assessed the potential contribution of CLASP1 in GA - mediated regulation of PIN2 trafficking . The clasp1 mutant was less sensitive to PAC treatment in terms of PIN2 depletion from the PM ( Fig . S6 E , F , and I ) , and more importantly , GA treatment was ineffective to recover PIN2 at the PM ( Fig . 2 E , F , and S ) , suggesting that both retromer complex and CLASP1 activity are necessary for the GA effect on trafficking . Next , we used GFP - CLASP1 fusion protein driven by its en - dogenous promoter to visualize the subcellular CLASP1 distri - bution . PAC - treated roots showed slightly but significantly fewer cells with cell edge - localized GFP - CLASP1 compared with mock ( Fig . 2 L and M ) . PAC treatment also led to an increase of the GFP - CLASP1 cytosolic signal , similarly to our observations when MTs were depolymerized by oryzalin . The complete MT depolymerization with oryzalin removed GFP - CLASP1 from cell edges entirely ( Fig . 2 N ) . By using time lapse imaging following GA treatment , we perceived a gradual enrichment of GFP - CLASP1 association with the cell edges , starting as early as 45 min after GA application ( Fig . 2 J and K ) . These observations suggest that GA targets both the retromer complex and its as - sociated protein CLASP1 , further strengthening the notion that A C D M N I E F J K B G H O P Q R S L Fig . 2 . GA action on PIN2 requires SNX1 and its associated protein CLASP1 . ( A – F ) PIN2 - GFP ( A and B ) , snx1 - 1 × PIN2 - GFP ( C and D ) , and clasp1 × PIN2 - GFP ( E and F ) seedlings pretreated with 1 μ M PAC and subsequently treated with 50 μ M GA . Reduced sensitivity to GA was observed in snx1 - 1 ( C and D ) and clasp1 ( E and F ) mutant seedlings in comparison with wild type ( A and B ) . ( G and H ) SNX1 - GFP - labeled endomembranes in the root epidermis of un - treated seedlings ( G ) and treated with 1 μ M PAC ( H ) . Note the abnormally enlarged SNX1 - GFP – labeled bodies in the PAC - treated seedlings ( H ) in comparison with the punctate bodies in untreated seedlings ( G ) . ( I ) Decrease in microsomal ( membrane ) SNX1 protein upon PAC treatment and increase upon GA in Arabidopsis root tips by Western blot analysis . ( J and K ) GFP - CLASP1 association with the cell edges at 0 min ( J ) and after 45 min ( K ) of GA application in epidermal cells . Note the gradual enrichment of the GFP - CLASP1 at the cell edges starting 45 min after GA application ( K ) . ( L – N ) Cellular localization of GFP - CLASP1 in untreated seedlings ( L ) , treated with 1 μ M PAC ( M ) and treated with 40 μ M oryzalin ( N ) . Note that PAC - treated roots have less cell edge - localized GFP - CLASP1 but more GFP - CLASP1 accu - mulated in the cytoplasm ( M ) compared with mock ( L ) , whereas oryzalin treatment entirely removed GFP - CLASP1 from the cell edges , and most of it localized in cytoplasm and vesicles ( N ) . ( O and P ) Quantification of the size of SNX1 - GFP – labeled bodies ( O ) and total amount of endosomes ( P ) . ( Q – S ) Quantified relative increase of PIN2 - GFP signals after GA treatment in the root epidermis of wild type ( Q ) , snx1 - 1 ( R ) , and clasp1 ( S ) . Measurements were performed as described in Fig . 1 . Color code was used for PIN2 - GFP intensity visualization . ( Scale bar : 10 μ m . ) 3718 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1721760115 Salanenka et al . these regulators are part of the mechanism by which GA regulates PIN2 trafficking . The Gibberellin Effect on Trafficking Needs Intact and Dynamic Microtubules . Because CLASP1 is known to be associated with MTs in different eukaryotes ( 23 – 25 ) , we tested the role of MTs in the GA effect on PIN2 trafficking . The effect of GA on MT orientation is well described , and in the majority of the studies , GA promotes the transversal orientation of MTs ( 26 , 27 ) . Taking into account that SNX1 and CLASP1 might be involved in the GA effect on trafficking , we studied MT behavior after PAC treat - ment . We used live imaging of different MT reporter lines ( such as MAP4 - GFP , VENUS - TUA6 , and EB1b - GFP ) and found that PAC treatment resulted in the transition of the MT array from a more organized pattern with a distinctive bundled network to a more randomized pattern with fewer MTs per area unit ( Fig . S8 A and B ) . Using an Eb1b - GFP marker line , we recorded the en - richment in longitudinally or obliquely oriented MTs in the roots treated with PAC ( Fig . S8 E – H ) . Similarly , as observed for SNX1 - GFP and GFP - CLASP1 , we found that prolonged PAC treatment led to an overall decrease in the MT network labeled with VENUS - TUA6 and an increase in fluorescent signal in the cyto - plasm ( Fig . S8 C and D ) . Overall , we observed that at the early stages of GA deficiency , MT network stayed intact although it reoriented randomly or longitudinally coinciding with mostly cell - edge localized CLASP1 , and SNX1 present in enlarged endo - somes . At later stages , polymerization of MTs was visibly affected correlating with an increase in the cytosolic CLASP1 and SNX1 . To identify a possible requirement for MT cytoskeleton in GA - modulated PIN2 stability at the PM , we used oryzalin to disrupt the MTs ( 28 , 29 ) and tested whether GA was still able to restore PIN2 abundance in PAC - grown roots . Whereas GA readily re - stored PIN2 at the PM in the mock control ( Fig . 3 A and B ) , this effect was abolished when MTs were depolymerized by oryzalin ( Fig . 3 C – E ) . Also , when MTs were stabilized by taxol ( 30 ) , the GA effect on the PM restoration of PIN2 was abolished ( Fig . 3 F – J ) . Oryzalin and taxol treatments themselves resulted in a decrease of PIN2 at the PM compared with control plants ( Fig . S8 I – N ) . To test if genetic interference with MTs also changes PIN2 responses to GA , we used the katanin 1 ( ktn1 ) mutant known to be com - promised in severing MTs and proper formation of cortical MT arrays ( 31 , 32 ) . Notably , in ktn1 roots pretreated with PAC , GA application was not able to restore PIN2 at PM ( Fig . 3 K – O ) or to decrease vacuolar PIN2 degradation ( Fig . S9 A – E ) . In general , ktn1 mutants contained less abundant PIN2 at PM , which was not further affected by PAC application ( Fig . S8 O – Q ) . Furthermore , tortifolia 1 ( tor1 ) , another mutant defective in MTs ( 33 ) , showed an unusual response to PAC , which rather increased instead of decreasing PIN2 incidence at the PM ( Fig . S9 F – M ) . The pharmacological and genetic interferences with MTs revealed that an intact , dynamic MT cytoskeleton is essential for GA effect on PIN2 trafficking . Thus , GA regulation of trafficking requires retromer activity , MT cytoskeleton , and CLASP1 protein , which directly links these cellular structures . The DELLA Components of GA Signaling Mediate GA Effect on Trafficking . Next , we assessed which GA signaling mechanism acts upstream of MTs and retromer to regulate PIN trafficking . DELLA proteins are key components of GA signaling , and they are typically viewed as nucleus - based transcriptional modulators of downstream genes ( 34 – 36 ) . Additionally , a supplementary mode of DELLA action has recently been proposed based on the DELLA interaction with Prefoldins ( 37 ) , which are important factors of tubulin folding in the cytoplasm ( 38 ) . To test the involvement of DELLA proteins in trafficking reg - ulation by GA , we used lines with deficient or modified DELLA activity . First , we studied the GA sensitivity of PIN2 trafficking in the quintuple della knockout mutant . Notably , in the quintuple della roots , PAC - based interference with GA biosynthesis did not result in a substantial decrease in PIN2 at the PM , and more importantly , GA treatment was ineffective in up - regulating PIN2 levels at the PM ( Fig . 4 A – H ) . Furthermore , the dominant - negative DELLA mutant gai Δ 17 roots showed less PIN2 abundance in comparison with wild type or della knockout mutant ( Fig . S10 A – C and E ) , similarly to the previous observations for PIN1 ( 9 ) . Also , the gai Δ 17 mutant roots were insensitive to GA treatment such that it failed to restore the PIN2 levels ( Fig . S10 D and E ) . Finally , we introduced PIN2 - GFP into the GAI : gai - 1 - GR line , which after induction by the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone ( DEX ) targets a dominant DELLA mutant protein from the cytosol to the nucleus ( 37 ) . In this line , the DEX treatment resulted in a sig - nificant down - regulation of PIN2 levels at the PM ( Fig . 4 I – L ) . Concurrent GA application and DEX induction did not recover PIN2 levels at the PM ( Fig . 4 K ) . Collectively , these experiments demonstrated that GA effect on PIN2 trafficking strictly requires the DELLA function . A possible mechanism for DELLA proteins to regulate MTs and trafficking is through the tubulin - folding factors Prefoldins ( PFDs ) that are known to control MT folding and dynamics in nonplant organisms ( 39 , 40 ) and have been shown to interact with DELLAs in plants ( 37 ) . Indeed , the pfd6 mutant had clearly reduced levels of PIN2 at the PM ( Fig . S10 F – H ) . To further confirm the role of PFDs in GA action on PIN2 trafficking , we analyzed GA sensitivity of the pfd5 pfd6 double mutant . In PAC - pretreated pfd5 pfd6 seedling roots , GA application was ineffective in restoring PIN2 - GFP levels at the PM ( Fig . 4 M – Q ) . Moreover , pfd5 pfd6 double mutants were less sensitive to PAC treatment in terms of PIN2 decrease in the PM ( Fig . S10 I – L ) . This observation supports the hypothesis that the DELLA interacting partner PFD mediates GA - dependent regulation of PIN2 trafficking . E J O A F K L M N G H I B C D Fig . 3 . Regulation of GA - dependent PIN2 trafficking by MTs . ( A – E ) De - polymerization of MTs with 20 μ M oryzalin prevented GA ( 50 μ M ) effect on PIN2 restoration at the PM in PAC - treated seedlings ( C and D ) compared with the oryzalin - free mock ( A and B ) . Quantifications ( E ) . ( F – J ) Ability of GA to increase PIN2 at the PM of PAC - treated seedlings was abolished by 10 μ M of MT - stabilizing agent taxol ( H and I ) compared with the taxol - free mock ( F and G ) . Quantifications ( J ) . ( K – O ) Efficiency of GA to increase PAC - compromised PIN2 amount ( K and L ) reduced in the ktn1 mutant ( M and N ) . Quantifications ( O ) . Color code was used for PIN2 - GFP intensity visualization . ( Scale bar : 10 μ m . ) Salanenka et al . PNAS | April 3 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 14 | 3719 P L A N T B I O L O G Y S EE C O MM E N T A RY Conclusion Gibberellin is a classical plant hormone that plays a crucial role in plant development and in response to environmental stimuli . Besides its traditionally studied roles in processes , such as ger - mination , elongation growth , and flowering time ( 41 ) , GA also modulates processes typically regulated by the plant hormone auxin , such as organ formation and gravitropism , by modulating trafficking and cell surface incidence of PIN auxin transporters ( 8 , 9 ) . Here we established the cellular mechanism and key molecular components of the GA - dependent trafficking of PIN auxin transporters and other proteins . Live imaging and the use of photoconvertible cargos revealed that GA promotes the exocytic delivery of both newly synthesized and recycled cargos and , concomitantly , diminishes vacuolar traf - ficking and subsequent degradation . In contrast , GA deficiency had an opposite effect by promoting vacuolar degradation and dimin - ishing cell surface cargo delivery , suggesting that GA targets pro - cesses at the intersection of exocytosis and vacuolar trafficking . The retromer complex acts on retrieval of cargos , including PIN proteins from the degradation route back to the exocytic track ( 12 , 20 ) . This crucial switch between trafficking routes seems to be a specific target of GA signaling because mutants in different subunits of the retromer complex are insensitive to GA in terms of trafficking regulation , and GA deficiency modifies the intracellular distribution of the SNX1 retromer component . To further strengthen the link to the retromer , GA action on trafficking depends on the dynamic MTs , in line with previous observations that MT depolymerization affects both SNX1 distribution and PIN trafficking ( 13 ) . This mechanism would be similar to that in animals , in which MTs and their associated motor proteins govern the endosomal trafficking and balance between recycling and degradation of PM receptors ( 42 ) . In plants , the connection between the endomembrane trafficking and MTs is mediated by the MT - associated protein CLASP1 , which has been proposed to control tethering of endosomal vesicles to MTs via direct interaction with SNX1 ( 13 ) . Again , CLASP1 activity is required for the GA effect on trafficking . Moreover , CLASP1 localization at sharp edges of the cells depends on GA availability . Therefore , our analysis suggests that retromer , MTs , and CLASP1 protein are linked as main targets of GA regulation of trafficking . How can these evolutionarily conserved cell structures and functions be regulated by plant - specific signals , such as GA ? The upstream processes involve the established components of GA signaling — the nuclear DELLA proteins , because manipulations with DELLA activity have an immediate effect on GA - mediated trafficking regulation . DELLAs can execute their effect on MTs and the retromer via their interactors , the PFDs ( 37 ) , because in the double pfd mutants , PIN2 cell surface abundance is di - minished , and this mutant is largely insensitive to GA . The exact role of PFDs in endomembrane trafficking has not been estab - lished yet , but they have been identified in a screen for exocytosis regulators in yeast ( 43 ) . Given the tight association between MT and actin cytoskeletons ( 44 ) as well as the proposed role of PFD in both MT and actin polymerization ( 45 ) it is likely that GA as well influences actin - related processes . Whether it is in any way related to the reported auxin effect on actin - mediated vacuolar morphology and function ( 46 ) remains to be seen . Based on these findings , we put forward a model ( Fig . 5 ) in which the GA signaling pathway branches at the level of DELLA A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O Q P Fig . 4 . DELLA proteins and their PFD interactors mediating GA effects on PIN2 . ( A – H ) Immunolocalization of PIN2 at the PM in nontreated wild - type ( A – C ) and della knockout mutant ( E – G ) seedlings . Note reduced sensitivity of della knockout seedlings to 1 μ M PAC and 50 μ M GA ( F and G ) in comparison with wild type ( B and C ) . Quantifications ( D and H ) . ( I – L ) GAI : : gai - 1 - GR induced in seedlings by treatment with 10 μ M DEX . After induction of dominant - negative DELLA , PIN2 amount at the PM was significantly reduced ( J ) , and GA treatment did not restore PIN2 levels at the PM ( K ) . Quantifications ( L ) . ( M – Q ) Reduced efficiency of 50 μ M GA to increase PIN2 level at the PM in 1 μ M PAC - treated seedlings of pfd5 pfd6 ( O and P ) mutant seedlings in comparison with wild type ( M and N ) . Color code was used for PIN2 - GFP intensity visualization . The 3D Z stacks are presented . Quantifications ( Q ) . ( Scale bar : 10 μ m . ) Fig . 5 . Model summarizing the mechanism of GA action on PIN protein abundance . CLASP1 , CLIP170 - associated protein 1 ; LE , late endosomes ; MT , microtubules ; RE , recycling endosomes ; SNX , sorting nexin ; TGN / EE , trans - Golgi network / early endosomes . 3720 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1721760115 Salanenka et al . proteins that , besides their well - established role in transcrip - tional regulation , would , via their interacting partners , the PFDs , and the downstream MT / CLASP1 module , regulate the retromer activity and redirect protein trafficking from the vacuolar path - way to the PM . By this mechanism , GA can regulate , in addition to transcription , also the relocation of transporters and receptors to and from the cell surface , thus controlling a wide array of cell processes , including cell expansion for growth regulation . Materials and Methods Plant Material and Constructs . The pfd5 × PIN2 - GFP , pfd6 × PIN2 - GFP , and pGAI : : gai - 1 - GR × PIN2 - GFP lines were obtained by manual hand - pollination of individual lines . pPIN2 : : PIN2 : DENDRA was generated by replacing the GFP fragment of the pPIN2 : : PIN2 : GFP construct ( 47 ) with DENDRA . pPIN2 : : PIN2 : mCherry was generated by replacing of the Venus tag with mCherry . To generate pPIN2 : : NLS - GFP and UBQ : : VENUS : TUA6 the Gateway cloning system was used . For detailed information , see SI Materials and Methods . Drug Application and Experimental Conditions . Exogenous drugs were applied in solid agar - based or liquid Murashige and Skoog ( MS ) medium or by spraying 5 - d - old seedlings . For treatments , 1 μ M paclobutrazol and 50 μ M GA 3 were used . The confocal laser scanning microscopes ( Zeiss CLSM 700 and 800 ) were used to image fluorescently labeled proteins in live or fixed plant cells . For detailed information , see SI Materials and Methods . Protein Extraction , Western Blot Analysis , and Protein Immunolocalization . For Western blotting , 15 – 20 mg of root material ( 4 – 5 d after germination ) was homogenized and processed as described in ref . 48 . Whole - mount immu - nolocalization in Arabidopsis thaliana ( L . ) Heyhn . roots was performed as described in ref . 49 . qRT - PCR . RNA was extracted with the RNeasy mini kit ( Qiagen ) from excised roottipsof5 - d - oldseedlings . AllPCRswere performedintechnicaltriplicates . For detailed information , see SI Materials and Methods . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We gratefully acknowledge M . Blázquez ( Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas ) , M . Fendrych , C . Cuesta Moliner ( In - stitute of Science and Technology Austria ) , M . Vanstraelen , M . Nowack ( Center for Plant Systems Biology , Ghent ) , C . Luschnig ( Universitat fur Bodenkultur Wien , Vienna ) , S . Simon ( Central European Institute of Technology , Brno ) , C . Sommerville ( Carnegie Institution for Science ) , and Y . Gu ( Penn State Uni - versity ) for making available the materials used in this study ; M . Muszkowski and M . Adamowski for help with data analysis ; Arabidopsis Stock Centre for providing seed stocks ; M . Fendrych for scientific discussions and technical help in confocal imaging ; and M . De Cock for help in preparing the manuscript . The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union ’ s Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007 - 2013 ) / ERC Grant Agreement 282300 . 1 . Bennett M , Bellini C , Van Der Straeten D ( 2005 ) Integrative biology : Dissecting cross ‐ talk between plant signalling pathways . Physiol Plant 123 : 109 . 2 . Benková E , Hejátko J ( 2009 ) Hormone interactions at the root apical meristem . Plant Mol Biol 69 : 383 – 396 . 3 . Weiss D , Ori N ( 2007 ) Mechanisms of cross talk between gibberellin and other hor - mones . Plant Physiol 144 : 1240 – 1246 . 4 . Fu X , Harberd NP ( 2003 ) Auxin promotes Arabidopsis root growth by modulating gibberellin response . Nature 421 : 740 – 743 . 5 . Nemhauser JL , Hong F , Chory J ( 2006 ) Different plant hormones regulate similar pro - cesses through largely nonoverlapping transcriptional responses . Cell 126 : 467 – 475 . 6 . Moubayidin L , et al . ( 2010 ) The rate of cell differentiation controls the Arabidopsis root meristem growth phase . Curr Biol 20 : 1138 – 1143 . 7 . Gallego - Bartolomé J , Kami C , Fankhauser C , Alabadí D , Blázquez MA ( 2011 ) A hor - monal regulatory module that provides flexibility to tropic responses . Plant Physiol 156 : 1819 – 1825 . 8 . Willige BC , Isono E , Richter R , Zourelidou M , Schwechheimer C ( 2011 ) Gibberellin regulates PIN - FORMED abundance and is required for auxin transport - dependent growth and development in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell 23 : 2184 – 2195 . 9 . Löfke C , et al . ( 2013 ) Asymmetric gibberellin signaling regulates vacuolar trafficking of PIN auxin transporters during root gravitropism . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : 3627 – 3632 . 10 . Adamowski M , Friml J ( 2015 ) PIN - dependent auxin transport : Action , regulation , and evolution . Plant Cell 27 : 20 – 32 . 11 . Vanneste S , Friml J ( 2009 ) Auxin : A trigger for changein plant development . Cell 136 : 1005 – 1016 . 12 . Kleine - Vehn J , et al . ( 2008 ) Differential degradation of PIN2 auxin efflux carrier by retromer - dependent vacuolar targeting . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 17812 – 17817 . 13 . Ambrose C , et al . ( 2013 ) CLASP interactswith sorting nexin 1 to link microtubulesand auxin transport via PIN2 recycling in Arabidopsis thaliana . Dev Cell 24 : 649 – 659 . 14 . Rademacher W ( 2000 ) Growth retardants : Effects on gibberellin biosynthesis and other metabolic pathways . Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 51 : 501 – 531 . 15 . Geldner N , Friml J , Stierhof Y - D , Jürgens G , Palme K ( 2001 ) Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1 cycling and vesicle trafficking . Nature 413 : 425 – 428 . 16 . Dhonukshe P , et al . ( 2007 ) Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin efflux carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr Biol 17 : 520 – 527 . 17 . Kleine - Vehn J , et al . ( 2008 ) ARF GEF - dependent transcytosis and polar delivery of PIN auxin carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr Biol 18 : 526 – 531 . 18 . Kleine - Vehn J , et al . ( 2008 ) Cellular and molecular requirements for polar PIN tar - geting and transcytosis in plants . Mol Plant 1 : 1056 – 1066 . 19 . Seaman MNJ ( 2012 ) The retromer complex – Endosomal protein recycling and beyond . J Cell Sci 125 : 4693 – 4702 . 20 . Jaillais Y , et al . ( 2007 ) The retromer protein VPS29 links cell polarity and organ ini - tiation in plants . Cell 130 : 1057 – 1070 . 21 . Nodzy (cid:1) nski T , et al . ( 2013 ) Retromer subunits VPS35A and VPS29 mediate prevacuolar compartment ( PVC ) function in Arabidopsis . Mol Plant 6 : 1849 – 1862 . 22 . Zwiewka M , et al . ( 2011 ) The AP - 3 adaptor complex is required for vacuolar function in Arabidopsis . Cell Res 21 : 1711 – 1722 . 23 . Carvalho P , Tirnauer JS , Pellman D ( 2003 ) Surfing on microtubule ends . Trends Cell Biol 13 : 229 – 237 . 24 . Akhmanova A , Hoogenraad CC ( 2005 ) Microtubule plus - end - tracking proteins : Mechanisms and functions . Curr Opin Cell Biol 17 : 47 – 54 . 25 . Ambrose JC , Shoji T , Kotzer AM , Pighin JA , Wasteneys GO ( 2007 ) The Arabidopsis CLASP gene encodes a microtubule - associated protein involved in cell expansion and division . Plant Cell 19 : 2763 – 2775 . 26 . Shibaoka H ( 1993 ) Regulation by gibberellins of the orientation of cortical microtu - bules in plant cells . Aust J Plant Physiol 20 : 461 – 470 . 27 . Shibaoka H ( 1994 ) Plant hormone - induced changes in the orientation of cortical microtubules : Alterations in the cross - linking between microtubules and the plasma membrane . Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 45 : 527 – 544 . 28 . Morejohn LC ( 1991 ) The molecular pharmacology of plant tubulin and microtubules . The Cytoskeletal Basis of Plant Growth and Form , ed Lloyd CW ( Academic , San Diego ) , pp 29 – 43 . 29 . NakamuraM , NaoiK , ShojiT , HashimotoT ( 2004 ) Lowconcentrationsofpropyzamide and oryzalin alter microtubule dynamics in Arabidopsis epidermal cells . Plant Cell Physiol 45 : 1330 – 1334 . 30 . MorejohnLC , FosketDE ( 1991 ) Thebiochemistryofcompoundswithanti - microtubule activity in plant cells . Pharmacol Ther 51 : 217 – 230 . 31 . Lin D , et al . ( 2013 ) Rho GTPase signaling activates microtubule severing to promote microtubule ordering in Arabidopsis . Curr Biol 23 : 290 – 297 . 32 . Nakamura M , Ehrhardt DW , Hashimoto T ( 2010 ) Microtubule and katanin - dependent dynamics of microtubule nucleation complexes in the acentrosomal Arabidopsis cortical array . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 1064 – 1070 . 33 . Buschmann H , et al . ( 2004 ) Helical growth of the Arabidopsis mutant tortifolia1 re - veals a plant - specific microtubule - associated protein . Curr Biol 14 : 1515 – 1521 . 34 . Peng J , et al . ( 1997 ) The Arabidopsis GAI gene defines a signaling pathway that negatively regulates gibberellin responses . Genes Dev 11 : 3194 – 3205 . 35 . Silverstone AL , et al . ( 2001 ) Repressing a repressor : Gibberellin - induced rapid re - duction of the RGA protein in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 13 : 1555 – 1566 . 36 . Harberd NP ( 2003 ) Botany . Relieving DELLA restraint . Science 299 : 1853 – 1854 . 37 . Locascio A , Blázquez MA , Alabadí D ( 2013 ) Dynamic regulation of cortical microtu - bule organization through prefoldin - DELLA interaction . Curr Biol 23 : 804 – 809 . 38 . Hartl FU , Hayer - Hartl M ( 2002 ) Molecular chaperones in the cytosol : From nascent chain to folded protein . Science 295 : 1852 – 1858 . 39 . Le Bot N , Tsai M - C , Andrews RK , Ahringer J ( 2003 ) TAC - 1 , a regulator of microtubule length in the C . elegans embryo . Curr Biol 13 : 1499 – 1505 . 40 . Lundin VF , Srayko M , Hyman AA , Leroux MR ( 2008 ) Efficient chaperone - mediated tubulin biogenesis is essential for cell division and cell migration in C . elegans . Dev Biol 313 : 320 – 334 . 41 . Ueguchi - Tanaka M , Nakajima M , Motoyuki A , Matsuoka M ( 2007 ) Gibberellin re - ceptor and its role in gibberellin signaling in plants . Annu Rev Plant Biol 58 : 183 – 198 . 42 . Hoepfner S , et al . ( 2005 ) Modulation of receptor recycling and degradation by the endosomal kinesin KIF16B . Cell 121 : 437 – 450 . 43 . Proszynski TJ , et al . ( 2005 ) A genome - wide visual screen reveals a role for sphingolipids and ergosterolin cellsurface deliveryinyeast . Proc NatlAcadSci USA 102 : 17981 – 17986 . 44 . Sampathkumar A , et al . ( 2011 ) Live cell imaging reveals structural associations between the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 23 : 2302 – 2313 . 45 . Simons CT , et al . ( 2004 ) Selective contribution of eukaryotic prefoldin subunits to actin and tubulin binding . J Biol Chem 279 : 4196 – 4203 . 46 . Scheuring D , et al . ( 2016 ) Actin - dependent vacuolar occupancy of the cell determines auxin - induced growth repression . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 : 452 – 457 . 47 . Leitner J , et al . ( 2012 ) Lysine63 - linked ubiquitylation of PIN2 auxin carrier protein governs hormonally controlled adaptation of Arabidopsis root growth . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 8322 – 8327 . 48 . Abas L , LuschnigC ( 2010 ) Maximumyieldsof microsomal - typemembranesfrom small amounts of plant material without requiring ultracentrifugation . Anal Biochem 401 : 217 – 227 . 49 . Friml J , Benková E , Mayer U , Palme K , Muster G ( 2003 ) Automated whole mount localisation techniques for plant seedlings . Plant J 34 : 115 – 124 . Salanenka et al . PNAS | April 3 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 14 | 3721 P L A N T B I O L O G Y S EE C O MM E N T A RY