INTRODUCTION Clostridium difficile is the causative organism of the antibiotic - associated pseudo - membranous colitis ( Bartlett , 1990 ; Lyerly et al . , 1988 ) . Two major virulence factors have been etiologi - cally linked to this disease : the enterotoxin ( toxin A ) and the cytotoxin ( toxin B ) . Both toxins are single chain molecules with M r of 308 , 000 for toxin A and of 270 , 000 for toxin B ( von Eichel - Streiber , 1993 ) . The pharmacological effects of toxin A are characterized by hemorrhagic ﬂuid secretion in the intestine followed by necrosis of the intestinal tissue . Toxin B exhibits no overt enterotoxicity but is an extremely potent cytotoxin , about three orders of magnitude more potent than toxin A . Both toxins are intracellularly acting agents that exert their cytotox - icity after receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Florin and Thelestam , 1986 ) . The effects of both toxins on mammalian cell lines are characterized by arborization , rounding up and reduction in size of the cells . These morphological changes are accompanied by disaggregation and condensation of the micro - ﬁlament network , while microtubles and intermediate ﬁlaments are affected later or much less ( Ottlinger and Lin , 1988 ; Ciesielski - Treska et al . , 1989 ) . It is generally accepted that mainly the actin cytoskeleton is affected by these toxins , but the precise cellular targets and the mechanism of action are still unknown ( for review see Fiorentini and Thelestam , 1991 ) . Recently , it has been shown that the so - called C3 - like exoenzymes that are produced by C . botulinum ( Braun et al . , 1989 ; Nemoto et al . , 1991 ; Rubin et al . , 1988 ; Popoff et al . , 1991 ) , C . limosum ( Just et al . , 1992a ) , Bacillus cereus ( Just et al . , 1992b ) and Staphylococcus aureus ( Sugai et al . , 1992 ) ADP - ribosylate the low - molecular - mass GTP - binding proteins of the Rho family . The Rho protein family , consisting of three members ( A , B and C ) , is reportedly involved in the regulation of the microﬁlamental cytoskeleton ( Chardin et al . , 1989 ; Paterson et al . , 1990 ; Wiegers et al . , 1991 ; Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . The role of Rho has been substantiated by the observa - tion that selective ADP - ribosylation of Rho by C3 results in disaggragation of the actin ﬁlaments ( Chardin et al . , 1989 ; Wiegers et al . , 1991 ) . In contrast , microinjection of Rho Val14 , a persistently active mutated form of Rho , induces an increase in the formation of actin ﬁlaments ( Paterson et al . , 1990 ) . This biological effect of Rho Val14 is blocked by C3 - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation ( Paterson et al . , 1990 ) . The growth factor - stimu - lated formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions in ﬁbrob - lasts is also blocked by C3 ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . ADP - ribosylation of Rho proteins occurs at asparagine 41 ( Sekine et al . , 1989 ) , which is located in the putative effector - coupling domain ( Ueda et al . , 1990 ) . The Rho proteins share several features with other GTP - binding proteins ( Bourne et al . , 1990 ) : they are functionally active in the GTP - bound form and inactive when GDP is bound . The activation / deactivation cycle is regulated by exchange factors : guanine nucleotide dis - sociation stimulators ( GDS ) promote the active GTP - bound form and the guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) 1653 Clostridium difficile toxin B and Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme caused comparable morphological alteration of CHO cells , which was accompanied by disaggregation of the microﬁlamental cytoskeleton . The cytotoxic effect of toxin B was correlated with a decrease in C3 - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation of the low - molecular - mass GTP - binding protein Rho , which is involved in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . We used Xenopus laevis oocytes as a model to study the toxin effect on Rho in more detail . Toxin B treatment of oocytes caused a decrease in subsequent ADP - ribosylation of cytoplasmic Rho by C3 . This decrease was observed when toxin B was applied externally or after microinjection . Besides endogenous Rho , microinjected recombinant Rho - glutathione S - transferase fusion protein was affected . Impaired ADP - ribosylation of Rho was neither due to altered guanine nucleotide binding nor to complexation with the guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor , which is known to inactivate Rho and to prevent Rho modiﬁcation by C3 . Proteolytical degradation of Rho was excluded by immunoblot analysis . In intact oocytes toxin B caused neither ADP - ribosylation nor phosphoryla - tion of Rho . The data indicate that C . difficile toxin B acts on Rho proteins in Xenopus oocytes to inhibit ADP - ribosy - lation by C3 . It is suggested that toxin B mediates its cytotoxic effect via functional inactivation of Rho . Key words : Clostridium difficile toxin B , Rho , Xenopus oocyte SUMMARY Probing the action of Clostridium difficiletoxin B in Xenopus laevis oocytes Ingo Just 1 , * , Hans - Peter Richter 2 , Ulrike Prepens 1 , Christoph von Eichel - Streiber 3 and Klaus Aktories 1 1 Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie , 2 Institut für Physiologie I , Universität des Saarlandes , D - 66421 Homburg / Saar , Germany 3 Institut für Med . Mikrobiologie , Johannes - Gutenberg - Universität , D - 55101 Mainz , Germany * Author for correspondence Journal of Cell Science 107 , 1653 - 1659 ( 1994 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1994 1654 traps the inactive Rho protein ( Isomura et al . , 1990 ; Fukumoto et al . , 1990 ; Ueda et al . , 1990 ) . The active state of the GTP - bound form is most likely terminated by the GTPase - activat - ing protein ( GAP ) ( Yamamoto et al . , 1990 ; Garrett et al . , 1991 ; Morii et al . , 1991 ) . Here we studied the effect of C . difficile toxin B on Rho proteins by using the Xenopus oocyte model . Treatment of Xenopus oocytes with C . difficile toxin B inhibits subsequent ADP - ribosylation of Rho by C3 exoenzyme . This inhibition is not caused by toxin B - induced phosphorylation or ADP - ribo - sylation of Rho . The data suggest that Rho proteins are involved in the cytotoxic action of toxin B . MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials [ a - 32 P ] NAD and [ g - 32 P ] ATP were obtained from Dupont NEN ( Dreieich , Germany ) . All other reagents were of analytical grade and purchased from commercial sources . Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme ( Aktories et al . , 1987 ) , Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin ( Ohishi et al . , 1980 ) and Clostridium difficile toxin B ( von Eichel - Streiber et al . , 1987 ) were puriﬁed as described . Cell culture Chinese hamster ovary epithelial ( CHO ) cells were grown in HAM’s F12 and DMEM ( 1 + 1 ) supplemented with 5 % FCS , 4 mM glutamine , penicillin and streptomycin . After 24 hours the medium was changed and the cells were incubated with toxin B for 3 hours at the indicated concentrations . Before cell lysis , the cells were rinsed with ice - cold phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and were then mechanically removed from the dishes in the presence of lysis buffer ( 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride , 10 m g / ml leupeptin , 25 mM triethanolamine , pH 7 . 5 ) , sonicated ﬁve times for 5 seconds on ice and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1000 g . The supernatant was used as cell lysate . Immunoﬂuorescence labeling CHO cells were treated with toxin B ( 2 ng / ml ) for 3 hours or with C3 ( 30 m g / ml ) for 18 hours . The cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformalde - hyde , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and then rinsed three times with PBS . After washing , the cells were incubated with FITC - phalloidin ( 0 . 25 m M , from Sigma ) for 60 minutes . The preparation was washed three times with PBS and mounted in p - phenylendiamine ( 10 m g / ml ) in PBS - buffered glycerol . Pictures were taken with a ﬂuorescence microscope at 490 nm ( Zeiss Axiovert ) . Oocytes Fully grown prophase - arrested oocytes of Xenopus laevis were isolated by treatment with collagenase at 20˚C for 2 hours ( 10 mg of 2 . 3 i . u . collagenase from Serva , Heidelberg , dissolved in 5 ml of Barth’s medium ) followed by immersion and pipette agitation in Ca 2 + - free Barth’s medium for 5 minutes ( modiﬁed Barth’s medium : 100 mM NaCl , 3 mM KCl , 0 . 8 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 8 mM CaCl 2 , 15 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 6 ) . Oocytes were incubated in Barth’s medium with 400 ng / ml of toxin B for 18 hours or as indicated . After washing with Barth’s medium , ﬁve oocytes were homogenized with a tiny glass pestle in a 0 . 3 ml Eppendorf reaction vial in the presence of 100 m l 0 . 32 M sucrose containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride . The homogenate was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1000 g ; the yolk pellet and lipoid supernatant were discharged and the interphase was used as the cytoplasmic lysate . The membraneous and cytosolic fractions were obtained after 100 , 000 g centrifugation for 1 hour . Preparation of RhoA - glutathione S - transferase fusion protein Rho fusion protein ( Rho - GST ) was obtained by cloning of the PCR - generated product of Rho into the bacterial expression vector pGEX - 2T . Rho - GST was isolated by affinity puriﬁcation with glutathione - Sepharose beads ( Pharmacia , Freiburg , Germany ) . The fusion protein was eluted with reduced glutathione ( 5 mM ) in 50 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 8 . 0 ) . Microinjection Application of the agents ( each 60 nl ) was performed using a Drummond nanoliter injector ( World Precision Instruments ) . Microinjected agents ( 60 nl ) : Rho - GST ( 150 m g / ml ) ; [ a - 32 P ] NAD ( 60 nCi ) plus toxin B ( 75 m g / ml ) , [ a - 32 P ] NAD ( 60 nCi ) plus C3 ( 75 m g / ml ) ; [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( 60 nCi ) plus toxin B ( 200 m g / ml ) , [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( 60 nCi ) , C . botulinum C2I toxin ( ADP - ribosyltransferase ) ( 75 m g / ml ) . After injection , oocytes were incubated in Barth’s medium for the indicated periods of times at 20˚C . The ﬁnal intracellular con - centrations were calculated from the volume of an oocyte of about 900 nl . ADP - ribosylation reaction The cytoplasmic lysate from oocytes ( 50 m g ) or the lysate from CHO cells ( 50 m g ) were incubated in buffer ( 3 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM dithiothreitol , 50 mM triethanolamine - HCl , pH 7 . 5 ) containing either 0 . 3 m M ( 0 . 5 m Ci ) or 1 . 0 m M [ a - 32 P ] NAD ( if Rho - GST fusion protein was used ) for 15 minutes at 30˚C . For dissociation of the Rho - GDI complex , the cytosolic fraction was preincubated with the following agents for 5 minutes followed by the ADP - ribosylation reaction : 40 m g / ml phosphatidyl inositides ( crude extract , mixture of PIP and PIP 2 eqivalent to 20 m g / ml PIP 2 ) or sodium dodecyl sulfate ( 0 . 01 % , w / v ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange The cytoplasm from oocytes was incubated with 300 m M of GTP [ S ] in the presence of 5 mM EDTA for 10 minutes at 30˚C . After addition of 7 mM MgCl 2 the ADP - ribosylation reaction was performed as described above . Treatment with alkaline phosphatase The cytoplasmic fraction was treated in the presence of phosphatase buffer ( 1 mM MgCl 2 / 0 . 1 mM ZnCl 2 ) with 1 unit per ml alkaline phos - phatase ( Boehringer Mannheim , Germany ) or with bovine serum albumin for 120 minutes at 30˚C . To favor phosphorylation , the cyto - plasmic fraction was incubated with 300 m M ATP , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM dithiothreitol , 1 m M cyclic - AMP for 15 minutes at 30˚C . After preincubation , [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylation by C3 was performed as described above . Gel electrophoresis Proteins were precipitated by 20 % trichloroacetic acid , dissolved in sample buffer and subjected to SDS - polyacrylamide gel elec - trophoresis in 12 . 5 % gels ( Laemmli , 1970 ) with subsequent autora - diography . Autoradiograms were evaluated by densitometry ( GS 300 Transmittance Scanning Densitometer , Hoefer , San Francisco ) . The amount of ADP - ribosylation was calculated as percentage of control ( untreated cells ) . Immunoblotting Immunoblotting was performed according to Towbin et al . ( 1979 ) with mouse anti - GST antiserum ( 1 : 10 , 000 ) , alkaline phosphatase - coupled swine anti - mouse IgG as second antibody and bro - mochloroindolyl phosphate plus nitro blue tetrazolium as substrate . Protein concentration Protein concentrations were determined according to Peterson ( 1977 ) with bovine serum albumin as standard . All experiments were performed at least in triplicate . I . Just and others 1655 Clostridium difficiletoxin B in Xenopus laevis oocytes RESULTS When CHO cells were treated with C . difficile toxin B ( 2 ng / ml ) or with C . botulinum C3 exoenzyme ( 30 m g / ml ) , both toxins caused rounding - up and retraction of the cell body while neurite - like cell protrusions persisted . Staining of the microﬁl - amental cytoskeleton with FITC - phalloidin revealed destruc - tion of the actin ﬁlaments and formation of condensed actin plaques ( Fig . 1 ) . Thus , both toxins induced comparable features of actin staining . C3 is known to cause disaggregation of actin ﬁlaments via ADP - ribosylation of the low - molecular - mass GTP - binding protein Rho , which is reportedly involved in the regulation of the actin cytoskleton ( Paterson et al . , 1990 ) . The cellular target of toxin B has not been identiﬁed . The com - parable effects on the cytoskeleton of both toxins prompted us to study whether toxin B affects Rho by testing the ADP - ribo - sylation of Rho after toxin B treatment . Therefore , lysates from toxin B - treated CHO cells were ADP - ribosylated with C3 and [ 32 P ] NAD . Toxin B induced a clear decrease in C3 - catalyzed modiﬁcation of Rho , compared to untreated cells . This inhibi - tion was dependent on the concentration of toxin B ( Fig . 2 ) and caused almost complete inhibition of Rho ADP - ribosylation at a concentration of 2 ng / ml . To study the biochemical effect of toxin B on Rho in more detail we used X . laevis oocytes because the fate of exogenous agents or proteins applied by microinjection can be followed by subsequent biochemical analysis of the cytoplasmic fraction . Treatment of oocytes with C . difficile toxin B ( 400 ng / ml ) for 18 hours caused no gross morphological changes like those observed in mammalian cell lines after intoxication . However , subsequent [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylation of the cytoplas - mic fraction with C3 exoenzyme revealed a signiﬁcant decrease in ADP - ribosylation of Rho . The maximum decrease was observed after about 18 hours . The difference in ADP - ribosylation between toxin - treated and control cells was detected even in the presence of high concentrations of NAD ( 10 m M ) , thus excluding altered NAD metabolism as a basis for inhibited Rho - ADP - ribosylation . Heat - inactivated toxin showed no effect on Rho - ADP - ribosylation . Inhibition of ADP - ribosylation of Rho was also detected when toxin B had been microinjected . The observation was made that oocytes microinjected with toxin B showed a delay in resealing of the injection site resulting in cytoplasmic protrusions . The maximum decrease in ADP - ribosylation was observed after a signiﬁcant shorter incubation time of 3 hours compared to 18 hours after external application of the toxin . RhoA - glutathione S - transferase fusion protein ( Rho - GST , of 48 kDa ) microinjected before toxin treatment was also affected by toxin B . Both Rho proteins , the endogenous and the fusion protein , showed a simultaneous decrease in C3 - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation ( Fig . 3 ) . Increasing concentrations of the Rho - GST , up to tenfold compared to endogenous Rho ( estimated by [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylation ) , did not prevent the inhi - bition of Rho ADP - ribosylation by toxin B ( not shown ) . These ﬁndings suggest that toxin B acts on Rho by exhibiting ( most likely ) an enzyme activity . To test whether proteolytic degradation of Rho is the basis for the decreased ADP - ribosylation after toxin treatment , we performed an immunoblot analysis . Oocytes loaded with Rho - GST via microinjection were incubated with toxin B . The cyto - plasmic fraction was electroblotted and subjected to immunoblotting using a polyclonal anti - GST antibody that did not recognize endogenous Rho . Control oocytes that were not loaded with Rho - GST showed no staining of the 48 kDa protein . Control and toxin B - treated oocytes revealed no dif - ference in staining and molecular mass ( 48 kDa for Rho - GST ) ( Fig . 4 ) . [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylation of Rho - GST from control oocytes by C3 resulted in a complete shift to a higher molecular mass . Toxin B - treated oocytes , however , showed a double band at 48 kDa with a faint upper band . The autoradiography of the immunoblot showed impaired ADP - ribosylation of Rho - GST and identiﬁed the upper band as ADP - ribosylated Rho - GST ( not shown ) . This immunoblot analysis indicates that toxin B does not cause intracellular degradation of Rho , nor a visible increase in molecular mass by covalent modiﬁcation . Because the guanine nucleotide bound to Rho deﬁnes the functional status of the regulatory protein , we studied the effect of the nonhydrolyzable GTP analog GTP [ S ] on the inhibited ADP - ribosylation . Guanine nucleotide exchange of the cyto - plasmic fraction of oocytes either treated or not with toxin B Fig . 1 . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy of CHO cells treated with C . difficile toxin B or C3 exoenzyme . CHO cells were treated with toxin B ( 2 ng / ml ) for 3 hours or with C3 ( 30 m g / ml ) for 18 hours . The cells were probed with FITC - phalloidin . Control ( A ) ; toxin B ( B ) ; C3 exoenzyme ( C ) . 1656 was induced by EDTA treatment . Subsequent ADP - ribosyla - tion showed a slight increase in control cytoplasm , but impaired ADP - ribosylation induced by toxin B treatment did not increase up to control levels ( Fig . 5 ) . The increase in ADP - ribosylation of Rho by GTP [ S ] , observed in the cytoplasm from toxin B - treated oocytes , is due to the stimulated ADP - ribosylation of the remainder Rho , which had not been affected by the toxin . Recently , Rho has been reported to be function - ally blocked by the Rho guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) . GDI forms a high affinity complex with Rho and prevents modiﬁcation by C3 ( Kikuchi et al . , 1992 ) . Rho is apparently released from this complex by phosphatidylinositol diphosphate or sodium dodecyl sulfate and becomes again a substrate for C3 ( Bourmeyster et al . , 1992 ) . To test whether decreased ADP - ribosylation of Rho is caused by complexation with GDI , cytosolic fractions were incubated with phos - phatidyl inositides ( PIP 2 , 40 m g / ml ) . A large increase in ADP - ribosylation was observed in cytosolic fractions from control cells ( Fig . 5 ) . However , ADP - ribosylation of Rho from toxin - treated cytosol was only slightly increased but did not reach the level of control cytosol . Identical results were obtained with sodium dodecyl sulfate ( 0 . 01 % ) , indicating that toxin B - induced impairment of ADP - ribosylation of Rho is not caused by promoting its complexation with GDI . Decrease in ADP - ribosylation of Rho could be merely a response to the destruction of the microﬁlaments . C . botulinum C2 toxin causes complete depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments by selective ADP - ribosylation of actin ( Aktories and Just , 1990 ) . We therefore studied the effect of C2 toxin on Rho . I . Just and others Fig . 2 . Concentration - dependent effect of C . difficile toxin B on the ADP - ribosylation of Rho . CHO cells were treated for 3 hours with increasing concentrations of toxin B . The cell lysate was [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylated with C3 ( 1 m g / ml ) and analyzed by SDS - PAGE followed by autoradiography . The autoradiograms were evaluated by densitometry and the amount of ADP - ribosylation was calculated as percentage of control ( untreated cells ) . The inset autoradiogram shows the ADP - ribosylation of Rho ( 22 kDa ) from control cells and from cells treated with the highest concentration of toxin B used . Fig . 3 . Effect of C . difficile toxin B on the ADP - ribosylation of Rho from Xenopus oocytes . Oocytes were microinjected with Rho - GST and then incubated without ( - ) or with ( + ) toxin B ( 400 ng / ml ) in Barth’s medium for 18 hours . The cytoplasmic fractions of three oocytes were [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylated with C3 ( 1 m g / ml ) . The proteins were analyzed by SDS - PAGE in 12 . 5 % gels ( A ) with subsequent autoradiography ( B ) ; 22 kDa endogenous Rho ; 48 kDa Rho - GST . Fig . 4 . Immunoblot analysis of toxin B - treated oocytes previously microinjected with Rho - GST fusion protein . Oocytes were microinjected with Rho - GST ( 48 kDa ) and incubated without ( 2 , 4 ) or with toxin B ( 1 , 3 ) in Barth’s medium for 18 hours . For control , non - microinjected oocytes were used ( con ) . The cytoplasmic fractions of the oocytes were applied to immunoblot analysis either after ADP - ribosylation by C3 ( 1 , 2 ) or without ADP - ribosylation ( 3 , 4 ) . Immunoblotting was performed with anti - GST and detected with alkaline phosphatase . Fig . 5 . Effect of GTP [ S ] and phosphatidylinositides on the impaired ADP - ribosylation of Rho . Oocytes were treated without ( control ) or with toxin B in Barth’s medium for 18 hours . Left panel : the cytoplasm of the oocytes was incubated without ( - ) or with ( + ) GTP [ S ] ( 300 m M ) in the presence of EDTA ( 5 mM ) for 10 minutes at 22˚C followed by [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylation with C3 in the presence of MgCl 2 ( 7 mM ) . Right panel : the cytosolic fractions were incubated without ( - ) or with ( + ) phosphatidylinositides ( PIP 2 ) ( 40 m g / ml ) for 5 minutes at 22˚C followed by [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylation with C3 . Proteins were subjected to 12 . 5 % SDS - PAGE and subsequently autoradiographed . 1657 Clostridium difficiletoxin B in Xenopus laevis oocytes Microinjection of oocytes with the ADP - ribosyltransferase of the C2 toxin ( 5 m g / ml ) caused complete ADP - ribosylation of oocyte actin . The amount of Rho ADP - ribosylated by C3 , however , was identical to that of control cytoplasm ( data not shown ) . Thus , alteration of the actin cytoskeleton per se does not result in impaired ADP - ribosylation of Rho . The toxin B - caused inhibition in ADP - ribosylation of Rho could be explained by an intrinsic ADP - ribosyltransferase activity of toxin B . Therefore , we tested whether toxin B revealed ADP - ribosyltransferase activity in vivo . Oocytes were loaded with [ 32 P ] NAD ( 60 nCi per oocyte ) by microin - jection and were subsequently incubated with toxin B for 18 hours . Alternatively , oocytes were microinjected with a mixture of [ 32 P ] NAD and toxin B , and incubated for 3 hours . Proteins of the oocyte cytoplasm were separated by SDS - PAGE and analyzed by autoradiography . No labeled proteins were detected , not even after prolonged exposure times ( up to one week ) ( Fig . 6A ) . Microinjection of a mixture of [ 32 P ] NAD with C3 , however , resulted in the selective ADP - ribosylation of the 22 kDa Rho protein ( Fig . 6A ) . The same procedure was used to assess possible phosphorylation of Rho proteins ( Fig . 6B ) . A mixture of [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( 60 nCi per oocyte ) and Rho - GST was microinjected . In the presence of toxin B the phos - phorylation of 32 kDa and 60 kDa proteins was markedly enhanced , but no phosphorylated proteins in the molecular mass range of 20 to 24 kDa ( Rho ) were detected . Furthermore , toxin B did not cause phosphorylation of previously microin - jected Rho - GST fusion protein ( 48 kDa ) . To test whether toxin B indirectly affects Rho by phospho - rylation or dephosphorylation of Rho - regulating proteins , cyto - plasmic fractions were treated with alkaline phosphatase ( Fig . 7 ) . In controls , phosphatase treatment caused a slight decrease in ADP - ribosylation of Rho . The same result was observed with cytoplasm from toxin - treated oocytes . Conditions that favoured phosphorylation ( ATP , MgCl 2 and cAMP ) induced a clear increase in ADP - ribosylation of Rho ( Fig . 7 ) . However , Rho from toxin - treated cytoplasm showed only a slight increase in ADP - ribosylation , not to the level observed under control conditions . DISCUSSION C . botulinum C3 exoenzyme has been reported to induce destruction of the microﬁlamental cytoskeleton via selective ADP - ribosylation of the low - molecular - mass GTP - binding protein Rho ( Chardin et al . , 1989 ; Paterson et al . , 1990 ; Wiegers et al . , 1991 ) . It is generally accepted that ADP - ribo - sylation renders Rho functionally inactive ( Paterson et al . , 1990 ; Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . Comparable cytoskeletal changes were observed with C . difficile toxin B . Toxin B acts much faster on the ﬁlaments than does C3 and is much more potent . However , both bacterial agents seem to act on the same regulator protein because CHO cells treated with toxin B showed a decrease in C3 - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation of Rho . This effect of toxin B seems to be a general feature of its action , because it has been observed in several mammalian cell lines ( Just et al . , unpublished observations ) and as reported here in X . laevis oocytes . In oocytes , inhibition of Rho ADP - ribosylation was observed after prolonged external application time ( about 18 hours ) and at high concentrations of toxin B . Toxin B did not cause comparable morphological changes in oocytes as observed in mammalian cells . Destruction of the actin cytoskeleton in cells results in rounding and the cells attain spherical shape after detachment . However , oocytes resemble a sphere and it is unlikely that they change their shape after destruction of the cytoskeleton . Toxin B has been reported to unfold its activity after receptor - mediated endocytosis and sub - sequent activation by acidic hydrolysis in the postendosome Fig . 6 . Probing the ADP - ribosyltransferase activity or kinase activity of toxin B . ( A ) Oocytes were microinjected with [ a - 32 P ] NAD ( 60 nCi ) plus toxin B ( 5 m g / ml ) or plus C3 exoenzyme ( 5 m g / ml ) and incubated for 3 hours . ( B ) Oocytes were microinjected with [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( 60 nCi ) and toxin buffer ( - ) or toxin B ( 5 m g / ml ) ( + ) and incubated for 3 hours . Cytoplasm was prepared from the oocytes and the proteins were separated by 12 . 5 % SDS - PAGE followed by autoradiography . Fig . 7 . Effect of alkaline phosphatase on impaired ADP - ribosylation of Rho . Oocytes were incubated without ( con ) or with toxin B in Barth’s medium for 18 hours . Left panel : the cytoplasmic fractions were incubated without ( control ) or with alkaline phosphatase ( aPP ) plus 1 mM MgCl 2 and 0 . 1 mM ZnCl 2 for 120 minutes at 30˚C . Right panel : to favour phosphorylation reactions the cytoplasmic fractions were incubated without ( control ) or with ATP plus 2 mM MgCl 2 and 1 m M cAMP ( phosph . ) for 15 minutes at 30˚C . Preincubation was followed by [ 32 P ] ADP - ribosylation with C3 . The autoradiogram of the SDS - PAGE is shown . 1658 compartment ( Florin and Thelestam , 1986 ) . In contrast , we found that toxin B exhibited its effect on Rho directly after microinjection , reassessing the ﬁndings of Müller et al . ( 1992 ) , who reported cytopathic effects of toxin B microinjected into endothelial cells . This ﬁnding is consistent with the notion that toxin B needs no activation to exhibit cytotoxic effects . The delay in the onset of toxin B activity observed in oocytes exter - nally treated with the toxin is most likely due to a retarded uptake of the toxin into the oocytes . The possible reason for this observation is that these cells have no speciﬁc receptor for toxin B and the uptake is mediated by nonspeciﬁc endocyto - sis . This kind of uptake is slow and requires a high concentra - tion of toxin B . The rather long incubation time compared to that of mammalian cells , even after microinjection , may be due to restricted diffusion rates inside the large oocyte . Several cytotoxins affect the microﬁlamental cytoskeleton , e . g . C . botulinum C2 toxin , which ADP - ribosylates actin , thereby trapping it in the monomeric form ( Aktories et al . , 1992 ) . As deduced from these studies , the complete ADP - ribo - sylation of actin in oocytes most likely causes a conversion of the cellular actin pool into the monomeric form . However , this conversion does not affect ADP - ribosylation of Rho . Therefore , inhibition of ADP - riboslyation of Rho is speciﬁc for toxin B and not merely a response to disaggregation of actin ﬁlaments . Besides endogenous Rho , the Rho - GST fusion protein applied via microinjection was affected by toxin B . ADP - ribo - sylation of increasing concentrations of Rho - GST up to ten times higher than endogenous Rho was inhibited by a constant concentration of toxin B , indicating that this action on Rho most likely represents an enzymic activity of toxin B . To exclude proteolytical activity of toxin B , Rho was analyzed by immunoblotting . In default of an antibody recognizing endoge - nous Rho , immunoblot analysis was performed with Rho - GST fusion protein and anti - GST . No changes in the amount or in the molecular mass were observed , thus excluding the possi - bility of proteolytic degradation or attachment of bulky moieties to Rho . However , immunoblot data do not exclude low - molecular modiﬁcation of Rho , which could block C3 - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation . ADP - ribosyltransferase activity has been claimed for toxin B but has been disproved in studies performed with lysates from cells ( Florin and Thelestam , 1991 ; Bette et al . , 1991 ) . We addressed this issue by using intact oocytes loaded with [ 32 P ] NAD via microinjection . Toxin B did not cause any ADP - ribosylation in the intact oocyte whereas C3 induced selective modiﬁcation of the endogenous 22 kDa Rho protein in the same system . These experiments deﬁnitely showed that toxin B exhibits no transferase activity . Further - more , we did not detect phosphorylation of Rho and Rho - GST by using the same system with radioactively labeled ATP . However , toxin B caused an increase in phosphorylation of 32 and 60 kDa proteins . An altered phosphorylation pattern in response to treatment with toxin B has been reported in astro - cytes ( Ciesielski - Treska et al . , 1991 ) but so far it has not been clariﬁed whether changed phosphorylation is a direct effect of the toxin or only a response to the disaggregated ﬁlaments . We therefore tested whether impaired ADP - ribosylation of Rho can be restored by dephosphorylation . Phosphatase treatment induced a decreased ADP - ribosylation of control as well as toxin - treated Rho . Conversely , conditions that favoured phos - phorylation enhanced the ADP - ribosylation of control Rho but did not change the impaired ADP - ribosylation after toxin B treatment . Phosphorylation / dephosphorylation seems to regulate functional states of Rho , reﬂecting the ability to serve as a substrate for C3 ( Fritz and Aktories , 1994 ) . But this mechanism is obviously not involved in toxin B action on Rho . So far , it is not clear whether toxin B acts directly on Rho or induces the modiﬁcation of Rho via cellular agents . The ﬁndings that increasing concentrations of Rho fusion protein are affected by the toxin indicate that Rho itself rather than Rho - regulating proteins are the target . Consistent with this notion are the ﬁndings that neither GTP [ S ] nor phosphatidyli - nositides reversed the impaired ADP - ribosylation of Rho . Phosphatidylinositides cleave the complex of Rho with the guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor . This complex is reported to be the cytosolic store of functional inactive Rho , which is therefore not a substrate for ADP - ribosylation ( Kikuchi et al . , 1992 ) . The results with GTP [ S ] and phos - phatidylinositides indicate that toxin B does not reversibly inactivate Rho as expected when Rho functions are regulated physiologically . In summary , we show for the ﬁrst time that C . difficile toxin B acts on X . laevis oocytes to inhibit C3 - catalyzed ADP - ribo - sylation of the Rho protein . So far it is not clear whether toxin B affects Rho directly or indirectly but evidence is presented that Rho is neither proteolytically cleaved nor modiﬁed by phosphorylation or ADP - ribosylation . Furthermore , toxin B does not inactivate Rho in a reversible manner as observed under physiological conditions as in the case of Rho - GDI inter - action and phosphorylation / dephosphorylation of Rho - regulat - ing proteins . Impaired ADP - ribosylation probably reﬂects functional inactivation of the Rho protein and it is most likely that C . difficile toxin B mediates its cytotoxic effects via turning off Rho . The excellent technical assistance of Mrs Monika Lerner and Mrs Gabriele Kiefer is gratefully acknowledged . This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungs - gemeinschaft ( Sonderforschungsbereich 246 , B10 and C5 ) . C . v . E . - S . is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( Sonderforschungsbereich 249 , project A1 ) . REFERENCES Aktories , K . , Weller , U . and Chhatwal , G . S . ( 1987 ) . Clostridium botulinum type C produces a novel ADP - ribosyltransferase distinct from botulinum C2 toxin . FEBS Lett . 212 , 109 - 113 . Aktories , K . and Just , I . ( 1990 ) . Botulinum C2 toxin . In ADP - ribosylating toxins and G - proteins ( ed . J . Moss and M . Vaughan ) , pp . 79 - 95 . American Society for Microbiology , Washington , DC . Aktories , K . , Wille , M . and Just , I . ( 1992 ) . Clostridial actin - ADP - ribosylating toxins . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 175 , 97 - 113 . Bartlett , J . G . ( 1990 ) . Clostridium difficile : clinical considerations . Rev . Infect . Dis . 12 Suppl . 2 , S243 - S251 . Bette , P . , Oksche , A . , Mauler , F . , Eichel - Streiber , C . von , Popoff , M . R . and Habermann , E . ( 1991 ) . A comparative biochemical , pharmacological and immunological study of clostridium novyi a - toxin , C . difficile toxin B and C . sordellii lethal toxin . Toxicon 29 , 877 - 887 . Bourmeyster , N . , Stasia , M . - J . , Garin , J . , Gagnon , J . , Boquet , P . and Vignais , P . V . ( 1992 ) . Copuriﬁcation of rho protein and the rho - GDP dissociation inhibitor from bovine neutrophil cytosol . Effect of phosphoinositides on rho ADP - ribosylation by the C3 exoenzyme of Clostridium botulinum . Biochemistry 31 , 12863 - 12869 . Bourne , H . R . , Sanders , D . A . and McCormick , F . ( 1990 ) . The GTPase superfamily : a conserved switch for diverse cell functions . Nature 348 , 125 - 132 . I . Just and others 1659 Clostridium difficiletoxin B in Xenopus laevis oocytes Braun , U . , Habermann , B . , Just , I . , Aktories , K . and Vandekerckhove , J . ( 1989 ) . Puriﬁcation of the 22 kDa protein substrate of botulinum ADP - ribosyltransferase C3 from porcine brain cytosol and its characterization as a GTP - binding protein highly homologous to the rho gene product . FEBS Lett . 243 , 70 - 76 . Chardin , P . , Boquet , P . , Madaule , P . , Popoff , M . R . , Rubin , E . J . and Gill , D . M . ( 1989 ) . The mammalian G protein rho C is ADP - ribosylated by Clostridium botulinum exoenzyme C3 and affects actin microﬁlament in Vero cells . EMBO J . 8 , 1087 - 1092 . Ciesielski - Treska , J . , Ulrich , G . , Rihn , B . and Aunis , D . ( 1989 ) . Mechanism of action of Clostridium difficile toxin B : role of external medium and cytoskeletal organization in intoxicated cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 48 , 191 - 202 . Ciesielski - Treska , J . , Ulrich , G . , Baldacini , O . , Monteil , H . and Aunis , D . ( 1991 ) . Phosporylation of cellular proteins in response to treatment with Clostridium difficile toxin B and Clostridium sordellii toxin L . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 56 , 68 - 78 . Fiorentini , C . and Thelestam , M . ( 1991 ) . Clostridium difficile Toxin A and its effects on cells . Toxicon 29 , 543 - 567 . Florin , I . and Thelestam , M . ( 1986 ) . Lysosomal involvement in cellular intoxication with Clostridium difficile toxin B . Microb . Pathogen . 1 , 373 - 385 . Florin , I . and Thelestam , M . ( 1991 ) . ADP - ribosylation in Clostridium difficile toxin - treated cells is not related to cytopathogenicity of toxin B . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1091 , 51 - 54 . Fritz , G . and Aktories , K . ( 1994 ) . ADP - ribosylation of Rho proteins by Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme is inﬂuenced by phosphorylation of Rho associated factors . Biochem . J . ( in press ) . Fukumoto , Y . , Kaibuchi , K . , Hori , Y . , Fujioka , H . , Araki , S . , Ueda , T . , Kikuchi , A . and Takai , Y . ( 1990 ) . Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel type of regulatory protein ( GDI ) for the rho proteins , ras p21 - like small GTP - binding proteins . Oncogene 5 , 1321 - 1328 . Garrett , M . D . , Major , G . N . , Totty , N . and Hall , A . ( 1991 ) . Puriﬁcation and N - terminal sequence of the p21 rho GTPase - activating protein , rho GAP . Biochem . J . 276 , 833 - 836 . Isomura , M . , Kaibuchi , K . , Yamamoto , T . , Kawamura , S . , Katayama , M . and Takai , Y . ( 1990 ) . Partial puriﬁcation and characterization of GDP dissociation stimulator ( GDS ) for the rho proteins from bovine brain cytosol . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 169 , 652 - 659 . Just , I . , Mohr , C . , Schallehn , G . , Menard , L . , Didsbury , J . R . , Vandekerckhove , J . , van Damme , J . and Aktories , K . ( 1992a ) . Puriﬁcation and characterization of an ADP - ribosyltransferase produced by Clostridium limosum . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 10274 - 10280 . Just , I . , Schallehn , G . and Aktories , K . ( 1992b ) . ADP - ribosylation of small GTP - binding proteins by Bacillus cereus . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 183 , 931 - 936 . Kikuchi , A . , Kuroda , S . , Sasaki , T . , Kotani , K . , Hirata , K . , Katayama , M . and Takai , Y . ( 1992 ) . Functional interactions of stimulatory and inhibitory GDP / GTP exchange proteins and their common substrate small GTP - binding protein . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 14611 - 14615 . Laemmli , U . K . ( 1970 ) . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature 227 , 680 - 685 . Lyerly , D . M . , Krivan , H . C . and Wilkins , T . D . ( 1988 ) . Clostridium difficile : its disease and toxins . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 1 , 1 - 18 . Morii , N . , Kawano , K . , Sekine , A . , Yamada , T . and Narumiya , S . ( 1991 ) . Puriﬁcation of GTPase - activating protein speciﬁc for the rho gene . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 7646 - 7650 . Müller , H . , Von Eichel - Streiber , C . and Habermann , E . ( 1992 ) . Morphological changes of cultured endothelial cells after microinjection of toxins that act on the cytoskeleton . Infect . Immunol . 60 , 3007 - 3010 . Nemoto , Y . , Namba , T . , Kozaki , S . and Narumiya , S . ( 1991 ) . Clostridium botulinum C3 ADP - ribosyltransferase gene . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 19312 - 19319 . Ohishi , I . , Iwasaki , M . and Sakaguchi , G . ( 1980 ) . Puriﬁcation and characterization of two components of botulinum C2 toxin . Infect . Immunol . 30 , 668 - 673 . Ottlinger , M . E . and Lin , S . ( 1988 ) . Clostridium difficile toxin B induces reorganization of actin , vinculin , and talin in cultures cells . Exp . Cell Res . 174 , 215 - 229 . Paterson , H . F . , Self , A . J . , Garrett , M . D . , Just , I . , Aktories , K . and Hall , A . ( 1990 ) . Microinjection of recombinant p21 rho induces rapid changes in cell morphology . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 1001 - 1007 . Peterson , G . L . ( 1977 ) . A simpliﬁcation of the protein assay methods of Lowry et al . , which is more generally applicable . Anal . Biochem . 83 , 346 - 356 . Popoff , M . R . , Hauser , D . , Boquet , P . , Eklund , M . W . and Gill , D . M . ( 1991 ) . Characterization of the C3 gene of Clostridium botulinum types C and D and its expression in Escherichia coli . Infect . Immunol . 59 , 3673 - 3679 . Ridley , A . J . and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress ﬁbers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 , 389 - 399 . Rubin , E . J . , Gill , D . M . , Boquet , P . and Popoff , M . R . ( 1988 ) . Functional modiﬁcation of a 21 - Kilodalton G protein when ADP - ribosylated by exoenzyme C3 of Clostridium botulinum . Mol . Cell . Biol . 8 , 418 - 426 . Sekine , A . , Fujiwara , M . and Narumiya , S . ( 1989 ) . Asparagine residue in the rho gene product is the modiﬁcation site for botulinum ADP - ribosyltransferase . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 8602 - 8605 . Sugai , M . , Hashimoto , K . , Kikuchi , A . , Inoue , S . , Okumura , H . , Matsumota , K . , Goto , Y . , Ohgai , H . , Moriishi , K . , Syuto , B . , Yoshikawa , K . , Suginaka , H . and Takai , Y . ( 1992 ) . Epidermal cell differentiation inhibitor ADP - ribosylates small GTP - binding proteins and induces hyperplasia of epidermis . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 2600 - 2604 . Towbin , H . , Staehelin , T . and Gordon , J . ( 1979 ) . Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 4350 - 4354 . Ueda , T . , Kikuchi , A . , Ohga , N . , Yamamoto , J . and Takai , Y . ( 1990 ) . Puriﬁcation and characterization from bovine brain cytosol of a novel regulatory protein inhibiting the dissociation of GDP from and the subsequent binding of GTP to rhoB p20 , a ras p21 - like GTP - binding protein . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 9373 - 9380 . von Eichel - Streiber , C . , Harperath , U . , Bosse , D . and Hadding , U . ( 1987 ) . Puriﬁcation of two high molecular weight toxins of Clostridium difficile which are antigenetically related . Microb . Pathogen . 2 , 307 - 318 . von Eichel - Streiber , C . ( 1993 ) . Molecular biology of the Clostridium difficile toxins . In Genetics and Molecular Biology of Anaerobic Bacteria ( ed . M . Sebald ) , pp . 264 - 289 . Springer - Verlag , New York . Wiegers , W . , Just , I . , Müller , H . , Hellwig , A . , Traub , P . and Aktories , K . ( 1991 ) . Alteration of the cytoskeleton of mammalian cells cultured in vitro by Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin and C3 ADP - ribosyltransferase . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 54 , 237 - 245 . Yamamoto , J . , Kikuchi , A . , Ueda , T . , Ohga , N . and Takai , Y . ( 1990 ) . A GTPase - activating protein for rhoB p20 , a ras p21 - like GTP - binding protein - partial puriﬁcation , characterization and subcellular distribution in rat brain . Brain Res . Mol . Brain Res . 8 , 105 - 111 . ( Received 18 November 1993 - Accepted , in revised form , 28 February 1994 )