 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2001 / 08 / 549 / 23 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 154 , Number 3 , August 6 , 2001 549 – 571 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200104057 JCB Article 549 A protein interaction map for cell polarity development Becky L . Drees , 2 Bryan Sundin , 4 Elizabeth Brazeau , 2 Juliane P . Caviston , 5 Guang - Chao Chen , 8 Wei Guo , 12 Keith G . Kozminski , 1 Michelle W . Lau , 1 John J . Moskow , 9 Amy Tong , 6 Laura R . Schenkman , 7 Amos McKenzie III , 7 Patrick Brennwald , 10 Mark Longtine , 11 Erfei Bi , 5 Clarence Chan , 8 Peter Novick , 13 Charles Boone , 6 John R . Pringle , 7 Trisha N . Davis , 4 Stanley Fields , 3 and David G . Drubin 1 1 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 2 Departments of Genetics and Medicine , 3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Genetics and Medicine , and 4 Department of Biochemistry , University of Washington , Seattle , WA 98195 5 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine , Philadelphia , PA 19104 6 Banting and Best Department of Medical Research , University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario M5G 1L6 , Canada 7 Department of Biology , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC 27599 8 Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology , Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology , University of Texas , Austin , TX 78712 9 Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , NC 27710 10 Department of Cell Biology and Genetics , Cornell University , New York , NY 10021 11 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Oklahoma State University , Stillwater , OK 74078 12 Biology Department , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 13 Department of Cell Biology , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06520 any genes required for cell polarity development in budding yeast have been identiﬁed and ar - ranged into a functional hierarchy . Core elements of the hierarchy are widely conserved , underlying cell po - larity development in diverse eukaryotes . To enumerate more fully the protein – protein interactions that mediate cell polarity development , and to uncover novel mechanisms that coordinate the numerous events involved , we carried out a large - scale two - hybrid experiment . 68 Gal4 DNA binding domain fusions of yeast proteins associated with the actin cytoskeleton , septins , the secretory apparatus , and Rho - type GTPases were used to screen an array of yeast transformants that express (cid:2) 90 % of the predicted Saccha - romyces cerevisiae open reading frames as Gal4 activation domain fusions . 191 protein – protein interactions were de - tected , of which 128 had not been described previously . 44 M interactions implicated 20 previously uncharacterized pro - teins in cell polarity development . Further insights into pos - sible roles of 13 of these proteins were revealed by their multiple two - hybrid interactions and by subcellular local - ization . Included in the interaction network were associa - tions of Cdc42 and Rho1 pathways with proteins involved in exocytosis , septin organization , actin assembly , microtu - bule organization , autophagy , cytokinesis , and cell wall synthesis . Other interactions suggested direct connections between Rho1 - and Cdc42 - regulated pathways ; the secre - tory apparatus and regulators of polarity establishment ; ac - tin assembly and the morphogenesis checkpoint ; and the exocytic and endocytic machinery . In total , a network of in - teractions that provide an integrated response of signaling proteins , the cytoskeleton , and organelles to the spatial cues that direct polarity development was revealed . Introduction Cell polarity is an essential characteristic of virtually every cell type ( Drubin , 2000 ) . In response to a cue acting at a specific site on the cell cortex , a cascade of events involving receptors , signaling proteins , the cytoskeleton , and organelles results in an asymmetric distribution of cellular components ( Drubin and Nelson , 1996 ) . The budding yeast Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae has been critical for elucidation of proteins and mechanisms that underlie cell polarity development . Growth of the yeast cell is polarized to direct budding dur - ing cell division and projection formation during mating . As in other eukaryotic cells , polarized growth is mediated by a series of steps involving cortical landmarks , Rho GTPases , and a polarized actin cytoskeleton . Secretion is targeted to the bud or mating projection , allowing selective growth in Address correspondence to David Drubin , Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , 401 Barker Hall , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 - 3202 . Tel . : ( 510 ) 642 - 3692 . Fax : ( 510 ) 643 - 0062 . E - mail : drubin @ uclink4 . berkeley . edu Key words : cytoskeleton ; Rho proteins ; secretion ; cell polarity ; endocytosis 550 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 that area ( for reviews see Drubin and Nelson , 1996 ; Chant , 1999 ; Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000a , b ) . Several Rho type GTPases function in the establishment and maintenance of cell polarity ( Bender and Pringle , 1989 ; Johnson and Pringle , 1990 ; Matsui and Toh - e , 1992 ; Drgonová et al . , 1996 ; Imai et al . , 1996 ; Kamada et al . , 1996 ; Robinson et al . , 1999 ) . One of these , Cdc42 , is a cru - cial factor in the switch from isotropic to polarized growth that occurs when the cyclin - dependent protein kinase Cdc28 is activated by G1 cyclins ( Adams et al . , 1990 ; Ayscough et al . , 1997 ) . A decisive event for the establishment and mainte - nance of cell polarity is the recruitment of Cdc42 to the cell surface and its activation in response to positional cues and cell cycle signals ( Chant , 1999 ) . In budding cells , spatial markers left by previous cell divisions stimulate the local acti - vation of the Ras - related Rsr1 / Bud1 GTPase , which recruits and activates Cdc42 via interaction with the guanidine nu - cleotide exchange factor Cdc24 ( Ruggieri et al . , 1992 ; Bender , 1993 ; Zheng et al . , 1995 ; Park et al . , 1999 ) . In hap - loid cells exposed to mating pheromone , the protein Far1 in - teracts with Cdc24 and recruits Cdc42 to the tip of the mating projection ( Butty et al . , 1998 ) . The activated GTP - bound form of Cdc42 interacts with several proteins that are presumed to be effectors that transduce its signal to bring about polarization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Cvrcková et al . , 1995 ; Brown et al . , 1997 ; Chen et al . , 1997 ; Evangelista et al . , 1997 ; Bi et al . , 2000 ) . Actin cables are proposed to serve as tracks for vesicle , organelle , and mRNA transport , whereas cortical actin patches are important for endocytosis ( Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000a , b ) . Largely unknown are how cortical cues lead to localized activation of Rho GTPases , how their activation polarizes the spatial distribution of cytoskeletal proteins , the secretory apparatus , and other cellular constitu - ents , and what mechanisms coordinate the many events that underlie cell polarity development . For example , at the site of bud formation , several Rho proteins function together with associated protein kinases and other effector proteins , and the cytoskeleton and secretory apparatus become orga - nized around these signaling proteins . Bud morphogenesis requires spatial and temporal coordination of these events , but little is known of the coordinating mechanisms . The yeast two - hybrid system ( Fields and Song , 1989 ) is a powerful method for identifying pairs of proteins that asso - ciate with each other , and it can be used in a high - through - put manner ( Uetz et al . , 2000 ; Ito et al . , 2001 ) . Uetz et al . ( 2000 ) constructed an array of yeast transformants , each of which expresses one of the (cid:2) 6 , 000 predicted yeast ORFs as a fusion to an activation domain ( Hudson et al . , 1997 ) . This array was screened by a simple automated procedure in which protein – protein interactions responsible for positive responses were identified by the position within the array . A similar strategy was used for analysis of protein – protein in - teractions of vaccinia virus ( McCraith et al . , 2000 ) . One ad - vantage of the array - based approach is that each individual assay is compared with multiple identical assays , making it easier to distinguish bona fide interactions from background due to nonspecific activation of the reporter gene . Here we present the results of an array - based two - hybrid experiment designed to systematically detect protein – protein interac - tions involved in yeast cell polarity development . The pro - teins screened included Cdc42 and other Rho - type GTP - ases , their regulators and effectors , actin cytoskeleton – associ - ated proteins , septin - associated proteins , and proteins in - volved in secretion . Our aims were to identify new links in the network of protein – protein associations controlling po - larized growth and to provide biological context for ORFs of unknown functions , with the goal of understanding their functional roles . Owing to high conservation of cell polarity development pathways , this information should be useful for developing a deeper understanding of cell polarity devel - opment in all types of eukaryotic cells ( Drubin and Nelson , 1996 ; Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000a , b ) . Results and discussion Overview and general considerations 68 proteins with various functions in cell polarity develop - ment were used as DNA binding domain hybrids for two - hybrid screens . These included Rho - type GTPases and their regulators and effectors , actin cortical patch components , septin - associated proteins , and proteins involved in secretion ( Table I ) . The yeast ORF - Gal4 activation domain fusion ar - ray used in our experiments expresses (cid:2) 85 – 90 % of the pre - dicted ORFs of S . cerevisiae ( Hudson et al . , 1997 ; Uetz et al . , 2000 ) . 14 proteins , Aip2 , Bud5 , Bud6 , Bud7 , Bud9 , Cap2 , Cdc3 , Cdc10 , Iqg1 , Kin1 , Msb1 , Sec9 , Snc1 , and Snc2 , showed no reproducible two - hybrid interactions when used as baits in our screens . Screens of the other 54 baits found from 1 to 13 interactions each . Overall , 196 repro - ducible two - hybrid positives were detected that describe 191 putative protein – protein interactions involving 110 proteins ( Table I and Figs . 1 – 3 ) . 128 interactions had not been de - scribed previously and 44 involve 20 proteins of unknown function . The results of this study clearly do not represent all of the detectable or probable interactions between the pro - teins examined . The lack of an interaction detected in this analysis is not necessarily meaningful , as some constructs in the array might not express the expected fusion proteins or might express them in a nonfunctional form due to the Gal4 fusion . Differences in fusion construction , construct expres - sion , strain background , and selection stringency are also factors that may account for discrepancies between the set of interactions seen here and those found in other studies . To observe the subcellular localization of the proteins of unknown function , we expressed 13 of them in yeast under control of their own promoters as fusions with yellow fluo - rescent protein , a variant of the A . victoria green fluorescent protein ( Niedenthal et al . , 1996 ; Miller et al . , 1999 ) . Results of the localization experiments are shown in Table II and Figs . 4 – 6 . Of the 128 new interactions , many appear plausi - ble on the basis of genetic or localization criteria . The signif - icance of others remains unclear . The two - hybrid results de - rived from these screens should be considered as a set of putative interactions requiring further verification . It is also important to note that an interaction might be direct , or might be bridged by a protein or proteins that bind to both the bait and the prey protein . As shown in Fig . 1 , two - hybrid interactions were observed not only between proteins involved in the same polarity - related process , but also between proteins involved in distinct Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 551 Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Abp1 Actin binding protein involved in cortical actin assembly , has SH3 domain Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Rvs167 ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Srv2 ( AD ) Adenylate cyclase – associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Ynl094w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yor284w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Acf2 Protein involved in cortical actin assembly Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Act1 Actin , involved in cell polarization , endocytosis , cytoskeletal function Cof1 ( BD ) Cofilin , actin binding and severing protein Las17 ( BD ) WASP homologue involved in cortical actin assembly Pfy1 ( BD ) Profilin , can act to prevent actin polymerization and to complex with monomeric actin Rvs167 ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Srv2 ( AD , BD ) Adenylate cyclase – associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Aip1 Actin interacting protein involved in disassembly of actin filaments Srv2 ( BD ) Adenylate cyclase – associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Air1 RING finger protein that affects RNA processing Cdc24 a ( BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Apg17 Protein essential for autophagy Apg17 a ( AD , BD ) Protein essential for autophagy Exo84 a ( BD ) Subunit of the exocyst complex , required for exocytosis Myo1 a ( BD ) Myosin heavy chain ( myosin II ) , involved in septation and cell wall organization Nip100 a ( BD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Rho1 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rho2 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Ykr083c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Apg7 Conjugation protein essential for autophagy Sso2 a ( BD ) Syntaxin homologue ( t - SNARE ) involved in vesicle transport from Golgi to plasma membrane Arp1 Actin - related protein of the dynactin complex , required for mitotic spindle orientation and nuclear migration Nip100 ( BD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Bcy1 Regulatory subunit of cAMP - dependent protein kinases Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Bem1 Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Boi2 ( BD , AD ) Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Cdc24 ( AD , BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Cdc42 – GDP ( AD , BD ) Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Cdc42 – GTP ( BD ) Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Bem1 ( continued ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Far1 ( AD ) Inhibitor of CDK – cyclin complexes involved in cell cycle arrest for mating and polarized growth of mating projection Sec15 a ( AD ) Component of exocyst complex required for exocytosis Ste20 ( AD ) PAK kinase of the pheromone pathway ; also regulates polarized growth Swe1 a ( AD ) Serine / tyrosine dual - specificity protein kinase ; able to phosphorylate Cdc28p on tyrosine and inhibit its activity Bem3 GAP for Cdc42p and Rho1p Bem4 a ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Zds1 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds2 Zds2 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Bem4 Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Bem3 a ( BD ) GAP for Cdc42p and Rho1p Cdc11 a ( AD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Cdc12 a ( AD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Cdc24 a ( BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Cdc42 – GDP ( BD ) Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Cdc42 – GTP ( BD ) Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Nfi1 a ( AD ) Septin - interacting protein Rho1 – GTP ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rho2 – GTP ( BD ) GTP - binding protein , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rho4 – GTP ( BD ) GTP - binding protein of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rsr1 – GDP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein of the ras superfamily involved in bud site selection Rsr1 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein of the ras superfamily involved in bud site selection Spr28 a ( AD ) Septin - related protein expressed during sporulation Bni1 Formin protein involved in cytoskeletal polarization and cytokinesis Msb3 a ( BD ) Protein involved in bud emergence Pfy1 ( BD ) Profilin , can act to prevent actin polymerization and to complex with monomeric actin Rho1 – GTP ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Bni4 Protein linking chitin synthase III to septins of the neck filaments Msb2 a ( BD ) Protein involved in bud emergence Bnr1 Bni1p - related formin protein Pfy1 ( BD ) Profilin , can act to prevent actin polymerization and to complex with monomeric actin Boi1 Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi2 homologue Ste20 ( AD ) PAK kinase of the pheromone pathway ; also regulates polarized growth Yer124c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) 552 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 Cdc24 ( continued ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Cdc42 - GDP ( BD ) Rho - type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Ent2 a ( AD ) Epsin homologue required for endocytosis Far1 ( AD ) Inhibitor of CDK - cyclin complexes involved in cell cycle arrest for mating and polarized growth of mating projection Rsr1 - GDP ( BD ) GTP - binding protein of the ras superfamily involved in bud site selection Sec15 a ( AD ) Component of exocyst complex required for exocytosis Ste20 ( AD ) PAK kinase of the pheromone pathway ; also regulates polarized growth Swe1 a ( AD ) Serine / tyrosine dual - specificity protein kinase ; able to phosphorylate Cdc28p on tyrosine and inhibit its activity Ygr221c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Cdc42 – GDP Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity , GDP - bound form Bem1 ( AD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Bem4 ( AD , BD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Cdc24 ( AD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Cdc42 – GTP Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity , GTP bound form Bem1 ( AD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Bem4 ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Boi2 ( AD ) Bem1p - binding protein , in - volved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Cla4 ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Gic1 ( AD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 ( AD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Rgal ( AD ) Rho - type GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) for Cdc42 Ste20 ( AD ) Serine / threonine protein kinase of the pheromone pathway ; also participates in the pathway regulating filamentous growth Chs4 Protein that stimulates chitin synthase III activity Yil007c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Cka1 Casein kinase II catalytic ( (cid:3) ) subunit Rho3 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein involved in control of actin cytoskeleton and exocytosis , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Cka2 Casein kinase II catalytic ( (cid:3)(cid:4) ) subunit Rho3 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein involved in control of actin cytoskeleton and exocytosis , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Ckb1 Casein kinase II regulatory ( (cid:2) ) subunit Rho3 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein involved in control of actin cytoskeleton and exocytosis , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Cla4 PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Abp1 a ( BD ) Actin binding protein involved in cortical actin assembly , has SH3 domain Bem3 a ( BD ) GAP for Cdc42p and Rho1p Boi2 a ( BD ) Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Cdc12 a ( AD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Boi2 Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Bem1 ( BD , AD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Cdc42 – GTP ( BD ) Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity , GTP bound form Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Mrs6 a ( AD ) Rab geranylgeranyltransferase regulatory component ( component A ) and rab GDI Msb1 a ( AD ) Protein involved in cell polarity and bud emergence Ste20 ( AD ) PAK kinase of the pheromone pathway ; also regulates polarized growth Yer124c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Bub2 Protein required for cell cycle arrest in response to loss of microtubule function Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Bud2 GTPase - activating protein for Rsr1 , involved in bud site selection Cln2 a ( AD ) G1 / S - specific cyclin Bud8 Protein required for bipolar budding Ste20 a ( AD ) PAK kinase of the pheromone pathway ; also regulates polarized growth Ykl082c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Cap1 Actin - capping protein , (cid:3) subunit Cap2 ( AD ) Actin - capping protein , (cid:2) subunit Gic2 a ( AD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Ypr171w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Cap2 Actin - capping protein , (cid:2) subunit Cap1 ( BD ) Actin - capping protein , (cid:3) subunit Cdc11 Septin , involved in cytokinesis Bem4 a ( BD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho - type GTPases Cdc12 ( AD , BD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Nfi1 ( AD ) Septin - interacting protein Spr28 a ( AD ) Septin - related protein expressed during sporulation Yor084w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Cdc12 Septin , involved in cytokinesis Bem4 a ( BD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho - type GTPases Cdc11 ( AD , BD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Cdc12 ( AD , BD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Cla4 a ( BD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue She3 a ( AD ) Protein required for mother cell - specific expression of HO Cdc24 GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Air1 a ( AD ) RING finger protein that affects RNA processing Bem1 ( AD , BD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Bem4 a ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho - type GTPases Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 553 Gic1 ( continued ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Zds1 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds2 Zds2 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Gic2 Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Cap1 a ( AD ) Actin - capping protein , (cid:3) subunit Cdc12 a ( AD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Cdc42 - GTP ( BD ) Rho - type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Gic1 ( AD , BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Rga1 a ( BD ) Rho - type GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for Cdc42p Ste50 a ( AD ) Protein required for feedback control of pheromone - induced signal transduction Ycr086w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ykl082c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Zds1 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds2 Zds2 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Hof1 Protein involved in cytokinesis , has an SH3 domain Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Hsl7 Negative regulatory protein of the Swe1p protein kinase Ynl094w ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Kin3 Serine / threonine protein kinase , unknown function Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Las17 WASP homologue involved in cortical actin assembly Act1 ( AD ) Actin , involved in cell polarization , endocytosis , cytoskeletal functions Rvs167 ( AD , BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla1 ( BD ) Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Yhr133c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ypl246c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Mrs6 Rab geranylgeranyltransferase regulatory subunit and rab GDI Boi2 a ( BD ) Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Msb1 Protein involved in cell polarity and bud emergence Boi2 a ( BD ) Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Msb2 Protein involved in bud emergence Bni4 a ( AD ) Protein linking chitin synthase III to septins of the neck filaments Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Msb3 Protein involved in bud emergence Bni1 a ( AD ) Formin protein involved in cytoskeletal polarization and cytokinesis Spa2 a ( AD ) Protein involved in cell polarity and cell fusion during mating Msb4 Protein involved in bud emergence Spa2 a ( AD ) Protein involved in cell polarity and cell fusion during mating Myo1 Myosin heavy chain ( myosin II ) , involved in septation and cell wall organization Apg17 a ( AD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Spr3 a ( AD ) Sporulation - specific septin Ypr188c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Cla4 ( continued ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Cdc42 – GTP ( BD ) Rho type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Msb2 a ( BD ) Protein involved in bud emergence Rga1 ( BD ) Rho type GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for Cdc42p Sla2 a ( BD ) Talin - like protein involved in membrane cytoskeleton assembly and required for cell polarization ; also required for the internalization phase of endocytosis Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Cln2 G1 / S - specific cyclin Bud2 a ( BD ) GTPase - activating protein for Rsr1 , involved in bud site selection Cof1 Cofilin , actin binding and severing protein Act1 ( AD ) Actin , involved in cell polarization , endocytosis , cytoskeletal functions Crn1 Coronin , actin - bundling protein Svl3 a ( AD ) Protein involved in vacuolar uptake of endocytosed vital dyes Ynl094w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Dfg5 Protein required for cell polarity , apical growth , and pseudohyphal growth Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Ent2 Epsin homologue required for endocytosis Cdc24 a ( BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Exo84 Subunit of the exocyst complex , required for exocytosis Apg17 a ( AD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Sec15 ( AD ) Component of exocyst complex required for exocytosis Far1 Inhibitor of CDK - cyclin complexes involved in cell cycle arrest for mating and polarized growth of mating projection Bem1 ( BD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Cdc24 ( BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Gic1 Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Bem4 a ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho - type GTPases Bub2 a ( AD ) Protein required for cell cycle arrest in response to loss of microtubule function Cdc12 a ( AD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Cdc42 - GTP ( BD ) Rho - type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Dfg5 a ( AD ) Protein required for cell polarity , apical growth , and pseudohyphal growth Gic1 ( AD , BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 ( AD , BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Hof1 a ( AD ) Protein involved in cytokinesis , has an SH3 domain Ste50 a ( AD ) Protein required for feedback control of pheromone - induced signal transduction Ykl082c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ycr086w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) 554 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 Rho1 – GTP ( continued ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins , GTP - bound form Nip100 a ( AD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Pkc1 ( AD ) Protein kinase C , regulates MAP kinase cascade involved in regulating cell wall metabolism Shc1 a ( AD ) Protein involved in cell wall chitin synthesis or deposition Yil007c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Rho2 – GTP GTP - binding protein , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins , GTP bound form Apg17 a ( AD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Bem4 ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Nip100 a ( AD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Rho3 – GTP GTP - binding protein , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins , GTP bound form Cka1 a ( AD ) Casein kinase II catalytic ( (cid:3) ) subunit Cka2 a ( AD ) Casein kinase II catalytic ( (cid:3)(cid:4) ) subunit Ckb1 a ( AD ) Casein kinase II regulatory ( (cid:2) ) subunit Rho4 – GTP GTP - binding protein of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins , GTP bound form Bem4 ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Yil007c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Rpn4 Subunit of the regulatory particle of the proteasome Yil007c a ( BD ) Protein of unknown function Rsr1 - GDP GTP - binding protein of the ras superfamily involved in bud site selection , GDP - bound form Bem4 a ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Cdc24 ( AD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Sec15 a ( AD ) Component of exocyst complex required for exocytosis Rsr1 – GTP GTP - binding protein of the ras superfamily involved in bud site selection , GTP - bound form Bem4 a ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Rvs161 Protein required for viability after N , C , or S starvation , for internalization step of endocytosis , and for cell fusion during mating ; roles in endocytosis and in cell fusion are independent of one another Rvs167 ( AD , BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Rvs167 Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Abp1 ( AD ) Actin binding protein involved in cortical actin assembly , has SH3 domain Acf2 a ( AD ) Protein involved in cortical actin assembly Act1 ( AD ) Actin , involved in cell polarization , endocytosis , cytoskeletal functions Las17 ( AD , BD ) WASP homologue involved in cortical actin assembly Rvs161 ( AD , BD ) Protein required for viability after N , C , or S starvation , for internalization step of endocytosis , and for cell fusion during mating ; roles in endocytosis and in cell fusion are independent of one another Rvs167 ( AD , BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla1 ( BD ) Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Sla2 ( AD ) Talin - like protein involved in membrane cytoskeleton assembly and required for cell polarization ; also required for the internalization phase of endocytosis Srv2 ( AD ) Adenylate cyclase – associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Nfi1 Septin - interacting protein Bem4 a ( BD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Cdc11 a ( BD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Nip100 a ( BD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Nip100 Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Apg17 a ( AD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Arp1 ( AD ) Actin - related protein of the dynactin complex , required for mitotic spindle orientation and nuclear migration Nfi1 a ( AD ) Septin - interacting protein Nip100 ( AD , BD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Pac11 ( AD ) Protein with similarity to rat dynein intermediate chain ; required in the absence of Cin8p , member of WD ( WD - 40 ) repeat family Rho1 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rho2 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Pac11 Protein with similarity to rat dynein intermediate chain Nip100 ( BD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Pfs1 Protein required for sporulation Yil007c a ( BD ) Protein of unknown function Pfy1 Profilin , can act to prevent actin polymerization and to complex with monomeric actin Act1 ( AD ) Actin , involved in cell polarization , endocytosis , cytoskeletal functions Bni1 ( AD ) Formin protein involved in cytoskeletal polarization and cytokinesis Bnr1 ( AD ) Bni1p - related formin protein Srv2 ( AD ) Adenylate cyclase – associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Pkc1 Protein kinase C , regulates MAP kinase cascade involved in regulating cell wall metabolism Rho1 – GTP ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Ygr221C a ( BD ) Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Rga1 Rho type GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for Cdc42p Cdc42 ( BD ) Rho - type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Gic2 a ( AD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Rho1 ( AD , BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rho1 – GTP GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins , GTP - bound form Rga1 ( AD , BD ) Rho type GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for Cdc42 and Rho1 Apg17 a ( AD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Bem4 ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Bni1 ( AD ) Formin protein involved in cytoskeletal polarization and cytokinesis Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 555 Rvs167 ( continued ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Ybr108c ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yjr083c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ygr268c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ynl086w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ynl094w a ( AD , BD ) Protein of unknown function Yor284w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ypr171w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ysc84 a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function , has an SH3 domain Sec15 Component of exocyst complex required for exocytosis Bem1 a ( BD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Cdc24 a ( BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Exo84 ( BD ) Subunit of the exocyst complex , required for exocytosis Rsr1 – GDP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein of the ras superfamily involved in bud site selection Shc1 Protein involved in cell wall chitin synthesis or deposition Rho1 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins She3 Protein required for mother cell - specific expression of HO Cdc12 a ( BD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Sla1 Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Las17 ( AD ) WASP homologue involved in cortical actin assembly Rvs167 ( AD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Srv2 ( AD ) Adenylate cyclase – associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Ygr268c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ynl094w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ypr171w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ysc84 a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function , has an SH3 domain Sla2 Talin - like protein involved in membrane cytoskeleton assembly and required for cell polarization ; also required for the internalization phase of endocytosis Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Rvs167 ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Ynl094w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yor284w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Ysc84 a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function , has an SH3 domain Spa2 Protein involved in cell polarity and cell fusion during mating Msb3 a ( BD ) Protein involved in bud emergence Msb4 a ( BD ) Protein involved in bud emergence Spr28 Septin - related protein expressed during sporulation Bem4 a ( BD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho type GTPases Cdc11 a ( BD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Spr3 Sporulation - specific septin Myo1 a ( BD ) Myosin heavy chain ( myosin II ) , involved in septation and cell wall organization Spr6 Sporulation - specific protein Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Sro77 Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Apg17 a ( AD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Bcy1 a ( AD ) Regulatory subunit of cAMP - dependent protein kinases Ent2 a ( AD ) Epsin homologue required for endocytosis Kin3 a ( AD ) Serine / threonine protein kinase , unknown function Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Sro77 ( continued ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Nip100 a ( AD ) Mitotic spindle positioning protein , dynactin complex protein associated with the spindle Yap1801 a ( AD ) Protein homologous to clathrin assembly polypeptide AP180 ; interacts with Pan1p Yip1 a ( AD ) Protein involved in vesicular transport ; interacts with transport GTPases Ypt1p and Ypt31p at the Golgi membrane Ynl094w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yor197w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Srv2 Adenylate cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Abp1 ( BD ) Actin binding protein involved in cortical actin assembly , has SH3 domain Act1 ( AD , BD ) Actin , involved in cell polarization , endocytosis , cytoskeletal functions Aip1 ( AD ) Actin interacting protein involved in disassembly of actin filaments Pfy1 ( BD ) Profilin , can act to prevent actin polymerization and to complex with monomeric actin Rvs167 ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla1 ( BD ) Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Srv2 ( AD , BD ) Adenylate cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Yhr070w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Sso1 Syntaxin homologue ( t - SNARE ) involved in vesicle transport from Golgi to plasma membrane Yap1801 ( AD ) Protein homologous to clathrin assembly polypeptide AP180 ; interacts with Pan1p Sso2 Syntaxin homologue ( t - SNARE ) involved in vesicle transport from Golgi to plasma membrane Apg7 a ( AD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Yap1801 ( AD ) Protein homologous to clathrin assembly polypeptide AP180 ; interacts with Pan1p Ste20 Serine / threonine protein kinase of the pheromone pathway ; also participates in the pathway regulating filamentous growth Bem1 ( AD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Bem4 a ( AD ) Bud emergence protein , interacts with Rho - type GTPases Boi1 ( AD ) Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi2 homologue Boi2 ( AD ) Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Bud8 a ( BD ) Protein required for bipolar budding Cdc42 - GTP ( BD ) Rho - type GTPase involved in bud site assembly and cell polarity Ste50 Protein required for feedback control of pheromone - induced signal transduction Gic1 ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Svl3 Protein involved in vacuolar uptake of endocytosed vital dyes Crn1 a ( BD ) Coronin , actin - bundling protein Swe1 Serine / tyrosine dual - specificity protein kinase ; able to phosphorylate Cdc28p on tyrosine and inhibit its activity Bem1 a ( BD ) Protein required for cell polarization and bud formation , has two SH3 domains Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) 556 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 Swe1 ( continued ) Serine / tyrosine dual - specificity protein kinase ; able to phosphorylate Cdc28p on tyrosine and inhibit its activity Cdc24 a ( BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Ynl094w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yal004w Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Yap1801 Protein homologous to clathrin assembly polypeptide AP180 ; interacts with Pan1p Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Sso1 ( BD ) Syntaxin homologue ( t - SNARE ) involved in vesicle transport from Golgi to plasma membrane Sso2 ( BD ) Syntaxin homologue ( t - SNARE ) involved in vesicle transport from Golgi to plasma membrane Ybr108c Protein of unknown function Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Ycr086w Protein of unknown function Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Yel023 Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Yer124c Protein of unknown function Boi1 a ( BD ) Bem1p - binding protein , involved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Boi2 a ( BD ) Bem1p - binding protein , in - volved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Ygr221c Protein of unknown function Cdc24 a ( BD ) GEF for Cdc42 , involved in bud emergence , bud site selection , growth of mating projection Pkc1 a ( AD ) Protein kinase C ; regulates MAP kinase cascade involved in regulating cell wall metabolism Ygr268c Protein of unknown function Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla1 a ( BD ) Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Yhr070w Protein of unknown function Srv2 a ( BD ) Adenylate cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) that may provide a link between growth signals and the cytoskeleton Yhr133c Protein of unknown function Las17 a ( BD ) WASP homologue involved in cortical actin assembly Yhr149C Protein of unknown function Zds1 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds2 Zds2 a ( AD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Yil007C Protein of unknown function Chs4 a ( AD ) Protein that stimulates chitin synthase III activity Pfs1 a ( AD ) Protein required for sporulation Rho1 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and (cid:2) - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rho4 – GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Rpn4 a ( AD ) Subunit of the regulatory particle of the proteasome Yip1 Protein involved in vesicular transport ; interacts with transport GTPases Ypt1p and Ypt31p at the Golgi membrane Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Yjr083c Protein of unknown function Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Ykl082c Protein of unknown function Bud8 a ( BD ) Protein required for bipolar budding Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Zds2 a ( BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Ykr083c Protein of unknown function Apg17 a ( BD ) Protein essential for autophagy response to nutritional stress Ynl086w Protein of unknown function Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Ynl094w Protein of unknown function Abp1 a ( BD ) Actin binding protein involved in cortical actin assembly , has SH3 domain Crn1 a ( BD ) Coronin , actin - bundling protein Hsl7 ( BD ) Negative regulatory protein of the Swe1p protein kinase Rvs167 a ( AD , BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla1 a ( BD ) Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Sla2 a ( BD ) Talin - like protein involved in membrane cytoskeleton assembly and required for cell polarization ; also required for the internalization phase of endocytosis Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Swe1 a ( BD ) Serine / tyrosine dual - specificity protein kinase ; able to phosphorylate Cdc28p on tyrosine and inhibit its activity Yor084w Protein of unknown function Cdc11 a ( BD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Yor197w Protein of unknown function Sro77 a ( BD ) Protein that functions together with Sec9p in exocytosis downstream of the Rho3p GTPase Yor284w Protein of unknown function Abp1 a ( BD ) Actin binding protein involved in cortical actin assembly , has SH3 domain Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla2 a ( BD ) Talin - like protein involved in membrane cytoskeleton assembly and required for cell polarization ; also required for the internalization phase of endocytosis Ypl246c Protein of unknown function Las17 a ( BD ) WASP homologue involved in cortical actin assembly Ypr171w Protein of unknown function Cap1 a ( BD ) Actin - capping protein , (cid:3) subunit Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla1 a ( BD ) Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Ypr188c Protein of unknown function Myo1 a ( BD ) Myosin heavy chain ( myosin II ) , involved in septation and cell wall organization Ysc84 Protein of unknown function , has an SH3 domain Rvs167 a ( BD ) Protein that affects actin distribution and bipolar budding , has an SH3 domain Sla1 a ( BD ) Protein involved in assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton , has three SH3 domains Sla2 a ( BD ) Talin - like protein involved in membrane cytoskeleton assembly and required for cell polarization ; also required for the internalization phase of endocytosis Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 557 Figure 1 . Schematic overview of connections between processes involved in cell polarity development . Major processes are color coded in this and the following figures : blue , Cdc42 - signaling path - ways ; purple , Rho1 - signaling pathways ; green , septin organization ; red , actin organization and endocytosis ; yellow , exocytosis ; brown , cell wall synthesis ; turquoise , cytokinesis . Only individual proteins that appear to be branchpoints or major nodal connections between different processes are depicted . Bem4 , for example , shows interac - tions with both Rho1 and Cdc42 GTPase pathways and with the septins . Zds1 and Zds2 link Rho1 with Cdc42 effectors and down - stream processes . Ygr221c also shows interactions with both Cdc42 and Rho1 pathways . Apg17 shows interactions with proteins in - volved in cytokinesis , exocytosis , and Rho1 function . of the interacting proteins has a previously unrecognized function . Additionally , it is not possible to know the direc - tionality of the flow of information through the protein in - teraction network . Finally , further studies are required to de - termine when , where , and why two proteins interact . Here we discuss some interactions that appear particularly signifi - cant or provocative . Cdc42 effectors Activation of the Cdc42 GTPase is a key event in establish - ment and maintenance of cell polarity . Yeast cells deficient in Cdc42 function grow isotropically and are unable to form buds , mating projections , or pseudohyphae . They are unable to properly organize the actin cytoskeleton , septins , or the secretory pathway . Cdc42 interacts with several effector proteins that transduce its signal to bring about several processes , including polarization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Cvrcková et al . , 1995 ; Brown et al . , 1997 ; Chen et al . , 1997 ; Evangelista et al . , 1997 ; Bi et al . , 2000 ; Jaquenod and Peter , 2000 ) . Protein – protein interactions detected in our two - hybrid screens suggest connections between Cdc42 , its regulatory and effector proteins , and proteins involved in several different processes required for cell polarity develop - ment ( Figs . 1 – 3 and Table I ) . Screening with mutant Cdc42 baits locked in the GDP or GTP state , we found interactions between Cdc42 and sev - eral of its known regulators and effector proteins : Cdc24 , Rga1 , Bem1 , Bem4 , Cla4 , Ste20 , Gic1 , and Gic2 . Two - hybrid interactions were observed between Cdc42 GAPs and Cdc42 effectors . The GAP Rga1 interacted with Gic2 , and the GAP Bem3 interacted with Cla4 . It is possible that these interactions were bridged by the Cdc42 protein itself ( Kozminski et al . , 2000 ) . However , if these interactions are direct , they might reflect a feedback mechanism for Cdc42 regulation . Zds1 Bem3 a ( BD ) GAP for Cdc42p and Rho1p Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Yhr149c a ( BD ) Protein of unknown function Zds2 a ( AD , BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Zds2 Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 Bem3 a ( BD ) GAP for Cdc42p and Rho1p Bni1 a ( AD ) Formin protein involved in cytoskeletal polarization and cytokinesis Boi1 a ( BD ) Bem1p - binding protein , in - volved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi2 homologue Boi2 a ( BD ) Bem1p - binding protein , in - volved in bud formation , has an SH3 domain , Boi1 homologue Cdc11 a ( AD ) Septin , involved in cytokinesis Cla4 a ( AD ) PAK kinase required for cytokinesis Gic1 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic2 homologue Gic2 a ( BD ) Effector of Cdc42p , important for bud emergence , Gic1 homologue Pkc1 a ( AD ) Protein kinase C ; regulates MAP kinase cascade involved in regulating cell wall metabolism Rho1 - GTP a ( BD ) GTP - binding protein required to activate the PKC1 pathway and beta - 1 , 3 - glucan synthase , member of the rho subfamily of ras - like proteins Spr6 aa ( AD ) Sporulation - specific protein Yal004w a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yel023c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yer124c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Yhr149c a ( BD ) Protein of unknown function Ykl082c a ( AD ) Protein of unknown function Zds1 a ( AD , BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds2 Zds2 a ( AD , BD ) Protein with effects on cell polarity and transcriptional silencing , homologue of Zds1 A total of 191 reproducible two - hybrid interactions involving 110 proteins were detected . Proteins are listed in alphabetical order . Each pairwise interaction appears twice in the table , once under the bait protein and once under the interacting prey protein . Entries in the second column are noted as BD ( binding domain ) or AD ( activation domain ) to signify the direction of the two - hybrid interaction . a Interactions not previously identified . Table I . Summary of protein – protein interactions detected in two - hybrid screens ( Continued ) Protein Interacting protein ( s ) processes . These two classes of interaction can , respectively , provide novel insights into the biochemical mechanisms re - sponsible for each process and into the regulatory mecha - nisms that coordinate the different processes spatially and temporally within a cell . Interaction of a protein with others involved in a process distinct from the one it was originally implicated in might reflect an underlying regulatory mecha - nism linking the two processes , or it might indicate that one 558 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 of the Cla4 kinase in unbudded cells , but not at later stages , leads to hyperpolarized bud growth and defects in cytokine - sis ( Weiss et al . , 2000 ) . Perhaps Cla4 regulates the polarity of cortical patches via an interaction with Sla2 . The NH 2 - terminal region of Cla4 , which appears to have a function in maintaining cell polarity ( Bi et al . , 2000 ) , contains proline - rich motifs which might be binding sites for the SH3 do - main of Abp1 ( Weiss et al . , 2000 ) . Both Sla2 and Abp1 have vertebrate homologues , and it will be important to test these for interactions with and regulation by PAK kinases ( Eng - qvist - Goldstein et al . , 1999 ; Kessels et al . , 2000 ) . Interest - ingly , PAK family protein kinase was implicated previously in the regulation of yeast class I myosins , and Abp1 , Sla2 , and class I myosins are each implicated in separate mecha - nisms to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Wu et al . , 1996 , 1997 ; Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ; Goode et al . , 2001 ; M . Duncan , J . Cope , and D . Drubin , personal communication ) . Multicopy expression of MSB2 suppresses the defects of a cdc24 mutant ( Bender and Pringle , 1992 ) , but the function of the Msb2 protein is unknown . A two - hybrid interaction between Cla4 and Msb2 suggests that Msb2 is also part of the Cdc42 regulatory pathway . We found that Msb2 inter - acts with Bni4 , a protein that targets chitin deposition to sites of polarized growth by linking chitin synthase to septins ( DeMarini et al . , 1997 ) . Msb2 might coordinate cell wall Table II . Cellular localization of YFP - tagged proteins encoded by novel ORFs Protein Null mutant phenotype Two - hybrid interactions Homologues a YFP fusion location Figure Ykl082c Lethal b Bud8 , Zds2 , Gic1 , Gic2 D . melanogaster CG13648 ( 21 % ) ; CG9274 ( 22 % ) C . elegans ZK354 . 3 ( 25 % ) ; C17F3 . 3 ( 27 % ) S . pombe Spac8c9 . 10cp ( 24 % ) ; Spbc1861 . 01cp ( 20 % ) Nucleolus Fig . 4 , A and B Ycr086w Viable , benomyl sensitive c Gic1 , Gic2 None known Punctate localization at nuclear periphery , nuclear envelope Fig . 4 , C and D Ygr221c Viable , sensitive to nonhydrolyzableGDP analogues c Cdc24 , Pkc1 S . cerevisiae Yhr149c ( 32 % ) ; Muc1 ( 23 % ) Bud tip , bud neck Fig . 4 , E and F Yhr149c Viable b Zds1 , Zds2 S . cerevisiae Ygr221c ( 32 % ) Bud tip , bud neck Fig . 4 , O and P Yil079c / Air1 Viable b Cdc24 H . sapiens ZNF9 ( 26 % ) M . musculus CNBP ( 26 % ) D . melanogaster CG9715 ( 28 % ) ; CG3800 ( 28 % ) C . elegans GLH - 4 ( 25 % ) Nucleolus Fig . 4 , G and H Yer124c Viable b Boi1 , Boi2 , Zds2 D . melanogaster DS02740 . 2 : BG : DS02740 . 2 ( 32 % ) No detectable signal Data not shown Yil007c Viable b Rho1 , Rho4 , Pfs1 , Chs4 , Rpn4 H . sapiens PSMD9 ( 35 % ) D . melanogaster CG9588 ( 28 % ) C . elegans C44B7 . 1 ( 31 % ) ; Y42H9AR . F ( 30 % ) S . pombe Spac2h10 . 02cp ( 27 % ) Cytoplasm Data not shown Ylr423c / Apg17 Viable b Rho1 , Rho2 , Apg17 , Exo84 , Myo1 , Nip100 , Sro77 , Ykr083c S . cerevisiae Ynl047p ( 24 % ) Punctate localization in cytoplasm Fig . 4 , I and J Ypr171w Viable b Cap1 , Rvs167 , Sla1 H . sapiens USP8 ( 23 % ) D . melanogaster CG13648 ( 22 % ) S . cerevisiae Crp1 ( 25 % ) Actin patches Figs . 4 , K and L , and 5 Ygr268c Viable b Rvs167 , Sla1 S . pombe Spac17a5 . 10p ( 31 % ) Cytoplasm Data not shown Yor284w Viable b Abp1 , Rvs167 , Sla2 None known 2 – 5 fast moving dots around cell periphery Figs . 4 , M and N , and 6 Yjr083c Viable b Rvs167 None known No detectable signal Data not shown Ynl094w Viable b Abp1 , Crn1 , Hsl7 , Rvs167 , Sla1 , Sla2 , Sro77 , Swe1 S . pombe Spbc29b5 . 04cp ( 26 % ) Actin patches Unpublisheddata Proteins are listed in the order in which they are discussed in the text . Percentages refer to amino acid identity between homologues . a Information on homologues from other species is taken from the Yeast Proteome Database at http : / / www . proteome . com . b Information on these phenotypes of null mutants is taken from Winzeler et al . ( 1999 ) . c Information on these phenotypes of null mutants is taken from Rieger et al . ( 1999 ) . The Cla4 p21 - activated protein kinase ( PAK ) * showed two - hybrid interactions with several proteins . Its interaction with the septin Cdc12 suggests that a direct interaction might underlie the role of this PAK in regulation of septin filament organization and cytokinesis ( Benton et al . , 1997 ; Weiss et al . , 2000 ) . The relevance of this interaction is sup - ported by the observation that a cla4 cdc12 double mutant is a synthetic lethal ( Cvrcková et al . , 1995 ) . Two - hybrid inter - actions between Cla4 and the cortical patch proteins Sla2 and Abp1 suggest a previously unrecognized regulatory role associated with cortical actin patches . Both Abp1 and Sla2 have functions in cortical patch assembly and in endocytosis , a process that is intimately linked to cortical patches ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ; Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Sla2 is required to nucleate actin assembly in permeabilized yeast cells ( Li et al . , 1995 ; Ayscough et al . , 1997 ) and it mediates polarization of actin cortical patches in a Cdc42 - dependent process ( Yang et al . , 1999 ) . The cla4 null mutant , like an sla2 mutant , is defective in actin nucleation in permeabilized yeast cells ( Eby et al . , 1998 ) . Colocalization of Sla2 with actin is most evident in unbudded and small - budded cells , suggesting that its activity might be most important early in the cell cycle ( Yang et al . , 1999 ) . The kinase activity of Cla4 also appears to be required at an early stage of the cell cycle , as inhibition * Abbreviation used in this paper : PAK , p21 - activated protein kinase . Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 559 Figure 3 . Protein interactions involved in actin assembly and actin functions in endocytosis , cytokinesis , and morphogenesis . Cdc42 effectors show interactions with proteins involved in endocy - tosis and cytokinesis . Interactions between Ynl094w , several actin cytoskeleton proteins , and Swe1 and Hsl7 may underlie the mor - phogenesis checkpoint that monitors actin assembly . Several inter - actions between SH3 domain – containing proteins ( shaded rectan - gles ) and proteins containing proline - rich putative SH3 binding sites ( shaded ovals ) are shown . growth with other Cdc42 - regulated processes . Cla4 also showed two - hybrid interactions with the Cdc42 effectors Gic1 and Gic2 and with Zds2 , a protein that might be a reg - ulator of Cdc42 and Rho1 ( Bi and Pringle , 1996 ) . As dis - cussed below , Zds2 and its homologue Zds1 showed interac - tions with Rho1 and several proteins downstream of Cdc42 and may therefore connect the Rho1 and Cdc42 pathways . The homologous Cdc42 effectors Gic1 and Gic2 ( Brown et al . , 1997 ; Chen et al . , 1997 ; Jaquenod and Peter , 2000 ) also showed interactions with Ste50 , a protein that positively regulates the Ste11 kinase in the pheromone response path - way ( Xu et al . , 1996 ) , in the Hog1 osmotic stress path - way ( Posas et al . , 1998 ) , and during pseudohyphal growth ( Ramezani Rad et al . , 1998 ) . Ste50 and the pheromone re - sponse pathway have been implicated recently in mainte - nance of cell wall integrity in budding cells ( Cullen et al . , 2000 ) . Dfg5 , another protein required for polarized and pseudohyphal growth ( Mösch and Fink , 1997 ) , also inter - acts with Gic1 . These interactions may be involved in main - taining polarized growth during budding and mating and in reestablishing polarity after osmotic stress ( Brewster and Gustin , 1994 ) . An interaction between Gic2 and the Cap1 subunit of the actin filament capping protein suggests a pos - sible role in regulating actin assembly and , therefore , a po - tential novel link between Cdc42 and the actin cytoskeleton . Figure 2 . Interaction map for proteins involved in Cdc42 - and Rho1 - regulated processes and in other cell polarity development pathways . Proteins that regulate Cdc42 function or that transduce signals from activated Cdc42 are shown in blue . Rho1 and its effectors are shown in purple . Cdc42 - regulated pathways show interactions with proteins involved in septin organization via interactions with Bem4 ; with Rho1 via interactions with Zds2 and Ygr221c ; and with proteins involved in cell cycle control , endocytosis , and polarized exocytosis . Cdc42 effector proteins show interactions with proteins involved in cytokinesis , microtubule stability , polarized growth , actin assembly , polarized secretion , and cell wall synthesis . Proteins involved in septin organization may interact with Rho1 via Bem4 . Rho1 involvement in nuclear migration , actin / myosin ring contraction , and septum formation ( exocytosis ) during cytokinesis is suggested by Apg17 - mediated connections between proteins involved in these processes . Other interactions suggest connections between late exocytic and early endocytic processes , between early and late steps in secretory pathways , and between exocytosis and autophagy . 560 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 Apical bud growth appears to stimulate establishment of a distal bud site landmark that functions in the bipolar budding pattern seen in diploids . Several interactions may shed new light on this process . Gic1 and Gic2 both interact with Zds2 , and all three proteins showed interactions with Ykl082c , an essential protein of unknown function ( Winzeler et al . , 1999 ) . Ykl082c also showed interactions with Bud8 , a protein that appears to be a component of the distal bud site tag ( Zahner et al . , 1996 ; Harkins et al . , 2001 ) . Recent find - ings also suggest that Ste20 PAK kinase , a Cdc42 effector , regulates the pattern of diploid bud site selection via Bud8 ( Sheu et al . , 2000 ) . Ste20 was found to affect bipolar bud site selection through its regulation of apical growth in the bud . The decreased period of polarized bud growth seen in ste20 mutants reduced the accuracy of bud site selection in diploid cells and produced a unipolar budding pattern like that of the bud8 mutant . Interestingly , we found that Bud8 interacts with Ste20 . The Ykl082c protein may also be involved in po - larized growth and participate in this process . We found that haploid cells containing the genomic Ykl082c - YFP fusion were slow growing and temperature sensitive . Heterozygous diploids appeared to have a cell cycle delay in late mitosis , suggesting a possible defect in nuclear migration ( data not shown ) . Curiously , YFP - tagged Ykl082c localized to the nu - cleolus ( Table II and Fig . 4 , A and B ) . Nucleolar localization may be connected to its interaction with Zds2 , which in ad - dition to its effects on cell polarity also has a role in gene si - lencing and interacts with the nucleolar protein Sir2 ( Roy and Runge , 2000 ) . Nucleolar sequestration via association with a multiprotein complex containing Sir2 has been found to control the functions of regulatory proteins , including the protein phosphatase Cdc14 that regulates mitotic exit ( Shou et al . , 1999 ; Visintin and Amon , 2000 ) . The double mutant gic1 gic2 has depolarized microtubules as well as a disorganized actin cytoskeleton ( Brown et al . , 1997 ) . We found two novel interactions for Gic1 and Gic2 that suggest that these proteins may directly affect microtu - bule polarization and nuclear migration during mitosis . The first is an interaction between Gic1 and Bub2 , which func - tions in the microtubule / spindle checkpoint ( Hoyt et al . , 1991 ) . The second is with an uncharacterized protein , Ycr086w . The ycr086w null mutant is benomyl sensitive and has impaired nuclear migration ( Rieger et al . , 1999 ) . YFP - tagged Ycr086w localizes to the nuclear periphery in a punc - tate pattern ( Table II and Fig . 4 , C and D ) . Other interac - tions of Gic1 and Gic2 with the septin Cdc12 and with Hof1 / Cyk2 , an SH3 - domain containing protein involved in cytokinesis ( Kamei et al . , 1998 ; Lippincott and Li , 1998a ; Vallen et al . , 2000 ) , suggest that Gic1 and Gic2 might regu - late cytokinesis , particularly septum formation . In total , these interactions suggest that Gic1 and Gic2 have the potential to regulate microtubule polarity and to coordinate nuclear mi - gration and division with cytokinesis ( Pereira et al . , 2000 ) . Gic1 also interacts with Bem4 , which is interesting because Bem4 also interacts with the septins Cdc11 and Cdc12 and with several GTPases , including Cdc42 ( and Rsr1 , see below ) , and is thought to have a role in GTPase localization or regula - tion ( Hirano et al . , 1996 ; Mack et al . , 1996 ) . It is tempting to speculate that these Bem4 interactions might target Cdc42 and other GTPases to the bud neck to regulate septation . Figure 4 . Fluorescence micrographs of proteins tagged at the COOH terminus with YFP ( A – N ) . YFP signal is shown in green . Cells were outlined by staining with Alexa fluor 633 conjugated to con - canavalin A ( blue ) . ( A and B ) Ykl082c - YFP ; ( C and D ) Ycr086w - YFP ; ( E and F ) Ygr221c - YFP ; ( G and H ) Yil079c / Air1 - YFP ; ( I and J ) Ylr423c / Apg17 - YFP ; ( K and L ) Ypr171w - YFP ; ( M and N ) Yor284w - YFP . ( O and P ) Immunofluorescence micrographs of Yhr149c tagged with a 13Myc epitope . GFP - tagged Yhr149 ex - hibits the same localization although the GFP signal is extremely weak . Bar , 5 (cid:5) m . Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 561 Cdc42 regulators The guanidine nucleotide exchange factor Cdc24 is required for activation of Cdc42 ( Zheng et al . , 1994 ) . We found novel interactions between Cdc24 and several other proteins . One of the most interesting is Ygr221c , a protein of un - known function . Consistent with a function for Ygr221c as a positive GTPase regulator , the ygr221c null mutant is sensi - tive to a GDP analogue that inhibits G protein activation by GTP ( Rieger et al . , 1999 ) . Ygr221c also interacted with the yeast protein kinase C ( Pkc1 ) , which functions downstream of the Rho1 GTPase . Therefore , Ygr221c may provide a reg - ulatory connection between Rho1 - and Cdc42 - regulated pathways . In support of the in vivo relevance of these two - hybrid interactions , YFP - tagged Ygr221c localizes to sites of cell growth , including the nascent bud site , bud tips , and bud necks , similar to the pattern observed for Cdc42 ( Table II and Fig . 4 , E and F ; S . Tcheperegine and E . Bi , personal communication ) . A homologue of Ygr221c , Yhr149c , was identified as a dosage suppressor of a cdc42 - 118 polarized growth defect ( M . Lau , S . Gadde , and K . Kozminski , per - sonal communication ) . Like Ygr221c , Yhr149c localizes to sites of cell growth ( Fig . 4 , Q and R ; S . Tcheperegine and E . Bi , personal communication ) . Yhr149c was used as a bait in a two - hybrid screen and found to interact with Zds1 and Zds2 , suggesting that it may be involved in coordinating Rho1 - and Cdc42 - regulated pathways ( see below ) . Cdc24 localizes to the nucleus during the G1 phase of the cell cycle ( Toenjes et al . , 1999 ; Nern and Arkowitz , 2000 ; Shimada et al . , 2000 ) . We detected interactions between Cdc24 and Yil079c . Yil079c was found recently to have a role in regulation of nuclear RNA processing and named Air1 ( Inoue et al . , 2000 ) . YFP - tagged Yil079c localized to the nucleolus ( Fig . 4 , G and H ) . This result is particularly intriguing in light of the fact that the human Cdc42 was re - cently found to stimulate RNA splicing ( Wilson and Ceri - one , 2000 ; Wilson et al . , 2000 ) . Cdc24 was also found to interact with the epsin Ent2 ( Wendland et al . , 1999 ) . Ent2 and other epsins are clathrin - binding proteins that function during the internalization step of endocytosis ( Chen et al . , 1998 ) . They are also essen - tial for normal cortical actin patch assembly ( Wendland et al . , 1999 ; Tang et al . , 2000 ) . Cortical actin patch proteins are essential for the internalization step of endocytosis ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) , and the cortical patches are concentrated proximal to sites of rapid exocytosis ( Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000b ) . The interaction between Cdc24 and an epsin might target the endocytic pathway to bud tips , where it would be in proximity with the exocytic pathway . As each process retrieves components necessary for the other , both may be made more efficient by this proximity . Zds1 and Zds2 are homologous proteins . The double mu - tant zds1 zds2 has abnormally elongated buds , abnormal septin localization , and a cytokinesis defect ( Bi and Pringle , 1996 ) . Zds1 localizes to bud tips in small - and medium - budded cells . Based on genetic interactions , Zds1 and Zds2 seem to be neg - ative regulators of the polarized growth and septation processes initiated by Cdc42 activation ( Bi and Pringle , 1996 ) . Two - hybrid interactions of Zds1 and Zds2 with the Cdc42 effectors Gic1 , Gic2 , and Cla4 , and with other proteins that are likely to function downstream of these effectors ( Table I and Figs . 1 and 2 ) , provide support for a role in regulation of Cdc42 - dependent pathways . Intriguingly , Zds2 also showed inter - actions with Rho1 and its downstream effectors Pkc1 and Bni1 , suggesting either a mechanism to coordinate Cdc42 and Rho1 Figure 5 . Fluorescence micrographs of Ypr171w - YFP showing localization to actin cor - tical patches . Cells were outlined by staining with Alexa fluor 633 conjugated to concanavalin A ( blue ) . ( A and D ) Ypr171w - YFP ( green ) ; ( B and E ) Abp1 - CFP ( red ) ; ( C and F ) merged image . ( G and H ) Ypr171w - YFP ( G ) and Abp1 - CFP ( H ) in an ark1 prk1 deletion strain . Bar , 5 (cid:5) m . 562 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 pathways , or that Zds2 has distinct roles in the two pathways . Zds2 also interacts with the septin Cdc11 , a sporulation - spe - cific protein , Spr6 ( Kallal et al . , 1990 ) , and three proteins of unknown function , Yer124c , Yal004w , and Yel023c . Cell polarity develops in response to cortical cues . In bud - ding yeast , cortical markers left by previous cell divisions re - sult in recruitment and local activation of the Rsr1 / Bud1 GTPase . Rsr1 is linked to Cdc42 via interaction with Cdc24 ( Ruggieri et al . , 1992 ; Bender , 1993 ; Zheng et al . , 1995 ; Chant , 1999 ; Park et al . , 1999 ) and via the scaffold protein Bem1 , whose two - hybrid interactions are described in a subse - quent paragraph . We detected a novel interaction between Rsr1 and Bem4 , a protein mentioned above as interacting with Gic1 and the septins Cdc11 and Cdc12 . Bem4 interacts with both the GTP - and GDP - bound forms of Rsr1 ( Table I ) , as it does in its interactions with Rho - type GTPases ( Hirano et al . , 1996 ; Mack et al . , 1996 ) . As suggested above , Bem4 might bring multiple GTPases to the bud neck . The activity of the Cdc28 cyclin – dependent kinase is re - quired to recruit Cdc24 to the plasma membrane in G1 to coordinate cell polarity development with the nuclear divi - sion cycle ( Jaquenod and Peter , 2000 ) . We found that Bud2 , the GTPase - activating protein that regulates Rsr1 ( Bender , 1993 ; Park et al . , 1993 , 1999 ) , interacts with the cyclin Cln2 , which activates Cdc28 in G1 . Bud2 might be a target of the Cln2 - Cdc28 kinase to regulate polarity in G1 . The observation that a bud2 cln2 double mutant is a syn - thetic lethal provides support for this possibility ( Benton et al . , 1993 ; Cvrcková and Nasmyth , 1993 ) . Bem1 interacts with several proteins involved in Cdc42 ac - tivation and is thought to act as a scaffold for proteins in - volved in cell polarity development ( Chant , 1999 ; Moskow et al . , 2000 ) . Here , Bem1 and Cdc24 were found to interact with Swe1 . Swe1 is a protein kinase that phosphorylates and inhibits Cdc28 in a morphogenesis checkpoint response that monitors actin perturbation ( McMillan et al . , 1998 ) and sep - tin assembly ( Barral et al . , 1999 ; McMillan et al . , 1999 ; Shulewitz et al . , 1999 ; Lew , 2000 ; Longtine et al . , 2000 ) . In - teractions between Swe1 , Bem1 , and Cdc24 raise the possi - bility that Swe1 might also monitor assembly of the Bem1 – Cdc24 – Cdc42 complex at the bud site . Alternatively , these interactions may reflect a role suggested for Swe1 in adapta - tion to defects in polarity establishment ( Weiss et al . , 2000 ) . The Bem1 protein , via its two SH3 domains , interacts with Boi1 and Boi2 ( Bender et al . , 1996 ; Matsui et al . , 1996 ) . Boi1 and Boi2 are homologous proteins and they themselves con - Figure 6 . Fluorescence micrographs of Yor284w - YFP showing the effect of actin depolarization ( A – D ) , localization to the spindle pole body ( E – J ) , and localization relative to the actin cytoskeleton ( K – P ) . Cells were outlined by staining with Alexa fluor 633 conjugated to con - canavalin A ( blue ) . ( A and B ) Yor284w - YFP ; ( C and D ) Yor284w - YFP in an ark1 prk1 deletion strain . ( E and H ) Yor284w - YFP ( green ) ; ( F and I ) Spc29 - CFP ( red ) ; ( G and J ) merged image . ( K and N ) Yor284w - YFP ( green ) ; ( L and O ) Abp1 - CFP ( red ) ; ( M and P ) merged image . Bar , 5 (cid:5) m . Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 563 tain SH3 domains . We found that Bem1 , Boi1 , and Boi2 par - ticipate in several previously unreported protein – protein in - teractions . Both Boi1 and Boi2 , as well as Zds2 , showed interactions with Yer124c , an uncharacterized protein . Expres - sion of Yer124c appears to be cell cycle regulated , with tran - script levels peaking in G1 ( Spellman et al . , 1998 ) . The pro - tein contains a motif that is a potential SH3 domain ligand and which binds specifically to the Boi1 SH3 domain ( unpub - lished data ) . The Boi1 bait was an activator , so that two - hybrid positives could not be easily detected , but several other new interacting partners were identified in the Boi2 screen . One of these is Msb1 , which has been implicated genetically in Cdc42 - regulated processes . MSB1 is a multicopy suppressor of cdc24 , cdc42 , and bem4 mutants ( Bender and Pringle , 1989 ; Mack et al . , 1996 ) , and the msb1 null mutant is synthetic le - thal with a bem1 null ( Bender and Pringle , 1991 ) . Connections between Cdc42 - regulated pathways and the secretory pathway Actin cables and a class V myosin are required for accumula - tion of secretory vesicles at the growing tips of yeast cells ( Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000a , b ) . However , an unresolved question is how vesicle fusion at the plasma membrane is properly targeted . Therefore , it is noteworthy that Rsr1 , Bem1 , and Cdc24 were all found to interact with the exo - cyst component Sec15 . The exocyst is a multiprotein com - plex thought to dock secretory vesicles at sites of polarized growth ( Ter Bush and Novick , 1995 ; Ter Bush et al . , 1996 ) . An interaction between Sec15 and the activated Sec4 Rab GTPase induces formation of the exocyst complex and vesi - cle docking on the plasma membrane ( Guo et al . , 1999b ) . Recently , Rho1 was shown to interact with Sec3 and be re - quired for localization of the exocyst to the bud tip ( Guo et al . , 2001 ) . A connection between the exocyst and the GTP - ases that function during bud initiation may allow Rsr1 - , Cdc42 - , and Rho1 - regulated processes to be coordinated with exocytosis to initiate bud growth . One or more of these GTPases might regulate exocyst assembly . An additional link between the polarity - regulating Rho GTPases and exocytosis was suggested by the observation that Boi2 interacts with the yeast Rab escort protein Mrs6 . Mrs6 is required for Sec4 - dependent transport of secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane ( Fujimura et al . , 1994 ; Jiang and Ferro - Novick , 1994 ; Bauer et al . , 1996 ; Alory and Balch , 2000 ) . This interaction , like those between Sec15 , Bem1 , and Rsr1 , suggests a link between regulators of bud initiation and the secretory apparatus . The possibility that Boi1 and Boi2 affect secretion is supported by the finding that the budding defect of a boi1 boi2 double mutant is sup - pressed by overproduction of the Rho3 GTPase ( Bender et al . , 1996 ; Matsui et al . , 1996 ) . Rho3 specifically regulates vesicle transport and fusion during exocytosis ( Adamo et al . , 1999 ; Robinson et al . , 1999 ) . Rho1 effectors The Rho1 GTPase is a major regulator of cell polarity and cell wall synthesis in S . cerevisiae ( Yamochi et al . , 1994 ; Drgonová et al . , 1996 ; Kamada et al . , 1996 ; Qadota et al . , 1996 ) . The GTP - bound form of Rho1 activates 1 , 3 - (cid:2) - glucan synthase , which catalyzes the synthesis of the major structural component of the cell wall , and Pkc1 , which controls a mito - gen - activated protein kinase cascade – regulating cell wall me - tabolism and actin polarity ( Paravicini et al . , 1992 ; Delley and Hall , 1999 ) . We found that Rho1 interacts with Bem4 , Rga1 , Pkc1 , and Bni1 . The formin protein Bni1 is thought to be a cortical anchor that directs actin polarity and nuclear migration ( Imamura et al . , 1997 ; Fujiwara et al . , 1998 , 1999 ; Vallen et al . , 2000 ) , in part via an interaction with profilin ( Pfy1 ) . An interaction of Bni1 with Spa2 localizes Bni1 to the bud growth sites , where it mediates reorganization of the ac - tin cytoskeleton and concentration of polarized growth to bud tips during apical growth ( Fujiwara et al . , 1998 ; Sheu et al . , 2000 ) . Bni1 is also connected to Cdc42 pathways ( Evan - gelista et al . , 1997 ; Jaquenod and Peter , 2000 ) . New interactions for Rho1 and its associated proteins sug - gest possible roles in cell wall synthesis during sporulation , starvation - induced autophagy , and cytokinesis . A role for Rho1 in cell wall synthesis during sporulation was suggested previously by the finding that a bem2 Rho1 - GAP mutant has a sporulation defect due to loss of cell wall integrity ( Cid et al . , 1998 ) . We found that Bem4 interacted with the sporulation - specific septin Spr28 ( De Virgilio et al . , 1996 ; Fares et al . , 1996 ) , as well as with the septins involved in vegetative growth . Rho1 also interacted with Shc1 , a protein required for maintenance of cell wall integrity under osmotic stress ( Hong et al . , 1999 ) . SHC1 expression is upregulated during sporulation and it is involved in the chitin synthase III – dependent formation of the spore wall chitosan layer ( Bulawa , 1993 ) . Shc1 has homology to the Chs4 protein ( Cid et al . , 1995 ; Trilla et al . , 1997 ) , which stimulates chitin synthase III activity ( Bulawa , 1993 ; DeMarini et al . , 1997 ; Trilla et al . , 1997 ) . Rho1 also interacted with a novel pro - tein , Yil007c , which may have a function in regulating cell wall synthesis and other processes during sporulation . When used as bait in two - hybrid screens , Yil007c interacted with Chs4 and with Pfs1 , a protein required for sporulation ( Deng and Saunders , 2001 ) . Pfs1 is a homologue of the S . pombe protein tea1 , which regulates polarized growth ( Mata and Nurse , 1997 ) and contains kelch repeats , structures thought to mediate binding interactions with actin filaments ( Mata and Nurse , 1997 ) . Yil007c is homologous to a human proteasome regulatory subunit ( Watanabe et al . , 1998 ) , but had not been implicated as functioning with the yeast pro - teasome ( Russell et al . , 1999 ) . However , we found an inter - action between Yil007c and the proteasome subunit Rpn4 , supporting such a role and suggesting a novel function in cell wall synthesis regulation . A Yil007c - YFP fusion local - ized diffusely in the cytoplasm ( data not shown ) . Rho1 also interacted with Ylr423c / Apg17 , a protein that was shown recently to regulate autophagy by interacting with and activating the Apg1 kinase ( Kamada et al . , 2000 ) . Autophagy is a poorly understood starvation - induced pro - cess by which cytoplasm is surrounded by a double mem - brane which then fuses with the vacuole or lysosome . Autophagy is induced by downregulation of the phosphati - dylinositol kinases Tor1 and Tor2 ( Ohsumi , 1999 ; Ka - mada et al . , 2000 ) . The interaction between Rho1 and Apg17 suggests that autophagy may be regulated in part by Rho1 . In addition to its role in regulation of protein syn - thesis , Tor2 has an essential function in cell cycle – depen - 564 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 dent organization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Helliwell et al . , 1998 ) . Overexpression of PKC1 , RHO1 , or ROM2 , a gene that encodes a Rho1 guanidine nucleotide exchange factor , suppresses the actin organization defect of a tor2 mutant . Perhaps Apg17 acts as an effector of Rho1 in a Tor2 - depen - dent pathway that modulates cell polarity and autophagy . Apg17 interacted with several proteins in addition to Rho1 , including Rho2 , Myo1 , Nip100 , Exo84 , and Sro77 , and it had been reported previously to make additional two hybrid interactions ( Ito et al . , 2001 ) . Interactions with Exo84 and Sro77 suggest a connection to exocytosis . Exo84 is an exocyst component ( Guo et al . , 1999a ) , and Sro77 and its homologue Sro7 regulate vesicle docking and mem - brane fusion at the plasma membrane ( Lehman et al . , 1999 ) . Interactions with Nip100 and Myo1 suggest that Apg17 may have a role in cytokinesis or that Myo1 and Nip100 have roles in autophagy . Nip100 is a yeast dynactin component involved in nuclear division and migration ( Ka - hana et al . , 1998 ; Fujiwara et al . , 1999 ) . Myo1 is a type II myosin that functions in the contractile ring ( Bi et al . , 1998 ; Lippincott and Li , 1998b ) . Sro77 and Sro7 have been found to form a complex with Myo1 ( Kagami et al . , 1998 ) . The Drosophila homologue of Sro77 and Sro7 , the lethal ( 2 ) giant larvae gene product , also interacts with myo - sins ( Strand et al . , 1994 ) . During cytokinesis , targeted exo - cytosis at the site of cell division is coordinated with , and possibly guided by , contraction of the actinomyosin ring ( Hales et al . , 1999 ; Vallen et al . , 2000 ) . Perhaps a Myo1 – Sro77 complex couples septum formation to contraction of the actomyosin ring , with Myo1 playing a specialized role in vesicle targeting to the bud neck ( Schott et al . , 1999 ) . In - teractions between Apg17 and Nip100 , Myo1 , Sro77 , and Exo84 might be part of a mechanism coordinating nuclear migration , actomyosin ring contraction , and exocytosis dur - ing cytokinesis or autophagy ( Kahana et al . , 1998 ; Fuji - wara et al . , 1999 ; Hales et al . , 1999 ) . YFP - tagged Ylr423c / Apg17 localized in punctate patches in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 4 , I and J ) . Perhaps these patches play a role in autophago - cytic vesicle formation . Connections between Rho1 and Cdc42 pathways As discussed above , Ygr221c interacts with both Cdc24 and the Rho1 effector Pkc1 . This interaction is quite interesting as a potential means for Pkc1 to regulate Cdc42 function and cell polarity . Cell wall stress induces hyperactivation of Rho1 , which in turn results in a transient loss of actin polarity in or - der to depolarize cell wall synthesis and repair widespread cell wall damage ( Delley and Hall , 1999 ) . An undefined Pkc1 - dependent pathway controls actin depolarization . Depolariza - tion is dependent on Pkc1 but not on the Pkc1 - activated mi - togen - activated protein kinase cascade , which is necessary for repolarization . The interactions between Pkc1 , Ygr221c , and Cdc24 , together with the proposed function of Ygr221c as a GTPase regulatory protein ( Rieger et al . , 1999 ) , suggest that Pkc1 could affect the actin cytoskeleton by inhibiting Cdc42 function through an interaction with Ygr221c . Zds1 and Zds2 might also monitor and regulate Cdc42 in response to Rho1 . Zds2 interacts with both Rho1 and the Rho1 effectors Pkc1 and Bni1 , as well as with several proteins in Cdc42 - regu - lated pathways . Interestingly , when Yhr149c , the homologue of the Cdc24 - interacting protein Ygr221c , was used as bait in a two - hybrid screen , Zds1 and Zds2 were both found to inter - act with Yhr149c . These interactions suggest that Yhr149c may also be involved in coordinating Rho1 - and Cdc42 - regu - lated pathways . Actin cortical patch assembly , the morphogenesis checkpoint , and endocytosis Actin cortical patches are one of the major cytoskeletal struc - tures in yeast and are essential for normal endocytosis , cell growth , and morphology ( Botstein et al . , 1997 ; Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000b ) . Patches are associated with invaginations of the plasma membrane ( Mulholland et al . , 1994 ) and are found in polarized clusters at regions of cell growth in bud - ding cells . Numerous cortical patch proteins have been iden - tified . How these proteins function in patch assembly and endocytosis are largely unknown . Patch assembly probably begins with the association of assembly factors recruited to the plasma membrane by Cdc42 - associated proteins , and is then followed by nucleation of actin filaments and actin - dependent association of proteins regulating filament assembly and stability ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ; Botstein et al . , 1997 ; Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000b ) . Our results confirm several interactions between patch proteins , identify new interac - tions , and suggest roles for several uncharacterized proteins in patch assembly or patch - mediated endocytosis ( Fig . 3 ) . Sla2 ( related to mammalian Hip1 ) , Sla1 , Las17 / Bee1 ( re - lated to mammalian WASp / SCAR ) , Rvs167 ( related to mammalian amphiphysin ) , and Abp1 ( related to mamma - lian Abp1 ) all function in actin nucleation and assembly ( Holtzman et al . , 1993 ; Amberg et al . , 1995 ; Li et al . , 1995 ; Li , 1997 ; Lila and Drubin , 1997 ; Wesp et al . , 1997 ; Ay - scough et al . , 1999 ; Balguerie et al . , 1999 ; Yang et al . , 1999 ; Goode et al . , 2001 ) . Las17 / Bee1 and Abp1 both localize with and activate the Arp2 / 3 complex to nucleate actin fila - ment assembly ( Madania et al . , 1999 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ; Goode et al . , 2001 ) . Sla1 , Rvs167 and Abp1 might share functions in actin cortical patch assembly because they inter - act with overlapping sets of proteins and show synthetic – lethal genetic interactions ( Holtzman et al . , 1993 ; Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) . The actin monomer binding adenylate cy - clase regulatory subunit Srv2 can , for example , apparently interact with all three proteins to mediate the association of monomeric actin with the actin - nucleating complex ( Free - man et al . , 1996 ; Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) . Sla1 , Rvs167 , and Abp1 contain SH3 domains that are important for their function ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ; Ay - scough et al . , 1999 ) , and several of the proteins with which they interact contain proline - rich regions that are potential SH3 domain binding sites . Sla1 and Rvs167 both showed interactions with Las17 / Bee1 ( Li , 1997 ) and Ysc84 ( Mada - nia et al . , 1999 ) . Ysc84 itself contains an SH3 domain that might make other protein contacts . Two proteins of un - known function , Ygr268c and Ypr171w , also interacted with Sla1 and Rvs167 . As noted in Fig . 3 , Ygr268c and Ypr171w contain proline - rich motifs that are potential SH3 domain binding sites . Ypr171w also interacted with Cap1 , the (cid:3) subunit of the yeast actin filament capping protein , which regulates the growth of actin filaments ( Amatruda and Cooper , 1992 ; Amatruda et al . , 1992 ) . Thus , Ypr171w Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 565 may function as a link between actin - nucleating complexes and the actin - capping protein , perhaps coordinating the nucleation and elongation of actin filaments . YFP - tagged Ypr171w was observed at growth sites in the bud in a punc - tate pattern and at the bud neck of large - budded cells ( Fig . 4 , K and L ) . Coexpression of Ypr171w - YFP with CFP - tagged Abp1 , an actin cortical patch component , demon - strated that Ypr171w colocalizes with some , but perhaps not all , Abp1 - containing actin cortical patches ( Fig . 5 , A – F ) . The punctate localization pattern is , like that of Abp1 , dis - turbed in the ark1 prk1 double deletion strain ( Fig . 5 , G and H ) , which has abnormal actin clumps ( Cope et al . , 1999 ) . However , Ypr171w localization to the bud neck is still seen in the ark1 prk1 mutant ( Fig . 5 G ) . A Ygr268c - YFP fusion localized diffusely in the cytoplasm ( data not shown ) . Another uncharacterized protein , Yor284w , interacted with cortical patch components Sla2 , Rvs167 , and Abp1 . Sla2 localizes to sites of polarized growth independently of actin ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ) and mediates an early step in the polarization of actin cortical patches ( Yang et al . , 1999 ) . Rvs167 also affects patch polarization ( Balguerie et al . , 1999 ) , perhaps via the interaction observed here with Sla2 . Colocal - ization of Sla2 with actin is most visible in unbudded and small - budded cells , implying that its patch assembly activity is most important early in the cell cycle ( Yang et al . , 1999 ) . Expression of Yor284w peaks in the G1 phase of the cell cy - cle ( Spellman et al . , 1998 ) , supporting the idea that it plays a role in this process . The Yor284w - YFP fusion localized to a few distinct , mobile punctate structures in the cell ( Figs . 4 , M and N and 6 , A and B ) . In many cases these dots were ob - served moving rapidly around the cell periphery . The rela - tionship of these structures to cortical patches is unclear . Yor284w appears in a stationary , diffuse cytoplasmic clump in the ark1 prk1 double deletion strain ( Fig . 6 , C and D ) , suggesting that its localization is dependent on actin polariza - tion . However , coexpression of Yor284w - YFP with CFP - tagged Spc29 spindle pole body protein ( Fig . 6 , E – J ) and CFP - tagged Abp1 ( Fig . 6 , K – P ) showed that the Yor284w - containing dots do not localize to cortical patches , but that a subset of them colocalize with the spindle pole body . Four other proteins that interact with Rvs167 contain proline - rich potential SH3 domain binding sites . One is Acf2 , a protein implicated in cortical actin assembly ( Lechler and Li , 1997 ) , whereas the others , Ybr108w , Yjr083c , and Ynl094w , are proteins of unknown function . Ybr108w has been found to interact with both Rvs167 and Rvs161 ( Bon et al . , 2000 ) , a protein that forms a complex with Rvs167 ( Navarro et al . , 1997 ) . A Yjr083c - YFP fusion localized dif - fusely in the cytoplasm ( data not shown ) . Ynl094w showed interactions with five cortical patch pro - teins . It interacted with Sla2 and with three SH3 domain proteins involved in actin nucleation , Sla1 , Rvs167 , and Abp1 . Ynl094w also interacted with the actin - bundling protein Crn1 ( Goode et al . , 1999 ) and with Sro77 , a pro - tein which functions in polarized secretion ( Kagami et al . , 1998 ; Lehman et al . , 1999 ) . These interactions suggest that Ynl094w may link actin nucleation to exocytosis . Other in - teractions suggest that Ynl094w might function in the mor - phogenesis checkpoint response . Because this response is poorly understood , two - hybrid interactions involving the checkpoint proteins might provide important insights into the mechanisms for monitoring the cytoskeleton . Ynl094w interacted with two proteins involved in regulation of the morphogenesis checkpoint , Swe1 and Hsl7 ( Shulewitz et al . , 1999 ) . In addition to monitoring the actin cytoskeleton ( McMillan et al . , 1998 ; Lew , 2000 ) , Swe1 may monitor sep - tin organization via an interaction with Hsl7 and Hsl1 at the bud neck ( Barral et al . , 1999 ; McMillan et al . , 1999 ; Shule - witz et al . , 1999 ; Lew , 2000 ; Longtine et al . , 2000 ) . The fact that Ynl094w showed interactions with Swe1 and Hsl7 and with five cortical patch proteins suggests that Swe1 and Hsl7 might monitor actin assembly via an interaction with Ynl094w . Ynl094w has been found to localize to actin corti - cal patches ( L . Tseng , M . Schulewitz , and J . Thorner , per - sonal communication ) . Interactions of the secretory apparatus Polarized growth and budding require the delivery of pro - teins and lipids to specific sites on the plasma membrane . Under cell cycle control , exocytosis first becomes localized to regions of cell growth at the presumptive bud site . As a bud emerges , exocytosis initially localizes to a small region at the bud tip , then becomes delocalized in the bud , and finally it becomes localized to the bud neck , mirroring cortical ac - tin cytoskeleton organization at each stage ( Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000b ) . The mechanisms that insure this contin - ual coordination between the exocytic machinery and the ac - tin cytoskeleton have yet to be fully elucidated . The Rho3 GTPase interacts with elements of the exocytic machinery to control transport of secretory vesicles and vesicle docking and fusion at the plasma membrane . Vesicle transport is depen - dent on function of the class V myosin Myo2 ( Schott et al . , 1999 ) . Vesicle fusion occurs through an interaction with Exo70 ( Adamo et al . , 1999 ; Robinson et al . , 1999 ) , a compo - nent of the exocyst complex . Rho3 can also affect organiza - tion of the actin cytoskeleton ( Imai et al . , 1996 ) . We found that Rho3 interacts with three subunits of casein kinase II . This observation is interesting because one function of casein kinase II is to maintain actin cytoskeleton polarity ( Rethi - naswamy et al . , 1998 ) . Our results suggest that casein kinase II might therefore function as an effector of Rho3 to regulate actin cytoskeleton organization , and that Rho3 might coordi - nate secretory and actin cytoskeletal organization . The vesicle - docking protein Sro77 , homologous to the Drosophila protein lethal ( 2 ) giant larvae gene product , showed numerous interactions implicating this protein in regulatory , cytoskeletal , and endocytic roles ( Table I ) . As mentioned above , Sro77 showed interactions with Apg17 and Nip100 . It also showed interactions with the epsin Ent2 and with Yap1801 , both clathrin - binding proteins that func - tion during the internalization step of endocytosis ( Chen et al . , 1998 ; Wendland and Emr , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1999 ) . Sro77 and the related protein Sro7 might therefore also function in the early steps of endocytosis , or they may coordinate endocytosis and exocytosis . The v - SNAREs Snc1 and Snc2 appear to be involved in both exocytic and en - docytic transport at the plasma membrane . Snc1 and Snc2 can interact with endosomal t - SNAREs and snc mutants are defective in endocytosis as well as exocytosis ( Gurunathan et al . , 2000 ) . Perhaps the plasma membrane t - SNAREs and 566 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 their regulators , such as Sro7 / Sro77 , are also able to partici - pate in both processes . Similiarly , an interaction we observed between Sro77 and Yip1 , which recruits the Ypt1 and Ypt31 transport GTPases to the Golgi apparatus , suggests similar possible relationships between proteins involved in early and late steps of exocytosis and / or endocytosis . Sro77 also showed an interaction with Bcy1 , the regula - tory subunit of cAMP - dependent protein kinases ( Cannon et al . , 1990 ) . In epithelial cells , exocytosis is stimulated by the cAMP - dependent protein kinase PKA ( Takuma , 1990 ; Koh et al . , 2000 ) , which appears to regulate SNARE com - plex formation ( Foster et al . , 1998 ) . Perhaps SNARE assem - bly in S . cerevisiae is also regulated in response to cAMP - dependent protein kinase activity . Further Sro77 interactions were observed with several un - characterized proteins , including Ynl094w , which may be a link between the secretory apparatus and actin organization ( see above ) , and Kin3 , a protein kinase of unknown function . Sso1 and Sso2 are syntaxin homologue t - SNAREs that me - diate vesicle targeting to the plasma membrane during exocy - tosis ( Aalto et al . , 1993 ) . Sso2 interacted with Apg7 , a regula - tor of autophagy , revealing another possible connection between exocytic and autophagocytic processes . Apg7 has ho - mology to the E1 family of ubiquitin - activating enzymes and mediates a novel protein conjugation reaction required for autophagy ( Mizushima et al . , 1998 ; Kim et al . , 1999 ; Tanida et al . , 1999 ) . Perhaps Apg7 - mediated modification of plasma membrane t - SNAREs recruits them for formation of auto - phagocytic vesicles or for processes related to exocytosis . MSB3 and MSB4 are multicopy suppressors of bud emer - gence mutations and appear to link Cdc42 to the actin cyto - skeleton ( Bach et al . , 2000 ; Bi et al . , 2000 ) . Surprisingly , Msb3 and Msb4 were also found to have GAP activity towards the Rab GTPases Sec4 and Ypt6 , respectively ( Albert and Gall - witz , 1999 , 2000 ) . Therefore , Msb3 and Msb4 may have roles in exocytosis . Sec4 is required for formation of the exocyst complex and for vesicle docking at the plasma membrane ( Walworth et al . , 1992 ; Guo et al . , 1999b ) , whereas Ypt6 is re - quired for vesicle transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus ( Lupashin et al . , 1996 ) . In our screens , both Msb3 and Msb4 interacted with Spa2 , a protein that concentrates polarized growth to bud and mating projection tips during apical growth , and to the septum during cytokine - sis ( Fujiwara et al . , 1998 ; Sheu et al . , 2000 ) . Sec4 is partially delocalized in spa2 mutants ( Sheu et al . , 2000 ) , and Spa2 is re - quired for normal localization of secretory vesicles to the cell fusion zone during mating ( Gammie et al . , 1998 ) . These ge - netic observations and the interactions with Msb3 and Msb4 provide support for a role for Spa2 in polarized exocytosis . Conclusions We have reported here the results of a two - hybrid study of proteins involved in cell polarity development , a highly complex process involving cortical cues , signaling proteins , the cytoskeleton , and the secretory apparatus , each of which is itself characterized by considerable complexity . Elucida - tion of the mechanisms that underlie cell polarity develop - ment is a daunting task , due to the vast number of proteins involved . The result of our studies is a protein interaction map that helps define the scope of the problem of under - standing cell polarity development and can be used to guide further genetic and biochemical studies . Because most of the proteins and processes included in this study are highly con - served , this map should prove useful for studies of polarity development in diverse cell types . Among interactions iden - tified in this map are some that implicate new proteins in polarity development , and others that suggest modes for co - ordinating distinct processes involved in polarity develop - ment . Our localization of previously uncharacterized pro - teins implicated here in polarity development is only the first step in verification of the biological relevance of each in - teraction . Future studies must address when , where , and why each interaction occurs and how these interactions are regulated . Despite years of genetic analysis of cell polarity development in budding yeast , we were able to implicate un - characterized proteins in this process , and to suggest novel functions for proteins studied previously . Genetic studies may have missed much of this information , due to factors including redundancy , lack of appropriate alleles , homeosta - sis mechanisms , and checkpoints that mask the underlying mutant defect by arresting a process before an informative phenotype develops . In total , the large number of interac - tions that we identified among proteins involved in diverse aspects of cell polarity development suggests a high level of integration in the functioning of these proteins . Materials and methods Generation of DNA binding domain hybrids Transformants containing Gal4 DNA binding domain hybrids were con - structed in the (cid:3) mating type of the yeast strain PJ694 ( MAT (cid:3) trp1 - 901 leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 his3 - 200 gal4 (cid:6) gal80 (cid:6) LYS2 : : GAL1 - HIS3 GAL2 - ADE2 met2 : : GAL7 - lacZ ) ( James et al . , 1996 ) as described ( McCraith et al . , 2000 ; Uetz et al . , 2000 ) . Recombination ( Ma et al . , 1987 ) of the linearized vector pOBD2 ( McCraith et al . , 2000 ) with PCR fragments corresponding to each of the yeast ORFs was used to generate the hybrids ( Hudson et al . , 1997 ) . Transformation was carried out using the lithium acetate procedure ( Ito et al . , 1983 ) . After transformation , cells were plated on synthetic trp media . Yeast media were prepared as described ( Sherman et al . , 1986 ) . Cdc3 , Cdc11 , Cdc12 , and Bud8 baits were made in the vector pGDBU and trans - formants selected on ura media ( James et al . , 1996 ) . Several GTPase baits contained cysteine - to - serine amino acid substitu - tions to prevent prenylation and facilitate nuclear entry , and other substitu - tions that affect GTP binding and hydrolysis to favor either the GTP - or GDP - bound form : Rho1 - GTP ( Q68H , C206S ) , Rho2 - GTP ( Q 65H , C188S ) , Rho3 - GTP ( G25V , C228S ) , Rho4 - GTP ( Q70H , C228S ) , Cdc42 - GTP ( G12V , C188S ) , Cdc42 - GDP ( D57Y , C188S ) , Rsr1 - GTP ( G12V ) , and Rsr1 - GDP ( K16N ) . Gic1 and Gic2 fusions were truncations lacking 30 residues at the COOH terminus because the full - length protein was an activator . The Sso1 ( 1 – 515 ) , Sso2 ( 1 – 266 ) , and fusions were truncations that removed predicted transmembrane domains at their COOH termini . The Msb2 fu - sion contained a truncation , Msb2 ( 1186 – 1306 ) that removed predicted transmembrane domains at the NH 2 and COOH termini . The Bud8 and Bud9 fusions also contained truncations , Bud8 ( 534 – 578 ) and Bud9 ( 480 – 521 ) , that removed predicted transmembrane domains . Two - hybrid screens Screens of the yeast ORF activation domain fusion array were performed in a manner similar to that described previously ( McCraith et al . , 2000 ; Uetz et al . , 2000 ) . This array was expressed in the a mating type of strain PJ694 ( MATa trp1 - 901 leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 his3 - 200 gal4 (cid:6) gal80 (cid:6) LYS2 : : GAL1 - HIS3 GAL2 - ADE2 met2 : : GAL7 - lacZ ) ( James et al . , 1996 ) . To screen for protein – protein interactions , we mated a transformant containing one of the DNA binding domain hybrids to all of the transformants of the array , selecting diploids using markers carried on the two - hybrid plasmids . The diploids were then transferred to selective plates deficient in histidine , and colonies positive for the two - hybrid reporter HIS3 gene were identified by their positions in the array . Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 567 Two - hybrid screens can generate significant numbers of false positives that are not reproducible in duplicate screens . Random generation of histi - dine - positive colonies can result from overexpression of a fusion protein that affects transcription or cell metabolism , rearrangements or deletions of the DNA - binding domain plasmid , recombinational events between plas - mids , or genomic rearrangements of the host strain . To identify reproduc - ible two - hybrid interactions rapidly , we duplicated the array so that each ORF - Gal4 activation domain fusion is represented twice on a microassay plate . The entire array is contained in duplicate on 16 microassay plates of 768 colonies each . Only protein combinations that resulted in histidine prototrophy for both duplicate colonies of a given activation domain fu - sion were scored as two - hybrid interactions . We estimate that 10 – 20 % of the yeast ORF - Gal4 activation domain fusions are not expressed due to er - rors in the PCR amplification of the ORFs . In addition , there are likely to be other constructs that are expressed poorly or in a nonfunctional form due to improper folding . All pinning steps were carried out using a Biomek 2000 robot ( Beckman Coulter ) and a 768 - pin replicating tool ( UW Scientific Instruments , Ma - chine / Optical Division ) . Strains containing the Gal4 - DNA binding - domain hybrids were first tested on plates of synthetic his media with different con - centrations of 3 - aminotriazole to determine the level of stringency needed to eliminate background activation of the HIS3 reporter gene . Strains were grown overnight at 30 (cid:7) C in 25 ml of trp synthetic medium , centrifuged at 1 , 000 rpm for 2 min and resuspended in 5 – 7 ml of medium . The cell sus - pension was transferred to 16 plates of solid YEPD medium . The yeast ORF activation domain fusion array was then replica - pinned onto the plates . Plates were incubated at 30 (cid:7) C for 2 – 4 d to allow mating , and then cells were replica - pinned to synthetic trp leu medium . After 2 – 4 d , cells were replica - pinned onto his synthetic media containing the appropriate con - centration of 3 - aminotriazole . Plates were incubated at 30 (cid:7) C for 7 – 10 d and then scored for two - hybrid positives . Generation of ORFs tagged with CFP or YFP A PCR - based method was used to integrate a gene encoding either YFP or CFP at the 3 (cid:4) end of the targeted yeast ORF such that each fusion protein is expressed under the control of its native promoter ( Wach et al . , 1997 ) . De - tailed protocols are described at http : / / depts . washington . edu / ~ yeastrc / fm _ home3 . htm . The template for integration of YFP was the plasmid pDH6 , which contains the YFP ORF followed by the kan r gene . pDH6 was made by replacing the AvaI – AscI fragment encoding GFP in pFA6a - GFP ( S65T ) KanMX6 ( Wach et al . , 1997 ) with the AvaI – AscI frag - ment encoding YFP from pDH5 . pDH5 was derived from pFA6a - GFP ( S65T ) HIS3MX6 by site - directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange method as described by the supplier ( Stratagene ) . The mutations in YFP as compared with the original GFP are : S65G , V68L , Q69K , S72A , Q80R , and T203Y . The template for integration of CFP was plasmid pDH3 , which contains the CFP ORF followed by the kan r gene . pDH3 was derived from pFA6a - GFP ( S65T ) KanMX6 by site - directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange method . The mutations in CFP as compared with the original GFP are : F64L , S65T , Y66W , Q80R , N146I , M153T , V163A , and N164H . Integrations were checked by PCR . Fluorescence microscopy Cells containing YFP or CFP fusion proteins were grown on solid YPD me - dium overnight at 30 (cid:7) C and then resuspended in PBS containing 1 . 3 (cid:5) g / ml concanavalin A tagged with Alexa 633 ( Molecular Probes ) and incubated for 30 min at 30 (cid:7) C . Cells were washed twice with PBS and resuspended in S medium or SD complete medium ( 1 . 7 g / liter Difco yeast nitrogen base without amino acids or ammonium sulfate , 5 g / liter ammonium sulfate , 0 . 1 % casamino acids , 25 (cid:5) g / ml uracil , 50 (cid:5) g / ml adenine , 100 (cid:5) g / ml tryp - tophan , 2 % glucose ) . Cells were mounted in one of two ways . An aliquot of cells ( 3 (cid:5) l ) was mixed on the slide with an equal volume of SD com - plete medium containing 1 . 2 % SeaPlaque low melting temperature aga - rose ( FMC BioProducts ) at 40 (cid:7) C . A coverslip ( No . 1 . 5 ) was quickly added and pressed firmly . Alternatively , a cushion of 1 . 2 % SeaKem LE agarose ( FMC BioProducts ) in SD complete medium was poured into 0 . 5 - mm con - cavity slides ( PGC Scientific ) and pressed flat with another slide . Once the agar was solidified , an aliquot ( 15 (cid:5) l ) of cells was pipetted onto the cush - ion and covered with a coverslip ( No . 1 . 5 ) . The latter method is preferable for examination of actin cytoskeletal components . Fluorescence microscopy was performed on a DeltaVision microscope with a Photometrics Quantix camera . The filter sets were from Omega . The images were sharpened by two dimensional deconvolution using the Soft - WorX software ( Applied Precision , Inc . ) . To localize Yhr149c , the COOH terminus was tagged with a 13Myc epitope using the PCR - based method of Longtine et al . ( 1998 ) in the strain DDY1102 ( MAT a / MAT (cid:3) ade2 - 1 / ADE2 his3 (cid:6) 200 / his3 (cid:6) 200 leu2 - 3 , 112 / leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 / ura3 - 52 LYS2 / lys2 - 801 ) ( Kozminski et al . , 2000 ) . Log phase cells were processed for indirect immunofluorescence microscopy and images were acquired as described by Kozminski et al . ( 2000 ) . Mouse anti - Myc antibody ( 9E10 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) and FITC - conju - gated donkey anti – mouse antibody ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laborato - ries ) were diluted 1 : 50 and 1 : 100 , respectively . Thanks to Daniel Lew , Avi Rodal , Eric Weiss , and Cammie Lesser for dis - cussion of the data . Sharat Gadde helped with plasmid construction . S . Fields and T . N . Davis were supported by the National Center for Re - search Resources grant PHS P41 RR11823 . S . Fields is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . D . Drubin was supported by the Na - tional Institutes of Health R01 grant GM50399 . E . Brazeau was supported by National Institutes of Health R01 grant GM59216 . P . Brennwald was supported by National Institutes of Health R01 grant GM54712 . J . R . Pringle was supported by National Institutes of Health R01 grant GM31006 . K . G . Kozminski was funded by a fellowship from the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society . J . J . Moskow was supported by fellowship PF - 98 - 008 from the American Cancer Society . C . Chan was funded by the Texas Higher Educa - tion Coordinating Board , grant ARP - 427 . P . Novick was supported by Na - tional Institutes of Health R01 grant GM35370 . C . Boone was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada and by the Na - tional Cancer Institute of Canada . M . Longtine was supported by the Okla - homa Center for Advancement of Scientific Technology , grant HR00 - 32 . Submitted : 13 April 2001 Revised : 18 June 2001 Accepted : 3 July 2001 References Aalto , M . K . , H . Ronne , and S . Keranen . 1993 . Yeast syntaxins Sso1p and Sso2p belong to a family of related membrane proteins that function in vesicular transport . EMBO J . 12 : 4095 – 4104 . Adamo , J . E . , G . Rossi , and P . Brennwald . 1999 . The Rho GTPase Rho3 has a di - rect role in exocytosis that is distinct from its role in actin polarity . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 4121 – 4133 . Adams , A . E . M . , D . I . Johnson , R . M . Longnecker , B . F . Sloat , and J . R . Pringle . 1990 . CDC42 and CDC43 , two additional genes involved in budding and the establishment of cell polarity in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 131 – 142 . Albert , S . , and D . Gallwitz . 1999 . Two new members of a family of Ypt / Rab GTP - ase activating proteins . Promiscuity of substrate recognition . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 33186 – 33189 . Albert , S . , and D . Gallwitz . 2000 . Msb4p , a protein involved in Cdc42p - depen - dent organization of the actin cytoskeleton , is a Ypt / Rab - specific GAP . Biol . Chem . 381 : 453 – 456 . Alory , C . , and W . E . Balch . 2000 . Molecular basis for Rab prenylation . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 89 – 103 . Amatruda , J . F . , and J . A . Cooper . 1992 . Purification , characterization , and immu - nofluorescence localization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae capping protein . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 1067 – 1076 . Amatruda , J . F . , D . J . Gattermeir , T . S . Karpova , and J . A . Cooper . 1992 . Effects of null mutations and overexpression of capping protein on morphogenesis , ac - tin distribution and polarized secretion in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1151 – 1162 . Amberg , D . C . , E . Basart , and D . Botstein . 1995 . Defining protein interactions with yeast actin in vivo . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2 : 28 – 35 . Ayscough , K . R . , J . Stryker , N . Pokala , M . Sanders , P . Crews , and D . G . Drubin . 1997 . High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the ac - tin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J . Cell Biol . 137 : 399 – 416 . Ayscough , K . R . , J . J . Eby , T . Lila , H . Dewar , K . G . Kozminski , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . Sla1p is a functionally modular component of the yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton required for correct localization of both Rho1p - GTPase and Sla2p , a protein with talin homology . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 1061 – 1075 . Bach , S . , O . Bouchat , D . Portetelle , and M . Vandenbol . 2000 . Co - deletion of the MSB3 and MSB4 coding regions affects bipolar budding and perturbs the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Yeast . 16 : 1015 – 1023 . Balguerie , A . , P . Sivadon , M . Bonneu , and M . Aigle . 1999 . Rvs167p , the budding yeast homolog of amphiphysin , colocalizes with actin patches . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 2529 – 2537 . 568 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 Barral , Y . , M . Parra , S . Bidlingmaier , and M . Snyder . 1999 . Nim1 - related kinases coordinate cell cycle progression with the organization of the peripheral cy - toskeleton in yeast . Genes Dev . 13 : 176 – 187 . Bauer , B . E . , S . Lorenzetti , M . Miaczynska , D . M . Bui , R . J . Schweyen , and A . Rag - nini . 1996 . Amino - and carboxy - terminal domains of the yeast Rab escort protein are both required for binding of Ypt small G proteins . Mol . Biol . Cell . 7 : 1521 – 1533 . Bender , A . 1993 . Genetic evidence for the roles of the bud - site - selection genes BUD5 and BUD2 in control of the Rsr1p ( Bud1p ) GTPase in yeast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 90 : 9926 – 9929 . Bender , A . , and J . R . Pringle . 1989 . Multicopy suppression of the cdc24 budding defect in yeast by CDC42 and three newly identified genes including the ras - related gene RSR1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 9976 – 9980 . Bender , A . , and J . R . Pringle . 1991 . Use of a screen for synthetic lethal and multi - copy suppressee mutants to identify two new genes involved in morphogen - esis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 : 1295 – 1305 . Bender , A . , and J . R . Pringle . 1992 . A Ser / Thr - rich multicopy suppressor of a cdc24 bud emergence defect . Yeast . 8 : 315 – 323 . Bender , L . , H . S . Lo , H . Lee , V . Kokojan , J . Peterson , and A . Bender . 1996 . Associ - ations among PH and SH3 domain - containing proteins and Rho - type GTP - ases in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 879 – 894 . Benton , B . K . , A . H . Tinkelenberg , D . Jean , S . D . Plump , and F . R . Cross . 1993 . Ge - netic analysis of Cln / Cdc28 regulation of cell morphogenesis in budding yeast . EMBO J . 12 : 5267 – 5275 . Benton , B . K . , A . Tinkelenberg , I . Gonzalez , and F . R . Cross . 1997 . Cla4p , a Sac - charomyces cerevisiae Cdc42p - activated kinase involved in cytokinesis , is acti - vated at mitosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 : 5067 – 5076 . Bi , E . , and J . R . Pringle . 1996 . ZDS1 and ZDS2 , genes whose products may regu - late Cdc42p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 : 5264 – 5275 . Bi , E . , P . Maddox , D . J . Lew , E . D . Salmon , J . N . McMillan , E . Yeh , and J . R . Prin - gle . 1998 . Involvement of an actomyosin contractile ring in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1301 – 1312 . Bi , E . , J . B . Chiavetta , H . Chen , G . - C . Chen , C . S . M . Chan , and J . R . Pringle . 2000 . Identification of novel , evolutionarily conserved Cdc42p - interacting proteins and of redundant pathways linking Cdc24p and Cdc42p to actin polarization in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 773 – 793 . Bon , E . , P . Recordon - Navarro , P . Durrens , M . Iwase , A . Toh - e , and M . Aigle . 2000 . A network of proteins around Rvs167p and Rvs161p , two proteins re - lated to the yeast actin cytoskeleton . Yeast . 16 : 1229 – 1241 . Botstein , D . , D . Amberg , J . Mulholland , T . Huffaker , A . Adams , D . Drubin , and T . Stearns . 1997 . The yeast cytoskeleton . In The Molecular and Cellular Bi - ology of the Yeast Saccharomyces : Cell Cycle and Cell Biology . J . R . Pringle , J . R . Broach , and E . W . Jones , editors . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . 1 – 90 . Brewster , J . L . , and M . C . Gustin . 1994 . Positioning of cell growth and division af - ter osmotic stress requires a MAP kinase pathway . Yeast . 10 : 425 – 439 . Brown , J . L . , M . Jaquenoud , M . - P . Gulli , J . Chant , and M . Peter . 1997 . Novel Cdc42 - binding proteins Gic1 and Gic2 control cell polarity in yeast . Genes Dev . 11 : 2972 – 2982 . Bulawa , C . E . 1993 . Genetics and molecular biology of chitin synthesis in fungi . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . 47 : 505 – 534 . Butty , A . - C . , P . M . Pryciak , L . S . Huang , I . Herskowitz , and M . Peter . 1998 . The role of Far1p in linking the heterotrimeric G protein to polarity establish - ment proteins during yeast mating . Science . 282 : 1511 – 1516 . Cannon , J . F . , R . Gitan , and K . Tatchell . 1990 . Yeast cAMP - dependent protein ki - nase regulatory subunit mutations display a variety of phenotypes . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 11897 – 11904 . Chant , J . 1999 . Cell polarity in yeast . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 : 365 – 391 . Chen , G . - C . , Y . - J . Kim , and C . S . M . Chan . 1997 . The Cdc42 GTPase - associated proteins Gic1 and Gic2 are required for polarized growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genes Dev . 15 : 2958 – 2971 . Chen , H . , S . Fre , V . Slepnev , M . Capua , K . Takei , M . Butler , P . Di Fiore , and P . De Camilli . 1998 . Epsin is an EH - domain - binding protein implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature . 394 : 793 – 797 . Cid , V . J . , A . Durán , F . del Rey , M . P . Snyder , C . Nombela , and M . Sánchez . 1995 . Molecular basis of cell integrity and morphogenesis in Saccharomyces cerevi - siae . Microbiol . Rev . 59 : 345 – 386 . Cid , V . J . , R . Cenamor , M . Sánchez , and C . Nombela . 1998 . A mutation in the Rho1 - GAP - encoding gene BEM2 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae affects morpho - genesis and cell wall functionality . Microbiology . 144 : 25 – 36 . Cope , M . J . T . V . , S . Yang , C . Shang , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . Novel protein ki - nases Ark1p and Prk1p associate with and regulate the cortical actin cyto - skeleton in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 1203 – 1218 . Cullen , P . J . , J . Schultz , J . Horecka , B . J . Stevenson , Y . Jigami , and G . F . Sprague , Jr . 2000 . Defects in protein glycosylation cause SHO1 - dependent activation of a STE12 signaling pathway in yeast . Genetics . 155 : 1005 – 1018 . Cvrcková , F . , and K . Nasmyth . 1993 . Yeast G1 cyclins CLN1 and CLN2 and a GAP - like protein have a role in bud formation . EMBO J . 12 : 5277 – 5286 . Cvrcková , F . , C . De Virgilio , E . Manser , J . R . Pringle , and K . Nasmyth . 1995 . Ste20 - like protein kinases are required for normal localization of cell growth and for cytokinesis in budding yeast . Genes Dev . 9 : 1817 – 1830 . De Virgilio , C . , D . J . DeMarini , and J . R . Pringle . 1996 . SPR28 , a sixth member of the septin gene family in Saccharomyces cerevisiae that is expressed specifically in sporulating cells . Microbiology . 142 : 2897 – 2905 . Delley , P . - A . , and M . N . Hall . 1999 . Cell wall stress depolarizes cell growth via hy - peractivation of RHO1 . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 163 – 174 . DeMarini , D . J . , A . E . M . Adams , H . Fares , C . De Virgilio , G . Valle , J . S . Chuang , and J . R . Pringle . 1997 . A septin - based hierarchy of proteins required for lo - calized deposition of chitin in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell wall . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 75 – 93 . Deng , C . , and W . Saunders . 2001 . PFS1 , a novel gene required for prospore mem - brane formation at selected spindle poles in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell . In press . Drgonová , J . , T . Drgon , K . Tanaka , R . Kollár , G . - C . Chen , R . A . Ford , C . S . M . Chan , Y . Takai , and E . Cabib . 1996 . Rho1p , a yeast protein at the interface between cell polarization and morphogenesis . Science . 272 : 277 – 279 . Drubin , D . G . , editor . 2000 . Cell Polarity . Oxford University Press , Oxford . 313 pp . Drubin , D . G . , and W . J . Nelson . 1996 . Origins of cell polarity . Cell . 84 : 335 – 344 . Eby , J . J . , S . P . Holly , F . van Drogen , A . V . Grishin , M . Peter , D . G . Drubin , and K . J . Blumer . 1998 . Actin cytoskeleton organization regulated by the PAK family of protein kinases . Curr . Biol . 8 : 967 – 970 . Engqvist - Goldstein , Å . E . , M . M . Kessels , V . S . Chopra , M . R . Hayden , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 1503 – 1518 . Evangelista , M . , K . Blundell , M . S . Longtine , C . J . Chow , N . Adames , J . R . Pringle , M . Peter , and C . Boone . 1997 . Bni1p , a yeast formin linking Cdc42p and the actin cytoskeleton during polarized morphogenesis . Science . 276 : 118 – 122 . Evangelista , M . , B . M . Klebl , A . H . Y . Tong , B . A . Webb , T . Leeuw , E . Leberer , M . Whiteway , D . Y . Thomas , and C . Boone . 2000 . A role for myosin - I in actin assembly through interactions with Vrp1p , Bee1p , and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 353 – 362 . Fares , H . , L . Goetsch , and J . R . Pringle . 1996 . Identification of a developmentally regulated septin and involvement of the septins in spore formation in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 399 – 411 . Fields , S . , and O . Song . 1989 . A novel genetic system to detect protein - protein in - teractions . Nature . 340 : 245 – 246 . Foster , L . , B . Yeung , M . Mohtashami , K . Ross , W . S . Trimble , and A . Klip . 1998 . Binary interactions of the SNARE proteins syntaxin - 4 , SNAP23 , and VAMP - 2 and their regulation by phosphorylation . Biochemistry . 37 : 11089 – 11096 . Freeman , N . L . , T . Lila , K . A . Mintzer , Z . Chen , A . J . Pahk , R . Ren , D . G . Drubin , and J . Field . 1996 . A conserved proline - rich region of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cyclase - associated protein binds SH3 domains and modulates cyto - skeletal localization . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 : 548 – 556 . Fujimura , K . , K . Tanaka , A . Nakano , and A . Toh - e . 1994 . The Saccharomyces cere - visiae MSI4 gene encodes the yeast counterpart of component A of Rab ger - anylgeranyltransferase . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 9205 – 9212 . Fujiwara , T . , K . Tanaka , A . Mino , M . Kikyo , K . Takahashi , K . Shimizu , and Y . Takai . 1998 . Rho1p - Bni1p - Spa2p interactions : implication in localization of Bni1p at the bud site and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in Saccharo - myces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 1221 – 1233 . Fujiwara , T . , K . Tanaka , E . Inoue , M . Kikyo , and Y . Takai . 1999 . Bni1p regulates microtubule - dependent nuclear migration through the actin cytoskeleton in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 : 8016 – 8027 . Gammie , A . E . , V . Brizzio , and M . D . Rose . 1998 . Distinct morphological pheno - types of cell fusion mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 1395 – 1410 . Goode , B . L . , J . J . Wong , A . - C . Butty , M . Peter , A . L . McCormack , J . R Yates , D . G . Drubin , and G . Barnes . 1999 . Coronin promotes the rapid assembly and cross - linking of actin filaments and may link the actin and microtubule cy - toskeletons in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 83 – 98 . Goode , B . L . , A . A . Rodal , G . Barnes , and D . G . Drubin . 2001 . Activation of the Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 569 Arp2 / 3 complex by the actin filament binding protein Abp1p . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 627 – 634 . Guo , W . , A . Grant , and P . Novick . 1999a . Exo84p is an exocyst protein essential for secretion . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 23558 – 23564 . Guo , W . , D . Roth , C . Walch - Solimena , and P . Novick . 1999b . The exocyst is an effector for Sec4p , targeting secretory vesicles to sites of exocytosis . EMBO J . 18 : 1071 – 1080 . Guo , W . , F . Tamanoi , and P . Novick . 2001 . Spatial regulation of the exocyst com - plex by Rho1 GTPase . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 353 – 360 . Gurunathan , S . , D . Chapman - Shimshoni , S . Trajkovic , and J . E . Gerst . 2000 . Yeast exocytic v - SNAREs confer endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 3629 – 3643 . Hales , K . G . , E . Bi , J . - Q . Wu , J . C . Adam , I . - C . Yu , and J . R . Pringle . 1999 . Cyto - kinesis : an emerging unified theory for eukaryotes ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 : 717 – 725 . Harkins , H . A . , N . Pagé , L . R . Schenkman , C . De Virgilio , S . Shaw , H . Bussey , and J . R . Pringle . 2001 . Bud8p and Bud9p , proteins that may mark the sites for bipolar budding in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 2497 – 2518 . Helliwell , S . B . , I . Howald , N . Barbet , and M . N . Hall . 1998 . TOR2 is part of two related signaling pathways coordinating cell growth in Saccharomyces cerevi - siae . Genetics . 148 : 99 – 112 . Hirano , H . , K . Tanaka , K . Ozaki , H . Imamura , H . Kohno , T . Hihara , T . Kam - eyama , K . Hotta , M . Arisawa , T . Watanabe , H . Qadota , Y . Ohya , and Y . Takai . 1996 . ROM7 / BEM4 encodes a novel protein that interacts with the Rho1p small GTP - binding protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 : 4396 – 4403 . Holtzman , D . A . , S . Yang , and D . G . Drubin . 1993 . Synthetic - lethal interactions identify two novel genes , SLA1 and SLA2 , that control membrane cytoskele - ton assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 635 – 644 . Hong , S . K . , S . B . Han , M . Snyder , and E . Y . Choi . 1999 . SHC1 , a high pH induc - ible gene required for growth at alkaline pH in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Bio - chem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 255 : 116 – 122 . Hoyt , M . A . , L . Totis , and B . T . Roberts . 1991 . S . cerevisiae genes required for cell cycle arrest in response to loss of microtubule function . Cell . 66 : 507 – 517 . Hudson , J . R . , Jr . , E . P . Dawson , K . L . Rushing , C . H . Jackson , D . Lockshon , D . Conover , C . Lanciault , J . R . Harris , S . J . Simmons , R . Rothstein , and S . Fields . 1997 . The complete set of predicted genes from Saccharomyces cerevi - siae in a readily usable form . Genome Res . 7 : 1169 – 1173 . Imai , J . , A . Toh - e , and Y . Matsui . 1996 . Genetic analysis of the Saccharomyces cere - visiae RHO3 gene , encoding a Rho - type small GTPase , provides evidence for a role in bud formation . Genetics . 142 : 359 – 369 . Imamura , H . , K . Tanaka , T . Hihara , M . Umikawa , T . Kamei , K . Takahashi , T . Sasaki , and Y . Takai . 1997 . Bni1p and Bnr1p : downstream targets of the Rho family small G - proteins which interact with profilin and regulate actin cytoskeleton in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . EMBO J . 16 : 2745 – 2755 . Inoue , K . , T . Mizuno , K . Wada , and M . Hagiwara . 2000 . Novel RING finger pro - teins , Air1p and Air2p , interact with Hmt1p and inhibit the arginine meth - ylation of Npl3p . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 32793 – 32799 . Ito , H . , Y . Fukuda , K . Murata , and A . Kimura . 1983 . Transformation of intact yeast cells treated with alkali cations . J . Bacteriol . 153 : 163 – 168 . Ito , T . , T . Chiba , R . Ozawa , M . Yoshida , M . Hattori , and Y . Sakaki . 2001 . A com - prehensive two - hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 4569 – 4574 . James , P . , J . Halladay , and E . A . Craig . 1996 . Genomic libraries and a host strain designed for highly efficient two - hybrid selection in yeast . Genetics . 144 : 1425 – 1436 . Jaquenod , M . , and M . Peter . 2000 . Gic2p may link activated Cdc42p to compo - nents involved in actin polarization , including Bni1p and Bud6p ( Aip3p ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 6244 – 6258 . Johnson , D . I . , and J . R . Pringle . 1990 . Molecular characterization of CDC42 , a Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene involved in the development of cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 143 – 152 . Jiang , Y . , and S . Ferro - Novick . 1994 . Identification of yeast component A : recon - stitution of the geranylgeranyltransferase that modifies Ypt1p and Sec4p . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 4377 – 4381 . Kagami , M . , A . Toh - e , and Y . Matsui . 1998 . Sro7p , a Saccharomyces cerevisiae counterpart of the tumor suppressor l ( 2 ) gl protein , is related to myosins in function . Genetics . 149 : 1717 – 1727 . Kahana , J . A . , G . Schlenstedt , D . M . Evanchuk , J . R . Geiser , M . A . Hoyt , and P . A . Silver . 1998 . The yeast dynactin complex is involved in partitioning the mi - totic spindle between mother and daughter cells during anaphase B . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 1741 – 1756 . Kallal , L . A . , M . Bhattacharyya , S . N . Grove , R . F . Iannacone , T . A . Pugh , D . A . Pri - merano , and M . J . Clancy . 1990 . Functional analysis of the sporulation - spe - cific SPR6 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Curr . Genet . 18 : 293 – 301 . Kamada , Y . , H . Qadota , C . P . Python , Y . Anraku , Y . Ohya , and D . E . Levin . 1996 . Activation of protein kinase C by Rho1 GTPase . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 9193 – 9196 . Kamada , Y . , T . Funakoshi , T . Shintani , K . Nagano , M . Ohsumi , and Y . Ohsumi . 2000 . Tor - mediated induction of autophagy via an Apg1 protein kinase complex . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1507 – 1513 . Kamei , T . , K . Tanaka , T . Hihara , M . Umikawa , H . Imamura , M . Kikyo , K . Ozaki , and Y . Takai . 1998 . Interaction of Bnr1p with a novel Src homology 3 domain - containing Hof1p . Implication in cytokinesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 28341 – 28345 . Kessels , M . M . , Å . E . Engqvist - Goldstein , and D . G . Drubin . 2000 . Association of mouse actin - binding protein 1 ( mAbp1 / SH3P7 ) , a Src kinase target , with dynamic regions of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in response to Rac GTP - ase activators . Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 : 393 – 412 . Kim , J . , V . M . Dalton , K . P . Eggerton , S . V . Scott , and D . J . Klionsky . 1999 . Apg7p / Cvt2p is required for the cytoplasm - to - vacuole targeting , macroautophagy , and peroxisome degradation pathways . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 1337 – 1351 . Koh , D . S . , M . W . Moody , T . D . Nguyen , and B . Hille . 2000 . Regulation of exocy - tosis by protein kinases and Ca ( 2 (cid:8) ) in pancreatic duct epithelial cells . J . Gen . Physiol . 116 : 507 – 520 . Kozminski , K . G . , A . J . Chen , A . A . Rodal , and D . G . Drubin . 2000 . Functions and functional domains of the GTPase Cdc42p . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 339 – 354 . Kübler , E . , and H . Riezman . 1993 . Actin and fimbrin are required for the internal - ization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 12 : 2855 – 2862 . Lechler , T . , and R . Li . 1997 . In vitro reconstitution of cortical actin assembly sites in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 95 – 103 . Lechler , T . , A . Shevchenko , and R . Li . 2000 . Direct involvement of yeast type I myosins in Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 363 – 373 . Lehman , K . , G . Rossi , J . E . Adamo , and P . Brennwald . 1999 . Yeast homologues of tomosyn and lethal giant larvae function in exocytosis and are associated with the plasma membrane SNARE , Sec9 . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 125 – 140 . Lew , D . J . 2000 . Cell - cycle checkpoints that ensure coordination between nuclear and cytoplasmic events in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 10 : 47 – 53 . Li , R . 1997 . Bee1 , a yeast protein with homology to Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein , is critical for the assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 649 – 658 . Li , R . , Y . Zheng , and D . G . Drubin . 1995 . Regulation of cortical actin cytoskeleton assembly during polarized cell growth in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 599 – 615 . Lila , T . , and D . G . Drubin . 1997 . Evidence for physical and functional interactions among two Saccharomyces cerevisiae SH3 domain proteins , an adenylyl cy - clase - associated protein and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 649 – 658 . Lippincott , J . , and R . Li . 1998a . Dual function of Cyk2 , a Cdc15 / PSTPIP family protein , in regulating actomyosin ring dynamics and septin distribution . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 1947 – 1960 . Lippincott , J . , and R . Li . 1998b . Sequential assembly of myosin II , an IQGAP - like protein , and filamentous actin to a ring structure involved in budding yeast cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 355 – 366 . Longtine , M . S . , A . McKenzie III , D . J . DeMarini , N . G . Shah , A . Wach , A . Brachat , P . Phillipsen , and J . R . Pringle . 1998 . Additional modules for versa - tile and economical PCR - based gene deletion and modification in Saccharo - myces cerevisiae . Yeast . 14 : 953 – 961 . Longtine , M . S . , C . L . Theesfeld , J . N . McMillan , E . Weaver , J . R . Pringle , and D . J . Lew . 2000 . Septin - dependent assembly of a cell cycle - regulatory module in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 4049 – 4061 . Lupashin , V . V . , S . Hamamoto , and R . W . Schekman . 1996 . Biochemical require - ments for the targeting and fusion of ER - derived transport vesicles with pu - rified yeast Golgi membranes . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 277 – 289 . Ma , H . , S . Kunes , P . J . Schatz , and D . Botstein . 1987 . Plasmid construction by ho - mologous recombination in yeast . Gene . 58 : 201 – 216 . Mack , D . , K . Nishimura , B . K . Dennehey , T . Arbogast , J . Parkinson , A . Toh - e , J . R . Pringle , A . Bender , and Y . Matsui . 1996 . Identification of the bud emergence gene BEM4 and its interactions with rho - type GTPases in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 : 4387 – 4395 . Madania , A . , P . Dumoulin , S . Grava , H . Kitamoto , C . Schärer - Brodbeck , A . Sou - lard , V . Moreau , and B . Winsor . 1999 . The Saccharomyces cerevisiae homo - 570 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 154 , 2001 logue of human Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein Las17p interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 3521 – 3538 . Mata , J . , and P . Nurse . 1997 . tea1 and the microtubular cytoskeleton are impor - tant for generating global spatial order within the fission yeast cell . Cell . 89 : 939 – 949 . Matsui , Y . , and A . Toh - e . 1992 . Yeast RHO3 and RHO4 ras superfamily genes are necessary for bud growth , and their defect is suppressed by a high dose of bud formation genes CDC42 and BEM1 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 : 5690 – 5699 . Matsui , Y . , R . Matsui , R . Akada , and A . Toh - e . 1996 . Yeast src homology region 3 domain - binding proteins involved in bud formation . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 865 – 878 . McCraith , S . , T . Holtzman , B . Moss , and S . Fields . 2000 . Genome - wide analysis of vaccinia virus protein - protein interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 97 : 4879 – 4884 . McMillan , J . N . , R . A . L . Sia , and D . J . Lew . 1998 . A morphogenesis checkpoint monitors the actin cytoskeleton in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1487 – 1499 . McMillan , J . N . , M . S . Longtine , R . A . L . Sia , C . L . Theesfeld , E . S . G . Bardes , J . R . Pringle , and D . J . Lew . 1999 . The morphogenesis checkpoint in Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae : cell cycle control of Swe1p degradation by Hsl1p and Hsl7p . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 : 6929 – 6939 . Miller , D . M . , N . S . Desai , D . C . Hardin , D . W . Piston , G . H . Patterson , J . Fleenor , S . Xu , and A . Fire . 1999 . Two - color GFP expression system for C . elegans . Biotechniques . 26 : 914 – 918 . Mizushima , N . , T . Noda , T . Yoshimori , Y . Tanaka , T . Ishii , M . D . George , D . J . Klionsky , M . Ohsumi , and Y . Ohsumi . 1998 . A protein conjugation system essential for autophagy . Nature . 395 : 395 – 398 . Mösch , H . - U . , and G . R . Fink . 1997 . Dissection of filamentous growth by transpo - son mutagenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics . 145 : 671 – 684 . Moskow , J . J . , A . S . Gladfelter , R . E . Lamson , P . M . Pryciak , and D . J . Lew . 2000 . Role of Cdc42p in pheromone - stimulated signal transduction in Saccharo - myces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 7559 – 7571 . Mulholland , J . , D . Preuss , A . Moon , A . Wong , D . Drubin , and D . Botstein . 1994 . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 381 – 391 . Navarro , P . , P . Durrens , and M . Aigle . 1997 . Protein - protein interaction between the RVS161 and RVS167 gene products of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1343 : 187 – 192 . Nern , A . , and R . A . Arkowitz . 2000 . Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the Cdc42p exchange factor Cdc24p . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 1115 – 1122 . Niedenthal , R . K . , L . Riles , M . Johnston , and J . H . Hegemann . 1996 . Green fluo - rescent protein as a marker for gene expression and subcellular localization in budding yeast . Yeast . 12 : 773 – 786 . Ohsumi , Y . 1999 . Molecular mechanism of autophagy in yeast , Saccharomyces cere - visiae . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B . Biol . Sci . 354 : 1577 – 1581 . Paravicini , G . , M . Cooper , L . Friedli , D . J . Smith , J . - L . Carpentier , L . S . Klig , and M . A . Payton . 1992 . The osmotic integrity of the yeast cell requires a func - tional PKC1 gene product . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 : 4896 – 4905 . Park , H . - O . , J . Chant , and I . Herskowitz . 1993 . BUD2 encodes a GTPase - activat - ing protein for Bud1 / Rsr1 necessary for proper bud - site selection in yeast . Nature . 365 : 269 – 274 . Park , H . - O . , A . Sanson , and I . Herskowitz . 1999 . Localization of Bud2p , a GTP - ase - activating protein necessary for programming cell polarity in yeast to the presumptive bud site . Genes Dev . 13 : 1912 – 1917 . Pereira , G . , T . Hofken , J . Grindlay , C . Manson , and E . Schiebel . 2000 . The Bub2p spindle checkpoint links nuclear migration with mitotic exit . Mol . Cell . 6 : 1 – 10 . Posas , F . , E . A . Witten , and H . Saito . 1998 . Requirement of STE50 for osmostress - induced activation of the STE11 mitogen - activated protein kinase in the high - osmolarity glycerol response pathway . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 : 5788 – 5796 . Pruyne , D . , and A . Bretscher . 2000a . Polarization of cell growth in yeast . I . Estab - lishment and maintenance of polarity states . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 365 – 375 . Pruyne , D . , and A . Bretscher . 2000b . Polarization of cell growth in yeast . II . The role of the cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 571 – 585 . Qadota , H . , C . P . Python , S . B . Inoue , M . Arisawa , Y . Anraku , Y . Zheng , T . Wa - tanabe , D . E . Levin , and Y . Ohya . 1996 . Identification of yeast Rho1p GTP - ase as a regulatory subunit of 1 , 3 - (cid:2) - glucan synthase . Science . 272 : 279 – 281 . Ramezani Rad , M . , G . Jansen , F . Buhring , and C . P . Hollenberg . 1998 . Ste50p is involved in regulating filamentous growth in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevi - siae and associates with Ste11p . Mol . Gen . Genet . 259 : 29 – 38 . Rethinaswamy , A . , M . J . Birnbaum , and C . V . Glover . 1998 . Temperature - sensitive mutations of the CKA1 gene reveal a role for casein kinase II in maintenance of cell polarity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 5869 – 5877 . Rieger , K . - J . , M . El - Alama , G . Stein , C . Bradshaw , P . P . Slonimski , and K . Maun - drell . 1999 . Chemotyping of yeast mutants using robotics . Yeast 15 : 973 – 986 . Robinson , N . G . G . , L . Guo , J . Imai , A . Toh - e , Y . Matsui , and F . Tamanoi . 1999 . Rho3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , which regulates the actin cytoskeleton and exocytosis , is a GTPase which interacts with Myo2 and Exo70 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 : 3580 – 3587 . Roy , N . , and K . W . Runge . 2000 . Two paralogs involved in transcriptional silenc - ing that antagonistically control yeast life span . Curr . Biol . 10 : 111 – 114 Ruggieri , R . , A . Bender , Y . Matsui , S . Powers , Y . Takai , J . R . Pringle , and K . Mat - sumoto . 1992 . RSR1 , a ras - like gene homologous to Krev - 1 ( smg21A / rap1A ) : role in the development of cell polarity and interactions with the Ras path - way in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 : 758 – 766 . Russell , S . J . , K . A . Steger , and S . A . Johnston . 1999 . Subcellular localization , stoi - chiometry , and protein levels of 26 S proteasome subunits in yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 1943 – 1952 . Schott , D . , J . Ho , D . Pruyne , and A . Bretscher . 1999 . The COOH - terminal do - main of Myo2p , a yeast myosin V , has a direct role in secretory vesicle tar - geting . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 791 – 807 . Sherman , F . , G . R . Fink , and J . B . Hicks . 1986 . Methods in Yeast Genetics . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Sheu , Y . - J . , Y . Barral , and M . Snyder . 2000 . Polarized growth controls cell shape and bipolar bud site selection in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 5235 – 5247 . Shimada , Y . , M . - P . Gulli , and M . Peter . 2000 . Nuclear sequestration of the ex - change factor Cdc24 by Far1 regulates cell polarity during yeast mating . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 117 – 124 . Shou , W . , J . H . Seol , A . Shevchenko , C . Baskerville , D . Moazed , Z . W . Chen , J . Jang , A . Shevchenko , H . Charbonneau , and R . J . Deshaies . 1999 . Exit from mitosis is triggered by Tem1 - dependent release of the protein phosphatase Cdc14 from nucleolar RENT complex . Cell . 97 : 233 – 244 . Shulewitz , M . J . , C . J . Inouye , and J . Thorner . 1999 . Hsl7 localizes to a septin ring and serves as an adapter in a regulatory pathway that relieves tyrosine phos - phorylation of Cdc28 protein kinase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 : 7123 – 7137 . Spellman , P . T . , G . Sherlock , M . Q . Zhang , V . R . Iyer , K . Anders , M . B . Eisen , P . O . Brown , D . Botstein , and B . Futcher . 1998 . Comprehensive identification of cell cycle - regulated genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by microarray hybridization . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 3273 – 3297 . Strand , D . , R . Jakobs , G . Merdes , B . Neumann , A . Kalmes , H . W . Heid , I . Hus - mann , and B . M . Mechler . 1994 . The Drosophila lethal ( 2 ) giant larvae tumor suppressor protein forms homo - oligomers and is associated with nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1361 – 1373 . Takuma , T . 1990 . Evidence for the involvement of cAMP - dependent protein ki - nase in the exocytosis of amylase from parotid acinar cells . J . Biochem . ( To - kyo ) . 108 : 99 – 102 . Tang , H . - Y . , J . Xu , and M . Cai . 2000 . Pan1p , End3p , and S1a1p , three yeast pro - teins required for normal cortical actin cytoskeleton organization , associate with each other and play essential roles in cell wall morphogenesis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 12 – 25 . Tanida , I . , N . Mizushima , M . Kiyooka , M . Ohsumi , T . Ueno , Y . Ohsumi , and E . Kominami . 1999 . Apg7p / Cvt2p : a novel protein - activating enzyme essential for autophagy . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 1367 – 1379 . TerBush , D . R . , and P . Novick . 1995 . Sec6 , Sec8 , and Sec15 are components of a multisubunit complex which localizes to small bud tips in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 299 – 312 . TerBush , D . R . , T . Maurice , D . Roth , and P . Novick . 1996 . The exocyst is a multi - protein complex required for exocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . EMBO J . 15 : 6483 – 6494 . Toenjes , K . A . , M . M . Sawyer , and D . I . Johnson . 1999 . The guanine - nucleotide - exchange factor Cdc24p is targeted to the nucleus and polarized growth sites . Curr . Biol . 9 : 1183 – 1186 . Trilla , J . A . , T . Cos , A . Durán , and C . Roncero . 1997 . Characterization of CHS4 ( CAL2 ) , a gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae involved in chitin biosynthesis and allelic to SKT5 and CSD4 . Yeast . 13 : 795 – 807 . Uetz , P . , L . Giot , G . Cagney , T . A . Mansfield , R . S . Judson , J . R . Knight , D . Lock - shon , V . Narayan , M . Srinivasan , P . Pochart , A . Qureshi - Emili , Y . Li , B . Godwin , D . Conover , T . Kalbfleisch , G . Vijayadamodar , M . Yang , M . Johnston , S . Fields , and J . M . Rothberg . 2000 . A comprehensive analysis of protein - protein interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Nature . 403 : 623 – 627 . Vallen , E . A . , J . Caviston , and E . Bi . 2000 . Roles of Hof1p , Bni1p , Bnr1p , and Cell polarity interaction map | Drees et al . 571 Myo1p in cytokinesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 593 – 611 . Visintin , R . , and A . Amon . 2000 . The nucleolus : the magician’s hat for cell cycle tricks . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 372 – 377 . Wach , A . , A . Brachat , C . Alberti - Segui , C . Rebischung , and P . Philippsen . 1997 . Heterologous HIS3 marker and GFP reporter modules for PCR - targeting in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast . 13 : 1065 – 1075 . Walworth , N . , P . Brennwald , A . K . Kabcenell , M . Garrett , and P . Novick . 1992 . Hydrolysis of GTP by Sec4 protein plays an important role in vesicular transport and is stimulated by a GTPase - activating protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 : 2017 – 2028 . Watanabe , T . K . , A . Saito , M . Suzuki , T . Fujiwara , E . Takahashi , C . A . Slaughter , G . N . DeMartino , K . B . Hendil , C . H . Chung , N . Tanahashi , and K . Tanaka . 1998 . cDNA cloning and characterization of a human proteasomal modula - tor subunit , p27 ( PSMD9 ) . Genomics . 50 : 241 – 250 . Weiss , E . L . , A . C . Bishop , K . M . Shokat , and D . G . Drubin . 2000 . Chemical genetic analysis of the budding - yeast p21 - activated kinase Cla4p . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 677 – 685 . Wendland , B . , and S . Emr . 1998 . Pan1p , yeast eps15 , functions as a multivalent adaptor that coordinates protein - protein interactions essential for endocyto - sis . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 71 – 84 . Wendland , B . , K . E . Steece , and S . D . Emr . 1999 . Yeast epsins contain an essential N - terminal ENTH domain , bind clathrin and are required for endocytosis . EMBO J . 18 : 4388 – 4393 . Wesp , A . , L . Hicke , J . Palecek , R . Lombardi , T . Aust , A . L . Munn , and H . Riez - man . 1997 . End4p / Sla2p interacts with actin - associated proteins for endocy - tosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell . 8 : 2291 – 2306 . Wilson , K . F . , and R . A . Cerione . 2000 . Signal transduction and post - transcrip - tional gene expression . Biol . Chem . 381 : 357 – 365 . Wilson , K . F . , W . J . Wu , and R . A . Cerione . 2000 . Cdc42 stimulates RNA splicing via the S6 kinase and a novel S6 kinase target , the nuclear cap - binding com - plex . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 37307 – 37310 . Winter , D . , T . Lechler , and R . Li . 1999 . Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr . Biol . 9 : 501 – 504 . Winzeler , E . A . , D . D . Shoemaker , A . Astromoff , H . Liang , et al . 1999 . Functional characterization of the S . cerevisiae genome by gene deletion and parallel analysis . Science . 285 : 901 – 906 . Wu , C . , S . F . Lee , E . Furmaniak - Kazmierczack , G . P . Cote , D . Y . Thomas , and E . Leberer . 1996 . Activation of myosin - I by members of the Ste20p protein ki - nase family . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 31787 – 31790 . Wu , C . , V . Lytvyn , D . Y . Thomas , and E . Leberer . 1997 . The phosphorylation site for Ste20p - like protein kinases is essential for the function of myosin - I in yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 30623 – 30626 . Xu , G . , G . Jansen , D . Y . Thomas , C . P . Hollenberg , and M . Ramezani Rad . 1996 . Ste50p sustains mating pheromone - induced signal transduction in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Microbiol . 20 : 773 – 783 . Yamochi , W . , K . Tanaka , H . Nonaka , A . Maeda , T . Musha , and Y . Takai . 1994 . Growth site localization of Rho1 small GTP - binding protein and its involve - ment in bud formation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 1077 – 1093 . Yang , S . , M . J . T . V . Cope , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . Sla2p is associated with the yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton via redundant localization signals . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 2265 – 2283 . Zahner , J . E . , H . A . Harkins , and J . R . Pringle . 1996 . Genetic analysis of the bipolar pattern of bud site selection in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 : 1857 – 1870 . Zheng , Y . , R . Cerione , and A . Bender . 1994 . Control of the yeast bud - site assem - bly GTPase Cdc42 . Catalysis of guanine nucleotide exchange by Cdc24 and stimulation of GTPase activity by Bem3 . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 2369 – 2372 . Zheng , Y . , A . Bender , and R . A . Cerione . 1995 . Interactions among proteins in - volved in bud - site selection and bud - site assembly in Saccharomyces cerevi - siae . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 626 – 630 .