Methods of Information in Medicine f © F . K . Schattauer Verlagsgesellschaft mbH ( 1998 ) I - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ ~ - - - - - - - - ~ - - ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - , J . J . Cimino Department of Medical Informatics , Columbia University , New York , USA 1 . Introduction The need for controlled vocabularies in medical computing systems is widely recognized . Even systems which deal with narrative text and images provide enhanced capabilities through coding of their data with controlled vocabularies . Over the past four decades , system developers have dealt with this need by creating ad hoc sets of controlled terms for use in their applications . When the sets were small , their creation was a simple matter , but as applications have grown in function and complexity , the effort needed to create and maintain the controlled vocabularies became substantial . With each new system , new efforts were required , because previous vocabularies were deemed unsuitable for adoption in or adaptation to new applications . Furthermore , information in one system could not be recognized by other systems , hindering the ability to integrate component applications into larger systems . Consider , for example , how a com puter - based medical record system might work with a diagnostic expert system to improve patient care . In order 394 Desiderata for Controlled Medical Vocabularies in the Twenty - First Century Abstract : Builders of medical informatics applications need controlled medical vocabularies to support their applications and it is to their advan tage to use available standards . In order to do so , however , these stand ards need to address the requirements of their intended users . Overthe past decade , medical informatics researchers have begun to articulate some of these requirements . This paper brings together some of the common themes which have been described , including : vocabulary content , concept orientation , concept permanence , nonsemantic concept identifiers , poly hierarchy , formal definitions , rejection of " not elsewhere classified " terms , multiple granularities , mUltiple consistent views , context representation , graceful evolution , and recognized redundancy . Standards developers are beginning to recognize and address these desiderata and adapt their offer ings to meet them . Keywords : Controlled Medical Terminology , Vocabulary , Standards , Review to achieve optimal integration of the two , transfer of patient information from the record to the expert would need to be automated . In one attempt to do so , the differences between the controlled vocabularies of the two systems was found to be the major obstacle - even when both systems were created by the same developers [ 1 ] . The solution seems obvious : stand ards [ 2 ] . In fact , many standards have been proposed , but their adoption has been slow . Why ? System developers generally indicate that , while they would like to make use of standards , they can ' t find one that meets their needs . What are those needs ? The answers to this question are less clear . The simple answer is , " It doesn ' t have what I want to say . " Standards devel opers have taken this to mean that the solution is equally simple : keep adding terms to the vocabulary until it does say what ' s needed . However , systems de velopers , as users of controlled vocabu laries , are like users everywhere : they may not always articulate their true needs . Vocabulary developers have labored to increase their offerings , but have continued to be confronted with ambivalence . A number of vocabularies have been put forth as standards [ 3 ] but they have been found wanting in some recent evaluations [ 4 - 6 ] . Over the past ten years or so , medi cal informatics researchers have been studying controlled vocabulary issues directly . They have examined the struc ture and content of existing vocabu laries to determine why they seem unsuitable for particular needs , and they have proposed solutions . In some cases , proposed solutions have been carried forward into practice and new experience has been gained . As we prepare to enter the twenty - first cen tury , it seems appropriate to pause to reflect on this additional experience , to rethink the directions we should pursue , and to identify the next set of goals for the development of standard , reusable , mUltipurpose controlled medical voca bularies . 2 . Desiderata The task of enumeration of general desiderata for controlled vocabularies IS hampered in two ways . First , the Meth Inform Med 1998 ; 37 : 394 - 403 For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 desired characteristics of a vocabulary will vary with the intended purpose of that vocabulary and there are many possible intended purposes . I address this issue by stating that the desired vocabulary must be mUltipurpose . Some of the obvious purposes include : capturing clinical findings , natural language processing , indexing medical records , indexing medical literature , and representing medical knowledge . Each reader can add his or her own favorite purpose . A vocabulary intend ed for any of these can , and often has been , created . But the demands placed on a vocabulary become very different when it must meet several purposes . A second obstacle to summarizing general desiderata is the difficulty teasing out individual opinions from the literature and unifying them . The need for controlled vocabularies for medical computing is almost as old as computing itself [ 7 - 9 ] . However , it is only in the past ten years or so that researchers have gone past talking about the content of a vocabulary and started to talk about deeper representational aspects . Before then , the literature contains many implications and half stated assertions . Since then , authors have become more explicit , but the " terminology of terminology " has not yet settled down to a level of general understanding about what each of us means when we discuss vocabulary characteristics [ 10 ] . It is a foregone conclusion , then , that the summary I present here is bound to misrepresent some opinions and overlook others . With these disclaimers , then , I will attempt to enumerate some of the characteristics that seem to be emerging from recent vocabulary research . Some of them may seem obvious , but they are listed formally in order that they not be overlooked . 2 . 1 Content , Content , and Content Like the three most important fac tors in assessing the value of real estate ( location , location , and location ) , the importance of vocabulary content can not be over stressed . The first criticisms of vocabularies were almost universally for more content . The need for expand ed term coverage continues to be a problem , as can be seen in numerous Meth Inform Med studies which evaluate available stand ards for coverage of a particular domains . For example , recent publica tions examining the domain of nursing terminology are almost completely focused on the issue of what can be said [ 11 - 13 ] . Issues such as how things can be said , or how the vocabulary is organized are apparently less urgent , although sometimes solutions may need to go beyond the simple addition of more terms [ 14 , 15 ] . One approach to increasing content is to add terms as they are encountered , responding as quickly as possible to needs as they arise [ 16 ] . In ~ - this approach , one adds complex expressi ons as needed rather than attempting a systematic , anticipatory solution . For example , rather than try to anticipate every kind of fracture ( simple vs . com pound , greenstick vs . avulsion vs . com pression , etc . ) of every bone , one would add terms for the most common and add more as needed . This avoids the large numbers of terms occurring through combinatorial explosion and the enumeration of nonsensical combi nations ( such as " compound greenstick fracture of the stapes " , an anatomically implausible occurrence for a small bone in the middle ear ) . An alternative approach is to enume rate all the atoms of a terminology and allow users to combine them into neces sary coded terms [ 17 ] , allowing compo sitional extensibility [ 18 ] . The trade off is that , while domain coverage may become easier to achieve , use of the vocabulary becomes more complex . Even with this atomic approach , the identification of all the atoms is nontri vial . The atoms must be substantial enough to convey intended meaning and to preserve their meaning when combined with others . They must be more than simply the words used in medicine . For example , the atom " White " could be used for creating terms like " White Conjunctiva " but would be inappropriate to use in constructing terms such as " Wolff Parkinson - White Syndrome " . The word " White " needs to be more than a collec tion of letters - after all , we could repre sent all medical concepts with just the letters of the alphabet ( 26 , more or less ) , but this would hardly advance the field of medical informatics . The atomic approach must also consider how to differentiate between atoms and mole cules . " White " and " Conjunctiva " are almost certainly atoms , but what about " Wolff - Parkinson - White Syndrome " ? No matter what approach is taken , the need for adding content remains . This occurs because users will demand additions as usage expands and because the field of medicine ( with its attendant terminology ) expands . The real issue to address in considering the " content desideratum " is this : a formal metho dology is needed for expanding content . A haphazard , onesy - twosy approach usually fails to keep up with the needs of users and is difficult to apply consi stently . The result can be a patchwork of terms with inconsistent granularity and organization . Instead , we need formal , explicit , reproducible methods for recognizing and filling gaps in content . For example , Musen et al . applied a systematic approach ( negotia tion of goals , anticipation of use , accom modation of a user community , and evaluation ) to creation of a vocabulary for use in a progress note system [ 19 ] . Methods of similar rigor need to be developed which can be used for content discovery and expansion in large , multipurpose vocabularies . More attention must be focused on how representations are developed , rather than what representations are produced [ 20 ] . 2 . 2 Concept Orientation Careful reading of medical informa tics research will show that most systems that report using controlled vocabulary are actually dealing with the notion of concepts . Authors are becoming more explicit now in stating that they need vocabularies in which the unit of symbolic processing is the concept - an embodiment of a parti cular meaning [ 21 - 25 ] . Concept orienta tion means that terms must correspond to at least one meaning ( " nonvague ness " ) and no more than one meaning ( " nonambiguity " ) , and that meanings correspond to no more than one term ( " nonredundancy " ) [ 26 , 27 ] . Review of the literature suggests that there is some argument around the issue of ambiguity . Blois argues that while low - level concepts ( such as pro - 395 For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 tons ) may be precisely defined , high level concepts , including clinical con cepts like myocardial infarction , are defined not by necessary attributes but by contingent ones ( e . g . , the presence of chest pain in myocardial infarction ) [ 28 ] . Moorman et aL suggest that ambi guity can be allowed in the vocabulary as long as it is reduced to unequivocal meaning , based on context , when ac tually used ( e . g . , stored in a clinical re cord ) [ 29 ] . However , a distinction must be made between ambiguity of the meaning of a concept and ambiguity of its usage [ 26 , 30 ] . It is unfair , for example , to say that the concept " Myocardial Infarc tion " is ambiguous because it could mean " Right Ventricular Infarction " , " Left Ventricular Infarction " and so on . Any concept , no matter how fine grained , will always subsume some finer - grained concepts . But " Myocar dial Infarction " has a meaning which can be expressed in terms of a particular pathophysiologic process which affects a particular anatomic site . Now , if we use this concept to encode patient data , the meaning of the data will vary with the context ( " Myocardial Infarction " , " Rule Out Myocardial Infarction " , " History of Myocardial Infarction " , " Family History of Myocardial Infarc tion " , " No Myocardial Infarction " , etc . ) . This context - sensitive ambiguity is a different phenomenon from context independent ambiguity that might be found in a controlled vocabulary [ 31 ] . For example , the term " Diabetes " does not subsume " Diabetes Mellitus " and " Diabetes Insipidus " ; it has no useful medical meaning ( vague ) . The concept " MI " might mean " Myocardial Infarc tion " , " Mitral Insufficiency " , or " Medi cal Informatics " ; before it even appears in a context , it has multiple mean ings ( ambiguous ) . Concept orientation , therefore , dictates that each concept in the vocabulary has a single , coherent meaning , although its meaning might vary , depending on its appearance in a context ( such as a medical record ) [ 29 ] . 2 . 3 Concept Permanence The corollary of concept orientation is concept permanence : the meaning of a concept , once created , is inviolate . Its 396 preferred name may evolve , and it may be flagged inactive or archaic , but its meaning must remain . This is im portant , for example , when data coded under an older version of the vocabu lary need to be interpreted in view of a current conceptual framework . For example , the old concept " pacemaker " can be renamed " implantable pace maker " without changing its meaning ( as we add the concept " percutaneous pacemaker " ) . But , the name for the old concept " non - A - non - B hepatitis " can not be changed to " Hepatitis C " because the two concepts are not exactly synonymous ( that is , we can ' t infer that someone diagnosed in 1980 as having non - A - non - B hepatitis actually had hepatitis C ) . Nor can we delete the old concept , even though we might no longer code patient data with it . 2 . 4 Nonsemantic Concept Identifier If each term in the vocabulary is to be associated with a concept , the concept must have a unique identifier . The simplest approach is to give each concept a unique name and use this for the identifier . Now that computer storage costs are dropping , the need for the compactness provided by a code ( such as an integer ) has become less compelling . If a concept may have several different names , one could be chosen as the preferred name and the remainder included as synonyms . However , using a name as a unique identifier for a concept limits our ability to alter the preferred name when neces sary . Such changes can occur for a num ber of reasons without implying that the associated meaning of the concept has changed [ 32 ] . Because many vocabularies are orga nized into strict hierarchies , there has been an irresistible temptation to make the unique identifier a hierarchical code which reflects the concept ' s position in the hierarchy . For example , a concept with the code 1000 might be the parent of the concept with the code 1200 which , in turn might be the parent of the concept 1280 , and so on . One advantage to this approach is that , with some familiarity , the codes become some what readable to a human and their hierarchical relationships can be under stood . With today ' s computer inter - faces , however , there is little reason why humans need to have readable codes or , for that matter , why they even need to see the codes at alL Another advantage of hierarchical codes is that querying a database for members of a class becomes easier ( e . g . , searching for " all codes beginning with 1 " will retrieve codes 1000 , 1200 , 1280 , and so on ) . However , this advantage is lost if the concepts can appear in mUltiple places in the hierarchy ( see " Polyhier archy " , below ) ; fortunately , there are other ways to perform " class - based " queries to a database which will work even when concepts can be in multiple classes [ 32 ] . There are several problems with using the concept identifier to convey hierarchical information . First , it is possible for the coding system to run out of room . A decimal code , such as the one described above , will only allow ten concepts at any level in the hierar chy and only allow a depth of four [ 34 ] . Coding systems can be designed to avoid this problem , but other problems remain . For example , once assigned a code , a concept can never be reclassi fied without breaking the hierarchical coding scheme . Even more problema tic , if a concept belongs in more than one location in the hierarchy ( see " Polyhierarchy " , below ) , a convenient single hierarchical identifier is no longer possible . It is desirable , therefo re , to have the unique identifiers for the concepts which are free of hierarchical or other implicit meaning ( i . e . , nonse mantic concept identifiers ) ; such infor mation should instead be included as attributes of the concepts [ 14 ] . 2 . 5 Polyhierarchy There seems to be almost universal agreement that controlled medical vocabularies should have hierarchical arrangements . This is helpful for locat ing concepts ( through " tree walking " ) , grouping similar concepts , and convey ing meaning ( for example , if we see the concept " cell " under the concept " anatomic entity " we will understand the intended meaning as different than if it appeared under the concepts " room " or " power source " ) . There is some disagreement , however , as to whether concepts should be classified Meth Inform Med l I i I For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 to a single taxonomy ( strict or if multiple classifications can be allowed . Most hierarchies . . . Different vocabulary users may aeJ : Ill111U different , equally valid , arran ! > : tall " ' UL ~ of concepts . It seems unlikely there can ever be agreement on a ~ ingle arrangement that will satisfy all ; lience the popular demand for multiple . hierarchies [ 31 , 34 - 36 ] . Zweigenbaum and his colleagues believe that concept classification should be based on the essence of the concepts , rather than arbitrary descriptive knowledge [ 37 ] . They argue quite rightly that arbitrary , user - specific ad hoc classes can still be available using additional semantic information . However , unless there can be agreement on what the essence of concepts should be , there can never be agreement on what the appropriate hierarchy should be . Furthermore , if the essence of a concept is defined by its being the union of the essence of two other concepts , its classification be comes problematic . · For example , until medical knowledge advances to provide abetter definition , we must define the essence of " hepatorenal syndrome " as the occurrence of renal failure in pa tients with severe liver disease . If our vocabulary has the concepts " liver dis ease " and " renal disease " ( which seem desirable or at least not unreasonable ) , " hepatorenal syndrome " must be a descendant of both . There can be little argument that strict hierarchies are more manageable and manipulable , from a computing standpoint , than polyhierarchies . This is small consolation , however , if the voca bUlary is unusable . General consensus , seems to favor allowing mUltiple hierar chies to coexist in a vocabulary without arguing about which particular tree is the essential one . It is certainly possible that if a single hierarchy is needed for computational purposes , one could be so designated with the others treated as nonhierarchical ( but nevertheless directed and acyclic ) relationships . 2 . 6 Formal Definitions Many researchers and developers have indicated a desire for controlled vocabularies to have formal definitions in one form or another [ 23 , 25 - 27 , 36 , 38 - 50 ] . Usually , these definitions are expressed as some collection of rela tionships to other concepts in the voca bulary . For example , the concept " Pneumococcal Pneumonia " can be defined with a hierarchical ( " is a " ) link to the concept " Pneumonia " and a " caused by " link to the concept " Strep tococcus pneumoniae " . If " Pneumonia " has a " site " relationship with the concept " Lung " , then " Pneumococcal Pneumonia " will inherit this relation ship as well . This information can be expressed in a number of ways , in cluding frame - based semantic networks [ 40 ] , classification operators [ 51 ] , cate gorical structures [ 52 ] , and conceptual graphs [ 53 - 55 ] . The important thing to realize about these definitions is that they are in a form which can be mani pulated symbolically ( i . e . , with a com puter ) , as opposed to the unstructured narrative text variety , such as those found in a dictionary . Many researchers have included in their requests that the definitional knowledge be made explic - itly separated from assertional knowledge which may also appear in the vocabulary [ 25 , 41 , 43 , 46 , 56 ] . For example , linking " Pneumococcal Pneu monia " , via the " caused by " relation ship , to " Streptococcus pneumoniae " is definitional , while linking it , via a " treat ed with " relationship , to " Penicillin " would be assertional . Similarly , the inverse relationship ( " causes " ) from " Streptococcus pneumoniae " to " Pneu mococcal Pneumonia " would also be considered assertional , since it is not part of the definition of " Streptococcus pneumoniae " . The creation of definitions places additional demands on the creators of controlled vocabularies . However , with careful planning and design , these demands need not be onerous . For example , the definition given for " Pneumococcal Pneumonia " , given above , only required one additional " caused by " link to be added , assuming that it would be made a child of " Pneu monia " in any case and that the concept " Streptococcus pneumoniae " was already included in the vocabulary . Many of the required links can be gener ated through automatic means , either by the processing of the concept names directly [ 18 ] or through extraction from medical knowledge bases [ 57 ] . Also , the effort required to include definitions may help not only the users of the voca bulary , but the maintainers as well : for mal definitions can support automated vocabulary management [ 58 ] , collabo rative vocabulary development [ 59 ] , and methods for converging distributed development efforts [ 60 , 61 ] . 2 . 7 Reject " Not Elsewhere Classified " Since no vocabulary can guarantee domain completeness all of the time , it is tempting to include a catch - all term which can be used to encode informa tion that is not represented by other existing terms . Such terms often appear in vocabularies with the phrase " Not Elsewhere Classified " , or " NEC " ( this is not to be confused with " Not Other wise Specified " , or " NOS " , which simp ly means that no modifiers are included with the base concept ) . The problem with such terms is that they can never have a formal definition other than one of exclusion - that is , the definition can only be based on knowledge of the rest of concepts in the vocabulary . Not only is this awkward , but as the vocabulary evolves , the meaning of NEC concepts will change in subtle ways . Such " semantic drift " will lead to problems , such as the proper interpretation of historical data . Controlled vocabularies should therefore reject the use of " not elsewhere classified " terms . 2 . 8 Multiple Granularities Each author who expresses a need for a controlled vocabulary , does so with a particular purpose in mind . Associated with that purpose , usually implicitly , is some preconception of a level of granularity at which the concepts must be expressed . For example , the concepts associated with a diabetic patient might be ( with increasingly finer granularity ) : " Diabe tes Mellitus " , " Type II Diabetes Melli tus " , and " Insulin - Dependent Type II Diabetes Mellitus " ( note that the simp ler term " Diabetes " is so coarse - grained as to be vague ) . A general practitioner might balk at being required to select a diagnosis from the fine - grained end of this spectrum of concepts , while an endo crinologist might demand nothing less . 397 For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 In reviewing the various writings on the subject , it becomes clear that multiple granularities are needed for mUltipurpose vocabularies . Vocabula ries which attempt to operate at one level of granularity will be deemed inadequate for application where finer grain is needed and will be deemed cumbersome where coarse grain is needed . Insistence on a single level of detail within vocabularies may explain why they often are not reusable [ 62 ] . It also conflicts with a very basic attribute of medical information : the more macroscopic the level of discourse , the coarser the granularity of the concepts [ 63 ] . It is essential that medical vocabula ries be capable of handling concepts as fine - grained as " insulin molecule " and as general as " insulin resistance " . However , we must differentiate be tween the precision in medical knowl edge and the precision in creating controlled concepts to represent that knowledge . While uncertainty in medi cal language is inevitable [ 64 ] , we must strive to represent that uncertainty with precision . 2 . 9 Multiple Consistent Views If a vocabulary is intended to serve multiple functions , each requiring a different level of granularity , there will be a need for providing multiple views of the vocabulary , suitable for different purposes [ 30 ] . For example , if an appli cation restricts coding of patient dia gnoses to coarse - grained concepts ( such as " Diabetes Mellitus " ) , the more fine grained concepts ( such as " Insulin Dependent Type II Diabetes Mellitus " ) could be collapsed into the coarse concept and appear in this view as synonyms ( see Figs . la and Ib ) . Alternatively , an application may wish to hide some intermediate classes in a hierarchy if they are deemed irrelevant ( see Fig . lc ) . Similarly , although the vocabulary may support mUltiple hier archies , a particular application may wish to limit the user to a single , strict hierarchy ( see Fig . Id ) . We must be careful to confine the ability to provide multiple consistent views , such that inconsistent views do not result . For example , if we create a view in which concepts with multiple 398 parents appear in several places in a single hierarchy , care must be taken that each concept has an identical appearance within the view ( see Figs . Ie and If ) [ 31 ] . 2 . 10 Beyond Medical Concepts : Representing Context Part of the difficulty with using a standard controlled vocabulary is that the vocabulary was created indepen dent of the specific contexts in which it is to be used . This helps prevent the vocabulary from including too many implicit assumptions about the mean ings of concepts and allows it to stand on its own . However , it can lead to confusion when concepts are to be recorded in some specific context , for example , in an electronic patient record . Many researchers have express ed a need for their controlled vocabu lary to contain context representation through formal , explicit information about how concepts are used [ 21 , 65 , 66 ] . A decade ago , Huff and colleagues argued that a vocabulary could never be truly flexible , extensible and compre hensive without a grammar to define how it should be used [ 67 ] . Campbell and Musen stated that , in order to provide systematic domain coverage , they would need both a patient - descrip tion vocabulary and rules for manipula - - " tion of the vocabulary [ 68 ] . Rector et aL add an additional requirement : not only is there a grammar for manipulation , but there is concept - specific informa _ tion about " what is sensible to say " that further limits how concepts can be arranged [ 43 ] . Such limitations are needed in order for the vocabulary to support operations such as predictive data entry , natural language processing , and aggregation of patient records ; Rector ( and others in the Galen Project ) simply request that such information be included as part of the vocabulary , in the form of constraints and sanctions [ 69 ] . If drawing the line between concept and context can become difficult [ 41 ] , drawing the line between the vocabu lary and the application becomes even more so . After all , the ultimate context for controlled medical vocabulary concepts is some external form such as a patient record . Coping with such contexts may be easier if such contexts are modeled in the vocabulary [ 70 ] . A schematic of how such contexts fit together is shown in Fig . 2 . The figure differentiates between levels of concept interaction : what ' s needed to define the concepts , what ' s desired to show expressivity of the vocabulary , and how such expressiveness is channel ed for recording purposes ( e . g . , in a patient record ) . Of course , patient records vary a great deal from institution to institution Lc Fig . 1 Multiple views of a polyhierarchy . a ) Internal arrangements of nine concepts in a polyhierarchy , where E has two parents ; b ) Hierarchy has been collapsed so that specific concepts serve as synonyms of their more general parents ; c ) Intermediate levels in the hierarchy have been hidden ; d ) Conversion to a strict hierarchy ; e ) Strict hierarchy with mUltiple contexts for term E ; f ) Multiple contexts for E are shown , but are inconsistent ( different children ) . Meth Inform Med For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 Assertional ; Knowledge ( how concepts combine ) Contextual Knowledge ( how concepts are used ) I ~ I ' Body Stte Rndlng Progress Note Iprogress Note I Fig . 2 Definitional , assertional , and contextual information in the vocabulary showing how concepts can be combined and where they will appear in a clinical record . and , if we have difficulty standardizing on a vocabulary , what hope is there for standardizing on a record structure ? One possible solution is to view the recording of patient information from an " event " standpoint , where each event is constitutes some action , in cluding the recording of data , occurring during an episode of care which , in turn occurs as part of a patient encounter [ 71 , 72 ] . These add more levels to the organization of concepts in contexts , but can be easily modeled in the voca bulary , as in Fig . 2 . 2 . 11 Evolve Gracefully It is an inescapable fact that control led vocabularies need to change with time . Even if there were a perfect voca bulary that " got it right the first time " , the vocabulary would have to change Finding - - I Pneumonia I I Left Lower Lobe I with the evolution of medical knowl edge . All too often , however , vocabula ries change in ways that are for the convenience of the creators but wreak havoc with the users [ 32 ] . For example , if the name of a concept is changed in such a way as to alter its meaning , what happens to the ability to aggregate patient data that are coded before and after the change ? An important deside ratum is that those charged with main taining the vocabulary must accommo date graceful evolution of their content and structure . This can be accomplished through clear , detailed descriptions of what changes occur and why [ 73 ] , so that good reasons for change ( such as simple addition , refinement , precoordi nation , disambiguation , obsolescence , discovered redundancy , and minor name changes ) can be understood and bad reasons ( such as redundancy , major Left Lower Lobe Pneumonia is - a : Pneumonia has - site : Left Lower Lobe participates - in : Finding Fig . 3 Interchangability of redundant data representations . The structure on the left depicts the post coordination of a disease concept ( Pneumonia ) and a body location ( Left Lower Lobe ) to create a finding in an electronic medical record . The structure on the right shows a precoordinated term for the same finding ( Left Lower Lobe Pneumonia ) . Because this latter term includes formal , structured definitional information ( depicted by the is - a , has - site , and participates - in attributes ) , it is possible to recognize , in an automated way , that data coded in these two different ways are equivalent . Meth Inform Med name changes , code reuse , and changed codes ) can be avoided . [ 74 ] 2 . 12 Recognize Redundancy In controlled vocabulary parlance , redundancy is the condition in which the same information can be stated in two different ways . Synonymy is a type of redundancy which is desirable : it helps people recognize the terms they associate with a particular concept and , since the synonyms map to the same concept ( by definition ) , then the coding of the information is not redundant . On the other hand , the ability to code information in multiple ways is general ly to be avoided . However , such redun dancy may be inevitable in a good , expressive vocabulary . Consider an application in which the user records a coded problem list . For any given concept the user might wish to record , there is always the possibility that the user desires a more specific form than is available in the vocabulary . A good application will allow the user to add more detail to the coded problem , either through the addition of a coded modifier , through the use of unconstrained text , or perhaps a combi nation of both . For example , if a patient has a pneumonia in the lower lobe of the left lung , but the vocabulary does not have such a concept , the user might select the coded concept " Pneumonia " and add the modifier " Left Lower Lobe " . Suppose that , a year later , the vocabulary adds the concept " Left Lower Lobe Pneumonia " . Now , there are two ways to code the concept - the old and the new . Even if we were to somehow prevent the old method from being used , we still have old data coded that way . As vocabularies evolve , gracefully or not , they will begin to include this kind of redundancy . Rather than pretend it does not happen , we should embrace the diversity it represents while , at the same time , provide a mechanism by which we can recognize redundancy and perhaps render it transparent . In the example above , if I were to ask for all patients with " Left Lower Lobe Pneumonia " , I could retrieve the ones coded with the specific concept and those coded with a combination of concepts . Such recognition is possible if 399 For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 we have paid sufficient attention to two other desiderata : formal definitions and context representation . If we know , from context representation , that the disease concept " Pneumonia " can appear in a medical record together with an anatomical concept , such as " Left Lower Lobe " , and the definition of " Left Lower Lobe Pneumonia " includes named relationships to the concepts " Pneumonia " and " Left Lower Lobe " ( " is a " and " site of ' rela tionships , respectively ) , sufficient infor mation exists to allow us to determine that the representation of the new concept in the vocabulary is equivalent to the collection of concepts appearing in the patient database ( see Fig . 3 ) . 3 . Discussion The intense focus previously directed at such issues as medical knowledge representation and patient care data models is now being redirected to the issue of developing and maintaining shareable , mUltipurpose , high - quality vocabularies . Shareability of vocabu lary has become important as system builders realize they must rely on voca bulary builders to help them meet the needs of representing large sets of clinical terms . The multipurpose nature of vocabularies refers to their ability to be used to record data for one purpose ( such as direct patient care ) and then be used for reasoning about the data ( such as automated decision support ) , usually through a variety of views or abstrac tions of the specific codes used in data capture . Even the ability to support browsing of vocabularies remains pro blematic [ 75 ] . " High quality " has been difficult to define , but generally means that the vocabulary approaches comple teness , is well organized , and has terms whose meanings are clear . The above list of desiderata for shareable , mUltipurpose controlled vocabularies reflect one person ' s view of the neces sary priorities ; however , they are based on personal experience with attempts to adopt vocabularies [ 76 - 79 ] and gleaned from the reported experiences of others . The solutions necessary to meet the above list of desiderata vary from technical to political , from simple adoption to basic shifts in philosophy , 400 and from those currently in use to areas ripe for research . Developers of controlled vocabula ries are recognizing that their products are in demand for multiple purposes and , as such , they must address a variety of needs that go beyond those included for the vocabulary ' s original purpose [ 80 ] . The simple solution of " add more terms until they ' re happy " is not satisfy ing vocabulary users ; they want content , but they want more . They want infor mation about the terms , so they know what they mean and how to use them . They also want this information to sup plement the knowledge they create for their own purposes . These purposes are as diverse as natural language process ing , predictive data entry , automated decision support , indexing , clinical research , and even the maintenance of vocabularies themselves . Simple , technical solutions are at hand for some characteristics , and are already being adopted . For example , using nonsemantic concept identifiers and allowing polyhierarchies are straightforward . The systematic solu tion for some others , such as multiple granularities and multiple consistent views will require more thought , but generally should be tractable . Allowing graceful evolution and recognized redundancy are still areas for research , with some promising findings . For example , systematic approaches for vocabulary updates are being discussed to support evolution [ 73 ] , while concep tual graphs provide a mechanism for transforming between different synony mous ( i . e . , redundant ) arrangements of associated concepts [ 54 ] . Some of the desiderata will require fundamental philosophical shifts . For example , decisions to have a truly concept - oriented vocabulary and avoid the dreaded " NEC " terms are simple ones , but can not be taken lightly . Some of these decisions , such as formal defini tions and representing context , will also require significant development effort to make them a reality . Several devel opers describe commitment to these goals , and one group has actually pro vided formal , computer - manipulable definitions of their concepts [ 81 , 82 ] . But the amount of work remains formi dable . Finding ways to share the burden of vocabulary design and construction will be challenging [ 83 ] , but some ap proaches seem promising [ 59 ] . Finding ways to coordinate content develop ment and maintenance among mUltiple groups will require sophisticated appro aches [ 60 ] . Despite their perceived infancy [ 84 ] , the currently available standards should be the starting point for new efforts [ 85 ] . Predictions may not be difficult to make , given the current directions in which standards development is pro ceeding . It is likely that vocabularies will become concept - oriented , using nonsemantic identifiers and containing semantic information in the form of a semantic network , including mUltiple hierarchies . Development of a standard notation for the semantic information may take some time , but the conceptual graph seems to be a popular candidate . Maintenance of vocabularies will even tually settle down into some form which is convenient for users and concept permanence will become the norm . Still unclear is whether the semantic , definitional information provided by developers will be minimal , complete , or somewhere in between . Some of the other desiderata , such as context repre sentation , multiple consistent views , and recognition of redundancy will probably be late in coming . However , the knowledge and structure provided with the vocabulary will at least facili tate development of implementation specific solutions which have not here tofore been possible . 4 . Conclusions This list of desiderata is not intended to be complete ; rather , it is a partial list which can serve to initiate discussion about additional characteristics needed to make controlled vocabularies shara ble and reusable . The reader should not infer that vocabulary developers are not addressing these issues . In fact , these same developers were the sources for many of the ideas listed here . As a result , vocabularies are undergoing their next molt . Current trends seem to indicate that this one will be a true metamorphosis , as lists change to multi ple hierarchies , informal descriptive information changes to formal defini tional and assertional information , and Meth Inform Med For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 attention is given not just to the expan sion of content , but to structural and representational issues . Acknowledgments The ideas in this paper have been based on the medical informatics literature and syn thesized from years of work and conversations with many researchers . In particular , the author ' s collaborators on the UMLS project , the Canon group , and the InterMed Collaboratory can be credited with helping to precipitate these thoughts . In addition , since this paper has been prepared as an accompaniment to a presenta tion at the IMIA Working Group 6 conference , it is hoped that additional desiderata will be put forth at the meeting which will find their way into the final version of this manuscript . This work has been supported in part by the National Library of Medicine . REFERENCES 1 . Wong ET , Pryor TA , Huff SM , Haug PI , Warner HR . Interfacing a stand - alone diagnostik expert system with a hospital information system . Comput Biomed Res 1994 ; 27 : 116 - 29 . 2 . Masys 0 R . Of codes and keywords : stand ards for biomedical nomenclature . Acad Med 1990 ; 65 : 627 - 9 . 3 . Cimino 11 . Coding systems in health care . In van Bemmel IH , McCray AT , eds . : Year book of Medical Informatics , International Medical Informatics Association , Rotter dam , 1995 : 71 - 85 . Reprinted in Methods of Information in Medicine 1996 ; 35 ( 4 / 5 ) : 273 - 84 . 4 . Chute CG , Cohn SP , Campbell KE , Oliver DE , Campbell lR . The Content Coverage of Clinical Classifications . lAMIA 1996 ; 3 : 224 - 33 . 5 . Campbell lR , Carpenter P , Sneiderman C , Cohn S , Chute CG , Warren 1 . Phase II evaluation of clinical coding schemes ; com pleteness , taxonomy , mapping , definitions and clarity . 10urnal of the American Medical Informatics Association 1997 ; 4 : 238 - 51 . 6 . Conference Summary Report : Moving Toward International Standards in Primary Care Informatics : Clinical Vocabulary . New Orleans , November , 1995 . United States Department of Health and Human Service 1996 . 7 . Anderson J . The computer : medical vocabu lary and information . British Medical Bulle tin 1968 ; 24 ( 3 ) : 194 - 8 . 8 . Bates JAV . Preparation of clinical data for computers . British Medical Bulletin 1968 ; 24 ( 3 ) : 199 - 205 . 9 . Howell RW , Loy RM . Disease coding by computer : the " fruit machine " method . British Journal of Preventive and Social Me dicine 1968 ; 22 : 178 - 81 . 10 . Cimino 11 . Controlled medical vocabulary construction : methods from the Canon Group . lAMIA . 1994 ; 1 : 296 - 7 . 11 . Ozbolt JG , Fruchtnicht IN , Hayden JR . Toward data standards for nursing informa tion . JAMIA . 1994 ; 1 : 175 - 85 . Meth Inform Med 12 . McCloskey 1 , Bulechek G . Letter : Toward data standards for nursing information . JAMIA 1994 ; 1 : 469 - 71 . 13 . Ozbolt JG , Fruchtnicht IN , Hayden JR . Letter : Toward data standards for nursing information . lAMIA 1994 ; 1 : 471 - 2 . 14 . Humphreys BL . Comment : Toward data standards for nursing information . J AMIA 1994 ; 1 : 472 - 4 . 15 . Goossen WTF , Epping PJMM , Abraham IL . Classification systems in nursing : formalizing nursing knowledge and implications for nursing information systems . Meth Inform Med . 1996 ; 35 : 59 - 71 . 16 . Gabrieli ER . Computerizing text from office records . MD Compu ! . 1987 ; 4 : 44 - 9 , 56 . 17 . Cote RA , Robboy S . Progress in medical in formation management - Systematized nomenclature of medicine ( SNOMED ) . lA MA 1980 ; 243 : 756 - 62 . 18 . Evans DA , Rothwell 01 , Monarch lA , Lefferts RG , Cote RA . Towards representa tions for medical concepts . Med Decis Making 1991 ; 11 ( suppl ) : S102 - S108 . 19 . Musen MA , Weickert KE , Miller ET , Camp bell KE , Fagan LM . Development of a controlled medical terminology : knowledge acquisition and knowledge representation . Meth Inform Med 1995 ; 34 : 85 - 95 . 20 . Moehr lR , Kluge EH , Patel VL . Advanced patient information systems and medical concept representation . In Greenes RA , Peterson HE , Protti OJ , eds . Proceedings of the Eight World Congress on Medical Infor matics ( MEDINFO ' 95 ) , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . Healthcare Computing & Communications ( Canada ) ; 1995 : 95 - 9 . 21 . Evans DA . Pragmatically - structured , lexi cal - semantic knowledge bases for a Unified Medical Language System . In Greenes RA , ed . Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Sym posium on Computer Applications in Medi cal Care ( SCAMC ) . Washington , DC ; New York : IEEE Computer Society Press 1988 : 169 - 73 . 22 . Lindberg DAB , Humphreys BL , McCray AT . The Unified Medical Language System . Meth Inform Med 1993 ; 32 : 281 - 91 . 23 . Volot F , Zweigenbaum P , Bachimont B , Ben Said M , Bouaud J , Fieschi M , Boisvieux JF . Structuration and acquisition of medical knowledge using UMLS in the conceptual graph formalism . In Safran C , ed . Proceed ings of the Seventeenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Washington , DC , 1993 ; Mc Graw - Hill , New York ; 1994 : 710 - 14 . 24 . Evans DA , Cimino 11 , Hersh WR , Huff SM , Bell OS . Toward a medical - concept repre sentation language . JAMIA 1994 ; 1 : 207 - 17 . 25 . Rassinoux AM , Miller RA , Baud RH , Scherrer JR . Modeling principles for QMR medical findings . In Cimino 11 , ed . Proceed ings of the AMIA Annual Fall Symposium ( Formerly SCAMC ) . Washington , DC , Philadelphia : Hanley and Belfus 1996 : 264 - 98 . 26 . Henkind SJ , Benis AM , Teichholz LE . Quantification as a means to increase the utility of nomenclature - classification systems . In Salmon R , Blum B , Jlirgensen , eds . Proceedings of the Seventh World Con gress on Medical Informatics ( MED - INFO 86 ) . North - Holland ( Amsterdam ) ; 1986 : 858 - 61 . 27 . Cimino 11 , Clayton PO , Hripcsak G , 10hn son SB . Knowledge - based approaches to the maintenance of a large controlled medical terminology . JAMIA 1994 ; 1 : 35 - 50 . 28 . Blois MS . The effect of hierarchy on the encoding of meaning . In Orthner HF , ed . Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Sympo siurn on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Washington , DC ; IEEE Computer Society Press , New York ; 1986 : 73 . 29 . Moorman PW , van Ginneken AM , van der Lei 1 , van Bemmel JH . A model for structur ed data entry based on explicit descriptional knowledge . Meth Inform Med 1994 ; 33 : 454 - 63 . 30 . van Ginneken AM , van der Lei 1 , Moorman PW . Towards unambiguous representation of patient data . In Frisse ME , ed . Proceed ings of the Sixteenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Baltimore , MD , 1992 ; McGraw HilI , New York ; 1993 : 69 - 73 . 31 . Cimino 11 , Hripcsak G , Johnson SB , Clayton PD . Designing an introspective , controlled medical vocabulary . In Kingsland LC , ed . Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . New York , Washington , DC : IEEE Computer Society Press 1989 : 513 - 8 . 32 . Cimino IJ . Formal descriptions and adaptive mechanisms for changes in controlled medi cal vocabularies . Meth Inform Med . 1996 ; 35 : 202 - 10 . 33 . Forman BH , Cimino 11 , Johnson SB , Sen gupta S , Sideli R , Clayton P . Applying a con trolled medical terminology to a distributed production clinical information system . In Gardner RM , ed . Proceedings of the Nine teenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Philadelphia , New Orleans , LA : Hanley and Belfus 1995 : 421 - 5 . 34 . Bernauer J , Franz M , Schoop M , Schoop 0 , Pretschner DP . The compositional approach for representing medical concept systems . In Greenes RA , Peterson HE , Protti OJ , eds . Proceedings of the Eight World Congress on Medical Informatics ( MEDINFO ' 95 ) , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . Healthcare Computing & Communications ( Canada ) 1995 : 70 - 4 . 35 . Dunham GS , Henson DE , Pacak MG . Three solutions to problems of categorized medical nomenclatures . Meth Inform Med 1984 ; 23 : 87 - 95 . 36 . Baud R , Lovis C , Alpay L , Rassinoux AM , Nowlan A , Rector A . Modeling for natural language understanding . In Safran C , ed . Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . New York , Was hington , DC : 1993 ; New York : McGraw - Hill 1994 : 289 - 93 . 37 . Zweigenbaum P , Bachimont B , Bouaud J , Charlet J , Boisvieux JF . Issues in the structur ing and acquisition of an ontology for medi cal language understanding . Meth Inform Med 1995 ; 34 : 15 - 24 . 38 . Masarie Jf . FE , Miller RA . Bouhaddou 0 , Giuse NB , Warner , HR . An interlingua for 401 For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 electronic interchange of medical informa tion : using frames to map between clinical vocabularies . Computers in Biomedical Research 1991 ; 24 ( 4 ) : 379 - 400 . 39 . Gabrieli ER . Interface problems between medicine and computers . In Cohen GS , ed . Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Symposi um on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . New York , Washington , DC : IEEE Computer Society Press 1984 : 93 - 5 . 40 . Barr CE , Komorowski HJ , Pattison - Gordon E , Greenes RA . Conceptual modeling for the Unified Medical Language System . In Greenes RA , ed . Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Symposium on Computer Applica tions in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . New York , Washington , DC : IEEE Computer Society Press 1988 : 148 - 51 . 41 . Haimowitz IJ , Patil RS , Szolovitz P . Repre senting medical knowledge in a terminologi cal language is difficult . In Greenes RA , ed . Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Sympo sium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . New York , Washington , DC : IEEE Computer Society Press 1988 : 101 - 5 . 42 . Rothwell DJ , Cote RA . Optimizing the structure of a standardized vocabulary - the SNOMED model . In Miller RA , ed . Proceed ings of the Fourteenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . New York , Washington , DC : IEEE Computer Society Press 1990 : 181 - 4 . 43 . Rector AL , Nowlan WA , Kay S . Conceptual knowledge : the core of medical information systems . In Lun KC , Deguolet P , Piemme TE , Rienhoff 0 , eds . Proceedings of the Seventh World Congress on Medical Infor matics ( MEDINFO ' 92 ) , Geneva . North Holland ( Amsterdam ) 1992 : 1420 - 6 . 44 . Campbell KE , Das AK , Musen MA . A logi cal foundation for representation of clinical data . JAMIA 1994 ; 1 : 218 - 32 . 45 . Bernauer J . Subsumption principles underly ing medical concept systems and their formal reconstruction . In Ozbolt JG , ed . Proceed ings of the Eighteenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Washington , DC ; Hanley and Belfus , Philadelphia ; 1994 : 140 - 4 . 46 . Smart JF , Roux M . A model for medical knowledge representation application to the analysis of descriptive pathology reports . Meth Inform Med 1995 ; 34 : 352 - 60 . 47 . Kiuchi T , Ohashi Y , Sato H , Kaihara S . Methodology for the construction of a disease nomenclature and classification system for clinical use . Meth Inform Med 1995 ; 34 : 511 - 7 . 48 . Rector AL . Thesauri and formal classifica tions : terminologies for people and machi nes . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medical Concept Representation , Jackson ville , Florida , January 1997 : 183 - 95 . 49 . Brown PJB , O ' Neil M , Price C . Semantic representation of disorders in Version 3 of the Read Codes . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medical Concept Representa tion , Jacksonville , Florida : January 1997 : 209··14 . 402 50 . Price C , O ' Neil M , Bentley TE , Brown PJB . Exploring the ontology of surgical proce dures in the Read Thesaurus . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medical Concept Representation , Jacksonville , Florida , Jan uary 1997 : 215 - 21 . 51 . Bernauer J . Formal classification of medical concept descriptions : graph oriented opera tors . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medical Concept Representation , Jacksonville , Florida , January 1997 : 109 - 15 . 52 . Rossi Mori A , Consorti F , Galeazzi E . Standards to support development of termi nological systems for healthcare telematics . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medi cal Concept Representation , Jacksonville , Florida , January 1997 : 131 - 45 . 53 . Bernauer J . Conceptual graphs as a opera tional model for descriptive findings . In Clayton PD , ed . Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applicati ons in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Washington , DC , 1991 ; McGraw - Hill , New York ; 1992 : 214 - 8 . 54 . Campbell KE , Musen MA . Representation of clinical data using SNOMED III and con ceptual graphs . In Frisse ME , ed . Proceed ings of the Sixteenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Baltimore , MD , 1992 ; McGraw Hill , New York ; 1993 : 354 - 8 . 55 . Baud RH , RassinouxAM , Wagner Jc , Lovis C , Juge C , Alpay LL , Michel PA , Degoulet P , Scherrer JR . Representing clinical narrati ves using conceptual graphs . Meth Inform Med 1995 ; 34 : 176 - 86 . 56 . Robe PF de V , Flier FJ , Zanstra PE . Health classifications and terminological modeling . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medi cal Concept Representation , Jacksonville , Florida , January 1997 : 223 - 4 . 57 . Cimino JJ , Barnett GO . Automatic knowl edge acquisition from MEDLINE . Meth Inform Med 1993 ; 32 : 120 - 30 . 58 . Cimino JJ , Johnson SB , Hripcsak G , Hill CL , Clayton PD . Managing Vocabulary for a Centralized Clinical System . In Greenes RA , Peterson HE , Protti DJ , eds . Proceedings of the Eight World Congress on Medical Infor matics ( MEDINFO ' 95 ) , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . Healthcare Computing & Communications ( Canada ) ; 1995 : 117 - 20 . 59 . Friedman C , Huff SM , Hersh WR , Pattison Gordon E , Cimino JJ . The Canon group ' s effort : working toward a merged model . JAMIA 1995 ; 2 : 4 - 18 . 60 . Campbell KE , Cohn SP , Chute CG , Rennels G , Shortliffe EH . Galapagos : computer based support for evolution of a convergent medical terminology . In Cimino JJ , ed . Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall Sym posium ( Formerly SCAMC ) . Washington , DC ; Hanley and Belfus , Philadelphia ; 1996 : 269 - 73 . 61 . Campbell KE , Cohn SP , Chute CG , Shortlif fe EH , Rennels G . Scaleable methodologies for distributed development of logic - based convergent medical terminology . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medical Concept Representation , Jacksonville , Florida , J an uary 1997 : 243 - 56 . 62 . Musen MA . Knowledge sharing and reuse . Comput Biomed Res 1992 ; 25 : 435 - 67 . 63 . Blois MS . Medicine and the nature of verti cal reasoning . New Engl J Med 1988 ; 318 : 847 - 51 . 64 . Kong A , Barnett GO , Mosteller F , Youtz C . How medical professionals evaluate expres sions of probability . New Engl J Med 1986 ; 315 : 740 - 4 . 65 . Henry SB , Mead CN . Standardized nursing classification systems ; necessary , but not suf ficient , for representing what nurses do . In Cimino JJ , ed . Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall Symposium ( Formerly SCAMC ) . Philadelphia , Washington , DC : Hanley and Belfus 1996 : 145 - 9 . 66 . Huff SM , Rocha RA , Solbrig HR , Barnes MW , Schank SP , Smith M . Linking a medical vocabulary to a clinical data model using Abstract Syntax Notation 1 . In Chute CG , ed . IMIA Working Group 6 Conference on Natural Language and Medical Concept Representation , Jacksonville , Florida , Janu ary 1997 : 225 - 41 . 67 . Huff SM , Craig RB , Gould BL , Castagno DL , Smilan RE . Medical data dictionary for decision support applications . In Stead WW , ed . Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . New York , Was hington , DC : IEEE Computer Society Press 1987 : 310 - 7 . 68 . Campbell KE , Musen MA . Creation of a systematic domain for medical care : the need for a comprehensive patient - descrip tion vocabulary . In Lun KC , Deguolet P , Piemme TE , Rienhoff 0 , eds . Proceedings of the Seventh World Congress on Medical Informatics ( MEDINFO ' 92 ) , Geneva . North - Holland ( Amsterdam ) ; 1992 : 1437 - 42 . 69 . Rector AL , Glowinski AJ , Nowlan WA , Rossi - Mori A . Medical - concept models and medical records : an approach based on GALEN and PEN & PAD . JAMIA 1995 ; 2 : 19 - 35 . 70 . Prokosh HU , Amiri F , Krause D , Neek G , Dudeck J . A semantic network model for the medical record rheumatology clinic . In Greenes RA , Peterson HE , Protti DJ , eds . Proceedings of the Eight World Congress on Medical Informatics ( MEDINFO ' 95 ) , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . Healthcare Computing & Communications ( Canada ) ; 1995 : 240 - 4 . 71 . Huff SM , Rocha RA , Bray BE , Warner HR , Haug PJ . An event model of medical infor mation representation . JAMIA 1995 ; 2 : 116 - 34 . 72 . Johnson SB , Friedman C , Cimino JJ , Clark T , Hripcsak G , Clayton PD . Conceptual data model for a central patient database . In Clayton PD , ed . Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Symposium on Computer Applica tions in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Washing ton , DC 1991 ; McGraw - Hill , New York 1992 : 381 - 5 . 73 . Tuttle MS , Nelson SJ . A poor precedent . Meth Inform Med . 1996 ; 35 : 211 - 7 . 74 . Cimino ] J , Clayton PD . Coping with chang ing controlled vocabularies . In Ozbolt JG , Meth Inform Med r I For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107 ed . : Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ; New York , Washington , DC : November , McGraw - Hill , 1994 : 135 - 9 . Hripcsak G , Allen B , Cimino JJ , Lee R . Access to data : comparing Access Med with Query by Review . JAMIA . 1996 ; 3 : . . 288 - 99 . 16 . Cimino JJ . Representation of clinicallabora tory terminology in the Unified Medical Language System . In Clayton PD , ed . Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Sympo sium on Computer Applications in Medical Care ( SCAMC ) . Washington , DC , 1991 ; McGraw - Hill , New York ; 1992 : 199 - 203 . 77 . Cimino JJ , Side Ii RV . Using the UMLS to bring the library to the bedside . Medical Decision Making . 1991 ; 11 ( Suppl ) : S116 - S120 . 78 . Cimino JJ , Barrows RC , Allen B . Adapting ICD9 - CM for clinical decision support ( abstract ) . In Musen MA , ed . Proceedings of the 1992 Spring Congress of the American Medical Informatics Association ; Portland , Oregon ; May , 1992 . The Association , Be thesda , MD ; 1992 : 34 . 79 . Cimino JJ . Use of the Unified Medical Language System in patient care at the Columbia - Presbyterian Medical Center . Meth Inform Med . 1995 ; 34 : 158 - 64 . 80 . Schulz EB , Price CS , Brown PIB . Symbolic anatomic knowledge representation in the Read Codes Version 3 : structure and appli cation . Journal of the American Medical Association . 1997 ; 4 : 38 - 48 . 81 . Forrey A W , McDonald 0 , DeMoor G , Huff SM , Leaville D , Leland D , Fiers T , Charles L , Griffin B , Stalling F , Tullis A , Hutchins K , Baenziger J . Logical observa tion identifier names and codes ( LOINC ) database : a public use set of codes and names for electronic reporting of clinical laboratory test results . Clinical Chemistry . 1996 : 42 : 81 - 90 . 82 . Rocha RA , Huff SM . Coupling vocabularies and data structures : lessons from LOINC . In Cimino JJ , ed . Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall Symposium ( Formerly SCAMC ) . Washington , DC ; Hanley and Belfus , Philadelphia ; 1996 : 90 - 4 . 83 . Tuttle MS . The position of the Canon group : a reality check . JAMIA 1994 ; 1 : 298 - 9 . 84 . United States General Accounting Office . Automated Medical Records : Leadership Needed to Expedite Standards Develop ment : report to the Chairman / Committee on Governmental Affairs , U . S . Senate . Washing ton , DC : USGAOIIMTEC - 93 - 17 ; April 1993 . 85 . Board of Directors of the American Medical Informatics Association . Standards for medical identifiers , codes , and messages needed to create an efficient computer stored medical record . JAMIA 1994 ; 1 : 1 - 7 . Address of the author : James J . Cimino , M . D . , Department of Medical Informatics , Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons , 161 Fort Washington Avenue , New York , New York 10032 , USA E - mail : James . Cimino @ columbia . edu For personal or educational use only . No other uses without permission . All rights reserved . Downloaded from www . methods - online . com on 2011 - 09 - 08 | IP : 130 . 236 . 226 . 107