RESEARCH ARTICLE Hybrid self - optimized clustering model based on citation links and textual features to detect research topics Dejian Yu , Wanru Wang * , Shuai Zhang , Wenyu Zhang , Rongyu Liu Schoolof Information , ZhejiangUniversityof Finance and Economics , Hangzhou , Zhejiang , China * wanruwang0401 @ 163 . com Abstract The challenge of detecting research topics in a specific research field has attracted attention from researchers in the bibliometrics community . In this study , to solve two problems of clus - tering papers , i . e . , the influence of different distributions of citation links and involved textual features on similarity computation , the authors propose a hybrid self - optimized clustering model to detect research topics by extending the hybrid clustering model to identify “core documents” . First , the Amsler network , consisting of bibliographic coupling and co - citation links , is created to calculate the citation - based similarity based on the cosine angle of papers . Second , the cosine similarity is also used to compute the text - based similarity , which consists of the textual statistical and topological features . Then , the cosine angle of the linear combination of citation - and text - based similarity is considered as the hybrid simi - larity . Finally , the Louvain method is applied to cluster papers , and the terms based on term frequency are used to label clusters . To test the performance of the proposed model , a data - set related to the data envelopment analysis field is used for comparison and analysis of clustering results . Based on the benchmark built , different clustering methods with different citation links or textual features are compared according to evaluation measures . The results show that the proposed model can obtain reasonable and effective clustering results , and the research topics of data envelopment analysis field are also analyzed based on the proposed model . As different features are considered in the proposed model compared with previous hybrid clustering models , the proposed clustering model can provide inspiration for further studies on topic identification by other researchers . Introduction Clustering or mapping of scientific papers is an important area in scientometric research [ 1 ] . Clustering analysis is useful for detecting research topics and revealing scientific structure and dynamics , which can aid in systematic understanding of research fields . Bibliometric methods have been used to analyze research topics and scientific structure in different research fields [ 2 – 5 ] . There are also some studies combining bibliometric methods with clustering methods for clustering papers based on citation links , textual approach , and a combination of citation PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 1 / 21 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : Yu D , Wang W , Zhang S , Zhang W , Liu R ( 2017 ) Hybrid self - optimized clusteringmodel based on citation links and textual features to detect research topics . PLoS ONE12 ( 10 ) : e0187164 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 Editor : ZhaohongDeng , Jiangnan University , CHINA Received : August15 , 2017 Accepted : October 14 , 2017 Published : October 27 , 2017 Copyright : © 2017 Yu et al . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , whichpermits unrestricteduse , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand sourceare credited . Data Availability Statement : All relevantdata are withinthe paper and its Supporting Information files . Funding : This work has been supported by National NaturalScience Foundation ofChina ( nos . 51375429 , and 51475410 ) , URLof the funder : http : / / www . nsfc . gov . cn / ; NaturalScience Foundationof Zhejiang Province ( nos . LY17E050010 , and LY17G010007 ) , URL of the funder : http : / / www . zjnsf . gov . cn / ; Zhejiang Science & TechnologyPlan ofChina ( no . 2015C33024 ) , links and textual approach . These are known as citation - based method , text - based method , and hybrid clustering , respectively . Some related works are listed in Table 1 and are discussed in detail here . The main citation - based methods are direct citation , co - citation , bibliographic coupling , and Amsler . According to Janssens et al . [ 6 ] and Liu et al . [ 1 ] , the most widely used method is co - citation , which was proposed by Small [ 7 ] , although bibliographic coupling was discovered earlier by Kessler [ 8 ] . Co - citation can be considered when there are common in - links between two papers , and bibliographic coupling can be considered when there are common out - links between two papers . Amsler [ 9 ] proposed a combination of bibliographic coupling and co - citation that considers both the common out - and in - links between two papers . The main advantage of the citation - based methods is their discrimination power ; however , these meth - ods tend to “underestimate” the relationship between papers [ 10 ] . A popular text - based method is co - word analysis [ 11 ] , which analyzes the occurrence of words extracted from papers in an indexing database based on text mining techniques . Previ - ous studies applied co - word analysis to cluster and analyze research topics in different scien - tific fields [ 12 , 13 ] . There are additional text mining methods that are applied to identify important terms in a paper in bibliometric research [ 14 ] , such as term frequency , inverse doc - ument frequency , and term frequency - inverse document frequency ( TF - IDF ) , which are pop - ular text mining methods based on term frequency . The analysis of terms or keywords in two papers can be used not only to calculate the text - based similarity , but also to label the research topic of the paper . However , only term frequency is considered as the importance of terms is unilateral , and some high - frequency terms cannot represent the specific research fields [ 15 ] . Both citation - and text - based methods have their respective advantages and disadvantages . Citation - based methods can reveal the link structure and link relationship between papers but neglect the text feature between papers , whereas text - based methods only consider the text fea - ture between papers , but neglect the links between papers . Hybrid clustering methods , which combine citation - and text - based methods have been studied to improve the performance of scientific mapping and clustering [ 1 , 16 ] . Braam et al . [ 17 , 18 ] first proposed the hybrid clustering of co - citation and co - word analysis for scientific mapping from the perspective of structural aspects and dynamical aspects , respec - tively . Afterward , there are an increasing number of interesting studies regarding the combina - tion of citation - and text - based methods for clustering in different ways . Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 , 19 ] used the cosine measure to calculate both the citation - and text - based similarities based on bibliographic coupling and TF - IDF , respectively , and then combined the cosine angles underlying the citation - and text - based similarities to detect “core documents . ” Liu et al . [ 16 ] used a cross - citation network to construct a link structure , where the text - based sim - ilarity , calculated as the cosine angle of the documents based on the TF - IDF weight of terms , was considered as the edge strength in a coupled graph ; then , the link structure was coupled with the edge strength to cluster papers using the Louvain method . Meng et al . [ 20 ] proposed a multi - view clustering method , which uses a cosine similarity based on the TF - IDF of the terms as the text - based similarity , and adopted a cross - citation relation between papers to compute the citation - based similarity . Then , a simple linear combination of these two similarities was used as the integrated similarity to cluster journals . Liu [ 21 ] combined the bibliographic cou - pling with the context information of the references to compute the similarity between papers in the biomedical field . Silva et al . [ 22 ] constructed a citation network for clustering , extracted keywords to define the cluster topics , and combined these with network topological metrics to analyze the relatedness between topics . Previous studies on hybrid clustering methods have contributed to improving the perfor - mance of clustering . Many researchers tend to use one type of citation link to compute the Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 2 / 21 URL of the funder : http : / / www . zjsti . gov . cn / . The funders had no rolein studydesign , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparationof the manuscript . Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . citation - based similarity and a text statistical feature to compute the text - based similarity . Then , a simple linear combination of these two similarities between papers is represented as the integrated similarity to cluster documents . However , there are three issues to be noted . First , Calado et al . [ 23 ] and Couto et al . [ 24 ] found that different distributions of citation links in direct citation , co - citation , and bibliographic coupling networks can influence the clustering performance . Second , previous studies usually only took textual statistical features based on TF - IDF as the text - based similarity , whereas Chen and Xiao [ 15 ] pointed out that only taking the term frequency as the importance of terms is not sufficient . Third , the simple linear combi - nation of hybrid similarity might neglect different distributional characteristics of different datasets [ 25 ] . To solve these three issues , a hybrid self - optimized clustering model based on citation links and textual features is proposed in this study by extending the hybrid clustering model of Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] . First , the Amsler network that considers both the common out - and in - links between papers is created to address the preceding one , and then it is used to calculate the citation - based similarity by extending the measurement of the bibliographic coupling strength by Gla¨nzel and Czerwon [ 26 ] based on the angle between vectors . Second , to solve the second issue , the statistical feature based on TF - IDF and the topological feature based on accessibility of terms extracted from the title and abstract of papers are combined to calculate the text - based similarity using the cosine measurement based on the research by Amancio [ 27 ] , which showed that adding a textual topological property can improve the performance of conventional textual statistical methods . Third , to solve the third issue , Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] proposed a linear combination of the angles of similarities . Following the proposal of this hybrid method , some studies conducted further analysis and proposed applications [ 19 , 28 – 30 ] . In this study , we also use the cosine angles underlying the linear combination of the cita - tion - and text - based similarities , which are determined to represent the hybrid similarity between papers . Finally , the clustering result is obtained by applying the Louvain method [ 31 ] , and the terms based on term frequency are used to label the research topics of the obtained clusters . In addition , there are also other effective clustering methods that have been proposed and applied to text clustering , such as the soft subspace clustering ( SSC ) method , which has been extended and evaluated in text clustering . Jing et al . [ 32 ] used the weights calculated by the extended k - means clustering methods automatically to detect subsets of important dimen - sions . Deng et al . [ 33 ] proposed a new enhanced SSC method using within - class compactness and between - cluster separation based on a developed optimization objective function . Wang et al . [ 34 ] proposed a novel extended SSC algorithm , which introduced a partition index into the objective function and combined the concepts of hard and fuzzy clustering . These studies all applied the extended SSC methods to cluster textual data and evaluated their effective Table 1 . Related work of clustering methods based on citation links and textual features . Methods Similarity computation References Citation - based methods Co - citation network Small [ 7 ] Bibliographic coupling network Kessler [ 8 ] Amsler network Amsler [ 9 ] Text - based methods Co - word analysis Callon et al . [ 11 ] ; Radhakrishnan et al . [ 12 ] ; Yu et al . [ 13 ] Text mining methods Boyack et al . [ 14 ] Hybrid clustering methods Combination of co - citation and co - word analysis Braam et al . [ 17 , 18 ] Combination of bibliographic coupling and TF - IDF Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 , 19 ] ; Liu [ 21 ] Combination of cross - citation network and TF - IDF Liu et al . [ 16 ] ; Meng et al . [ 20 ] https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . t001 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 3 / 21 performance . However , we chose the Louvain method to cluster papers because it does not require the number of clusters to be set beforehand as it is an efficient and self - optimization clustering method based on modularity [ 16 ] . The detailed reasons are introduced in next section . The remainder of this paper is organized as follows . We first illustrate the details of the pro - posed model . Then we present the dataset related to the data envelopment analysis ( DEA ) field and the experimental results . Finally , we conclude the paper and discuss future works . Model and methodology First , to facilitate understanding of the proposed model , the symbols used in this study and their corresponding explanations are listed in Table 2 . Based on the previous study by Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] , some improvements to the hybrid clustering method are made in this current study . On one hand , the Amsler network of papers is constructed to calculate the citation - based similarity , which means that it is calculated by considering both the common out - and in - links between papers , while only the bibliographic coupling strength is used to compute the citation - based similarity by Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] . Table 2 . Symbols used in this study and their corresponding explanations . Symbols Explanations α Weight of citation - based similarity β Weight of text - based similarity λ Weight of statistical feature of terms p i , p j Two papers in the example A The matrix of the total links and their strength of all pairs of papers based on the Amsler network L Matrix of the citation - based similarity between papers f t i ; p Frequency of term t i in paper p LS ð p i ; p j Þ Citation - based similarity between p i and p j . N p Total number of papers df t i Number of papers containing term t i t i , t j Two nodes of the terms connected in paper p TF (cid:0) IDF ð t i ; p Þ Statistical feature of term t i in paper p I ð t i ; p Þ Importance of terms M Total number of performed walks W ð t i ! t j Þ Number of times that node t i reaches node t j after h steps P h ð t j ; t i Þ Transition probability that node t i reaches node t j after h steps of a self - avoiding walk E h ( Ω , t i ) Diversity of node t i after h steps OA h ð t i ; p Þ Outward accessibility of node t i after h steps TS ð p i ; p j Þ Text - based similarity between papers p i and p j k Total number of terms appearing in papers p i and p j . ES ð p i ; p j Þ Hybrid similarity between p i and p j E p i p j Weight of the edges between vertex p i and vertex p j w p i , w p j Sum of the weights of the edges attached to vertexes p i and p j , respectively c p i , c p j The clusters to which vertexes p i and p j belong to , respectively w p i ; in Sum of the weights of the links from p i to nodes on a community C m Sum of the weights of all the links in the network Σ in Sum of the weights of the links inside a community C Σ tot Sum of the weights of the links incident to nodes in a community C https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . t002 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 4 / 21 On the other hand , the calculation of the text - based similarity considers not only the frequency of terms extracted from the paper titles and abstracts , but also the topological characterization of the term adjacency network , whereas only the textual frequency feature is considered in the textual similarity by Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] . Finally , the Louvain method [ 31 ] is applied to clus - ter papers based on the hybrid similarity between papers . The advantages of the proposed model are reflected in three main aspects : ( a ) it can make citation - based and text - based methods complementary to improve the efficiency and over - come some limitations of these two methods [ 10 ] ; ( b ) considering both the common out - and in - links between papers can express the bibliometric relations between papers more accurately [ 24 ] ; and ( c ) adding the topological feature into the statistical feature of terms can improve the performance of existing textual statistical methods [ 27 ] . Moreover , the Louvain method is an efficient and self - optimal clustering method based on modularity ; thus , it does not require the number of clusters to be set beforehand . Once the clustering result is obtained , the clusters can be labeled according to the terms extracted from the title and abstract based on the term fre - quency . The proposed model is illustrated in Fig 1 and the detailed methods are introduced below . Citation - based analysis First , to obtain the citation - based similarity between two papers , the Amsler network was con - structed based on Amsler’s method [ 9 ] . According to Amsler [ 9 ] and Calado et al . [ 23 ] , co - citation and bibliographic coupling can be combined to measure the similarity , which means that two papers p i and p j are related if any of the three following conditions is met : ( i ) p i and p j are co - cited by the same paper , ( ii ) p i and p j cite the same paper , and ( iii ) p i cites a third paper that cites p j . According to the definitions of co - citation [ 7 ] and bibliographic coupling [ 8 ] , the relationship of co - citation between two papers can be used to measure the number of common in - links of two papers , whereas bibliographic coupling can be used to measure the number of common out - links of two papers . It should be noted that only the first two conditions in the Amsler network are considered in this study . Moreover , the common out - and in - links between two papers depend on the common citations and references , respectively . An example is shown in Fig 2 . Based on the method introduced by Gla¨nzel and Czerwon [ 26 ] whereby the citation - based similarity was calculated using the cosine angles between vectors based on biblio - graphic coupling , a matrix A representing the total links and their strength of all pairs of papers was built based on the Amsler network . The diagonal elements of matrix A represent the total number of links of each paper , i . e . , the number of references and citations , and the corresponding elements located in the i th row and j th column represent the number of common out - and in - links between p i and p j . Then , another matrix , L , representing the cita - tion - based similarity between papers can be created as Eq ( 1 ) , according to Gla¨nzel and Czerwon [ 26 ] : L ¼ ½ LS ð p i p j Þ (cid:138) ¼ Diag ð A Þ (cid:0) 1 = 2 (cid:1) A (cid:1) Diag ð A Þ (cid:0) 1 = 2 : ð 1 Þ According to Gla¨nzel and Czerwon [ 26 ] , matrix L contains Salton’s cosine measure of the link strength of all pairs of papers . The difference between this study and theirs is that the link strength is calculated based on the Amsler network rather than on the bibliographic coupling network . Although Gla¨nzel and Czerwon [ 26 ] showed that the bibliographic coupling network has several advantages compared to the co - citation network , some studies [ 23 , 24 ] also verified that different distributions of citation links have different influences on the citation - based clus - tering . Therefore , to weaken the influence of the different distributions of citation links , both Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 5 / 21 the common out - and in - links between pairs of papers are involved in the computation of cita - tion - based similarity in this study . Text - based analysis According to Amancio [ 27 ] , recently , complex network methods have proved useful to create several language models . Some complex network methods were devised to improve the perfor - mance of statistical methods . The results of several cases indicated that the hybrid methods of statistical features and topological properties outperformed the results when only the statistical or network methods were used . Inspired by Amancio [ 27 ] , the statistical feature of terms is combined with the topological feature of term adjacency network as the importance of terms . Fig 1 . Flowchart of the proposed hybrid self - optimized clustering model . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . g001 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 6 / 21 Then , the text - based similarity between two papers can be calculated using Salton’s cosine measure [ 35 ] . Statistical feature of terms . The TF - IDF method [ 36 ] is applied to compute the statistical weight of terms . Using the TF - IDF can identify important terms based on term frequency and inverse document frequency . The statistical feature TF (cid:0) IDF ð t i ; p Þ of term t i in a paper p can be calculated using the TF - IDF method as : TF (cid:0) IDF ð t i ; p Þ ¼ f t i ; p (cid:2) log N p df t i : ð 2 Þ Considering that the TF - IDF method only takes into account the frequency of terms and ignores the influence of the terms’ interconnectivity in the paper , the authors added the topo - logical features of terms based on the term adjacency network , as shown in the next sub - section . Topological feature of terms . According to Newman [ 37 ] , there are several popular topo - logical metrics in a network , such as degree , betweenness , closeness , average shortest path length , and accessibility . Based on the good performance of the accessibility metric in previous studies [ 27 , 38 , 39 ] , the accessibility metric [ 40 ] is applied to analyze the topological feature based on the term adjacency network in this study , which considers both the topology and dynamics of the network . According to Travenc¸olo and Costa [ 40 ] , accessibility is the normali - zation of diversity entropy , which can be used to evaluate the relative accessed frequency of one specific node . Furthermore , it can be divided into outward accessibility and inward acces - sibility , in which the former quantifies the diversity with which a node accesses the other nodes , and the latter quantifies the frequency at which the other nodes access the specific node . Considering that the accessibility applied in this study is aimed at representing the topo - logical feature rather than the frequency of terms , the outward accessibility is chosen for fur - ther computation . To define this metric , the following definitions are considered [ 40 ] . Let G T be an unweighted and undirected term adjacency network with N t nodes based on the terms extracted from a paper p . The nodes in the network represent the terms , and the edge between two nodes t i and t j represents two nodes connected in the paper p , i . e . , the two Fig 2 . In - links and out - links between two papers . p 1 , p 2 , and p 3 representsthe citations of the paper p i , while p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , and p 5 represent the citations of the paper p j ; therefore , p 2 and p 3 are the common in - links between p i and p j . Similarly , p 6 , p 7 , p 8 , and p 9 represent the references of the paper p i , while p 8 , p 9 , and p 10 representthe references of the paper p j ; therefore , p 8 and p 9 are the common out - linksbetween p i and p j . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . g002 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 7 / 21 nodes are adjacent . P h ð t j ; t i Þ is the transition probability that node t i reaches node t j after h steps of a self - avoiding walk , which is calculated as : P h ð t j ; t i Þ ¼ W ð t i ! t j Þ M : ð 3 Þ According to Amancio [ 27 ] , the standard deviation of the accessibility at the third level results in the best topological feature ; therefore , h is also set as 3 in this study . Then , the diversity E h ( O , t i ) of node t i after h steps is calculated as : E h ð O ; t i Þ ¼ (cid:0) X N t t j ¼ 1 0 if P h ð t j ; t i Þ ¼ 0 ; P h ð t j ; t i Þ log P h ð t j ; t i Þ if P h ð t j ; t i Þ 6¼ 0 : ð 4 Þ ( Finally , the outward accessibility OA h ð t i ; p Þ of node t i after h steps is calculated as : OA h ð t i ; p Þ ¼ exp ð E h ð O ; t i ÞÞ N t (cid:0) 1 : ð 5 Þ Text - based similarity computation . Once the statistical and topological feature of terms in the term adjacency network have been obtained , the importance of terms can be calculated as : I ð t i ; p Þ ¼ l (cid:1) TF (cid:0) IDF ð t i ; p Þ þ ð 1 (cid:0) l Þ (cid:1) OA h ð t i ; p Þ ; ð 6 Þ where λ (cid:15) [ 0 , 1 ] . The value of this parameter is explained later in detail . Then the text - based similarity TS ð p i ; p j Þ between papers p i and p j can be calculated as the cosine of the angle between the term vectors by using the cosine measure [ 35 ] , as shown below . TS ð p i ; p j Þ ¼ X k t ¼ 1 I ð t ; p i Þ (cid:2) I ð t ; p j Þ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃX k t ¼ 1 ð I ð t ; p i Þ Þ 2 s (cid:2) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃX k t ¼ 1 ð I ð t ; p j Þ Þ 2 s : ð 7 Þ Hybrid clustering using the Louvain method Hybrid similarity . Inspired by the definition of hybrid similarity by Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] , the hybrid similarity is also represented by the cosine angle of the linear combination of the aforementioned computation of citation - and text - based similarity . Therefore , the hybrid similarity between p i and p j ( ES ð p i ; p j Þ ) in this study can be calculated by the following formula : ES ð p i ; p j Þ ¼ cos ð a (cid:1) arccos ð LS ð p i ; p j Þ Þ þ b (cid:1) arccos ð TS ð p i ; p j Þ ÞÞ ; ð 8 Þ where α (cid:15) [ 0 , 1 ] , β (cid:15) [ 0 , 1 ] , and α + β = 1 . Louvain method . Once the hybrid similarity between papers is obtained , the Louvain method can be applied to cluster papers based on the optimal modularity . The Louvain method [ 31 ] is a popular community detection method with excellent accuracy and rapidity based on modularity optimization . Modularity is usually used to detect the community struc - ture for optimization methods in networks [ 41 ] . In this study , the hybrid similarities between papers are considered as the weight of the edges in the Amsler network , thus , the modularity Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 8 / 21 ( Q ) is defined as [ 42 ] : Q ¼ 1 2 m X p i p j E p i p j (cid:0) w p i w p j 2 m (cid:20) (cid:21) d ð c p i c p j Þ ; ð 9 Þ w p i ¼ X p j E p i p j ; ð 10 Þ where the δ function δ ( u , v ) is 1 if u = v and 0 otherwise and m ¼ 12 X p i p j E p i p j . Based on the modularity optimization , the clustering process of the Louvain method consists of two phases repeated iteratively [ 16 , 31 ] . First , each node is assigned to a different community , and then each node is moved to another community C based on the gained mod - ularity . The second phase is repeated iteratively for all nodes on the network until the optimal assignment is achieved . During the first phase , the gain of modularity of one node moved from its community to another community is evaluated . The node is then placed in the com - munity where its gained modularity is maximum , but only if this gain is positive . If there is no positive gain , the node will stay in its original community [ 31 ] . According to Blondel et al . [ 31 ] , part of the algorithm’s efficiency results from the fact that the gain in modularity Δ Q is obtained by moving an isolated node into a community C , which can be computed by D Q ¼ X in þ 2 w p i ; in 2 m (cid:0) X tot þ w p i 2 m ! 2 2 4 3 5 (cid:0) X in 2 m (cid:0) X tot 2 m ! 2 (cid:0) w p i 2 m (cid:16) (cid:17) 2 2 4 3 5 : ð 11 Þ There are several reasons why the Louvain method is chosen to cluster papers in this study . First , its excellent self - optimizing procedure based on modularity [ 42 ] means that it does not require the number of clusters to be set before the clustering process is con - ducted . Second , the Louvain method can take each paper as a vertex so that the clustering analysis can be implemented directly [ 16 ] . Third , Colliander and Ahlgren [ 43 ] and Meyer - Bro¨tz et al . [ 30 ] found that it is easy to obtain considerably more similar distributions of clustering sizes when the Louvain method is applied to cluster documents with different parameter setting of similarities . Moreover , some existing studies have shown the efficient performance of the Louvain method , such as those by Liu et al . [ 16 ] and Meng et al . [ 20 ] . Based on the proposed hybrid clustering model , a case study related to the DEA field is dis - cussed in the following section . Dataset and experimental results Dataset In this study , we used the proposed model for clustering papers in the DEA field to detect its research topics . The dataset contains 7308 papers related to the DEA field , which was down - loaded from the ISI Web of Science database on December 31 , 2016 . The retrieval method was employed by typing “data envelopment analysis” as the “Subject , ” coupled with “Science Cita - tion Index Expanded , SCIE , ” and “Social Science Citation Index , SSCI” in the “More settings” option , with no time limitation . After the page jumped to the search results page , only the rec - ords of types “article” and “review” were retained , eventually leaving 7308 papers for use in this study . During the creation process of the Amsler network based on the common out - links and in - links between papers , five isolated nodes with no out - links and in - links were deleted from the dataset ; therefore , the final dataset comprises 7303 papers . Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 9 / 21 Because the number of common out - links and in - links between papers is based on the cita - tion links , i . e . the references and citations of papers , we generate the basic statistics of the papers . The number of papers per year from 1980 to 2017 is shown in Fig 3A , and the number of citations and references of the 7303 papers is shown in Fig 3B . It can be observed from Fig 3B that the number of references significantly increased in 2009 , and the difference between the number of citations and references has continued increasing , particularly after 2009 . In addition , the pre - processing of text data was implemented using the “SnowballC” and “tm” packages in R project . First , the corpus of documents was constructed by extracting terms from the titles and abstracts of the 7303 papers . Then , the numbers , punctuation , white - space , and stopwords were removed . Next , each remaining term was lemmatized using Por - ter’s stemming algorithm . Finally , the pre - processed terms were obtained for further analysis . Benchmark and evaluation measures Comparing different models with different parameter settings requires a benchmark , which represents the gold standard of the clustering results . Considering that the dataset used in this study does not have a standard clustering result , the method of building a benchmark needs to be given first . According to previous studies , there are several methods for building bench - marks . For instance , Ahlgren and Colliander [ 44 ] asked some experts to perform a subjective classification of 43 papers using the abstracts and titles extracted from the papers as the ground truth classification . Chen and Xiao [ 15 ] also asked several experts to detect a keyword dataset as a reference to quantitatively evaluate which method more closely approximates the experts’ selections . Couto et al . [ 24 ] used a text - based classification of each classification method as the benchmark ; these are the k - nearest neighbor classifier using the cosine similarity , and the sup - port vector machine classifier with TF - IDF . Considering that the expert - based baseline is time - and labor - consuming , and also has a certain degree of subjectivity , the authors used the benchmark built by Couto et al . [ 24 ] as a reference . Then , text - based clustering with cosine measure was conducted based on TF - IDF using the Louvain method , i . e . , α = 0 , β = 1 , λ = 1 in the proposed model are set as benchmark for further analysis in this study . The main evaluation measures applied in this study are the F1 measure , and rand index ( RI ) . F1 measure is the harmonic mean between precision and recall , and is also widely used to measure clustering [ 45 , 46 ] , which is calculated in the standard approach , i . e . , Eq ( 12 ) . Preci - sion and recall are widely used in classification and clustering tasks for measuring the Fig 3 . Basic statistics of DEA - related papers per year from 1980 to 2017 . ( A ) Number of papers . ( B ) Number of citations and references of the papers . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . g003 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 10 / 21 relevance [ 47 ] , and are defined as Eqs ( 13 ) and ( 14 ) respectively . RI is used for measuring the agreement and disagreement between object pairs in different clusters , and is generally calcu - lated using Eq ( 15 ) [ 48 ] . All these indices are used to measure the degree of matching between different clustering results and the benchmark . F 1 ¼ 2 (cid:1) precision (cid:1) recall precision þ recall ; ð 12 Þ precision ¼ tp tp þ fp ; ð 13 Þ recall ¼ tp tp þ fn ; ð 14 Þ RI ¼ tp þ tn tp þ fp þ fn þ tn ; ð 15 Þ where tp represents the number of pairs in the same cluster in the benchmark that is also clustered in the same cluster in the evaluated models , fp represents the number of pairs in different clusters in the benchmark that is clustered in the same cluster in the evaluated models , tn represents the number of pairs in different clusters in the benchmark that is also clustered in different clusters in the evaluated models , and fn represents the number of pairs in different clusters in the benchmark that is clustered in the same cluster in the evaluated models . Values of parameters There are three parameters ( λ , α , and β ) that need to be further analyzed , as stated previously . λ is the weight of statistical feature of terms , which has an effect on the text - based similarity . Amancio [ 27 ] applied optimization heuristics to determine suitable values of the parameter , and found that λ = 0 . 15 can obtain a considerably reasonable classification and considered the topological feature of terms as the main feature . Therefore , the authors also set the value of λ as 0 . 15 based on the research result of Amancio [ 27 ] . Regarding the remaining parameters , α and β , their optimal values were obtained by using an iterative computation according to the values of evaluation measures of the clustering results . The values of α are set in the range of 0 to 1 with 0 . 05 as the interval used to analyze the distribution of the F1 measure and RI values of different clustering results based on the benchmark . Previous studies also analyzed the influence of different weights of citation - and text - based similarities in the hybrid similarities . Meng et al . [ 20 ] found that setting the same weights of two single similarities can obtain the best clustering results . Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 , 19 ] found that choosing the weights of citation - based similarity as 0 . 875 and 0 . 833 can obtain a balanced combination of two types of similarities . Meyer - Bro¨tz et al . [ 30 ] found that decreasing the tex - tual weight can obtain a more coherent clustering result and set the weights as 0 . 5 or 0 . 6 to obtain the best result . In this study , Fig 4 shows the F1 measure and RI values with different values of parameter α . It can be observed that both the highest F1 measure and RI values can be obtained when setting α = 0 . 55 , which means that the weight of the citation - based similarity is slightly higher than that of the text - based similarity in the proposed model . Therefore , the proposed model in this study is further analyzed based on the optimal setting of parameters ( α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , and λ = 0 . 15 ) in the following sections . Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 11 / 21 Comparison of different methods To measure the performance of the proposed hybrid clustering model , four groups of compar - isons of different clustering methods are analyzed . The first group is the comparison of the proposed hybrid clustering with the citation - based and text - based clustering methods to ana - lyze the difference between hybrid clustering and “single clustering” methods ( which means only considering citation - based similarity or text - based similarity ) . The second group is the comparison of different citation - based similarities in the hybrid clustering model to analyze the influence of different citation - based similarities . The third group is the comparison of dif - ferent text - based similarities in the hybrid clustering model to analyze the influence of differ - ent text - based similarities , and the last group is the comparison of different hybrid clustering models , which had been studied in previous research and only considers textual statistical fea - ture based on TF - IDF in the calculation of text - based similarity . The detailed settings of differ - ent clustering models are listed in Table 3 . Fig 5 shows the values of evaluation measures of the different methods , i . e . , precision , recall , F1 measure , and RI values , based on the benchmark . Overall , the curvilinear trends of these four metrics are similar , and the values of RI are higher than those of the other three metrics , respectively . The method that used only the citation - based similarity based on Amsler per - forms the worst . The second worst method is that which combines the citation - based similar - ity based on Amsler and the text - based similarity based on accessibility . The four groups with different parameter settings are analyzed in detail in the following . Group # 1 : Comparison of hybrid clustering and single clustering methods . A compari - son of the proposed hybrid clustering method ( Amsler + TF - IDF + OA ) with the single citation - ( Amsler ) and text - based ( TF - IDF + OA ) clustering methods shows that the values of all four metrics of the hybrid method are higher than those of the two single methods . This indicates that combining the citation - and text - based similarities can improve the clustering perfor - mance . It should be noted that the citation - based method ( Amsler ) has a very low precision , recall , and F1 measure , which means that the relation between the citation - based method based on the Amsler network and the benchmark considering the text - based similarity based on TF - IDF is weak ; therefore , the difference between the citation - based and text - based cluster - ing methods is highly significant . Similarly , the difference between the citation - based Fig 4 . Values of F1 measureand RI with different values of parameter α . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . g004 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 12 / 21 clustering method ( Amsler ) based on Amsler and the text - based clustering method ( TF - IDF + OA ) based on the hybrid textual feature is attributed to the weights of the TF - IDF , as well as the accessibility . Group # 2 : Comparison of different citation - based similarities in hybrid clustering methods . The same text - based similarity consists of textual statistical and topological features and different citation - based similarities based on different citation networks , namely biblio - graphic coupling , co - citation , and Amsler . Different hybrid clustering methods with different citation - based similarities ( BC + TF - IDF + OA , CoC + TF - IDF + OA , and Amsler + TF - IDF + OA ) Table 3 . Different clustering methods with different parameter settings . Groups Methods Parameter sets Citation networks Textual features 1 Amsler + TF - IDF + OA α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 0 . 15 Amsler Statistical and topological features Amsler α = 1 , β = 0 Amsler — TF - IDF + OA α = 0 , β = 1 , λ = 0 . 15 — Statistical and topological features 2 Amsler + TF - IDF + OA α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 0 . 15 Amsler Statistical and topological features BC + TF - IDF + OA α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 0 . 15 Bibliographic coupling Statistical and topological features CoC + TF - IDF + OA α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 0 . 15 Co - citation Statistical and topological features 3 Amsler + TF - IDF + OA α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 0 . 15 Amsler Statistical and topological features Amsler + TF - IDF α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 1 Amsler Statistical feature Amsler + OA α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 0 Amsler Topological feature 4 Amsler + TF - IDF + OA α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 1 Amsler Statistical and topological features BC + TF - IDF α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 1 Bibliographic coupling Statistical feature CoC + TF - IDF α = 0 . 55 , β = 0 . 45 , λ = 1 Co - citation Statistical feature https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . t003 Fig 5 . Values of evaluation measuresof different methods . The evaluationmeasures are precision , recall , F1 measure , and RI values , and the different methods are the models listed in Table 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . g005 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 13 / 21 are compared based on this . As shown in Fig 5 , the trends of the four metrics are approxi - mately equivalent , of which the values of all four metrics of the Amsler + TF - IDF + OA method are the highest of the three hybrid clustering methods , and that of the BC + TF - IDF + OA method is the lowest . In other words , based on the aforementioned benchmark , the citation - based similarity that considers both the common out - and in - links between papers can obtain more relevant and coherent clustering results , and the performance of the hybrid clustering method based on the common in - links is considerably better than that of the hybrid method based on the common out - links between papers . Group # 3 : Comparison of different text - based similarities in hybrid clustering meth - ods . Similar to the second group , based on the same citation - based similarity and different text - based similarity based on different textual features , the hybrid clustering methods with different text - based similarities are compared . It is apparent from Fig 5 that the Amsler + OA method that only considers the textual topological feature in text - based similarity performs the worst , whereas the Amsler + TF - IDF method that only considers the textual statistical feature in text - based similarity performs the best . It means that the text - based similarity with both the textual statistical and topological features performs worse than that which only considers the textual statistical feature in the hybrid clustering methods based on the benchmark . The reason may be that the benchmark we built only considers the text - based similarity based on the tex - tual statistical feature . Considering that the performance of the proposed method remains far better and more reasonable , the proposed model is still effective . Group # 4 : Comparison of different hybrid clustering methods . In this group , the two other hybrid clustering models are compared with the proposed hybrid clustering model in this study . The BC + TF - IDF model clusters documents according to the hybrid similarities consisting of the citation - based similarity based on bibliographic coupling links and the text - based similarity based on the cosine measure of TF - IDF , i . e . , the concept of the “core docu - ments” proposed by Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] . The CoC + TF - IDF model is similar to the preced - ing model ; the difference is that the citation - based similarity is based on the co - citation links between papers that have been analyzed and its performance was found to be worse than the former by Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] . As shown in Fig 5 , the values of the metrics of the CoC + - TF - IDF model are the highest , i . e . , the model based on co - citation and TF - IDF performs the best . It is apparent that the result obtained is the inverse of that by Gla¨nzel and Thijs [ 10 ] . This may be attributed to the different distribution of networks based on different datasets , or the influence of the benchmark built in this study . Generally , the hybrid clustering methods perform better than the other methods that only consider single citation - or text - based similarity . The hybrid clustering methods based on the Amsler network with both the common out - and in - links between papers perform much better than the hybrid methods based on networks that only involve out - links or in - links , respec - tively . Because the benchmark used in this study is set by the authors based on previous stud - ies , the comparison between different clustering methods can only prove that the proposed hybrid clustering model is effective and can obtain reasonable clustering results , rather than demonstrating that it has the best clustering performance . Research topics in DEA field based on the proposed model The clustering results using the proposed hybrid clustering model include seven main clusters , and exclude a small cluster , with only four papers based on the dataset used in this study . To further analyze the clustering result of the proposed model , i . e . , research topics of the DEA field , the clusters are labeled according to the terms extracted from the title and abstract based on the term frequency . After filtering some common nouns and verbs in scientific articles , Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 14 / 21 such as “study , ” “paper , ” “result , ” “model , ” and the common concepts related to DEA , such as “input , ” “output , ” “cost , ” “efficiency , ” “dea , ” and “performance , ” the top 30 high - frequency terms of each cluster were determined as shown in Fig 6 . In addition , the number of papers per year for each cluster is also shown to analyze the development tendency of each research topic in the DEA field . As shown in Fig 6 , of the seven clusters , there are three clusters with less than 500 papers , three clusters with approximately 1000 papers , and only one cluster with more than 2000 papers . Based on the top 30 terms listed in Fig 6 , the detailed research topics in the DEA field can be concluded as follows . Cluster # 1 : Decision - making analysis and fuzzy DEA . According to the terms “dmus” ( represents “decision - making units” ) and “rank , ” it can be initially concluded that this cluster includes the topic of ranking decision - making units using DEA . Based on these terms , includ - ing “decis , ” “multipl , ” “criteria , ” “decisionmak , ” and “oper , ” multiple criteria decision - making is included in this research topic . The term “fuzzi” indicates that fuzzy DEA is also attracting attention , such that this cluster studies mainly the mutual application between decision mak - ing and DEA methods . Moreover , this cluster is the biggest cluster that indicates the trend where the number of papers is continually increasing , particularly after 2002 . Cluster # 2 : Energy and environment . This cluster focuses on studying the application of DEA in energy and environment according to the terms listed , such as “energi , ” “environ - ment , ” “emiss , ” “carbon , ” “pollut , ” and “plant . ” In the energy and environment subfield , some undesirable factors such as carbon emission , pollution , and resource consumption are particu - larly of special concern . This research topic has been attracting attention since 1990 , and has continued receiving increasing attention , particularly after 2008 , according to the trend of a number of papers per year . In addition , the terms “China , ” “region , ” and “countri” indicate that this topic focuses most on studying the energy and environmental problems in specific countries or regions . Cluster # 3 : Business company . This cluster is related to the application of DEA in a com - mercial company , i . e . , a profitable organizations according to the terms “firm , ” “company , ” “market , ” “financi , ” “busi , ” and “profit . ” The detailed industries include hotel , airline , insur - ance , and manufacturing service . Applying the DEA methods to business areas can promote enterprises to obtain maximum profit and enhance the competitiveness of firms . The trend of number of papers per year is slightly fluctuant , and is growing more rapidly after 2009 based on the dataset . Cluster # 4 : Public service . From the terms listed in Fig 6 , such as “hospit , ” “health , ” “pub - lic , ” “univers , ” “school , ” and “edu , ” the research topic of this cluster is related to the applica - tion of DEA in the healthcare and education sectors , i . e . , applying DEA methods to measure the efficiency of care services in hospitals and education quality in schools and universities . Because there are also some terms related to local government , such as “countri , ” “region , ” “state , ” “local , ” and “municip , ” the research topic of this cluster also concerned other public affairs related to the local government . The trend of number of papers per year shows that it keeps increasing , and is growing rapidly after 2008 . Cluster # 5 : Agriculture and farm . Of the top 30 terms in this cluster , there are some terms closely related to agriculture and farm , such as “farm , ” “water , ” “farmer , ” “agricultur , ” “dairi , ” “fisheri , ” and “crop . ” Therefore , the research topic of this cluster is the application of DEA in the agriculture and farm field . Applying DEA to the agriculture and farm fields can assess the efficiency of dairy farms and increase the efficiency of resource allocation . There are 492 papers in this cluster , which means that this research topic receives considerably less atten - tion in the DEA field . The trend of the number of papers by year is slightly fluctuant , and it began to attract substantially more attention in 2008 . Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 15 / 21 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 16 / 21 Cluster # 6 : Banking . According to the top term “bank , ” this cluster can initially be judged to be related to the application of DEA in the banking industry . The terms , including “financi , ” “commerci , ” “loan , ” and “crisi , ” are also related to the banking industry . Applying the DEA methods to estimate the efficiency of branches of banks in countries around the world is also a popular topic in the application of DEA . The trend of number of papers per year is slightly fluctuant and reached its peak in 2013 . Cluster # 7 : Transportation . This cluster is the smallest of the seven clusters , which is related to the application of DEA in transportation based on the terms listed in Fig 6 , such as “airport , ” “port , ” “transport , ” “cargo , ” and “seaport . ” Applying DEA to the airport field can evaluate the performance of seaports , or airports , and the efficiency of airline industries . The trend of this research topic is also fluctuant ; it has been studied since 1987 , starting with only one paper per year , and now has increased to approximately 20 papers per year . Overall , the clusters obtained using the proposed model are mostly related to the applica - tions of DEA in different sectors , including energy and environment , agriculture and farm , transportation , banking , public service , and business companies . Of these application areas , the research topic related to the energy and environment sector is the biggest cluster . In addi - tion to the application areas , there is also a topic related to the mutual application between decision making and DEA . Moreover , the listed terms related to the DEA methods include return to scale , stochastic frontier analysis , and Malmquist index . Discussion and conclusions In this study , the authors propose a hybrid self - optimized clustering model that combines both citation links and textual features between papers to detect research topics in a specific research field . The proposed model has several improvements over the hybrid clustering mod - els of previous studies . First , the Amsler network , which considers both bibliographic coupling and co - citation links , was constructed based on the citation links between papers . The citation links were used to compute the citation - based similarity between papers based on the cosine measure . Second , the textual feature was used to calculate the text - based similarity between papers , which considers both the textual statistical and topological features . Finally , the cosine angles underlying the linear combination of citation - and text - based similarity were consid - ered as the hybrid similarity and used for further clustering using the Louvain method , which is based on modularity optimization . To test the effectiveness of the proposed model , a case study related to the DEA field was analyzed in this study . Based on the dataset used , first , the optimal parameters related to the weights of citation - and text - based similarities were analyzed according to the F1 measure and RI metrics . Different parameter sets have significant influences on the clustering results , which were also analyzed by Meng et al . [ 20 ] and Meyer - Bro¨tz et al . [ 30 ] . Based on the optimal weight of the citation - based similarity , i . e . , setting 0 . 55 as the weight of citation - based similarity in the hybrid similarity , four comparative groups with different parameter sets were discussed . The evaluation measures ( precision , recall , F1 measure , and RI ) were analyzed to compare the dif - ferent methods . The comparative results show that the different hybrid clustering methods based on different citation links or textual features have different clustering results , and the proposed model can also obtain reasonable and effective clustering results . Admittedly , this study also has limitations . First , as there are no existing gold standards of clustering results based on the dataset we used , the proposed model can only be judged as an Fig 6 . Information of each cluster based on the proposed model . It includesthe total numberof papers , top 30 high - frequency terms , and the trends of numberof papers by year of the main seven clusters . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 . g006 Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 17 / 21 effective model , rather than being the best model based on the comparison results . According to Boyack et al . [ 49 ] , the current challenge of topic identification aims to gain more informa - tion about the proposed clustering methods and the comparison to other methods , rather than obtaining the best clustering results of the dataset . This is because it is impossible to have only one single best solution . Therefore , based on the analysis and discussion in this study , the pro - posed hybrid clustering model still can provide inspiration for other related studies in the future . Second , we focus on extending and analyzing the computation of hybrid similarity between papers and then applying the Louvain method to cluster papers , whereas the compari - son between different clustering algorithms is not included in this study , as the clustering algo - rithms also have influence on the performance of the clustering models . There are some new proposed clustering techniques for textual clustering , such as the aforementioned SSC meth - ods , and fuzzy c - means methods [ 50 , 51 ] . In future works , first , we will aim to apply different clustering algorithms to cluster papers and analyze their advantages and disadvantages . This can help to build more efficient and effective clustering models . Second , different textual topo - logical features and optimization objective functions will be introduced to the hybrid cluster - ing methods to improve the performance of the clustering papers . Moreover , in our previous work [ 52 ] , PageRank algorithm was applied to calculate the prestige of papers in the paper cita - tion network that considering both the quantity and the quality of citations , similar idea will be used to calculate the citation - based similarity in the future . Supporting information S1 Data . Detailed statistics of DEA - related papers per year from 1980 to 2017 . ( XLSX ) S2 Data . Detailed data of the F1 measure and RI with different values of parameter α . It also includes the values of tp , fp , tn , fn , precision , and recall . ( XLSX ) S3 Data . Detailed data of evaluation measures of the different methods . The evaluation measures include precision , recall , F1 measure , and RI , and the different methods include the models listed in Table 3 . ( XLSX ) S4 Data . Detailed statistics of the number of papers by year of each cluster . ( XLSX ) S5 Data . Terms and its frequency of each cluster for labeling clusters . ( XLS ) S6 Data . Papers citation networks and terms . This zip file includes four text files , they are : 1 ) the citation number ( CN ) and reference number ( RN ) of all 7308 papers ; 2 ) papers biblio - graphic coupling network ; 3 ) papers co - citation network ; 4 ) the terms extracted from the titles and abstracts of papers . ( ZIP ) S7 Data . Basic information of papers . This data includes the ID , name , title , abstract , publica - tion year , times cited , cited reference count , cited year , ISI unique article identifier , source , and subject category of 7308 papers related to DEA field . ( XLSX ) Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 18 / 21 Acknowledgments The dataset used in this paper is downloaded from ISI Web of Science , and then the network data are constructed by Sci2 tool ( Indiana University and SciTech Strategies ) . The authors would like to thank all the members in our research group for their support and advice . Author Contributions Conceptualization : Dejian Yu , Wanru Wang . Data curation : Wanru Wang , Rongyu Liu . Formal analysis : Wanru Wang . Funding acquisition : Shuai Zhang , Wenyu Zhang . Methodology : Wanru Wang . Project administration : Shuai Zhang , Wenyu Zhang . Software : Wanru Wang . Supervision : Dejian Yu , Shuai Zhang , Wenyu Zhang . Validation : Dejian Yu , Wanru Wang , Rongyu Liu . Visualization : Wanru Wang . Writing – original draft : Wanru Wang . Writing – review & editing : Dejian Yu , Shuai Zhang , Wenyu Zhang . References 1 . Liu X , Yu S , JanssensF , Gla¨nzel W , Moreau Y , De Moor B . Weightedhybrid clusteringby combining text mining and bibliometrics on a large - scale journaldatabase . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol . 2010 ; 61 ( 6 ) : 1105 – 1119 . 2 . Yu DJ , Shi SS . Researchingthe development of Atanassov intuitionistic fuzzy set : using a citation net - work analysis . Appl Soft Comput . 2015 ; 32 : 189 – 198 . 3 . Yu DJ , Li DF , Merigo´ JM , Fang LC . Mappingdevelopment of linguistic decisionmaking studies . J Intell Fuzzy Syst . 2016 ; 30 ( 5 ) : 2727 – 2736 . 4 . Merigo´ JM , Rocafort A , Aznar - Alarco´n JP . Bibliometric overviewof business & economicsresearch . J Bus Econ Manag . 2016 ; 17 ( 3 ) : 397 – 413 . 5 . Merigo´ JM , CancinoCA , Coronado F , UrbanoD . Academic research in innovation : a country analysis . Scientometrics . 2016 ; 108 ( 2 ) : 559 – 593 . 6 . JanssensF , Zhang L , De Moor B , Gla ¨ nzel W . Hybrid clusteringfor validationand improvement of sub - ject - classification schemes . Inform Process Manag . 2009 ; 45 ( 6 ) : 683 – 702 . 7 . Small H . Co - citationin the scientific literature : a new measureof the relationship betweentwo docu - ments . J Am Soc Inf Sci . 1973 ; 24 ( 4 ) : 265 – 269 . 8 . Kessler MM . Bibliographiccouplingbetweenscientific papers . Am Doc . 1963 ; 14 ( 1 ) : 10 – 25 . 9 . Amsler RA . Applications of citation - based automatic classification . 1st ed . LinguisticsResearchCen - ter , Universityof Texas at Austin ; 1972 . 10 . Gla¨nzel W , Thijs B . Using “core documents” for the representation of clusters and topics . Sciento - metrics . 2011 ; 88 ( 1 ) : 297 – 309 . 11 . CallonM , CourtialJP , Turner WA , Bauin S . From translations to problematic networks—anintroduction to co - wordanalysis . Soc Sci Inf . 1983 ; 22 ( 2 ) : 191 – 235 . 12 . Radhakrishnan S , Erbis S , Isaacs JA , Kamarthi S . Novel keyword co - occurrence network - based meth - ods to foster systematic reviews of scientific literature . PLoS ONE , 2017 ; 12 ( 3 ) : e0172778 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0172778PMID : 28328983 13 . Yu DJ , Xu ZS , Pedrycz W , Wang WR . Information Sciences1968 – 2016 : a retrospective analysiswith text mining and bibliometric . Inform Sci . 2017 ; 418 – 419 : 619 – 634 . Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 19 / 21 14 . Boyack KW , NewmanD , DuhonRJ , Klavans R , Patek M , Biberstine JR , et al . Clusteringmore than two million biomedical publications : comparing the accuraciesof nine text - based similarity approaches . PLoS ONE . 2011 ; 6 ( 3 ) : e18029 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0018029PMID : 21437291 15 . Chen G , Xiao L . Selectingpublication keywords for domainanalysisin bibliometrics : a comparisonof three methods . J Informetr . 2016 ; 10 ( 1 ) : 212 – 223 . 16 . Liu X , Gla¨nzel W , De Moor B . Optimal and hierarchical clusteringof large - scale hybrid networks for sci - entific mapping . Scientometrics . 2012 ; 91 ( 2 ) : 473 – 493 . 17 . Braam RR , Moed HF , Van Raan AF . Mappingof science by combinedco - citationand word analysisI . Structural aspects . J Am Soc Inf Sci . 1991 ; 42 ( 4 ) : 233 – 251 . 18 . Braam RR , Moed HF , Van Raan AF . Mappingof science by combinedco - citationand word analysisII . Dynamical aspects . J Am Soc Inf Sci . 1991 ; 42 ( 4 ) : 252 – 266 . 19 . Gla¨nzel W , Thijs B . Using “core documents” for detectingand labellingnew emergingtopics . Sciento - metrics . 2012 ; 91 ( 2 ) : 399 – 416 . 20 . Meng X , Liu X , Tong Y , Gla¨nzel W , Tan S . Multi - viewclusteringwith exemplarsfor scientific mapping . Scientometrics . 2015 ; 105 ( 3 ) : 1527 – 1552 . 21 . Liu RL . Passage - based bibliographic coupling : an inter - articlesimilarity measurefor biomedical articles . PLoS ONE , 2015 ; 10 ( 10 ) : e0139245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0139245 PMID : 26440794 22 . Silva FN , AmancioDR , Bardosova M , Costa LDF , Oliveira ON . Using network science and text analyt - ics to producesurveys in a scientifictopic . J Informetr . 2016 ; 10 ( 2 ) : 487 – 502 . 23 . CaladoP , Cristo M , Gonc¸alves MA , de Moura ES , RibeiroNetoB , Ziviani N . Link - basedsimilarity mea - sures for the classificationof Web documents . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol . 2006 ; 57 ( 2 ) : 208 – 221 . 24 . Couto T , Ziviani N , CaladoP , Cristo M , Gonc¸alves M , de Moura ES , Brand ã oW . Classifying documents with link - basedbibliometric measures . Inf Retrieval . 2010 ; 13 ( 4 ) : 315 – 345 . 25 . JanssensF , Gla¨nzel W , Moor B . A hybrid mappingof informationscience . Scientometrics . 2008 ; 75 ( 3 ) : 607 – 631 . 26 . Gla¨nzel W , Czerwon HJ . A new methodological approachto bibliographic couplingand its applicationto the national , regionaland institutional level . Scientometrics . 1996 ; 37 ( 2 ) : 195 – 221 . 27 . AmancioDR . A complex network approach to stylometry . PLoS ONE . 2015 ; 10 ( 8 ) : e0136076 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0136076PMID : 26313921 28 . Gla¨nze W , Thijs B . Using hybrid methodsand “core documents”for the representation of clusters and topics . The astronomydataset . Scientometrics . 2017 ; 111 ( 3 ) : 1071 – 1087 . 29 . Zhang L , Gla¨nzel W , Fred YY . The Dynamic evolutionof core documents : an experimental study based on h - relatedliterature ( 2005 – 2013 ) . Scientometrics . 2016 ; 106 ( 1 ) : 369 – 381 . 30 . Meyer - Bro¨tz F , Schiebel E , Brecht L . Experimental evaluationof parameter settings in calculationof hybrid similarities : effects of first - and second - order similarity , edgecutting , and weightingfactors . Scientometrics . 2017 ; 111 ( 3 ) : 1307 – 1325 . 31 . BlondelVD , GuillaumeJL , LambiotteR , Lefebvre E . Fast unfoldingof communitiesin large networks . J Stat Mech Theor Exp , 2008 ; 10 : P10008 . 32 . Jing L , Ng MK , Huang JZ . An entropy weightingk - means algorithmfor subspaceclusteringof high - dimensional sparse data . IEEE Trans Knowl Data En . 2007 ; 19 ( 8 ) : 1026 – 1041 . 33 . Deng Z , Choi KS , Chung FL , Wang S . Enhanced soft subspace clustering integrating within - cluster and between - cluster information . Pattern Recogn . 2010 ; 43 ( 3 ) : 767 – 781 . 34 . Wang J , Wang S , ChungF , Deng Z . Fuzzy partition basedsoft subspace clustering and its applications in high dimensional data . Inform Sci . 2013 ; 246 ( 14 ) : 133 – 154 . 35 . Salton G , McGill MJ . Introduction to moderninformationretrieval . 1st ed . New York , NY : McGrawHill , Inc ; 1986 . 36 . Salton G , Buckley C . Term - weighting approachesin automatic text retrieval . Inform Process Manag . 1988 ; 24 ( 5 ) : 513 – 523 . 37 . NewmanM . Networks : An introduction . 1st ed . New York , NY : Oxford UniversityPress Inc ; 2010 . 38 . AmancioDR , Nunes MG , Oliveira ON , Costa LDF . Extractive summarization using complexnetworks and syntactic dependency . Physica A . 2012 ; 391 ( 4 ) : 1855 – 1864 . 39 . AmancioDR . Comparingthe topological propertiesof real and artificially generatedscientific manu - scripts . Scientometrics . 2015 ; 105 ( 3 ) : 1763 – 1779 . 40 . Travenc¸olo BAN , Costa LDF . Accessibilityin complexnetworks . Phys Lett A . 2008 ; 373 ( 1 ) : 89 – 95 . 41 . NewmanM . Modularity and community structure in networks . P Natl Acad Sci USA . 2006 ; 103 ( 23 ) : 8577 – 8582 . Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 20 / 21 42 . NewmanM . Fast algorithmfor detecting community structure in networks . Phys Rev E . 2004 ; 69 ( 6 ) : 066133 . 43 . Colliander C , AhlgrenP . Experimental comparisonof first and second - ordersimilarities in a sciento - metric context . Scientometrics . 2012 ; 90 ( 2 ) : 675 – 685 . 44 . AhlgrenP , CollianderC . Document - document similarity approachesand science mapping : experimen - tal comparisonof five approaches . J Informetr . 2009 ; 3 ( 1 ) : 49 – 63 . 45 . Kim J , DiesnerJ . Distortive effects of initial - basedname disambiguation on measurements of large - scale coauthorship networks . J Assoc Inf Sci Technol . 2016 ; 67 ( 6 ) : 1446 – 1461 . 46 . Salles T , Rocha L , Gonc¸alves MA , AlmeidaJM , Mour ã oF , Meira W , ViegasF . A quantitative analysis of the temporaleffects on automatic text classification . J Assoc Inf Sci Technol . 2016 ; 67 ( 7 ) : 1639 – 1667 . 47 . Olson DL , DelenD . Advanceddata miningtechniques . 1st ed . Springer Science & BusinessMedia ; 2008 . 48 . Rand WM . Objective criteria for the evaluationof clusteringmethods . J Am Stat Assoc . 1971 ; 66 ( 336 ) : 846 – 850 . 49 . Boyack K , Gla¨nzel W , Gla¨ser J , Havemann F , Scharnhorst A , Thijs B , et al . Topic identification chal - lenge . Scientometrics . 2017 ; 111 ( 2 ) : 1223 – 1224 . 50 . Qian P , Zhao K , Jiang Y , Su KH , Deng Z , Wang S , et al . Knowledge - leveraged transfer fuzzy c - means for texture image segmentation with self - adaptive cluster prototype matching . Knowl - BasedSyst . 2017 ; 130 ( 2017 ) : 33 – 50 . 51 . Jiang Y , ChungFL , Wang S , Deng Z , Wang J , Qian P . Collaborative fuzzy clusteringfrom multiple weightedviews . IEEE Trans Cybernetics . 2015 ; 45 ( 4 ) : 688 – 701 . 52 . Yu D J , Wang WR , Zhang S , Zhang WY , Liu RY . A multiple - link , mutually reinforcedjournal - ranking model to measure the prestige of journals . Scientometrics . 2017 ; 111 ( 1 ) : 521 – 542 . Using hybrid clusteringmodel to detect researchtopics PLOS ONE | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0187164 October 27 , 2017 21 / 21