This article was downloaded by : [ Simon Fraser University ] On : 11 November 2014 , At : 18 : 45 Publisher : Taylor & Francis Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Behaviour & Information Technology Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / tbit20 Integrating working and enrichment approach learning : A document Paul Mulholland a , Zdenek Zdrahal a , John John Domingue a & Marek Hatala a a The Open University Published online : 08 Nov 2010 . To cite this article : Paul Mulholland , Zdenek Zdrahal , John John Domingue & Marek Hatala ( 2000 ) Integrating working and enrichment approach learning : A document , Behaviour & Information Technology , 19 : 3 , 171 - 180 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 014492900406164 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 014492900406164 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions Integrating working and learning : a document enrichment approach PAUL MULHOLLAND , ZDENEK ZDR AHAL , JOHN DOMINGUE and M AREK HATALA Knowledge Media Institute , The Open University , Milton Keynes , MK7 6AA , UK ; e - mails : p . mulholland @ open . ac . uk ; z . zdrahal @ open . ac . uk ; j . b . domingue @ open . ac . uk ; m . hatala @ open . ac . uk ; URL ; http : / / www . kmi . open . ac . uk / Abstract . Integrating working and learning is seen as a desirable alternative to traditional training regimes . An integrated approach to working and learning is more gradual , contextual , problem oriented and cost e(cid:127) ective . Knowledge technology aims to catalyze workplace learning , but requires the right organisational culture and brings additional costs regarding the articulation , representation and transmission of knowledge . Our approach reduces these costs by making articulation a natural part of collaborative working , designing for both informal and formal knowledge , and facilitating the transition of socially situated knowledge through enriched documents . To be successful , our approach has certain prequesites concerning organisational culture , and the nature of shared documents , organisational knowledge and work activities . 1 . Introduction Companies and therefore their workers need to adapt to ever changing demands . A traditional top - down approach to this problem is for a company to identify the skills gap between the company they need to be and the current competencies of their sta(cid:127) . The gap is then bridged by conventional training methods that extend sta(cid:127) competencies to meet company requirements . This model has a number of shortcomings . First , training has been shown to be ine(cid:127) ective . Detterman ( 1993 ) reported that 90 % of training was not transferred to the job , wasting $ 90 billion per year in the US . This is believed to be due to training occurring outside the normal context of work , and therefore being di (cid:129) cult to transfer . Second , this approach also leads to stress among employees , as skills have to be developed intermittently and abruptly ( Iverga Ê rd 1998 ) . Third , the process is almost solely top - down , where senior personnel must identify what needs to be done and how , devaluing the role workers can play in determining their own development . Many have recognized the potential to harness and support the learning that naturally occurs between colleagues within the workplace . This process , termed organisational learning , involves workers learning and sharing ideas as a normal part of the social and collaborative nature of their activities . It appears bene® cial to nurture this process as , compared to conventional training , it is more responsive to immedi - ate needs , being driven by problems occurring in the workplace , as well as being gradual , ongoing and conducted within the work context . For organisational learning to occur , a number of social and cultural conditions have to be in place . First , this learning primarily occurs within a commu - nity of practice ( Lave and Wegner 1991 ) . These communities do not necessarily equate to the formal team structure of the organisation . Organisational learning emerges in collaborative activity , which requires an appropriate collaborative culture ( Argyris and SchoÈn 1996 ) and a process of socialization ( Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995 ) . Another common feature of organisational learning is the reuse and reworking of past experience and solutions ( Levitt and March 1988 , Argyris and SchoÈn 1996 ) . Organisational learning builds on , questions and modi® es previous solutions and ideas . Although there are many exam - ples of successful learning communities ( Orr 1990 , Lave and Wegner 1991 ) , to be of large potential to the organisation , knowledge needs to be e (cid:129) ciently transferable , across space and time . BEHAVIOUR & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY , 2000 , VOL . 19 , NO . 3 , 171±180 Behaviour & Information Technology ISSN 0144 - 929X print / ISSN 1362 - 3001 online Ó 2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd http : / / www . tandf . co . uk / journals D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 Knowledge technology aims to catalyze the organisa - tional learning process for the service of the organisa - tion , but there are two hurdles that knowledge technology needs to negotiate in order to be successful . First , knowledge technology requires the social and cultural conditions for organisational learning to be in place ( McDermott 1999 ) . Deploying the technology will not bootstrap an appropriate collaborative climate . There are a number of examples of how knowledge technology will otherwise fail ( e . g . Orlikowski 1992 ) . Second , knowledge technology imposes extra demands on the workforce . These demands are concerned with the articulation , representation and transmission of knowledge . For knowledge to be stored and represented , it must ® rst be articulated . This can be problematic even if the necessary cultural conditions are in place . Workers can ® nd it di (cid:129) cult to say what they know . Articulated knowledge then needs to be represented in order that it can be stored and retrieved . This knowledge may be formal or informal . The advantage of formal knowledge is that it can be can be objectively indexed as part of the representation process , but much of the valuable knowledge of a company is tacit , hard to formalize , and therefore hard to classify . Represented knowledge then needs to be transmitted across community boundaries and appropriately interpreted by the recipients . This is hard to achieve as knowledge tends to be ` sticky’ ( McDermott 1999 ) and di (cid:129) cult to extract from the social context in which it was created . Knowledge technology therefore aims to accelerate organisational learning but imposes costs of its own . Our document enrichment approach to organisa - tional learning ( Sumner et al . 1999 ) , like all knowl - edge technologies , cannot create the conditions of organisational learning where they do not already exist , but does aim to reduce the costs of articula - tion , representation and transmission . Articulation is supported by making it a natural consequence of collaboration within the workplace . Representation is supported by capturing both formal and informal knowledge and adopting a model of how the formalization of knowledge in a domain can be captured . The transmission of sticky knowledge is supported by sharing knowledge captured in key documents of the organisation , enriched by their context . The rest of this paper is structured as follows . The next two sections describe the design of the document enrichment architecture . Section two describes the identi® cation and redesign of shared documents to capture informal knowledge . Section three describes the development of the underlying formal knowledge structure . Section four describes the evolution of the organisational memory . Section ® ve discusses the applicability of the approach . 2 . Characterizing shared documents Two main kinds of design activity occur when deploying our approach . This section describes design activities concerned with identifying and redesigning key documents within the organisation , and the activities that occur around them . The next section describes construction of the knowledge model . Although these two tasks are described separately , they are in practice intertwined . Our tools and methodology aim to be an organisational learning solution for document centred organisations . By this we mean that knowledge crucial to the organisation is captured , stored and accessed from key documents within the organisation . Additionally , the documents are central to work activity , rather than functioning as receptacles of information . These documents facilitate the negotiation of shared meaning , enabling commu - nities to come to some degree of consensus on a shared view of a particular domain ( Brown and Duguid 1998 ) . We term these documents , ` working documents’ . Our ® rst task when analyzing the organi - sation is to identify these working documents that function as community support tools and identify how they are incorporated with work practices , who uses them , and the nature of the collaborative activities in which they support . Our integration of tools in a number of organisations has identi® ed speci® c examples of working documents with a number of common characteristics : · Each document supports a speci® c ` case’ . · The document is used to capture ongoing problem solving activity as well as the ® nal solution . · Individuals or team members have explicit respon - sibility for the working document and its asso - ciated tasks . · Solving a problem captured in a document requires collaboration . In our test site in the aerospace industry , the identi® ed working document was a team planning tool . A team plan is completed periodically to support re¯ ection on current team performance , set near term targets , actions for delivering them and measurements of success . Preparing the plan is a collaborative activity involving the whole team , and a facilitator , who is the member of the team responsible for recording contributions in the plan . Each new plan builds on its predecessors , and the P . Mulholland et al . 172 D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 ongoing experiences of the team . For a second test site in the mining industry we identi® ed fault reports which are initiated whenever one of the main mining machines presents a fault . This document is used for communica - tion , and to record communications , between the technician responsible for investigating the fault , and other experts . This records all repair activities until the machine is back in service . A third test site , a customer support department , initiate a new case document when a customer contacts them with a new problem . This document , assigned to a particular technician , records all work carried out in dealing with the problem , including all interactions between the technician and the customer . The case is closed and archived when the customer query has been satis® ed . A summary of the test sites is presented in Table 1 . When determining how these working documents could be redesigned , a crucial issue to investigate was the nature of the communication surrounding the use of the document . In each case , the working document was used to support some problem solving process ( e . g . ® xing a fault , constructing a plan ) . In each case , solving the problem involved certain kinds of collaboration around the document , and around the problem to which the document referred . Some of this collaboration was already captured within the document in some form . It was considered an important part of the design process to investigate the nature of this collaboration . This is because collaboration reveals the context and reasoning behind a solution , and a solution in context is a far more e(cid:127) ective learning resource . There is a great deal of support for the idea that solving real world problems should be thought of as situated and collaborative ( Lave and Wegner 1991 ) . Important lessons from an earlier problem solving episode are inextricably linked to context and much is lost if they are decontextualized into a canonical form ( Brown and Duguid 1991 ) . For a solution to be reusable it is necessary to view it in context and appreciate the reasoning behind that solution as found in the collaborative activities that led to its construction . Therefore , when designing around the working docu - ments identi® ed in an organisation , it is necessary to understand the collaboration and communication that surrounds them . As we wish to capture the reasoning behind a solution we need to know how collaboration currently occurs ( e . g . via e - mail , face - to - face , written memos , etc . ) and how it can form part of the captured solution . Our aim to capture important events within the collaboration also has the dual role of serving as a design rationale for the life of the current problem , supporting those involved in reaching an optimal solution . In the initial analysis of the scenarios where our tools have been deployed , we investigated the nature of the communication surrounding their working documents and found some interesting di(cid:127) erences . With our case within the aerospace industry , face - to - face collaboration forms an important role in constructing a team plan . Contributions to the meeting are recorded by a facilitator . Results of the meeting , including targets are publicly displayed and periodically updated , often as a distributed document and on the team notice board . Current performance against the target is also presented on the notice board . Similarly , synchronous commu - nication formed an important role within our test site within the mining industry . Although all decisions and work concerning a machine fault were recorded on an Intergrating working and learning 173 Table 1 Summary of identi® ed working documents , collaboration patterns and use of best practices across the test sites . Test site Working document Collaboration Best practices Aerospace company Team planning tool for re¯ ecting on performance and setting near term targets Face - to - face planning meetings . Report and discussions of ongoing team actions toward meeting objectives . Growing archieve of concise best practise descriptions grouped around company values . Customer support centre Electronic case ® les of customer problems from request to resolution . Mainly asynchronous collaboration between coleagues focused around current customer problems . On - line FAQs used as internal learning resource and publicy accessible by customers . Mining company Fault logs pertaining to the main mining machines . Synchronouscommunication between workers above and below ground concerning current machine fault . Vast archive of machine faults logs for use by mining technicians D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 electronic fault log , technicians used the telephone to discuss the fault . The fault log would then be updated later . This is because the technician usually identi® ed the fault when underground , and the telephone was the only form of communication with workers above ground . In the customer helpline case - site , unlike the ® rst two , a great deal of the collaboration around the problem tended to be asynchronous using e - mail . The telephone is an important form of customer contact , therefore most collaboration between colleagues tended to use e - mail to keep the telephone lines free . These observations have a number of consequences for the design and integration of our tools . Although one of our aims is to capture and share the collaboration and rationale behind a solution , enforcing new patterns of work to make the capture process easier would not be appropriate . For example , if synchronous communica - tion is the current way of working , then trying to force workers to communicate asynchronously would be doomed to failure . We need to understand the role of communication in the activities around the working documents , and consider how they can be supported by , incorporated with , and improved by , our technology . As we mentioned earlier , team planning meetings in our aerospace industry test site are conducted face - to - face . This of course continued with the new tools , with contributions being entered by a facilitator . An added bene® t of the new approach is that capturing and laying out the rationale in a more structured way helps to ensure that alternative suggestions are adequately explored in the meeting . The redesigned planning document is shown in Figure 1 , modi® ed slightly for reasons of privacy . The centre of the window shows the new version of the previously paper - based planning document . The discussion and rationale space is shown to the right . This document is prepared using an extended version of the Digital Document Discourse Environment ( D3E ) ( Sumner and Buckingham Shum 1998 ) . In the coal mining case , asynchronous commu - nication between the underground workers and the control centre was provided for the ® rst time , along side the existing telephone link . Although asynchronous P . Mulholland et al . 174 Figure 1 . A redesigned planning document ( in the centre ) , with a navigation bar ( to the left ) and an associated discussion and rationale space ( to the right ) . D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 communication was not originally used , it may have advantages , for example due to the intermittent avail - ability of sta(cid:127) during a shift . These trials are ongoing , and we await the outcome . If asynchronous commu - nication proves successful then rationale capture is well supported and mining sta(cid:127) have a new useful tool . If the new link is not used , then a summary of the commu - nication and rationale is still captured in the fault log . This would provide a more rationalized account but is far better than coercing sta(cid:127) into a sub - optimal way of working , which in the end may be subverted and leave us with tools no one uses . The customer helpline case is more straightforward due to the existing preference for asynchronous communication , but careful integration with existing tools still needed to be addressed . Another important design issue was the development of the initial seed structure of the discussion and rationale capture component of the new working document . This initial seed was based on the identi® ed stereotypical steps or issues involved in the activity the working document supported . These were identi® ed from interviews with workers and an examination of the original document structure . Discussion seeds in this initial version covered issues or steps such as problem description , objectives and actions . In our team plan - ning scenario ( see Figure 1 ) , the discussion is seeded around the ® ve company values ( customer , people , performance , partnership and innovation ) . During the planning meeting this is used to record the main points raised , concerning the justi® cation of the plan . During the following months , this area is used to record progress against , and discussions about the measurable objectives outlined in the plan . At the next planning meeting , the discussion area for the previous plan , gives a record of how outcomes related to objectives , which is then taken into account when developing the new plan . We have described how we capture key activities in each organisation , occurring around working docu - ments , including solutions to problems and the rationale behind them . We will now move on to consider how these form a reusable resource . Our document centred organisations have a further characteristic in com - monÐ the problem solving process draws on knowledge of previous solutions . Many of the lessons learned when solving earlier problems , can be captured in working documents and their associated discussion and be a valuable resource to other teams and individuals when solving similar problems . Documents describing some past successful work episode , selected and approved by the organisation are often referred to as best practices . The three test sites mentioned already had in place some form of best practice archive , though these were not necessarily well developed and often captured little of the reasoning behind a solution , which is so important for reuse . Our aim in the long term is to extend the best practice archive by selecting and editing important working documents . The discussion associated with the working document has two important roles at this point . First , it supports the best practice co - ordinator in ensuring the rationale and context behind a solution are presented . Second it can be used to seed important points for discussion , to be considered by a team when considering the best practice in the context of their own problem or plan . For the initial seed , existing best practices were redesigned in our new environment and a discussion seed was developed , based on problem solving steps identi® ed in the use of best practices . 3 . Constructing the formal knowledge model The second part of the seeding process involves constructing the initial formal knowledge model . The role of the knowledge model is to establish viable connections between descriptions of work being entered in the current working document and potentially useful best practices . The role of the knowledge model is therefore to support e(cid:127) ective reuse of knowledge contained in best practice documents , and previous working documents of the team . An overview of how the knowledge model relates to the documents of the organisation is shown in Figure 2 . The search for relevant best practices could be done as a text search or keyword search though this approach is inadequate for our purposes . A conven - tional search proceeds by looking for documents containing the requested text . In our case , the words on which the search is based ( i . e . the words entered in the working document ) are not necessarily words appearing in the most appropriate best practice document . Some process of inference , some knowledge , is required to make the connection between the working document and the best practice . It is worth noting at this point that with our approach , there is not a separate search engine , distinct from the working document that is used to ® nd the best practices . The working document e(cid:127) ectively doubles as the search engine interface , therefore the search is based on what is found in the working document . Best practices are suggested to the team or individual as they go about their work . The required search process is therefore far more than matching text and can draw on quite abstract concepts . The process of constructing the knowledge model can also have a bene® cial side e(cid:127) ect of mapping out the learning resources of the organisa - tion , allowing them to identify their strengths and areas of their work that need more support . Intergrating working and learning 175 D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 Our construction of knowledge models is supported by the WebOnto tool ( Domingue 1998 ) , which allows the collaborative editing and viewing of models via a conventional web browser . Figure 3 shows a screen snapshot of WebOnto . The represented ontology relates to our team planning scenario . The left part of the larger window contains a list of all the classes de® ned within the model . The right part of the window allows the classes and instances to be graphically browsed and edited . Each node within the ontology contains slots and values of the ontology . The smaller window to the front of Figure 3 , provides a detailed view of the customer - best - practice node . Within our approach , the formal model represents three kinds of knowledge : process , domain and media . Process knowledge describes how a best practice relates to a working document . Domain knowledge describes the domain of work , such as work products and machinery . Media knowledge describes where resources can be found . Our approach to building the knowledge models always kept in sight the way in which the knowledge would be used : to successfully discriminate between and select best practices based on information in the working document . Some characteristics of the organisation , its structure and products , although important in other situations gave little leverage in the selection of best practices and therefore played a lesser role in the knowledge model . This aspect of our approach can be described as minimal ontological commitment ( Uschold and Gruninger 1996 ) . Also , as will be described below , the relative importance of the process knowledge and domain knowledge di(cid:127) ered considerably between the test sites . Determining the signi® cance of each of the three kinds of knowledge , and determining their role in ® nding best practices involved a great deal of preliminary work observing work practices , interviewing sta(cid:127) and assessing the P . Mulholland et al . 176 Figure 2 . Overview of the document enrichment approach . D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 documents and how they are used . The three kinds of knowledge and the role they play are now brie¯ y described . Process knowledge describes the inferential process of how a best practice can be selected as appropriate for the current problem . The nature of this part of the knowledge model was strongly in¯ uenced by the structure of the planning or problem solving process as re¯ ected in the working documents . These provide concrete evidence as to how the process works , where within the process best practice knowledge can be useful , and the reasoning behind the existing use of prior knowledge when solving problems , either from an existing archive or personal experience . This was used to identify abstractions of the problem solving domain utilized by workers and their application of heuristics . The process of selecting best practices could then be embedded within an understanding of the problem solving or planning process as a whole . Then , turning speci® cally to the selection of best practices , develop - ment of the process knowledge model focussed on how information in the working document could be used to rule in or rule out a potential best practice . This drew on formal methodologies or classi® cations embedded in current use of the working document , and newly identi® ed discriminating characteristics of best practices lying outside the formal methodology . On analysis , the structure and terminology of each kind of document re¯ ects a formal methodology of its use , which is also re¯ ected in the structure of the best practice archive . In our team planning case , the planning process is structured around ® ve values , serving as Intergrating working and learning 177 Figure 3 . A screen snapshot showing part of the ontology underlying the selection and representation of documents in our team planning scenario . D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 dimensions along which their current and target performance can be measured . One value is ` Customer’ which measures knowledge of the customer and the quality of procedures in place to meet customer needs . The team’s current and target performance on these values is scored on a scale from one to nine . Most best practices are classi® ed as to the value they address , and some have ` before and after’ scores giving an indication of the bene® t the best practice can provide for the team . Our analysis augmented this formal methodology with further attributes that helped to improve discrimi - nation between best practices . These focused on two issues . First , we represented the range of lessons embedded within best practice ( represented in the lesson - learned class ) . These included for example the bene® ts of a regular maintenance agreement . Second , we represented the problems this lesson could solve and the nature of the solution state ( represented as best - practice - problem and best - practice - solution ) . The planning process and the utility of lessons learned tended to be fairly independent of the domain of expertise of the workers . A marketing team could learn from a manufacturing team and vice versa . This contrasted sharply with the other two test sites where domain knowledge played a far greater discrimi - nating role . Domain knowledge is used to represent the domain of expertise within which the members of the organisation worked . This kind of knowledge was found to be far more important in the mining and customer support test sites . Within these scenarios the extent to which knowl - edge could be shared was far more dependent on domain characteristics such as the type of machine used . Domain knowledge within these formal models was used to scope or limit the relevance of best practices to the current problem . These test sites had elaborate problem solving methodologies , but in use , the metho - dology was instantiated within particular machine components and faults , and opportunities for abstrac - tion were more limited . Both test sites had legacy domain knowledge models that could be incorporated within the archive seed . Media knowledge describes where knowledge and learning resources can be found . This included not only the URLs of documents , but also external pointers to books , manuals , training resources and contact details for people able to o(cid:127) er particular kinds of consultancy or support . 4 . Evolution of the organizational memory The SER ( Seeding , Evolutionary growth , Reseeding ) model ( Fischer et al . 1994 ) was proposed to describe the importance of appreciating the necessary evolution of systems that are embedded in organisations . The designer can never fully envisage how the system will come to be used . The users themselves must have a stake in the evolution of the system , and the overall design must be ¯ exible and amenable to evolution . Seeding creates through a process of participatory design , an initial state encompassing tools and an archive . Evolu - tionary growth occurs through use . Emerging scenarios of use lead to modi® cations of tools and the develop - ment of the archive as further knowledge is articulated . The reseeding process occurs after some period of use and can be thought of as a process of revolution rather than evolution . For example , key concepts in the formal knowledge repository may need to be reorganized , or extensive changes made to tools in response to emergent work patterns . The last two sections have described how we seed the organisational memory in terms of docu - ment redesign , structuring the discussion and rationale capture space , and construction of the seed knowledge model . We now move onto the second part of the process : the evolution of the organisational memory and how it is supported . The evolution of the organisational memory tends to be left to the host organisation , with limited support . The organisational memory evolves in four ways : · Additions to documents and their discussion space . · Additions and deletions to the best practice archive . · Modi® cations to the knowledge model . · Indexing new documents . The most prevalent form of evolution is contributions made , as part of the normal working process , to documents and their associated discussion and rationale capture space . This provides teams with a record of their ideas , work and progress over time . This evolving historical collection of working documents provides a useful reference for teams or communities in the organisation , and is archived for this purpose . Although of direct value to the workers concerned , these docu - ments do not make a very sharable resource in their raw form . Best practices describe knowledge that can be shared within the organisation , and in some cases , even across organisational boundaries . Most of these evolve from working documents , though some process of selection and editing needs to be applied . Many working documents will not contain lessons of utility to a wider audience . Those that do , may have limited impact in their current form . The process of selecting best practice from the growing array of documents produced in the organisation may take a number of forms . Documents P . Mulholland et al . 178 D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 may be submitted by teams or individuals when identifying one of their own work episodes as potentially useful best practice . This process often requires some form of incentive , even in a sharing culture . One of our test sites had an extensive incentive and reward scheme to promote the submission of best practice . Within our test sites , separate best practice teams were also common , whose purpose was to identify best practices within the organisation , so they could be given a wider audience . Once a best practice has been identi® ed it needs to be edited by the best practice coordinator to form a reusable resource . The nature of the editing process needs to be informed by an understanding of how and to what extent context is bound up with the lesson , technique or insight to be shared . The approach taken to editing a best practice lies on a context continuum . At one extreme there is the position that the identi® ed knowledge can be extracted from the episode in which it occurred and shared in isolation of its context . At the other extreme is the position that all context , no matter how seemingly irrelevant , must be preserved as context is inextricable . From our own perspective , we reject out of hand the ® rst of the two positions , subscribing to the view that knowledge is intertwined with the context in which it was created ( Brown and Duguid 1991 ) . The opposing position , though persuasive , is often neither desirable nor practical . The particular stance taken to this issue is dependent on organisational characteristics , and draws on similar issues to those that motivate the design of the formal knowledge model . Best practices within our team planning scenario maintain less context . The best practice is intended to have immediate impact , be thought provoking and describe techniques or insights that can have wide applicability across the organisation . In the other test sites , far more context is preserved as context is a crucial component of the knowledge . In each case , preserving the discussion space in some form is an important part of the design . The full discussion or rationale that accompanied the working document submitted or identi® ed as best practice is pruned to leave some main issues of debate to act as a discussion seed related to how the lessons learned can be applied in varying situations . Evolution of the best practice archive will also periodically involve the deletion of existing best practices as they become surpassed by newly evolving best practices . Contributions to documents and discussions some - times lead to modi® cations of the knowledge model . Contributions may o(cid:127) er new insights into relations between concepts in the model , or newly developed concepts . Over time , groups establish and formalize new concepts and terminology relating to their work . Once established within the community they can be incorporated into the formal representation of their work . This evolving knowledge may be part of the methodology of how they perform their work ( process knowledge ) or an elaboration of their shared areas of expertise ( domain knowledge ) . Also , new documents , particularly best practice documents need to be indexed in terms of the knowledge model . This work is carried out , drawing on the work of Gannt and Nardi ( 1992 ) , by a local developer , who is a member of the work team , but has a greater familiarity with the technology and methodology . This formalization of their knowledge is recorded in their personal team ontology which forms a part of the overall company ontology . The best practice coordinator may also make changes to the company ontology , as a result of knowledge contained in new best practices . Reseeding involves more radical changes to central concepts in the knowledge model , overhauling the methodology , and redesigning ( or possibly even di(cid:127) er - ently identifying ) the key documents of the organisation . Reseeding would generally be conducted by the organi - sation in collaboration with the original designers . The nature of the reseeding process would be motivated by the result of the evolution process and the ascertained success of the tools as indicated by the evaluation process . 5 . Applicability of the approach Our document enrichment approach aims , as do other knowledge technologies , to support the organisational learning process , but also reduce the additional costs imposed on the articulation , representation and trans - mission of knowledge . Our approach is , however , not universally applicable . From our experiences deploying the tools and methodology , a number of requirements have been identi® ed . These encompass the nature of key documents within the organisation , the activities that surround them , and the characteristics of knowledge within the organisation . As with all organisational learning support tools , the social and cultural conditions ( e . g . the existence of communities , collaborative work - ing , etc . ) have to already be in place . In terms of document characteristics , the organisation needs to utilize working documents that capture , coordinate and guide ongoing work activity . These documents , though having a canonical , prescribed structure , must describe experience of some event covering some period of time , such as a planning or diagnostic process . There also needs to be a separate set of documents that serve as best practices , describing some past lesson or success . Intergrating working and learning 179 D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014 The organisation needs to have the right activities surrounding these documents . Collaborative work must occur around the documents so that knowledge and practices can be naturalistically articulated . To capture and represent ongoing activities , not just solutions to problems , work must be integrated with the documents . This ensures that both formal and informal knowledge can be captured . There are further conditions relating to the nature of the knowledge within the organisation , and how it is used , questioned and created . Some of the knowledge within the company needs to be formalizable in order that a seed ontology can be developed . Overall , the knowledge of the company needs to be changing , but relatively stable . The company needs to be open to new knowledge so that the organisation can learn , through document enrichment , but also there needs to be some stability , characterized by the gradual evolution , rather than constant revolution of company knowledge . A wide range of organisations meet these broad document , activity and knowledge criteria , as have been found within the initial test sites for the approach . 6 . Conclusions Organisational learning , unlike conventional training is gradual , contextual and problem driven . Knowledge technology aims to facilitate organisational learning , but it needs the right social and cultural conditions in place , and incurs extra costs concerning the articulation , representation and transmission of knowledge . Our document enrichment approach aims to deliver the bene® ts of organisational learning while minimizing increased cost . Our approach has been deployed in three industrial settings , and although lowering the ongoing costs of using knowledge technology , has certain requirements in terms of the nature of documents in the organisation , the kinds of knowledge they are used to express , and the activities surrounding them . References A RGYRIS , C . and S CHOÈN , D . A . 1996 , Organisational L earning II : Theory , Method and Practice . ( Reading , MA : Addison Wesley , ) . B ROWN , J . S . and D UGUID , P . 1991 , Organizational Learning and Communities of Practice : Towards a Uni® ed View of Working , Learning , and Innovation . Organization Science , 2 , 40 ±57 . B ROWN , J . S . and D UGUID , P . 1998 , Organizing knowledge . California Management Review , 40 , 90 ±111 . D ETTERMAN , D . K . 1993 , The Case for the Prosecution : Transfer as an Epiphenomenon , in D . K . Detterman and R . J . Sternberg ( eds . ) Transfer on Trial : Intelligence , Cognition , and Instruction . ( Norwood , New Jersey : Ablex Publishing Corporation , ) . D OMINGUE , J . 1998 , Tadzebao and WebOnto : discussing , browsing , and editing ontologies on the web . In B . Gaines and M . Musen ( eds ) Proceedings of the 11th Knowledge Acquisation for Knowledge - Based Systems W orkshop ( April 18± 23 ) ( Ban(cid:127) : SSRDG Publications ) . F ISCHER , G . , M C C ALL , R . , O STWALD , J . , R EEVES , B . , S HIPMAN , F . 1994 , Seeding , evolutionary growth and reseeding : support - ing the incremental development of design environments . In B . Adelson , S . Dumais and J . Olson ( eds ) Proceedings of ACM CHI’94 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( April 24 ± 28 ) ( Boston , MA : ACM ) . G ANTT , M . and N ARDI , B . 1992 , Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among CAD users . In P . Bauersfeld , J . Bennet and G . Lynch ( eds ) Proceedings of ACM CHI’92 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( May 3 ± 7 ) ( Monterey : ACM ) . I VERGAÊRD , T . B . K . ( 1998 ) . Measures to balance the demand for skill in a fact changing technological business environment and the supply of skill available in the existing work force . In P . Vink , E . A . P . Koningsveld and S . Dhondt ( eds ) Human Factors in Organizational Design and Management ± V I , ( Amsterdam : Elsevier ) . L AVE , J . and W EGNER , E . 1991 , Situated L earning : L egitimate Peripheral Participation . ( Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Uni - versity Press ) . L EVITT , B . and M ARCH , J . 1988 , Organisational learning . Annual Review of Sociology , 14 , 319 ±340 . M C D ERMOTT , R . 1999 , Why information technology inspired but cannot deliver knowledge management . California Management Review , 41 , 103 ±117 . N ONAKA , I , and T AKEUCHI , H . 1995 , The Knowledge - Creating Company : How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation . ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . O RLIKOWSKI , W . 1992 , Learning from notes : organizational issues in groupware implementation . Computer supported collaborative work . In J . Turner and R . Kraut ( eds ) Proceedings of ACM CSCW ` 92 Conference on Conmputer Supported Collaborative Work ( November 1 ± 4 ) ( Toronto : ACM ) . O RR , J . 1990 , Sharing knowledge , celebrating identity : War stories and community in a service culture . In D . S . Middleton and D . Edwards ( eds ) Collective Remembering : Memory in Society . ( Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications ) . S UMNER , T . and B UCKINGHAM S HUM , S . 1998 , From Documents to Discourse : Shifting Conceptions of Scholarly Publishing . In C . Karat and I . Horrocks ( eds ) Proceedings of ACM CHI’98 Human Factors in Computing Systems ( April 18 ± 23 ) ( Los Angeles : ACM ) S UMNER , T . , D OMINGUE , J . , Z DRAHAL , Z . , M ILLICAN , A . and M URRAY , J . 1999 , Moving from On - the - job Training towards Organisational Learning . In B . Gaines , M Musen and R . Kremer ( eds ) Proceedings of the 12th Ban(cid:128) Knowledge Acquisition Workshop , ( October 16 ± 22 ) ( Ban(cid:127) : SSRDG Publications ) . U SCHOLD , M . and G RUNINGER , M . 1996 , Ontologies : principles , methods and applications . The Knowledge Engineering Review , 11 , 93 ±136 . P . Mulholland et al . 180 D o w n l o a d e d by [ S i m on F r a s e r U n i v e r s it y ] a t 18 : 45 11 N ov e m b e r 2014