How We Teach Expanding course goals beyond disciplinary boundaries : physiology education in an undergraduate course on psychoactive drugs Joseph A . Near and Bruce J . Martin Medical Sciences , Indiana University School of Medicine , Bloomington , Indiana Submitted 7 September 2005 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 8 February 2007 Near JA , Martin BJ . Expanding course goals beyond disciplinary boundaries : physiology education in an undergraduate course on psychoactive drugs . Adv Physiol Educ 31 : 161 – 166 , 2007 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00058 . 2005 . —The topic of psychoactive drugs is one of inherent interest to college students . We used this insight to design and implement a multidisciplinary undergraduate course with psycho - active drugs as the central theme . The Medical Science of Psycho - active Drugs examines the biological mechanisms underlying all major effects of psychoactive drugs , including the effects on the brain and other organs and tissues . Physiological principles , molecular mechanisms , and genetic factors involved in drug - induced therapeutic and adverse effects are emphasized . The course is open to undergrad - uate students at all levels and carries no prerequisites , and enrollment is limited to (cid:1) 50 students . Major teaching modes include lecture , short homework papers on topics related to the previous class meet - ing , small - group discussions at several points during each class , and whole class discussions . Because of the diversity of students’ knowl - edge of basic science , we employ a variety of methods designed to help students grasp the necessary scientiﬁc concepts . Our methods are intended to be inquiry based and highly interactive . Our goals are 1 ) to foster the development of an organized knowledge base about psychoactive drugs that will have practical applicability in the daily lives of the students ; 2 ) to promote the rational application of this knowledge in thinking about current medical , social , legal , and ethical issues involving psychoactive drugs ; and 3 ) to cultivate science literacy , critical thinking , and communication skills among students . undergraduate physiology ; undergraduate pharmacology DEWEY ( 10 ) wrote that “All genuine education terminates in discipline , but it proceeds by engaging the mind in activities worthwhile for their own sake . ” Education in physiology is clearly an essential part of instruction for the health care and medical professional . However , the role of discipline - speciﬁc physiology courses in liberal arts education and in the broad undergraduate training of future biological scientists is less well deﬁned ( 13 , 22 , 28 ) . In these settings , it has recently been argued that educational modules that transcend disciplinary boundaries and integrate physiological principles into a broader , multidisciplinary setting provide unique educational advan - tages ( 13 , 22 , 28 ) . Courses designed with this expansive goal allow the physiologist to contribute a unique perspective to problems with wide - scale ramiﬁcations . In this article , we describe a novel course devoted to the broad medical science of psychoactive drugs . We chose this topic because it provides a central theme of abiding curiosity to undergraduates of various ages and interests . Indeed , we have found in the steadfast interest of our students conﬁrmation of the following statement by Dr . Louis Silverstein ( 27 ) , a mem - ber of the Department of Liberal Education at Columbia College in Chicago , IL : “mention drugs and you have a subject that affects and concerns students in most profound ways , and that they most earnestly desire to know about in an intellectu - ally honest way – the truth in its entirety . For our institutions of higher education to ignore and / or deny the reality and necessity of such inquiry is shameful and destructive of both the schol - arly tradition and free speech as well as being harmful to the best interests of our youth . ” It is deeply satisfying to the student and the teacher to tap into this wellspring of student curiosity by examining the actions of psychoactive drugs , their underlying mechanisms , and the implications of these that extend far beyond the physiological , pharmacological , or med - ical . Our multidisciplinary approach allows physiological prin - ciples to be interwoven with those from pharmacology , genet - ics , and chemistry and also those from psychology , sociology , ethics , and law . In this way , students come to understand how physiological principles play out in their full biological and social context . The personal , social , and economic costs of drug abuse can hardly be overstated . For example , it is estimated that roughly a third of all hospital beds not devoted to maternity or intensive care in the United States are occupied by persons being treated for complications of alcohol problems ( 7 ) . Furthermore , the economic costs of alcohol , nicotine , and other substance abuse were estimated to be $ 176 , $ 137 , and $ 114 billion dollars , respectively , in 1995 ( 24 ) . These totals are comparable with the economic costs of diabetes ( 7 ) and coronary heart disease ( 2 ) . Although the effectiveness of drug education in reducing drug abuse is controversial , attempts to reduce the likelihood of drug abuse through the use of nontraditional educational methods may have a signiﬁcant positive impact ( 5 , 25 ) . At least one previous study ( 26 ) has shown that objectivity and a nonjudg - mental attitude on the part of instructors may be important aspects with regard to success of the course and positive outcomes with regard to change in student attitudes toward drug abuse . Furthermore , in one study ( 30 ) of a drug education project , strong positive effects were observed only in a “highly interactive” version where communication among students and instructors was an integral part of the design , suggesting that learning modes involving improvement of communication skills , peer learning , and group discussion may have an impor - tant impact on the student beyond the learning of scientiﬁc facts and principles . In addition to obvious epidemiological and economic rea - sons , it is clear that improving education in the medical science of psychoactive drugs is a goal for more than physicians and Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : J . A . Near , Medical Sciences , Jordan Hall 104 , Indiana Univ . , Bloomington , IN 47405 ( e - mail : nearj @ indiana . edu ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . The article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Adv Physiol Educ 31 : 161 – 166 , 2007 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00058 . 2005 . 161 1043 - 4046 / 07 $ 8 . 00 Copyright © 2007 The American Physiological Society b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / ad v an . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m health care workers . For example , the Medical Society of the State of New York ofﬁcially “supports prevention policies and programs that include . . . adequate professional education about alcohol and drug problems in all programs which prepare students for careers in health , human services , teaching , the clergy , police , public administration and law” ( 19 ) . Our educational goals are 1 ) to foster the development of an organized knowledge base about psychoactive drugs and about the principles of pharmacology and physiology that will have practical applicability in the daily lives of the students ; 2 ) to promote the rational application of this knowledge in thinking about current medical , social , legal , and ethical issues involv - ing psychoactive drugs ; and 3 ) to cultivate general science literacy , critical thinking , and communication skills among the students . In this report , we describe the methods and content employed in the design of a highly interactive multidisciplinary course on the medical science of psychoactive drugs to achieve these goals . METHODS Course structure . The Medical Science of Psychoactive Drugs is an examination of the biological mechanisms underlying the pharmaco - logical , physiological , and pathological effects of psychoactive drugs , including the effects on the brain and other organs and tissues . The course is open to undergraduate students at any level and carries no prerequisites , and enrollment is limited to (cid:1) 50 students . Students exhibit a very wide range of backgrounds , from fourth - year chemistry , biology , and biochemistry majors to ﬁrst - semester students intending to major in the humanities or business . As a new course , it currently can be used as a science elective by students in nursing or exercise science , but it is not yet a required course for any major or profes - sional program , nor is it yet able to serve as a science elective for biology or psychology majors . The class meets twice a week for 75 min . The two instructors , a pharmacologist and a physiologist , attend and participate in all class meetings . Major teaching modes include lecture , short homework papers on an assigned topic related to the previous class meeting , small - group discussions at several points during lectures , and whole class discussions . Grades are assigned on the basis of class attendance , completion of homework assignments , self - assessment of class participation , and four objective examina - tions . After the basic science is evaluated , students are encouraged by a variety of means to discover and discuss the various psychological , sociological , economic , and legal ramiﬁcations that result from the basic properties of the drug . Students are then asked to reﬂect upon and articulate their attitudes and values as they relate to these con - siderations . Homework is due at the beginning of each class meeting ( 21 , 29 ) . Students are told to explain a speciﬁc topic to a friend , roommate , or relative and to write a one - page description of the exercise . Teaching material to another helps consolidate learning , encourages students to keep up with the material , and allows students to work at an individ - ually suitable level of complexity of the material ( 4 ) . By reading daily homework , instructors are able to monitor the progress of each student as well as of the class as a whole . Although we have not analyzed the homework quantitatively , we are convinced that structuring the as - signments as student descriptions of their own explanations minimizes plagiarism ( 4 ) . Students take a two - question quiz at the beginning of each class and are awarded points each time they appear in class on time ( 17 ) . Students also award themselves points on the basis of their own evaluation of their participation in class and team discussions . This is designed to promote engagement with the class , motivate students to keep up with the material on a daily basis , and encourage them to arrive in class on time ( 8 ) . At various points during each class , students are directed to discuss speciﬁc topics with their assigned partner . Partners are reassigned every two to four classes . Individual students who are having prob - lems with the course material may be paired with more knowledge - able students or with the instructor not lecturing during that section of the course . Partners may also be assigned for particular class blocks on the basis of major and / or year to facilitate peer learning . Discussion topics are phrased as a question or series of questions and are designed to help students use their existing knowledge to reach new insights or to apply information from the lecture in a new way . Often , they are based on a short newspaper account , summary of a research article , proposed legislation or constitutional amendment , or a magazine editorial . We have found that the more advanced science students in the class are a valuable resource to less advanced students during the small - group discussion because they often clarify and emphasize a basic concept presented only moments before by the instructor in lecture . Likewise , the diversity of student’s academic interests and goals often adds a new dimension to the discussion for science majors , who gain insight into the social , medical , legal , and moral implica - tions of drug effects from other students pursuing other career goals ( 1 , 20 , 32 ) . Course content . The course is organized to sequentially cover each of the classes of psychoactive drugs ( Table 1 ) . This structure derives in part from our choice of textbook for the course ( 15 ) . For each class of drugs , initial lectures and discussions focus on factual materials and central scientiﬁc concepts . These readily lead to consideration of a broad spectrum of issues and complex medical , genetic , social , ethi - cal , and legal situations . The course is arranged to initially provide basic information re - garding drug absorption , distribution , metabolism , and excretion - Table 1 . Course outline Lecture Number Topic 1 Pharmacokinetics : how drugs enter the body 2 Drug metabolism 3 Receptors and pharmacodynamics 4 Alcohol pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 5 Alcohol tolerance and dependence 6 Genetic risk factors for alcohol dependence 7 Alcoholic cirrhosis , pancreatitis , vitamin deﬁciency , and fetal alcohol syndrome 8 Alcohol withdrawal and treatment of alcohol abuse 9 Anxiety , benzodiazepines , and volatile inhalants 10 Anxiety , depression , and antidepressant drugs 11 Bipolar affective disorder and antimanic drugs 12 History , pharmacokinetics , and pharmacodynamics of the opioids 13 Opioid addiction , withdrawal , and treatment 14 Marijuana : history and pharmacology 15 The future of medical marijuana and cannabinoids 16 Psychosis , schizophrenia , and the antipsychotic drugs 17 The history and central and peripheral actions of MDMA 18 Psychedelic drugs , including LSD , psilocybin , ketamine , and PCP 19 Amphetamine and related stimulants : how structure relates to potency 20 Abuse and clinical use of amphetamines ; treatment of attention deﬁcit / hyperactivity disorder 21 Cocaine history and its central and peripheral actions 22 Caffeine actions , dependence , and withdrawal 23 Nicotine receptors and receptor actions inside and outside the brain 24 Nicotine dependence , withdrawal , and treatment 25 Smoking - related diseases 26 Summary of stimulants : uses , abuses , and future drug developments MDMA , methylenedioxymethamphetamine ( also called Ecstasy ) . How We Teach 162 AN UNDERGRADUATE COURSE ON PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS Advances in Physiology Education • VOL 31 • JUNE 2007 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / ad v an . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m pharmacokinetics . This treatment necessarily involves handling the topic of drug routes of administration and is entirely dependent on grasping a number of physiological concepts ( Tables 1 and 2 ) . Pharmacokinetics leads to pharmacodynamics and an exploration of how neurotransmitters and portions of the brain mediate drug effects ; this area as well depends in part on physiological principles ( Tables 1 and 2 ) . After an explaination as to how neurons and neurotransmitters are involved in the central psychoactive actions of drugs , the course moves to a drug - by - drug format . Although we have chosen a drug - by - drug sequence that corresponds to a standard textbook , drugs could also be treated in a sequence that focuses in separate discussions on therapeutic and nontherapeutic agents . For each drug class considered , complex cause - effect relationships can best be examined using the perspectives of several disciplines . These relationships are illustrated by a concept map for the nicotine section of the course ( Fig . 1 ) . The discussion of nicotine begins with its effects on acetylcholine receptors in the brain . A ﬁrst topic is the link between these central receptors and dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens and the accompanying reward , receptor down - regulation , and eventual addiction . These same acetylcholine binding characteristics are then also described in skeletal muscle , and the effects of their binding on tonic muscle activity in smokers . Of course , addiction to nicotine results in chronic exposure of the lung to tar and the many carcinogens inevitably found in burning organic matter . From that point , it is an immediate step to consideration of the pathophysiology of emphysema and the basic biology of lung cancer . Group discussion then centers on analysis of the genetic factors that contribute to nicotine addiction potential , susceptibility to toxic ef - fects of cigarette smoke , the history and current legal status of nicotine in the United States and worldwide , the sociological factors that contribute to risk of smoking initiation , and the mechanisms under - lying antidepressant and nicotine replacement treatment for nicotine addiction . Some of the more peripheral topics that are discussed in recent offerings of the course were included because of a question or set of questions asked by a student . This continuous evolution of a portion of the course content is likely to keep the contextual topics that confer personal meaning of the material to the student in tune with the general interests of the student population . While we continue to concentrate on the physiological underpinnings of the pharmacol - ogy , the stories we tell about how these affect us and our society as well as the debates we have about those effects change with student interests . The theme is nicotine , the approach is integrative , and physiology plays a central role . RESULTS Evaluations of the course . Through ﬁve semesters , the course has been well received by students ( Table 3 ) . Instructor evaluations are consistently among the highest in the depart - ment ( data not shown ) . Although it is unknown how these course evaluations are affected by content , characteristics of the instructors , the small class enrollment of 50 students , or teaching style , they may well reﬂect the fact that the course content is of great inherent interest to the students ( 27 ) . DISCUSSION Interdisciplinary nature of the course . Students learn more and are more engaged when material is presented in a context that is relevant to their daily lives and when they are encour - aged to recognize the relationships between the current learn - ing experience and others they have had , both formal and informal ( 16 , 23 ) . The use of speciﬁc drug classes as the focus of discussion leads inevitably to consideration of a very broad spectrum of relevant disciplines and how they contribute to Table 2 . Physiological and pathophysiological concepts addressed in the coverage of psychoactive drug actions Drug or Drug Concept Physiological and Pathophysiological Concepts Routes of drug administration Body ﬂuid compartments and drug distribution ; pulmonary blood ﬂow ; nasal , oral , and rectal mucosal blood ﬂow ; intramuscular blood ﬂow ; blood - brain barrier ; control of gastric emptying and intestinal absorption ; venous and arterial pressure ; circulatory transit time Hepatic ﬁrst - pass metabolism Liver function ; portal circulation Alcohol metabolism Mechanism of alcohol ﬂush reaction ; vasodilation ; blood pressure regulation ; skin blood ﬂow Alcoholic liver disease Consequences of portal hypertension : ascites , esophageal varices , and gastrointestinal bleeding ; consequences of cirrhosis and liver failure Alcoholic pancreatitis Function of exocrine pancreas ; mechanism for stagnation of exocrine pancreatic secretion Alcoholism - induced vitamin deﬁciencies Functions of various vitamins , including thiamine , vitamin A , etc . Fetal alcohol syndrome Uterine blood ﬂow ; placental function ; placental barrier Alcohol as a central nervous system depressant Medullary respiratory and cardiovascular central function Volatile inhalants Ambient , alveolar , and arterial P O 2 ; hypoxia ; ventilation and rebreathing Benzodiazepines and selective benzodiazopine receptor agonists Function of and control of sleep Antianxiety drugs Afferent and efferent limbs of the stress response ; sympathetic nervous system control and effects ; hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal axis ; effects of cortisol Antidepressant drugs Regulation and dysregulation of appetite and sleep ; physiology and pathophysiology of the sexual response Antipsychotic drugs Motor control : higher and low motor nerves and basal ganglia Opioids Peripheral and integrated central pain reception ; regulation of intestinal secretion and motility and mechanism of antidiarrheal agents ; brain stem respiratory control Marijuana and synthetic cannabinoids Function of central and peripheral cannabinoid receptors : modulation of pain , appetite , nausea , and immune function Hallucinogens Central gating of sensory information MDMA Control of metabolic rate ; temperature regulation and mechanisms of hyperthermia Amphetamines and related stimulants Sympathetic nervous system function ; control of blood pressure and heart rate Nicotine Central and peripheral nicotinic acetylcholine receptors ; pulmonary function and mechanics ; consequences of changes in lung compliance : emphysema , hypoxia , hypoventilation , and respiratory failure ; hemoglobin and carboxyhemoglobin ; elastin and elastase function ; mechanisms of carcinogenesis How We Teach 163 AN UNDERGRADUATE COURSE ON PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS Advances in Physiology Education • VOL 31 • JUNE 2007 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / ad v an . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m understanding complex real - world situations . A very large number of topics in physiology and pathophysiology play a pivotal role in understanding the medical aspects of psychoac - tive drugs , but many other disciplines are also involved ( Fig . 1 ) . The pivotal role of physiology content in the course . Under - standing the physiological mechanisms of normal function and drug action is central to almost all important aspects of course content . The major physiological concepts considered in our course are presented in Table 2 . Physiological principles and concepts appear abundantly and involve all systems , including renal , cardiovascular , endocrine , respiratory , muscle , and neu - ral systems . Simply considering drug side effects , in addition to primary psychoactive effects , allows access to almost every organ system and process . It is our experience that students appreciate the drug - by - drug approach , in which all things relating to the current drug are brought into play when needed , rather than an organ - or systems - driven approach , which is appropriate in a focused physiology course but is , in our view , out of place in this interdisciplinary setting . Considering that the typical student’s initial approach to information about drugs is holistic and self - centered rather than discipline driven , it is logical to start considering very general questions and then turn to disciplinary material for answers . Students learn more , retain it longer , and integrate it better when material is pre - sented in a context in which it has personal meaning ( 16 , 23 ) and when it is communicated in narrative form rather than as a collection of facts and concepts ( 11 , 12 , 31 ) . One surprising result growing out of our approach is how much students marvel at physiological principles when they appear as surprising explanations for drug effects . The drug effects themselves may be familiar from media or personal accounts of psychoactive drug use . However , the same sources that describe the drug effects rarely , if ever , explain why they happen in a predictable fashion . Hence , undergraduates some - times view these drug effects as unexplained , almost magical phenomena . When students understand instead , for example , that the “munchies” created by marijuana smoking stem from cannabinoid receptor agonist actions in the hypothalamic ap - petite control center , it often comes as a revelation . For this reason , this course serves as a physiology course taught from an example - ﬁrst approach . Each drug serves as case , and the physiology provides part of the explanation . The effectiveness of this approach conﬁrms the theoretical and experimental literature on the use of case - based learning , inquiry - based learning , and peer or group learning ( 1 , 14 , 26 , 32 ) . Methods for teaching sophisticated scientiﬁc principles to naı¨ve students . The interdisciplinary aspect to our course gives rise to a number of challenges in teaching , in part because there are no prerequisites and students come to the course with a wide range of backgrounds in the sciences . Perhaps 20 – 25 % of our students have no more than the science background re - Fig . 1 . Concept map of the nicotine section of the course . Physiology plays an essential role in the multidisciplinary discussions that begin with nicotine action in the brain and extend to many organ systems . Table 3 . Student evaluations Question Mean Score 1 . The objectives of this course were clearly stated and met . 4 . 74 2 . Supplemental instructional materials ( websites , models , laboratory guides , case studies , etc . ) helped my learning in this course . 4 . 29 3 . This course increased my interest in the subject matter . 4 . 74 4 . This course was worthwhile in terms of my career objectives . 4 . 57 5 . Overall , I rate this course as follows : 5 , outstanding ; 4 , above average ; 3 , average ; 2 , below average ; or 1 , poor . 4 . 66 Students ( n (cid:2) 122 ) in 3 offerings of the course in 2004 and 2005 were asked to evaluate the course on the basis of the 5 questions shown above using Likert scales . For questions 1 – 4 , the options were as follows : 5 , strongly agree ; 4 , agree , but not strongly ; 3 , undecided ; 2 , disagree ; and 1 , strongly disagree . How We Teach 164 AN UNDERGRADUATE COURSE ON PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS Advances in Physiology Education • VOL 31 • JUNE 2007 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / ad v an . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m quired to meet minimum high school graduation and college admissions requirements . Physiology and pharmacology can be difﬁcult for the naı¨ve student because these subjects are built upon prior knowledge from many other scientiﬁc disci - plines including calculus , physics , chemistry , biology , and biochemistry . In addition , they are becoming increasingly interdisciplinary . Our task is to select those aspects of the basic sciences and other disciplines that are central to the under - standing of the physiology and pharmacology of psychoactive drugs and to assemble and present these in a way that is meaningful and useful to students with very diverse scientiﬁc backgrounds . To this end , we incorporate visual and physical models whenever possible ( 3 , 9 ) . In addition , we use ﬁrst - person accounts of drug use and addiction , references to current events , and historical explanations to help students connect real - world effects with the scientiﬁc concepts dis - cussed in class ( 18 ) . The value of narrative as a learning tool has long been recognized . Providing a context of learning of facts and examining the relationship between those facts in the real world stimulates student interest and promotes critical thinking and higher - order learning ( 11 , 12 , 31 ) . From the perspective of physiology teaching , these models and narra - tives potently enhance the understanding and appreciation of physiological concepts at work in the class , especially for nonscience majors , who might otherwise be reluctant to take a discipline - speciﬁc physiology course . We have some evidence that these methods may be working : students consistently ﬁnd the course to be worthwhile in terms of their career goals and state that it increases their interest in the subject ( Table 3 ) . Nonetheless , the most useful way to determine the effectiveness of the course would be to look for improvement in areas related to our goals of science literacy , critical thinking , and communication skills using objective measures . We are now in the process of designing such metrics with the assistance of education consultants at our institution . Summary and conclusions . We described a course focused on the medical science of psychoactive drugs that allows physiological principles to be taught in a broad interdiscipli - nary context . During this course , the majority of students master many important concepts in physiology and pharma - cology and develop some understanding of such complex and rapidly evolving areas as the cellular and molecular mecha - nisms of drug addiction . Their grasp of physiological princi - ples that are likely to inﬂuence their daily lives far exceeds that of the general population , as judged by their homework and performance on exams . Their own assessment of their learning is extremely positive as judged by teaching and course evalu - ations . Our experience demonstrates that , with the appropriate instructional methods built around a suitable theme , it is quite possible to impart the basic principles of physiology and pharmacology to a highly motivated student audience with very limited scientiﬁc backgrounds in a fashion that meets the goals of liberal and interdisciplinary education . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Jennifer Robinson , Sharon K . Smith , Laura Plummer , Whitney Schlegel , and Valerie O’Loughlin for helpful discussions and the Indiana University Scholarship of Teaching and Learning Program for hosting both of us at the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning Writing Retreat of 2005 . REFERENCES 1 . Allison J . A model for substantial deviations from the traditional lecture format for graduate and upper - level undergraduate courses in science – lecture and learning classes . J Chem Educ 78 : 965 – 969 , 2001 . 2 . American Heart Association . Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics – 2005 Update . Dallas , TX : American Heart Association , 2005 . 3 . Baker WP , Lawson AE . Complex instructional analogies and theoretical concept acquisition in college genetics . Sci Educ 85 : 665 – 683 , 2001 . 4 . Bean JC . Engaging Ideas : the Professor’s Guide to Integrating Writing , Critical Thinking , and Active Learning in the Classroom . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass , 1996 . 5 . Blizard RA , Teague RW . Alternatives to drug use : an alternative ap - proach to drug education . Int J Addict 16 : 371 – 375 , 1981 . 6 . Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse . The Cost of Substance Abuse to America’s Health Care System . Report 1 : Medicaid Hospital Costs . New York : Columbia Univ . , 1994 . 7 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Diabetes : Disabling , Deadly , and on the Rise ( online ) . http : / / www . diabetesmonitor . com / 6324 . html [ 28 May 2007 ] . 8 . Clump MA , Bauer H , Whiteleather A . To attend or not to attend : is that a good question ? J Instruct Psych 30 : 220 – 224 , 2003 . 9 . Coll RK , France B , Taylor I . The role of models / and analogies in science education : implications from research . Int J Sci Educ 27 : 183 – 198 , 2005 . 10 . Dewey J . How We Think : a Restatement of the Relation of Reﬂective Thinking to the Education Process . Boston , MA : Holt , 1933 , p . 86 – 87 . 11 . Egan K . Teaching as Story - Telling : an Alternative Approach to Teaching and Curriculum in the Elementary School . Chicago , IL : Univ . of Chicago Press , 1986 . 12 . Egan K . The Educated Mind : How Cognitive Tools Shape Our Under - standing . Chicago , IL : Univ . of Chicago Press , 1997 . 13 . Feder M . Aims of undergraduate physiology education : a view from the University of Chicago . Adv Physiol Educ 29 : 3 – 10 , 2005 . 14 . Gerald MC . Teaching pharmacology to college teachers . Am J Pharm Educ 42 : 45 – 47 , 1978 . 15 . Julien RM . A Primer of Drug Action . New York : Worth , 2005 . 16 . Kellogg RT , Friedman A , Johnson P , Rickard TC . Domain - speciﬁc knowledge in intellectual skills : a symposium in honor of Lyle E . Bourne , Jr . In : Experimental Cognitive Psychology and Its Applications . , edited by Healy AF . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association , 2005 , p . 3 – 15 . 17 . Kouyoumdjian H . Inﬂuence of unannounced quizzes and cumulative exam on attendance and study behavior . Teach Psychol 31 : 110 – 111 , 2004 . 18 . Kunselman JC , Johnson KA . Using the case method to facilitate learn - ing . College Teach 52 : 87 – 92 , 2004 . 19 . Medical Society of the State of New York . MSSNY Position State - ments . 20 . 000 : Alcohol and Alcoholism ( online ) . http : / / www . mssny . org / mssnyip . cfm ? c (cid:2) i & nm (cid:2) Alcohol _ Abuse [ 19 March 2007 ] . 20 . Morgan RL , Whorton JE , Gunsalus C . A comparison of short term and long term retention : lecture combined with discussion versus cooperative learning . J Instruct Psych 27 : 53 – 58 , 2000 . 21 . Mysliwiec T , Dunbar ME , Shibley IAJ , Kouyoumdjian H . Learning outside the classroom : practical suggestions for reorganizing courses to promote higher - order thinking . J College Sci Teach 34 : 36 – 39 , 2005 . 22 . United States National Research Council . Committee on Undergraduate Biology Education to Prepare Research Scientists for the 21st Century . Bio 2010 : Transforming Undergraduate Education for Future Research Biologists . Washington , DC : National Academies , 2003 . 23 . Ramaley JA , Haggett RR . Engaged and engaging science : a compo - nent of a good liberal education ( online ) . Peer Review 7 : 8 – 12 , 2005 . 24 . Rice DP . Economic costs of substance abuse , 1995 . Proc Assoc Am Physicians 111 : 119 – 125 , 1999 . 25 . Schaps E , Churgin S , Palley CS , Takata B , Cohen AY . Primary prevention research : a preliminary review of program outcome studies . Int J Addict 15 : 657 – 676 , 1980 . 26 . Schmidt WK , Burchiel SW , Meyers FH . The pharmacology of drug abuse – a novel approach to drug education at San Quentin . Drug Alcohol Depend 2 : 175 – 83 , 1977 . 27 . Silverstein L . Globalization ( 2003 ) : Breaking the Silence ( online ) . http : / / globalization . icaap . org / content / v3 . 2 / 10 _ letter _ silverstein . html [ 15 May 2005 ] . 28 . Silverthorn DU . Restoring physiology to the undergraduate biology curriculum : a call for action . Adv Physiol Educ 27 : 91 – 96 , 2003 . How We Teach 165 AN UNDERGRADUATE COURSE ON PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS Advances in Physiology Education • VOL 31 • JUNE 2007 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / ad v an . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 29 . Singh C . Hands - on homework for introductory science . J College Sci Teach 32 : 126 – 130 , 2002 . 30 . Sussman S , Rohrbach LA , Patel R , Holiday K . A look at an interactive classroom - based drug abuse prevention program : interactive contents and suggestions for research . J Drug Educ 33 : 355 – 368 , 2003 . 31 . Wiggins G , McTighe J . Understanding by Design . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice - Hall , 1998 . 32 . Williamson VM , Rowe MW . Group problem - solving versus lecture in college - level quantitative analysis : the good , the bad , and the ugly . J Chem Educ 79 : 1131 – 1134 , 2002 . How We Teach 166 AN UNDERGRADUATE COURSE ON PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS Advances in Physiology Education • VOL 31 • JUNE 2007 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J u l y 6 , 2017 h tt p : / / ad v an . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m