Epsilon : A Visible Light Based Positioning System Liqun Li , Pan Hu , Chunyi Peng , Guobin ( Jacky ) Shen , Feng Zhao Motivation : the need of higher precision • WiFi - based indoor positioning and tracking : • Point positioning : several meters • Tracking : few meters • Scenarios needs higher accuracy : • Precise navigation to the object • Books on bookshelves • Goods on stacks in grocery store • Physical analytics • Gestured - based interaction • Human desire never ends… Exploring the visible light medium – LEDs • Increasingly widespread of LED lighting • High lighting efficiency ( 2x , compared with CFL ) • Long lifespan ( 6x , 60 , 000 hours ) • Environment friendly ( mercury free ) • Long - term cost savings • Instantaneous on / off • 4 microseconds transition time • PWM for dimming purpose Suitable for visible light communication ( VLC )  Dual - paradigm ( illumination + comm . ) T 1 T 2 60 % Duty Cycle 20 % Duty Cycle Advantages of exploring visible light • High density : order of magnitude denser than WiFi . • Visible : easy to get human in loop . Visible Lights ( infrastructure ) Light / Image Sensor ( on device ) Achieve high accuracy by leveraging the existing infrastructure ! Basic concept of Epsilon A B C Optical channel model Sensing Ranging Trilateration The optical channel model The optical channel model The optical channel model • Emission power spreads over the baseband and all harmonics • For localization , the baseband energy suffices . • Interestingly , a function of duty cycle α = τ / 𝑇 The optical channel model • Emission power spreads over the baseband and all harmonics • For localization , the baseband energy suffices . • Interestingly , a function of duty cycle α = τ / 𝑇 Normalized Constant Duty cycle α C Design : practical considerations • Choosing the right method for communication • LED lights support up to 100kHz • Must be higher than 200Hz to avoid flicker • Stay away from 50 / 60Hz interference • Avoid self - interference by harmonics • Limited sampling frequency of light sensors on commodity phones • Capped by the driver • Up to few hundred Hz Prototype • Modify off - the - shelf LED bulb • Add a control board implementing BFSK beaconing • Phone + Light sensor board • Add a dedicated light sensor board to the audio jack • Optical spectrum : 10KHz ~ 19 KHz • # of channels : 30 • Channel bandwidth : 300 Hz Evaluation Sub - meter accuracy across various environments Evaluation : comparison against WiFi - based Name EZ MobiCom’10 Radar INFOCOM’00 Horus MobiSys’05 PinPoint NSDI’13 ArrayTrack NSDI’13 Pharos This paper Accuracy 2 ~ 7m 3 ~ 5m ~ 1m 2 ~ 3m ~ 0 . 9m 0 . 4 ~ 0 . 7m Method Model Fingerprint Fingerprint Angle Angle Model Database Yes Yes Yes No No No Overhead Minimum Wardriving Wardriving Dense AP 16 Antennas LED Light 13 Maximum error at 90 percentile of different methods : What if insufficient LEDs ? Human in loop , leverage the visibility of the bulb . Orienting the device Rotate the device Finding the tipping point d North Evaluation with a single LED Sensing error Position accuracy • SDN , DCN • Wireless • Mobile