Editorial A transparent black box The EMBO Journal ( 2010 ) 29 , 3891 – 3892 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 307 Further enhancements to the peer review process and journal policies ensure a transparent , fast and fair editorial process Vital statistics : high speed and fewer laps to the ﬁnish line A unique feature of The EMBO Journal is that we publish data on the efﬁciency of the editorial process ( ﬁnd the latest analysis of manuscripts submitted in 2009 at http : / / www . nature . com / emboj / about / process . html ) . We accepted 12 % of submitted manuscripts , 2 % more than in the preceding year , with similar submission volumes . The journal is fast : editorial decisions were made , on average , in 2 . 3 days and post - review decisions in 29 days 1 . The majority of manuscripts went through only one major round of revision . Notably , we ensure that no new issues are raised that were not brought forward in the initial review ( excluding points on data added in revision , of course ) . A total of 74 % manuscripts were rejected before formal peer review , 21 % of these with additional advice from the editorial advisory board . We have a relatively high ‘ﬁrst cut’ , so that only manuscripts that ﬁt within the journal’s scope , that present a sufﬁciently striking advance and that have a real chance of being published with realistic further revision continue to the more time - intensive peer review process . As a result , 46 % of the peer reviewed manuscripts end up being published . Remarkably , 97 % of cases where a revision is invited are published . Thus , once a revision is invited , the odds for publication without delay are high . Are we selecting the right papers for publication ? Our analysis of manuscripts rejected in 2008 shows that until now 1 % appeared in journals with an impact factor two or more notches above this journal . 9 % of the rejected manuscripts cite higher than the average EMBO Journal paper . Scooping protection Molecular cell biology is a rather competitive discipline . The next big open questions rarely occur to only one researcher . Technical and research advances , as well as funding priorities , encourage multiple laboratories to pursue similar directions . In contrast to other disciplines , experiments are quickly executed and often don 0 t require unique hardware or expertise . Derivative work will not be accepted in a highly selective journal such as this . However , in our view , work that has been scooped is not necessarily derivative . We certainly don 0 t want to encourage premature publication to claim ﬁrst discovery and we appreciate that authors who go the extra mile to cross every t and dot every i , who delve further in mechanism or expand the physiological signiﬁcance of their ﬁndings run the risk of being scooped . We want to encourage broad and deep studies over ‘salami slices’ . For this reason , it is editorial policy that a study will not be rejected on account of having been scooped while it is under consideration . Where additional experimentation is required , we will specify when to expect a revision ( usually around 3 months ) . In this period , an author is also immune from rejection due to scooping , as long as related publications are immediately discussed with the editor so as to minimize delays . If there is good reason that a revision will take longer than speciﬁed and no related literature has appeared , we will usually be able to extend the deadline . Peer review process ﬁles The majority of papers published in The EMBO journal over the past 2 years ( 408 at the last count ) have been accompanied by a detailed document edited only for typos , presenting the referee comments , author responses and editorial decision letters of every round of review ( R ^ rth , 2009 ; Pulverer 2010a , b ) . In addition , the actual submission , revision and decision times are published ; that is dates are not reset upon resubmission following substantial revision . It is time to take stock : have the peer review process ﬁles enhanced the editorial process ? The ﬁles are popular . The feedback to the policy is overwhelmingly positive , although some rightly note that viewing reports on the rejected manuscripts would be much more telling . Alas , the only way we can address this is to encourage referee report recycling ( see below ) . Several other journals are adopting similar strategies and notably some BioMed Central journals have had a similar system for some time ( Linder et al , 2010 ) . Importantly , the ﬁles remain strictly optional ; that is an author can opt out at any stage ( even after having seen the reports ) —but only 5 . 3 % do . In a couple of cases , authors were reluctant to publish ‘for referees’ data , but we are willing to remove such data from the ﬁles if there are good reasons for doing so . Referees are of course informed that their reports may be published upon acceptance , and yet our referee acceptance rate has not changed . A handful of referees have disagreed with the policy , noting that they think a critical report may detract from the paper , or a fear that their identity might be revealed . Does anyone actually look at peer review process ﬁles ? We assessed a 3 - month period earlier this year and found that around 1 / 10th of the readership of a paper seem to go on to visit the process ﬁle . The most accessed ones tended to be associated with the most visited papers and indeed manuscripts that had received enthusias - tic referee reports . We are encouraged by the positive echo and have now adopted the same policy at the other three EMBO scientiﬁc publications : EMBO Reports , Molecular Systems Biology and EMBO Molecular Medicine ( Lemberger , 2010 ; Pulverer , 2010c ) . Have the ﬁles led to tangible changes in the reports we receive ? We have not noticed any systematic change , although a few referees have noted that they are taking extra care with writing their reports . Importantly , neither referees nor authors have become more timid in putting forthright arguments to paper . The hope is , of course , that a more open discussion would be as thorough as before , but more civil . Why invest so much effort into these reports ? A key aim is to show that the refereeing process is usually constructive and effective . Of course , a diverse set of opinions follow many papers , but the expert reader will readily discern the divergent expertise of the referees . Peer review is much maligned , and we hope systematically showcasing the reports may quell some of these concerns . Furthermore , these ﬁles can serve as educational tools : peer review is very much at the core of the research process and yet it is rarely formally taught . We are thinking hard at present how to provide more tangible credit for the currently anonymous experts behind these comments . For now , the ﬁles remain also a thank you for the help of all our referees : much of the input is far too valuable to let it sink into oblivion unnoted—for rejected manuscripts , we hope some reports can be ‘recycled’ . 1 ( full weeks , not working days ) The EMBO Journal ( 2010 ) 29 , 3891 – 3892 | & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization | All Rights Reserved 0261 - 4189 / 10 www . embojournal . org & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 23 | 2010 EMBO THE EMBO JOURNAL THE EMBO JOURNAL 3891 Manuscript transfer and review recycling Undoubtedly , the bottleneck of the editorial process is peer review . Science output is growing so rapidly that the number of experienced referees cannot keep up . Furthermore , the pressures to publish in highly selective journals are ever more prominent , so that authors try to submit their data sets to the most prestigious journal possible . The result is extremely high rejection rates at top journals and many frustrating ‘cascade submissions’—every new journal will have to ﬁnd referees . As referees who have seen a manuscript previously are understandably reluctant to re - review ( often because they feel it might result in ‘double jeopardy’ ) , this can rapidly deplete the number of qualiﬁed experts in increasingly specialized subject areas . It is in nobody’s interest to bypass a high - quality peer review process—certainly an author will not want to publish a study with serious deﬁciencies . In order to address this catch 22 , we are in favour of ‘referee report recycling’ through author controlled manu - script transfer between journals . Any author can already transfer a manuscript between the four EMBO titles at the click of a mouse button at any stage of the process ( after peer review with the referee reports and identities ) . In case a promising manuscript is rejected by one journal for scope considerations , the editor will recommend a transfer . With your permission , the editors of both journals will be more than happy to discuss a manuscript to ensure a successful outcome is pre - programmed . For example , a highly novel study that is thoroughly experimentally controlled and documented , but that ultimately lacks a sufﬁciently developed level of molecular mechanistic understanding , may turn out to be more suitable for EMBO Reports ( http : / / www . nature . com / embor / index . html ) . Cross - peer review , co - review and ‘conﬁdential comments’ In our opinion , highly selective journals have not outlived their raison d’ etre . On the contrary , with exponentially growing and increasingly specialized research , a quality ﬁltering service appears to be more important than ever to stay abreast of scientiﬁc progress . Of course , the specialist literature will remain an important compo - nent of documenting research advances , and it should certainly be included prominently in research assessment . Nevertheless , no semantic text search engine has as yet obviated the need for platforms that allow browsing beyond one’s immediate area of specialization in a trusted and reliable environment . We aim to provide such a platform with The EMBO Journal . A high - quality peer review process is and will remain at the heart of quality journals . However , it is clear that not only is the process near saturation , but it can also go awry . One obvious concern is that referees have to be close to the research submitted—it is all too easy to get too close and encounter undeclared ( and usually unperceived ) conﬂicts of interest . Obviously , referees are as opinionated as authors about certain experimental approaches and lines of evidence and they will naturally tend to let their preferences guide their reports . It is , therefore , essential that there is an additional layer to arbitrate . We have for this very reason a professional group of scientiﬁcally qualiﬁed editors supported by an editorial advisory board composed of a broad panel of leading researchers . We read referee reports and author responses impartially , as our only aim is to publish the best papers possible . Professional editors spend a lot of time on getting decisions right . However , we are naturally generalists and it would be naive to state that a well - argued report by a trusted referee would not have a signiﬁcant impact on the editorial decision—and so it should . The key is to disambiguate essential criticisms from further reaching suggestions based on personal preferences . Based on where papers rejected at this journal are subsequently published , the fact that we accept most papers after one major round of revision and our low appeals rate ( 6 . 4 % ) , the editorial process is robust . Nevertheless , we are acutely aware that every mistaken rejection can seriously damage the author’s research career . For this reason , we have added an additional layer to the peer review process : we actively encourage referees to comment on each other’s reports . Like other journals , we used to send all referee comments to each referee with a summary of the editorial decision . We almost never heard back . Instead , for the majority of manu - scripts , we now send the reports to all referees a day before the decision is made and actively encourage feedback . We are also in the process of adapting our manuscript submission system so that a referee sees the other reports already uploaded as soon as they post their own comments . It is essential to emphasize that we do not expect every referee to comment on every other report—this will be the exception , not the norm . The lack of a post - review comment will in no way lessen our appreciation of the primary report ﬁled . We see two major scenarios where post - review feedback is impor - tant : if a referee wants to note that one of the other referees has raised erroneous or non - essential issues , or indeed if a bias is perceived , or if a referee has overlooked an essential point raised by another referee and wants to reinforce that point . Importantly , we will not always go with the last word—the additional feedback will just help us think in a more differentiated way about the decision , and , if need be , engage in further consultation . Note that this additional step in no way delays the editorial process : we make the decision with or without additional feedback ! Remarkably , we are receiving a signiﬁcant level of cross - referee commenting now , and a good fraction of these comments have aided the decision . As part of our transparency initiative , we have dropped the ‘conﬁdential comments’ box from our referee reports . We actually rarely encounter comments that are at odds with the main referee report , although referees sometimes repeat their views in more straight language . Nevertheless , the existence of this additional layer of commenting naturally begs the question ‘What went on behind the scenes ? ’ . Conﬁdential comments are clearly appropriate in the rare cases where there are concerns about ethical standards , data integrity , biosecurity or conﬂicts of an academic or commercial nature , which should be communicated directly to the editor . One further change to our referee policy is that we acknowledge the relatively common practice of handing the review onto someone else in the laboratory . If carried out correctly , this can in fact be an important part of training , but it should be reserved for experienced postdocs . Thus , The EMBO Journal allows co - refereeing with one other senior member of a referee’s laboratory as part of the mentoring process only if the primary referee has independently evaluated the manuscript and agrees with the report ﬁled . For co - review , conﬂict of interest and conﬁdentiality rules apply to both referees . In order to provide accountability and appropriate credit , we request that the name of the co - referee be documented to the editors . We hope that these measures collectively serve to enhance the peer review process . Peer review is here to stay and we will continue to optimize its practice , also based on your feedback . References Lemberger T ( 2010 ) From bench to website . Mol Syst Biol 6 : 410 Linder S , Schliwa M , Werner S , Gebauer D ( 2010 ) Transparent peer review—an appreciation of the reviewers’ contribution to a published article . Eur J Cell Biol 89 : 779 Pulverer B ( 2010a ) Evolution . EMBO J 29 : 1 Pulverer B ( 2010b ) Transparency showcases strength of peer review . Nature 468 : 29 – 31 Pulverer B ( 2010c ) Transparency and accountability . EMBO Mol Med 2 : 329 – 330 R ^ rth P ( 2009 ) The EMBO journal 2009 : new initiatives . EMBO J 28 : 1 – 3 Bernd Pulverer Chief Editor The EMBO Journal Head of Scientiﬁc Publications , EMBO E - mail : bernd . pulverer @ embo . org Editorial The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 23 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3892