An Agent Based Model of environmental awareness and limited resource consumption Ernesto Damiani Computer Science Department Università degli Studi di Milano Via Bramante , Crema ( CR ) , Italy ernesto . damiani @ unimi . it Giovanna Sissa Computer Science Department Università degli Studi di Milano Via Bramante , Crema ( CR ) , Italy giovanna . sissa @ unimi . it ABSTRACT An Agent Based Model is proposed to study the individual and collective behavioral changes toward environmental sustainability using ICT - based services . Using ABMs to simulate how environmental awareness spreads is an interdisciplinary issue that involves ICT and energy and environment studies , as well as social and behavioral sciences . Our demonstration will show how the proposed ABM can describe the impact of such awareness on consumption of a limited or critical resource , like energy or water . We will show that there are scenarios that lead to overuse of the resource and scenarios in which this does not happen because sustainable behavior emerges . The key discriminating factor is the collective situational awareness of environmental effects of actions . Such awareness makes “green behavior” easier and can counter possible rebound effects . The demonstration will focus on the role played by smart metering functions . Categories and Subject Descriptors I . 6 [ SIMULATION AND MODELING ] : I . 6 . 3 Application I . 2 . 11 [ Distributed Artificial Intelligence ] : Intelligent agents , Multiagent systems General Terms Economics , Experimentation , Human Factors . Keywords Environmental awareness , Agent Based Modeling ( ABM ) , sustainable behavior , resources consumption , social influence , social norms , socio - technical ecosystem . 1 . INTRODUCTION The overall goal of the presented model is to study how to reduce ( or to optimize ) the consumption of a critical or limited resource , leveraging on social norms and environmental awareness . We look at the individual behavior from a perspective that goes beyond the traditional “homo economicus” paradigm , by including psychological and societal influential mechanisms which may lead to more sustainable consumption patterns . We present an agent - based model to explore the mechanisms of social influence and resource consumption . Some smart metering functions can be provided to households to facilitate their behavioral changes . A really smart environmental behavior is enabled not only by monitoring individual resource consumption , but also by a set of context - dependent smart functions . Such smart functions are facilitators for environmental awareness spread and for critical resource reduction - like for example energy saving as well as water saving [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] . An extended awareness of the consequences of own actions can lead to a more sustainable life style . The presented model describes the mechanism of social interaction and its effect on environmental collective behavior , aiming also to avoid rebound effect [ 4 ] . Agents influence each other , and such influence changes agent awareness that , in turn , can impact on the consumption of a resource that has to be reduced for environmental related issues . Agents are aware of the overall trend of consumption and can receive reinforcement about their beliefs . Such reinforcement influences the individual awareness too . Social norm can emerge when a given percentage of influent and aware agents reach a tipping point . 1 . 1 Conceptual framework A social norm is defined [ 5 ] as “a rule governing an individual’s behavior that third parties other than state agents diffusely enforce by means of social sanctions” . If an environmentally friendly behavior becomes a social norm it will be carried on without any need for controls , fines or law enforcement . “Effective policies are ones that induce both short - term changes in behavior and longer - term changes in social norm” [ 6 ] . The individual chooses personal norms regardless of what others may think . The individual himself sets these norms and feels guilty if he is not respecting them or feels pleasure when he is respecting them . Social norms are persistent and , once adopted , will be followed even after the state intervention ceases . Changing the conditions influencing behaviors , often referred as “ choice architecture ” , can make behaviors more convenient and more visible . For instance , recycling rates increase when recycling containers are widely scattered ( there is one near every apartment block ) and can be used for all materials ( glass , plastic , paper etc . ) so there is no need to recycle different materials in different places . Making behaviors convenient may strengthen both personal and social norms . Making behaviors more visible is showing people what others are doing . Sociotechnical ICT - based systems , as those based on a set smart metering advanced functions , can be pivotal for effectiveness of social norms . Psychological ownership , social proof [ 7 ] and environmental awareness [ 8 ] are the building concepts of a social norm system Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . MEDES’13 , October 28 - 31 , 2013 , Neumünster Abbey , Luxembourg . Copyright © 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2004 - 7 / 10 / 10 . . . $ 10 . 00 . - 54 - that can lead to an high enough awareness level to enable sustainable behaviors of user / consumers . An empirical definition of social norm widely used in the research area of global environmental challenge [ 6 ] said that when enough people or certain people ( e . g . , those with disproportionate social influence ) adopt these norms , there may be a tipping point such that the “pro - environment” norms become widely shared and environmentally friendly behaviours become pervasive . This tipping point may be as low as 10 % of the population , if the minority is “consistent and inflexible” in its beliefs [ 9 ] - Under such theoretical framework [ 10 ] we can see how important is empowering people giving them the facility of measuring the resource under consumption , to have a feedback of individual historical consumptions , to make comparison with other agents and to receive suggestions from influent agents about beneficial behavior to reduce the resource consumption or to recycle it or to produce it , as for example , in case of energy prosumers . Societal and psychological mechanisms , leading to more sustainable life style and pattern consumptions , are enabled by ICT - based socio - technical systems [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] and in particular by individualized web based smart metering systems . Smart metering is an umbrella term used to indicate different kinds of Hw or Sw tools , ranging from very elementary Hw devices to sophisticated sets of web - based systems . The above mentioned empowering features of an agents can be implemented by smart metering functions allowing to see and quantify the real consumption , allowing to have time series of own consumption as a reference , allowing to make comparison with others consumers , to dynamically re - define individual reduction goals and to share collective reduction goals . Here we present an Agent Based Model ( ABM ) aimed to a better understanding of the underlying influence mechanisms and to identify the infrastructural empowering conditions . The proposed demonstration is targeted to the emergence of macro - scenarios from the micro - behavior of individual agents , focusing on the sustainability assessment of potential smart solution in their intended application context . 2 . AGENT BASED MODELLING A broad research corpus shows how behaviours [ 14 ] can easily be modelled according to an Agent Based Modelling approach . Such research crosses the disciplinary borders between several disciplines , as economics , energy sociology , environmental science computer science , as well as complex systems , and social network analysis . An ABM is proposed to study individual and collective behavioural changes toward sustainability using ICT - based services and the emergence of social norms . An ABM allows defining a set of scenarios ( simulation experiments ) [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] to study the emergence of collective phenomena that are impossible to foresee at individual level . Axelrod [ 18 ] thoughts simulation as a third way of undertaking scientific research , after induction - i . e . the discovery of patterns in empirical data ( not to be confused with mathematical induction ) - and deduction – that involves specifying a set of axioms and proving consequences that can be derived from them . According to Axelrod “starting with a set of explicit assumptions , simulation does not prove theorems but instead generates data that can be analysed inductively , as a way of conducting thought experiments” [ 19 ] . Some questions can be answered with simulation experiments . There are several broad possibilities [ 20 ] . According with Marks [ 21 ] “ . . . a simulation might attempt to explain a phenomenon ; it might attempt to predict the outcome of a phenomenon ; or it might be used to explore a phenomenon , to play , in order to understand the interactions of elements of the structure that produces the phenomenon” . 3 . The SAM4SN Model The presented SAM4SN ( Spread of Awareness Model for Social Norm ) Agent Based Model is an exploratory model about the spread of environmental awareness in a community of individual household that can be reached by the enabling infrastructure of advanced smart metering systems and functions , the availability of which impacts on consumption patterns of a critical or limited resource . 3 . 1 The model purpose Our model simulates the micro - behaviours of individuals about limited or critical resource consumption . We assume that the limited resource is overused by the most part of individuals . The consumption is not sustainable and some consumption reduction is mandatory for long - term sustainability . The ABM aims to observe at a macro - level how awareness can spread in the community , how the dynamic of such awareness can impact on individual reduction goals and consumptions , on reaching a given overall reduction goal . The availability of smart metering functions can impact on such mechanisms by empowering agents . In some scenario , a sustainability social norm can emerge . Households compose the community . People of such community share some smart metering functions , including : • In home metering ; • Individual feedback about own consumption of the limited or critical resource ; • Information about green leaders and their low consumption profile that are taken as reference ; • Personalized advice for consumption reduction . The resource which consumption has to be reduced is energy , but could be water as well . Such resource is available on the model system scale without limitation . It has to be reduced for environmental sustainability related issues , but is perceived by agents without availability limitation . The size of the community is such that overuse does not lead to market price increasing . That means the people detracting environmental issue with an unaware environmental behaviour have not price mechanism to counter their overconsumption . Green people , i . e . people with high awareness , can decide to limit their privacy rights about their own consumption information and accept to share with the community their own consumption data . Such voluntary mechanism of “privacy versus reputation” is an emerging trend in green communities , where to become a green opinion leader is a goal to reach . The notion of social diversity [ 22 ] is introduced in order to simulate a network of neighbours composed by different types of agents , which are more or less influential on the basis of their level of environmental awareness . Our ABM has been - 55 - implemented in Netlogo 5 . 0 1 as a part of the Ph . D . research activity of the second author . 3 . 2 The agents The entities of the models ( i . e . the agents ) relate to people involved in the consumption of one limited or critical resource . Specifically , each agent models a household . There are five types of entity : blinds , indifferents , spectators , actives , and evangelists 2 . • Blind agents are a group of agents with similar negative environmental behaviours . As detractors of the need to prevent an overuse of the resource , their environmental sustainability goals are negative . Their consumption increases and they are mocking other agents . Their awareness level is very low and they have a significant negative influence on neighbours . • Indifferent agents , the larger group in general , are quite neutral about the environmental sustainability goal . Their consumptions are quite constant , with only some possible little improvements in their environmental behaviour . • Spectator agents are quite neutral in their behaviour , but are open to listen and to observe their neighbour’s behaviours . • Active agents are green people , engaged into reduction of resource consumption . They allow other people to look at their own data in order to show beneficial behaviour results and to share reduction goal with other . They have a significant positive influence on neighbours . • Evangelist agents are the activists that , in addition , are able to supply new resource into the system . By recycling the resource , for example when they recycle water for gardening irrigation . Or by producing the resource , for example when they produce renewable energy at a local scale with solar panels . They have a strong influence on neighbours . Our agents belong to one and only one type at time . Agents interact between them by proximity and cannot move around . According to the number and the type of neighbours in a given radius of influence each agent changes his awareness . When the awareness reaches a given value ( threshold ) , the agent changes the type he belongs to . The main hypothesis of this model is that the influence of neighbours in a given radius depends on their type . Different types of agents influence differently the awareness of their neighbours . There are several thresholds for an agent to change his type . The threshold for changing the type to belong to is different from each agent type . Greener agents have a higher threshold to shift to a more aware type , but they never decrease their awareness and their awareness increase faster than in other less green agents . There is a cascade effect , limited only by the influence sphere of the agents . 1 Wilensky , U . ( 1999 ) . NetLogo . http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu / netlogo / . Center 2 The use of the term “evangelist” is taken from the innovation field jargon , where is widely used without any religious meaning . Figure 1 . SAM4SN interface 3 . 3 Model initialization The initial state of the model world , i . e . at time t = 0 , is given by the parameters supplied by the users , as showed in Figure 2 : • the number of agents of each type ; • the initial global resource consumption value ; • the overall reduction goal ( in percentage ) • the smart metering functions availability . Figure 2 . Model initialization User defines the combination of available metering functions , by setting to ON or to OFF the availability of smart functions : • Metering - availability • Individual - feedback • Neighbour - comparison • Tips & Tricks The availability of the first basic metering function is a pre - condition for the availability of the other three smart functions . 4 . Some different scenarios We will show that there are scenarios , which lead to overuse of the resource and scenarios in which this does not happen because the social influence mechanism has a positive effect , i . e . sustainable behaviour emerges . The main research question that the model tries to answer is : from which initial conditions and parameters does it depend whether the system can reach a sustainable state or not ? For example , in Figure 1 we can detect one possible initial configuration that will lead to an emergent behaviour showed in Figure 3 . - 56 - Figure 3 . Scenario 1 : unsustainability In scenario 1 the resource reduction goal is never reached , because the overall consumption increases , as showed in detail in Figure 4 , where we can see the resource use temporal plot . The time unit is of one week . Figure 4 . Resource use in Scenario 1 This collective resource use in scenario 1 is not trivial to forecast based on the individual agents’ behaviours . Even a very small difference in the configuration can strongly change the overall behaviour . Figure 5 . Scenario 2 : sustainability For example changing the initial number of only one unit of most influential type of agent - the evangelist - the awareness spread leads to a sustainable state , where the consumption of the agents decreases till reaching the resource reduction goal . The user has defined such resource reduction goal A sustainability scenario emerges - Scenario 2 in Figure 5 - where there is an overall resource consumption reduction . The reduction goal is reached , as shown in Figure 6 . Figure 6 . Resource use in Scenario 2 : sustainability The only difference between the two initial configurations leading to Scenario 1 and to Scenario 2 , as mentioned before , is of one more evangelist agent in the agent set . This type of agent has a wider influence radius than the other types of agent . In Figure 7 we can compare the time - series of the five different types of agents in the scenario 1 ( on the left ) , and in the scenario 2 ( on the right ) . We observe that a small difference in initial condition can lead to a different dynamics in the whole system . Figure 7 . Agents in unsustainable and sustainable scenarios We can compare the two agent membership mechanisms leading to reach the overall reduction goal , i . e . leading to sustainability , and leading to unsustainability . We can observe than a totally different dynamics is generated by the same behavioral consumption patterns of the agents and only one more influent agent , over a whole population of more than 500 agents . 4 . 1 Empowering the agents with smart metering functions The role played by smart metering function can be described by an example . - 57 - The initial configuration of Scenario 1 has been defined supplying agents only with the metering function but without the other smart metering functions . We can see if giving agents with other smart metering function affect the overall system behavior . To add a smart metering function empowering agents with individual feedback about their historical consumption , we change this initial configuration by setting to ON the availability of feedback smart metering function . In this new Scenario 3 ( Figure 8 ) the overall emergent behavior changes and the system reaches the reduction goal . Figure 8 . Scenarios 3 The resource use of the scenario , as shown in Figure 9 , leads to sustainability by reaching the reduction goal of 1 % in 120 time units . Figure 9 . Resource use in Scenario 3 ( Scenario 1 with feedback smart function ) As mentioned in section 1 . 1 , an empirical definition of social norm widely used in the research area of global environmental challenge [ 20 ] establishes that social norm emerges after the system has reached a given tipping point . This tipping point may be as low as 10 % of the population , if the minority is “consistent and inflexible” in its beliefs [ 21 ] . 4 . 2 Tipping point , reduction goal and social norm In our system the agents that are “consistent and inflexible” in their beliefs” are the actives and the evangelists , i . e . the green agents , but also the blinds . Figure 10 . Tipping point in Scenario 2 If we come back to the resource use in Scenario 2 , we can observe , as showed in Figure 8 , when the system reach the tipping point of 10 % of green ( actives and evangelists ) agents that adopted a sustainable behavior . Such tipping point is the preliminary step for a sustainability social norm emergence . In Figure 10 we see the tipping point of Scenario 3 . Figure 11 . Tipping point in Scenarios 3 We can observe that the tipping point is reached much earlier of reaching the reduction goal . The reaching of the reduction goal is the effect of a long - term sustainability social norm . 5 . CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK We described an ABM modelling awareness dynamic and reduction consumption mechanisms of households , with the aim to identify emerging patterns and scenarios leading to a reduction the resource or leading to its overuse . The presented ABM is only a part of a wider research aimed at understanding behavioural mechanisms leading to sustainability . Such goal can be reached in a sociotechnical ecosystem on the basis of individual behaviour , social influence and social norm concepts . - 58 - 6 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Abrahamse , W . , Steg , L . , Vlek and C . , Rothengatter , T . 2007 . The Effect of Tailored Information , Goal Setting , and Tailored Feedback on Household Energy Use , Energy - Related Behaviors , and Behavioral Antecedents . Journal of Environmental Psychology 27 , 265 – 276 . [ 2 ] Anda , M . , Le Grey Brereton , F . E . , Paskett , 2013 . Smart metering infrastructure for residential water efficiency : results of a trial in a Behavioral Change program in Perth , Western Australia . ICT4S 2013 . [ 3 ] Costabile , M . , Dittrich , Y . , Fischer , G . 2011 . From Consumers to Owners : Using Meta design Environments to Motivate Changes in Energy Consumption . pg . 319 - 324 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume : 6654 Doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 21530 - 8 _ 33 [ 4 ] Sissa , G . , 2013 . An awareness based approach to avoid rebound effect in ICT . Proceedings of the First International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Sustainability , ICT4S . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3929 / ethz - a - 007337628 [ 5 ] Ellickson , RC . , 2001 . The market for social norms . American Law and Economic Review 3 , 1 – 49 [ 6 ] Kinzig , A . P . , Ehrlich , P . R . , Alston L . J . , Arrow , K . , Barrett , S . , Buchman , T . G . , Daily , G . C . , Levin , B . , Oppenheimer , M . , Ostrom , E . , Sahari D . , 2013 . Social Norms and Global Environmental Challenges : the Complex Interaction of Behaviors , Values , and Policy . BioScience . Vol . 63 , No . 3 , 164 - 175 . [ 7 ] Fischer , G . 2010 . End User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( JOEUC ) , 22 ( 1 ) , 52 - 82 . doi : 10 . 4018 / joeuc . 2010101901 . [ 8 ] Fischer , G . 2012 . Context - Aware Systems - The ' Right ' Information , at the ' Right ' Time , in the ' Right ' Place , in the ' Right ' Way , to the ' Right ' Person . Proceedings of the Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( AVI 2012 ) , ACM , pp . 287 - 294 . [ 9 ] Xie J , Sreenivasan S , Korniss G , Zhang W , Lim C , Syzmanski BK . 2011 . Social consensus through the influence of committed minorities . Physical Review E 84 ( art . 01130 ) . [ 10 ] Salerno , J . , Yang , S . J . , Nau , D . and Chai , S . K . ( eds . ) . 2011 . Social Computing , Behavioral - Cultural Modeling and Prediction . 4th International Conference , SBP 2011 , College Park , MD , USA , 29 - 31 , Springer - Verlag , Berlin . [ 11 ] Nuttall , W . J . , Zhang T . , Hamilton D . J . and Roquesl F . A . 2009 . Sociophysics Simulations of Technology Adoption and Consumer Behavior . In Second International Symposium on Engineering Systems , MIT , Cambridge , Massachusetts . [ 12 ] Sissa , G . 2008 , Il computer sostenibile , Franco Angeli ed . [ 13 ] Sissa , G . 2011 . Utility Computing : Green Opportunities and Risks , CEPIS UPGRADE , ISSN 1684 - 5285 2011 : 4 , 16 - 21 [ 14 ] Railback , S . F and Grimm , V . 2011 . Agent - based and Individual Based Modelling , Princeton University Press . [ 15 ] Grimm , V . , Berger , U . , Bastiansen , F . , Eliassen , S . , Ginot , V . , Giske , J . , Goss - Custard , J . , Grand , T . , Heinz , S . , Huse , G . , Huth , A . , Jepsen , J . U . , Jørgensen , C . , Mooij , W . M . , Müller , B . , Pe’er , G . , Piou , C . , Railsback , S . F . , Robbins , A . M . , Robbins , M . M . , Rossmanith , E . , Rüger , N . , Strand , E . , Souissi , S . , Stillman , R . A . , Vabø , R . , Visser , U . , DeAngelis , D . L . , 2006 . A standard protocol for describing individual - based and agent - based models . Ecol . Model . 198 , 115 – 126 . [ 16 ] Grimm , V , Berger U . , U , DeAngelis D , Polhill , J . G , Giske , J . , Railsback , S . , 2010 . The ODD protocol : A review and first update , Ecological Modelling , 221 , 23 , 2760 - 2768 . [ 17 ] Müller B , Bohn F , Dreßler G , Groeneveld J , Klassert C , Martin R , Schlüter M , Schulze J , Weise H , Schwarz N , 2013 . Describing human decisions in agent - based models - ODD + D an extension of the ODD protocol . Environ . Model . Softw . 48 : 37 - 48 [ 18 ] Axelrod , R . , 2006 . Simulation in the social sciences , in Rennard , 90 – 100 . [ 19 ] Bianchi , C . , Cirilo , P . , Gallegati M . , Vagliasindi , P . , 2007 . Validating and Calibrating Agent - Based Models : A Case study . Computational Economics . 30 , 245 – 264 . [ 20 ] Janssen , M . A . , Ostrom , E . , 2006 . Empirically based , agent - based models . Ecology and Society 11 ( 2 ) : 37 [ 21 ] Marks , R . M . , 2007 . Validating Simulation Models : A General Framework and Four Applied Examples . Computational Economics 30 , 265 – 290 . [ 22 ] Ugander , J . , Backstrom , L . , Marlow , C . Kleinberg , J . , 2012 . Structural diversity in social contagion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 109 , 5962 – 5966 - 59 -