ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2000 / 03 / 1047 / 15 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , Number 5 , March 6 , 2000 1047 – 1061 http : / / www . jcb . org 1047 Syndapin Isoforms Participate in Receptor - mediated Endocytosis and Actin Organization Britta Qualmann and Regis B . Kelly Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and the Hormone Research Institute , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143 - 0534 Abstract . Syndapin I ( SdpI ) interacts with proteins in - volved in endocytosis and actin dynamics and was therefore proposed to be a molecular link between the machineries for synaptic vesicle recycling and cyto - skeletal organization . We here report the identiﬁcation and characterization of SdpII , a ubiquitously expressed isoform of the brain - speciﬁc SdpI . Certain splice vari - ants of rat SdpII in other species were named FAP52 and PACSIN 2 . SdpII binds dynamin I , synaptojanin , synapsin I , and the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , a stimulator of Arp2 / 3 induced ac - tin ﬁlament nucleation . In neuroendocrine cells , SdpII colocalizes with dynamin , consistent with a role for syn - dapin in dynamin - mediated endocytic processes . The src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain of SdpI and - II inhibited receptor - mediated internalization of transferrin , dem - onstrating syndapin involvement in endocytosis in vivo . Overexpression of full - length syndapins , but not the NH 2 - terminal part or the SH3 domains alone , had a strong effect on cortical actin organization and induced ﬁlopodia . This syndapin overexpression phenotype ap - pears to be mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex at the cell periphery because it was completely suppressed by co - expression of a cytosolic COOH - terminal fragment of N - WASP . Consistent with a role in actin dynamics , syn - dapins localized to sites of high actin turnover , such as ﬁlopodia tips and lamellipodia . Our results strongly suggest that syndapins link endocytosis and actin dy - namics . Key words : pheochromocytoma • Arp2 / 3 complex • dynamin • neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein • ﬁlopodia Introduction Endocytosis allows eukaryotic cells to internalize parts of their plasma membrane and constituents of the extracellu - lar medium . The extracellular molecules are engulfed by a part of the lipid bilayer and sequestered through the for - mation of a sealed endocytic vesicle that subsequently detaches from the plasma membrane . The formation of vesicles for receptor - mediated endocytosis in higher or - ganisms is driven by the assembly of clathrin and the adap - tor protein 2 complex ( reviewed in Schmid , 1997 ) , and in - volves a large array of accessory proteins ( reviewed in Marsh and McMahon , 1999 ) . One is the GTPase dynamin , which is targeted to the necks of endocytic coated pits where it functions to regulate the fission reaction leading to clathrin - coated vesicle formation ( Schmid et al . , 1998 ; Sever et al . , 1999 ) . Dynamin interacts via its proline - rich domain ( PRD ) 1 with several src homology 3 ( SH3 ) do - main - containing proteins implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Shupliakov et al . , 1997 ; Wigge et al . , 1997 ; Owens et al . , 1998 ; Wigge and McMahon , 1998 ; Sengar et al . , 1999 ; Simpson et al . , 1999 ) . In yeast , endocytosis is critically dependent on actin fila - ment organization ( Riezman et al . , 1996 ) and genetic anal - yses of endocytosis have identified gene products that are required both for the internalization step at the plasma membrane and proper actin organization ( reviewed in Geli and Riezman , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1998 ) . They in - clude actin itself and proteins that affect actin dynamics , such as Arp2 , a component of the Arp2 / 3 complex which enhances actin filament polymerization ( reviewed in Ma - chesky and Insall , 1999 ) . The ability of the Arp2 / 3 com - plex to nucleate actin filaments in vitro is greatly enhanced Address correspondence to Regis B . Kelly , Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and the Hormone Research Institute , University of California , 513 Parnassus Avenue , 1090 HSW , San Francisco , CA 94143 - 0534 . Tel . : ( 415 ) 476 - 4095 . Fax : ( 415 ) 731 - 3612 . E - mail : rkelly @ biochem . ucsf . eduBritta Qualmann’s present address is Leibnitz Institute for Neurobiol - ogy , D - 39118 Magdeburg , Germany . 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : GST , glutathione S - transferase ; MBP , maltose binding protein ; N - WASP , neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ; PC12 , pheochromocytoma cells ; PRD , proline - rich domain ; Sdp , syndapin ; SH3 , src homology 3 ; VCA , verpolin , homology , cofilin and acidic domains at the COOH terminus of N - WASP ; WASP , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 1048 by members of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 1999 ) . Deletion of the WASP homologue , Las17p , resulted in both the loss of cortically attached actin patches ( Li , 1997 ) and a block of fluid - phase uptake in yeast ( Naqvi et al . , 1998 ) . Simi - larly , lymphocytes from WASP knockout mice exhibited both a reduction in actin polymerization and defects in T cell receptor endocytosis ( Zhang et al . , 1999 ) . However , the association between the endocytic machinery and the actin cytoskeleton in mammalian cells is not well under - stood . Evidence for the actin requirement for clathrin - dependent and - independent internalization in mamma - lian cells , based on the use of drugs modulating the degree of actin polymerization ( reviewed in Geli and Riezman , 1998 ) and on mutant forms of the Rho family of small GTP - ases ( Schmalzing et al . , 1995 ; Lamaze et al . , 1996 ) , appears to be conflicting and seems to depend on the cell type and the assay used . If endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton are also functionally connected in mammalian cells , it should be possible to identify molecular links . Candidate molecules are the G - actin binding proteins profilin I and II , which bind to molecules of the endocytic pathway ( Witke et al . , 1998 ) and HIP1R , a new component of clath - rin - coated pits and vesicles ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 1999 ) . Another attractive possible linker is SdpI . The dy - namin - associated protein SdpI also interacts with the neu - ral WASP ( N - WASP ; Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) , a highly brain - enriched multidomain protein ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . The COOH terminus of N - WASP , which greatly activates the ability of the Arp2 / 3 complex to nucleate actin fila - ments ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) , is usually masked and inacti - vated through an intramolecular interaction ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) ; however , N - WASP can be activated by binding of the small GTPase Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) bisphosphate ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) most likely by expos - ing the COOH terminus of the protein . These observa - tions suggest an exciting link between endocytosis and the regulation of actin polymerization . Protein associations measured in vitro can be mislead - ing . Although the SH3 domains of Grb2 , spectrin , and phospholipase C g , for example , bind to dynamin they failed to block receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Wang and Moran , 1996 ; Wigge et al . , 1997 ) . Here , we confirm the in - volvement of syndapin in endocytosis by inhibiting inter - nalization of transferrin with syndapin fragments . In addi - tion , overexpression of full - length syndapin modulates the cortical actin cytoskeleton in vivo to induce filopodia for - mation . The ability to modify endocytosis and actin poly - merization is shared by SdpII , a ubiquitously expressed protein highly homologous to the brain - specific SdpI . Thus , the role of syndapin in connecting endocytosis and actin organization is not specific for synaptic vesicle recy - cling , but represents a general , fundamental mechanism in mammalian cells . Materials and Methods Cloning of Syndapin II During PCR amplification of the SdpI gene from a rat brain cDNA li - brary , an additional , slightly larger , insert was generated ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . Sequencing of the insert revealed a gene product different from the SdpI gene , but related . The nucleotide sequence was extended to the 5 9 and 3 9 ends by nested PCR , using 10 ng cDNA prepared from a rat brain MATCHMAKER cDNA library in pGAD10 ( Clontech Laboratories , Inc . ) per reaction as template . The primers for the nested PCR were syn - thesized to hybridize with the gene sequence : first round at the 5 9 end , 5 9 - TCAAGCTCCTTCAGGGC - 3 9 and at the 3 9 end , 5 9 - ACACGGGCAG - CAGCGTCA - 3 9 ; second round at the 5 9 end , 5 9 - GAGGGATGGATCT - GCTT - 3 9 and at the 3 9 end , 5 9 - GAAGTGCGAGTTCGAGCC - 3 9 ; and with vector sequences flanking the cDNA inserts . PCR products from the second round were ligated into the pT - Adv vector ( Clontech Laborato - ries , Inc . ) . To generate specifically SdpII full - length clones , a gene product con - taining noncoding sequence at the 5 9 and 3 9 end was amplified by PCR re - action and used as a template for a second round of PCR with primers BQ056 ( 5 9 - CGCGGATCCATGTCTGTCACCTACGATGA - 3 9 ) and BQ057 ( 5 9 - CGGAATTCTCACTGGATAGCCTCAGCATAG - 3 9 ) . The PCR products of the second round ( sizes z 1 , 400 – 1 , 600 bp ) were digested with BamH1 and EcoRI and subcloned into the pGEX - 2T vector ( Phar - macia Biotech ) . The nucleotide sequences have been deposited in the Genbank / EMBL / DDBJ database with accession numbers AF139492 , AF139493 , AF139494 , and AF139495 . All PCRs were carried out with the EXPAND High Fidelity PCR Sys - tem ( Boehringer Mannheim Corp . ) . DNA of all PCR products was se - quenced in the UCSF / BRC sequencing facility . DNA Constructs and Recombinant Proteins Glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) fusion proteins containing full - length SdpI or domains thereof were generated as described ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . The following GST – SdpII constructs were produced by performing PCR on the appropriate full - length constructs : SdpII – SH3 ( amino acid residues 419 – 488 of SdpII - l ) with primer BQ058 ( 5 9 - CGCGGATC - CAACCCGTTTGACGAGGACAC - 3 9 ) and primer BQ057 ; SdpII - l – N ( residues 1 – 426 ) and SdpII - s – N ( residues 1 – 387 ) with primer BQ056 and with primer BQ059 ( 5 9 - CGGAATTCTCATCCTGAGGTAGTGTCC - TCG - 3 9 ) . The resulting DNA fragments were cloned into the BamH1 – EcoRI sites of the pGEX - 2T vector . A construct encompassing residues 305 – 387 of SdpII - l for antibody generation ( SdpII - l – Ab ) was generated with primers BQ076 ( 5 9 - CGGAATTCGAGTGGTCTGCAGATCTGA - 3 9 ) and BQ077 ( 5 9 - CGCGTCGACTAGCTGACATTTTTGGCCTTA - 3 9 ) . The PCR product was digested with Sal1 and EcoRI and cloned into the Sal1 – EcoRI sites of pGEX - 5X . GST fusion proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 cells according to standard methods and purified from cell lysates on glutathione agarose ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) columns as described before ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . GST for control experiments was expressed from the plasmid pGEX - 2T . A construct to express a maltose binding protein ( MBP ) fusion protein of SdpII for affinity purification of anti - SdpII antibodies was obtained by subcloning SdpII - l – Ab into the Sal1 – EcoRI sites of the pMAL - c2 vector ( New England Biolabs ) . MBP fusion proteins were expressed and purified over an amylose column following the recommendations of the manu - facturer . For expression in mammalian cells , constructs encoding the full - length proteins or fragments thereof were subcloned into the pcDNA3 . 1 / His vec - tor ( Invitrogen ) . Since expression of the SH3 domains was very low , new plasmids containing slightly larger COOH - terminal fragments were gen - erated by PCR using the appropriate plasmids as template . SdpI – SH3 , wild - type and mutant ( residues 339 – 441 ) , were generated with forward primer BQ070 ( 5 9 - CGCGGATCCGGGGACCGTGGCAGTGTCA - 3 9 ) and reverse primer BQ026 ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) , SdpII – SH3 ( residues 383 – 488 of SdpII - l ) with primer BQ068 ( 5 9 - CGCGGATCCAAGGC - CAAAAATGTCAGCAG - 3 9 ) and primer BQ057 . The PCR products were subsequently cloned into the BamH1 – EcoRI sites of pcDNA3 . 1 / His . A construct for expression of the COOH - terminal part of rat N - WASP containing the verpolin homology , cofilin , and acidic domains ( VCA ; amino acids 391 – 501 , N - WASP – VCA ) in mammalian cells was generated by PCR with primers BQ092 ( 5 9 - CCGCTCGAGGGTGACCATCA - AGTTCCAG - 3 9 ) and BQ093 ( 5 9 - CGGAATTCAGTCTTCCCACTCA - TCATC - 3 9 ) using rat N - WASP cDNA as a template . The PCR product was cloned into the XhoI – EcoRI sites of a derivative of the pEGFP - C1 vector ( Clontech ) , in which GFP was replaced by the HA peptide . Antibodies Polyclonal anti - SdpII antibodies were raised in rabbit ( 3685 ) and guinea pig ( P339 ; Alpha Diagnostic International . , Inc . ) against a purified GST Qualmann and Kelly Syndapins Link Endocytosis and Actin Dynamics 1049 fusion protein of amino acid residues 305 – 387 of the long SdpII splice variant ( SdpII - l – Ab ) . Antibodies were affinity - purified on an analogous MBP fusion protein of SdpII - l – Ab blotted to nitrocellulose membranes ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . SdpI - specific antibodies ( antiserum 2703 ) were raised and affinity - puri - fied as described previously ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . Rabbit antisera 2521 , 2703 , and 2704 also served as the source for affinity - purified anti - GST an - tibodies . Antisynaptojanin antibodies , anti – N - WASP antibodies , and anti - Arp3 antibodies were kindly provided by Dr . P . McPherson ( McGill University , Montreal , Canada ) , Dr . H . Miki ( University of Tokyo , Japan ) , and Dr . M . D . Welch ( University of California , Berkeley , CA ) , respec - tively . Antibodies against dynamin - 1 ( hudy - 1 ) and synapsin I were pur - chased from Upstate Biotechnology and Biogenesis , respectively . Mouse ascites fluid containing mAbs against human transferrin receptor ( H68 . 4 ) was generated by Berkeley Antibody Co . from cells kindly provided by Dr . I . S . Trowbridge ( Salk Institute , La Jolla , CA ) . Tissue Homogenates and Cell Extracts Postnuclear supernatants and subcellular fractions from different rat tis - sues ( brain , liver , kidney , spleen , lung , skeletal muscle , heart , and testis ) were prepared and processed for Western blots as described ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . To generate cellular extracts , cells grown to 80 – 90 % conflu - ency were rinsed with PBS and lysed in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in buffer A ( 10 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 1 mM MgCl 2 ) sup - plemented with protease inhibitors ( 10 m g / ml aprotinin , 5 m g / ml leupep - tin , 2 m g / ml antipain , 10 m g / ml benzamidine , 1 m g / ml chymostatin , 5 m g / ml pepstatin , 1 mM PMSF ) for 30 min at 4 8 C . The lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 16 , 000 g at 4 8 C . Blot Overlay Blot overlays with recombinant fusion proteins were performed as de - scribed previously ( Roos and Kelly , 1998 ) . In brief , samples were resolved on SDS - PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose . Membranes were blocked and incubated overnight at 4 8 C with the GST fusion protein in 5 % nonfat dry milk powder in PBS / 0 . 05 % Tween 20 . Fusion protein binding was detected by subsequently incubating the overlays with affin - ity - purified antibodies directed against GST , goat anti – rabbit HRP - conju - gated secondary antibody ( Cappel / ICN ) , and the ECL detection system ( Amersham ) . Coprecipitation Assays For the generation of solubilized brain extracts , frozen rat brains ( Pel - Freeze ) were diced and homogenized at 4 8 C in buffer A ( 1 : 3 , wt / vol ) sup - plemented with protease inhibitors via 20 passes in a glass Teflon Dounce homogenizer . The homogenate was incubated with Triton X - 100 at a final concentration of 1 % ( vol / vol ) for 1 h at 4 8 C and insoluble material was re - moved by centrifugation for 1 h at 40 , 000 g . Recombinant GST fusion pro - teins ( 25 m g each ) were immobilized on glutathione Sepharose 4B beads ( Pharmacia Biotech ) in PBS . 25 m l of beads were incubated with rat brain extracts ( 1 mg protein ) overnight at 4 8 C . Beads were extensively washed with buffer A and eluted with 30 m l of 20 mM glutathione in 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 120 mM NaCl for 30 min at room temperature . Proteins were then separated on 4 – 15 % SDS - PAGE and assayed by Coomassie staining and by Western blotting with various antibodies . Immunoprecipitation Pheochromocytoma cells ( PC12 ) grown to 80 – 90 % confluency were rinsed with PBS and collected by centrifugation ( 1 , 000 g , 5 min ) . The cell pellet was resuspended in IP buffer ( 10 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , 10 mM NaCl , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 % Triton X - 100 ) supplemented with pro - tease inhibitors ( see above ) , and lysed for 30 min at 4 8 C . Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14 , 000 g for 20 min at 4 8 C . Immunoprecipita - tions from PC12 cell extracts were performed with affinity - purified SdpII - specific antibodies ( from serum 3685 ) or unrelated rabbit IgG prebound to protein G – Sepharose as described previously ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . Immunofluorescence PC12 cells for immunocytochemistry were grown in DME H - 21 supple - mented with 0 . 5 % FCS and 1 % horse serum at 37 8 C in 10 % CO 2 on Lab - Tek Permanox slides ( Nunc ) that were coated with 50 m g / ml poly - L - lysine ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) and 75 m g / ml rat tail collagen ( Collaborative Bio - medical Products ) . Cells were differentiated with 50 ng / ml NGF ( Boeh - ringer Mannheim Corp . ) for 2 d ; the medium was replaced every 2 d . For immunofluorescence staining , cells were washed twice in 50 mM MES , pH 6 . 3 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 3 mM EGTA , and fixed in 4 % freshly depolymerized paraformaldehyde ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde ( Fluka ) in PBS for 30 min . After quenching free aldehyde groups with 25 mM glycine in PBS twice for 10 min and an additional wash in PBS , the cells were permeabilized and blocked for 1 h in 2 % BSA , 1 % fish skin gel - atin , and 0 . 02 % saponin in PBS ( block solution ) . The slides were then in - cubated with primary antibodies for 90 min at room temperature and subsequently washed three times with block solution . Fluorophore - conju - gated secondary antibodies and , when indicated , phalloidin - Texas red ( 1 : 667 dilution ; Molecular Probes ) were applied for 1 h at room tempera - ture in block solution . After several washes , cells were mounted in Moviol ( Calbiochem - Novabiochem Corp . ) . As primary antibodies , affinity - purified antibodies from serum 2703 and 3685 / P339 , which specifically recognize SdpI and - II , respectively , were used at 1 : 100 . The expression of constructs in the pcDNA3 . 1 / His vector was detected with anti - Xpress antibodies ( 1 : 500 ; Invitrogen ) , the expression of HA - tagged N - WASP fragments with the monoclonal anti - HA antibody HA . 11 ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Berkeley Antibody Co . ) . Secondary anti - bodies used in this study were fluorescein - conjugated goat anti – rabbit IgG ( Cappel ) , fluorescein - conjugated goat anti – mouse IgG ( Cappel ) , fluores - cein - conjugated goat anti – guinea pig IgG ( Cappel ) , Texas red - conjugated goat anti – mouse IgG ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) , Texas red - conjugated rabbit anti – mouse IgG ( Cappel ) , rabbit anti – mouse FITC ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories , Inc . ) , and Alexa Fluor™ 350 goat anti – mouse IgG ( Molecular Probes ) . Incubations were viewed under a Leica TCS NT laser confocal micro - scope using the Leica TCS software package or with an inverted Nikon Eclipse TE300 fluorescence microscope and recorded digitally ( Im - ageProPlus ; Phase3 Imaging Systems ) . Images were processed using Adobe Photoshop software . Endocytosis Assay and Actin Cytoskeleton Analysis To analyze the effect of overexpression of the full - length syndapin pro - teins or fragments thereof , HeLa cells were transiently transfected using the FuGENE™ 6 transfection reagent ( Boehringer Mannheim Corp . ) with the appropriate SdpI or - II cDNAs subcloned into the pcDNA3 . 1 / His vector and / or cDNA encoding N - WASP fragments . HeLa cells were maintained in DME H - 21 supplemented with 10 % FCS at 37 8 C in 10 % CO 2 and replated onto glass coverslips ( 18 - mm diam ) . Transfection was carried out in serum - containing medium following the recommendations of the manufacturer . For cotransfection experiments , equal amounts of the appropriate plasmids were used . Cotransfection efficiency was . 95 % , as judged by double immunofluorescence staining . 24 h after transfection , N - butyric acid ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) was added at a final concentration of 6 mM to increase protein expression levels . After a further 24 h , cells were processed to study receptor - mediated endocytosis and cytoskeletal archi - tecture as follows . HeLa cells used for the transferrin internalization assays were serum - starved in DME H - 21 containing 1 mg / ml BSA for 45 min at 37 8 C and sub - sequently incubated with 25 m g / ml FITC - transferrin ( Molecular Probes ) in DME H - 21 / BSA . After three washes with ice - cold PBS ( containing 0 . 3 mM CaCl 2 and 0 . 3 mM MgCl 2 ) , cell surface labeling was reduced by in - cubating the cells twice with 50 m M of the iron chelator , deferoxamine mesylate ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) , in 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 25 mM so - dium acetate / acetic acid , pH 4 . 5 , for 10 min on ice according to Stoorvogel et al . ( 1991 ) . The cultures were fixed in 4 % freshly depolymerized paraformaldehyde in PBS for 30 min and processed for immunofluores - cence as described . The percentage of transferrin uptake - positive cells was determined by counting cells from at least three independent experiments . Cells were only scored to be uptake - negative when no FITC signal was observed . To assess cytoskeletal changes , cells were washed twice in 50 mM MES , pH 6 . 3 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 3 mM EGTA , and fixed in 4 % freshly depolymer - ized paraformaldehyde and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS for 30 min and processed for immunofluorescence staining . Filamentous actin was visual - ized with Texas red - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) , microtubuli were stained with mouse anti – a - tubulin ( Nycomed Amersham Inc . ) . Quantita - tion of the percentage of cells with filopodia induction was performed as follows . According to the cell morphology and cortical actin organization observed on the red fluorescence channel , cells were classified into those exhibiting numerous filopodia or those with almost no filopodia ( see Fig . 7 k ) at the cell surface . Thereafter , cells in both groups were analyzed for The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 1050 expression of full - length syndapin or fragments thereof as determined by labeling with syndapin - or tag - specific primary antibodies and FITC - or fluorescein - conjugated secondary antibodies . For each construct and for untransfected cells , the phenotype induction was analyzed in at least three independent experiments . Each bar corresponds to . 250 cells counted . Syndapin expression was visualized either with anti - Syndapin or anti - Xpress ( Invitrogen ) antibodies . Results Identification and Cloning of SdpII Dynamin and endophilin have brain - specific forms and forms with wider tissue distribution ( Ringstad et al . , 1997 ; Urrutia et al . , 1997 ) , implying that they are universally used in endocytosis . This also appears to be true for syn - dapin . During cloning of the gene for the synaptic dy - namin - associated protein , SdpI ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) , we identified additional 1 , 400 – 1 , 600 bp messages in the rat cDNA library that all encoded different splice variants of the same putative protein , which we named SdpII because it has 67 % sequence identity with SdpI ( Fig . 1 ) . The open reading frame of the longest gene identified encodes a pu - tative protein of 488 amino acids with a predicted molecu - lar weight of 56 . 1 kD . We identified additional messages encoding splice variants of SdpII lacking amino acids 303 – 304 and / or amino acids 346 – 386 ( Fig . 1 b ) . The polymor - phism at the first splice site has no detectable effects on the properties of SdpII ( data not shown ) . The long form of SdpII containing the second insert will be referred to as SdpII - l , while for the shorter form lacking the insert we will use the term SdpII - s . The first sequence reported for a syndapin family member was FAP52 , a focal adhesion pro - tein found in chicken ( Meriläinen et al . , 1997 ) . This pro - tein is most similar to SdpII - s ( Fig . 1 , a and c ) . Recently , PACSIN2 , the mouse homologue of SdpII - l , has been de - scribed ( Ritter et al . , 1999 ) . Members of the syndapin protein family share a similar domain structure with a highly conserved SH3 domain at the COOH terminus , two predicted coiled coil domains , and several arginine – proline – phenylalanine ( NPF ) motifs ( Fig . 1 b ) . The COOH - terminal SH3 domain represents the part of the protein that is most highly conserved be - tween members of the syndapin protein family ( Fig . 1 c ) . The region containing the two splice sites in SdpII shows the lowest degree of sequence similarity between syn - dapin - like proteins and might , therefore , correspond to a flexible linker region . However , this region contains multi - ple copies of the tripeptide motif NPF , two copies in SdpI and SdpII - s , and an additional copy in the insert in SdpII - l . NPF motifs mediate protein – protein interactions to Eps15 homology domains , modules that appear to have an im - portant role in endocytic function . Syndapin II Splice Variants Show a Distinct Expression Pattern in a Variety of Different Tissues and Cell Lines Polyclonal antisera against SdpII were produced in rabbits Figure 1 . Sequence analysis of SdpII . a , The amino acid sequence of the shortest and the longest of the four splice variants of the novel rat proteins SdpII , SdpII - s , and SdpII - l , respectively , is shown aligned to SdpI ( GenBank / EMBL / DDBJ accession num - ber AF104402 ) , the chicken protein FAP52 ( GenBank / EMBL / DDBJ accession number Z50798 ) , and murine PACSIN 2 ( Gen - Bank / EMBL / DDBJ accession number AAD41780 ) . Boxes indi - cate residues of $ 80 % identity between all five sequences . b , Schematic cartoon of the domain structure of SdpII . Members of the syndapin protein family share a similar domain structure with a highly conserved SH3 domain at the COOH terminus , two pre - dicted coiled coil domains , and several NPF motifs . The multido - main protein is alternatively spliced at at least two different sites ( amino acids 303 – 304 and / or amino acids 346 – 386 of SdpII - l ) . c , Comparison of sequence identities between SdpII and related proteins . The COOH - terminal SH3 domain , corresponding to amino acids 430 – 488 in SdpII - l , represents the part of the protein that is most highly conserved between members of the syndapin protein family . These sequence data for SdpII are available from GenBank / EMBL / DDBJ under accession numbers AF139492 , AF139493 , AF139494 , and AF139495 . Qualmann and Kelly Syndapins Link Endocytosis and Actin Dynamics 1051 and guinea pigs by injecting a GST fusion protein encod - ing the region with the lowest degree of sequence similar - ity between SdpI and - II , amino acids 305 – 387 of SdpII - l . After affinity purification , antibodies were tested for spec - ificity on extracts of cells transiently transfected with the full - length proteins SdpI , SdpII - s , SdpII - l , or vector alone transferred to nitrocellulose membranes . Affinity - purified guinea pig antibodies ( P339 ) specifically recognized both forms of SdpII ; the rabbit antibodies ( 3685 ) , however , showed a preference for SdpII - l ( Fig . 2 a ) . Antibodies raised against the NH 2 terminus of SdpI ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) did not cross - react with SdpII ( Fig . 2 a ) . An addi - tional weak band at 65 kD could be detected in all cell ly - sates , including the vector - only control after long expo - sures of the blots incubated with antibodies from P339 and 3685 ( data not shown ) . This signal most likely corresponds to endogenous SdpII - l present in the HeLa cells . Western blot analysis of cellular extracts and postnu - clear supernatants from a variety of rat tissues demon - strate that SdpII is ubiquitously expressed with a different tissue distribution for the short and long splice variants . SdpII - l is preferentially expressed in the PC12 cell line and heart , whereas SdpII - s was detected in most tissues exam - ined ( Fig . 2 b ) consistent with the expression pattern de - scribed for the chicken focal adhesion protein , FAP52 ( Meriläinen et al . , 1997 ) . Using antibody dilutions on Western blots that were calibrated against material ex - pressed in HeLa cells , SdpII is far less abundant than SdpI ( data not shown ) . Investigation of SdpII - binding Partners SdpI has been shown to recognize a subset of highly brain - enriched proteins via its SH3 domain . By an overlay tech - nique , the protein bands recognized by full - length SdpII ( Fig . 3 a ) were almost identical to the binding pattern pre - viously shown for SdpI full - length . Thus , the high degree of similarity in the SH3 domain of SdpI and - II is reflected in similar binding patterns . The 41 - amino acid insert in SdpII - l did not appear to significantly change the binding pattern of the affinities displayed . Binding partners of SdpII were only observed in nonneural tissues after longer exposure . Nonneural tissues may have a low abundance of binding partners consistent with the similarly low expres - sion levels of SdpII . A major protein detected with SdpII in all tissues analyzed comigrated with N - WASP . To identify some of the major binding partners of SdpII , GST fusion proteins comprising either the wild - type SdpII SH3 domain , the wild - type SdpI SH3 domain , or the P434L mutant SdpI SH3 domain , immobilized on glu - tathione Sepharose beads , were incubated with Triton X - 100 extracts from rat brains homogenized in buffer A . Precipitated material was eluted with glutathione , sepa - rated by SDS - PAGE , and assayed by immunoblotting . The SH3 domain of SdpII coprecipitated the PRD - con - taining proteins synaptojanin , dynamin I , synapsin I , and the N - WASP as shown in Fig . 3 b . The amount of precipi - tated material was comparable for the SH3 domains of SdpII and SdpI ; however , the SdpI SH3 domain exhibited a greater affinity for synapsin I . A GST fusion protein of the P434L mutated form of the SdpI SH3 domain was in - cluded as a control and did not show any binding to synap - tojanin , dynamin , synapsin , or N - WASP ( Fig . 3 b ) . Coimmunoprecipitation analyses from PC12 cell ex - tracts furthermore demonstrate that SdpII is associated with dynamin . Affinity - purified anti - SdpII antibodies , but not unrelated rabbit IgG , coimmunoprecipitated dynamin ( Fig . 3 c ) . Our results indicate that syndapins are not restricted to nerve cells , and that the neuronal and ubiquitous forms have similar properties , particularly the ability to bind dy - namin and N - WASP . Syndapin II Colocalizes with Dynamin in NGF - differentiated PC12 Cells Antibodies specific to SdpII allowed us to investigate the distribution of endogenous SdpII in a differentiating neu - roendocrine cell line . Rat PC12 cells , which resemble chro - maffin cells under normal growth conditions , respond to NGF by differentiating into nonreplicating , neuron - like cells . Within 24 – 48 h , NGF - treated cells flatten and begin to send out short neurite - like processes , which extend with time ( Fig . 4 ) . The endogenous SdpII colocalized with dy - namin at the edges of the cell bodies ( Fig . 4 , a – c ) and , to an even higher degree , at the tips and in varicosities along the processes ( Fig . 4 , d – i ) , as observed by confocal micros - Figure 2 . SdpII - specific antibodies identify different splice vari - ants of the protein in a number of different cell lines and tissues . a , Lysates from HeLa cells transfected with the full - length pro - teins SdpI , SdpII - s , SdpII - l , or vector alone were separated on SDS - PAGE , transferred to nitrocellulose , and probed with either tag - specific antibodies ( anti - Xpress ) or affinity - purified antibod - ies raised against SdpI ( antiserum 2703 ) and SdpII ( antisera P339 and 3685 ) . b , Postnuclear supernatants from various rat tissues and cellular extracts were resolved by SDS - PAGE , transferred to nitrocellulose , and subjected to Western blot analysis . SdpII - spe - cific antibodies recognized a 65 - kD band predominantly in the PC12 cell line and heart , and , less prominent , in testis and addi - tional cellular extracts . In addition , a protein of an electro - phoretic mobility of 52 kD was detected in all tissues analyzed , which appears to be enriched in brain , kidney , testis , and skeletal muscle . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 1052 copy . Striking was the concentration of both markers in punctae of z 0 . 7 m m in diameter . These are reminiscent of hot spots of endocytosis seen in Drosophila melanogaster nerve terminals ( Estes et al . , 1996 ; González - Gaitán and Jäckle , 1997 ; Roos and Kelly , 1998 ) . Colocalization of the two markers in the punctae suggested that SdpII is in - volved in endocytosis . The transferrin receptor could also be recovered in small punctae ( Fig . 4 k ) . The subcellular distribution of SdpII in PC12 cells overlapped only partially with trans - ferrin receptor - positive compartments . Colocalization was at its maximum , but still not complete when the focal plane was close to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 4 , j – l ) . However , SdpII does not codistribute with the transferrin receptor at perinuclear compartments , since overlap was minimal in confocal sections through the center of the cells ( data not shown ) . Thus , it seems that the patches of dy - namin , SdpII , and transferrin receptor only show overlap when they are on or near the cell surface . Intracellular en - dosomes do not appear to contain SdpII . Syndapin SH3 Domains Inhibit Receptor - mediated Endocytosis In Vivo SdpI and - II are associated via a PRD / SH3 domain inter - action with the large GTPase dynamin ( this study ; Qual - mann et al . , 1999 ) which has been demonstrated to be an essential component in the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles in the receptor - mediated endocytosis pathway ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . To assess the relevance of syndapin interactions on receptor - mediated endocytosis in vivo , we transiently overexpressed different domains of syndapin in HeLa cells and assayed the endocytic accumulation of FITC - labeled transferrin . In untransfected cells , the trans - ferrin internalized for 30 min at 37 8 C accumulated in vesic - ular structures spread throughout the cytoplasm . Overex - pression of the wild - type SH3 domains of SdpI and - II in HeLa cells inhibited endocytosis as evidenced by a block in accumulation of intracellular FITC – transferrin ( green signal ) in transfected cells ( red fluorescence ) , compared with neighboring untransfected cells ( Fig . 5 a ) . In contrast , transfection of cells with the NH 2 terminus or the mutant SH3 domain ( P434L ) of SdpI had no effect on transferrin accumulation ( Fig . 5 a ) . Quantitation of the results by as - sessing the percentage of cells with detectable transferrin uptake demonstrates that the SH3 domains of syndapin can interfere with receptor - mediated endocytosis in vivo . Whereas almost all cells overexpressing the NH 2 terminus of Sdp ( 97 . 4 6 0 . 3 % , n 5 956 ) or the P434L mutant of the SdpI SH3 domain ( 97 . 0 6 0 . 3 % , n 5 366 ) were capable of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , the fraction of cells that in - ternalized transferrin was significantly reduced among those overexpressing the wild - type SdpI or - II SH3 do - main ( Fig . 5 b ) . Only 44 . 4 6 3 . 4 % ( n 5 519 ) of the cells overexpressing the wild - type SdpI SH3 domain and 47 . 6 6 4 . 4 % ( n 5 450 ) of cells overexpressing the SdpII SH3 do - main contained some internalized transferrin . The fraction of cells that could still take up transferrin was also reduced by overexpression of the SH3 domains of amphiphysin I and II ( 24 . 0 6 3 . 1 % , n 5 641 , and 73 . 1 6 6 . 5 % , n 5 433 uptake - positive cells , respectively ) as has been reported previously ( Wigge et al . , 1997 ; Owens et al . , 1998 ) . The results might underestimate the amount of inhibi - tion since only cells exhibiting virtually no FITC – transfer - rin signal were counted as uptake - negative , whereas par - tial inhibition was neglected . Syndapin Overexpression Induces Rearrangements of the Cortical Actin Cytoskeleton SdpI and - II interact with the N - WASP . N - WASP in turn Figure 3 . Characterization of SdpII protein – protein interactions . a , Overlay analysis of postnuclear supernatants from various rat tissues with GST fusion proteins of SdpII full - length molecules . 50 m g of each fraction was resolved on 4 – 15 % SDS - PAGE gels , transferred to nitrocellulose , and overlaid with GST – SdpII - l and GST – SdpII - s . Binding of fusion proteins was detected with affin - ity - purified anti - GST antibodies . Both SdpII splice variants bind a similar subset of brain - enriched or brain - specific proteins . After a long exposure , the interaction of SdpII with a protein of 65 kD was also detectable in nonneural tissues ( arrow ) . b , Triton X - 100 soluble proteins from rat brain were affinity - purified onto GST – SdpII SH3 domain , GST – SdpI SH3 domain wild - type , or the P434L point mutant immobilized on glutathione Sepharose . Ma - terial specifically bound was eluted with glutathione containing buffer and analyzed per SDS - PAGE and Western blotting . The wild - type SH3 domains from both SdpI and - II , but not the mu - tant form , specifically coprecipitate synaptojanin , dynamin I , syn - apsin I , and N - WASP . c , Coimmunoprecipitation of dynamin with SdpII . Immunoprecipitates from PC12 extracts were gener - ated with affinity - purified antibodies against SdpII ( from rabbit serum 3685 ) or with unrelated rabbit IgG immobilized onto pro - tein G – Sepharose . Precipitated material was analyzed by West - ern blotting using antidynamin antibodies ( hudy - 1 ) and anti - SdpII antibodies ( from guinea pig serum P339 ) . Qualmann and Kelly Syndapins Link Endocytosis and Actin Dynamics 1053 interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex , leading to a stimulation of actin filament nucleation and polymerization . This prompted us to investigate the consequences of syndapin overexpression on the actin cytoskeleton in HeLa cells . Syndapin overexpression induced a striking cortical actin phenotype . Cells transiently transfected with full - length SdpI exhibited actin - rich filopodia ( Fig . 6 , a – d ) all over the cell surfaces . Similar filopodia formation was trig - gered by overexpression of both SdpII - l ( Fig . 6 , e and f ) and SdpII - s ( Fig . 6 , g and h ) ; however , the phenotype was less striking for SdpII than SdpI . Massive filopodia induc - tion ( Fig . 7 k ) was observed in almost all SdpI - transfected cells ( 97 . 7 6 0 . 8 % ) and in 86 . 5 6 2 . 4 % and 70 . 0 6 2 . 5 % of HeLa cells overexpressing the short and the long splice variant of SdpII , respectively ( Fig . 7 l ) . This overexpres - sion phenotype was only observed in transfected cells ; in contrast , untransfected cells displayed only a few short filopodia ( Fig . 6 , a – h ) . SdpI - positive cells exhibited 52 . 4 6 9 . 9 filopodia over a surface length of 100 m m , compared with 2 . 9 6 2 . 3 in untransfected cells ( Fig . 7 k ) . Filopodia at the surface of syndapin - overexpressing cells were in aver - age two to three times longer and thicker than those at the surface of untransfected cells . In addition to peripheral ac - tin microspikes , SdpI overexpression also frequently re - sulted in the induction of lamellipodial - like protrusions ( Fig . 6 , c and d , and see Fig . 9 , a , b , e , and f ) . Syndapin lo - calized to the periphery of these lamellipodia ( Fig . 6 c , and see Fig . 9 , a and e ) . In general , syndapin did not colocalize with stable F - actin stress fibers , but instead localized to ar - eas characterized as sites of actin polymerization and turn - over . The observed cytoskeletal changes were not specific to HeLa cells , but were induced as well in NIH 3T3 fibro - Figure 4 . SdpII colocalizes with dynamin in NGF - stimulated PC12 cells . PC12 cells , differentiated with 50 m g / ml NGF for 2 d , were fixed and double - labeled with antibodies directed against SdpII ( a , d , e , and j ) , dynamin ( b , f , and g ) , or transferrin receptor ( k ) . SdpII localizes to discrete areas in cortical cell regions ( a ) , in growth cones ( e ) , and in the varicosities of processes ( d ) that are marked by the endocytic machinery of the cells , as indicated by staining for dynamin ( b , f , and g ) . Colocalization of SdpII with transferrin receptor is partial and most prominent at the cell surface ( l ) . Bars : ( a – c , j – l ) 5 m m ; ( d – i ) 3 m m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 1054 blasts ( data not shown ) . Western blot analysis confirmed the expression of the transfected genes , revealing appro - priately sized proteins ( Fig . 2 a , and data not shown ) . To determine structural domains of syndapin involved in these peripheral actin rearrangements , various con - structs were transiently expressed in HeLa cells . The mor - phological changes were not observed with the SH3 do - main of SdpI ( Fig . 7 , c and d ) or SdpII alone , with only 5 . 2 6 2 . 7 % and 6 . 9 6 1 . 4 % of filopodia - positive cells detected ( Fig . 7 l ) , indicating that binding of syndapin via its SH3 domain alone to the actin - modulating protein N - WASP is not sufficient to induce these cytoskeletal rearrangements . Furthermore , the NH 2 terminus of SdpI , SdpII - l ( Fig . 7 , g and h ) , or SdpII - s ( Fig . 7 , i and j ) , as well as the full - length SdpI protein harboring the P434L mutation in the SH3 do - main ( SdpIm ; Fig . 7 , e and f ) were incapable of stimulating filopodial outgrowth . The percentages of filopodia - posi - tive cells ( Fig . 7 l ) , 6 . 4 6 1 . 6 % , 9 . 7 6 1 . 5 % , and 6 . 8 6 4 . 5 % of cells overexpressing the NH 2 - terminal parts of SdpI , II - s , and II - l , respectively , and 4 . 0 6 1 . 7 % of cells overexpress - ing SdpIm , were very similar to levels observed in untrans - fected cells ( 4 . 5 6 2 . 2 % ) . These results indicate that syn - dapin - induced filopodia formation depends on an intact NH 2 - terminal and an intact SH3 domain . Strikingly , SdpI frequently localized to the very tips of the actin - rich filopodia induced upon overexpression ( Fig . 8 ) . These structures were observed to be very fragile and were easily ripped off during incubations . This may be the reason why they are not seen on every cell exhibiting filopodia . Syndapin - induced Cortical Actin Rearrangements Are Mediated by the Arp2 / 3 Complex The Arp2 / 3 complex can enhance the nucleation of new actin filaments in vitro and is required for actin - based mo - tility in vivo ( reviewed in Machesky and Insall , 1999 ) . In SdpI - transfected HeLa cells , the Arp2 / 3 complex , visual - ized with an antibody directed against Arp3 , localized to lamellipodia ( arrows ) and other structures , which ap - peared to be cortical ( arrowheads ; Fig . 9 , b and d ) , in - duced upon overexpression of syndapin and colocalized at these sites with SdpI ( Fig . 9 , a and c ) . These results suggested that syndapin - induced cortical actin rearrange - ments involved the targeting of the Arp2 / 3 complex to the sites of dynamic actin remodelling at the cell cortex . To test this hypothesis , we coexpressed the COOH - terminal VCA - region of N - WASP with SdpI in HeLa cells . This Figure 5 . A surplus of SdpI and - II SH3 domain inhibits transferrin in - ternalization in vivo . a , HeLa cells transiently transfected with SdpI SH3 domain , SdpII SH3 domain , the P434L mutant form of the SdpI SH3 domain , or the SdpI NH 2 terminus were incubated at 37 8 C with FITC - transferrin for 30 min , fixed , and pro - cessed for immunofluorescence mi - croscopy . Expression of syndapin constructs was visualized with anti - Xpress antibodies , followed by a Texas red - conjugated secondary anti - body . Panels show superimposition of FITC – transferrin with the staining of the epitope - tagged protein frag - ments . SdpI and - II SH3 domains in - hibited endocytosis as evidenced by a block in accumulation of intracellular transferrin ( green signal ) in transfected cells ( red fluorescence ) compared with neighboring untransfected cells . In contrast , transfection of cells with the NH 2 terminus or the mutant SH3 domain had no effect on transferrin accumulation . b , Quantitation of the results by as - sessing the percentage of transferrin uptake - positive cells demonstrates that a surplus of the SH3 domain of syndapin interferes with re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis in vivo . Whereas 97 . 4 6 0 . 3 % ( n 5 956 ) of the HeLa cells overexpressing the NH 2 terminus of SdpI and 97 . 0 6 0 . 3 % ( n 5 366 ) of cells overexpressing the P434L mutant of the SdpI SH3 domain were capable of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis , only 44 . 4 6 3 . 4 % ( n 5 519 ) of the cells overexpressing the wild - type SdpI SH3 domain and 47 . 6 6 4 . 4 % ( n 5 450 ) of cells overex - pressing the SdpII SH3 domain contained some internalized transferrin . Qualmann and Kelly Syndapins Link Endocytosis and Actin Dynamics 1055 Figure 6 . SdpI and - II induce a strik - ing cortical actin phenotype upon overexpression . HeLa cells transiently transfected with SdpI full - length ( a , b , c , and d ) , SdpII - l ( e and f ) , and SdpII - s ( g and h ) ( green fluorescence ) ex - hibit actin microspikes ( filopodia ) all over the cell surfaces in addition to protrusion - like structures ( lamellipo - dia ) . This overexpression phenotype was only observed in transfected cells , untransfected cells were unaf - fected and displayed smooth cell surfaces . Right panels show phalloi - din – Texas red staining of F - actin to visualize actin rearrangements . Anti - tag labeling to identify syndapin - overexpressing cells is shown in the left panels . Bar : ( a , b , e – h ) 25 m m ; ( c and d ) 15 . 75 m m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 1056 Figure 7 . Only full - length proteins are sufficient to induce cytoskeletal rearrangements upon overex - pression . HeLa cells transiently transfected with SdpI full - length ( a and b ) , but not the SdpI SH3 do - main alone ( c and d ) , the SdpI full - length P434L mutant ( e and f ) , the NH 2 terminus of SdpII - l ( g and h ) , or SdpII - s ( i and j ) exhibit filopodia . 48 h after transfection , cells were fixed and stained for expres - sion of the syndapin constructs ( anti - Xpress label - ing ; left ) and filamentous actin ( phalloidin – Texas red staining ; right ) . Bar , 25 m m . k , Overexpression of syndapin full - length proteins dramatically in - creased the number of filopodia observed at the cell surface of HeLa cells from 2 . 9 6 2 . 3 filopodia / 100 m m in untransfected to 52 . 4 6 9 . 9 , as observed by confocal microscopy ( n 5 15 cells each ; S surface length analyzed 5 2 , 361 m m and 1 , 630 m m for SdpI - overexpressing and untransfected cells , respectively . l , HeLa cells transfected with plasmids encoding wild - type or mutant syndapin proteins , or fragments thereof , were classified into those exhibiting numer - ous filopodia or those with almost no filopodia at their cell . Thereafter , these cells were analyzed for expression of the protein encoded by the trans - fected construct . Bars represent the mean 6 stan - dard deviation of the percentage of cells with filopo - dia induction from at least three independent experiments ( n . 250 for each construct ) . Only wild - type full - length syndapin proteins potently triggered filopodia formation . Massive filopodia induction was observed in 97 . 7 6 0 . 8 % of cells overexpressing SdpI and 86 . 5 6 2 . 4 % and 70 . 0 6 2 . 5 % of cells over - expressing the short and long splice variants of SdpII ( SdpII - s and SdpII - l ) , respectively . Percent - ages of filopodia - positive in cells overexpressing truncated syndapin constructs ( 5 . 2 6 2 . 7 % and 6 . 9 6 1 . 4 % for the SH3 domain of SdpI and - II , re - spectively , and 6 . 4 6 1 . 6 % , 9 . 7 6 1 . 5 % , and 6 . 8 6 4 . 5 % for the NH 2 - terminal parts of SdpI , - II - s , and - II - l , respectively ) were quite similar to levels ob - served in untransfected cells ( 4 . 5 6 2 . 2 % ) . Even a single point mutation in the SH3 domain , P434L , abolished the ability of SdpI to trigger filopodia for - mation at the cell cortex ( 4 . 0 6 1 . 7 % ; SdpIm ) . Qualmann and Kelly Syndapins Link Endocytosis and Actin Dynamics 1057 COOH - terminal segment binds to actin ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) and to the Arp2 / 3 complex , and greatly enhances its ability to nucleate actin polymerization in vitro ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . In Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts , a similar COOH - terminal fragment of Scar1 or WASP disrupted lamellipodia forma - tion and impaired the localization of the Arp2 / 3 complex to the cell periphery ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ) . Coexpression of the VCA fragment of N - WASP abol - ished the syndapin - induced cortical actin phenotype com - pletely . Whereas HeLa cells overexpressing only synda - pin showed the customary formation of lamellipodia and filopodia ( Fig . 9 , e and f , and e 9 and f 9 ) , cells expressing both SdpI and N - WASP – VCA did neither . Their cell sur - faces appeared smooth ( Fig . 9 , e – h and e 9 – h 9 ) . This effect is not caused by reduced SdpI expression levels in double - transfected cells because severe cortical actin rearrange - ments were already triggered by moderate expression lev - els of SdpI ( Fig . 9 , e and f , and e 9 and f 9 ) . In contrast , in HeLa cells coexpressing N - WASP – VCA , SdpI overex - pressed at much higher levels failed to induce filopodia formation as measured by phalloidin - Texas red staining ( Fig . 9 , e – h and e 9 – h 9 ) . N - WASP – VCA protein - positive cells were detected by antibodies to the HA - epitope and Alexa Fluor™ 350 - conjugated secondary antibodies ( blue fluorescence ; Fig . 9 , g and g 9 ) . The effects were quantified by assessing the percentage of cells with filopodia induc - tion ( Fig . 9 i ) . Whereas the cortical actin phenotype was observed in almost every cell overexpressing SdpI alone ( 95 . 9 6 1 . 2 % ) , coexpression of N - WASP – VCA reduced the percentage to 4 . 4 6 1 . 5 % , which equals values ob - served in untransfected cells ( 3 . 7 6 2 . 0 % ) and HeLa cells single - transfected with N - WASP – VCA ( 3 . 5 6 0 . 4 % ) . HeLa cells expressing N - WASP – VCA ( green fluores - cence ; Fig . 9 , j – l ) exhibited a striking increase in diffuse phalloidin - stainable actin within the cytosol , especially in the perinuclear region ( Fig . 9 j ) . This was also true when N - WASP – VCA was coexpressed with SdpI ( Fig . 9 , e – h and e 9 – h 9 ) . These data suggest that syndapin - induced cortical actin rearrangements require the Arp2 / 3 complex and its trans - location to the cell periphery . Discussion Based on protein – protein interactions , the synaptic dy - namin - associated protein , SdpI , has been proposed to link actin dynamics and endocytic processes in the nerve termi - nal ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ) . Whereas SdpI is brain - specific , SdpII , described here , exhibits a wide tissue distribution . The colocalization of endogenous SdpII with dynamin in PC12 cells is consistent with a role in endocy - tosis . The behavior of cells transfected with either of the two syndapins or their fragments , the distribution of ex - ogenous syndapin , and the interaction of SdpI and - II with synaptojanin , dynamin I , synapsin I , and N - WASP strongly suggest a center role for the syndapins in linking endocytosis to the actin cytoskeleton . The broad tissue dis - tribution of SdpII and the existence of syndapin - related proteins in a wide array of multicellular organisms ( Echi - nococcus , Caenorhabditis elegans , rat , mouse , and human ) furthermore suggest that a connection of endocytosis and actin organization via syndapin is based on a conserved machinery in many different organisms and cell types . To establish a function of syndapin in endocytosis , we tested the physiological significance of the determined syndapin protein interactions by assaying the effect of overexpression of both SdpI and - II SH3 domains on transferrin uptake . We observed a potent block in recep - Figure 8 . SdpI localizes to the very tips of actin - rich filopodia induced upon overexpression . HeLa cells transiently trans - fected with SdpI full - length were fixed and stained for fila - mentous actin ( phalloidin – Texas red ) and SdpI ( anti - Xpress / FITC – anti - mouse ) . Bar , 15 m m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 1058 Figure 9 . Syndapin - induced cortical actin rearrangements require the Arp2 / 3 complex . The Arp2 / 3 complex , visualized with an anti - body directed against Arp3 ( b and d ) colocalizes with SdpI ( a and c ) at lamellipodial ( arrows ) and other structures ( arrowheads ) in - duced upon overexpression of SdpI in transiently transfected HeLa cells . Expression of syndapin was detected with antibodies against the Xpress - tag ( a and c ) . Coexpression of the COOH - terminal VCA fragment of N - WASP ( amino acids 391 – 501 ) suppressed the syn - dapin - induced cortical actin phenotype completely ( e – i ) . Cells expressing only SdpI , as identified by staining with anti - SdpI antibodies and FITC - conjugated secondary antibodies ( e and e 9 ) , exhibit lamellipodia and numerous filopodia detected by phalloidin ( red fluores - cence ; f and f 9 ) . Other cells , coexpression of N - WASP – VCA , as identified by staining with anti - HA – antibodies and Alexa Fluor™ 350 - conjugated secondary antibodies ( g ) , impaired the customary induction of lamellipodia and filopodia ( f and f 9 ) . Anti - Sdp , phalloidin , and anti - HA staining are overlaid in h . e 9 – h 9 show 3 . 5 - fold enlargements of selected surface areas from SdpI only ( top ) or SdpI and N - WASP – VCA coexpressing cells ( bottom ) , as indicated by the boxes in h . Quantitation of the percentage of cells with filopodia induc - Qualmann and Kelly Syndapins Link Endocytosis and Actin Dynamics 1059 tor - mediated endocytosis in vivo . This is in striking con - trast to the SH3 domains of Grb2 , spectrin , and phospholi - pase C g that bind to dynamin in vitro , but do not block receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Wang and Moran , 1996 ; Wigge et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , both syndapin isoforms ap - pear to play a role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis , al - though SdpI , which is expressed at much higher levels in brain , might be specialized for synaptic vesicle endocyto - sis . The transfection studies are consistent with earlier in vitro reconstitution assays in which the SdpI SH3 domain interfered with endocytic coated vesicle formation ( Simp - son et al . , 1999 ) . The reconstitution studies also suggested that the interaction of the syndapin SH3 domain with one of its partners is required for late events in endocytosis , leading to vesicle fission . Late events in coated vesicle for - mation were also selectively affected by a dynamin mutant defective in GTP binding and the actin monomer seques - tering drugs , latrunculin B and thymosin beta4 ( Damke et al . , 1994 ; Lamaze et al . , 1997 ) . Syndapins interact with synaptojanin , synapsin I , and N - WASP , all proteins implicated in cytoskeletal reorgani - zation ( Bähler and Greengard , 1987 ; Miki et al . , 1996 ; Sak - isaka et al . , 1997 ) . In this study , we have provided in vivo evidence that syndapin modulates the actin cytoskele - ton . Syndapin overexpression triggered the formation of filopodia , protrusions from the cell surface containing bundled actin filaments that are found particularly in mo - tile cells and at the ends of growth cones in neurons ( O’Connor and Bentley , 1993 ) . Full - length syndapin proteins , but not the SH3 domain or the NH 2 terminus alone , induced filopodia upon overexpression . Strikingly , syndapin localizes to the very tips of filopodia induced upon overexpression , which represent the actual sites of actin polymerization ( Okabe and Hirokawa , 1991 ) and to the edges of lamellipodia . Neither location is a known site of endocytosis . Our data suggest that syndapin - induced cortical actin rearrangements are mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . First , syndapin and Arp3 colocalize at lamellipodial struc - tures induced upon syndapin overexpression . Likewise , GFP – dynamin 2 , but not other parts of the endocytosis machinery , like clathrin , has been reported to localize to cortical membrane ruffles and lamellipodia ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) . Second , coexpression of a COOH - terminal frag - ment of N - WASP completely suppressed syndapin - trig - gered filopodia formation ( Fig . 9 ) . An analogous fragment of Scar or WASP was shown by Machesky and Insall ( 1998 ) to impair cortical localization of the Arp2 / 3 com - plex and lamellipodia formation . Thus , syndapin - induced filopodia formation appears to require the Arp2 / 3 com - plex and its translocation to the cell cortex . In contrast , filopodia formation triggered by constitutively active Cdc42 mutants was not inhibited by the coexpression of the Scar COOH terminus ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ) . This is con - sistent with the observation that filopodia induced by membrane recruitment of Cdc42 differed from those in - duced by WASP in morphology and protein composition ( Castellano et al . , 1999 ) , suggesting that there may be two types of filopodia formation and syndapins may only in - duce one class . Overexpression of the dynamin K44A mutant ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) and K 1 - depletion or cytosolic acidification ( Altankov and Grinnell , 1993 ) were shown to block recep - tor - mediated endocytosis , but also to alter cell shape and redistribute actin stress fibers . In these cases , the defects in cell morphology and cytoskeletal organization might be secondary to an endocytosis block . We have shown here that different domains of syndapin affect membrane traf - ficking and cytoskeletal architecture in vivo . While the SH3 domain alone was sufficient to block endocytosis , it did not induce filopodia . To trigger these actin rearrange - ments , overexpression of the full - length protein was neces - sary , showing that the syndapin - induced cytoskeletal rear - rangements , at least , are not an indirect consequence of the inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Several potential mechanisms may explain the syn - dapin - induced rearrangement of the cortical actin cyto - skeleton . First , syndapin may mimic N - WASP activators , such as Cdc42 ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) , causing a conforma - tional change of N - WASP , which allows its COOH termi - nus to interact with and stimulate the Arp2 / 3 complex actin polymerization machinery . Second , syndapin may re - cruit N - WASP to the plasma membrane and this recruit - ment by itself may be sufficient for filopodia formation . In support of this , overexpression of N - WASP alone was in - sufficient to alter cell morphology or cytoskeletal architec - ture ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) , whereas the local recruitment of WASP to a membrane receptor resulted in the formation of membrane protrusions ( Castellano et al . , 1999 ) . A third potential mechanism is syndapin could act upstream of Cdc42 and activate the GTPase . And fourth , syndapin it - self may have actin - modulating properties in conjunction with the Arp2 / 3 complex . In general , the actin cytoskeleton could be involved in endocytic processes in several different ways , implicating different potential functional roles for syndapin . Cytoskel - etal structures may help to organize the endocytic machin - ery at the plasma membrane . Specific sites , or “hot spots” , for synaptic vesicle recycling have been observed in Dro - sophila nerve terminals ( Estes et al . , 1996 ; González - Gaitán and Jäckle , 1997 ; Roos and Kelly , 1998 ) . Since syndapin protein family members represent multidomain proteins , they could provide the linkage between the en - docytic machinery and the cytoskeleton . A rigid cortical actin cytoskeleton has an inhibitory effect on membrane traffic ( Trifaró and Vitale , 1993 ) . Syndapin might thus , via its interaction with N - WASP , promote local actin treadmilling , removing physical barriers to endocytosis . A tion ( i ) demonstrates that coexpression of the COOH - terminal VCA fragment of N - WASP reduced the phenotype induction from 95 . 9 6 1 . 2 % in HeLa cells overexpressing syndapin alone to 4 . 4 6 1 . 5 % . This value equals those in untransfected cells ( 3 . 7 6 2 . 0 % ) and cells expressing N - WASP – VCA alone ( 3 . 5 6 0 . 4 % ) . Transfection of HeLa cells with N - WASP – VCA ( k , green fluorescence ) did not cause cortical actin rearrangements , but resulted in an increase in phalloidin - stainable actin , especially in the perinuclear region ( j ) even at low expression levels of N - WASP – VCA ( k and l ) . Bars : ( a – d ) 10 m m ; ( e – h and j – l ) 30 m m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 1060 third potential function of the dynamin - associated syn - dapin involves the membrane fission event . By in vitro re - constitution studies , syndapin was implicated in the late , coated - pit scission event ( Simpson et al . , 1999 ) , which is also selectively affected by a dynamin mutant ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) and by actin monomer sequestering drugs in mam - malian A431 cells ( Lamaze et al . , 1997 ) . Perhaps the actin cytoskeleton provides the force to drive membrane fission . Actin polymerization may also promote the movement of newly formed endocytic vesicles into the cytoplasm . Both pinosomes and clathrin - coated vesicles have recently been described associated with actin comet tails in the cyto - plasm ( Frischknecht et al . , 1999 ; Merrifield et al . , 1999 ) . Finally , it is possible that syndapin regulation allows either endocytosis to take place at a patch of membrane or actin rearrangement , but not both simultaneously . Our results strongly suggest that SdpI links endocyto - sis and cytoskeletal dynamics in mature nerve terminals , whereas SdpII performs a similar role in other cell types . We are grateful to Dr . H . Miki for rat N - WASP cDNA and anti – N - WASP antibody , to Dr . P . McPherson for antisynaptojanin antibodies , and to Dr . M . D . Welch for anti - Arp3 antibodies . We thank Dr . M . M . Kessels for ad - vice and stimulating discussion . We thank Drs . Y . Lichtenstein , H . Palo - kangas , and J . Roos for critically reading the manuscript . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants ( NS15927 , NS09878 , and DA10154 ) to R . B . Kelly and by fellowships from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( Qu 116 / 1 - 1 and Qu 116 / 2 - 1 ) and the Max - Planck - Gesellschaft to B . Qualmann . Submitted : 7 September 1999 Revised : 14 January 2000 Accepted : 19 January 2000 References Altankov , G . , and F . Grinnell . 1993 . Depletion of intracellular potassium dis - rupts coated pits and reversibly inhibits cell polarization during fibroblast spreading . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 1449 – 1459 . Bähler , M . , and P . Greengard . 1987 . Synapsin I bundles F - actin in a phosphory - lation - dependent manner . Nature . 326 : 704 – 707 . Cao , H . , F . Garcia , and M . A . McNiven . 1998 . Differential distribution of dy - namin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 2595 – 2609 . Castellano , F . , P . Montcourrier , J . - C . Guillemot , E . Gouin , L . Machesky , P . Cossart , and P . Chavrier . 1999 . Inducible recruitment of Cdc42 or WASP to a cell - surface receptor triggers actin polymerization and filopodium forma - tion . Curr . Biol . 9 : 351 – 360 . Damke , H . , T . Baba , D . E . Warnock , and S . L . Schmid . 1994 . Induction of mu - tant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 915 – 934 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . , M . M . Kessels , V . S . Chopra , M . R . Hayden , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / Huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 1503 – 1518 . Estes , P . S . , J . Roos , A . van der Bliek , R . B . Kelly , K . S . Krishnan , and M . Ra - maswami . 1996 . Traffic of dynamin within individual Drosophila synaptic boutons relative to compartment - specific markers . J . Neurosci . 16 : 5443 – 5456 . Frischknecht , F . , S . Cudmore , V . Moreau , I . Reckmann , S . Röttger , and M . Way . 1999 . Tyrosine phosphorylation is required for actin - based motility of vaccinia but not Listeria or Shigella . Curr . Biol . 9 : 89 – 92 . Geli , M . I . , and H . Riezman . 1998 . Endocytic internalization in yeast and animal cells : similar and different . J . Cell Sci . 111 : 1031 – 1037 . González - Gaitán , M . , and H . Jäckle . 1997 . Role of Drosophila a - adaptin in pre - synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell . 88 : 767 – 776 . Lamaze , C . , T . - H . Chuang , L . J . Terlecky , G . M . Bokoch , and S . L . Schmid . 1996 . Regulation of receptor - mediated endocytosis by Rho and Rac . Nature . 382 : 177 – 179 . Lamaze , C . , L . M . Fujimoto , H . L . Yin , and S . L . Schmid . 1997 . The actin cyto - skeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 20332 – 20335 . Li , R . 1997 . Bee1 , a yeast protein with homology to Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein , is critical for the assembly of the cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 649 – 658 . Machesky , L . M . , and R . H . Insall . 1998 . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 : 1347 – 1356 . Machesky , L . M . , and R . H . Insall . 1999 . Signaling to actin dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 267 – 272 . Machesky , L . M . , R . D . Mullins , H . N . Higgs , D . A . Kaiser , L . Blanchoin , R . C . May , M . E . Hall , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Scar , a WASp - related protein , acti - vates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 3739 – 3744 . Marsh , M . , and H . T . McMahon . 1999 . The structural era of endocytosis . Sci - ence . 285 : 215 – 220 . Meriläinen , J . , V . - P . Lehto , and V . - M . Wasenius . 1997 . FAP52 , a novel , SH3 domain - containing focal adhesion protein . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 23278 – 23284 . Merrifield , C . J . , S . E . Moss , C . Ballestrem , B . A . Imhof , G . Giese , I . Wunderlich , and W . Almers . 1999 . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cul - tured mast cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 : 72 – 74 . Miki , H . , K . Miura , and T . Takenawa . 1996 . N - WASP , a novel actin - depoly - merizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 15 : 5326 – 5335 . Miki , H . , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , and T . Takenawa . 1998 . Induction of filopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Na - ture . 391 : 93 – 96 . Naqvi , S . N . , R . Zahn , D . A . Mitchell , B . J . Stevenson , and A . L . Munn . 1998 . The WASp homologue Las17p functions with the WIP homologue End5p / ver - prolin and is essential for endocytosis in yeast . Curr . Biol . 8 : 959 – 962 . O’Connor , T . P . , and D . Bentley . 1993 . Accumulation of actin in subsets of pio - neer growth cone filopodia in response to neural and epithelial guidance cues in situ . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 935 – 948 . Okabe , S . , and N . Hirokawa . 1991 . Actin dynamics in growth cones . J . Neuro - sci . 11 : 1918 – 1929 . Owens , D . J . , P . Wigge , Y . Vallis , J . D . A . Moore , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMa - hon . 1998 . Crystal structure of the amphiphysin - 2 SH3 domain and its role in the prevention of dynamin ring formation . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 17 : 5273 – 5285 . Qualmann , B . , J . Roos , P . J . DiGregorio , and R . B . Kelly . 1999 . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 501 – 513 . Riezman , H . , A . Munn , M . I . Geli , and L . Hicke . 1996 . Actin - , myosin - and ubiquitin - dependent endocytosis . Experientia . 52 : 1033 – 1041 . Ringstad , N . , Y . Nemoto , and P . De Camilli . 1997 . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 8569 – 8574 . Ritter , B . , J . Modregger , M . Paulsson , and M . Plomann . 1999 . PACSIN 2 , a novel member of the PACSIN family of cytoplasmic adapter proteins . FEBS Lett . 454 : 356 – 362 . Rohatgi , R . , L . Ma , H . Miki , M . Lopez , T . Kirchhausen , T . Takenawa , and M . W . Kirschner . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell . 97 : 221 – 231 . Roos , J . , and R . B . Kelly . 1998 . Dap160 , a neural - specific Eps15 homology and multiple SH3 domain - containing protein that interacts with Drosophila dy - namin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 19108 – 19119 . Sakisaka , T . , T . Itoh , K . Miura , and T . Takenawa . 1997 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate phosphatase regulates the rearrangement of actin fila - ments . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 : 3841 – 3849 . Schmalzing , G . , H . - P . Richter , A . Hansen , W . Schwarz , I . Just , and K . Aktories . 1995 . Involvement of the GTP binding protein Rho in constitutive endocyto - sis in Xenopus laevis oocytes . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 1319 – 1332 . Schmid , S . L . 1997 . Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an in - tegrated process . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 : 511 – 548 . Schmid , S . L . , M . A . McNiven , and P . De Camilli . 1998 . Dynamin and its part - ners : a progress report . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 : 504 – 512 . Sengar , A . S . , W . Wang , J . Bishay , S . Cohen , and S . E . Egan . 1999 . The EH and SH3 domain Ese proteins regulate endocytosis by linking dynamin and Eps15 . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 18 : 1159 – 1171 . Sever , S . , A . B . Muhlberg , and S . L . Schmid . 1999 . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature . 398 : 481 – 486 . Shupliakov , O . , P . Löw , D . Grabs , H . Gad , H . Chen , C . David , K . Takei , P . De Camilli , and L . Brodin . 1997 . Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by dis - ruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science . 276 : 259 – 263 . Simpson , F . , N . K . Hussain , B . Qualmann , R . B . Kelly , B . K . Kay , P . S . McPher - son , and S . L . Schmid . 1999 . SH3 - domain – containing proteins function at dis - tinct steps in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Nature Cell Bio . 1 : 119 – 124 . Stoorvogel , W . , G . J . Strous , H . J . Geuze , V . Oorschot , and A . L . Schwartz . 1991 . Late endosomes derive from early endosomes by maturation . Cell . 65 : 417 – 427 . Trifaró , J . - M . , and M . L . Vitale . 1993 . Cytoskeleton dynamics during neu - rotransmitter release . Trends Neurosci . 16 : 466 – 472 . Urrutia , R . , J . R . Henley , T . Cook , and M . A . McNiven . 1997 . The dynamins : re - dundant or distinct functions for an expanding family of related GTPases ? Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 377 – 384 . Wang , Z . , and M . F . Moran . 1996 . Requirement for the adaptor protein GRB2 in EGF receptor endocytosis . Science . 272 : 1935 – 1939 . Wendland , B . , S . D . Emr , and H . Riezman . 1998 . Protein traffic in the yeast en - docytic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 : 513 – 522 . Qualmann and Kelly Syndapins Link Endocytosis and Actin Dynamics 1061 Wigge , P . , and H . T . McMahon . 1998 . The amphiphysin family of proteins and their role in endocytosis at the synapse . Trends Neurosci . 21 : 339 – 344 . Wigge , P . , Y . Vallis , and H . T . McMahon . 1997 . Inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis by the amphiphysin SH3 domain . Curr . Biol . 7 : 554 – 560 . Winter , D . , T . Lechler , and R . Li . 1999 . Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr . Biol . 9 : 501 – 504 . Witke , W . , A . V . Podtelejnikov , A . Di Nardo , J . D . Sutherland , C . B . Gurniak , C . Dotti , and M . Mann . 1998 . In mouse brain profilin I and profilin II associate with regulators of the endocytic pathway and actin assembly . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 17 : 967 – 976 . Yarar , D . , W . To , A . Abo , and M . D . Welch . 1999 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 9 : 555 – 558 . Zhang , J . , A . Shehabeldin , L . A . G . da Cruz , J . Butler , A . - K . Somani , M . Mc - Gavin , I . Kozieradzki , A . O . dos Santos , A . Nagy , S . Grinstein , et al . 1999 . Antigen receptor - induced activation and cytoskeletal rearrangement are im - paired in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein - deficient lymphocytes . J . Exp . Med . 9 : 1329 – 1341 .