686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , VOL . 68 , NO . 1 , JANUARY 2019 A Novel NLOS Mitigation Algorithm for UWB Localization in Harsh Indoor Environments Kegen Yu , Senior Member , IEEE , Kai Wen , Student Member , IEEE , Yingbing Li , Shuai Zhang , and Kefei Zhang Abstract —Non - line - of - sight ( NLOS ) propagation of radio sig - nals can signiﬁcantly degrade the performance of ultra - wideband localization systems indoors , it is hence crucial to mitigate the NLOS effect to enhance the accuracy of positioning . The exist - ing NLOS mitigation algorithms to improve localization accuracy are either by compensating range errors through NLOS identiﬁ - cation and mitigation methods for ranging or by using dedicated localization techniques . However , they are only applicable to some speciﬁc scenarios due to some special assumptions or the need of a priori knowledge , such as thresholds and distribution functions . Another disadvantage is that they neither have the capability to evaluate the magnitude of NLOS effect nor take account of the residual NLOS range errors during location estimation . To remedy these problems , this paper proposes a less environment - dependent and a priori knowledge - independent NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method for ranging which is able to determine the speciﬁc NLOS channel . Based on the identiﬁed channel informa - tion , a rule is developed to select appropriate NLOS ranges for location estimation . Meanwhile , an equality constrained Taylor series robust least squares ( ECTSRLS ) technique is proposed to suppress residual NLOS range errors by introducing robustness to Taylor series least squares method . All these constitute our FCE - ECTSRLS NLOS mitigation algorithm . The performance of the proposed algorithm is compared with four existing NLOS mitiga - tion algorithms by both static and mobile localization experiments in a harsh indoor environment . Experimental results have demon - strated that the proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algorithm outperforms the other four algorithms signiﬁcantly . Index Terms —Fuzzy sets , least squares method , non - line - of - sight identiﬁcation and mitigation , robustness , ultra - wideband . Manuscript receivedJuly4 , 2018 ; revisedSeptember 30 , 2018andNovember 16 , 2018 ; accepted November 19 , 2018 . Date of publication November 28 , 2018 ; date of current version January 15 , 2019 . This work was supported by the Independent Innovation Project of “Double - First Class” Construction under Grant 2018ZZCX08 of the China University of Mining and Technology . The review of this paper was coordinated by Prof . G . Mao . ( Corresponding author : Kegen Yu . ) K . Yu is with the School of Environmental Science and Spatial Informatics , China University of Mining and Technology , Xuzhou 221116 , China , and also with the School of Geodesy and Geomatics , Wuhan University , Wuhan 430079 , China ( e - mail : , kegen . yu @ ieee . org ) . K . Wen , Y . Li , and S . Zhang are with the School of Geodesy and Geomat - ics , Wuhan University , Wuhan 430079 , China ( e - mail : , wenkai @ whu . edu . cn ; ybli @ sgg . whu . edu . cn ; 2016102140015 @ whu . edu . cn ) . K . Zhang is with the School of Environment Science and Spatial Informat - ics , China University of Mining and Technology , Xuzhou 221116 , China , and also with the Satellite Positioning for Atmosphere , Climate and Environment Research Centre , School of Science , RMIT University , Melbourne , VIC 3000 , Australia ( e - mail : , kefei . zhang @ rmit . edu . au ) . Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online at http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org . Digital Object Identiﬁer 10 . 1109 / TVT . 2018 . 2883810 I . I NTRODUCTION L OCATION information plays a critical role in location based services and their applications . In outdoor environ - ments , accurate location information can be readily obtained from Global Navigation Satellite Systems , such as Global Posi - tioning System and BeiDou Navigation Satellite System . How - ever , these positioning systems may be signiﬁcantly degraded or even fail to provide any useful location information in indoor environments due to the blockage of satellite signals [ 1 ] . Various technologies have been used for indoor localization , including wireless sensor network , sound , infrared , camera , simultaneous localization and mapping , inertial sensor , and ultra - wideband ( UWB ) . Therein , UWB is considered as one of the promis - ing technologies for high - precision indoor localization due to a number of desirable properties , including low energy consump - tion , centimeter - level range resolution , immunization to multi - path , and certain obstacle penetration capability [ 2 ] . UWB has thus been extensively investigated for localization and naviga - tion by both academia and industry in recent years [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] . How - ever , the UWB localization accuracy is deteriorated when the signal propagates under non - line - of - sight ( NLOS ) conditions . The NLOS usually refers to the situation where the direct path between a radio transmitter and a radio receiver is obstructed . In this case , the transmitted signal may arrive at the receiver through a penetrated , reﬂected or diffracted path , resulting in increased travel time and reduced signal strength . Consequently , the distance estimated based on whether time measurement or signal strength measurement is biased . NLOS is a common problem of radio localization technologies , such as WiFi , Zig - Bee , and Bluetooth , in addition to UWB . Compared with other methods , the problem is more severe for the UWB due to its larger operational range ( in the order of 100 m ) and the desired high localization accuracy ( in the order of a few decimeters ) indoors [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] . Therefore , NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation has been a popular research topic in the ﬁeld of UWB localiza - tion [ 7 ] . A number of methods have been proposed to improve localization accuracy [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] . These methods either compensate ranges for NLOS induced range errors before location estima - tion or directly suppress NLOS effect by dedicated localization algorithms . It is well known that the complete removal of NLOS effect is impractical , but these methods take no account of the effect of residual NLOS range errors on location estimation . In addition , the existing NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation meth - ods identify the propagation condition as either line - of - sight or NLOS without providing further information about the channel . 0018 - 9545 © 2018 IEEE . Personal use is permitted , but republication / redistribution requires IEEE permission . See http : / / www . ieee . org / publications standards / publications / rights / index . html for more information . YU et al . : NOVEL NLOS MITIGATION ALGORITHM FOR UWB LOCALIZATION IN HARSH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS 687 In many cases , it is valuable to know the speciﬁc channel type for NLOS treatment . For instance , we can intuitively evaluate the magnitude of NLOS effect . To deal with these problems , we propose a novel NLOS mitigation localization algorithm . The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows : 1 ) A fuzzy comprehensive evaluation ( FCE ) based NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method for mitigating range error is proposed . In this method , it is the ﬁrst to suggest dividing indoor propagation channels into multiple cate - gories so that the channel identiﬁcation results can be used to evaluate how serious the NLOS effect is . In addition , this method can also provide information concerning the probability which the hypothesis of NLOS is accepted at . 2 ) A range selection rule is proposed when NLOS ranges are required , together with LOS ranges , to determine the location of a node . The rule ingeniously combines chan - nel information and the geometric dilution of precision ( GDOP ) factor . 3 ) An equality - constrained Taylor series robust least squares ( ECTSRLS ) location estimation technique is developed to further suppress the residual NLOS range error . The algo - rithm is simple and can be used for any NLOS scenarios . 4 ) A UWB localization system for a single node case based on time division multiple access ( TDMA ) technology is built . Both static and mobile experiments are conducted in a complex indoor environment and the experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed local - ization algorithm over the existing algorithms . The rest of this paper is organized as follows . Section II brieﬂy reviews the related works about NLOS mitigation for UWB localization . In Section III , the measurement model is given and related problems are described . In Section IV , a NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method for ranging is proposed , which is suited for the case of multiple propagation channels . In Section V , the proposed ECTSRLS location estimation tech - nique is derived . Then , the performance of the proposed lo - calization algorithm is evaluated in Section VI . Finally , some conclusions are given in Section VII . II . R ELATED W ORKS In this paper , we divide the existing NLOS mitigation algo - rithms into two categories based on whether NLOS identiﬁ - cation is involved . The ﬁrst category directly mitigates NLOS effect on location estimation without implementing NLOS iden - tiﬁcation [ 8 ] , [ 10 ] – [ 13 ] . The second category , which is also con - sidered to be the most common method , tackles the problem of NLOS effect in two - steps : 1 ) identifying the NLOS corrupted range estimate ; 2 ) then remedying the NLOS induced range er - ror or / and suppressing its effect on location estimation . Since the proposed localization algorithm in this paper belongs to the latter , the second category is focused on . A . NLOS Identiﬁcation Traditional NLOS identiﬁcation techniques can be classiﬁed into three categories , namely range based methods , channel based methods , and location based methods [ 9 ] , [ 14 ] . Range based methods mainly use the probability density function ( PDF ) or variance of range estimates to distinguish between LOS and NLOS [ 14 ] . These methods are simple but are lim - ited by the requirement of a priori distribution functions or the presence of time latency . Channel based methods use the chan - nel impulse response ( CIR ) to distinguish NLOS from LOS , including two popular classes . First uses the PDF or cumula - tive distribution function ( CDF ) of the received power envelope for NLOS identiﬁcation [ 15 ] . The other uses the metrics of the received signal , such as signal - to - noise - ratio ( SNR ) , kurtosis , and mean excess delay ( MED ) , for NLOS identiﬁcation , which usually requires a joint probability distribution or thresholds [ 16 ] – [ 19 ] . However , it is challenging to determine an appropri - ate distribution function and unclear on how to set the threshold [ 20 ] . Both the range based and channel based methods identify NLOS before location estimation , whereas the location based methods identify NLOS in the process of location estimation and may even use the calculated position coordinates in turn for NLOS identiﬁcation . In the case where redundant range esti - mates are available , it is likely to identify NLOS by comparing the location estimates produced by different subsets of range estimates [ 21 ] , but then the method would be ineffective when there are no redundant range estimates or multiple range esti - mates belong to NLOS . In addition , NLOS can also be identiﬁed by combining the calculated location with extra environment in - formation , such as geometry , map , and the continuity of a path [ 15 ] , [ 22 ] – [ 24 ] . Such methods seem to be more ﬂexible and more robust because no a prior knowledge is required . Never - theless , it is hard to ensure that NLOS is effectively identiﬁed since the additional constraint conditions are not always there . Also , the complexity of the system will be increased . B . NLOS Mitigation There are two common strategies for NLOS mitigation after identiﬁcation . The ﬁrst one is to remedy range errors and then use the corrected range estimates for localization . Heidari et al . [ 25 ] subtracted the range error from a NLOS range estimate based on the statistics of range errors associated with each class of receiver location . Wu et al . [ 26 ] deduced the NLOS range er - ror expression based on the signal propagation path loss model , then used it to calibrate the range estimate under NLOS con - ditions . Both methods are developed for certain environments with known environmental parameters . In addition , the method in [ 26 ] has a high computational complexity due to iterative estimation of direct path ( DP ) . On the other hand , the second strategy is to directly suppress the NLOS effect on location esti - mation by using dedicated localization techniques . G¨uvenc¸ et al . [ 19 ] set a smaller weight for NLOS range estimates in the least squares ( LS ) based location estimation algorithm . Yu et al . [ 27 ] proposed a weighted Taylor series least squares ( TS - LS ) algo - rithm for localization in NLOS environments . The difference between the NLOS range estimate and the calculated range is set to zero in the process of iterative calculation . Venkatesh et al . [ 28 ] presented a linear programming ( LP ) approach instead of LS for location estimation to improve the overall performance of a positioning system by correctly incorporating both LOS and NLOS range estimates . Although these methods turned out to improve location accuracy based on simulation results , the 688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , VOL . 68 , NO . 1 , JANUARY 2019 TS - LS method would not work when all of the range estimates are corrupted by NLOS and the LP method only can accurately estimate a node’s location when there are at least three LOS range estimates available for two - dimensional ( 2 - D ) scenarios ( its performance would degrade signiﬁcantly in other cases ) . In addition , the LP method greatly increases computational com - plexity due to high - dimensional matrix operations . C . Recent Progress of NLOS Identiﬁcation and Mitigation In recent years , machine learning technology has also been investigated and exploited as a new means of NLOS identiﬁ - cation and mitigation . The main advantage of such methods is that they can be widely used since no a priori knowledge is involved . In [ 29 ] and [ 30 ] , support vector machine ( SVM ) is applied to distinguish between LOS and NLOS and to mitigate the NLOS range error by using the trained classiﬁcation and prediction models . In [ 31 ] , a similar method based on relevance vector machine also is proposed . Other common advantage of the two methods is that NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation are implemented within the same theory framework . However , the performances of the two methods are highly dependent on the used kernel function and the quality of ofﬂine ( training ) data . An inappropriate kernel function or an insufﬁcient ofﬂine data will lead to under - ﬁtting or over - ﬁtting problem in model train - ing . Authors in [ 20 ] modeled the channel sight conditions be - tween the node and anchors as a Hidden Markov Model ( HMM ) . Based on the trained HMM during the ofﬂine phase , real time sight conditions are identiﬁed and then used to improve the location accuracy by building a proper relation between the re - ceived signal strength and distance . However , the method may be unsuitable for some cases like navigation which has a clear walking direction rather than random walk . Besides , the method is unable to identify NLOS scenarios which are caused by dy - namic factors like pedestrians , and is also lack of generalization because of the strong dependence on the geometry constituted by the boundaries of ﬁeld of interest ( FOI ) and obstacles in the FOI . In addition to the mentioned issues in the above analysis , the existing methods do not take the residual NLOS range er - rors into consideration during localization . Also , they lack of the capacity of providing more information about propagation channel without the LOS / NLOS sight condition . However , it is inevitable to suffer from the effect of residual NLOS range errors . Meanwhile , more information about propagation chan - nel is helpful to motivate a new method for NLOS treatment . In this paper , we propose a less environment - dependent and a priori knowledge - independent NLOS identiﬁcation and mitiga - tion method for ranging . The method can determine the speciﬁc channel type . Based the identiﬁed channel information , we de - velop a rule to select an optimal range set for location estimation . In addition , robustness is introduced to TS - LS to suppress the residual NLOS effect . III . M EASUREMENT M ODEL AND P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION Suppose that a location network consists of m UWB anchors with known locations and an UWB node to be located . At time t k , the node is surrounded by n ( n ≤ m ) anchors . Here , for analytical clarity , we consider localization in 2 - D scenarios but the extension to three - dimensional scenarios can be realized with the same steps described as below . Considering both noise and NLOS range errors , the range estimates between anchors and the node can be modeled as : ˆ d i = (cid:2) d i + ε i , for LOS case d i + ε i + η i , for NLOS case , i = 1 , 2 , · · · , n , ( 1 ) with d i = (cid:3) p i − p (cid:3) = (cid:3) ( x i − x ) 2 + ( y i − y ) 2 , ( 2 ) where p i = [ x i y i ] T is the location of the i th anchor , p = [ x y ] T is the node’s location , “ (cid:3) • (cid:3) ” is the euclidean - 2 - norm , ˆ d i is the range estimate between the i th anchor and the node which is usually obtained based on the time - of - arrival ( TOA ) technique [ 32 ] or the two - way time - of - ﬂy ( TW - TOF ) technique [ 33 ] , ε i is the noise which is generally modeled as a zero - mean Gaussian random variable , and η i is the NLOS range error . With biased NLOS range estimates , the location accuracy will be adversely affected . In this paper , we ﬁrstly identify and remedy the NLOS range estimates . The corrected ranges are expressed by : (cid:2) ˜ d i = d i + ε i , for LOS case ˜ d i = d i − Δ d i + ε i + η (cid:4) i , for NLOS case , ( 3 ) where Δ d i is the estimated NLOS range error associated with NLOS range ˆ d i and η (cid:4) i is the residual NLOS range error since the complete removal of NLOS effect is impractical . The n corrected ranges are then divided into two sets S los and S nlos , which include LOS range estimates and NLOS range estimates respectively . S los = (cid:4)(cid:5) p i , ˜ d i (cid:6) : ˆ l i = 1 (cid:7) , S nlos = (cid:4)(cid:5) p i , ˜ d i (cid:6) : ˆ l i = − 1 (cid:7) . ( 4 ) Here ˆ l i stands for the sight condition of identiﬁed channel , which is set to 1 for LOS and − 1 for NLOS . Apparently , ac - curate location estimate can be obtained when sufﬁcient range estimates in S los are available . Such location estimation strat - egy has been proposed in [ 29 ] , but it does not consider the issue of selecting an optimal range set when a mixture of LOS and NLOS ranges is needed for location estimation . Such an optimal range set can be written as : S = S los ∪ S (cid:4) nlos and S (cid:4) nlos ⊆ S nlos , ( 5 ) where the “ ∪ ” represents the union of two sets , and the “ ⊆ ” indi - cates that S (cid:4) nlos is a subset of S nlos . Then , location estimation is generally done by maximizing or minimizing an objective func - tion . It is also observed that residual NLOS range errors caused by incorrect NLOS identiﬁcation or incomplete NLOS mitiga - tion have not been considered during the location estimation in the literature . Motivated by these observations , we propose a novel method to identify NLOS and mitigate the induced range error , develop a NLOS range selection rule , and derive a loca - tion estimation technique which takes account of residual NLOS range errors in the following sections . The overall idea of the proposed NLOS mitigation algorithm in this paper is shown in YU et al . : NOVEL NLOS MITIGATION ALGORITHM FOR UWB LOCALIZATION IN HARSH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS 689 Fig . 1 . The overall idea of the proposed NLOS mitigation localization algo - rithm . The blue dashed line and red chain line indicate the NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation for ranging and the optimal range set selection , respectively . The card ( · ) stands for the number of elements in a set . Fig . 1 . It is worth noting that although this paper focuses on UWB localization , the proposed algorithm is also suitable for other radio signal based localization systems . IV . P ROPOSED NLOS I DENTIFICATION AND M ITIGATION M ETHOD FOR R ANGING In this section , we ﬁrst introduce the idea of subdivision of indoor NLOS propagation channels . Then a Pearson correlation coefﬁcient ( PCC ) based feature selection method is described to obtain the optimal feature combination . At last but not least , the detail of the proposed NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method for ranging is provided . A . Subdivision of Indoor NLOS Propagation Channels Taking TOA based ranging as an example , the NLOS range error can be expressed by [ 26 ] : Δ d = 10 (cid:8) √ ε nlos − 1 (cid:9) att nlos log 10 (cid:10) max 1 < i ≤ L (cid:8) a 2 i τ ni (cid:9) a 2 DP τ nDP (cid:11) , ( 6 ) where ε nlos and att nlos denote the equivalent factor of dielec - tric constants and that of attenuation constants associated with obstructions in the propagation channel respectively , L is the number of multipath , a i and τ i denote the amplitude and TOA of the i th multipath , and a DP and τ DP denote the amplitude and TOA of the DP signal . According to ( 6 ) , NLOS range errors under different propaga - tion channels may be rather different . Fig . 2 shows the statistics of NLOS range errors in ﬁve typical indoor NLOS channels , from which we see that the through - concrete - wall and through - iron - door induced range errors are much larger than other range errors . Naturally , more information concerning the range error can be exploited if the speciﬁc NLOS propagation channel is provided . As a result , it will beneﬁt the handling of NLOS range estimates , especially for these localization algorithms which do not remedy the NLOS range estimates directly . For instance , in the absence of sufﬁcient LOS range estimates , a number of NLOS range estimates with smaller errors rather than all NLOS range estimates can be used for location determination . There - fore , we propose to subdivide the indoor NLOS propagation channels into a number of typical representatives instead of Fig . 2 . BoxchartofrangeerrorsunderﬁvekindsoftypicalNLOSpropagation conditions . The square denotes the mean , the dash denotes the maximum or minimum , and the asterisk denotes the 1 % or 99 % of range errors . Fig . 3 . Signal waveforms recorded in two different propagation channels . only LOS and NLOS channels . It is thus indispensable to con - sider both the case of a single propagation channel and that of mixed multiple propagation channels in NLOS identiﬁcation . B . PCC Based Feature Selection Fig . 3 shows two recorded waveforms ( i . e . , CIRs ) associated with two range estimates under different NLOS propagation channels , from which signiﬁcant differences between them can be observed . In order to develop our NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method , eight familiar features are abstracted from the signal waveform as candidate classiﬁcation features , which are the total energy ( TE ) , maximal amplitude ( MA ) , normalized strongest path energy ( SPE ) , SNR , rise time ( RT ) , MED , root - mean - square delay spread ( RDS ) and kurtosis ( KUR ) . These features are selected based on the following considerations . 1 ) When signal penetrates through obstructions , signal energy will be greatly decayed [ 28 ] . 2 ) The noise level may change considerably in different propagation channels . 3 ) Dramatic variation will occur to RT , MED , RDS , and KUR when the propagation channel suffers from more obstructions [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] . 4 ) RDSincreases whenmoremultipathcomponents areincluded in the received signal [ 34 ] , [ 36 ] . And 5 ) in LOS case without multipath interference , the KUR is high , but in the presence of multipath , the KUR will degrade considerably . These candidate features are calculated as follows : 690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , VOL . 68 , NO . 1 , JANUARY 2019 1 ) total energy ε = N (cid:12) i = 1 | r ( t i ) | 2 , where N is the number of discrete samples of the signal waveform r ( t ) and r ( t i ) is the amplitude of the i th sample . 2 ) maximum amplitude r max = max { | r ( t i ) | } . 3 ) normalized strongest path energy λ = r 2 max / ε . 4 ) signal - to - noise ratio δ snr = 10 log 10 (cid:13) r 2 max 2 σ 2 n (cid:14) , where σ n is the standard deviation of the thermal noise . 5 ) rise time t rise = t stop − t start , with (cid:2) t start = min { t i : | r ( t i ) | ≥ 0 . 1 r max } t stop = min { t i : | r ( t i ) | ≥ 0 . 9 r max } , where t i is the sampling time of the i th sample of r ( t ) . 6 ) kurtosis κ = 1 Nσ 4 r N (cid:12) i = 1 ( | r ( t i ) | − μ r ) 4 , with μ r = 1 N N (cid:12) i = 1 | r ( t i ) | , σ 2 r = 1 N N (cid:12) i = 1 ( | r ( t i ) | − μ r ) 2 . 7 ) mean excess delay τ med = 1 ε N (cid:12) i = 1 (cid:5) t i | r ( t i ) | 2 (cid:6) . 8 ) root - mean - square delay spread τ rms = 1 ε N (cid:12) i = 1 (cid:15) ( t i − τ med ) 2 | r ( t i ) | 2 (cid:16) . To select an optimal subset from the eight features , we use the PCC analysis method to calculate the correlations between different features [ 37 ] . According to the obtained correlations , we choose less relevant features to form a feature set . Taking the case of TE and MA , the correlation between two features is calculated as : γ TE , M A = (cid:17) ni = 1 [ ( u i − ¯ u ) ( v i − ¯ v ) ] (cid:3)(cid:17) ni = 1 ( u i − ¯ u ) 2 (cid:3)(cid:17) ni = 1 ( v i − ¯ v ) 2 , (cid:2) u i ∈ { u i } ni = 1 v i ∈ { v i } ni = 1 , ( 7 ) where { u i } ni = 1 and { v i } ni = 1 represent the TE set and the MA set abstracted from ofﬂine data respectively , ¯ u = 1 / n Σ ni = 1 u i and analogously for ¯ v . C . FCE Based NLOS Identiﬁcation and Mitigation When subdividing the propagation channels , we borrow the idea of fuzzy comprehensive evaluation ( FCE ) to identify the speciﬁc channel and the corresponding sight condition . The model of FCE can be expressed by : B ∼ = A ∼ • R ∼ , ( 8 ) where A ∼ and B ∼ are two fuzzy sets deﬁned in factor domain and evaluation domain respectively , R ∼ represents the relation between A ∼ and B ∼ , and “ • ” is a fuzzy operator by which we can obtain the evaluation result based on information included in A ∼ and R ∼ . The elements in a fuzzy set are calculated by the membership function [ 38 ] . Further information concerning fuzzy set and FCE can be found in [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] . Assuming that the indoor propagation channels are divided into m categories { c i } mi = 1 , the ofﬂine data consist of m subsets { D i } mi = 1 , where D i = { Δ d ik , X ik , l i } n i k = 1 is the sample subset under propagation channel c i . Here , Δ d ik is the range error of k th range estimate in subset D i ( i . e . , ˆ d ik ) , X ik is the feature set extracted from the waveform associated with range estimate ˆ d ik , l i is the true sight condition of channel c i , and n i is the number of samples included in subset D i . X ik is further deﬁned as : X ik = (cid:18) x ikj (cid:19) p j = 1 , ( 9 ) where p is the number of classiﬁcation features , x ikj is the j th element of set X ik . For a given online measurement , including the range estimate ˆ d and the extracted feature set ˆ X = { x j } pj = 1 , the NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation is conducted as follows . Firstly , we look for the closest sample to the online mea - surement in each ofﬂine sample subset . Taking subset D i as an example , ˆ X and D i are regarded as factor domain and evaluation domain respectively . Assuming that the importance of feature x j to propagation channel identiﬁcation is w j , the combined importance of p features is seen as a fuzzy set W ∼ in domain ˆ X : W ∼ = { w j } p j = 1 , subject to (cid:2) 0 ≤ w j ≤ 1 (cid:17) pj = 1 w j = 1 . ( 10 ) Meanwhile , the evaluation result is deﬁned as a fuzzy set S ∼ = { s i k } n i k = 1 ( s i k ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] ) in domain D i , and is obtained by the fuzzy transform : S ∼ = W ∼ • R ∼ , ( 11 ) where R ∼ is written in the form of matrix [ r jk ] p × n i ( j = 1 , 2 , . . . , p ; k = 1 , 2 , . . . , n i ) . In this paper , the used fuzzy op - erator is equivalent to the inner product of two vectors , i . e . , s ik = p (cid:12) j = 1 ( w j r jk ) . ( 12 ) YU et al . : NOVEL NLOS MITIGATION ALGORITHM FOR UWB LOCALIZATION IN HARSH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS 691 Here , r jk is calculated using the deﬁned membership function μ R ∼ as : r jk = μ R ∼ (cid:8) x j , x ikj (cid:9) = 1 − (cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:20) x j − x ikj (cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:20) max (cid:4) x j , x ikj (cid:7) . ( 13 ) The sample corresponding to the maximal value in S ∼ ( let s ik be maximal here ) is considered as the one closest to the online mea - surement . The corresponding X ik , Δ d ik , s ik and l i are rewritten as X isim , Δ d isim , s isim and l isim , respectively . In the same way , the closest sample in each data subset can be found , and a new set D sim = { X isim , Δ d isim , l isim , s isim } mi = 1 is obtained by com - bining all the closest samples . Then , D sim is used for NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation . Speciﬁcally , we identify the propagation channel of the online measurement as the channel of one sample in D sim , or as a mixture of channels of multiple samples in D sim . When NLOS is identiﬁed , we further predict the NLOS range error in a similar way . Since the representative propagation channels are eventu - ally limited , the proposed NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method may be incapable for handling a few special scenarios . A threshold ω is set to exclude such situations . Deﬁne : s isim < ω , ∀ i , i ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . , m } . ( 14 ) If ( 14 ) is satisﬁed , the online measurement is beyond the iden - tiﬁcation capability of this method and is abandoned . Note that ( 14 ) enables this method to remove outliers which signiﬁcantly deviate from the ofﬂine data . The propagation channel is identiﬁed as c i provided that : s isim > β , ( 15 ) where β is another threshold greater than ω . In the case where multiple { s isim } satisfy ( 15 ) , the propagation channel corre - sponding to the maximal one in { s isim } ( let s isim be maximal here ) is selected . Then NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation is implemented as : (cid:21) nlos , ˜ d = ˆ d − (cid:2) d i sim , when ˆ l = l i sim < 0 los , ˜ d = ˆ d , when ˆ l = l i sim > 0 . ( 16 ) Alternatively , if both ( 15 ) and ( 16 ) are not satisﬁed , the propa - gation channel is considered as a combination of multiple chan - nels which all satisfy : s i sim ≥ ω , i ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . , m } . ( 17 ) The NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation is then imple - mented as : ⎧⎪⎪⎪ ⎨ ⎪⎪⎪⎩ nlos , ˜ d = ˆ d − (cid:17) (cid:5) s isim Ω Δ d isim (cid:6) , when ˆ l = (cid:17) (cid:5) s isim Ω l isim (cid:6) < 0 los , ˜ d = ˆ d , when ˆ l = (cid:17) (cid:5) s isim Ω l isim (cid:6) ≥ 0 , ( 18 ) with Ω = (cid:12) s isim , subject to s isim ≥ ω . ( 19 ) It is worth mentioning that since the membership itself , vary - ing between 0 and 1 , implies the degree of acceptance , the involved thresholds ω and β can be easily determined without a priori knowledge . V . P ROPOSED L OCATION E STIMATION A LGORITHM In the previous section , we conduct NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation for each range estimate . In the section , we further de - scribe how to use these ranges to produce an accurate location estimate . There are many techniques for location estimation in the literature [ 40 ] . Therein , Taylor series least squares ( TS - LS ) technique owns a good trade - off between accuracy and simplic - ity [ 41 ] . However , inthepresenceof residual NLOSrangeerrors , locations estimated by this method will have low accuracy and poor reliability . On the other hand , robust estimation technique can effectively resist the abnormal observations which do not follow the pattern of most of the observations [ 42 ] . Therefore it is promising to achieve high - precision location estimation by introducing robustness to TS - LS . In this section , we ﬁrst intro - duce an effective NLOS range selection rule . Then we deduce an equality - constrained Taylor series robust least squares ( ECT - SRLS ) estimation technique . A . NLOS Range Selection Rule As shown in Fig . 4 , the more LOS ranges produce smaller radial location errors ( i . e . , Euclidean distances between the lo - cation estimates and the true locations ) , but the radial location errors may be increased when NLOS ranges are added . There - fore , considering the residual NLOS range errors , it is necessary to select an appropriate range set for location estimation when the number of available LOS ranges is insufﬁcient for local - ization . Location performance of LS based methods is related with the standard deviation ( STD ) of the UWB ranges and the topology of the UWB node and anchors which is often called GDOP factor [ 40 ] , [ 43 ] , [ 44 ] . A theoretical location accuracy measure for 2 - D localization is derived in [ 43 ] : M = (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:28) (cid:17) k ∈ S A σ − 2 k (cid:17) k ∈ S A (cid:17) u ∈ S A u > k (cid:8) σ − 2 k σ − 2 u Λ 2 ku (cid:9) , ( 20 ) where S A indicates a set of involved anchors , σ i ( i = k , u ) is the standard derivation of range estimate between the node and the i th anchor , and Λ ku is the area of the parallelogram speciﬁed by the unit vectors from the node to the k th anchor and from the node to the u th anchor . However , in practice , ( 20 ) requires the STD of each corrected range after NLOS mitigation and the area Λ ku , which are un - known . Therefore , we use a calculable M c instead of M to select the optimal range set based on the range estimates . Firstly , we assume that the residual NLOS range error is larger when the signal is subject to more severe NLOS channel . This assumption is reasonable because the more severe NLOS channel means that the factors leading to NLOS range error are more complex in general , and thus it is more difﬁcult to remedy the error . Un - der this hypothesis , we can select NLOS ranges based on the variances of range estimates . Nonetheless , it still is infeasible to 692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , VOL . 68 , NO . 1 , JANUARY 2019 Fig . 4 . Radial location errors simulation ( in m ) . The black dots , spaced one meter apart , represent the locations where location estimation is implemented . The black and red triangles stand for the locations of anchors . These three heat maps provide a smooth topographical representation of location accuracy . The ﬁrst is for the case of three LOS anchors while the middle one is for the case of four LOS anchors ( the red triangle is an added anchor ) . The right heat map uses the same anchors as those of the middle one , but NLOS channel is assumed between nodes with the red anchor ( i . e . , a range error equivalent to 5 % of the true range is contained in the range estimate ) . The noise contained in each range estimate is modeled as Gaussian random variable with mean = true range , variance = 1m . know the variance of each range estimate . In the help of chan - nel subdivision , considering that the ranging accuracy under the same propagation channel is similar , we take range estimates under each propagation channel as independent identically dis - tributed . Thus , we can readily obtain the variance of each range estimate based on the ofﬂine data . Deﬁning the variance of range estimates under channel c i ( i = 1 , 2 , . . . , m ) as σ 2 c i , yields : M ≈ (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:28) (cid:17) k ∈ S A ˆΓ − 1 k (cid:17) k ∈ S A (cid:17) u ∈ SA u > k (cid:5) ˆΓ − 1 k ˆΓ − 1 u Λ 2 ku (cid:6) , ( 21 ) where ˆΓ i is the variance of range ˆ d i , which is calculated based on the identiﬁed propagation channel as : ⎧⎨ ⎩ ˆΓ i = (cid:17) (cid:13)(cid:5) s isim Ω (cid:6) 2 σ 2 c i (cid:14) , when ω ≤ s isim ≤ β ˆΓ i = σ 2 c i , when s isim > β . ( 22 ) The Ω in ( 22 ) has been deﬁned by ( 19 ) . Meanwhile , since the residual NLOS range error is small relative to the true range , we can write Λ ku as : 1 Λ ku ≈ Λ (cid:4) ku = (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:28) 1 − (cid:10) ˜ d 2 k + ˜ d 2 u − d 2 ku 2 ˜ d k ˜ d u (cid:11) 2 . ( 23 ) Therefore a calculable location accuracy measure is deﬁned as : M c (cid:3) (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:28) (cid:17) k ∈ S A ˆΓ − 1 k (cid:17) k ∈ S A (cid:17) u ∈ S A u > k (cid:5) ˆΓ − 1 k ˆΓ − 1 u Λ (cid:4) 2 ku (cid:6) . ( 24 ) If m 1 ( m 1 < 3 ) LOS ranges and m 2 NLOS ranges are avail - able at one location ( m 1 + m 2 ≥ 3 ) , the number of possi - ble range sets for localization is C 3 − m 1 m 2 + C 4 − m 1 m 2 + · · · + C m 2 m 2 1 Λ ku = | sin θ ku | , where θ ku is the angle between the unit vector from the node to k th and the unit vector from the node to u th anchor . Considering cos θ ku = ( d k 2 + d u 2 − d 2 ku ) / ( 2 d k d u ) , | sin θ ku | = (cid:29) 1 − cos 2 θ ku ( where d k and d u are the ranges between the node and k th anchor and the u th anchor respectively , and d ku istherangebetweentwoanchors ) , ˜ d k ≈ d k and ˜ d u ≈ d u , we can obtain Λ (cid:4) ku ≈ Λ ku . where C denotes the composition operator and the set size ranges from 3 to m 1 + m 2 . Based on ( 24 ) , location accuracy measure for each range set can be calculated , then the range set achiev - ing the minimal location accuracy measure is considered as the optimal range set . B . Equality - Constrained Taylor Series Robust Least Squares Deﬁne : f i ( p ) Δ = ˜ d i − (cid:3) p − p i (cid:3) . When n ( n ≥ 3 ) range estimates are available , an M - estimator for location estimation can be deﬁned as : 2 p = arg min p n (cid:12) i = 1 P i ρ ( v i ) , ( 25 ) with v i ≈ f i ( p 0 ) + ∇ f i ( p 0 ) T ( p − p 0 ) = f i ( p 0 ) + ∇ f i ( p 0 ) T δ p , ( 26 ) where P i is called weight who indicates the degree of conﬁdence that one can place on ˜ d i and ∇ f i ( p 0 ) is the gradient vector of f i ( p ) at a prior approximation p 0 . The solution of ( 25 ) can be deduced as ( 27 ) which owns the same form as that of LS ( see appendix A ) , therefore we call the location estimation technique as Taylor series robust least squares ( TS - RLS ) . ˆp = p 0 + (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 A T ¯Pb . ( 27 ) where A = ∂f ( p ) / ∂ p T with f ( p ) = [ f 1 ( p ) f 2 ( p ) · · · f n ( p ) ] T and ¯P = diag { ¯ P 1 , ¯ P 2 , · · · , ¯ P n } is called equivalent weight with ¯ P i = P i ω i . In practice , the value of ω i is directly determined based on a selected function which is called equiva - lent weight function . In this paper , IGG function 3 is used as the 2 In statistics , M - estimators are a kind of main robust estimation methods . Generally , an M - estimator may be deﬁned to be a zero of anestimating function . This estimating function is often the derivative of another statistical function . 3 IGG is the abbreviation of “Institute of Geodesy and Geophysics , Chinese Academy of Sciences . ” YU et al . : NOVEL NLOS MITIGATION ALGORITHM FOR UWB LOCALIZATION IN HARSH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS 693 equivalent weight function [ 45 ] : ω i = ω ( ˜ v i ) = (cid:2) 1 | ˜ v i | ≤ c c / | ˜ v i | | ˜ v i | > c , ( 28 ) where ˜ v i is called normalized residual error , which results from v i ( v i = ˜ d i − (cid:3) p − p i (cid:3) ) normalized by the median of residual errors . c is a constant which is usually set to 2 . 5 – 3 . 0 . TS - RLS owns the ability of resisting the residual NLOS range error and achieving an accurate location estimate . However , when a large number of NLOS ranges have large residual NLOS range errors at one location , the location accuracy of the tech - nique will be deteriorated . 4 To deal with this problem , additional constraints are added to TS - RLS as follows : ⎧⎨ ⎩ (cid:17) ni = 1 P i ρ ( v i ) = min s . t . (cid:3) p − p k (cid:3) − ˜ d k ≤ 0 , (cid:5) p k , ˜ d k (cid:6) ∈ S los , ( 29 ) where S los and S have been deﬁned in ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) . Such a constrained optimization problem can be solved as a type of quadratic programming problems , but the solution process is complex . Therefore , we solve this problem using a novel ag - gregate function approach by converting these inequality con - straints into one equality constraint . Li have demonstrated that the constraint region in ( 29 ) is equivalent to the following expression [ 46 ] . r ( p ) = max (cid:4) (cid:3) p − p k (cid:3) − ˜ d k (cid:7) ≤ 0 , (cid:5) p k , ˜ d k (cid:6) ∈ S los . ( 30 ) Then , according to the principle of aggregate function , the ( 30 ) can be replaced by [ 46 ] : 5 g ( p ) = 1 p ln (cid:2) m (cid:12) k = 1 exp (cid:15) p (cid:5) (cid:3) p − p k (cid:3) − ˜ d k (cid:6)(cid:16)(cid:30) = 0 , ( 31 ) where m = card ( S los ) , p is a control parameter which is a suf - ﬁciently large positive number . Therefore the solutions of ( 29 ) can be obtained by minimizing the following objective function : p = arg min p , λ (cid:31) n (cid:12) i = 1 P i ρ ( v i ) + λ g ( p ) , where λ is the Lagrangian multiplier . As derived in appendix B , the ﬁnal solution of equality - constrained Taylor series robust least squares ( ECTSRLS ) is : ˆp ≈ p 0 + δ ¯p − (cid:8) g ( p 0 ) + G T 0 δ ¯p (cid:9) × (cid:5) G T 0 (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 G 0 (cid:6) − 1 (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 G 0 , ( 32 ) 4 Any kind of robust estimation technique owns limited ability to resist abnor - mal observations ( i . e . , range estimates with large residual NLOS errors in our case ) . For median based robust estimators belongs to which category the pro - posed TS - RLS , the robustness will be destroyed when the number of abnormal observations is more than half the total observations . 5 Since g ( p ) = r ( p ) + 1 / p ln [ (cid:17) mk = 1 exp ( p ( g k ( p ) − r ( p ) ) ) ] where g k ( p ) = (cid:3) p − p k (cid:3) − ˜ d k , we can obtain r ( p ) ≤ g ( p ) ≤ r ( p ) + 1 / p ln m . Further , we can get lim p →∞ g ( p ) = r ( p ) . In the ( 29 ) , at least a constraint condition is the active constraint due to that we can think the range error is zero , so g ( p ) = 0 . where g ( p 0 ) is the value of g ( p ) at a prior approximation p 0 , G 0 = ∇ g ( p 0 ) , and δ ¯p is the solution obtained from TS - RLS without constraints . C . Approximate Value Determination for Linearization In the proposed ECTSRLS estimation technique , the a priori location of a node is required for linearizing the objective func - tion using ﬁrst - order Taylor expansion , which can be obtained by other external sensors . Here , we provide a method to estimate the a priori location by the UWB system itself . Based on two corrected ranges after NLOS mitigation , we can construct a virtual measurement : Δ ˜ d ij Δ = (cid:3) p − p i (cid:3) 2 − (cid:3) p − p j (cid:3) 2 + χ ij , i , j ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . , n } , ( 33 ) where χ ij is the combined effect of residual NLOS range er - rors and measurement noises from involved two ranges . Then p 0 can be readily estimated using standard LS technique . How - ever , one extra anchor is required for this method ( i . e . , at least 4 anchors for 2 - D scenarios ) . In addition , the constructed vir - tual measurement will be more vulnerable to the residual NLOS range error because whichever involved range suffers from the residual NLOS effect , the virtual measurement will be affected . This is the main reason why we do not directly use this equa - tion for location estimation . Nonetheless , this method is feasible to estimate an approximation with low accuracy , especially for dynamic cases where only the approximation of the ﬁrst loca - tion need be estimated , and afterwards we can use the previous estimate as the approximation of the next location . The FCE based NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method and the ECTSRLS technique is together called FCE - ECTSRLS NLOS mitigation algorithm , which is summarized in Fig . 5 . VI . E VALUATION AND A NALYSIS A static localization experiment and a mobile localization experiment were conducted to verify the performance of FCE - ECTSRLS algorithm . Meanwhile , we tested the success rate of LOS / NLOS identiﬁcation as well as the effectiveness of NLOS mitigation of the proposed FCE based NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation method in the static experiment . In both experiments , the performance of the proposed localization algorithm was compared to four existing NLOS mitigation algorithms in liter - ature : TS - LS [ 27 ] , Two - Step [ 10 ] , SVM - SD [ 29 ] , and LP [ 28 ] . Since NLOS identiﬁcation is required in TS - LS and LP algo - rithms but no NLOS identiﬁcation method is provided in [ 27 ] and [ 28 ] , we use the proposed FCE based method instead . In the processing of experimental data , the ω and β were set to 0 . 5 and 0 . 8 respectively , the constant c was set to 3 . 0 , and the importance of each feature to channel identiﬁcation was set as the same . A . Experimental Setup and Data Collection 1 ) Experimental Environment : Both experiments were con - ducted on the second ﬂoor of a teaching building within Wuhan University . This is a harsh indoor environment , containing 694 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , VOL . 68 , NO . 1 , JANUARY 2019 Fig . 5 . The solution process of the proposed NLOS mitigation algorithm . concrete walls , corridors , wood doors , classroom desks , pedes - trians , and so on . The signal propagation channels here were divided into ﬁve categories , C = { c i } 5 i = 1 , which denote prop - agating in a free space ( c 1 ) , propagating through a pedestrian ( c 2 ) , propagating through a wood door ( c 3 ) , propagating around a corner ( c 4 ) and propagating through a concrete wall ( c 5 ) . The corresponding sight conditions of ﬁve channels were set as : l ( c 1 ) = 1 , l ( c 2 ) = l ( c 3 ) = l ( c 4 ) = l ( c 5 ) = − 1 . 2 ) Experimental Instrument : In both experiments , the Pul - sON410 module ( UWB device ) , manufactured by Time Do - main , was used for ranging and channel impulse measurement . When used for ranging , the protocol of TW - TOF is used and an accuracy of a few centimeters can be achieved under LOS . Based on the ability of channel impulse measurement , we can obtain a discrete waveform associated with each range measurement . The waveform is sampled at 61 ps over an observation window of 100 ns , with 90 ns before the leading edge and 10 ns after the leading edge ( the leading edge is used for the determination of arriving time ) . Meanwhile , we use total station KTS - 472R10LC , which is manufactured by Kolida in China , to measure the lo - cations of anchors and the true ranges between anchors and a node . The range error of KTS - 472R10LC is within 3 mm while the range less than 1 km . A typical setup of UWB and total station is shown in Fig . 6 . 3 ) Static Localization Experiment : In the static experiment , a few of UWB modules were installed as anchors in the experi - mental area , whereas another was used as the node . The layout of experiment is shown in Fig . 7 where the black points denote node locations and the stars stand for the locations of anchors . This experiment consists of two stages . In the ﬁrst stage , 235 ∗ Fig . 6 . The instruments used in the experiments . ( a ) A UWB device with an antenna and a laptop for operating and data logging . ( b ) A total station KTS - 472R10LC located on a tripod . 50 sample data were collected at 62 different points under ﬁve different propagation channels in region B ( each measurement is repeated by 50 times ) . In the second stage , we conducted lo - calization test at 60 different points in region A . The regions A and B have similar NLOS propagation conditions . The purpose of collecting ofﬂine data and online data in different regions is to show the performance of the proposed method in the changing environment . 4 ) Mobile Localization Experiment : The mobile localiza - tion system was built by the authors based on TDMA technology using seven UWB modules : six modules were used as anchors and one was installed on a mobile cart . The system can record the range between the node and each of anchors as well as the waveform associated with each range at the frequency of 5 Hz . The experiment was conducted in a harsh environment . Accord - ing to the experimental setup , no more than two out of the six ranges are measured under LOS at any time . In the experiment , the mobile cart moved clockwise along a reference trajectory twice ﬁrstly , and then moved counter - clockwise along the same reference twice again . B . Performance in the Static Localization Experiment Fig . 8 shows the correlations between eight candidate fea - tures extracted from the ofﬂine data . It can be seen that there is signiﬁcant positive correlations between KUR and SPE , be - tween MA and TE , and between MA and SNR . On the other hand , an obviously negative correlation between RT and SNR is also observed . Other features present weak correlations with each other at various levels . Based on the analysis , eight feature subsets { F i } 8 i = 1 were selected as candidate feature sets . The detailed elements in the eight sets refer to later analysis . 1 ) LOS / NLOS Identiﬁcation Performance : We use three in - dexes to evaluate the identiﬁcation performance : sensitivity p s = Σ c i ∈ T I [ ˆ l i ≥ 0 , l i ≥ 0 ] / Σ c i ∈ T I [ l i ≥ 0 ] , speciﬁcity p e = Σ c i ∈ T I [ ˆ l i < 0 , l i < 0 ] / Σ c i ∈ T I [ l i < 0 ] , accuracy p a = Σ c i ∈ T I [ ( ˆ l i ≥ 0 , l i ≥ 0 ) | | ( ˆ l i < 0 , l i < 0 ) ] / n ( T ) . Here “ T ” denotes the testing data , n ( T ) is the number of samples in the testing data , and I ( · ) is an indicator function , which is one if the variable is true , or zero elsewhere . The sensitivity and speciﬁcity repre - sent the identiﬁcation performances of LOS and NLOS respec - tively , and the accuracy represents the overall performance of identiﬁcation . YU et al . : NOVEL NLOS MITIGATION ALGORITHM FOR UWB LOCALIZATION IN HARSH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS 695 Fig . 7 . The layout of the static localization experiment . Fig . 8 . Correlation analysis of eight candidate features . The grid chart is symmetrical with the main diagonal , i . e . , the size of each color circle indicates the same meaning as the value at the symmetry position . TABLE I LOS / NLOS I DENTIFICATION P ERFORMANCE ∗ The result of SVM based method is calculated using LS - SVMlab Toolbox ( http : / / www . esat . kuleuven . be / sista / lssvmlab / ) . We use the same kernel function as that used in [ 29 ] . The obtained training parameters are gam = 8 . 7495 and sig2 = 0 . 4187 during the identiﬁcation . Table I shows the LOS / NLOS identiﬁcation performance of the proposed FCE based method with eight different feature sets . We can see that no matter which feature set is used , the correct rate of NLOS identiﬁcation is above 91 % , indicating that the method is always effective in identifying NLOS . The ability of LOS identiﬁcation is slightly inferior to NLOS iden - tiﬁcation . Nonetheless , the correct rate of LOS identiﬁcation is more than 88 % . The best identiﬁcation performance is obtained when using feature set F 2 , with a NLOS identiﬁcation correct TABLE II NLOS M ITIGATION P ERFORMANCE ∗ The obtained training parameters are gam = 8 . 7495 and sig2 = 0 . 4187 during the identiﬁcation and the obtained training parameters are gam = 28 . 6462 and sig2 = 4 . 6439 during the mitigation . The range estimate itself is also used as a feature for NLOS mitigation in [ 29 ] . rate of 93 . 9 % and a LOS identiﬁcation correct rate of 92 % . Compared with the SVM based method in [ 29 ] , when using the respective optimal feature sets , the difference of overall identi - ﬁcation performance between two methods is very small . The LOS identiﬁcation success rate of SVM based method is l . 2 % lower than our method while the NLOS identiﬁcation success rate is 0 . 9 % higher than our method . 2 ) NLOS Mitigation Performance for Ranging : NLOS mit - igation performance is measured in terms of mean , STD , and root mean square ( RMS ) of absolute range errors after NLOS mitigation ( i . e . , | d − ˜ d | ) . According to Table II , the performance difference between different feature sets is small . Similarly , the best mitigation performance is obtained with feature set F 2 . In this case , the RMS error is reduced from original 1 . 3 m to 0 . 651 m . With respective optimal feature sets , the SVM based method is inferior to our method in NLOS mitigation . The STD of our method is obviously smaller which is because the pro - posed method can abandon a few of measurements with large range errors by ( 14 ) . Note that although NLOS range errors are effectively reduced , the RMS of absolute range errors is still more than 0 . 5 m , which may not be satisfactory for high - precision localization . 3 ) Localization Performance : Fig . 9 compares the radial location errors of testing points using different localization algorithms . Clearly , the proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algo - rithm substantially outperforms the other four algorithms in 696 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , VOL . 68 , NO . 1 , JANUARY 2019 Fig . 9 . Radial location errors of thirty static testing points using different localization algorithms . Other testing points fail to estimate their locations due to lack of sufﬁcient range estimates . TABLE III S TATISTICS OF R ADIAL L OCATION E RRORS Fig . 10 . Location accuracy comparison between the case of subdividing NLOS channels and the case of only using LOS and NLOS . localization performance . Almost all of radial location errors are below 0 . 5 m for the proposed algorithm while those of other methods are larger , even up to a few meters . Table III gives the statistics of radial location errors , from which we see that a location accuracy in the order of decimeters is achieved by the proposed algorithm . Compared with other methods , the mean , STD and RMS of the proposed algorithm all are minimal . Meanwhile , we further analyze the localization performance in the case of only using LOS and NLOS rather than subdividing NLOS channels . In this case , all ranges are used for location estimation based on the proposed ECTSRLS technique . Fig . 10 shows that the location accuracy when only using LOS and NLOS is signiﬁcantly degraded , with RMS error being 0 . 949 m , while that of the case of subdividing NLOS channels is 0 . 602 m as listed in Table III . Fig . 11 . The computation time comparison of different NLOS mitigation locational algorithms . Fig . 12 . The estimated locations using the proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algo - rithm . The node moves counter - clockwise along the reference trajectory for one lap from startpoint . The reference trajectory passes through two rooms with concrete walls and a corridor , and is surround by six anchors . 4 ) Computational Complexity : Fig . 11 compares the time consumption of our algorithm to the four existing algorithms . The bar indicates the total time consumption of each algorithm , while the red dot stands for the time consumed by NLOS iden - tiﬁcation and mitigation in the algorithm . Note that the time consumption of each location estimation may be different even for the same algorithm due to the different number of iterations . Therefore , we compare the total time consumption of all testing locations rather than one location between different algorithms . Results show that except for the TS - LS algorithm , the proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algorithm has the lowest computational com - plexity , dramatically lower than the other three algorithms . C . Performance in the Mobile Localization Experiment Fig . 12 shows the location estimates when the node moves along the reference trajectory for one lap using the proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algorithm . We can see that almost all of loca - tion estimates are well close to the reference trajectory . Due to lack of true location information , the location accuracy is evaluated using the measurable cross - track error , which is the shortest distance from an estimated location to the reference trajectory . Based on the ﬁtted PDF of cross - track errors , CDF YU et al . : NOVEL NLOS MITIGATION ALGORITHM FOR UWB LOCALIZATION IN HARSH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS 697 Fig . 13 . CDFs of radial location errors estimated based on cross - track errors . TABLE IV T HEORETICAL M EAN OF R ADIAL L OCATION E RRORS of radial location errors can be derived under the assumption that PDFs of cross - track errors and along - track errors are the same [ 47 ] . Fig . 13 shows the calculated CDFs of radial loca - tion errors from all four laps . Similarly , the performance of the proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algorithm obviously outperforms other four algorithms . The radial location errors are smaller than about 2m and over 93 % is below 1m . Meanwhile , the theoret - ical mean of radial location errors , which is calculated based on the derived CDF , is given in Table IV . Compared with other four algorithms , the proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algorithm has the smallest mean . Additionally , the localization performance when only using LOS and NLOS is also given in Fig . 13 and Table IV . In Fig . 13 , the radial location errors more than 2m are observed in the absence of NLOS range selection . Meanwhile , the theo - retical mean is larger than that of the case of subdividing NLOS channels . All these indicate that an appropriate range selection contributes to improving the location accuracy . VII . C ONCLUSION In this paper , an FCE based NLOS identiﬁcation and mitiga - tion method for ranging was proposed , which provides more information about the identiﬁed channel and is a less environment - dependent and a priori knowledge - independent . Based on the identiﬁed channel information , an optimal range set was selected for location estimation . In addition , an ECT - SRLS technique was developed to suppress the residual NLOS range errors . Both static and mobile localization experiments were conducted to verify the new algorithm developed . The performance of the FCE based NLOS identiﬁcation and mitiga - tion method for ranging was also analyzed in the static experi - ment . The correct rates of NLOS and LOS identiﬁcation were 93 . 9 % and 92 % respectively . The RMS of absolute range er - rors after NLOS mitigation was reduced from original 1 . 3 m to 0 . 651 m . The proposed FCE - ECTSRLS algorithm substantially outperformed the other four algorithms in both static and mobile localization experiments . The RMS of radial location errors was 0 . 602 m for the new algorithm whilst all the other algorithms could only achieve 1 . 063 m ( at the best ) in the static experiment , and the theoretical mean of radial location errors was 0 . 346 m for the new algorithm whilst all the other algorithms were more than 0 . 8 m in the mobile experiment . A PPENDIX A . Solution of Taylor Series Robust Least Squares Deﬁne : ψ ( v i ) Δ = ∂ρ ∂v i . ( 34 ) Then the solution of optimization problem ( 25 ) satisﬁes the following equation : n (cid:12) i = 1 (cid:15) P i ψ ( v i ) ∇ f i ( p 0 ) T (cid:16) = 0 . ( 35 ) Letting ψ ( v i ) / v i = ω i , then ( 35 ) can be rewritten as : n (cid:12) i = 1 (cid:15) P i ω i v i ∇ f i ( p 0 ) T (cid:16) = 0 . ( 36 ) Deﬁne ¯ P = { ¯ P i } Δ = { P i ω i } , which is called equivalent weight . Rewriting ( 36 ) in the term of vector , we obtain : A¯Pv = 0 , with v = ! v 1 · · · v n " T , ( 37 ) with A = ⎡ ⎢⎢⎢⎣ ∂f 1 ( p ) ∂x | p 0 ∂f 1 ( p ) ∂y | p 0 . . . . . . ∂f n ( p ) ∂x | p 0 ∂f n ( p ) ∂y | p 0 ⎤ ⎥⎥⎥⎦ . Further , A T ¯PA δ p − A T ¯Pb = 0 , ( 38 ) with b = ! − f 1 ( p 0 ) · · · − f n ( p 0 ) " T . Therefore , we obtain the solutions as : ˆp = p 0 + (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 A T ¯Pb . ( 39 ) B . Solution of Equality - Constrained Taylor Series Robust Least Squares Deﬁne Lagrangian function : Φ ( p , λ ) = n (cid:12) i = 1 P i ρ ( v i ) + λ g ( p ) . ( 40 ) 698 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , VOL . 68 , NO . 1 , JANUARY 2019 Then the solution of ( 40 ) is determined by : ⎧⎨ ⎩ ∂ Φ ( p , λ ) ∂ λ = g ( p ) = 0 ∂ Φ ( p , λ ) ∂ p = ∂ [ (cid:17) ni = 1 P i ρ ( v i ) ] ∂ v ∂ v ∂ p + λ ∂g ( p ) ∂ p = 0 k × 1 , ( 41 ) where k is number of dimensions of vector p . Expanding g ( p ) at the a priori approximation p 0 and retaining the ﬁrst two terms yields : g ( p ) ≈ g ( p 0 ) + ∇ g ( p 0 ) T δ p . ( 42 ) Substitution of ( 42 ) in ( 41 ) gives : (cid:2) g ( p 0 ) + ∇ g ( p 0 ) T δ p ≈ 0 A T ¯PA δ p − A T ¯Pb + λ ∇ g ( p 0 ) ≈ 0 k × 1 . ( 43 ) For simplicity , we rewrite ∇ g ( p 0 ) as G 0 . Therefore , δ p ≈ (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 A T ¯Pb − λ (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 G 0 ≈ δ ¯p − λ (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 G 0 , ( 44 ) where δ ¯p is the solution obtained from TS - RLS without con - straints . Substitution of ( 44 ) in the ﬁrst expression of ( 43 ) yields : λ ≈ (cid:8) g ( p 0 ) + G T 0 δ ¯p (cid:9) (cid:5) G T 0 (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 G 0 (cid:6) − 1 . ( 45 ) Again substituting ( 45 ) into ( 44 ) , we obtain the last result : ˆp = p 0 + δ p ≈ p 0 + δ ¯p − (cid:8) g ( p 0 ) + G T 0 δ ¯p (cid:9) × (cid:5) G T 0 (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 G 0 (cid:6) − 1 (cid:8) A T ¯PA (cid:9) − 1 G 0 . ( 46 ) A CKNOWLEDGMENT Theauthors thankW . Liang , L . Zhou , Q . Huang , K . Gao , Y . Li , S . Li , and Y . Deng for their help in the setup of the experiments and in the collection of the experimental data . Meanwhile , the authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] F . L . Piccolo , “A new cooperative localization method for UMTS cellular networks , ” in Proc . IEEE Glob . Telecommun . Conf . , 2008 , pp . 1 – 5 . [ 2 ] S . Gezici et al . , “Localization via ultra - wideband radios : a look at posi - tioning aspects for future sensor networks , ” IEEE Signal Process . Mag . , vol . 22 , no . 4 , pp . 70 – 84 , Jul . 2005 . [ 3 ] R . J . Fontana , “Recent system applications of short - pulse ultra - wideband ( UWB ) technology , ” IEEE Trans . Microw . Theory Tech . , vol . 52 , no . 9 , pp . 2087 – 2104 , Sep . 2004 . [ 4 ] A . Abdulrahman et al . , “Ultra wideband indoor positioning technologies : analysisandrecentadvances , ” Sensors , vol . 16 , no . 5 , pp . 1 – 36 , May2016 . [ 5 ] A . D . Angelis , J . O . Nilsson , I . Skog , P . H¨andel , and P . Carbone , “Indoor positioning by ultrawide band radio aided inertial navigation , ” Metrol . Meas . Syst . , vol . 17 , no . 3 , pp . 447 – 460 , Jan . 2010 . [ 6 ] Z . N . Low , J . H . Cheong , C . L . Law , W . T . Ng , and Y . J . Lee , “Pulse detectionalgorithmforline - of - sight ( los ) uwbrangingapplications , ” IEEE Antennas Wirel . Propag . Lett . , vol . 4 , no . 1 , pp . 63 – 67 , Jun . 2005 . [ 7 ] B . Silva and G . P . Hancke , “IR - UWB - based non - line - of - sight identiﬁca - tion in harsh environments : principles and challenges , ” IEEE Trans . Ind . Informat . , vol . 12 , no . 3 , pp . 1188 – 1195 , Jun . 2016 . [ 8 ] J . Khodjaev , Y . Park , and A . S . Malik , “Survey of NLOS identiﬁca - tion and error mitigation problems in UWB - based positioning algo - rithms for dense environments , ” Ann . Telecommun . , vol . 65 , pp . 301 – 311 , Jun . 2010 . [ 9 ] J . Schroeder , S . Galler , K . Kyamakya , and K . Jobmann , “NLOS detec - tion algorithms for ultra - wideband localization , ” in Proc . 4th Workshop Positioning , Navig . Commun . , 2007 , pp . 159 – 166 . [ 10 ] X . Wang , Z . Wang , and B . O’Dea , “A TOA - based location algorithm reducing the errors due to non - line - of - sight propagation , ” IEEE Trans . Veh . Technol . , vol . 52 , no . 1 , pp . 112 – 116 , Jan . 2003 . [ 11 ] C . D . WannandC . S . Hsueh , “NLOSmitigationwithbiasedKalmanﬁlters for range estimation in UWB systems , ” in Proc . TENCON IEEE Reg . 10 Conf . , 2007 , pp . 1 – 4 . [ 12 ] V . Savic , E . G . Larsson , J . Ferrer - Coll , and P . Stenumgaard , “Ker - nel methods for accurate UWB - based ranging with reduced complex - ity , ” IEEE Trans . Wirel . Commun . , vol . 15 , no . 3 , pp . 1783 – 1793 , Mar . 2016 . [ 13 ] K . YuandY . J . Guo , “Improvedpositioningalgorithmsfornonline - of - sight environments , ” IEEE Trans . Veh . Technol . , vol . 57 , no . 4 , pp . 2342 – 2353 , Jul . 2008 . [ 14 ] J . Borr´as , P . Hatrack , andN . B . Mandayam , “Decisiontheoreticframework for NLOS identiﬁcation , ” in Proc . VTC , 1998 , pp . 1583 – 1587 . [ 15 ] A . Lakhzouri , E . S . Lohan , R . Hamila , andM . Renfors , “ExtendedKalman ﬁlterchannelestimationforline - of - sightdetectioninWCDMAmobilepo - sitioning , ” EURASIP J . Appl . Signal Process . , vol . 2003 , no . 13 , pp . 1268 – 1278 , Dec . 2003 . [ 16 ] S . Sczyslo , J . Schroeder , S . Galler , and T . Kaiser , “Hybrid localization us - ing UWB and inertial sensors , ” in Proc . IEEE Int . Conf . Ultra - Wideband , 2008 , pp . 89 – 92 . [ 17 ] H . Shimizu , H . Masui , M . Ishii , and K . Sakawa , “LOS and NLOS path - loss and delay characteristics at 3 . 35 GHz in a residential environment , ” in Proc . IEEE Antennas Propag . Soc . Int . Symp . , 2000 , pp . 1142 – 1145 . [ 18 ] K . Yu and I . Oppermann , “Positioning , ” in UWB Theory and Application . Hoboken , NJ , USA : Wiley , 2004 , pp . 175 – 196 . [ 19 ] I . G¨uvenc¸ , C . C . Chong , F . Watanabe , and H . Inamura , “NLOS identi - ﬁcation and weighted least - squares localization for UWB systems using multipath channel statistics , ” EURASIP J . Adv . Signal Process . , vol . 2008 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 14 , Jan . 2008 . [ 20 ] X . Shi , H . C . Yong , C . Yuen , and Z . Yang , “A RSS - EKF localization method using HMM - based LOS / NLOS channel identiﬁcation , ” in Proc . IEEE Int . Conf . Commun . , 2014 , pp . 160 – 165 . [ 21 ] R . Casas , A . Marco , J . J . Guerrero , andJ . Falco , “Robustestimatorfornon - line - of - sight error mitigation in indoor localization , ” EURASIP J . Appl . Signal Process . , vol . 2006 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 8 , Apr . 2006 . [ 22 ] Y . H . Jo , J . Y . Lee , D . H . Ha , and S . H . Kang , “Accuracy enhancement for UWB indoor positioning using ray tracing , ” in Proc . IEEE / ION Position , Location , Navig . Symp . , 2006 , pp . 565 – 568 . [ 23 ] D . E . Gustafson , J . M . Elwell , and J . A . Soltz , “Innovative indoor geoloca - tion using RF multipath diversity , ” in Proc . IEEE / ION Position , Location , Navig . Symp . , 2006 , pp . 904 – 912 . [ 24 ] S , Pittet , V . Renaudin , and B . Merminod , “UWB and MEMS based indoor navigation , ” J . Navig . , vol . 61 , no . 3 , pp . 369 – 384 , Jul . 2008 . [ 25 ] M . Heidari , F . O . Akgul , and K . Pahlavan , “Identiﬁcation of the absence of direct path in indoor localization systems , ” in Proc . IEEE 18th Int . Symp . Pers . , Indoor Mobile Radio Commun . , 2007 , pp . 1 – 6 . [ 26 ] S . Wu , Y . Ma , Q . Zhang , and N . Zhang , “NLOS error mitigation for UWB ranging in dense multipath environments , ” in Proc . IEEE Wireless Commun . Netw . Conf . , 2007 , pp . 1565 – 1570 . [ 27 ] K . Yu and Y . J . Guo , “NLOS error mitigation for mobile location estima - tion in wireless networks , ” in Proc . IEEE 65th Veh . Technol . Conf . , 2007 , pp . 1071 – 1075 . [ 28 ] S . Venkatesh and R . M . Buehrer , “NLOS mitigation using linear pro - gramming in ultrawideband location - aware networks , ” IEEE Trans . Veh . Technol . , vol . 56 , no . 5 , pp . 3182 – 3198 , Sep . 2007 . [ 29 ] W . M . Gifford , H . Wymeersch , and M . Z . Win , “NLOS identiﬁcation and mitigation for localization based on UWB experimental data , ” IEEE J . Sel . Areas Commun . , vol . 28 , no . 7 , pp . 1026 – 1035 , Sep . 2010 . [ 30 ] H . Wymeersch , S . Maran ` o , W . M . Gifford , and M . Z . Win , “A machine learningapproachtorangingerrormitigationforUWBlocalization , ” IEEE Trans . Commun . , vol . 60 , no . 6 , pp . 1719 – 1728 , Jun . 2012 . [ 31 ] T . V . Nguyen , Y . Jeong , H . Shin , and M . Z . Win , “Machine learning for wideband localization , ” IEEE J . Sel . Areas Commun . , vol . 33 , no . 7 , pp . 1357 – 1380 , Jul . 2015 . [ 32 ] J . Y . Lee and R . A . Scholtz , “Ranging in a dense multipath environment using an UWB radio link , ” IEEE J . Sel . Areas Commun . , vol . 20 , no . 9 , pp . 1677 – 1683 , Dec . 2002 . YU et al . : NOVEL NLOS MITIGATION ALGORITHM FOR UWB LOCALIZATION IN HARSH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS 699 [ 33 ] J . O . Nilsson , A . De Angelis , I . Skog , and P . Carbone , “Signal processing issues in indoor positioning by ultra wide band radio aided inertial navi - gation , ” in Proc . 17th Eur . Signal Process . Conf . , 2009 , pp . 2161 – 2165 . [ 34 ] H . Hashemi , “Impulse response modeling of indoor radio propagation channels , ” IEEE J . Sel . Areas Commun . , vol . 11 , no . 7 , pp . 967 – 978 , Sep . 1993 . [ 35 ] S . J . Howard and K . Pahlavan , “Measurement and analysis of the indoor radio channel in the frequency domain , ” IEEE Trans . Instrum . Meas . , vol . 39 , no . 5 , pp . 751 – 755 , Oct . 1990 . [ 36 ] H . Hashemi and D . Tholl , “Statistical modeling and simulation of the RMS delay spread of indoor radio propagation channels , ” IEEE Trans . Veh . Technol . , vol . 43 , no . 1 , pp . 110 – 120 , Feb . 1994 . [ 37 ] K . Pearson , “Notes on regression and inheritance in the case of two par - ents , ” Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . , vol . 58 , pp . 240 – 242 , Jun . 1895 . [ 38 ] L . A . Zadeh , “Fuzzy sets , ” Inf . Control , vol . 8 , no . 3 , pp . 338 – 353 , 1965 . [ 39 ] H . J . Zimmermann , Fuzzy set theory – and its applications , 4th ed . New York , NY , USA : Springer , 2001 . [ 40 ] K . Yu , I . Sharp , and Y . J . Guo , Ground - Based Wireless Positioning . Pis - cataway , NJ , USA : Wiley , 2009 , pp . 147 – 196 . [ 41 ] K . Yu , J . P . Montillet , A . Rabbachin , P . Cheong , andI . Oppermann , “UWB location and tracking for wireless embedded networks , ” Signal Process . , vol . 86 , no . 9 , pp . 2153 – 2171 , Sep . 2006 . [ 42 ] P . J . Huber , “Robust estimation of a location parameter , ” Ann . Math . Statist . , no . 35 , pp . 73 – 101 , 1964 . [ 43 ] M . A . Spirito , “On the accuracy of cellular mobile station location esti - mation , ” IEEE Trans . Veh . Technol . , vol . 50 , no . 3 , pp . 674 – 685 , 2001 . [ 44 ] J . Yan , “Algorithms for indoor positioning systems using ultra - wideband signals , ” Ph . D . dissertation , Master Sci . Eng . , , Chalmers Univ . Technol . , Gothenburg , Sweden , 2010 . [ 45 ] Y . Yang , “Robust estimation for dependent observations , ” Manuscripta Geodaetica , vol . 19 , pp . 10 – 17 , Nov . 1994 . [ 46 ] X . Li , “An aggregate constraint method for non - linear programming , ” J . Oper . Res . Soc . , vol . 42 , no . 11 , pp . 1003 – 1010 , 1991 . [ 47 ] I . Sharp , K . Yu , and T . Sathyan , “Positional accuracy measurement and error modeling for mobile tracking , ” IEEE . Trans . Mob . Comput . , vol . 11 , no . 6 , pp . 1021 – 1032 , Jun . 2012 . Kegen Yu ( SM’12 ) received the Ph . D . degree in electrical engineering from the University of Syd - ney , Sydney , NSW , Australia , in 2003 . He was with Jiangxi Geological and Mineral Bureau , Nanchang , China ; Nanchang University , Nanchang , China ; the University of Oulu , Oulu , Finland ; the CSIRO ICT Center , Sydney , NSW , Australia ; Macquarie Univer - sity , Sydney , NSW , Australia ; the University of New South Wales , Sydney , NSW , Australia ; and Wuhan University , Wuhan , China . Since 2011 , he has been an Adjunct Professor with Macquarie University . He is currently a Professor with the School of Environmental Science and Spa - tial Informatics , China University of Mining and Technology , Xuzhou , China . He has coauthored the book Ground - Based Wireless Positioning ( Wiley and IEEE Press , 2009 , a Chinese version of the book is also available ) and another book Wireless Positioning : Principles and Practice ( Springer , 2018 ) , and has authored or coauthored more than 100 refereed journal and conference papers . He edited the book Positioning and Navigation in Complex Environments ( IGI Global , 2018 ) . His research interests include global - navigation - satellite - system reﬂectometry , ground - basedandsatellite - basedpositioning , andremotesensing . Dr . Yu served on the editorial boards of the EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing , the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON A EROSPACE AND E LECTRONIC S YSTEMS , and the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY from 2013 to 2017 . He was the Lead Guest Editor for a Special Issue of the Physical Communication on “Indoor Navigation and Tracking” and for a Special Issue of the EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing on “GNSS remote sensing . ” KaiWen ( S’18 ) receivedtheB . S . degreeinsurveying and mapping engineering from China University of MiningandTechnology , Xuzhou , China , in2012 , and the M . S . degree in geodesy and geomatics engineer - ing from Wuhan University , Wuhan , China , in 2016 . He is currently working toward the Ph . D . degree at the School Of Geodesy and Geomatics , Wuhan Uni - versity . He has coauthored a positioning - related book chapter in Positioning and Navigation in Complex Environments ( IGI Global , 2018 ) . His research in - terests include the integrated positioning technology based on UWB and IMU , machine learning theory , and optimal estimation theory . Yingbing Li received the B . S . and M . S . degrees in engineering surveying from Wuhan Surveying and Mapping Technology University ( currently Wuhan University ) , Wuhan , China , in 1997 and 2000 , re - spectively , and received the Ph . D . degree in geodesy and geomatics engineering from Wuhan University , in2003 . Since1997 , hehasbeenengagedintheteach - ing and research in geographic information system . He is currently an Associate Professor with Wuhan University . He is also the Leader of Institute of Space and Information Engineering of School of Geodesy and Geomatics , Wuhan University . His research interests include GNSS data processing and software development , big data analysis , machine learning and data mining , and geological hazard monitoring and forecasting . Shuai Zhang received the B . S . degree in surveying and mapping engineering from Henan Polytechnic University , Jiaozuo , China , in 2013 , and the M . S . degree in cartography and geographical information engineering from Xi’an University of Science and Technology , Xi’an , China , in 2016 . He is currently working toward the Ph . D . degree at the School of Geodesy and Geomatics , Wuhan University , Wuhan , China . His research interests include indoor localiza - tion based on WIFI , database technology , and ma - chine learning theory . Kefei Zhang is the Founder of the Satellite Po - sitioning for Atmosphere , Climate and Environ - ment ( SPACE ) Research Centre , RMIT University , Australia . He has more than 30 years experience in satellite positioning and geospatial sciences . His cur - rent research interest is primarily in algorithm devel - opment and innovative applications of satellite tech - nologies for high - accuracy positioning , atmospheric sounding , space situational awareness , space mining , big data analytics and people mobility and object tracking . He is an inventor of eight patents and has authored more than 300 peer - reviewed publications in these ﬁelds and has at - tracted in excess of 80 million dollars ( incl . in - kind contributions ) in funding from the Australian Research Council , and national and international govern - ments and industries since 1990 . He is a regular reviewer of numerous national and international funding agencies and journals , a member of journal edito - rial boards and a frequent guest speaker at various international events . He is an Australian pioneer in cutting - edge technologies for smart tracking , weather and climate , atmosphere and space environment management applications . His satellite - to - satellite tracking research has led to 10 hours weather forecast im - provement and successful integration of the GPS radio occultation data into the Australian weather forecasting system in 2012 and the technology is now con - sidered to be one of the top 5 of the 30 + data sources used in reducing forecast error . The research he led was ranked as “outstanding“ in the Excellence in Innovation for Australia trial 2012 and was featured in the ATN of Universities “50 solutions that count“ . His research was also presented in the showcase of the “Partners for a Better Future – Australia and China : Science and Technology Week“attheShanghaiWorldExpo2010 . Histeamwasalsoselectedasaﬁnalist in “The Australian Innovation Challenge Award“ 2014 .