Rev . Neurosci . 2018 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 125 – 137 Yi Chen Guo a , Yu Xuan Wang a , Yan Ping Ge , Lu Jia Yu and Jun Guo * Analysis of subcellular structural tension in axonal growth of neurons https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / revneuro - 2017 - 0047 Received June 30 , 2017 ; accepted August 5 , 2017 ; previously published online November 14 , 2017 Abstract : The growth and regeneration of axons are the core processes of nervous system development and func - tional recovery . They are also related to certain physiologi - cal and pathological conditions . For decades , it has been the consensus that a new axon is formed by adding new material at the growth cone . However , using the existing technology , we have studied the structural tension of the nerve cell , which led us to hypothesize that some subcellu - lar structural tensions contribute synergistically to axonal growth and regeneration . In this review , we classified the subcellular structural tension , osmotic pressure , microfil - ament and microtubule - dependent tension involved con - trollably in promoting axonal growth . A squeezing model was built to analyze the mechanical mechanism under - lying axonal elongation , which may provide a new view of axonal growth and inspire further research . Keywords : axons ; cytoskeleton ; motor protein ; neuron ; structural tension . Introduction The nervous system requires the connection between nerve cells and their targets to constitute a functional architecture , and this process relies on axonal growth and regeneration ( Li et al . , 2016 ; Requejo - Aguilar et al . , 2017 ) . New axons often undergo a remarkably long extension from their cell body ( Lopez - Leal et al . , 2016 ) . By conven - tion , axonal growth is divided into three stages : protru - sion , engorgement and consolidation ( Dent et al . , 2011 ) . All three stages evidently require the reorganization of the cytoskeleton , including actin filaments and microtubules ( MTs ; Fukata et al . , 2002 ) . Yoshimura et al . put forward the hypothesis that axon elongation is promoted by MT assem - bly ( Yoshimura et al . , 2015 ) . Arimura et al . concluded that dynamic actin filaments allow the enhanced polymeriza - tion and / or transport of MTs , resulting in the promotion of axon elongation ( Yoshimura et al . , 2006 ) . It was consid - ered that new axons form simply by adding new material at the growth cone ( Dent et al . , 2003 ) . However , current technologies have suggested that this process is segmen - tary . Actually , material addition resulting from force activ - ity and material transport is also a mechanical procedure ( Lantoine et al . , 2016 ) . Therefore , axonal growth experi - ences a period of mechanical activity rather than a simple assembly of materials . The mechanism of the mechanical activities in growth cone has been investigated for more than three decades ( Ingber et al . , 2014 ) . It is believed widely that intracellular force is initialized by motor proteins , including myosin , dynein and kinesin ( Bridgman et al . , 2001 ) . For instance , myosin II drives the retrograde flow of the growth cone , which provides a tension to pull the actin filaments in a retrograde manner toward the base of the filopodia , affecting the shape and generation of the growth cone ( Lin et al . , 1997 ; Craig et al . , 2012 ) . In addition , the force relies on cytoskeletal structures to achieve its function . Similar to myosin moving along the microfilaments ( MFs ) , dynein and kinesin move along MTs ( Sellers and Veigel , 2006 ; Xiao et al . , 2016 ) . Thus , because the generation and trans - duction of the force is related closely to the cytoskeletal structure , the force is termed as intracellular structural tension ( Kassianidou and Kumar , 2015 ) . The structural tension process includes force generation , transference , sensation and signal transduction , which are achieved by different intracellular structures . For example , a structural force can be sensed by mechanosensors , which translate the force into chemical signals , triggering the downstream regulation of axonal growth ( Vogel , 2006 ) . In other ways , any factor that can affect the structural tension will affect axonal growth , such as osmotic pressure ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) . When there are concentration differences among diffusible solutes between cytoplasmic and extracellular environments , osmotic pressure will produce a force that acts on the membrane and the cytoskeletal gel , leading to the shrinkage or swelling of the growth cone ( Pietuch et al . , 2013 ) . Of course , these processes cannot run without linker proteins , which organize the cytoskeletal a Yi Chen Guo and Yu Xuan Wang : These authors contributed equally to this work . * Corresponding author : Jun Guo , School of Medicine and Life Sciences , Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine , Nanjing , 210046 , P . R . China , e - mail : Guoj @ njucm . edu . cn ; guoj69 @ aliyun . com Yi Chen Guo , Yu Xuan Wang , Yan Ping Ge and Lu Jia Yu : School of Medicine and Life Sciences , Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine , Nanjing , 210046 , P . R . China 126 Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth network and take part in signaling pathways and funda - mental biological processes . Therefore , axonal growth is like sailing , where the smooth operation of intracellular tension enables axons to accomplish the feat of naviga - tion . Currently , the mechanism underlying the effect of intracellular structural tension on axonal growth is not completely uncovered ; however , it has an essential effect on axon growth activities . Subcellular structural tension As mentioned above , the cytoskeleton , osmotic pressure , motor proteins and linker proteins are all implicated in the regulation of axonal growth . The cytoskeleton , an internal molecular framework , is responsible for main - taining the mechanical stability of living cells . Actin MFs , MTs and intermediate filaments ( IFs ) , as the three major filamentous components of the cytoskeleton , connect to each other by various cross - linking proteins and can form a structurally coupled network ( Ingber et al . , 2014 ) . By adding other linker proteins and the membrane , the network will serve as the foundation for the generation , perception , transmission and translation of mechanical forces to modulate axonal growth . In addition , osmotic pressure and the movement of motor proteins will gener - ate endogenous forces that cooperate with the network to affect axonal growth ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) . We classify all the above into a system we termed as the subcellu - lar structural tension , based on their cooperativity , and divided the subcellular structural tension into five parts , including osmotic pressure , MF - dependent motion , MT - dependent motion , IF and linker protein nonmotion tension . According to whether there is a force generated , we concluded that the first three regulate axonal growth actively , whereas the remaining two regulate axonal growth passively . Osmotic pressure Osmotic pressure affects axonal growth Osmotic pressure is a hydrostatic pressure produced by concentration differences among diffusible solutes between the cytoplasmic and extracellular environ - ments , which modulates the shrinkage or swelling of cells ( Wright et al . , 1995 ; Yang et al . , 2015 ) . Poroelasticity is known as the elastic stress in a cross - linked cytoskeleton under osmotic pressure ( Casares et al . , 2015 ) . The osmotic pressure difference across the membrane , the membrane tension , or the changes in the composition of the different components of the membrane are controlled by the cell , which can determine the axon’s radius of curvature and ultimately its growth ( Gov , 2009 ) . During elongation of the axon , osmotic pressure gen - erates an outward force on the cortex ( Goriely et al . , 2015 ) . However , the actomyosin cortex must maintain this force against external impediments caused by osmotic pressure ( Stewart et al . , 2011 ) . Cytoskeletal cross - linking is bonded to the membrane by certain linker proteins and the cytoskel - etal system plays a role in maintaining and changing the cell shape ; consequently , it provides an inward trend that acts against the osmotic pressure ( Dai and Sheetz , 1999 ; Gilden and Krummel , 2010 ; Eva and Fawcett , 2014 ) . This force is balanced by osmotic pressure ( Stewart et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , axons can control their volume , shape , and mechan - ical properties by the local modulation of the actomyosin - cortex - dependent surface tension and globally regulating osmotic pressure ( Mammoto and Ingber , 2010 ; Fischer - Friedrich et al . , 2014 ) . Lin et al . created an environment in which the ion concentration in the cell was higher than that outside to simulate an osmotic pressure difference . They proved that osmotic pressure plays an important role in axonal growth . They employed calibrated glass needles to exert a constant force to elongating axons of cultured neurons . A neurite being pulled at a constant force will grow 50 – 300 % faster after a 50 % dilution of inorganic ions in the culture medium . That is , osmotic pressure seems to enhance the sensitivity of axons to applied tensions ( Lin et al . , 1995 ) . The static tension normally born by neurites suggests a direct mechanical effect on the cytoskeletal pro - teins of the neurite shaft . Removing a compressive load on axonal MTs up - regulated their assembly , thus inducing axonal elongation . The cell can change the value of the axon radius , enabling it to reach the value that minimizes the overall energy by controlling the pressure difference across the axon membrane ( Gov , 2009 ) . When the osmotic pressure acts on the membrane , it results in the strain of the bilayer ( Silhavy et al . , 2010 ) . Then , linkers are transactivated by mechanical transduc - tion . Such a force results in the formation of a strain on the proteins , even causing conformational changes of the cytoskeleton ( Martins et al . , 2012 ) . By extending or shortening the MFs and MTs , mechanosensors adjust the tension of the cytoskeleton , which eventually conducts the mechanical force in three dimensions ( del Alamo et al . , 2013 ; Krieg et al . , 2015 ) . Ion channels play an important role in the growth of axons as well as in aquaporins ( AQPs ; Cui and Yuan , 2007 ; Martinac et al . , 2010 ; Chen et al . , 2014 ) . Ion channels are Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth 127 pore - forming membrane proteins that can control the flow of ions and modulate cell volume . AQPs are essen - tial in the flow of water across a cell membrane . However , only the electroneutral fluxes , such as potassium ( K + ) and chloride ( Cl − ) , can change the cell volume . Acute volume regulation involves the net transport of K + , sodium ( Na + ) , Cl − and organic osmolytes across the plasma membrane . Ion channels are classified into different kinds according to different standards . Some reports stated that ion chan - nels could affect the mechanical activity of axon cells . When it comes to hypertonicity , hypotonicity , or mem - brane stretching , the stress at the membrane will change , probably leading to the opening of the mechanosensitive ion channels . The ion flow can then regulate the osmotic pressure , functioning in mechanotransduction , which transforms the external mechanical force into electrical and / or chemical signals . Osmotic pressure is the control parameter ( Golzio et al . , 1998 ) . Usually , K + channels regu - late the efflux of K + , Na + - H + exchangers and regulate Na + / K + / 2Cl − cotransporters ( NKCCs ) to control influx of Na + . These two activities maintain the balance . Generally , negative ions play a decisive role in cell volume regula - tion ( Min et al . , 2014 ) . One common pathway that could be activated during hypo - osmotic stress involves Cl − chan - nels ( Basavappa and Ellory , 1996 ) . Various cells may use different sets of ion transport proteins to modulate their volume . Taking astrocytes as an example , secondary active transporters can be divided into ion channels and cotransporters . These include the Na + / K + / Cl − cotrans - porter ( NKCC1 ) and the Na + / Ca 2 + exchanger . The activa - tion of the NKCC1 has been suggested to be involved in cell swelling in some neurological disorders . NKCCl can mediate the secondary cotransport of water at the luminal face ( Jentsch , 2016 ) . Secondary cotransport can be medi - ated by the K + / Cl − cotransporter ( KCC ; Jentsch , 2016 ) . The electroneutral NKCC protein transports Na + , K + and Cl − into cells under both physiological and pathophysio - logical conditions , with a stoichiometry of 1Na + : 1K + : 2Cl − . In addition to NKCC1 and KCC , all solute transporters that cotransport water can be driven to operate in response to an osmotic gradient in the range of 25 – 117 mM ; the size of astrocyte swelling becomes linearly related to extra - cellular [ K + ] ( Stokum et al . , 2016 ) . Na + , the primary driver of ionic edema , drives the influx of secondary participants , such as Cl − and water , to equalize electrical and osmotic gradients . Transendothelial Cl − flux is likely regulated by Cl − channels and Cl − cotransporters , such as NKCC1 and KCC ( Yan et al . , 2001 ; Jayakumar et al . , 2008 ) . The effect of ion fluxes may involve catalytic rather than osmotic amounts of material ( Sachs and Sivaselvan , 2015 ) . The potential role of ion channels in cell volume regulation suggests that cell volume cannot be modulated by an electrogenic transport of ions alone ( Sachs and Sivaselvan , 2015 ) . Osmotic pressure and IFs As mentioned above , the cytoskeletons of neuron cells are responsible for bearing mechanical loads and maintain - ing cell morphology . Furthermore , they are also respon - sive to osmotic loading . Several studies have suggested a direct role of the cytoskeleton in the cell volume regu - latory response . For example , erythrocytes behave as a perfect osmometer only after the disruption of the spec - trin - actin cytoskeleton ( Heubusch et al . , 1985 ) , implying that the cytoskeleton normally resists osmotic changes . To study the role of the neuronal cytoskeleton , Bober et al . examined actin - and myosin - dependent effects of hyper - osmotic and hypo - osmotic shock on their morphology . Their results emphasized the dynamic response of neu - ronal cells to osmotic stress and suggested that actin and myosin play a role in both accommodating and respond - ing to the stress ( Bober et al . , 2015 ) . Compared to other components of the neuronal cytoskeleton , IFs are believed to play the main role in resisting osmotic pressure . The evidence is twofold . First , keratins make up the largest subgroup of IFs ( Infante et al . , 2007 ) , and it has been demonstrated that keratins could help to resist osmotic stress ( Markl and Schechter , 1998 ; D’Alessandro et al . , 2011 ) . Second , in some patho - logical situations , IFs are the only filamentous com - ponent of the cytoskeleton , which remains intact in keratinocytes subjected to hypo - osmotic cell swelling ( D’Alessandro et al . , 2002 ) . Together with the phenom - enon that cells with defective , incapacitated , or missing IF proteins lose their ability to resist cell swelling or its consequences ( D’Alessandro et al . , 2002 ) , these observa - tions provide strong evidence for role of IFs in resisting osmotic pressure . MF - dependent motion MF - dependent motion is a force generated by myosin transmitted through the MFs to regulate cytoskeleton mechanics and contribute to axon growth ( Ingber et al . , 2014 ) . The MF network is the medium of force transfer and comprises highly conserved proteins that exist widely in eukaryotic cells . These filaments are self - assembled from actin monomers , a 42 - kDa protein , into a double - stranded 128 Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth helical actin filament ( Shabbir et al . , 2014 ) . MFs are about 5 nm in diameter and the persistence length of MFs is in the range of 7 – 22 μ m , which gives MFs mechanical elas - ticity ( Block et al . , 2015 ) . As all the actin subunits lie the same direction , the filament is polar with a ‘barbed’ and ‘pointed’ end . Monomers can add to or depolymerize from either end ( Chhabra and Higgs , 2007 ) . In neurons , 10 – 30 bundles of MFs are cross - linked together using α - actinin in bipolar fibers known as stress fibers . MFs form stress fibers for cell contraction ( Taylor et al . , 2000 ) . Here , the contractile force is generated by the ATP - driven movement of the myosin II motor protein along the MFs . Myosin II assembles into bipolar bundles and moves on the ‘tracks’ provided by the MFs , which are also organized in bipolar arrays . This relative movement of the myosin II domain and MFs results in the contrac - tion of the actomyosin bundle ( Murrell and Gardel , 2014 ) . Stress fibers are often anchored to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) through integrins and interact with IFs . These junc - tions could be crucial for the MF - dependent motion to be passed on and take effect . In axons , MFs have two main types of organization : patches and submembranous rings . Patches have fila - ments organized in the form of meshworks , which mainly exist in the distal axon and the axon initial segment ( AIS ) . In the distal axon , patches function as precursors to the formation of filopodia and branches , which are termed as lamellipodia . At the AIS , ascribed to interactions with myosin motors , patches capture membranous organelles locally and contribute to polarized trafficking , which also influences axonal growth . The axon between the distal axon and the AIS , called the axonal shaft , develops rings of actin filaments , which are separated by , and connect to , rings of spectrin , forming an actin - spectrin cytoskel - eton ( Arnold and Gallo , 2014 ) . Using the super - resolution microcopy technique called stochastic optical reconstruc - tion microscopy ( STORM ) , we observed that the actin - spectrin cytoskeleton is a periodic , ladder - like structure with a periodicity of approximately 180 – 190 nm ( Xu et al . , 2013 ; Stewart and Shen , 2015 ) . At the tips of developing axons , there is a motile structure termed as the growth cone , which comprises three parts : a peripheral domain ( P domain ) , a central domain ( C domain ) and a transition zone ( T zone ; Dent et al . , 2011 ) . In the P domain , actin filaments are rendered as filopodia and lamellipodia ( He et al . , 2015 ) . Near the lamellipodial leading edge , actin monomers continue to polymerize , leading to lamellipodium protrusion that pushes the membrane forward . Thus , MF - dependent motion , combined with adhesion to the substrate , moves the leading edge forward in response to guidance cues . Similarly , filopodia , finger - like protrusions supported by a bundle of actin filaments extending from lamellipodium , are believed to be used by the cell to explore the environ - ment ( Mattila and Lappalainen , 2008 ) . In the C domain , enriched in MT tips and organelles , actin filaments are often observed as accumulations that likely reflect the sites of substratum attachment . Between the C and P domains is the T zone . Within the T zone , actin filaments often form bundles running from one side to the other of the growth cone , termed as arcs . Arcs are considered one of the major sites for actomyosin contractility in growth cones and are regulated by the Rho family ( Zhang et al . , 2003 ) . Actomyosin contractility drives the retrograde flow of filaments from the P domain to the C domain of the growth cone ( Arnold and Gallo , 2014 ) and turns the rear structure into the axonal shaft ( O’Toole et al . , 2015 ) . Therefore , by balancing MF growth with retrograde flow , the MF - dependent motion plays an important role in axon elongation ( Dent et al . , 2011 ) . In axons , myosins 1b , 1c , Va and VI , which are related to transport , have been more closely studied than other myosins . In addition , large amounts of myosin II are located in axons ( Bridgman , 2004 ) . Except for myosin VI , which moves to the minus or pointed end , the other myosins move to the plus or barbed end of actin filaments ( Wells et al . , 1999 ) . Myosin II is present in much higher amounts compared to the other types ; therefore , the influ - ence of myosin VI can be counteracted . Based on the inter - action principle of force , when myosin moves to one end , actin filaments provide it with a forward force . In return , actin filaments are pulled backward in the opposite direc - tion . According to the existing research , actin filaments in the filopodia are organized with plus or barbed ends toward the tips ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . When myosin II moves along the MFs , it produces a force that pulls the membrane inward against the outward force it bears . Also , when myosin moves on the arcs within the T zone , it will produce an inward contraction force , no matter which direction it moves to . The mechanism of interaction between different types of myosins and MFs in other zones of axons is similar . Thus , to sum up , taking no account of the assembly of MFs that benefits axon growth , the retro - grade flow and MF - dependent motion might have a nega - tive effect on axon growth . The MF - dependent motion generates an inward force to mediate axon growth . MT - dependent motion MT - dependent motion is motivated by dynein and kinesin moving along the MTs . This motion , which enables cargo Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth 129 transport through the cell , plays an essential and instruc - tive role in growth cone behavior ( Snyder et al . , 1997 ) . MTs are tracks of motion as well as cargo delivery vehicles . These polymers of tubulins are assembled by protofilaments , in which α / β - tubulin heterodimers are held together in a head - to - tail fashion . Eleven to 15 proto - filaments interact laterally to form sheets that are rolled into a polarized hollow tubule with a diameter of 25 nm ( Pastuglia and Bouchez , 2007 ) . After tube nucleation , the MTs also undergo a dynamic process in which hetero - dimers can assemble or disassemble from either end of the MT . This enormous and complex structure gives MTs a length of several millimeters but is less flexible than MFs . Similar to MFs , MTs generate forces through two motor proteins : dynein and kinesin . Dynein is a large , two - headed complex motor containing six AAA + sub - units , shown as a hexameric ring ( Roberts et al . , 2013 ) . Dynein uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis to move cargo to the minus end of MTs . Motion is generated by interhead movement . In this case , a head is released from MTs under tension and relieves tension when stepping toward the other head ( Cleary et al . , 2014 ) . However , dynein heads step independently of their partner , so dynein depends on a structure called a ‘linker’ to prevent release of the motor from the MT . In addition , dynein often functions as a dynein - dynactin complex with its regulator , dynactin , which plays an important part in dynein cargo recruit - ment and movement stimulation ( Tripathy et al . , 2014 ) . Kinesin is also an ATP - driven , dimeric motor that func - tions in the transport of intracellular cargo along MTs to the plus ends . Kinesin molecules are also formed from two identical protein chains . Each chain has a head binding to MTs and a tail linking to the cargo . Two heads are con - nected to a common , coiled - coil stalk termed as the ‘neck linker’ ( Andreasson et al . , 2015 ) . Kinesin also forms an interhead tension when two heads are coordinated and takes strict , alternating steps along the MTs ( Cleary et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , dynein and kinesin contribute to the crosstalk between MTs and IFs to facilitate the function of MT - dependent motion ( Snider and Omary , 2014 ) . The vital function of MT - dependent motion in axonal growth is unquestionable . In general , MTs form a par - allel dense array remaining in the axon shaft . MTs are straight and bundled together so that they can consoli - date and provide mechanical support for actin dynam - ics . In the growth cone , most MTs are stable , bundled in the C domain . However , sometimes , certain MTs invade the P domain and extend into the filopodia , led by their plus ends ( Dent and Gertler , 2003 ) . The advanced MTs in filopodia become stabilized , which leads to axon elonga - tion ( Kalil and Dent , 2004 ) . Thus , based on the theory of interaction force , we concluded that when dynein moves to the minus ends of MTs in this region , it would produce a force that pushes the MT outward in response . While kinesin moves to the plus ends , it will generate an inward force opposite to that of dynein . By striking a balance between the forces generated by dynein and kinesin , axon growth could be adjusted . If the force inward is greater than force outward , it will generally form a force inward and vice versa . In addition , recent studies implied that MTs might react to guidance cues and mediate growth cone turning ( Dent et al . , 2011 ) . Unsurprisingly , like MFs , MTs are also capable of rapid retrograde movement , induced by MT - dependent motion ( Suomalainen et al . , 1999 ) , and this MT - dependent motion might play an important role in axon growth . IF nonmotion tension IFs act as a fundamental structure in various activities of mechanics ; they can make the cell stable and resilient . Also , they have the function of mechanotransduction . In keratinocytes subjected to hypo - osmotic cell swelling , IFs keep them largely intact , and this by itself might be a pow - erful reason behind the evolutionary need for their exist - ence ( D’Alessandro et al . , 2002 ) . The mechanical function of IFs is related to their archi - tecture . In contrast to MTs and MFs , IFs are nonpolar and assemble in a hierarchical manner . IF proteins form indi - vidual filaments , bundles and networks . The two patterns of manifestation are single IFs and IF networks ( Quinta et al . , 2011 ) . The basic mechanical property of single IFs is stiffness and flexibility . Neurofilaments ( NFs ) are much softer than the other studied cytoskeletal proteins , with a value between 0 . 05 and 0 . 2 μ m ( Block et al . , 2015 ) . Exten - sibility is another physical property of single IFs . The average extensibility of NFs on a mica surface is 2 . 6 - fold the initial length of a filament , which is accompanied by a significant reduction in the filament diameter . The experi - ment demonstrated that single IFs could be stretched by about 240 % before they rupture . However , this stretching might be irreversible ( Kreplak et al . , 2005 ) . Single IFs can be linked to one another by IF - associated proteins ( IFAPs ) in IF networks . With the help of such cross - linker proteins , cytoskeleton components are linked to one another , the adhesive structure , and the mem - brane . They exhibit strain - hardening properties , meaning that they are less rigid at low strain but ‘harden’ at high strain ( Koster et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , reconstituted IF networks display a viscoelastic response when exposed to external stress or strain fields ( Haase and Pelling , 2015 ) . 130 Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth Various IF proteins are expressed differentially during nervous system development , especially in axonal growth , such as NFs , vimentin in the mesenchyme , and α - internexin in the neurons ( Lariviere and Julien , 2004 ) . Based on similarities in the intron - exon gene structure and protein sequence homologies , IF proteins can be classified into six types ( I – VI ) . NF proteins are a typical example . They are made up of light ( NF - L ) , medium ( NF - M ) and heavy ( NF - H ) filaments ( Cui et al . , 1995 ) . NFs are essential for axonal radial growth , signal transduction of axonal elongation , mechanical stability and resilience . A combined increase of NF - L , with either NF - M or NF - H , promotes radial axonal growth , resulting in an expan - sion of axonal volume ( Xu et al . , 1996 ; Sousa and Bhat , 2007 ) . The genetic ablation of astrocyte IFs might compro - mise the ability of astrocytes to respond to hypo - osmotic stress . Glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) − / − Vim − / − mice , in which reactive astrocytes are completely devoid of IFs , will be useful to address the role of reactive astrocytes in osmotic stress and other aspects of stroke pathogenesis ( Ding et al . , 1998 ) . Some proteins affect the growth of the axons . α - Internexin is found in the developing central nervous system , and nestin is expressed in proliferating stem cells in the central nervous system . In the nervous system , nestin and vimentin are detected early , whereas differ - ent subunits of NFs appear later during development and are associated with neuronal differentiation ( Shea and Beermann , 1994 ) . When considering cytoplasmic IF proteins , neuro - ectodermal cells are keratin positive . As neuroectodermal cells transition to neural stem cells , keratin expression is down - regulated and vimentin and nestin expressions are induced later in development . When glial and neuronal lineage cells diverge from primitive neural stem cells , vimentin and nestin are replaced progressively by the IF proteins found in the mature cell type . In addition , during the maturation of radial glial cells into astrocytes , synemin is transiently expressed . Although most mature astrocytes express GFAP only , a subpopulation of astrocytes , such as Bergman glial cells , may coexpress GFAP together with vimentin . Of note , mature oligodendrocytes do not appear to contain cytoplasmic IF proteins perhaps because of the scarcity of their cytoplasm ( Quick et al . , 2015 ) . IFs act as the messenger for stress - mediated signaling in axonal growth . For example , because of their remarkable ability to greatly stretch beyond their original length , vimentin sustains the tensile forces of actin stress fibers and act as stretch sensors , thereby regulating the force - dependent recruitment of different molecules to their surfaces . In an elegant study , it was shown that vimentin IF could mediate the transfer of a direct mechanical force from cell surface integrins to the cell interior . Interestingly , in living cells , the contribution of IFs to the whole cell elasticity becomes prominent when cells are highly strained ( Wang and Stamenovic , 2000 ) and IFs pre - sumably become fully extended ( Wang and Stamenovic , 2000 ) . Linker proteins Linker proteins are important in the organization of the cytoskeletal network and the maintenance of cellular integrity in nervous tissue . In addition , they participate in signaling pathways and fundamental biological pro - cesses , such as cell adhesion , migration , polarization , and the stress response ( Bouameur et al . , 2014 ) . The plakin and spectrin families are typical of such linker proteins in the nervous system . Mammalian plakins have a similar structural organi - zation . Linker proteins play a role resembling a bridge in fragments of cytoskeleton components ( polymers of actin , tubulin , or IF proteins , forming MF , MT and IF ) with each other and bind them to organelles , plasma and nuclear membranes via different binding sites or structure domains . Plectin is a member of the plakins ( Atai et al . , 2012 ) . Its neural isoform interacts with not only the rod domain of IF fractions but also several IF subunit proteins , including vimentin and NFs , via IFBD and ABD , strengthening the self - interaction of NF pro - teins or linking them to MTs . In addition , the SH3 domain of plectin has been found to bind to high molecular mass MT - associated proteins ( MAPs ; Du et al . , 1998 ) , forming MAP - MT interactions and cross - bridges between IFs and MTs . Plakin repeat domains connecting to integrin β 4 - subunit link IFs to various adhesive complexes , such as hemidesmosomes , desmosomes and focal adhesions ( Karakesisoglou et al . , 2000 ) . Therefore , plectin may mod - ulate integrin - mediated adhesion during axon extension . Spectraplakins including MACF1 ( MT actin cross - linking factor ) and BPAG1 carry an MT - binding domain in their C tail ( EF hands and GAR domain ) , which interacts with MTs and links MTs to other cytoskeletal components ( Suozzi et al . , 2012 ) . This may affect the aggregation of MTs during the development of axons . As a major component of the plasma membrane skeleton , spectrin provides multiple attachments to pro - teins and allows the cytoskeleton to attach to the mem - brane ( Bennett and Healy , 2009 ) . The spectrin skeleton is anchored to the membrane via two major membrane skeleton macrocomplexes ( interaction with protein 4 . 1 , Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth 131 ankyrin , in turn binding the cytoplasmic domain of the anion exchanger ) . It allows direct interactions with the cytoplasmic domains of transmembrane proteins ( Mohan - das and Gallagher , 2008 ) . Protein 4 . 1 and adducin promote spectrins connecting fragments of actin filaments by the lateral interaction of CH domains . Spectrin repeats act as a spacer region that separates the functional domains at the N and C termini , determining whether the protein would form a bundle or make a cross - link with actin fila - ments . In this way , spectrin takes part in axonal growth by organizing and regulating MF dynamics in growth cones . In axons , spectrins surround the MTs as loops . This struc - ture can protect axons from mechanic damage ( Kevenaar and Hoogenraad , 2015 ) . The mechanical properties of cytolinker proteins provide elasticity and stability for actin cytoskeletons . For example , the binding capacity for different cytoskel - eton proteins toward plectin contributes to cytoskeletal plasticity of the developing neuronal architecture ( Bonak - dar et al . , 2015 ) . Additionally , they also transmit tension signals in axonal segments by acting as a platform for the assembly of signaling proteins , such as the energy - con - trolling AMP - activated protein kinase , the protein kinase C receptor RACK1 ( Butler et al . , 2008 ) . It is possibly regu - lated by phosphorylation and transmits through abun - dant interactions with cytoskeletons and the environment ( Parsons et al . , 2010 ) . Cytolinker proteins are necessary for axon growth and are involved in selected later axon extension events and postnatal synapse modulation and maturation . During axon development , linker proteins may also organize proteins in the growth cone by coor - dinating actin and MT dynamics in response to guidance cues ( Chen and Cheng , 2009 ; Shen and Cowan , 2010 ) . Tension hypothesis Structural mechanics modeling approaches To understand how structural force impact on axonal growth , it is essential to correlate them with the growing process , either causally or statistically . Methods to measure cellular forces have grown rapidly over the last years , including traction force microscopy ( TFM ) , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) and fluorescent resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) - based tension probes . TFM incorporates a strain gauge in a cell culture setup , which measures forces by calculating the move - ment of the calibrated spring . For instance , in setting up thick polyacrylamide ( PAA ) films with embedded marker beads , PAA films deform gradually because of the cell traction , and the movement of markers is recorded to show this mechanical process ( Schwarz and Soine , 2015 ) . TFM shows the correlation of cellular traction and adhe - sion contacts . However , TFM mainly focuses on measur - ing forces at the cell - matrix interface , which can hardly represent intracellular tension within axons . In recent years , AFM has demonstrated its capability to analyze live cells in their native environment , achiev - ing a relatively high resolution between that of optical and electron microscopy ( Eghiaian et al . , 2014 ) . AFM is a valu - able tool for the three - dimensional imaging of living cells , as well as interacting with the sample , which provides possibilities for physical or mechanical measurements ( Neuman and Nagy , 2008 ) . Once the sample is removed from the CO 2 incubator and adhered to a glass slide , AFM starts to operate by scanning using a sensitive tip installed on a flexible cantilever . The forces between the tip and the sample lead to cantilevering deflection , which can be measured , and the data are transformed into force - defor - mation curves ( Dufrene and Lee , 2000 ) . In each curve , deformation also refers to the vertical distance traveled by the cantilever when it presses on the axon . As the AFM tip forces the cell membrane down , actin filaments remain rel - atively stable , which results in a complex image of cellular topography ( Usukura et al . , 2016 ) . These indentations of the tips on the axons can be used to estimate the thickness and stiffness of the submembrane growth cone structures ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . Previous investigations showed the exact topographical feature of the growth cone structures and their elasticity , where the lamellipodia are 30 – 60 nm in thickness , whereas the filopodia have a diameter of 120 – 180 nm and a thickness lying in the range between 5 and 30 nm . What’s more , using AFM , we find that the axon has a soft growth cone , and the P domain is stiffer than C domain . It shows that there is a force that drags the membrane inward in the growth cone ; however , the force in the P domain is much smaller or may be missing ( Martin et al . , 2013 ) . Concerning the restriction , AFM can only be applied to detect extracellular mechanics , which are not efficient in the study of intracellular structural tension . Therefore , to monitor the forces and their distribu - tion in live cells timely , FRET - based force probes that make up for the deficiency of preexisting techniques have been developed ( Guo et al . , 2014 ; Dingyu et al . , 2016 ) . The FRET - based force probe is composed of a pair of the fluorescent molecules and an elastic spring or linker . The two fluorescent proteins , donor and acceptor molecules , have dipole - dipole interactions with overlapping excita - tion and spectral wavelength . The process of the FRET 132 Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth takes place when the donor molecule with the electroni - cally excited states can transfer its energy to the acceptor molecules . The efficiency of the FRET - based force probe is determined by the distance and the orientation of the two fluorophores . Using a gene engineering technique , the dipole orientation - based FRET probe can be combined with cytoskeletal proteins , which can measure a real - time tension when they are under assembly in live cells . The FRET - based force probe had been constructed to be par - allel when the applied tension is zero while expected to twist toward a vertical configuration under tension , indi - cating that the angle between the donor and the acceptor can modulate the probe . The kink and swivel motions in an otherwise undistorted angular junction and its FRET efficiency also decrease under tension because of the increment of the angle flexibility leaded by the distortion . Therefore , the FRET probe turns structural forces into optical signals to estimate the intracellular force in spe - cific proteins , including the structural proteins ( e . g . actin and spectrin ) in live cells ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) . Based on these methods and existing knowledge , we can discuss what really causes axonal growth . It is obvious that the five elements related to subcellular struc - tural tension we mentioned above influence the morphol - ogy of neurons . However , what really enables axons to move along remains to be discussed . MTs induce a tension heading forward during the assembly process in the axon growth cone ( Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ) . Also , while dyneins and kinesins move on MTs , they will generate forces in different directions on the MTs . Through linker proteins , these forces are transmitted to the cytomem - brane and transform the morphology of neurons . However , although MTs might extend into the filopodium occasionally , there are actually no MTs in the leading edge of the filopodium , according to morphological studies , and in the growth cone , MTs usually exist in the C domain ( Dingyu et al . , 2016 ) . Hence , we can exclude the possibil - ity of MT - dependent tension in pushing the axon ahead . When it comes to MT - dependent tension , the outcome of the FRET - based force probe studying the axonal growth , we realized that the actin filament meshwork at the leading edge is not under tension when axons protrude , whereas the rear MFs are under high tension . It shows that the actin filament meshwork in the leading edge takes no part in the procedure , and the rear MFs affect axon growth , but their specific function remains to be explored ( Figure 2A ; Dingyu et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , as mentioned in the previous section , MF - dependent tension charges the retrograde movement of the filopodium and it heads inward , just as does the reverse direction of axonal out - growth ; therefore , we can conclude that MF - dependent tension provides a contraction force that limits the axonal growth . Clearly , there is only one candidate left , which is osmotic pressure . We believe that osmotic pressure pro - vides an expansive force to the axon growth cone , which induces axonal outgrowth . Meanwhile , axons regulate osmotic pressure acting on the cytoskeleton , resulting in growth cone protrusion in a given direction . However , the causes of the change in osmotic pressure are unknown . Recent findings highlighted ring - like structures as a novel form of ultrastructural organization of the axonal actin filament cytoskeleton in neurons ( Figure 1 ; Gallo , 2013 ; Rasband , 2013 ; Xu et al . , 2013 ; Stewart and Shen , 2015 ) . Considering that the direction of the transmission A B Fo Fo Fo Fo Fo Fo Fo Fo Fa Figure 1 : Analysis of structural force in axons . ( A ) Schematic diagram for the cortical cytoskeleton in axons . Short actin filaments ( green ) connect to one another in a ring - like organiza - tion , with an adducin ( blue ) cap at one end wrapping around the circumference of the axon . Spectrin tetramers ( magenta ) connect the adjacent MF rings along the axon . ( B ) Cross - section schematic diagram of an axon . The direction of Fa ( MF - dependent motion ) generated from MF motion is opposite to Fo ( generated by osmotic pressure ) , therefore keeping the body of the axon tubular . Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth 133 of the structural force depends on the orientation of the cytoskeleton components , we established a ‘squeezing’ model to describe axon growth ( Figure 2 ) . According to our data , the osmotic pressure induces a bulging force ( Fo ) for axonal onward movement , with no limitation of direction , whereas the MF - dependent tension heads inward and antagonizes the direction of Fo . The mecha - nism is analogous to the effect of squeezing a balloon on each side , causing the balloon to deform and extrude to the opposing side ( Figure 3 ) . This viewpoint is also supported by data from AFM . Martin et al . revealed that neurons are characterized by softer growth cones ( Martin et al . , 2013 ) . The outward swelling force of the soft membrane in the growth cones should be the resultant vector of outward osmotic pres - sure and inward stronger MF tension . However , this hypothesis still requires confirmation by further experi - mental data and analysis , especially of the intracellular structural force vector . Conclusion and perspectives In recent years , we have revealed the subcellular struc - ture of growth cone and axon using preexisting tech - nologies , such as STORM , AFM and FRET - based tension probe . However , until now , the internal mechanical properties of neurons and the reasons for axonal growth have remained unclear . There is no doubt that the cytoskeleton is the key to maintaining cell morphology . However , in contrast to the pervious theory , we believe that the cytoskeleton is not the direct factor leading to axon growth . They are simply the medium for molecu - lar motors . While the molecular motors move on the cytoskeleton , they generate a relative tension on the cytoskeleton , and via ankyrin , which links the cytoskel - eton to the cell membrane , the growth or retraction of the axon is regulated . Usually , it will produce an inward tension against forward growth . In addition , osmotic pressure also plays a pivotal role in axonal growth . With Fo Fo Fo Fo Fo Fo Fa Fa Fa Fa Fa Fo Fo Fo A B Figure 2 : Vector analysis of structural forces in axon growth . ( A ) Axons are generated after nerve growth factor treatment for 5 days and obtained a higher tension than that in the cell body . However , the actin filament meshwork in the leading edge is not under tension when axons protrude . ( B ) Schematic diagram of vector tension in neuronal polarization . Few MFs are seen in the growth cone tip , suggesting that the growth of axons is mainly induced by the outward Fo ( generated by osmotic pressure ) . The axon remains tubular because of the balance between outward Fo and inward Fa ( MF - dependent motion ) . Fo Fc Fo Squeezing Squeezing Squeezing Squeezing Fo – Fs Fo – Fs Fo – Fs Figure 3 : Mechanism of axonal growth . Similar to the squeezing of a balloon on each side , the balloon tends to deform and extrudes to the other side . Fo , force generated by osmotic pressure ; Fc , cytoskeleton - driven force ; Fs , squeezing force . 134 Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth the regulation of ion channels , such as Cl − , it provides an outward force , which acts on the IFs , to regulate axonal growth . IFs are nonpolar and flexible . They act as the force foundation of osmotic pressure and as the messen - ger for stress - mediated signaling . Linker proteins have the same function in axonal growth . Based on previous findings , we constructed a squeez - ing model and put forward a hypothesis that MF - depend - ent tension is the primary cause of axonal growth and that osmotic pressure is the immediate cause . Although the MF - dependent tension provides an inward contrac - tility and seems to confront outward growth of axons , it will ultimately bring about the growth of axon because it increases osmotic pressure , which then promotes axonal growth . Although a number of facts support our hypoth - esis , it still has defects . For instance , osmotic pressure is intricate in the axon , and we cannot explain the regula - tory mechanism clearly . Whether there is a mechanism by which MF - dependent tension can affect osmotic pressure remains to be determined . Moreover , it is still ambiguous whether osmotic pressure is uniform in cells and whether there is a mechanism that makes the osmotic pressure at the top of the axon different from that at other areas . Also , the internal specific structure like the amount of pro - teins and cytoskeletons and the magnitude of force that is transported by MFs are still unclear . In addition , as our model focuses on the growth cone , and the ‘squeezing’ force is applied by MF - dependent tension from arcs exist - ing in the T zone , our lack of knowledge about this area should be improved . Thus , there seems to be much more to reveal regarding the mechanism of axonal growth and further research is required . Acknowledgments : This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( No . 81573409 ) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province ( No . BK20161574 ) and the Priority Aca - demic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions ( integration of traditional Chinese and west - ern medicine ) . References Andreasson , J . O . , Milic , B . , Chen , G . Y . , Guydosh , N . R . , Hancock , W . O . , and Block , S . M . ( 2015 ) . Examining kinesin processivity within a general gating framework . eLife 4 , e07403 . Arnold , D . B . and Gallo , G . ( 2014 ) . Structure meets function : actin filaments and myosin motors in the axon . J . Neurochem . 129 , 213 – 220 . Atai , N . A . , Ryan , S . D . , Kothary , R . , Breakefield , X . O . , and Nery , F . C . ( 2012 ) . Untethering the nuclear envelope and cytoskeleton . biologically distinct dystonias arising from a common cellular dysfunction . Int . J . Cell Biol . 2012 , 634214 . Basavappa , S . and Ellory , J . C . ( 1996 ) . The role of swelling - induced anion channels during neuronal volume regulation . Mol . Neuro - biol . 13 , 137 – 53 . Bennett , V . and Healy , J . ( 2009 ) . Membrane domains based on ankyrin and spectrin associated with cell - cell interactions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 , a003012 . Block , J . , Schroeder , V . , Pawelzyk , P . , Willenbacher , N . , and Koster , S . ( 2015 ) . Physical properties of cytoplasmic intermediate fila - ments . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1853 , 3053 – 3064 . Bober , B . G . , Love , J . M . , Horton , S . M . , Sitnova , M . , Shahamatdar , S . , Kannan , A . , and Shah , S . B . ( 2015 ) . Actin - myosin network influences morphological response of neuronal cells to altered osmolarity . Cytoskeleton 72 , 193 – 206 . Bonakdar , N . , Schilling , A . , Sporrer , M . , Lennert , P . , Mainka , A . , Winter , L . , Walko , G . , Wiche , G . , Fabry , B . , and Goldmann , W . H . ( 2015 ) . Determining the mechanical properties of plectin in mouse myoblasts and keratinocytes . Exp . Cell Res . 331 , 331 – 337 . Bouameur , J . E . , Favre , B . , and Borradori , L . ( 2014 ) . Plakins , a versa - tile family of cytolinkers : roles in skin integrity and in human diseases . J . Invest . Dermatol . 134 , 885 – 894 . Bridgman , P . C . ( 2004 ) . Myosin - dependent transport in neurons . J . Neurobiol . 58 , 164 – 174 . Bridgman , P . C . , Dave , S . , Asnes , C . F . , Tullio , A . N . , and Adelstein , R . S . ( 2001 ) . Myosin IIB is required for growth cone motility . J . Neurosci . 21 , 6159 – 6169 . Butler , J . , Mohandas , N . , and Waugh , R . E . ( 2008 ) . Integral protein linkage and the bilayer - skeletal separation energy in red blood cells . Biophys J . 95 , 1826 – 1836 . Casares , L . , Vincent , R . , Zalvidea , D . , Campillo , N . , Navajas , D . , Arroyo , M . , and Trepat , X . ( 2015 ) . Hydraulic fracture during epithelial stretching . Nat . Mater . 14 , 343 – 351 . Chen , S . Y . and Cheng , H . J . ( 2009 ) . Functions of axon guidance molecules in synapse formation . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 19 , 471 – 478 . Chen , D . , Yu , S . P . , and Wei , L . ( 2014 ) . Ion channels in regulation of neuronal regenerative activities . Transl . Stroke Res . 5 , 156 – 162 . Chhabra , E . S . and Higgs , H . N . ( 2007 ) . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1110 – 1121 . Cleary , F . B . , Dewitt , M . A . , Bilyard , T . , Htet , Z . M . , Belyy , V . , Chan , D . D . , Chang , A . Y . , and Yildiz , A . ( 2014 ) . Tension on the linker gates the ATP - dependent release of dynein from microtubules . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4587 . Craig , E . M . , Van Goor , D . , Forscher , P . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2012 ) . Mem - brane tension , myosin force , and actin turnover maintain actin treadmill in the nerve growth cone . Biophys J . 102 , 1503 – 1513 . Cui , K . and Yuan , X . ( 2007 ) . TRP channels and axon pathfinding . In : TRP ion channel function in sensory transduction and cellular signaling cascades . W . B . Liedtke and S . Heller , eds . Front . Neurosci . ( Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press / Taylor & Francis ) . Cui , C . , Stambrook , P . J . , and Parysek , L . M . ( 1995 ) . Peripherin assembles into homopolymers in SW13 cells . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 3279 – 3284 . D’Alessandro , M . , Russell , D . , Morley , S . M . , Davies , A . M . , and Lane , E . B . ( 2002 ) . Keratin mutations of epidermolysis bullosa simplex alter the kinetics of stress response to osmotic shock . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4341 – 4351 . Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth 135 D’Alessandro , M . , Coats , S . E . , Jonkmann , M . F . , Leigh , I . M . , and Lane , E . B . ( 2011 ) . Keratin 14 - null cells as a model to test the efficacy of gene therapy approaches in epithelial cells . J . Invest . Derma - tol . 131 , 1412 – 1419 . Dai , J . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys J . 77 , 3363 – 3370 . del Alamo , J . C . , Meili , R . , Alvarez - Gonzalez , B . , Alonso - Latorre , B . , Bastounis , E . , Firtel , R . , and Lasheras , J . C . ( 2013 ) . Three - dimensional quantification of cellular traction forces and mechanosensing of thin substrata by Fourier traction force microscopy . PLoS One 8 , e69850 . Dent , E . W . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2003 ) . Cytoskeletal dynamics and transport in growth cone motility and axon guidance . Neuron 40 , 209 – 227 . Dent , E . W . , Tang , F . , and Kalil , K . ( 2003 ) . Axon guidance by growth cones and branches : common cytoskeletal and signaling mechanisms . Neuroscientist 9 , 343 – 353 . Dent , E . W . , Gupton , S . L . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2011 ) . The growth cone cytoskeleton in axon outgrowth and guidance . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a001800 . Ding , M . , Eliasson , C . , Betsholtz , C . , Hamberger , A . , and Pekny , M . ( 1998 ) . Altered taurine release following hypotonic stress in astrocytes from mice deficient for GFAP and vimentin . Brain Res . Mol . Brain Res . 62 , 77 – 81 . Dingyu , W . , Fanjie , M . , Zhengzheng , D . , Baosheng , H . , Chao , Y . , Yi , P . , Huiwen , W . , Jun , G . , and Gang , H . ( 2016 ) . Regulation of intracellular structural tension by talin in the axon growth and regeneration . Mol . Neurobiol . 53 , 4582 – 4595 . Du , Y . , Weed , S . A . , Xiong , W . C . , Marshall , T . D . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1998 ) . Identification of a novel cortactin SH3 domain - binding protein and its localization to growth cones of cultured neu - rons . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 5838 – 5851 . Dufrene , Y . F . and Lee , G . U . ( 2000 ) . Advances in the characteriza - tion of supported lipid films with the atomic force microscope . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1509 , 14 – 41 . Eghiaian , F . , Rico , F . , Colom , A . , Casuso , I . , and Scheuring , S . ( 2014 ) . High - speed atomic force microscopy : imaging and force spectroscopy . FEBS Lett . 588 , 3631 – 3638 . Eva , R . and Fawcett , J . ( 2014 ) . Integrin signalling and traffic during axon growth and regeneration . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 27 , 179 – 185 . Fischer - Friedrich , E . , Hyman , A . A . , Julicher , F . , Muller , D . J . , and Helenius , J . ( 2014 ) . Quantification of surface tension and inter - nal pressure generated by single mitotic cells . Sci . Rep . 4 , 6213 . Fukata , Y . , Kimura , T . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2002 ) . Axon specification in hippocampal neurons . Neurosci . Res . 43 , 305 – 315 . Gallo , G . ( 2013 ) . More than one ring to bind them all : recent insights into the structure of the axon . Dev . Neurobiol . 73 , 799 – 805 . Gilden , J . and Krummel , M . F . ( 2010 ) . Control of cortical rigidity by the cytoskeleton : emerging roles for septins . Cytoskeleton 67 , 477 – 486 . Golzio , M . , Mora , M . P . , Raynaud , C . , Delteil , C . , Teissie , J . , and Rols , M . P . ( 1998 ) . Control by osmotic pressure of voltage - induced permeabilization and gene transfer in mammalian cells . Biophys J . 74 , 3015 – 3022 . Goriely , A . , Geers , M . G . , Holzapfel , G . A . , Jayamohan , J . , Jerusalem , A . , Sivaloganathan , S . , Squier , W . , van Dommelen , J . A . , Waters , S . , and Kuhl , E . ( 2015 ) . Mechanics of the brain : perspectives , challenges , and opportunities . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 14 , 931 – 965 . Gov , N . S . ( 2009 ) . Physical model for the width distribution of axons . Eur . Phys . J . E Soft Matter 29 , 337 – 344 . Guo , J . , Wang , Y . , Sachs , F . , and Meng , F . ( 2014 ) . Actin stress in cell reprogramming . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , E5252 – E5261 . Haase , K . and Pelling , A . E . ( 2015 ) . Investigating cell mechan - ics with atomic force microscopy . J . R . Soc . Interface 12 , 20140970 . He , Y . , Ren , Y . , Wu , B . , Decourt , B . , Lee , A . C . , Taylor , A . , and Suter , D . M . ( 2015 ) . Src and cortactin promote lamellipodia protrusion and filopodia formation and stability in growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell . 26 , 3229 – 3244 . Heubusch , P . , Jung , C . Y . , and Green , F . A . ( 1985 ) . The osmotic response of human erythrocytes and the membrane cytoskel - eton . J . Cell . Physiol . 122 , 266 – 272 . Infante , C . , Manchado , M . , Asensio , E . , and Canavate , J . P . ( 2007 ) . Molecular characterization , gene expression and dependence on thyroid hormones of two type I keratin genes ( sseKer1 and sseKer2 ) in the flatfish Senegalese sole ( Solea senegalensis Kaup ) . BMC Dev . Biol . 7 , 118 . Ingber , D . E . , Wang , N . , and Stamenovic , D . ( 2014 ) . Tensegrity , cellu - lar biophysics , and the mechanics of living systems . Rep . Prog . Phys . 77 , 046603 . Jayakumar , A . R . , Liu , M . , Moriyama , M . , Ramakrishnan , R . , Forbush 3rd B . , Reddy , P . V . , and Norenberg , M . D . ( 2008 ) . Na - K - Cl cotransporter - 1 in the mechanism of ammonia - induced astro - cyte swelling . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 33874 – 33882 . Jentsch , T . J . ( 2016 ) . VRACs and other ion channels and transporters in the regulation of cell volume and beyond . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 293 – 307 . Kalil , K . and Dent , E . W . ( 2004 ) . Branch management : mechanisms of axon branching in the developing vertebrate CNS . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 15 , 7 – 18 . Karakesisoglou , I . , Yang , Y . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2000 ) . An epidermal plakin that integrates actin and microtubule networks at cel - lular junctions . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 195 – 208 . Kassianidou , E . and Kumar , S . ( 2015 ) . A biomechanical perspective on stress fiber structure and function . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1853 , 3065 – 3074 . Kevenaar , J . T . and Hoogenraad , C . C . ( 2015 ) . The axonal cytoskel - eton : from organization to function . Front . Mol . Neurosci . 8 , 44 . Koster , S . , Weitz , D . A . , Goldman , R . D . , Aebi , U . , and Herrmann , H . ( 2015 ) . Intermediate filament mechanics in vitro and in the cell : from coiled coils to filaments , fibers and networks . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 32 , 82 – 91 . Kreplak , L . , Bar , H . , Leterrier , J . F . , Herrmann , H . , and Aebi , U . ( 2005 ) . Exploring the mechanical behavior of single intermediate fila - ments . J . Mol . Biol . 354 , 569 – 577 . Krieg , M . , Dunn , A . R . , and Goodman , M . B . ( 2015 ) . Mechanical systems biology of C . elegans touch sensation . Bioessays 37 , 335 – 344 . Lantoine , J . , Grevesse , T . , Villers , A . , Delhaye , G . , Mestdagh , C . , Versaevel , M . , Mohammed , D . , Bruyere , C . , Alaimo , L . , Lacour , S . P . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Matrix stiffness modulates formation and activity of neuronal networks of controlled architectures . Biomaterials 89 , 14 – 24 . Lariviere , R . C . and Julien , J . P . ( 2004 ) . Functions of intermediate fila - ments in neuronal development and disease . J . Neurobiol . 58 , 131 – 148 . Li , G . , Cao , Y . , Shen , F . , Wang , Y . , Bai , L . , Guo , W . , Bi , Y . , Lv , G . , and Fan , Z . ( 2016 ) . Mdivi - 1 inhibits astrocyte activation and 136 Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth astroglial scar formation and enhances axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury in rats . Front . Cell Neurosci . 10 , 241 . Lin , C . , Lamoureux , P . , Buxbaum , R . E . , and Heidemann , S . R . ( 1995 ) . Osmotic dilution stimulates axonal outgrowth by making axons more sensitive to tension . J . Biomech . 28 , 1429 – 1438 . Lin , C . H . , Espreafico , E . M . , Mooseker , M . S . , and Forscher , P . ( 1997 ) . Myosin drives retrograde F - actin flow in neuronal growth cones . Biol . Bull . 192 , 183 – 185 . Lopez - Leal , R . , Alvarez , J . , and Court , F . A . ( 2016 ) . Origin of axonal proteins . Is the axon - Schwann cell unit a functional syncytium ? Cytoskeleton 73 , 629 – 639 . Lowery , L . A . and Van Vactor , D . ( 2009 ) . The trip of the tip : under - standing the growth cone machinery . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 332 – 343 . Mammoto , T . and Ingber , D . E . ( 2010 ) . Mechanical control of tissue and organ development . Development 137 , 1407 – 1420 . Markl , J . and Schechter , N . ( 1998 ) . Fish intermediate filament pro - teins in structure , evolution , and function . Subcell . Biochem . 31 , 1 – 33 . Martin , M . , Benzina , O . , Szabo , V . , Vegh , A . G . , Lucas , O . , Cloi - tre , T . , Scamps , F . , and Gergely , C . ( 2013 ) . Morphology and nano mechanics of sensory neurons growth cones following peripheral nerve injury . PLoS One 8 , e56286 . Martinac , B . , Rohde , P . R . , Battle , A . R . , Petrov , E . , Pal , P . , Foo , A . F . , Vasquez , V . , Huynh , T . , and Kloda , A . ( 2010 ) . Studying mecha - nosensitive ion channels using liposomes . Methods Mol . Biol . 606 , 31 – 53 . Martins , R . P . , Finan , J . D . , Guilak , F . , and Lee , D . A . ( 2012 ) . Mechani - cal regulation of nuclear structure and function . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 14 , 431 – 455 . Mattila , P . K . and Lappalainen , P . ( 2008 ) . Filopodia : molecular architec - ture and cellular functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 446 – 454 . Min , Q . , Zhang , X . , Chen , X . , Li , S . , and Zhu , J . J . ( 2014 ) . N - doped gra - phene : an alternative carbon - based matrix for highly efficient detection of small molecules by negative ion MALDI - TOF MS . Anal . Chem . 86 , 9122 – 9130 . Mohandas , N . and Gallagher , P . G . ( 2008 ) . Red cell membrane : past , present , and future . Blood 112 , 3939 – 3948 . Murrell , M . and Gardel , M . L . ( 2014 ) . Actomyosin sliding is attenu - ated in contractile biomimetic cortices . Mol . Biol . Cell . 25 , 1845 – 1853 . Neuman , K . C . and Nagy , A . ( 2008 ) . Single - molecule force spectro - scopy : optical tweezers , magnetic tweezers and atomic force microscopy . Nat . Methods 5 , 491 – 505 . O’Toole , M . , Lamoureux , P . , and Miller , K . E . ( 2015 ) . Measurement of subcellular force generation in neurons : Biophys J . 108 , 1027 – 1037 . Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . R . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Cell adhe - sion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 633 – 643 . Pastuglia , M . and Bouchez , D . ( 2007 ) . Molecular encounters at microtubule ends in the plant cell cortex . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 10 , 557 – 563 . Pietuch , A . , Bruckner , B . R . , and Janshoff , A . ( 2013 ) . Membrane tension homeostasis of epithelial cells through surface area regulation in response to osmotic stress . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1833 , 712 – 722 . Quick , Q . , Paul , M . , and Skalli , O . ( 2015 ) . Roles and potential clinical applications of intermediate filament proteins in brain tumors . Semin . Pediatr . Neurol . 22 , 40 – 48 . Quinta , H . R . , Galigniana , N . M . , Erlejman , A . G . , Lagadari , M . , Piwien - Pilipuk , G . , and Galigniana , M . D . ( 2011 ) . Management of cytoskeleton architecture by molecular chaperones and immunophilins . Cell Signal . 23 , 1907 – 1920 . Rasband , M . N . ( 2013 ) . Cytoskeleton : axons earn their stripes . Curr . Biol . 23 , R197 – R198 . Requejo - Aguilar , R . , Alastrue - Agudo , A . , Cases - Villar , M . , Lopez - Mocholi , E . , England , R . , Vicent , M . J . , and Moreno - Manzano , V . ( 2017 ) . Combined polymer - curcumin conjugate and ependymal progenitor / stem cell treatment enhances spinal cord injury functional recovery . Biomaterials 113 , 18 – 30 . Roberts , A . J . , Kon , T . , Knight , P . J . , Sutoh , K . , and Burgess , S . A . ( 2013 ) . Functions and mechanics of dynein motor proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 713 – 726 . Sachs , F . and Sivaselvan , M . V . ( 2015 ) . Cell volume control in three dimensions : water movement without solute movement . J . Gen . Physiol . 145 , 373 – 380 . Schwarz , U . S . and Soine , J . R . ( 2015 ) . Traction force microscopy on soft elastic substrates : a guide to recent computational advances . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1853 , 3095 – 3104 . Sellers , J . R . and Veigel , C . ( 2006 ) . Walking with myosin V . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 18 , 68 – 73 . Shabbir , S . H . , Cleland , M . M . , Goldman , R . D . , and Mrksich , M . ( 2014 ) . Geometric control of vimentin intermediate filaments . Biomaterials 35 , 1359 – 1366 . Shea , T . B . and Beermann , M . L . ( 1994 ) . Respective roles of neuro - filaments , microtubules , MAP1B , and τ in neurite outgrowth and stabilization . Mol . Biol . Cell . 5 , 863 – 875 . Shen , K . and Cowan , C . W . ( 2010 ) . Guidance molecules in synapse formation and plasticity . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 , a001842 . Silhavy , T . J . , Kahne , D . , and Walker , S . ( 2010 ) . The bacterial cell envelope . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 , a000414 . Snider , N . T . and Omary , M . B . ( 2014 ) . Post - translational modifica - tions of intermediate filament proteins : mechanisms and func - tions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 163 – 177 . Snyder , L . H . , Batista , A . P . , and Andersen , R . A . ( 1997 ) . Coding of intention in the posterior parietal cortex . Nature 386 , 167 – 170 . Sousa , A . D . and Bhat , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Cytoskeletal transition at the paranodes : the Achilles’ heel of myelinated axons . Neuron Glia Biol . 3 , 169 – 178 . Stewart , E . and Shen , K . ( 2015 ) . STORMing towards a clear picture of the cytoskeleton in neurons . eLife 4 , e06235 . Stewart , M . P . , Helenius , J . , Toyoda , Y . , Ramanathan , S . P . , Muller , D . J . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2011 ) . Hydrostatic pressure and the actomyosin cortex drive mitotic cell rounding . Nature 469 , 226 – 230 . Stokum , J . A . , Gerzanich , V . , and Simard , J . M . ( 2016 ) . Molecular pathophysiology of cerebral edema . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 36 , 513 – 38 . Suomalainen , M . , Nakano , M . Y . , Keller , S . , Boucke , K . , Stidwill , R . P . , and Greber , U . F . ( 1999 ) . Microtubule - dependent plus - and minus end - directed motilities are competing pro - cesses for nuclear targeting of adenovirus . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 657 – 672 . Suozzi , K . C . , Wu , X . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2012 ) . Spectraplakins : mas - ter orchestrators of cytoskeletal dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 465 – 475 . Y . C . Guo et al . : Structural tension in axonal growth 137 Taylor , K . A . , Taylor , D . W . , and Schachat , F . ( 2000 ) . Isoforms of a - actinin from cardiac , smooth , and skeletal muscle form polar arrays of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 635 – 646 . Tripathy , S . K . , Weil , S . J . , Chen , C . , Anand , P . , Vallee , R . B . , and Gross , S . P . ( 2014 ) . Autoregulatory mechanism for dynactin control of processive and diffusive dynein transport . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 1192 – 1201 . Usukura , E . , Narita , A . , Yagi , A . , Ito , S . , and Usukura , J . ( 2016 ) . An unroofing method to observe the cytoskeleton directly at molecular resolution using atomic force microscopy . Sci . Rep . 6 , 27472 . Vogel , V . ( 2006 ) . Mechanotransduction involving multimodular proteins : converting force into biochemical signals . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 459 – 488 . Wang , N . and Stamenovic , D . ( 2000 ) . Contribution of intermedi - ate filaments to cell stiffness , stiffening , and growth . Am . J . Physiol . Cell . Physiol . 279 , C188 – C194 . Wells , A . L . , Lin , A . W . , Chen , L . Q . , Safer , D . , Cain , S . M . , Hasson , T . , Carragher , B . O . , Milligan , R . A . , and Sweeney , H . L . ( 1999 ) . Myo - sin VI is an actin - based motor that moves backwards . Nature 401 , 505 – 508 . Wright , A . R . , Rees , S . A . , Vandenberg , J . I . , Twist , V . W . , and Powell , T . ( 1995 ) . Extracellular osmotic pressure modulates sodium - calcium exchange in isolated guinea - pig ventricular myocytes . J . Physiol . 488 , 293 – 301 . Xiao , Q . , Hu , X . , Wei , Z . , and Tam , K . Y . ( 2016 ) . Cytoskeleton molecu - lar motors : structures and their functions in neuron . Int . J . Biol . Sci . 12 , 1083 – 1092 . Xiong , Y . , Lee , A . C . , Suter , D . M . , and Lee , G . U . ( 2009 ) . Topography and nanomechanics of live neuronal growth cones analyzed by atomic force microscopy . Biophys J . 96 , 5060 – 5072 . Xu , Z . , Marszalek , J . R . , Lee , M . K . , Wong , P . C . , Folmer , J . , Crawford , T . O . , Hsieh , S . T . , Griffin , J . W . , and Cleveland , D . W . ( 1996 ) . Subunit composition of neurofilaments specifies axonal diameter . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1061 – 1069 . Xu , K . , Zhong , G . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2013 ) . Actin , spectrin , and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons . Science 339 , 452 – 456 . Yan , Y . , Dempsey , R . J . , and Sun , D . ( 2001 ) . Na + - K + - Cl − cotransporter in rat focal cerebral ischemia . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 21 , 711 – 721 . Yang , C . , Zhang , X . , Guo , Y . , Meng , F . , Sachs , F . , and Guo , J . ( 2015 ) . Mechanical dynamics in live cells and fluorescence - based force / tension sensors . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1853 , 1889 – 1904 . Yoshimura , T . , Arimura , N . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2006 ) . Molecular mechanisms of axon specification and neuronal disorders . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1086 , 116 – 125 . Yoshimura , T . , Kawano , Y . , Arimura , N . , Kawabata , S . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2015 ) . Molecular mechanisms of neuronal polarity . Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi 25 , 169 – 174 . Zhang , X . F . , Schaefer , A . W . , Burnette , D . T . , Schoonderwoert , V . T . , and Forscher , P . ( 2003 ) . Rho - dependent contractile responses in the neuronal growth cone are independent of classical peripheral retrograde actin flow . Neuron 40 , 931 – 944 .