c Academy of Management Journal 2002 , Vol . 45 , No . 1 , 58 - 80 . THEORIZING CHANGE : THE ROLE OF PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS IN THE TRANSFORMATION OF INSTITUTIONALIZED FIELDS ROYSTON GREENWOOD University of Alberta ROY SUDDABY University of Iowa C . R . HININGS University of Alberta This study examines the role of professional associations in a changing , highly insti - tutionalized organizational field and suggests that they play a significant role in legitimating change . A model of institutional change is outlined , of which a key stage is " theorization , " the process wherehy organizational failings are conceptualized and linked to potential solutions . Regulatory agencies , such as professional associations , play an important role in theorizing change , endorsing local innovations and shaping their diffusion . The concept of organizational field is central to institutional theory . It represents an intermediate level between organization and society and is in - strumental to processes by which socially con - structed expectations and practices become dis - seminated and reproduce . d ( Scott , 1994 , 1995 ) . Surprisingly , there are few studies of field dynam - ics . Most accounts focus on the effects of field dynamics , showing how communities of organiza - tions respond in similar fashion to institutional norms . Much less attention has been given to un - derstanding how the effects of isomorphism are brought about . An inevitable corollary is that little is known of how and why institutionalized prac - tices within a field atrophy or change . The present work is a case study of a profession that underwent major change over a 20 - year period . The setting is the professional business services field in Alberta , Canada , from 1977 to 1997 . Over that period , the jurisdiction of accounting firms changed dramatically . At the beginning of the pe - riod , accounting firms primarily delivered accoun - tancy services and were managed as professional partnerships . By 1997 , several firms depicted them - selves as multidisciplinary practices , one - stop The research described here is supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada . We acknowledge gratefully the support of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Alberta , the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants , and the members of individ - ual accounting firms . shops for an extensive array of services , including financial advisory , management consulting , and le - gal services . The shift in jurisdiction was associ - ated with radical changes to structures and mana - gerial arrangements . Significantly , the new model received authoritative endorsement from the Cana - dian Institute of Chartered Accountants ( CICA ) and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Alberta ( ICAA ) , which declared the new portfolio of ser - vices appropriate for the profession and urged its adoption . The case study is thus an account of how the boundaries of one community of organizations ( tbe accounting profession ) within a field ( profes - sional business services ) changed . We are particu - larly concerned with how the profession legiti - mated the change to itself . Noticeably , the setting examined here is a highly institutionalized one . It is thus an interesting site for two reasons . First , although institutionalists recognize and seek to understand change ( e . g . , Creenwood & Hinings , 1993 ; Hoffman , 1999 ) , most existing studies are of the processes of institution - alization , not of deinstitutionalization and reinsti - tutionalization . Second , our specific interest is in the role played by professional associations , which , although typically portrayed as important regula - tory mechanisms ( DiMaggio & Powell , 1983 ; Ruef & Scott , 1998 ) have been relatively neglected empir - ically ( Maijor & van Witteloovuijn , 1996 ; Van Hoy , 1993 ) . This article suggests that professional associa - tions are , indeed , important regulatory agents . Con - 58 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 59 trary to prevailing institutional accounts , which focus upon the essentially conservative role of as - sociations in reinforcing existing prescriptions for appropriate conduct , our analysis addresses the role of associations at moments of deinstitutional - ization and change . We suggest that at those mo - ments , associations can legitimate change by host - ing a process of discourse through which change is debated and endorsed : first by negotiating and managing debate within the profession ; and , sec - ond , by reframing professional identities as they are presented to others outside the profession . This discourse enables professional identities to be re - constituted . THEORETICAL CONTEXT Organizational Fields DiMaggio and Powell defined a field as " sets of organizations tbat , in the aggregate , constitute an area of institutional life ; key suppliers , resource and product consumers , regulatory agencies , and other organizations that produce similar services or products . " ( 1983 : 148 - 149 ) . Essential to this defi - nition is the focus upon " sets " or " communities " ( Porac , Thomas , & Baden - Fuller , 1989 ) of organiza - tions that directly interact with one another or are influenced by each other in a meaningful way . Scott ( 1994 ) added the idea that patterns of inter - action between organizational communities be - come defined by shared systems of meaning . These meaning systems establish the boundaries of each community of organizations , defining its member - ship , the appropriate ways of behaving , and the appropriate relationships between organizational communities ( Lawrence , 1999 ) . The notion of organizational field thus draws heavily upon the social constructionist account of reality ( Berger & Luckman , 1967 ; Zucker , 1977 , 1987 ) . Collective beliefs are seen as emerging from processes of repeated interactions between organi - zations . Organizations develop categorizations ( or typifications ) of their exchanges , which achieve the status of objectification and thus constitute social reality . Organizations , initially at least , behave in accordance with this socially constructed reality because to do so reduces ambiguity and uncer - tainty . Reciprocally shared understandings of ap - propriate practice permit ordered exchanges . Over time , these shared understandings , or collective be - liefs , become reinforced by regulatory processes involving state agencies and professional bodies , which normatively and / or coercively press confor - mity upon constituent communities . Regulatory processes thus both disseminate and reproduce coded prescriptions of social reality . Deviations from such prescriptions cause discomfort and trig - ger attempts to justify ( that is , legitimize ) depar - tures from the social norm ( Deephouse , 1999 ; Els - bach , 1994 ; Lamertz & Baum , 1997 ; Miller & Chan , 1995 ) . The notion of " structuration , " which has been de - scribed elsewhere , captvires this process of gradual maturity and specification of roles , behaviors , and interactions of organizational communities . Bound - aries and behaviors are not , however , fixed . Structu - ration does not imply perfect reproduction ( Ranson , Hinings , & Creenwood , 1980 : Coodrick & Salancik , 1996 ) . Furthermore , ever since Abbott ' s ( 1988 ) trea - tise on the political nature of professional activity , it has been recognized that the jiu - isdictions of profes - sions ( which are communities of organizations ) are not absolute but are the outcome of ongoing claims and counterclaims . The boundaries of organizational communities are constantly under review and subject to redefinition and defence . Examples of conflicts within fields and of destructuration processes appear in D ' Aunno , Sutton , and Price ( 1991 ) , Holm ( 1995 ) , Davis , Dieckman , and Tinsley ( 1994 ) , and Scott , Ruef , Mendel , and Caronna ( 2000 ) . Institutional processes may , for a time , give a field the appearance of stability . Differences of in - terpretation and emphasis may be temporarily re - solved by socially negotiated consensus . Within a mature field , the boundaries of occupational and professional communities , though implicitly con - tested , will thus exhibit phases of " isomorphic " stability . During these phases , practices are repro - duced by regulatory and interactive processes . Nev - ertheless , the appearance of stability is probably misleading : fields sbould be seen " not as static but evolving " ( Hoffman , 1999 : 352 : see also Sahlin - Andersson , 1996 ) . At times , fields may even " re - semble institutional war " ( Hoffman , 1999 : 352 ) . Up to the present period , however , the literature has focused upon the relative stability of fields : struc - turation is portrayed as increasing the specificity of , and consensus over , resilient logics of action . Stages of Institutional Change Institutional theory neither denies nor is incon - sistent with change . On the contrary , many institu - tional accounts are about isomorphic convergence , which implies movement from one position to an - other . Furthermore , it is possible to distill from the literature the outlines of a model of nonisomorphic change , which is summarized in Figure 1 . Accord - ing to this model , stage I occurs when events , or " jolts " ( Meyer , Brooks , & Coes 1990 ) , destabilize established practices . Jolts may take tbe form of 60 Academy of Management fournal February I : Precipitating Jolts • Social • Technological • Regulatory FIGURE 1 Stages of Institutional Change II : Deinstitutionalization • Emergence of new players • Ascendance of actors • Institutionalentrepreneurship VI : Reinstitutionalization • Cognitive legitimacy Fads and fashions V : DifTiision •Increasing objectification • Pragmatic legitimacy III : Preinstitutionalization • Independentinnovation • Technical viability paramount IV : Theorization • Specification of general organizational failing • fustification of abstract possible solution • Moral and / or pragmatic legitimacy social upheaval ( e . g . , Zucker , 1986 ) , technological disruptions , competitive discontinuities , or regula - tory change ( Fox - Wolfgramm , Boal , & Hunt , 1998 ; Lounsbury , 1999 ; Pov ^ rell , 1991 ) . These changes precipitate ( stage II ) the entry of new players ( Thornton , 1995 ) , the ascendance of existing actors ( Scott , Mendel , & Pollack , forthcoming ) , or local entrepreneurship ( DiMaggio , 1988 ; Lawrence , 1999 ; Leblebici , Salancik , Copay , & King , 1991 ; Suddaby & Creenwood , 1999 ) . Their effect is to disturb the socially constructed field - level consen - sus by introducing new ideas and thus the possi - bility of change . Tolbert and Zucker ( 1996 ) referred to stage III as one of preinstitutionalization , in which organizations innovate independently , seek - ing technically viable solutions to locally perceived problems . Tolbert and Zucker ( 1996 ) argued that institu - tional theorists have given very little attention to conceptualizing and specifying the processes that move innovations beyond preinstitutionalization toward full institutionalization ( that is , from stage III to stage VI ) . Rather , it is a matter of practices being either institutionalized or not institutional - ized . Actors follow extant institutional " scripts . " Understanding how such scripts are produced , maintained , and changed has been a neglected area , conceptually and empirically . A valuable lead into this question is provided by Strang and Meyer ( 1993 ) , who suggested that , for new practices to become widely adopted , they have to be " theo - rized . " Theorization is the development and spec - ification of abstract categories and the elaboration of chains of cause and effect . Such theoretical ac - counts simplify and distill the properties of new practices and explain the outcomes they produce . In effect , theorization is the process whereby local - ized deviations from prevailing conventions be - come abstracted ( Abbott , 1988 ) and thus made available in simplified form for wider adoption . Tolbert and Zucker ( 1996 ; 183 ) suggested that theorization involves " two major tasks " : specifica - tion of a general " organizational failing " for which a local innovation is " a solution or treatment , " and justification of the innovation . Diffusion occurs only if new ideas are compellingly presented as more appropriate than existing practices . In Strang and Meyer ' s words , " Models must make the transi - tion from theoretical formulation to social move - ment to institutional imperative " ( 1993 : 495 ) . This transition is achieved either by nesting and align - ing new ideas within prevailing normative pre - scriptions , thus giving them " moral " legitimacy ( Suchman , 1995 : see also Tolbert & Zucker , 1996 : 183 ) , and / or by asserting their functional superior - ity , or " pragmatic " legitimacy ( Suchman , 1995 ) . Successful theorization ( stage IV of the model ) is followed by diffusion . Several writers have ex - plored the patterns and mechanisms by which ideas are transported within organizational com - munities ( Baron , Dobbin , & Jennings , 1986 ; Burns & Wholey , 1993 ; Davis , 1991 ; Davis & Creve , 1997 ; Culati , 1995 ; Creve , 1995 , 1996 ; Haveman , 1993 ; Haunschild & Miner , 1997 ; Kraatz , 1998 ; Furusten , 1995 ; Mizruchi , 1996 ; Palmer , Jennings , & Zhou , 1993 ; Tolbert & Zucker , 1983 ; Westphal , Culati , & 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 61 Shorten , 1997 ; Westphal & Zajac , 1997 ) . The com - mon theme is that as innovations diffuse they be - come " objectified , " gaining social consensus con - cerning their pragmatic value ( Suchman , 1995 ) , and thus they diffuse even further ( Tolbert & Zucker , 1996 : 183 ) . Stages IV ( theorization ) and V ( diffusion ) corre - spond to Tolbert and Zucker ' s ( 1996 ) phase of " semiinstitutionalization . " Full institutionaliza - tion occurs as the density of adoption provides ideas with cognitive legitimacy ( Suchman , 1995 ) and the ideas themselves become taken - for - granted as the natural and appropriate arrangement . Once fully institutionalized , ideas can survive across generations , uncritically accepted as the definitive way of behaving ( Tolbert & Zucker , 1996 : 184 ) . Although few studies have focused upon stage VI , a related line of inquiry examines why semiinstitu - tionalized ideas fail to become institutionalized , instead receding with the rhythms of transient fash - ions ( e . g . , Abrahamson , 1991 ; Strang & Soule , 1998 ) . Although each of the stages in Figure 1 has com - manded some attention , it is only recently that attention has turned to unbundling the theorization process ( Strang & Soule , 1998 ; Tolbert & Zucker , 1996 ; Suchman , 1995 ) . Yet , theorization is impor - tant because it connects to one of the central con - cerns of institutional thinking , the conferring of legitimacy . Most writers to date have largely ig - nored how new ideas become legitimated , except where it occurs through processes of mimicry ( Mizruchi & Fein , 1999 ) . The explanation underly - ing mimicry is that ideas achieve legitimacy if , and as , they are adopted by exemplary others and are thought to have provided economic benefits ( Scott , 1995 ) . Organizations mimic because they antici - pate similar benefits . In this sense , pragmatic legit - imacy is based upon an assumed link between new ideas and economic outcomes . Moreover , accord - ing to this view , legitimacy is primarily gained during stage V , as diffusion occurs . In a more nor - mative setting , in contrast , legitimacy is unlikely to be based exclusively , perhaps not even primarily , on anticipated economic returns . Instead , new ideas may also have to be justified by aligning them with normative prescriptions prior to their diffu - sion ( in the theorization stage ) . A critical ques - tion—addressed in this article—concerns how new ideas become justified in such highly normative settings . The importance of theorization is likely to be especially acute in mature or highly structurated settings ( for instance , highly professional settings ) , where the boundaries of occupational communities and the templates of appropriate organizational forms are established and structured ( Lawrence , 1999 ) . Powell ( 1985 ) and Abbott ( 1988 ) pointed to the several " audiences " or " constituencies " af - fected by any jurisdictional movement by a profes - sion ( or , for that matter , by any occupational com - munity ) . These audiences include the profession itself , the marketplace , other professions and occu - pations , and ultimately , the state , through which the achievement of legislated exclusivity is ob - tained . Several writers have provided accounts of attempts by professions to achieve jurisdictional exclusivity . Rather less attention has been given to the logically prior issue of how jurisdictional claims come to be framed and accepted within the professions themselves . Dezalay and Carth made a similar point when they suggested that Abbott ' s focus upon " battles in frontier terrains " could not be understood without understanding battles " at the core " of a profession " over what representa - tions and categories are considered legitimate " ( Dezalay & Carth , 1996 : 291 ) . It is this issue—the process of jnfraprofessional legitimation—with which this study is concerned . Central to the pro - cess , we suggest , are regulatory agencies . Regulatory Agencies Regulatory agencies—such as the state , the Secu - rities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) , and profes - sional associations—are critically important in the theorization process because they enable the forma - tion and reproduction of shared meanings and un - derstandings ( e . g . , Ruef & Scott , 1998 ; Scott & Back - man , 1990 ) . They also adjudicate and push for negotiated agreements between competing claims . Available empirical studies of regulatory agencies , however , have largely concentrated upon the influ - ence ofthe nation - state or its agencies ( e . g . , Dobbin , 1994 ; Dobbin & Dowd , 1997 ; Hoffman , 1999 ; North , 1990 ) and neglected the role of professional bodies , empirical studies of which remain scarce ( Halliday , 1987 ; Van Hoy , 1993 ) . Two of these few studies are Collins ( 1979 ) and Friedson ( 1986 ) . We suggest that professional associations are im - portant for three reasons . First , they are arenas through which organizations interact and collec - tively represent themselves to themselves . Social constructionist accounts of how organizational ac - tors develop typifications to guide social interac - tion imply the importance of venues where inter - actions can occur . Professional associations are one such venue . They allow organizations within the same community to interact , and it is from these interactions that understandings of reasonable con - duct and the behavioral dues of membership emerge . Specifically , associations enable the con - 62 Academy of Management fournat February struction of accounts delineating the domain of a profession—that is , the portfolios of activities and services over which members claim jurisdictional exclusivity—and of accounts specifying conditions of membership : that is , who can practice authori - tatively within that jurisdiction , and how . Professions are not necessarily homogeneous communities ( Barker , 1998 ; Powell , 1991 ) . Deci - sion making within a profession can thus be a po - litical process ( Dezalay & Carth , 1996 ; Van Hoy , 1993 ) in which the competing interests of subcom - munities are reconciled and subjugated on an on - going basis . At any one moment , professions ex - hibit a temporary consensus . An important role of the professional association is thus the construc - tion and maintenance of intraprofessional agree - ment over boundaries , membership , and behavior . Second , shared typifications develop not solely as a result of interaction within a community , but also as a product of interactions with other com - munities . Professional associations act as negotiat - ing or representative agencies , shaping and redefin - ing appropriate practices of interaction for their respective memberships . They act as the means whereby communities represent themselves to others in the field . The act of representation is partly a process of social construction : the act of portrayal clarifies membership and , usually , leads to reciprocal behaviors from others that confirm , through acceptance or contestation , the legitimacy of the projected identity and role . But it is also partly a process of social negotiation , a claim upon jurisdiction with attendant rights of membership and exclusivity of practice ( Abbott , 1988 ; Cant & Sharma , 1995 ; Evetts , 1995 ) . Third , professional associations can play an im - portant role in monitoring compliance with norma - tively and coercively sanctioned expectations . The argument within institutional theory as to why col - lective beliefs develop is , initially at least , partly a functional one ( Tolbert & Zucker , 1996 ) . But , once established , these beliefs and the practices associ - ated with them become taken - for - granted and re - produced through processes such as training and education , hiring and certification , and ceremonies of celebration . Professional associations are partic - ularly active in these processes ( e . g . , Ruef & Scott , 1998 ) and , as such , " define or enforce " ( Oliver , 1997 : 102 ) collective beliefs ( see Friedson , 1970 ; 1986 ; Starr , 1982 ) . Associations are thus often in - cluded as part of the explanation for the sustained resilience of institutionalized practices . The third role described above—the monitoring of prevailing institutional norms—is essentially a conservative one , in which coded prescriptions are reproduced through an association ' s ongoing day - to - day routines . This third role is the one usually assumed , albeit implicitly , within institutional ac - counts—hence , their portrayal of associations as mechanisms of conformity and reproduction . Abel , for example , speaking of legal associations , wrote they " have tended to be reactionary forces rather than progressive , dedicated to preserving tradi - tional entitlements and characteristics " ( 1989 : 131 ) . Other writers have cited associations as crit - ical agencies within the professions , which are in turn reported as mechanisms of reproduction rather than change ( e . g . , D ' Aunno et al . , 1991 ; Di - Maggio & Powell , 1983 ; Oliver , 1997 ) . The first and second roles described above could be either conservative or reforming in their effects . Collective representation internally and / or exter - nally may be in defence of the status quo or an attempt to legitimate change . The role of profes - sional associations is thus an intriguing possibility of conservatism blended with reform . To date , however , these roles have not been unbundled , and the authors of institutionalist accounts have largely assumed associations to be essentially conserva - tive , reinforcing current jurisdictional boundaries and templates of organizing . This , we suspect , is because of the focus of interest upon stages IV and V ofthe model in Figure 1 . As noted below , the role of associations may be very different at other stages of the model . The process of theorization described here is similar to the two - stage process of institutionaliza - tion described by Holm ( 1995 ) . At one level , insti - tutional structures such as professional associa - tions engage in activities guided by an established institutional order . They are , when viewed at this level , inherently conservative structures devoted to perpetuating rules of conduct and ensuring compli - ance by social actors . At another level , however , institutions engage in " actions geared toward cre - ating new or changing old institutions " ( Holm , 1995 : 399 ) . Through this duality of action , new institutional practices are not created ab initio but are built upon older institutional practices that " re - place or push back pre - existing institutional forms " ( Holm , 1995 : 400 ) . This study extends Holm ' s in - sights by explicating the mechanism by which " first - order " institutional action is translated to the " second - order " level . METHODS Site The delineation of a field is to some extent sub - jective ( DiMaggio , 1983 ; Scott et al . , forthcoming ) . Earlier discussions of fields ( e . g . , Scott & Meyer , 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 63 1983 , 1991 ) noted the multiplicity of levels within a society , hut more recent studies ( e . g . , Thornton , 1995 ) have foregone some of the richness of the multiple - level approach in order to render the com - plexity more manageable . Jennings and Zandber - gen ( 1995 ) used the Fraser River Basin in British Columbia as their institutional field . Fligstein and Brantley ( 1992 ) and Davis and coauthors ( 1994 ) simply used the largest U . S . corporations . Scott and his colleagues ( 2000 ) restricted their scope to organ - izations within the San Francisco Bay region but showed the influence of causal forces at the na - tional and regional levels . Here , the field of interest is the provision of busi - ness advisory services in Alberta , Canada . This field is occupied by several organizational commu - nities , including accounting firms , law firms , man - agement consultancy firms , clients , and regulators , of which the accounting community is our primary concern . Because the provision of accounting ser - vices by chartered accountants ( CAs ) ^ in Canada is governed by rules established both at the provincial and federal levels , these territorial regulations can be used to demarcate the organizational commu - nity . The Accounting Profession In each Canadian province , the CA profession is governed by two institutes : the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants ( CICA ) and a provincial institute ( in our case , the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Alberta [ ICAA ] ) . Membership is mandatory . The CICA is responsible for develop - ment of uniform standards of practice and the stra - tegic development of the profession . It represents the interests of the CA profession to external con - stituencies . Provincial institutes are responsible for licensing , certification , training , and discipline . The CICA and ICAA collaborate in promoting the profession across Canada . Advertising and market - ing campaigns , for example , are developed jointly . The two institutes also work together on strategic developments . The CA profession is not homogeneous . Approx - imately 42 percent of CAs in Canada work in in - dustry ; 7 percent , in government ; 2 percent , in ed - ucation ; and 39 percent , " in public practice . " ^ Within the public practice sector in Canada , further stratification occurs . Specifically , there are three subcommunities whose interests are not always the same . First , there is the subcommunity of the " Big Five " firms , which are primarily international in scope and focus upon large clients . These firms dominate the mature audit market , holding 85 per - cent ofthe largest 1 , 000 Canadian audits . The sec - ond subcommunity consists of three firms that pro - vide national coverage and have strong links with an international federation of national firms . These firms overlap with the Big Five in terms of services offered and clients served , but they are less evi - dently global in orientation and are secondary , though still significant , players in the audit market ( 3 percent of the national share ) . Both of these subcommunities consist of large firms that are highly specialized internally . The third subcom - munity consists of regional and local accounting firms that service small and medium - sized clients . These firms have offices in a region or single local - ity and predominantly provide accounting and tax services . Most public practice firms are very small and local in scope : 20 percent of CAs in public practice are sole practitioners . Table 1 shows that over two - thirds of public practice professionals are em - ployed in the Big Five firms . The CA profession , in other words , is comprised of subcommunities whose interests on matters of jurisdiction might be expected to differ . These subcommunities are not equally influential . It is widely acknowledged that the larger firms are particularly influential within the profession . One indicator is the representation of the large firms on the committees and executive councils of the association . Table 2 shows the rep - resentation on the CICA Board of Covernors . At the very least , the international and national firms were in a strong position to influence the discourse within the institute . As one managing partner TABLE 1 Institute of Chartered Accountants of Alberta Public Practice Firms ' CAs are the equivalent of certified public accoun - tants [ CPAs ) in the United States . ^ " Public practice " means working in an accounting firm . The remainder are reported as " other " or " unspec - ified . " Type of Practice International ' ' NationalRegional and local Total Number 15 , 762 3 , 162 4 , 238 23 , 099 Professionals Percentage 68 14 18 100 ° Data are derived from statistics provided by the 1998 Cana - dian Institute of Chartered Accountants annual report and Bot - tom Line , April , 1998 . • ^ Big Five firms . 64 Academy of Management fournal February TABLE 2 Representation of Accounting Firms by Type on the Board of Governors and Committees ofthe Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants , 1978 - 96 " Type of Firm International ' ' NationalRegional and local Industry , commerce , and government 1978 38 % 1112 39 1981 42 % 12 9 38 1984 38 % 13 12 37 1987 42 % 12 9 36 1990 44 % 6 9 41 1993 40 % 6 11 43 1996 28 % 10 9 53 1998 26 % 13 22 39 Data are from the CICA ' s annual reports . In 1978 , the number of firms in this category was eight ; in 1998 , it was five . stated in an interview : " It would be crass to say they [ the CICA ] are irrelevant . But I think that if you found the Big Five heading down a particular road for business reasons , they would not let them get in the way . Really , the Association has to fol - low . " The ICAA itself recognized the problem ; a spokesperson stated : " We used to think of the big firms as ours . Not any more . We ' re having to re - think our relationship with them . " It follows that in considering the role of the CICA and ICAA it is important to bear in mind the rela - tive influence of the international and national subcommunities . As Dezalay and Garth noted , " Groups take positions that relate to their symbolic capital ; . . . and they act to shape the established ^ ^ institutions to reflect their concerns and ap - proaches " ( 1996 : 312 ) . The Change The institutional charige examined here was a jurisdictional migration of accounting firms from 1977 to 1997 . In 1977 , being an accounting firm primarily meant providing one or more of three sets of services : audit and accounting , tax , and insol - vency . The common theme was the interpretation of financial data . A fourth set , management advi - sory services , was occasionally added on to regular accounting services . Usually , management advi - sory services would not be provided by accoun - tants , would be modest in scale , and would be complementary rather than integral to the primary task of accounting . In some instances , especially in the larger firms , the different services would be structured as separate organizational entities . Two decades later , the range of officially endorsed ser - vices within accounting firms had changed . The shift is reflected in the theme of the 1995 national advertising campaign , " Strength beyond Num - bers , " which promoted accountants as " business advisers in the broadest sense with diverse skills and services to offer their clients and employers , " in the words of CICA ' s 1994 - 95 annual report . One element of the change , in other words , was a redef - inition of the role of a professional accountant , expanding it to include a capability to provide business advisory services . The second element of the change was endorsement of a new organiza - tional form , the multidisciplinary practice , which could , in principle , include accountants , lawyers , and consultants . Here , the change is to accounting firms , as another 1995 CICA document stated : In the multi - disciplinary practice firm today , the professional services being rendered may not be ac - counting and the information being relied on may be other than financial . What is more , increasingly the person providing that service may not be a chartered accountant . An interesting indicator of the change is given in Figure 2 , which reproduces the 1997 business card of KPMG , a Big Five firm . In other words , from 1977 to 199 7a fundamental shift occurred in the authoritative definition of ser - vices provided by firms associated with the CA profession and in the way the profession presented itself to others within the field of professional busi - ness services . Firms offered services beyond their traditional borders , moving from accounting , nar - rowly defined , to business advisory services . The standard organizational template became the mul - tidisciplinary practice . CAs were not " accountants " but " business advisors . " Not all firms have moved fully to the new tem - plate . The very largest firms moved earliest and farthest in order to serve global clients ( Rose & Hinings , 1999 ) . Nor has jurisdictional migration necessarily been accepted by neighboring profes - sions , or even by clients ( Flynn & Billington , 1997 ; Middlemiss , 1997 ) . Nevertheless , there has been a clear and radical change in the prescribed defini - tion of the domain in which accounting firms should function and in the officially endorsed or - ganizational template . Our interest was in how this 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 65 FIGURE 2 KPMG ' s Business Card The Advisory Firm I Accounting and Auditing I Taxation I Mergers and Acquisitions I Business Valuations I Information Systems Consulting I Human Resource Management I Corporate Finance KPMO I ISO Registration & Training I Financial Planning I Business Advisory Services I Management Consulting I Insolvency I Forensic Investigations I International Business change occurred in a highly institutionalized set - ting . Specifically , we were interested in how the profession theorized and legitimated the change to itself . A related but separate issue is how the pro - fession might negotiate and justify its enlarged ju - risdiction to other professions . In the present case , the profession most affected was management con - sultancy—a weakly organized occupational group . In contrast , the movement in 1997 to include law - yers within the multidisciplinary practice was se - riously contested ( see Suddaby & Greenwood , 2000 ) . Data Sources The materials used were primarily archival ( see the Appendix ) and were supplemented by inter - views . Professional associations are notable for their attention to documentation . There is careful preparation and retention of reports and statistics , and extensive minutes of meetings are taken . An - nual reports provide summaries of committee ac - tivities , and the committees themselves produce substantial reports . In Gephart ' s terms , professional associations leave " a substantial archival residue " ( 1993 : 1469 ) . These documents form the basis for the analysis that follows . The research strategy we adopted began with the annual reports and annual president ' s messages of the CICA and ICAA from 1977 to 1997 and the construction of a chronology of events . The juris - dictional issue was then pursued in detail ( for in - stance , by consulting the materials of committees and subcommittees ) . These documents embraced botb public and internal material . That is , some documents ( like annual reports , president ' s mes - sages , committee reports , and the CICA ' s official publication , the CA Magazine ) , although openly available to the media and other interested parties , were primarily written for the professional mem - bership at large . Other materials consulted were internal to the associations , with limited distribu - tion . These materials were not distributed to the membership at large or to the wider public , and thus they constituted , at least potentially , franker and less bland accounts of the debate . These mate - rials included the minutes of the ICAA ' s council meetings and briefing reports . Because these mate - rials were internal to the profession , they repre - sented accountants talking to themselves , not to external agencies . Annual reports and committee reports repre - sented , in one sense , the official record . Whenever possible , we complemented these " official " tran - scripts through examination of less obvious arti - facts of the debate , such as examination syllabi , professional development materials , and cata - logues of publications . These materials represented the day - to - day behaviors ofthe associations and , as such , recaptured the embedded discourse and as - sumptions within the routines prevalent at the time . These materials , moreover , were close to the mechanisms usually implied when institutionalists refer to the conservative role of professional asso - ciations . Thus , the programs of education and training , of practice review , and of celebration ( for 66 Academy of Management fournal February instance , the organization of conferences ) are the processes through which values were conveyed and socialization attained . Other materials consulted were the marketing campaigns used . We obtained and transcribed two promotional videos used in schools , two videos of television campaigns , four radio advertising slots , and advertisements published in the national press . These marketing materials provide a public account of accountants representing themselves to others outside the profession . Interviews were used for three purposes . First , respondents were asked to think of additional ma - terials that might be available and , on occasion , did indicate new archival sources . In effect , we were adopting a version of the " snowball " technique in order to satisfy ourselves that the archival materials were fully used . Second , those interviewed were asked to discuss the contexts of the committees on which they served and ofthe reports they authored . In this sense , informants were being used to suggest or clarify interpretations of textual materials . Thirdly , informants were used to validate our chro - nology of events ; they were not asked to validate our interpretations . The interviews were semistruc - tured , taped , and transcribed . Twenty - five people were interviewed . These in - cluded the senior officers of the CICA and the ICAA , a member of the Alberta Securities Commis - sion , and at least one member of each of the com - mittees and task forces listed in the Appendix . We interviewed members from each of the three sub - communities identified earlier , covering the 20 - year period ( see below ) . Those interviewed were all active within the ICAA or the CICA . In addition , we consulted the transcripts of interviews with mem - bers of accounting firms dating from 1986 onward that we had accumulated in previous research projects ( Greenwood , Hinings , & Brown , 1990 ; Greenwood , Cooper , & Hinings , 1993 ; Hinings , Greenwood , & Cooper , 1999 ) . Data Analysis The data were analyzed as follows : First , we read annual reports , simply to gain a chronology of key events ( such as the setting up of a committee , the appearance of a report , or the launching of a mar - keting campaign ) . Committee reports and archival materials itemized in the chronology were col - lected and added to the annual reports . So , too , were the transcripts of the two promotional videos . These materials constituted the initial " data bank " ( Gephart , 1993 ) . We then read the data bank , high - lighting all " text segments " ^ that discussed the role of accountants as all - round business advisors . Care was taken to include the textual context of each segment so that we had some record of the circum - stance in which language was being used . Our in - terpretation of what constituted discussion of ac - countants as business advisers was deliberately liberal rather than frugal so as to maximize the possibility of capturing all relevant passages . We arranged highlighted text segments chrono - logically to produce the reconstructed story . Once satisfied that the textual narrative was complete , we sought to interpret the materials , using a pro - cess Gephart labeled " expansion analysis , " describ - ing it as " conceptual interpretation of the hidden meanings and features of texts " ( 1993 : 1468 ) . In effect , we were asking ourselves . What response in the reader is the phrase seeking ( or likely ) to elicit ? The assumption was that the wording of a document was deliberate and carefully constructed , not casual . We validated the reasonableness of this assumption by asking authors how reports were written . Consis - tently , the response was that authorship involved considerable crafting and " wordsmithing . " Sentences and phrases were deliberately composed . It is worth noting that additional materials be - came available after the initial phase of expansion analysis . As we interviewed key respondents , new sources of materials were made available : specifi - cally , minutes of meetings and briefing papers . These materials tended to confirm our initial un - derstanding but did , in some instances , add nu - ances . Minutes were not analyzed according to the process described above because , although we were given access to them , we could not reproduce them ; instead we took notes on appropriate passages . THE CASE STUDY The debate over the role of accountants and the propriety of the multidisciplinary practice organi - zational format ran over two decades and is still unfolding . Four reports—the CICA ' s 1986 " Rain - bow Report , " the ICAA ' s 1989 Chartered Account - ing in the 199O ' s , the 1993 CICA Interprovincial Task Force ' s Report on Multidisciplinary Activities of Members Engaged in Public Practice , and the 1996 report of the CICA ' s Inter - Institute Vision ^ A text segment consists of two to three sentences that contain one or more key phrases . The length of the seg - ment is determined by the need to include sufficient context to provide understanding of how the phrase or phrases is or are being used . 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 67 Task Force—defined the rhythm of the debate and are used to arrange the following analysis . The Pre - Rainbow Years , 1977 - 86 Before 1981 , there was no discussion in the doc - uments of the CICA or the ICAA of nonaccounting services . Both bodies were concerned with details of accounting practices , such as how to classify " term preferred shares " on a balance sheet and how to standardize methods of lease accounting and foreign currency translation . This focus upon tech - nical matters was reflected both in publications and professional development activities . For exam - ple , only one of 107 professional development days provided by the ICAA in 1977 offered a program that might not be regarded as accounting— " Help - ing the Businessman Plan and Make Decisions " — and even that course concentrated on the financial aspects of a business . Lack of interest in nonac - counting matters was reflected in a 1981 promo - tional video whose narrator stated that " accounting and auditing [ are ] the main activities of a chartered accounting firm . " Neither management consul - tancy nor management advisory services were men - tioned in the video . The issue of accountants as business advisors , and the possibility of multidisciplinary practices , appeared first in Alberta with the formation of the Ad Hoc Committee on Multidisciplinary Practices . The committee was initiated in 1980 by the presi - dent of the ICAA , who was an influential partner in one of the ( then ) " Big Eight " firms ( and later be - came head of the firm in Canada ) . He was person - ally interested in the vague idea of multidisci - plinary practice and its possible implications . The committee reported the following year and was forthright in its central conclusion : " Multidisci - plinary activities are both practical and desirable . . . and the Rules of Professional Conduct should be amended to permit [ their ] development . " The committee never defined " multidisciplinary . " It re - ferred to audit , accounting , and tax as " well - accept - ed areas of expertise , " whereas " other services , in - cluding general management consulting . . . are less clearly solely the prerogative of the accountant . " Nevertheless , radical changes should be made to training and certification procedures . The committee ' s report is interesting as an early expression of how the multidisciplinary practice issue came to be theorized by the association . Two elements are noteworthy . First , the move toward multidisciplinary practice ( the solution ) was framed as historically inevitable : " [ It ] appears less to be in the nature of options and more in the nature of stages in the historical development of the Chartered Accountancy profession . " Moreover , the boundaries of the profession were described as flexible , not fixed , and change as normal and rep - resenting continuity with the past . Second , there was an early recognition of the need for normative alignment : change was necessary in order to service the expectations of clients . Furthermore , the pro - fession was uniquely qualified to deliver consult - ing services by virtue of the " high standards of quality that have been established in the core areas ( and which could thus be extended ) to all other services offered . " The implication was that accoun - tants would provide " higher standards of quality " than other occupational groups and therefore ought to provide them . Moreover , because clients were approaching CAs for these services , rather than the reverse , " it is entirely appropriate for them to be offered by Chartered Accountants . " This early at - tempt at theorization , however , gave little attention to organizational failings : there was virtually no discussion of a generic problem , as would be im - plied by institutional theory . On the contrary , the report provided only a vague description of an in - novation and provided justification for its possible adoption . The justification rested on the appeal to historical evolution and , more importantly , the consistency of the change with prevailing profes - sional values . The ICAA Council treated the report with indif - ference and referred it to the CICA . At the provin - cial level , nothing more would be written of the multidisciplinary practice issue until several years later . The 1981 report thus stands as an anomaly : it appeared unexpectedly , and " it had no impact and it sank without a trace , " in the words of the ad hoc committee chairman . One likely reason for this in - difference was the failure of the committee to frame the issue as a problem . By 1983 , new concerns had begun to surface for the accounting profession . Two banks failed in Al - berta , prompting governmental investigations into the adequacy of the public audit . The MacDonald Commission , set up by the provincial government in 1985 , analyzed the gap between public expecta - tions of the audit function and actual processes . The Estey Report , which appeared in 1986 , was critical of the auditors ' roles in the bank failures . " * * The Estey and Macdonald Commissions conducted public inquiries into the high - profile failures of promi - nent Canadian financial institutions . The Estey inquiry , commissioned by the minister of finance and chaired by Justice Willard Estey of the Supreme Court of Canada , focused on the failure of two Alberta banks in the early 1980s , Northlands Bank and Canadian Commercial Bank . 68 Academy of Management fournal February Not surprisingly , the ICAA and CICA were less concerned with intraprofessional discourse than with repairing the reputation of the CA profession . Nevertheless , annual reports and presidential mes - sages began to suggest , albeit in gentle tones , that the profession was reaching a moment for change . Partly , these suggestions were motivated by a wors - ening economic context . In the face of worsening market conditions , the profession began to review its situation . In doing so , the profession had to take account ofthe moves being made by its larger firms . There was an emerg - ing difference between the portfolios of the larger firms , who were providing a broad array of services to global clients , and the concentration of smaller firms upon traditional accounting services . Annual reports of the CICA and ICAA , and CA Magazine , explained and supported the expanding practices of the larger firms . For example , the CICA ' s 1985 - 86 annual report portrayed the profession as " always on the move " not only in terms of numbers but also " in our range of expertise . " Consequently , the report stated that a major responsibility for members was to " keep their knowledge expand - ing . . . we look to our institute for a range of ser - vices in this area . " Statements of pending change and declarations about a profession " on the move , " although signif - icant , were not reflected in the bulk of the insti - tutes ' activities . Publications , professional develop - ment activities , and committee reports continued mucb as before . No publication strayed from techni - cal aspects of accounting ; professional development reflected conventional concerns ( albeit with empha - sis upon use of computer technology ) ; and the pro - gram of precertification education remained un - touched . In short , the routines of the profession suggested a continuation of practices and reproduc - tion of the concerns and issues embodied within Estey ' s final report , in 1987 , criticized the auditors ' per - formance in their audits of the banks and also criticized the profession generally for failing to enforce appropriate standards of practice and professional independence . The Macdonald Commission , formed in 1986 by the Ca - nadian Institute of Chartered Accountants and chaired by a prominent Toronto corporate lawyer , focused on the broader question of audit credibility and public expecta - tions of auditors in the wake of the Alberta bank failures . In his 1988 final report , Macdonald criticized the audi - tors ' reluctance to disclose potentially important infor - mation to shareholders of investors . Macdonald made a series of recommendations to change the accounting pro - fession in order to strengthen the role of the auditors , improve accounting and disclosure practices , and ex - pand the responsibilities of audit committees . them . Any expression and recognition of pending change occurred primarily in fhe president ' s mes - sages , authored by professionals from the interna - tional firms . In other words , the discourse in the armual reports reflected the issues and practices of the larger firms , while the daily routines of the ICAA and the CICA reflected the concerns of regional and local firms . ^ It is worth reflecting upon the motivation of the larger firms and the dynamics within the profes - sion . Why did the large firms feel it necessary to gain endorsement from the ICAA and CICA ? After all , they were sufficiently powerful to have adopted a " take it or leave it " attitude , withdrawing from the CICA if their interests were not accommodated . Our interview data suggested two possible motiva - tions . First , there were many who would have found it difficult to withdraw from their profes - sional associations . Auditors , in particular , were committed . Second , and more intriguingly , the larger firms found the associations helpful in pre - senting their case to external constituencies , such as the state . When an association promotes the interests of a profession , the profession appears less self - serving than it does when its large firms pub - licly represent themselves . Here , the international and national accounting firms found it politically effective to press their interests through the associ - ations . The incipient debate over the appropriate func - tions of chartered accountancy firms led , in 1984 , to creation of the CICA ' s Committee on Long - Range Strategic Planning , charged with assessing issues affecting the profession . The committee was weighted in favor of the large firms . Four of ten members were from the Big Eight ; three were from industry or government ; one was from academia ; and one was from a regional firm , one from a bou - tique firm . The committee consulted extensively and noted the evolving divergence between firms . Larger firms , the committee reported , saw their fu - ture as multidisciplinary practices . Regional and local firms , in contrast , were not convinced that the profession should necessarily follow the interests ^ The ICAA did not keep detailed statistics on postcer - tification professional development training programs until 1990 . Our conclusion that the focus on the courses did not change is based upon the ad hoc summaries contained in the annual reports . After 1990 , the same pattern is revealed more systematically . Thus , the num - ber of courses ( usually less than one week long and commonly only one day long ) devoted to " management " issues showed very little change : 1990 , 6 courses ; 1991 , 1 ; 1992 , 10 ; 1993 , 4 ; 1994 , 2 ; 1995 , 3 ; 1996 , 6 ; 1997 , 8 ; 1998 , 11 ; and 1999 , 12 . 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 69 of the larger firms . In the words of one committee member , for many regional and local firms , " The CA designation was the entry to business and meant a lot . The feeling was that the big firms were harming it . By moving outside traditional areas and reducing the importance of the audit , we would become , somehow , less ' clubby and together . ' " In other words , outside of the large firms , there was only modest sympathy for the multidisci - plinary practice concept . It would be incorrect , however , to represent the profession as riven with conflict . Differences of emphasis did exist , along with recognition that the larger firms were pursu - ing their own interests . But the notion of " institu - tional war " described by Hoffman ( 1999 ) is not applicable . Most members were indifferent to what the large firms were doing . By expanding services , larger firms were not restricting what the smaller firms might do . Nevertheless , the committee ' s 1986 " Rainbow Report " ( so labeled because of its gaudy cover ) , articulated the case for change in a form likely to appeal to both large and smaller firms . The report reads as a text whose authors are aiming to satisfy the spectrum of the profession . They begin by stressing the urgent need for change : The Canadian CA profession is facing fundamental and pervasive change . Led primarily by the rapidly evolving information technology that is revolution - izing business operations , but due also to altered perceptions about the value of the traditional attest audit , the role of chartered accountants in society . . . is changing dramatically . ( Emphasis added ) Failure to change , the committee warned , would inevitably and adversely affect the profession . Therefore , " education and training must be adapted to fit current demands . " Notice here that the committee is specifying a problem facing all members of the profession . Note also how the lan - guage has become more urgent and dramatic than that used in earlier reports . It no longer invokes mere " change , " but ' revolutionary ' change . Change " must " occur . The committee then began to justify multidisciplinary practice as the solution . Empha - sis was placed upon the appropriateness of service : CAs in public practice face new and increasing demands from their clients . . . . Today ' s more so - phisticated and better - informed users want their CAs . . . to provide a wide range of . . . services re - sponsive to their economic decision - making needs . A second theme of the CICA ' s committee on Long - Range Strategic Planning was that the profes - sion had always been dynamic . This theme was articulated subtly . The committee classified the profession ' s domain into " core " and " elective " ar - eas of knowledge . Core activities—accounting and information systems , attestation , and taxation— were performed by all accounting firms , regardless of size , and were the basis ofthe profession ' s train - ing and certification routines . Elective areas ( such as financial services , insolvency , and business val - uation ) constituted " the outer perimeter of the CA profession . " However , additional activities were flagged as areas for possible future incorporation : Primarily , these are types of management advisory services that lie outside the interests of a large ma - fority of members and in which other professional bodies are well - established . These include market - ing , production , distribution , corporate strategy , hu - man resources and organizational development . We are not suggesting that CAs not engage in them , but , rather that they be treated as optional fields of in - terest outside the perimeter . As CA ' s expertise in particular optional services becomes more wide - spread , consideration can be given to including these within the profession ' s perimeter . ( Emphasis added ) In other words , although the committee fell short of giving full support to the inclusion of nonac - counting activities , it acknowledged their rele - vance and possible future inclusion within the pro - fession ' s domain . By tracing the progression of the CA profession from a core to elective services , and by accepting that some services presently beyond that elective perimeter might in the future be con - tained within it , the committee balanced the inter - ests of smaller firms , who could remain focused on core and some elective services , with the interests of large firms , which were operating outside that domain . Classifying services into core and periph - ery also minimized the scope of change . It was the " perimeter " of the profession ' s activities that would be affected : the larger core would remain stable . By implication , change , though necessary , would involve only modest and incremental ad - justments . There was thus an interesting paradox in the committee ' s endorsement of change . The need for change was argued dramatically , whereas the scope of the change was minimized . Rainbow and Its Aftermath , 1986 - 90 The Rainbow Report generated considerable dis - cussion . The CICA president ' s message of 1986 - 87 applauded it and decried the profession ' s " much too narrow " image . The CICA annual report of the same year invoked the appeal to client service : " We must continue to broaden our scope of expertise to meet new client and employer needs " ( emphasis added ) . Province - level support was more muted . The president ' s message acknowledged the Rain - bow Report would require careful attention and , " if 70 Academy of Management fournal February appropriate , " implementation , but agreed the im - age of the profession needed promotion . A new marketing strategy was launched portraying the CA " as an all - round business advisor . " This was the first instance of an externally oriented attempt to broaden the image of the accountant . The lukewarm attention the ICAA paid to the report is partly explained by the body ' s continuing attention to the aftermath of the Alberta bank fail - ures . It also reflected an upturn in economic activ - ity . But it also revealed the lack of conviction or the indifference , among smaller firms , about making jurisdictional expansion and changes in training and certification a high priority . The CICA was more closely associated with the interests of the larger firms , whereas the ICAA was closer to the day - to - day interests of regional and local firms . Then ( and now ) , over 90 percent ofthe CA firms in Alberta had fewer than five professionals . It was to these , rather than to the larger firms , that the ICAA ' s activities were directed . One consequence was that although the marketing campaign pro - jected CAs as the " best business advisors , " training and certification procedures remained unchanged and focused upon accounting . The ICAA ' s indifference to the Rainbow Report became clearer when it set up a strategic planning committee . The committee ' s report . Chartered Ac - counting in the 199O ' s , is more conservative than the Rainbow Report , defining CAs as " highly edu - cated professionals , uniquely trained to provide credible financial information and services . . . . As creative managers and advisors , they promote fi - nancial well - being by utilizing knowledge and judgment with integrity , objectivity and account - ability . " No mention is made of accountants as all - round business advisors , or of accountants pro - viding management advisory services . Further - more , 53 percent of respondents to a survey the planning committee conducted expressed " an in - creasing concern that competitive factors may be overriding professional considerations ( standards , independence ) in providing services to demanding clients . " Particular regret was felt over the declin - ing importance of audits refiecting the position of the smaller firms for whom the audit service fixed the core of the profession . Any developments that compromised the integrity of the audit were to be avoided . By the end of the decade , then , the situation was that , although the more powerful firms were mov - ing beyond the profession ' s traditional boundaries , the majority of accounting firms were not follow - ing . The CICA was thus nervous about losing the support and commitment ofthe larger firms ( which employed 20 percent ofthe profession ' s total mem - bership ) . Not to support the Big Five was almost unthinkable . At this point in the theorization pro - cess , therefore , the president ' s messages and an - nual reports began to frame the need for change and justify the proposed solution in a form more likely to appeal to smaller firms . There was continued reference to the historical flexibility of the profession : the CICA and ICAA annual reports proclaimed the profession was on the move , as it always had been . Change was , again , portrayed as normal . The historical inevitability of developments also continued to be stressed , but it was more dramatically attached to the challenging economic and regulatory context , especially the " fierce " competition facing CAs . For the first time , the CICA ' s annual reports referred expressly to the economic struggle facing the profession . Even so , the same documents emphasized the special exper - tise of the CA , along with the need for CAs to respond to increasing client demands for broader service . In making the case to broaden the domain of accounting , the reports ' authors chose language that appealed to the instinct of " service " and to a sense of obligation , rather than the crass language of exploiting market opportunities . This is not to suggest the profession was unaware of the eco - nomic reasons for change ; accounting firms are not philanthropic entities . The point is that the lan - guage used to justify the proposed changes was not that of market positioning , but the rhetoric of ser - vice . The debate , in other words , was conducted in the language of the professional , not that of the businessperson . The legitimacy sought was moral , not pragmatic . An intriguing extension of this nor - mative appeal occurred in the 1990 CICA presi - dent ' s message , in which the argument for jurisdic - tional change was openly connected to the interests of Canada : To succeed as a profession and as a country , our attitudes will undoubtedly change . They must change , if we are to remain a strong and vibrant profession . . . and if we are to create a renewed Canada that offers future generations the same pros - perity we have enjoyed . It is almost unthinkable that a more openly com - mercial entity would justify ( or need to justify ) diversification by referring to the good of the coun - try . In the context of the profession , in contrast , such a reference appears unexceptional . As well as appealing to service , annual reports openly raised the problem of professional stan - dards , directly addressing the concerns smaller firms raised in response to the Rainbow Report . Change would not be allowed to undermine the profession ' s objectivity . Only by vigilant attention 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 71 would accountancy " remain a profession and not be reduced to a trade or commercial activity . " The ICAA was particularly concerned with this appeal for normative integrity , an appeal that would be - come more important in the next decade . The Interprovincial Task Force , 1991 - 97 The new decade saw increasing attention given to the accountant as business advisor and to the multidisciplinary practice concept , a focus partly precipitated by a downswing in economic activity . In 1990 , the CICA formed an Interprovincial Task Force to examine " the continued trend towards multi - disciplinary activities . " While the task force gathered evidence , annual reports and president ' s messages of the ICAA and CICA continued the theme of change and reinforced the need to broaden the image of the CA as an all - round busi - ness advisor . Certain actions within the profession suggest a growing acceptance of the new role . For example , in 1991 the CICA proposed six " special - izations , " including one for " business advisory ser - vices . " The Alberta and British Columbia institutes proposed " significant reductions in specific hour [ certification ] requirements in audit , review and taxation . " But there was , too , the countertheme of protecting standards . The ICAA ' s 1990 annual re - port stressed the need to promote the profession as " responsible , trustworthy and having the highest standards . " In 1991 , the CICA ' s annual report in - sisted that " we cannot risk our reputation for integ - rity and objectivity . " The discussion within the profession on the im - portance of maintaining standards translated into the profession ' s external representation of itself . Thus far , our case report has evidenced the attempt to enlarge the public image of the CA from accoun - tant to all - round business advisor . In 1992 , this effort was adjusted in a national campaign centered around " credibility , trust , integrity and leader - ship . " These values were overlaid upon the all - round business contribution of the CA in a series of advertisements designed " to convey a message that chartered accountants maintain a broad base of ex - pertise , enabling them to contribute to the success of business beyond accounting and auditing ser - vices . " The advertising campaigns illustrate the in - traprofessional debate over the need to be all - round business advisors and the need to retain normative integrity . Nevertheless , despite the concern for standards , management advisory services were now central to the definition of what CAs could do for their clients . ICAA advertisements advised cli - ents to " contact a CA and get the best financial and management advice " ( emphasis added ) . The CICA ' s Inter - Provincial Task Force reported in 1993 and confirmed the " proliferation " of multi - disciplinary practices . Regional and local firms were " joining forces with each other and with pro - fessionals in other closely linked fields to build multidisciplinary practices . " The task force ap - plauded this trend . Multidisciplinary practice was " a necessary and commendable " response to the recession of the early ' 90s and the emergence of new types of competitors . The task force ' s report was thus not about whether multidisciplinary prac - tice was advisable , but about how to make it work . Both the CICA and the ICAA endorsed this report in their own annual reports . The " official " metamorphosis of accountants into business advisors and acknowledgment of multi - disciplinary practice as an appropriate form of or - ganization culminated in 1996 . Tbe CICA ' s Inter - Institute Vision Task Force , which included five members from the largest firms and four from re - gional firms , underlined the challenges facing the accounting profession and , in stronger terms than used previously , urged change upon the profession : The technological , economic knowledge , demo - graphic and market forces identified a decade ago , are defining and driving the environment within which the CA profession functions today . Our pro - fession and its institutions no longer have the lux - ury of considered , incremental change . In spite of successes in certain areas , the CA ' s pre - eminence in the marketplace , as trusted business advisors and key players in business decisions , has eroded over the last decade . If we continue on our current course , this erosion will only accelerate . ( Emphasis added ) Contrary to the thrust of the Rainbow Report , the burden of the 1996 report was that major , not pe - ripheral , change was necessary to reverse the de - cline in CAs ' stature . Dramatic phrases and imagery were used . Change " emerging " in previous periods was now " enveloping our profession . " More impor - tantly , the Inter - Institute Vision Task Force empha - sized justifying change as aligned with professional values . First , there was , an appeal to CAs ' " legiti - mate claim [ of ] expert status " in a " wide range of disciplines " ( such as management consulting ) . Sec - ond , there was an appeal to the core values of the profession—especially its " objectivity " : Traditionally , decision makers have relied almost exclusively on financial information primarily be - cause non - financial information has rarely met sim - ilar standards of rigorous preparation and objectiv - ity . CAs have an opportunity to make a tremendous contribution to decision - making generally through expanding the scope of information sources that 72 Academy of Management fournal February meet the tests of rigor and obfectivity . ( emphasis added ) . This latter appeal implicitly addressed the coun - tertheme of professional standards being under threat . On the one hand , change was necessary because of external shifts in the marketplace . CAs were threatened by competitors taking advantage of emerging opportunities . If the profession stood still , it would decline . Implied ( but never stated ) was that , without change , CAs would lose market share . On the other hand , movement into new mar - kets was legitimate because CAs had the necessary expertise and an appropriate and applicable value set . Stressing the core values of objectivity , integ - rity , and service , we suggest , enabled an interesting reformulation of the profession ' s identity . Instead of defining itself in terms of a substantive core of abstract knowledge , tbe profession became defined by its values of objectivity , service , and expertise . By implication , the jurisdictional domain to which these values could be applied became fiuid and open to reinterpretation . Hence , professional integ - rity would be sustained despite expansion of the profession ' s boundary . Change was thus , again , portrayed as representing continuity with the past because the essential basis of the profession was not the domain per se , but its core values , which were to be retained . The CICA and ICAA botb endorsed the Inter - Institute Vision Task Force report in words exem - plified by the 1997 CICA president ' s message : To be leaders in the marketplace , and ensure our continuing role and relevance , we have to realign our services and structures to meet our customers ' and employers ' needs . This means broadening the scope of our profession beyond our traditional fi - nancial focus and extending our range of services , so that we can enhance decision making and improve organizational performance . Extending the profession ' s range would occur within a framework of " core shared values and ethics " that would " continue to unite and distin - guish us , no matter what area of the profession we work in " ( 1997 : 4 ) . By 1997 , the ICAA and the CICA had each officially endorsed the concept of CAs as business advisors and of multidisciplinary practice as an appropriate organizational form . In doing so , they had authoritatively changed the definition of occupational membership and of appropriate be - haviors . The new template was legitimated by each institute and recommended to the profession at large . An expanded advertising campaign was launched , reinforcing the idea of a chartered ac - countant as a broadly based business advisor . There remained ( and remain ) several procedural implications to be accomplished , as well as the important exercise of negotiating the new bound - aries with affected professions ( especially the law profession ) and the state . ^ But from the official standpoint of the CA profession , the boundaries of its jurisdiction and appropriate mode of organizing had changed . Summary How were the two tasks of theorization per - formed in the present case ? Interestingly , early stages of the process were not characterized by articulation of a problem . Instead , discussion com - mented upon " interesting " innovations . This con - trasts with the terms often used in the institutional literature , such as organizational " failings " ( Tolbert & Zucker , 1996 ) and " frictions " and " problems " ( Suchman , 1995a ) . The notion of " solutions " or " treatments " carries the same idea . The present case did not begin with a problem but with a sensed opportunity and an interest in an idea . However , the failure of the initial theorizors to provide a convincing problem probably infiuenced the indif - ference to the idea , supporting Strang and Meyer ' s ( 1993 ) insistence that theorization has to specify a problem . Once the focus shifted to defining a problem , two recurrent narrative structures became observable . The first was in the framing of the problem . Tbe need for change was generalized to the profession . The profession was framed as under threat , envel - oped by forces for change . Over the 20 years , in other words , the nature of the problem was insis - tently specified and generalized as affecting all firms and members of the profession . Change was presented as a natural , almost inevitable , progres - sion . Change is progressive . Change is normal , whereas reluctance to change is unusual . Second , the language used became more expressive . A rbe - torical tone emerged , urging the need for change in increasingly dramatic form . Noticeably , it took almost two decades for the need for change to be endorsed . Theorizing is thus not a momentary act but , at least in tbe present case , one that requires sustained repetition to elicit a shared understanding of the problem . Suchman ( 1995 : 42 ) proposed that problems that affect cen - tral or vocal constituencies within a field are more readily acknowledged . He also proposed that diffu - sion of new ideas will be more rapid if a single ' ^ In fact , large accounting firms appear to have failed to convince Arthur Levitt , chairman of the U . S . SEC , of the merits of multidisciplinary practice . 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 73 account of a problem and solution occurs . In the present case , both conditions were apparent—the large firms initiated the discourse and one solution was articulated—which makes the length of the period required to develop the shared understand - ing especially noteworthy . The robustness of pre - vailing institutionalized scripts and the difficulty of dislodging them are , of course , consistent with the primary theme of institutionalization . The second task of theorization—justification— was characterized in the present case primarily by invoking professional values . There was very little explicit discussion of the functionality of multidis - ciplinary practice ( although functionality was im - plied ) . Instead , multidisciplinary practice was jus - tified by aligning the idea with the values of the profession . Initially , the value highlighted was cli - ent service , of responding to client needs . A related theme was that CAs have skills that uniquely qual - ify them to provide those services . Subsequently , change was justified by defining the profession in terms of its values , disconnected from any refer - ence to particular knowledge . The identity of the profession thus became bound up in a configura - tion of values ( service , objectivity , expertise ) whose applicability was more easily mutable . Resonating through these justifications was the priority given to " moral " alignment ( Suchman , 1995 ) rather than to pragmatic legitimacy . DISCUSSION The Role of Professional Associations at Moments of Change Professional associations are commonly under - stood as agents of reproduction rather than of change . Through the routines of licensing , training , and professional development and the monitoring and disciplining of behavior , associations suppos - edly act to underpin existing conventions and val - ues . Prevailing practices become encoded in the associations ' organizational routines and , to the ex - tent that routines remain unchanged , encoded in - stitutional logics are reproduced . In the present study , little change occurred in the CICA ' s and ICAA ' s routines . Entry to the CA profession re - quired completion of examinations that empha - sized accounting , with particular emphasis upon audit for third - party purposes . Practice reviews fo - cused solely upon enforcement of standards relat - ing to the audit . Programs of professional develop - ment changed to refiect demands from members for courses on information technology , but even these changes converged upon the contribution of tech - nology to delivering traditional services . In this sense , the institutes ' routines conveyed the prevail - ing logic of action . However , the routines did not prevent radical reconceptualization both of the boundaries of the profession and of the appropriate organizational template . Therefore , the assumption that prevailing practices are reinforced and repro - duced by routines is an oversimplification . One complexity is that institutional pressures may infiuence participants unevenly ( Leblebici et al , 1991 ; Ruef & Scott , 1998 ) . The CA profession is comprised of professionals who work in highly dif - ferent settings , ranging from sole proprietorships to international firms . Members of larger firms are the least likely to participate in the training and post - certification activities of the institutes . Training is provided by their firms , which means they have less exposure to the reproductive rhythm of insti - tute activities . Professionals in smaller firms , in contrast , are much more embedded in the insti - tutes ' routines . Consequently , the routines ofa pro - fessional association may work to reproduce pre - vailing practices , but their influence will be distributed unevenly . A second complexity is that the CA associations perform three roles , of which the reproduction of prevailing logics through repetitive routines is one . The institutes also host intraprofessional discourse and represent the profession to outsiders . These latter roles may not have conservative outcomes . Thus , in our case study , the professional associa - tions hosted and narrated the debate over which services and activities properly fell within the ju - risdiction of accounting and how they should be organized . Concurrent with the unfolding debate , the CICA and ICAA altered their formal portrayal of the profession to other communities . In effect , the association was a key agency in the process of clarifying and endorsing change in boundaries and format . Importantly , the institutes did not initiate change . The CICA and the ICAA were responding to the jurisdictional and organizational movements of the profession ' s largest firms . This is to be ex - pected , for three reasons . First , as noted earlier , these firms were less captured by the prevailing routines . Second , they were attuned to the emerg - ing opportunities involved in serving global cli - ents . Third , they had the political resources to re - sist traditional practices , much as predicted by DiMaggio ( 1988 ) . Together , these reasons enabled tbe large firms to act as institutional entrepreneurs . This pattern is consistent with the observations of Scott and his colleagues , who observed that changes in governance structures ( such as profes - sional regulatory arrangements ) " tend to lag " ( 2000 : 175 ) the development of new ideas and build up of 74 Academy of Management fournal February political will . The important , lagged role played by the CICA and the ICAA was to couch and frame the entrepreneurial movement in terms that nullified any emergent reluctance or opposition . In the present case , resistance was modest , and it would be misleading to portray the issue as sharply con - tested . However , any opposition that did occur was , over time , sublimated by the legitimating rhet - oric of the discourse , a discourse framed and ex - pressed in a particular way . Institutional fields are regulated through the re - ciprocal effects of market and institutional gover - nance structures ( Scott , 1995 : Suddaby & Creen - wood , 1999 ) whose relative emphasis can shift over time . It is therefore possible that the role of profes - sional associations within the same organizational field might change over time . Dacin ( 1997 ) drew attention to the ebb and fiow of macro institutional pressures . Our case was marked by increasing mar - ket pressures and technological shifts that contrib - uted to the press for change . The ICAA and CICA were no doubt infiuenced by these pressures . If so , it suggests that professional associations may play more conservative roles when market pressures are supportive or stable . In the present case , the in - creasing press of market forces over the 20 - year period altered the balance between institutional and market infiuences in favor of the latter , thus reducing the force of the institutes ' reproductive routines . The institutes ' ot / jer roles then came more into play , interpreting the market context and the - orizing appropriate responses . In other words , the role of the professional association may be multi - faceted , altering with the circumstances of the mar - ketplace . Our case study suggests that reproductiye routines may have contributed to the relative sta - bility of institutional practices until the late 1980s but that , thereafter , as the market changed , the role of the association changed also , orchestrating the legitimating discourse . In terms of the model in Figure 1 , the case sug - gests that professional associations contribute to legitimation in discrete ways . During the theoriza - tion stage , an association is a vehicle whereby nor - mative / moral legitimacy is actively attained . The association generates a " positive normative emula - tion " ( Suchman , 1995 : 579 ) both among the sub - communities within its profession and from exter - nal stakeholders . During the dissemination and reinstitutionalization stage , in contrast , the repro - ductive routines of the association contribute to attainment of cognitive legitimacy ( see Suchman , 1995 : 578 ) . Further research is clearly needed to draw out the complex ways through which associ - ations contribute to continuity and change and the connection between their actions and different types of legitimacy . Three further observations are worth making to guide future efforts . First , it is probably important to understand the " permeability " ( Greenwood & Hinings , 1996 ) or " plasticity " ( Fox - Wolfgram et al . , 1998 ) of professional boundaries . Professional communities may respond differently to the move - ments of constituent subcommunities . The legal profession , for example , at least in Canada , appears less open than accountancy to new ideas , even though some of its members ( again , the larger firms ) are contemplating change . Law societies are pro - nouncing against multidisciplinary practices . As such , they conform to the traditional model of a conservative institute . One interpretation is that the accounting profession exhibits greater plastic - ity in its identity than does the legal profession , with the result that jurisdictional change is less contested and more easily legitimated . The struc - tures that determine the relative plasticity of boundaries , however , are unclear and would be worth uncovering in further research . A rather different line of research is suggested by attention to the role of professional associations as arenas within which social construction occurs . Professional communities such as law and account - ing are highly organized as communities—associa - tion membership may be mandatory , association participation is extensive , and formal interaction and communication are highly developed . Associ - ations use committees and task forces that host intraprofessional discourses ; official publications easily and comprehensively transmit ideas and scripts ; and celebratory and developmental pro - grams gather professionals and provide for interac - tion and discussion . In this sense , the professional institute is an available arena where definitions of membersbip and conduct can be socially con - structed . Such a situation contrasts with other , nonprofessionalized settings , where interactions are less routinized and where official accounts are less evident or authoritative . Davis ( 1991 ) , for ex - ample , referred to the Fortune 500 as an organiza - tional community . The diversity of membership and lack of collective mechanisms within that com - munity strikingly contrast with those of profession - alized settings . The very occurrence of highly artic - ulated arenas of social construction ( such as professional associations ) may make change easier to achieve despite the highly institutionalized set - ting . The collective structures of professional com - munities , in other words , might ease change be - cause they enable theorization . An interesting comparison would be between the role of profes - sional associations in which membership is man - 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 75 datory and participation high ( like the accounting institutes ) and associations in which membership is voluntary and participation lower . Comparative analysis of communities that vary in their collec - tive structures would thus improve understanding of theorization . Third , relatively little is known of the politics within different professional settings . Following Abbott ( 1988 ) and Hoffman ( 1999 ) , we find it tempting to conclude that change follows confiicts between interests . In our case , there were differ - ences of interests between professional subcommu - nities , and it was the larger and more powerful subcommunity that desired change . However , in - terests were not sharply contested . Smaller firms could continue to pursue their interests irrespec - tive of whether large firms expanded their activi - ties . An interesting feature of the case is that de - spite the lack of confiict of interests , the profession sought a normative endorsement of the unfolding change . It is likely that the professional association would have legitimated changes promoted by smaller firms but contested by larger firms . Future research could usefully examine whether associa - tions play similar roles in similar ways when there is a sharper pattern of contestation between sub - communities . Theorization Theorization is integral to institutional change . It is the rendering of ideas into understandable and compelling formats . This article has begun to ex - plore how theorization occurs and how issues are interpreted , represented , translated , and norma - tively developed . We have uncovered how prob - lems are framed and articulated in one setting . Fur - ther studies in different settings will help specify the generalizability of our observations . We are par - ticularly intrigued with the task of establishing why new ideas should be adopted . This can be done in commercial settings by stressing the results obtained elsewhere and the technical soundness of ideas . Approval in this way is predicated on the logic of efficiency ( that is , by claiming tbat the ideas work ) and imputed from their adoption by exemplary others . In a highly professionalized set - ting , however , legitimation takes a different form : commercial pressures may precipitate institutional entrepreneurship , but diffusion requires a norma - tive justification . Jurisdictional migration , in our case , was justified not through reference to the actions of others but by emphasis upon the conti - nuity and alignment of change with the prevailing values and practices of the profession . The importance of this observation may be gauged by comparing the process described here with that implicit in institutional accounts of how change often spreads within nonprofessional set - tings , where the mimetic mechanism is more prev - alent ( DiMaggio & Powell , 1983 : Strang & Soule , 1998 ) . For example , Haveman ( 1993 ) showed that savings and loans firms entered new market niches in increasing numbers once those niches had been occupied by large , reputedly successful organiza - tions . Similarly , Haunschild and Miner , 1997 showed that firms ' choices of investment bankers were affected by earlier choices made by large , successful firms . These and similar studies imply that mimicry occurs because a course of action is legitimated by its use by others . The basis of legit - imation is primarily economic . Legitimation in pro - fessional settings , by contrast , is not simply a func - tion of anticipated economic outcomes , but of professional appropriateness . Wbat matters witbin a professional context is the demonstrated confor - mity of innovation with the values embedded in traditional beliefs . It is only when ideas are couched in such a way that they are perceived to be consistent with prevailing values that they appear compelling and legitimate for adoption . In the case examined here , one of the key tasks of the associa - tion was to theorize jurisdictional movement as consistent with the normative base of the profes - sion , thus niaking migration acceptable . Current understanding of theorization is sketchy because little empirical work exists . Future re - search might explore how theorization occurs in different contexts , focusing upon the language used , by whom , and how and with what effect . There are hints in the literature that , for example , discourse will vary according to the relative infiu - ence of particular governance mechanisms . In co - ercive settings ( such as the development of state regulations ) , we would expect emphasis upon dil - igence and principles of reasonableness . In eco - nomic settings , such as those considered by Abra - hamson ( 1996 ) , legitimating principles are more likely to be quasi - scientific , emphasizing the " soundness " of ideas . In highly professionalized settings , we expect appeals to normative alignment to be more salient . Theorization processes , in short , have to justify change ( or resistance to change ) by appealing , in a compelling way , to the particular values embedded in the setting . The form of those appeals will vary by institutional setting , but their purpose will be tbe same . Theorization , as noted a moment ago , might be expected to vary depending upon the relative ho - mogeneity of an organizational community . The greater the range and intensity of schisms , the more difficult will be the task of developing acceptable 76 Academy of Management fournal February norms . Organizational communities may be com - prised of subcommunities whose interests stub - bornly do not align . In our case , the schisms were relatively modest . The theorization discourse re - quired was thus relatively easy to construct . We would anticipate very different processes where the interests of subcommunities collide . Finally , theorization processes can be expected to vary according to their intended recipients . Le - gitimation involves discourse both within and out - side an organizational community . This study pri - marily focused on discourse occurring within a profession , on how professionals " talked " to each other . We excluded how professionals talked to recipients outside their profession . More attention should be given to how communities project their identity to others and to the processes used in negotiation with them . Conclusion Understanding how institutional change occurs is a central challenge to institutionalist accounts of organizational behaviors . In this article , we have suggested that a much neglected stage in the change process is that of theorization . We have further suggested that , at the level of the organizational field , collective agencies , such as professional as - sociations , are important entities . Thro . ugh exami - nation of the evolution of chartered accountants as business advisors , we bave glimpsed how associa - tions play a role in tbe process of collectively de - fining and redefining the institutional logic that establishes what it means to be a CA and what is an appropriate way of being organized . Specifically , we have observed how the professional associa - tions of accountancy engaged in discourse that le - gitimated a significant adjustment in what accoun - tants " do " and thus in the definition of what it meant to " be " a CA . The assumption within insti - tutionalist accounts that associations are conserva - tive agencies has been shown to be overly simplis - tic . Associations play multifaceted roles , whose degree of emphasis and importance vary according to the stage ofthe change process . Further , we have conceptualized and examined the theorization pro - cess , suggesting how it occurs and the particular nuances of theorization in a professionalized set - ting , which , we suggest , are rather different from those found in other settings . REFERENCES Abbott , A . 1988 . The system of professions : An essay on the division of expert labor . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Abel , R . L . 1989 . Comparative sociology of legal profes - sions . In R . L . Abel & P . C . Lewis ( Eds . ) , Lawyers in society , vol . 3 : Comparative theories : 80 - 153 . Berkeley : University of California Press . Abrahamson , E . 1991 . Managerial fads and fashions : The diffusion and rejection of innovations . Academy of Management Review , 16 : 586 - 612 . Abrahamson , E . 1996 . Technical and aesthetic fashion . In B . Czarniawska & G . Sevon ( Eds . ) , Translating or - ganizational change : 117 - 137 . Berlin : de Gruyter . Barker , K . 1998 . Women physicians and the gendered system of professions . Work and Occupations . 25 : 229 - 255 . Baron , J . N . , Dobbin , E . , & Jennings , P . D . 1986 . War and peace : The evolution of modern personnel practice in US industry . American Journal of Sociology , 92 : 250 - 283 . Berger , T . , & Luckmann , P . 1967 . The social construction of reality . New York : Doubleday Anchor . Burns , L . R . , & Wholey , D . R . 1993 . Adoption and aban - donment of matrix management programs : Effects of organizational characteristics on interorganizational networks . Academy of Management Journal , 36 : 106 - 138 . Gant , S . , & Sharma , U . 1995 . The reluctant profession - Homeopathy and the search for legitimacy . Work , Employment & • Society , 9 : 743 - 762 . Gollins , R . 1979 . The credential society . New York : Ac - ademic Press . Dacin , T . 1997 . Isomorphism in context : The power and prescription of institutional norms . Academy of Management Journal , 40 : 46 - 81 . D ' Aunno , T . , Sutton , R . I . , & Price , R . H . 1991 . Isomor - phism and external support in conflicting institu - tional environments : A study of drug abuse treat - ment units . Academy of Management Journal , 34 : 636 - 661 . Davis , G . F . 1991 . Agents without principles ? The spread of the poison pill through the intercorporate net - work . Administrative Science Quarterly , 36 : 583 - 613 . Davis , G . F . , Dieckman , K . A . , & Tinsley , G . H . 1994 . The decline and fall of the conglomerate firm in the 1980s : The deinstitutionalization of an organiza - tional form . American Sociological Review , 59 : 547 - 570 . Davis , G . F . , & Greve , H . R . 1997 . Gorporate ehte net - works and governance changes in the 1980s . Amer - ican Journal of Sociology , 103 : 1 - 37 . Deephouse , D . 1999 . To be different or to be the same ? It ' s a question ( and theory ) of strategic balance . Strate - gic Management Journal , 20 : 147 - 166 . Dezalay , Y . , & Garth , B . 1996 . Fussing about the forum : Gategories and definitions as stakes in a professional competition . Law and Social Inquiry , 21 : 285 - 312 . 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 77 DiMaggio , P . } . 1983 . State expansion and organizational fields . In R . Hall & R . E . Quinn ( Eds . ) , Organization theory and public policy : 147 - 161 . Beverly Hills , GA : Sage . DiMaggio , P . J . 1988 . Interest and agency in institutional theory . In L . Zucker ( Ed . ) , Institutional pattems and organizations : Culture and environment : 3 - 21 . Gambridge , MA : Ballinger . DiMaggio , P . , & Powell , W . W . 1983 . The iron cage revis - ited : Institutional isomorphism and collective ratio - nality in organizational fields . American Sociologi - cal Review , 48 : 147 - 160 . Dobbin , F . R . 1994 . Forging industrial policy : The United States , Rritain and France in the railway age . New York : Gambridge University Press . Dobbin , F . R . , & T . J . Dowd . 1997 . How poUcy shapes competition : Early railroad foundings in Massachu - setts . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 501 - 529 . Elsbach , K . 1994 . Managing organizational legitimacy in the Galifornia cattle industry : The construction and effectiveness of verbal accounts . Administrative Science Quarterly , 39 : 57 - 88 . Evetts , J . 1995 . International professional associations : The new context for professional projects . Work , Employment & Society , 9 : 763 - 772 . Fligstein , N . , & Brantley , P . 1992 . Bank control , owner control , or organizational dynamics : Who controls the large modern corporation ? American Journal of Sociology , 98 : 280 - 307 . Flynn , G . , & Billington , S . V . R . 1997 . Multidisciplinary practices . Law Society of Alberta Rencher ' s Advi - sory , 50 ( June ) : 7 - 8 . Fox - Wolfgram , S . J . , Boal , K . B . , & Hunt , J . G . 1998 . Organizational adaptation to institutional change : A comparative study of first - order change in prospec - tor and defender banks . Administrative Science Quarterly , 43 : 87 - 126 . Freidson , E . 1970 . Profession of medicine : A study of the sociology of applied knowledge . New York : Dodd , Mead . Freidson , E . 1986 . Professional powers : A study of the institutionalization of formal knowledge . Ghicago : University of Ghicago Press . Furusten , S . 1995 . The managerial discourse — A study ofthe creation and dijfusion of popular manage - ment knowledge . Doctoral thesis no . 60 , Department of Business Studies , Uppsala University . Gephart , R . P . 1993 . The textual approach : Risk and blame in disaster sensemaking . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 36 : 1465 - 1515 . Goodrich , E . , & Salancik , G . 1996 . Organizational discre - tion in responding to institutional practices : Hospi - tals and caesarean births . Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 : 1 - 28 . Greenwood , R . , Gooper , D . , & Hinings , G . R . 1993 . Biggest is best : Strategic assumptions and actions in the Ganadian audit industry . Canadian Journal of Ad - ministrative Sciences , 10 : 308 - 321 . Greenwood , R . , & Hinings , G . R . 1993 . Understanding strategic organizational change : The contribution of archetypes . Academy of Management Journal , 36 : 1052 - 1081 . Greenwood , R . , & Hinings , G . R . 1996 . Understanding radical organizational change : Bringing together the old and the new institutionalism . Academy of Man - agement Review , 21 : 1022 - 1054 . Greenwood , R . , Hinings , G . R . , & Brown , J . 1990 . P ^ - form strategic management : Gorporate practices in profes - sional partnerships . Academy of Management Jour - nal , 33 : 725 - 755 . Greve , H . R . 1995 . Jumping ship : The diffusion of strategy abandoned . Administrative Science Quarterly , 40 : 444 - 473 . Greve , H . R . 1996 . Patterns of competition : The diffusion of a market position in radio broadcasting . Admin - istrative Science Quarterly , 41 : 29 - 60 . Gulati , R . 1995 . Social structure and alliance formation patterns : A longitudinal analysis . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 41 : 621 - 643 . Halliday , T . G . 1987 . Reyond monopoly . Ghicago : Uni - versity of Ghicago Press . Haveman , H . 1993 . Follow the leader : Mimetic isomor - phism and entry into new markets . Administrative Science Quarterly , 38 : 593 - 627 . Haunschild , P . R . , & Miner , A . 1997 . Modes of interorga - nizational imitation : The effects of outcome salience and uncertainty . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 472 - 500 . Haunschild , P . R . , & Miner , A . S . 1997 . Modes of inter - organizational imitation : The effects of outcome sa - lience and uncertainty . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 472 - 500 . Hinings , G . R . , Greenwood , R . , & Gooper , D . 1999 . The dynamics of change in large accounting firms . In D . Brock , M . Powell , & G . R . Hinings ( Eds . ) , Restruc - turing the professional organization : 131 - 153 . London : Routledge . Hoffman , A . J . 1999 . Institutional evolution and change : Environmentalism and the U . S . chemical industry . Academy of Management Journal , 42 : 351 - 371 . Holm , P . 1995 . The dynamics of institutionalization : Transformation processes in Norwegian fisheries . Administrative Science Quarterly , 40 : 398 - 420 . Jennings , P . D . , & Zandbergen , P . A . 1995 . Ecologically sustainable organizations : An institutional ap - proach . Academy of Management Review , 20 : 1015 - 1052 . Kraatz , M . 1998 . Learning by association : Interorganiza - tional networks and adaptation to environmental 78 Academy of Management fournal February change . Academy of Management Journal , 41 : 621 - 643 . Lamertz , K . , & Baum , J . 1997 . The legitimacy of organi - zational downsizing in Ganada : An analysis of ex - planatory media accounts . Canadian Journal of Ad - ministrative Sciences , 5 : 93 - 107 . Lawrence , T . B . 1999 . Institutional strategy . Journal of Management , 25 : 161 - 187 . Leblibici , H . , Salancik , G . R . , Gopay , A . , & King , T . 1991 . Institutional change and the transformation of inter - organizational fields : An organizational history of the U . S . radio broadcasting industry . Administra - tive Science Quarterly , 36 : 333 - 363 . Lounsbury , M . 1999 . Field transformation and popula - tion recomposition : The dynamics of professional and business associations in the U . S . field of fi - nance , 1945 - 1993 . Paper presented at the 59th An - nual Meeting of Academy of Management , Ghicago . Maijoor , S . , & van Witteloostuijn , A . 1996 . An empirical test ofthe resource - based theory : Strategic regulation in the Dutch audit industry . Strategic Management Journal , 17 : 549 - 569 . Meyer , A . D . , Brooks , G . R . , & Goes , J . B . 1990 . Environ - mental jolts and industry revolutions : Organiza - tional responses to discontinuous change . Strategic Management Journal ; ( special issue ) : 93 - 110 . Middlemiss , J . 1997 . E & Y raids top Toronto law firm . Rottom Line , May : 1 & 23 . Miiler , D . , & Ghen , M . - J . 1996 . Nonconformity in compet - itive repertoires : A sociological view of markets . So - cial Forces , 74 : 1209 - 1234 . Mizruchi , M . S . 1996 . What do interlocks do ? An analysis critique , and assessment of research on interlocking directorates . Annual review of sociology , vol . 22 : 271 - 298 . Palo Alto , GA : Annual Reviews . Mizruchi , M . S . , & Fein , L . G . 1999 . The social constitu - tion of organizational knowledge : A study ofthe uses of coercive , mimetic and normative isomorphism . American Science Quarterly , 44 : 653 - 683 . North , D . G . 1990 . Institutions , institutional change and economic performance . Gambridge , England : Gam - bridge University Press . Oliver , G . 1997 . The influence of institutional and task environment relationships on organizational perfor - mance : The Ganadian construction industry . Journal of Management Studies , 34 : 99 - 124 . Palmer , D . A . , Jennings , P . D . , & Zhou , X . 1993 . Late adoption of the multi - divisional form by large U . S . corporations : Institutional , political , and economic accounts . Administrative Science Quarterly , 38 : 100 - 131 . Porac , J . , Thomas , H . , & Baden - Fuller , G . 1989 . Gompet - itive groups as cognitive communities : The case of the Scottish knitwear manufacturers . Journal of Management Studies , 26 : 397 - 415 . Powell , W . W . 1985 . Getting into print : The decision making process in scholarly publishing . Ghicago : University of Ghicago Press . Powell , W . W . 1991 . Expanding the scope of institutional analysis . In W . W . Powell & P . J . DiMaggio ( Eds . ) , The new institutionalism in organizational analy - sis . Ghicago : University of Ghicago Press . Ranson , S . , Hinings , G . R . , & Greenwood , R . 1980 . The structuring of organizational structures . Administra - tive Science Quarterly , 25 : 1 - 7 . Rose , T . , & Hinings , G . R . 1999 . Global clients ' demands driving change in global business advisory firms . In D . Brock , M . Powell , & G . R . Hinings ( Eds . ) , Restruc - turing the professional organization : 41 - 67 . Lon - don : Routledge . Ruef , M . , & Scott , W . R . 1998 . A multidimensional model of organizational legitimacy : Hospital survival in changing institutional environments . Administra - tive Science Quarterly , 43 : 877 - 904 . Sahlin - Andersson , K . 1996 . Imitating by editing success : The construction of organizational fields . In B . Gzar - niawska & G . Sevon ( Eds . ) , Translating organiza - tional change : 69 - 92 . Berlin : de Gruyter . Scott , W . R . 1994 . Gonceptualising organizational fields : Linking organizations and societal systems . In H . U . Derlien , U . Gerhardt , & F . W . Scharpf ( Eds . ) , System - rationalitat und partialinteresse [ Systems rational - ity and partial interests ] : 203 - 221 . Baden Baden , Germany : Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft . Scott , W . R . 1995 . Institutions and organizations . Thou - sand Oaks , GA : Sage . Scott , W . R . , & Backman , E . V . 1990 . Institutional theory and the medical care sector . In S . S . Mick ( Ed . ) , Innovations in health care delivery : Insights for organization theory : 20 - 52 . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Scott , W . R . , Mendel , P . , & Pollack , S . Forthcoming . En - vironments and fields : Studying the evolution of a field of medical care organizations . In W . W . Powell & D . Jones ( Eds . ) , How institutions change . Ghicago : University of Ghicago Press . Scott , W . R . , & Meyer , J . 1983 . The organization of soci - etal sectors . In J . W . Meyer & W . R . Scott ( Eds . ) , Organizational environments : Ritual and ratio - nality : Beverly Hills , GA : Sage . Scott , W . R . , & Meyer , J . 1991 . The rise of training pro - grams in firms and agencies : An institutional per - ' spective . In B . M . Staw , & L . L . Gummings ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior , vol . 13 : 297 - 326 . Greenwich , GT : JAI Press . Scott , W . R . , Rueff , M . , Mendel , P . J . , & Garonna , G . A . 2000 . Institutional change and healthcare organi - zations . Ghicago : University of Ghicago Press . Starr , P . 1982 . The social transformation of American medicine . New York : Basic Books . 2002 Greenwood , Suddaby , and Hinings 79 Strang , D . , & Meyer , J . W . 1993 . Institutional conditions for diffusion . Theory and Society , 22 : 487 - 511 . Strang , D . , & Soule , S . A . 1998 . Diffusion in organizations and social movements : From hybrid corn to poison pills . In ( Eds . ) , Annual review of sociology , vol . 24 : 265 - 309 . Palo Alto , GA : Annual Reviews . Suchman , M . 1995 . Managing legitimacy : Strategic and institutional approaches . Academy of Management Review , 20 : 571 - 611 . Suddaby , R . , & Greenwood , R . 1999 . The colonization of knowledge : Product commodification as a dy - namic of change in professional service firms . Pa - per presented at the SGANGOR Gonference , Stanford University , Stanford , GA . Thornton , P . H . 1995 . Accounting for acquisition waves : Evidence from the U . S . publishing industry . In W . R . Scott & S . Ghristensen ( Eds . ) , The institutional con - struction of organizations . Thousand Oaks , GA : Sage . Tolbert , P . S . , & Zucker , L . G . 1983 . Institutional sources of change in the formal structure of organizations : Diffusion of civil service reform , 1880 - 1935 . Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 28 : 22 - 39 . Tolbert , P . S . , & Zucker , L . G . 1996 . Institutionalization of institutional theory . In S . Glegg , G . Hardy , & W . Nord ( Eds . ) , The handbook of organization studies : 175 - 190 . Thousand Oaks , GA : Sage . Van Hoy , J . 1993 . Intraprofessional politics and profes - sional regulation . Work and Occupations . 20 : 90 - 109 . Westphal , J . D . , Gulati , R . , & Shortell , S . M . 1997 . Gus - tomization or conformity : An institutional and net - work perspective on the content and consequences of TQM adoption . Administrative Science Quar - terly , 42 : 366 - 394 . Westphal , J . D . , & Zajac , E . J . 1997 . Defections from the inner circle : Social exchange , reciprocity , and the diffusion of board independence in U . S . corpora - tions . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 161 - 183 . Zucker , L . G . 1977 . The role of institutionalization in cultural persistence . American Sociological Re - view , 42 : 726 - 743 . Zucker , L . G . 1986 . Production of trust : Institutional soiKces of economic structure , 1840 - 1920 . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Gummings ( Eds . ) , Research in organi - zational behavior , vol . 8 : 53 - 112 . Greenwich , GT : JAI Press . Zucker , L . G . 1987 . Institutional theories of organization . In W . R . Scott & J . F . Short , Jr . ( Eds . ) , Annual review of sociology , vol . 13 : 443 - 464 . Palo Alto , GA : An - nual Reviews . Royston Greenwood ( royston . greenwood @ ualberta . ca } is the Telus Professor of Strategic Management in the De - partment of Strategic Management and Organization , School of Business , the University of Alberta . He re - ceived his Ph . D . from the University of Birmingham . His research interests focus upon the management of profes - sional service firms and the dynamics of change in insti - tutionalized settings . C . R . Hinings is the Thornton A . Graham Professor of Business in the Department of Strategic Management and Organization , School of Business , the University of Al - berta . He is on the editorial boards of the journals Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly and Organization Studies . His research focuses on understanding processes of stra - tegic change in organizations , especially those of profes - sional service firms . Roy Suddaby is an assistant professor of management and organizations at the Henry B . Tippie Gollege of Busi - ness at the University of Iowa . He received his Ph . D . from the University of Alberta . His research interests include institutional theory and the management of professional organizations . Al ^ 80 Academy of Management fournal February APPENDIX Archival Materials Used in the Study " Internal Representations CICA annual reports , 1977 - 97 , inclusive ICAA annual reports , 1977 - 97 , inclusive ICAA briefing notes , 1977 - 97 , inclusive ICAA council minutes , 1977 - 97 , inclusive CICA president ' s messages , 1977 - 97 , inclusive Report of the ICAA Ad Hoc Committee on Multi - Disciplinary Practice , 1981 Report of the CICA , Meeting the Challenge of Change ( " Rainbovif Report " ) , 1986 Report of the CICA Committee on Advertising and Specialization , 1986 Report ofthe ICAA , Chartered Accountancy in the 1980s , 1989 Report of the ICAA , Strategic Planning Report , 1992 Report ofthe ICAA , Healthy Competition or Compromise of Standards , 1993 Report of the ICAA , Strategic Plan Implementation Report , 1995 Report of the Interprovincial Task Force on the Multi - Disciplinary Activities of Members Engaged in Public Practice , 1995 Report of the CICA Inter - Institute Vision Task Force , 1996 Research Review of the CICA Inter - Institute Vision Task Force , 1996 Lists of professional development materials Examination syllabi External Representations Video transcripts : CICA ' s Goodbye Mr . Dickens , 1981 CICA ' s The Secret ' s Out , 1991 Television advertisements Radio advertisements Newspaper advertisements , 1980 , 1985 , 1990 , 1995 , and 1997 " The CICA is the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants . The ICAA is the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Alberta .