Running head : RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 1 Risk - taking and creativity : Convergent , but not divergent thinking is better in low - risk takers Wangbing Shen a , b , * , Bernhard Hommel b , * , Yuan Yuan c , * , Chang , Liu d , Wei Zhang e a School of Public Administration and Business School , Hohai University , Nanjing , CHINA b Institute for Psychological Research , Leiden University , Leiden , The Netherlands c School of Rehabilitation Science , Nanjing Normal University of Special Education , Nanjing , CHINA d Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience , Nanjing Normal University , Nanjing , CHINA e School of Preschool education Yancheng Kindergarten Teachers College , Yancheng , CHINA Acknowledgments —This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31500870 ) , the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities ( 2017B14514 ) , China Postdoctoral Science Foundation ( 2017M621603 ) , Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu College of China ( 17KJB90002 ) , and the Philosophical and Social Science Foundation of Jiangsu Colleges of China ( 2017SJB0649 ) . We send our sincere thanks to Miss Zongying Liu , Haixia Gu , and Yuan Zhao for their scoring the divergent thinking test . * Corresponding authors . Date of Revision Submission : Nov 7 , 2017 Address : Dr . Wangbing Shen School of Public Administration and Business Shool , Hohai University No 8 , Focheng West Road , Nanjing , China Email : wangbingshpsy @ 163 . com Dr . , Prof . , Hommel Bernhard , Institute of Psychological Research Leiden University , Wassenaarseweg 52 2333 AK Leiden , The Netherlands Email : hommel @ fsw . leidenuniv . nl Dr . Yuan Yuan School of School of Rehabilitation Science , Nanjing Normal University of Special Education , Nanjing , 210038 , No 1 Shennong Road , Email : psychyy1989 @ 163 . com RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 2 Abstract The relationship between risk - taking and creativity is critical to understanding social harmony and innovation . While some studies have assessed the link between risk - taking and divergent thinking , the association between risk - taking and convergent thinking remains unclear . Two studies were conducted to systemically investigate whether risk - taking is linked to convergent thinking . In Study 1 , a sample of 127 healthy participants performed a Chinese Remote Associate Test ( RAT ) and completed a risk - taking questionnaire . As predicted , risk - taking was negatively correlated with RAT performance , implying that risk - taking may have a negative association with convergent thinking . Study 2 was an online survey study that replicated Study 1 , and extended the measures to include self - rated risk and a measure of divergent thinking ( the Alternate Uses Task ) . The findings were fully replicated , showing that low risk - taking goes with better convergent thinking , while risk - taking was not significantly correlated with divergent thinking . Furthermore , the risk - taking / convergent - thinking relationship was best described by a linear regression model in both studies . Taken together , these results suggest that appropriate reductions in risk - taking can boost convergent thinking . Keywords : convergent thinking ; risk - taking ; divergent thinking ; remote associates test RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 3 Risk - taking and creativity : Convergent , but not divergent thinking is better in low - risk takers The relationship between risk - taking and creativity is particularly important and interesting because these two constructs are crucial to the maintenance of social harmony and the development of scientific technology . Mounting evidence suggests that we all live in a highly complex , and therefore risky society in which we are confronted by various difficult to predict challenges . Perhaps due to the pervasiveness of risks and risk - taking in contemporary society , researchers have argued that our society is becoming a “risky society” ( e . g . , Beck , 2002 ) . Against this background the study of how , when , and why people take risks seems especially important as it may unravel better ways of managing risk or ways of enabling more people to benefit from risk - taking , e . g . through making large profits from highly risky investments ( e . g . , Platt & Huettel , 2008 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1992 ) . The concept of creativity is similar to that of risk - taking . Being creative often involves , sometimes even requires taking some degree of risk , and it can also generate considerable improvements in quality of life and wellbeing , including enabling individuals to mate with attractive partners , promoting development of high - tech devices and scientific inventions , leading to medical breakthroughs that improve health and enabling individuals to make large profits from entrepreneurial activities ( Baas , Koch , Nijstad , & De Dreu , 2015 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1992 ) . Despite such similarities , the actual relationship between creativity and risk - taking is still unclear . The possibility that such a relationship might exist has long been recognized . Many early studies on creative thinking show that risk - taking is integral to creativity ( Eisenman , 1987 ; Dewett , 2007 ; Feist , 1998 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1992 ) . Perhaps influenced by this view of the relationship , William’s ( 1980 ) well - known 50 - item scale for measuring creativity personality , RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 4 the William Test of Creative Propensity , includes a risk - taking subscale . At the end of the 20th century , the significance of investigating the link between risk ( - taking ) and creativity has been successively elevated by the achievement motivation theory ( Dewett , 2006 ; Zhou & George , 2001 ) and creativity’s investment theory ( Sternberg & Lubart , 1992 ; Sternberg , 2006 ) , both of which posit that taking sensible risks is a prerequisite for creativity . Although the theoretical significance of the relationship between creativity and risk - taking has been recognized , there have been only a few empirical studies examining it . Eisenman ( 1987 ) found positive correlations between risk - taking and three separate indicators of creativity , namely creative attitude , divergent thinking and creative preference for complexity , in a sample of middle - class men . Creativity and risk - taking were also found to be positively correlated in separate samples of advertising executives ( El - Murad & West , 2003 ) and employees working in research and development ( Dewett , 2006 , 2007 ) . A recent study of 120 undergraduate students ( Simmons & Ren , 2009 ) also documented a positive relationship between situational risk and creativity as measured by the in - basket task ( e . g . , Shalley , 1991 ) . A positive relationship in students has also been reported by Tyagi , Hanoch , Hall , Runco , and Denham ( 2017 ) , but only between high - level , biographical measures of creativity and social risk - taking , while neither divergent nor convergent thinking ( as assessed by the Alternate Uses Task [ AUT ] and the Remote Associates Task [ RAT ] , respectively ) correlated with any risk - taking measure . In summary , some aspects of creativity have been linked to some aspects of risk - taking in diverse samples ( varying from undergraduates to employees to middle - class men ) and using diverse methods of assessing creativity and risk - taking . With the exception of Tyagi et al . , the relevant studies ( e . g . , Eisenman , 1987 ; Dewett , 2007 ; Shen , Yuan , Liu , Yi , & Dou , 2016 ; Tyagi et al . , 2017 ) have focused on the association between RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 5 risk - taking and divergent thinking ( brainstorming - like creativity ) , while the relationship between risk - taking and convergent ( “deep” ) thinking has received almost no attention . Divergent thinking involves generating many possible solutions to an often vaguely defined problem or puzzle , whereas convergent thinking relies on speed , accuracy , logic and the capacity to quickly recognize the best , correct solution to a clearly defined problem ( Cropley , 2006 ; Lee & Therriault , 2013 ) . Importantly , a growing number of empirical studies consolidate previous ideas that convergent thinking is dissociable from divergent thinking . As new kinds of evidence for such distinctiveness , for example , Hommel and colleagues showed that divergent and convergent thinking are differently affected by mood induction ( Akbari Chermahini & Hommel , 2012 ) , individual dopamine levels ( Akbari Chermahini & Hommel , 2010 ) , physical exercise ( Colzato , Szapora , Panekoek , & Hommel , 2013 ) , and meditation ( Colzato , Szapora , Lippelt , & Hommel , 2017 ) . Specifically , they observed that divergent thinking both improves and is improved by mood , and has an inverted U - shape relationship with dopamine levels , whereas convergent thinking lowers mood and tends to be negatively correlated with dopamine levels . This implies that creativity is no homogeneous concept but relates to different , separable subprocesses that are likely to reflect the same mechanisms . The authors therefore agree with Tyagi et al . ( 2017 ) that the present inconsistency in findings on the relationship between risk - taking and creativity are likely to reflect the use of different tests and methods to assess the underlying concepts , but they do not share their optimism that a “holistic” approach that considers as many creativity measures as possible will make it easier to come to a conclusion . Many available measures have been developed for practical , rather than theoretical reasons ( leaving their relationships entirely undefined ) and for the purpose of personality assessment , rather than the identification of the RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 6 underlying cognitive mechanisms , which makes us skeptical about a multidimensional approach will lead to theoretically interpretable outcomes . The present study therefore focused on a single convergent - thinking task , the RAT . For one , because this task has been often used in studies on the cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying this aspect of creativity ( e . g . , Akbari Chermahini & Hommel , 2010 , 2012 ; Kounios et al . , 2006 ; Shen , Yuan , Liu , & Luo , 2016 ; Subramaniam , Kounios , Parrish , & Jung - Beeman , 2009 ) . For another , because of the observation that psychological safety improves creativity as assessed by the RAT ( Mikulincer , Shaver , & Rom , 2011 ) . Considering that psychological safety implies the opposite of risk , this research predicted that risk - taking would be negatively correlated with convergent thinking ( RAT performance ) . To test this hypothesis , Study 1 , a laboratory study with computerized cognitive measures of risk - taking and convergent thinking ( using a Chinese version of the RAT ) was devised . The findings were consistent with our hypothesis , suggesting that convergent thinking seems better in less risk - taking individuals . Given that these findings are inconsistent with the observations of Tyagi et al . ( 2017 ) , whose article appeared only after having run our first study , we tried to replicate and extend our findings in another , more heterogeneous sample in Study 2 , which also compared the risk - taking measure and creativity task that were used in Study 1 with another risk - taking measure and a divergent - thinking task , respectively . Study 1 Method Participants RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 7 A sample of 127 paid volunteers was recruited for this study . The sample consisted of healthy , right - handed undergraduates from two universities ( 87 men , 40 women ) aged between 19 and 28 years ( M = 20 . 96 , S . D . = 1 . 42 ) . All the participants are native Chinese and gave written , informed consent prior to participation , had no history of neurological disorder or psychiatric illness , had not been exposed to similar cognitive tasks and had normal or corrected - to - normal vision . Measures Risk - taking preference The risk - taking preference index ( RPI ; Hsee & Weber , 1997 , 1999 ) is a commonly used tool for measuring individuals’ preferred level of risk - taking which has good cross - national validity ( Hsee & Weber , 1999 ) . An RPI score is computed from responses to a set of 14 questions related to two types of situation and can range from 1 ( most risk - averse ) to 8 ( most risk - seeking ) . In the gain situations , if a participant choses the ‘sure’ option in all of the given seven questions , her / his RPI equals 1 ( most risk - aversive ) . If she / he choses the risky option in all seven questions , her / his RPI equals 8 ( most risk - seeking ) . According to Hsee and Weber ( 1999 ) , if the participant choses the risk option in Question 1 through Question i - 1 , and the “sure” option in Question I through Question 7 , her / his RPI is scored as i . The reverse marking scheme is used in the loss situations . Convergent thinking A Chinese Remote Associate Task ( RAT ) was utilized to assess convergent creativity . The task is a variant of the English - language RAT originally developed by Mednick ( 1968 ) . In the original RAT each item consists of three “clue” words that can be associated with a “solution” word to form a compound word or specify a semantic association ( Shen , Yuan , Yi , et al . , 2016 ) . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 8 Our Chinese version has been validated and has already been used in research with native Chinese participants ( e . g . , Wo , Chen , Liu , & Lin , 2010 ; Huang , 2017 ) . Like the original RAT , our version requires respondents to choose a fourth ( solution ) word or Chinese character - pair that can be associated with each triad . All items are constructed in such a way that only a solution is possible . For example , the solution to the triad “ Orbit ( 轨道 ) , Weather ( 气象 ) , Earth ( 地球 ) ” is “ Satellite ( 卫星 ) ” and the problem “ Candle ( 蜡烛 ) , Cigarette ( 香烟 ) , Girl ( 女孩 ) ” is “ Match ( 火 柴 ) ” . This study used 54 of the 97 RAT items ( 6 items were used in practice and 48 in experimental testing ) . The difficulty of this subset of RAT items ranged from 0 . 2 to 0 . 8 in a sample of 141 undergraduates . Procedure All participants completed the two cognitive tasks ( the RAT , used to measure convergent thinking , and the RPI , used to measure risk - taking preference ) individually , in a dimly lit room sitting approximately 70 cm away from the computer monitor . After completing the first task participants were allowed to take a brief break ( about 90 seconds ) during which they had to remain quietly at their desk . After this they completed the second task . The order of the two tasks was counterbalanced across participants . The participants were invited to individually complete the pencil - and - paper survey on the RPI . As in the RAT , all the items were presented using E - prime 2 . 0 software . The stimulus presentation process is illustrated in Fig . 1 . Each trial started with the participant fixating on a cross positioned in the center of the screen for 0 . 5 s to ensure that she or he would see the problem words , which were presented subsequently . The problem words were presented together , in their normal orientation , in a horizontal line across the screen . Participants were instructed to press the space bar as soon as they had thought out the solution and were given 10 s RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 9 to do so . When the participant pressed the space bar a white screen was displayed for 0 . 3 s , then the participant was required to enter her or his solution in the designated spot . Participants were instructed to not to enter anything at this point if they had not worked out a solution before the disappearance of the problem words . There are two ratings without any time limit , involving solution strategy ( insight vs . non - insight ) and difficulty level individually , before the ended white screen persisting for 1 s . [ INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE ] Results Descriptive statistics for convergent thinking and risk - taking are listed in Table 1 . Given the gender imbalance in the sample and previous reports that gender is associated with both risk - taking ( e . g . , Cárdenas , Dreber , Von Essen , & Ranehill , 2012 ) and creativity ( Abraham , Thybusch , Pieritz , & Hermann , 2014 ; Abraham , 2015 ; Shen , Yuan , Shi , & Liu , 2015 ) independent - sample t - tests were applied to assess whether gender was associated with any of the variables investigated . The association between gender and solution time just failed to reach significance , t ( 125 ) = 1 . 96 , p = 0 . 052 , Cohen’s d = 0 . 37 , and gender was not associated with any of the other dependent variables , all | t | s < 1 . 5 , all p s > 0 . 05 . Most importantly , Pearson correlation analysis revealed a significant negative correlation between risk - taking and RAT solution accuracy , r ( 127 ) = - 0 . 20 , p < 0 . 05 . [ INSERT TABLE 1 HERE ] To determine the nature of the relationship between risk - taking and RAT solution accuracy , this study calculated curve ( including logarithmic model and quadratic model ) and linear regressions . As illustrated in Figure 2 , the results showed the quadratic model is inappropriate ( p > 0 . 05 ) and the effects of gender and age are insignificant across three regression models . The logarithmetic and linear model are both significant , but the linear regression model ( R 2 = 4 % ) is RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 10 relatively better than the logarithmic regression model ( β = - 0 . 18 , SE = 0 . 04 , t 125 = - 2 . 07 , p < 0 . 05 , R 2 = 3 % ) in accounting variance . Accordingly , only the linear model was accepted , as Table 2 illustrated , which implies there is linearly negative association between risk - taking and convergent thinking performance and the low - risk takers behave better performance in convergent thinking than the high - risk takers . [ INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE ] Discussion Consistent with the prediction of an inverse relationship between risk - taking and convergent thinking , our study revealed that participants’ risk - taking level is negatively correlated with the RAT performance . Although this result is contradictory with popular belief mentioned in some self - help books that argue for the facilitating effect of risk - taking on creative performance , the present finding is supported by some studies on convergent thinking ( e . g . , Mikulincer et al . , 2011 ) . And yet , it is also important to point out that our finding is inconsistent with the results of Tyagi and colleagues ( 2017 ) , which were published after our Study 1 was completed . They found no relationship between performance in the RAT or in the AUT , a measure of divergent thinking , with any of their indicators of risk - taking . Before considering some possible explanations for this discrepancy , the researchers wanted to confirm that our finding is sufficiently robust and replicable . The authors therefore replicated the design of Study 1 in an online setting ( Study 2 ) , which permitted us to test participants with various kinds of Chinese culture backgrounds . Study 2 also extended the design by adding a second measure of risk - taking , based on self - report , and a divergent - thinking task—the AUT that was also used by Tyagi et al . It is expected that risk - taking would again be negatively correlated with convergent thinking . [ INSERT TABLE 2 HERE ] RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 11 Study 2 Method Participants The sample comprised 198 Chinese people ( 51 males ) from 11 provinces / regions of China . All participants were recruited through campus advertisements , forum posters , telephone messages , or emails . A total of 44 respondents was excluded due to incomplete responses in one or more of the three measures ( two creativity measures and the RPI measure ) , or because of suspiciously short ( < 650s ) or long ( > 9000s ) overall response time , or due to indications of random response patterns ( e . g . , more than 10 or 15 response repetitions ) . The final sample included 154 healthy and well - educated volunteers ( 40 men ) from eight provinces / regions of China , aged between 15 and 47 years ( M = 21 . 24 , S . D . = 4 . 05 ) . All participants provided informed consent prior to participation , had no ( self - reported ) history of neurological disorder or psychiatric illness , and had not yet been exposed to similar cognitive tasks . Measures Risk - taking preference In addition to the risk - taking measure used in Study 1 , this study also adopted another self - reported risk - taking measure in which the participants were asked to directly score their own adventurousness on the scale ranging from 0 to 100 . Convergent thinking This measure was same as that in Study 1 . However , the 48 RAT items were represented on a web page listing all items rather than item - by - item . Divergent thinking RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 12 The Alternate Uses Task ( AUT ) was adopted to assess individuals’ divergent thinking and creative potential ( Runco & Acar , 2012 ) . Participants were asked to generate as many different uses as possible for four common objects , namely “leather shoes” , “shoebox” , “candle” , and “iron nail” . The participants’ responses were initially screened to exclude irrelevant responses and were then independently rated by three trained postgraduate students on three of the four ① standard AUT dimensions , namely fluency ( the total sum of intelligible responses ) , flexibility ( the number of categories in which these responses fell ) , and originality ( 2 points for responses with a total frequency of less than 5 % in the sample ; 1 point for a frequency of 5 - 10 % ) . Tutorials were given to raters for the AUT together with the definition of each indicator to score . In line with Amabile’s ( 1982 ) Consensual Assessment Technique ( CAT ) , raters used their own definitions of creativity . The inter - rater reliability was 1 for fluency ; 0 . 95 - 0 . 98 for flexibility ; and 0 . 79 - 0 . 83 for originality . Procedure This study was conducted online and data were collected via the web - based questionnaires hosted by wenjuanxing ( www . sojump . com ) , a Chinese professional survey platform similar to SurveyMonkey . The participants were invited to individually provide the demographic information , and work through the risk - taking questions and the creativity tests . The order of the four measures was fixed : demographic information , divergent thinking task , risk - taking measure , and convergent thinking task . All the tasks were presented in an online survey web service without any time restriction , but the participants were encouraged to complete each divergent thinking item within the maximum 3 minutes ② . To ensure the validity and reliability of the ① The elaboration score is not enough meaningful due to only a few elaborated responses provided by participants . ② The responding time was controlled by the participants through their own timing tools ( e . g . , timing software in their computers / telephones or alarm clocks / watches ) . To ensure participants followed the rules and completed each divergent thinking item within the time interval , they were informed that the responding time for each item was automatically monitored by the web service platform and their time - keeping performance would be rewarded . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 13 results , three forward and backward self - paced turning pages ( individually to present the measures on demographic information and divergent thinking , risk - taking , and convergent thinking ) were designed . The participants were compensated by a raffle ticket of 10 Yuan or course credit after completing their test . Results Independent t - tests did not yield any differences between females and males on the creativity and risk - taking measures . The Pearson correlation analyses revealed a significant correlation between RAT accuracy and both the risk preference as assessed by RPI ( r = - 0 . 163 , p < 0 . 05 ) and the self - reported adventurousness score ( r = - 0 . 204 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Even though the measures of convergent thinking and of divergent thinking were correlated ( Table 3 ) , there was no significant correlation between the two risk - taking scores and any of the three indicators of divergent thinking ( i . e . , flexibility , originality , and fluency ) . Given the subjective risky level and the RPI are only two different indicators of risk - taking , rather than two different observed variables . Accordingly , they are employed two independent regression model , not as two predictors into one regression model ③ . As exhibited in Table 2 , the linear regression analysis results showed that the RPI ( R 2 = 3 % ) and subjective risky level ( R 2 = 4 % ) reliable predicted the RAT solution accuracy , respectively . [ INSERT TABLE 3 HERE ] General Discussion The results from this online study demonstrate a significant negative association between risk - taking and convergent thinking as assessed by RAT , corroborating our finding from Study 1 . ③ The curve ( including the logarithmic model and quadratic model ) regression of these two risk - taking measures on the Chinese RAT solution accuracy and on three indicators of divergent thinking were also calculated , but none of them reached the level of statistical significance ( p > 0 . 05 ) , except the significant quadratic model of the RPI ( only for the square of the RPI on the average originality score ; β = - 0 . 66 , SE = 0 . 003 , t 151 = - 2 . 27 , p < 0 . 05 ) . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 14 Importantly , the link between the two constructs was further supported by additional results showing a negative correlation between RAT accuracy and the level of self - reported adventurousness . It is interesting to note that the two risk - taking measures did not correlate and yet both measures were correlated with convergent thinking . This implies that our two measures picked up different aspects of risk - taking , which nevertheless share the negative association with convergent thinking . Hence , the underlying association seems to be rather robust , and as in Study 1 , it seems to be rather linear . The findings for convergent thinking were again inconsistent with previous observations of Tyagi et al . ( 2017 ) , who found no relationship . Several factors may be responsible for this inconsistency . First , Tyagi and colleagues have used a different measure of risk - taking . While this might have been responsible for the different outcomes , the fact that the authors found the same negative correlation for both of our measures of risk - taking renders this possibility not particularly likely . Second , Tyagi and colleagues have pointed out that their version of the RAT turned out to be rather difficult , presumably too difficult for many participants , which must have rendered the test undiagnostic . In comparison , our findings do not suggest any particular measurement problem , such as a floor or ceiling effect , which the current study thinks renders our findings more trustworthy with respect to the convergent thinking measure . Third , and perhaps most interestingly , various authors have considered the possibility that sample characteristics might play an important role ( e . g . , Fleming & Weintrauh , 1962 ; Dewett , 2004 , 2007 ) . Indeed , given that Chinese culture defines and values creativity differently from Western culture ( Shen , et al . , in press ; Niu , & Kaufman , 2013 ; Lan & Kaufman , 2012 ) , the discrepancy to the findings of Tyagi et al . ( 2017 ) may also indicate an interesting cultural difference that calls for further investigations . In this context , it may be important to note that our Study 2 revealed RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 15 significant positive correlations between convergent and divergent measures . In previous studies of one of us carried out in the Netherlands , these correlations were close to zero and , if anything , negative ( e . g . , Akbari Chermahini & Hommel , 2010 ) . The fact that these correlations were far from zero and positive in the present study , which used a Chinese sample , might be related to the dominant role in widespread use of dialectical thinking in Chinese thought ( Shen et al . , in press ) . This tradition considers two things with opposite characteristics as an integrated continuum so that two contradictory things should not necessarily be treated as two independent things , but as two sides of the same ( integrated ) thing . While this is an interesting possibility ④ , the researchers admit that it remains speculative and is not exclusive . For example , consistent with the present result , Wu , Chang and Chen ( 2017 ) reported a similar positive correlation between convergent thinking and divergent thinking , which , however , is ascribed to the common involvement of associative process in these two types of creative thinking ( Lee & Therriault 2013 ; Shen , Yuan , Liu , & Luo , in press ) . Accordingly , future studies should conduct cross - culture design to further investigate these interesting speculations . Even though convergent and divergent thinking scores were correlated in the present study , convergent thinking in a tighter , more reliable link to risk - taking than divergent thinking had . This tighter link makes functional sense : divergent thinking requires an individual to explore several cognitive paths , which sometimes may involve taking some risks in order to generate multiple solutions to a puzzle or problem . Convergent thinking , in contrast , involves focusing on finding the single correct solution , which is less likely to require risk - taking . Our findings ④ As the reviewers and handling editors stressed , there may be an alternative explanation for the found correlation between convergent thinking and divergent thinking that the requested time limitation might inhibit the participants’ divergent thinking performance , particularly inhibit their originality . This is because the participants in the time - limited context would think they are being tested , rather than playing with the divergent thinking tasks . In fact , after reviewing previous studies , we found nearly all researchers required their participants to complete divergent thinking task within a limited time interval and considerable studies requested the participants to complete each of the - like items within 3 minutes ( Silvia et al . , 2008 ; Fink , Graif , & Neubauer , 2009 ) or shorter time interval ( e . g . , Forthmann , Holling , Çelik , Storme , & Lubart , 2017 ) . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 16 suggest that convergent thinking may benefit from risk - avoidance , which fits with the observation that being conservative or taking less risk can promote convergent problem - solving ( Bassett - Jones , 2005 ) . Considering the positive relationship between risk - taking and impulsivity ( disinhibition ) , our findings also fit with the observation that performance on cognitive inhibition tasks was positively correlated with RAT performance ( Koppel & Storm , 2014 ) . Taken altogether , our findings have a number of interesting implications for future studies . First , it should note that the true nature of risk - taking remains unclear , which calls for further investigation . Our results do not provide information for determining the specific nature of risk ( - taking ) in creativity because risk ( - taking ) can be situational ( e . g . , willingness to take risks ; see Dewett , 2006 ) or cross - situational in nature , or can operate as ( intrinsic ) motivation or as propensity ( e . g . , Simmons & Ren , 2009 ) . Future studies should therefore continue to investigate the complex relationship between risk - taking and creativity . Second , the relationship between creativity and risk - taking is likely to be linear but not follow an ( inverted ) U - shaped relationship , which has implications for attempts to foster creativity in educational or organizational settings . Finally , the negativity of the correlation between risk - taking and convergent thinking suggests that risk - taking should not be considered integral to creativity as a whole , which stands in stark contrast to often - found recommendations in self - help books on creativity training . Nevertheless , our results do imply that psychological safety plays an important role in nurturing creativity and convergent thinking in particular . References Abraham , A . ( 2015 ) . Gender and creativity : An overview of psychological and neuroscientific literature . Brain Imaging and Behavior , 1 - 10 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 17 Abraham , A . , Thybusch , K . , Pieritz , K . , & Hermann , C . ( 2014 ) . Gender differences in creative thinking : Behavioral and fMRI findings . Brain Imaging and Behavior , 8 ( 1 ) , 39 - 51 . Akbari Chermahini , S . A . , Hickendorff , M . , & Hommel , B . ( 2012 ) . Development and validity of a Dutch version of the Remote Associates Task : An item - response theory approach . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 7 ( 3 ) , 177 - 186 . Akbari Chermahini , S . A . , & Hommel , B . ( 2010 ) . The ( b ) link between creativity and dopamine : spontaneous eye blink rates predict and dissociate divergent and convergent thinking . Cognition , 115 ( 3 ) , 458 - 465 . Akbari Chermahini , S . , & Hommel , B . ( 2012 ) . More creative through positive mood ? Not everyone ! Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 6 : 319 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1982 ) . Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment technique . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 43 , 997 - 1013 . Baas , M . , Koch , S . , Nijstad , B . A . , & De Dreu , C . K . ( 2015 ) . Conceiving creativity : The nature and consequences of laypeople’s beliefs about the realization of creativity . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 9 ( 3 ) , 340 - 354 . Bassett - Jones , N . ( 2005 ) . The paradox of diversity management , creativity and innovation . Creativity and Innovation Management , 14 ( 2 ) , 169 - 175 . Beck , U . ( 2002 ) . The terrorist threat : World risk society revisited . Theory , Culture & Society , 19 ( 4 ) , 39 - 55 . Cárdenas , J . C . , Dreber , A . , Von Essen , E . , & Ranehill , E . ( 2012 ) . Gender differences in competitiveness and risk taking : Comparing children in Colombia and Sweden . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 83 ( 1 ) , 11 - 23 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 18 Colzato , L . S . , Szapora , A . , Lippelt , D . , & Hommel , B . ( 2017 ) . Prior meditation practice modulates performance and strategy use in convergent - and divergent - thinking problems . Mindfulness , 8 , 10 - 18 . Colzato , L . S . , Szapora , A . , Pannekoek , J . N . , & Hommel , B . ( 2013 ) . The impact of physical exercise on convergent and divergent thinking . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7 , 824 . Cropley , A . ( 2006 ) . In praise of convergent thinking . Creativity research journal , 18 ( 3 ) , 391 - 404 . Dewett , T . ( 2004 ) . Employee creativity and the role of risk . European Journal of Innovation Management , 7 ( 4 ) , 257 - 266 . Dewett , T . ( 2006 ) . Exploring the role of risk in employee creativity . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 40 ( 1 ) , 27 - 45 . Dewett , T . ( 2007 ) . Linking intrinsic motivation , risk taking , and employee creativity in an R & D environment . R & D Management , 37 ( 3 ) , 197 - 208 . Eisenman , R . ( 1987 ) . Creativity , birth order , and risk taking . Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 25 ( 2 ) , 87 - 88 . El - Murad , J . , & West , D . C . ( 2003 ) . Risk and creativity in advertising . Journal of Marketing Management , 19 ( 5 - 6 ) , 657 - 673 . Feist , G . J . ( 1998 ) . A meta - analysis of personality in scientific and artistic creativity . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 2 ( 4 ) , 290 - 309 . Fink , A . , Graif , B . , & Neubauer , A . C . ( 2009 ) . Brain correlates underlying creative thinking : EEG alpha activity in professional vs . novice dancers . NeuroImage , 46 ( 3 ) , 854 - 862 . Fleming , E . S . , & Weintraub , S . ( 1962 ) . Attitudinal rigidity as a measure of creativity in gifted children . Journal of Educational Psychology , 53 ( 2 ) , 81 - 85 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 19 Forthmann , B . , Holling , H . , Çelik , P . , Storme , M . , & Lubart , T . ( 2017 ) . Typing speed as a confounding variable and the measurement of quality in divergent thinking . Creativity Research Journal , 29 ( 3 ) , 257 - 269 . Hsee , C . K . , & Weber , E . U . ( 1997 ) . A fundamental prediction error : Self – others discrepancies in risk preference . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 126 ( 1 ) , 45 - 53 . Hsee , C . K . , & Weber , E . U . ( 1999 ) . Cross - national differences in risk preference and lay predictions . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 12 , 165 - 179 . Huang , P . S . ( 2017 ) . An exploratory study on remote associates problem solving : Evidence of eye movement indicators . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 24 , 63 - 72 . Koppel , R . H . , & Storm , B . C . ( 2014 ) . Escaping mental fixation : Incubation and inhibition in creative problem solving . Memory , 22 ( 4 ) , 340 - 348 . Kounios , J . , Frymiare , J . L . , Bowden , E . M . , Fleck , J . I . , Subramaniam , K . , Parrish , T . B . , & Jung - Beeman , M . ( 2006 ) . The prepared mind : Neural activity prior to problem presentation predicts subsequent solution by sudden insight . Psychological Science , 17 , 882 - 890 . Lan , L . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2012 ) . American and Chinese similarities and differences in defining and valuing creative products . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 46 ( 4 ) , 285 - 306 . Lee , C . S . , & Therriault , D . J . ( 2013 ) . The cognitive underpinnings of creative thought : A latent variable analysis exploring the roles of intelligence and working memory in three creative thinking processes . Intelligence , 41 ( 5 ) , 306 - 320 . Mednick , S . A . ( 1968 ) . The remote associates test . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 2 ( 3 ) , 213 - 214 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 20 Merrifield , P . R . , Guilford , J . P . , Christensen , P . R . , & Frick , J . W . ( 1961 ) . Interrelationships between certain abilities and certain traits of motivation and temperament . The Journal of General Psychology , 65 ( 1 ) , 57 - 74 . Mikulincer , M . , Shaver , P . R . , & Rom , E . ( 2011 ) . The effects of implicit and explicit security priming on creative problem solving . Cognition and Emotion , 25 ( 3 ) , 519 - 531 . Niu , W . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2013 ) . Creativity of Chinese and American cultures : A synthetic analysis . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 47 ( 1 ) , 77 - 87 . Platt , M . L . , & Huettel , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Risky business : the neuroeconomics of decision making under uncertainty . Nature Neuroscience , 11 ( 4 ) , 398 - 403 . Runco , M . A . , & Acar , S . ( 2012 ) . Divergent thinking as an indicator of creative potential . Creativity Research Journal , 24 ( 1 ) , 66 - 75 . Shalley , C . E . ( 1991 ) . Effects of productivity goals , creativity goals , and personal discretion on individual creativity . Journal of Applied psychology , 76 ( 2 ) , 179 - 185 . Shen , W . B . , Yuan , Y . , Liu , C . , & Luo , J . ( 2016 ) . In search of the ‘Aha ! ’experience : Elucidating the emotionality of insight problem - solving . British Journal of Psychology , 107 , 281 - 298 . Shen , W . B . , Yuan , Y . , Liu , C . , & Luo , J . ( in press ) . The roles of the temporal lobe in creative insight : An integrated review . Thinking and Reasoning . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2017 . 1308885 . Shen , W . B . , Liu , Yuan , Y . , & Shi , C . H . ( 2015 ) . Gender differences in creative thinking . Advances in Psychological Science , 23 ( 8 ) , 1380 - 1389 . Shen , W . B . , Yuan , Y . , Liu , C . , Yi , B . S . , & Dou , K . ( 2016 ) . The development and validity of a Chinese Version of the Compound Remote Associate Test . American Journal of Psychology , 129 ( 3 ) , 245 - 258 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 21 Shen , W . B . , Yuan , Y . , Zhao , Y . , Zhang , X . J . , Liu , C . , . . . & Fan , L . L . ( in press ) . Defining insight : A study examining implicit theories of insight experience . Psychology of Aesthetics Creativity and the Arts . Doi : 10 . 1037 / aca0000138 . Simmons , A . L . , & Ren , R . ( 2009 ) . The influence of goal orientation and risk on creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 21 ( 4 ) , 400 - 408 . Silvia , P . J . , Winterstein , B . P . , Willse , J . T . , Barona , C . M . , Cram , J . T . , Hess , K . I . , . . . & Richard , C . A . ( 2008 ) . Assessing creativity with divergent thinking tasks : Exploring the reliability and validity of new subjective scoring methods . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 2 ( 2 ) , 68 - 85 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 2006 ) . The nature of creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 18 ( 1 ) , 87 - 98 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1992 ) . Buy low and sell high : An investment approach to creativity . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 1 ( 1 ) , 1 - 5 . Subramaniam , K . , Kounios , J . , Parrish , T . B . , & Jung - Beeman , M . ( 2009 ) . A brain mechanism for facilitation of insight by positive affect . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 21 , 415 - 432 . Tyagi , V . , Hanoch , Y . , Hall , S . D . , Runco , M . , & Denham , S . L . ( 2017 ) . The risky side of creativity : domain specific risk taking in creative individuals . Frontiers in Psychology , 8 . Williams , F . E . ( 1980 ) . Creativity Assessment Packet : ( CAP ) . DOK Publishers . Wo , J . Z . , Chen , W . R . , Liu , Y . , & Lin , C . D . ( 2010 ) . The eye movement differences during category learning process between high and low creativity students . Acta Psychologica Sinica , 42 ( 5 ) , 251 - 261 . Wu , C . L . , Chang , Y . L . , & Chen , H . C . ( 2017 ) . Enhancing the measurement of remote associative ability : A new approach to designing the Chinese Remote Associates Test . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 24 , 29 - 38 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 22 Zhou , J . , & George , J . M . ( 2001 ) . When job dissatisfaction leads to creativity : Encouraging the expression of voice . Academy of Management Journal , 44 ( 4 ) , 682 - 696 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 23 Captions Figure 1 Schematic diagram of the trial procedure for the Chinese RAT Figure 2 Performance in the convergent creativity task as a function of RPI score Table 1 Descriptive result on RPI and RAT performance ⑤ Table 2 Linear regression analyses results on various measures of creativity and risk - taking Table 3 the correlations among different measures of creativity and risk preference ⑤ Mean is listed in the Table 1 and Standard Deviation is placed in the parenthesis . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 24 Figure 1 RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 25 Figure 2 RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 26 Table 1 variable solution accuracy ( % ) RPI Male 46 . 58 ( 11 . 85 ) 8 . 15 ( 2 . 00 ) Female 48 . 85 ( 11 . 98 ) 8 . 65 ( 1 . 98 ) Total 47 . 29 ( 11 . 89 ) 8 . 31 ( 2 . 00 ) RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 27 Table 2 study predictors B β SE t Study1 RPI - 0 . 012 - 0 . 195 0 . 005 - 2 . 22 * Study 2 RPI RAT - 0 . 009 - 0 . 163 0 . 004 - 2 . 04 * subjective risky level RAT - 0 . 002 - 0 . 204 0 . 001 - 2 . 57 * Notes : * indicates p < 0 . 05 . RISK - TAING AND CREATIVITY 28 Table 3 Measures Subjective risk level RPI RAT accuracy Fluency Flexibility RPI . 031 RAT accuracy - . 204 * - . 163 * Fluency - . 117 - . 095 . 375 * * Flexibility - . 117 - . 083 . 378 * * . 981 * * Originality - . 114 - . 069 . 356 * * . 801 * * . 836 * * Notes : * indicates p < 0 . 05 , * * indicates p < 0 . 01 , * * * indicates p < 0 . 001 .