PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) Actin growth proﬁle in clathrin - mediated endocytosis D . J . Tweten , 1 P . V . Bayly , 1 and A . E . Carlsson 2 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering , Washington University , St . Louis , Missouri 63130 , USA 2 Department of Physics , Washington University , St . Louis , Missouri 63130 , USA ( Received 8 February 2017 ; revised manuscript received 1 May 2017 ; published 23 May 2017 ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in yeast is driven by a protein patch containing close to 100 different types of proteins . Among the proteins are 5000 – 10000 copies of polymerized actin , and successful endocytosis requires growth of the actin network . Since it is not known exactly how actin network growth drives endocytosis , we calculate the spatial distribution of actin growth required to generate the force that drives the process . First , we establish the force distribution that must be supplied by actin growth , by combining membrane - bending proﬁles obtained via electron microscopy with established theories of membrane mechanics . Next , we determine the proﬁle of actin growth , using a continuum mechanics approach and an iterative procedure starting with an actin growth proﬁle obtained from a linear analysis . The proﬁle has fairly constant growth outside a central hole of radius 45 – 50 nm , but very little growth in this hole . This growth proﬁle can reproduce the required forces if the actin shear modulus exceeds 80 kPa , and the growing ﬁlaments can exert very large polymerization forces . The growth proﬁle prediction could be tested via electron - microscopy or super - resolution experiments in which the turgor pressure is suddenly turned off . DOI : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 95 . 052414 I . INTRODUCTION Endocytosis is a key cellular process by which cells ingest nutrients from outside the cell and recycle membrane components [ 1 ] . The process occurs on a submicron length scale , smaller than that of other ingestion processes such as pinocytosis and phagocytosis . During endocytosis , the cell membrane ﬁrst forms a shallow dimple . The dimple becomes a tubule , and the tubule is pinched off to form a vesicle that travels into the cytoplasm . Yeast has been a preferred model system for studying this process because of the ease of genetic manipulation and ﬂuorescent labeling . Major driving forces for endocytosis in yeast include curvature - generating proteins and actin polymerization at the cell membrane [ 2 ] , which causes the actin network to grow . The clathrin - mediated variant of endocytosis ( CME ) has been studied extensively in yeast . The classic curvature - generating protein in CME is clathrin , which spontaneously forms cages and appears early in the process . Other established and putative curvature - generating proteins include Bzz1 and Ede1 , which arrive early , and Rvs161 / 167 , which arrives later . However , polymerization of actin is often required for successful endocytosis both in yeast and mammalian cells . In mammalian cells with membrane tension increased by hypoosmotic treatment , suppression of actin polymerization reduces the rate of endocytosis [ 3 ] . In yeast , actin polymer - ization is required for endocytosis under normal conditions [ 4 , 5 ] . This requirement is lessened under conditions of reduced turgor pressure [ 6 , 7 ] and conversely becomes more stringent when turgor pressure is increased [ 7 ] . Finally , correlative light - and electron - microscopy measurements indicate that membrane bending is always preceded by actin polymerization [ 8 ] , although this ﬁnding has been disputed by electron - microscopy studies using other methods [ 9 ] . Several modeling studies [ 10 – 12 ] have explored endocytic dynamics driven by assumed distributions of actin forces . However , the mechanism by which actin network growth exerts pulling forces to drive invagination is not deﬁnitively established . Mechanisms based on ﬁlaments growing inwards in the plane of the membrane [ 13 ] , and growing perpendicular to the membrane [ 14 – 16 ] , have been proposed . We have previ - ously compared these models [ 16 ] , and found that particularly in the early stages of invagination , the inward - growth scenario would involve an extremely large force per ﬁlament tip . Therefore , we focused on the perpendicular - growth scenario , in which polymerization of ﬁlament tips at the membrane pushes the actin ﬁlament network away from the membrane into the cytoplasm . The inward - moving network is in turn attached to adapter proteins such as Sla2 [ 17 – 19 ] at the center of the endocytic protein patch , which are dragged into the cytoplasm and pull the membrane along . We found that a ring - shaped distribution of actin growth can lead to focused pulling forces over a small region of the membrane , having a distribution qualitatively correct for endocytosis . Here , we build on this work by asking more precisely what spatial distribution of actin growth , in conjunction with contri - butions from curvature - generating proteins , would reproduce the force distribution required to overcome opposing forces from membrane bending and turgor pressure in the early stages of endocytosis . We calculate the distribution of actin growth in several steps . ( i ) Evaluate the force densities from turgor pressure and membrane bending from measured membrane proﬁles using the “Helfrich” continuum theory [ 20 ] of membrane elasticity , evaluate the force density from curvature - generating proteins by treating them as a “fuzzy” disk on the membrane , and evaluate the force density from the cell wall using a continuum mechanics approach . We use a single , averaged membrane proﬁle because we treat the actin growth distribution in the early stage of endocytosis , just after the membrane leaves the cell wall , rather than trying to calculate the dynamics of the actin network during the entire process . ( ii ) Evaluate the required actin growth force density using the constraint of force balance at all points on the membrane , extending previous calculations of the total actin force [ 6 , 11 ] . ( iii ) Use simulations of a continuum mechanics model of a growing hemispherical actin network , along with an initial distribution of actin growth coupled with an iterative correction 2470 - 0045 / 2017 / 95 ( 5 ) / 052414 ( 17 ) 052414 - 1 ©2017 American Physical Society D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) method , to ﬁnd a distribution of actin growth that yields the required forces . We begin with a trial distribution based on linear elasticity theory . We ﬁnd that actin growth occurs in a ring - shaped region , with a hole of diameter 45 – 50 nm around the endocytic site , and the growth rate is fairly constant inside this region . The hole diameter is larger than we assumed in our previous simulations [ 16 ] , but otherwise the shape is similar . This proﬁle can generate the required forces if the actin network is very stiff ( shear modulus 80 kPa or greater ) , and the growing ﬁlaments have a larger stall force than is generally assumed . II . MODEL In this section , we present models for the forces generated by the actin network and curvature - generating proteins ( CGP ) , the forces due to the membrane deformation , and the forces acting between the cell wall and the membrane . We focus on the initial stage of endocytosis , when the membrane ﬁrst separates from the cell wall . The main elements of the model shown in Fig . 1 ( a ) are the actin network , membrane , CGP ( not shown but taken to reside at the membrane ) , and cell wall . The scenario leading to pulling forces in this model is as follows . Polymerization occurs in a ring - shaped region near the membrane - actin boundary . The actin network thus pushes up against the membrane , and by Newton’s third law the membrane pushes down on the actin network in the ring region . This force is transferred to the central region of the actin network , which moves down , pulling the membrane with it . ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 1 . Axisymmetricdiagramofthemodel . ( a ) Themembraneis separatedfromthecellwallintheinitialstage , inwhichthemembrane forms a shallow dimple . The hatched sections of the cell wall and membrane are not included in the model but are shown for clarity . ( b ) Free - body diagram of the cell wall , membrane , and actin network . P 0 is the turgor pressure ; f W is the reaction force density of the cell wall ; and f A is the force density applied by ( and on ) the actin network . The cell wall force f W is balanced by a shear force F W - BC and bending moment M W - BC at the boundary . The forces f M and f CGP are omitted for clarity . The free - body diagram in Fig . 1 ( b ) highlights the forces involved in the process . We assume local force balance on each point of the membrane . The force densities f A generated by the actin and the CGP ( f CGP ) must overcome the turgor pressure P 0 , the membrane - bending force density f M , and the reaction force f W from the wall to the membrane being pushed into it by the turgor pressure . The deformation is slow , usually developing a tubule on the order of seconds [ 8 ] . Therefore , we assume that the force due to the actin growth is quasistatic in the sense that the membrane deformation equilibrates instantaneously after an increment of growth . The local force - balance equation then becomes f A + f M + f CGP + f W + P 0 = 0 . ( 1 ) The forces in Eq . ( 1 ) act on the membrane and are taken to be along the z direction since we consider only the initial stage of bending where the membrane is nearly ﬂat . We thus ignore radial force components . The positive force direction is taken to be pushing into the cell wall ( up in Fig . 1 ) . The model includes no external forces except for those acting on the cell wall . The local force balance allows us to calculate f A from the other force densities , as described in detail below . We obtain f M and f CGP from experimentally measured membrane displacements using a theoretical analysis based on the bending rigidity of the membrane and CGP layer , and the spontaneous curvature of the CGP layer . We obtain f W using a simulation in which the deformed membrane is embedded into the cell wall , described by an elastic model . Finally , the turgor pressure is taken to supply a uniform force density P 0 . There are also several integrated force - balance relations that simplify the calculation of the forces . The actin network moves very slowly , and is in the limit of low Reynolds number . The net force on the network from the membrane , which equals the drag force , may thus be obtained by the Stokes relation as f drag = 6 πηRv = 0 . 3 × 10 − 3 pN , where the viscosity η = 8 . 9 × 10 − 3 N s / m 2 is taken as ten times the viscosity of water , R = 100 nm is the radius of the actin network , and v = 20 nm / sec [ 21 ] is the velocity of the motion into the cell . Since f drag is so small , we take the actin force to vanish when integrated over the surface of the actin network . The total force due to membrane bending vanishes because it is an internal force . The membrane is the only agent acting on the CGP , and the total force on the CGP must vanish . Therefore , by Newton’s third law , the total force from the CGP onto the membrane must also vanish . Finally , the total force from the cell wall onto the membrane must be balanced by the force from the turgor pressure . This holds because the total actin force and the total CGP force onto the membrane are zero , and the total force on the membrane must be zero . A . Membrane Here , we describe our model for estimating membrane - bending forces and our method for estimating the membrane proﬁle from experimental data . In calculating the membrane forces , we treat the membrane as an inﬁnitely thin sheet described by a tension and a bending modulus , in the spirit of the “Helfrich” model [ 22 ] . Below , in Sec . II C , we model the membrane as an elastic material with a ﬁnite thickness in order to calculate interaction forces with the cell wall . However , this 052414 - 2 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) model is not used to calculate forces resulting from bending or stretching of the membrane . 1 . Membrane - bending force As in Refs . [ 10 , 11 ] , we use a Helfrich - type model to calculate the force density f M due to membrane bending . We use the axisymmetric implementation of Ref . [ 12 ] , which treats local variations in parameters such as the concentration of CGP . The z - direction force is given by f M ( r ) ≈ n · f = 1 2 r ∂ ∂s (cid:2) r ∂ ∂s (cid:3) ∂W ∂H (cid:4)(cid:5) + ∂W ∂H 2 H 2 − 2 H ( W + σ ) , ( 2 ) where n = − sin ( ψ ) e r + cos ( ψ ) k is a vector normal to the membrane surface , ψ is the angle of the normal away from the z direction , e r is a unit vector in the radial direction , k is a unit vector in the z direction , and s is the arc length coordinate in the radial direction . The mean curvature is deﬁned as H ( s ) = 1 2 (cid:3) sin ψ r + ∂ψ ∂s (cid:4) . ( 3 ) The strain energy density function for the membrane is given by W ( s ) = κ B ( s ) [ H ( s ) − H 0 ] 2 , ( 4 ) where κ B is the membrane - bending modulus . H 0 is the preferred curvature , which vanishes for the bare membrane . Note that we have left out the Gaussian curvature contri - bution to the forces because it does not contribute here : for the membrane , the spatial variation of the Gaussian bending modulus is probably very weak . Therefore , the Gaussian curvature energy [ 23 ] is proportional to the integral I = (cid:6) S C 1 C 2 dA , ( 5 ) where the surface S is a portion of the membrane large enough that the endocytic forces cause no deformation at its boundary ∂S , while C 1 and C 2 are the principal curvatures of the membrane . The Gauss - Bonnet theorem [ 24 ] states that I = 2 πχ ( S ) − (cid:6) ∂S k g ds , ( 6 ) where χ is the Euler characteristic of S ( determined by its topology ) and k g is the geodesic curvature of ∂S . Then I , and thus the Gaussian curvature energy , are independent of deformations at the endocytic site because they do not change the topology of S nor the geodesic curvature at its boundary . Thus , the Gaussian curvature causes no forces in the endocytic region . Bending of the cell membrane can in principle change the tension σ [ 25 ] . We have ignored this effect because the result - ing forces are very small in comparison to the other forces . For a 50 nm × 50 nm patch of curvature - generating proteins , simi - lar to the size treated here , Ref . [ 25 ] obtained tension changes less than 10 − 3 pN / nm . For the early stages of indentation that we consider , the force density is approximately σ ∇ 2 w [ 26 ] , where w is the membrane displacement . For a 10 - nm indenta - tion of radius 30 nm , ∇ 2 w (cid:4) 10 nm / ( 30 nm ) 2 = 0 . 01 nm − 1 . ( a ) ( c ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 10 5 0 5 r [ nm ] w [ n m ] Mean Fitted 100 50 0 50 100 20 0 20 w [ n m ] ( b ) r [ nm ] FIG . 2 . ( a ) Electron microscopy ( EM ) images of endocytic proﬁles . The left proﬁle shows the initial stage of endocytosis , in which the membrane forms a shallow dimple . Scale bars indicate 100 nm . Reprinted with permission from Kukulski et al . [ 8 ] . ( b ) Selected membrane proﬁles from the EM experiments [ 8 ] . Vertical displacement of membrane is w . ( c ) Mean membrane proﬁle of the initial stage of endocytosis ( solid line ) and Gaussian ﬁt ( dashed line ) . The corresponding force density , for σ = 10 − 3 pN / nm , is 10 − 5 pN / nm 2 = 10 Pa . This is four orders of magnitude smaller than the net force density from the other contributions , calculated below . Therefore , it is legitimate to ignore the coupling between bending and tension . 2 . Extracting membrane proﬁles from experimental data Kukulski et al . [ 8 ] measured the membrane displacement at a number of stages of endocytosis in S . cerevisiae cells . Electron microscopy ( EM ) images from an early stage of endocytosis in which the membrane resembles a dimple are shown in Fig . 2 ( a ) . Membrane proﬁles were also estimated by ﬁtting points from the EM with a second - degree polynomial . We selected membrane proﬁles from Ref . [ 8 ] to estimate a mean membrane proﬁle during the initial stage of endocytosis . Selected proﬁles were required to have both small displace - ments and symmetrical proﬁles . Proﬁles that had invaginations of about 11 nm or less were initially collected . From this set , we selected proﬁles which had a clear axis of symmetry so that the peak displacement was apparent . These selection criteria resulted in seven experimental proﬁles , which are plotted in Fig . 2 ( b ) ( note that they are ﬂipped in the z direction relative to the proﬁles given in Ref . [ 8 ] ) . To ﬁnd a mean proﬁle , the axis of rotation is taken to be the minimum ( most negative ) displacement value . An averaged proﬁle is obtained by combining the data on either side of the minimum . Outliers among the axisymmetric proﬁles 052414 - 3 D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) are rejected ( please see the discussion in the Appendix ) . The remaining proﬁles are normalized by the respective peak invaginations , interpolated using a cubic spline along a common grid , and averaged . The invagination depth of the resulting mean proﬁle , shown in Fig . 2 ( c ) , is the mean depth of the original proﬁles . Finally , the mean experimental proﬁle is ﬁtted in both spatial coordinates ( r and z ) and arc length coordinates [ s and ψ ( s ) ] . In the spatial coordinates , the mean proﬁle of the membrane displacement w is least - squares ﬁt to the Gaussian function w ( r ) = A exp ( − βr 2 ) + B , ( 7 ) where A is the depth of the invagination , β is a shape parameter , and B accounts for the fact that we have data only over a ﬁnite range of r . After the mean proﬁle is ﬁtted , the parameter B is discarded so that w ( r → ∞ ) = 0 . The arc length is calculated by numerically differentiating both r and z to ﬁnd the discrete step in arc length , taking (cid:10)s = (cid:7) (cid:10)r 2 + (cid:10)z 2 , ( 8 ) and numerically integrating . The azimuthal angle is calculated from ψ ( s ) = arctan ( (cid:10)z / (cid:10)r ) . ( 9 ) Because we consider the early stage of invagination , we assume that ψ is small , so that cos θ (cid:4) 1 . The angle coordinates are ﬁt to an odd - order polynomial expansion using constrained least squares . We chose a polynomial ﬁt for mathematical convenience in applying boundary conditions and for numerical convenience in ﬁnding the membrane force at r = 0 . In addition , the integrated polynomial ﬁt is a close match to the Gaussian ﬁt in the spatial domain ( see Appendix ) . Eliminating even - power terms from the polynomial ensures that it satisﬁes the boundary conditions [ 12 ] that ψ ( s ) and the second derivative of ψ ( s ) with respect to s must be zero at s = 0 . We chose odd polynomial of order 11 , which results in a total of 6 ﬁtting parameters . This number of parameters resulted in a good ﬁt and avoided unphysical oscillations in the ﬁtted curve . B . Curvature - generating proteins Since we treat only the initial stages of deformation , we assume for convenience a ﬂat membrane proﬁle , so H ( s ) = 0 in Eq . ( 2 ) . This results in the CGP force f CGP ( s ) = 1 2 r ∂ ∂s (cid:8) r ∂ ∂s [ 2 κ i ( s ) H 0 ] (cid:9) , ( 10 ) where κ i is the spatial distribution of the bending modulus . The spatial variation of κ i is assumed to result from the spatial distribution of the CGP proteins in a small patch . Note that a similar expression is obtained if a spatially varying spontaneous curvature is treated ( see Appendix ) . As for the calculation of the internal membrane - bending forces , we do not include bending terms from the Gaussian bending energy in our CGP force calculation . Because of the spatial variation of κ i , the Gaussian bending energy could in principle induce forces . However , this energy term is proportional to the product of the two principal curvatures [ 20 ] . Since the curvatures in the ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 3 . ( a ) Possible proﬁles of the bending modulus in the CGP patch . For the hyperbolic tangent proﬁles [ Eq . ( 11 ) ] , the center of the transition occurs at s 0 = 46 nm ; (cid:10)s is in nm and γ is given in units of nm − 1 . ( b ) Force densities f CGP resulting from the bending modulus proﬁles . A negative force indicates that CGP are pulling the membrane into the cell . initial stage of endocytosis treated here are small , the Gaussian bending energy should be negligible relative to contributions from mean curvature . We selected the following two distributions , which model the transition of the CGP bending modulus from its maximum value κ CGP at the center of the patch to near zero at the edge : κ i ( s ) = κ CGP 2 { 1 − tanh [ γ ( s − s 0 ) ] } , ( 11 ) κ i ( s ) = κ CGP exp (cid:3) − s 2 (cid:10)s 2 (cid:4) , ( 12 ) where γ determines the rate of the transition , s 0 is the center of the transition , and (cid:10)s adjusts the shape of the Gaussian curve . Figure 3 compares various possible proﬁles and their corresponding forces . Again , we assume that ψ is small and cos θ (cid:4) 1 . We chose a value of (cid:10)s so that the peak force from the Gaussian transition , in Fig . 3 ( b ) , would be comparable to the forces obtained by the tanh forms . For the narrower tanh distributions , f CGP has the form of a force couple or bending moment at the edge of the distribution , with only weak forces 052414 - 4 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) in the center . This occurs because f CGP is proportional to the Laplacian of κ i ( s ) [ Eq . ( 10 ) ] , which vanishes in regions where κ i ( s ) is constant . The form of f CGP is consistent with the physical observation that bending a rod to a uniform curvature requires only bending couples at the ends , but no forces along the bulk of the rod . The proportionality to the Laplacian also implies that the maximum force appears near r = 0 for the transition from Eq . ( 12 ) . We treat the transition radius of the preferred curvature s 0 = 46 nm as a ﬁtting parameter approximately equal to the transition radius of the wall force , calculated below . This choice of s 0 minimizes the total force that actin polymerization must supply ( see Appendix ) . C . Cell wall We calculate the wall reaction force f W from the membrane - bending proﬁle in Fig . 2 ( c ) . Consider Fig . 1 in which the turgor pressure is applied to the entire surface of the membrane , but f W acts only where the membrane and wall are in contact . We deﬁne f W as the elastic reaction force due to the displacement of the cell wall surface caused by the membrane pushing into it . We take the location of the separation point , or endocytic width R W , to be the point where f W = 0 . R W is crucial for estimating f A , and we estimate it from the experimental membrane proﬁles . We created a second axisymmetric continuum mechanics model , shown in Fig . 4 , to estimate f W . The cell wall and membrane are allowed to slide freely over each other . The bottom surface of the membrane is held rigidly in the shape of the mean experimental displacement . This rigid surface is displaced vertically , creating stresses in both the cell wall and membrane after contact . We increase this vertical displacement until the total force from the wall onto the membrane is balanced by the integrated turgor pressure ( they do not balance point by point ) , as discussed in connection with Eq . ( 1 ) : (cid:6) R A 0 2 πrP 0 dr = − (cid:6) R A R W 2 πrf W dr , ( 13 ) where f W is the Cauchy stress in the z direction on the membrane surface in contact with the actin network and R A is the diameter of the actin network . For both the cell wall and membrane we chose linear - elastic material models . For the cell wall , we chose material parameters of Young’s modulus E W and Poisson’s ratio ν W . For the cell membrane , we chose material parameters of shear modulus μ M and bulk modulus K M . Note that this membrane material model is only used to estimate the cell wall reaction force f W and is not used for the membrane - bending forces . Although the model is approximate in that it ignores the liquidlike nature of the lipid bilayer for in - plane motions , we feel that it is sufﬁciently accurate for calculating the out - of - plane interaction forces with the cell wall . This response of the model was found by ﬁnite - element ( FE ) simulation using COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS software ( V . 5 . 1 ) [ 27 ] to perform a 2D axisymmetric simulation . All geometry , moduli , and forces were nondimensionalized using a length parameter of R 0 = 25 nm and κ 0 = 20 k B T . The cell wall and membrane are initially separated with the contacting surfaces modeled as a frictionless pair . A frictionless boundary condi - tion ( BC ) with zero displacement in the z direction was applied Cell Wall Membrane Z R Applied Displacement Frictionless Surface F r i c t i o n l e ss S u r f a c e Actin Surface Z - 1 . 0 0 . 0 [ M P a ] R ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 4 . ( a ) Axisymmetric continuum mechanics model used to estimate the wall reaction force f W during the initial stages of endocytosis . The interface between the cell wall and membrane is frictionless . A frictionless boundary condition ( BC ) with zero displacement in the z direction is applied to the top surface of the cell wall . A frictionless BC with zero displacement in the radial direction is applied to the outer radius of both the cell wall and the membrane . The membrane is displaced vertically ( in the z direction ) into the cell wall to create the wall force . The wall force on the membrane is estimated from f W = − σ zz . ( b ) The resulting stresses in the membrane and cell wall estimated by ﬁnite element solution of the continuum mechanics model . to the top surface of the cell wall . Similarly , a frictionless BC with zero displacement in the radial direction was applied to the outer radii of both the cell wall and the membrane . The cell wall domain was discretized into 5192 triangular elements , and the membrane domain was discretized into 386 triangular elements , using quartic interpolation functions for the displacement ﬁeld . The size of the elements on the contact - ing surfaces were equivalent to 2 nm . The stationary studies were solved using the COMSOL parallel sparse direct algorithm with relative tolerance < 10 − 3 . We compared solution results of various mesh sizes , interpolation functions , and tolerances to conﬁrm the robustness of the results . D . Growing actin network The actin network is modeled as an elastic material initially having the shape of a hemisphere . Actin growth is concentrated 052414 - 5 D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 5 . Results from FE simulation of the continuum mechanics model used to obtain the actin force f A from a growth distribution g ( r ) taken from the linear theory of Sec . IIIB . The actin network is modeled as a hemisphere with radius R A = 100 nm in contact with a rigid , freely sliding boundary at the membrane surface . The network is not permitted to pull away from the surface . ( a ) The growth distribution in the model after a simulation time of 0 . 65 time units . ( b ) The resulting stress σ ZZ in the FE model after a simulation time of 0 . 65 time units . Positive stress is tensile . near the boundary with the membrane since the nucleators of actin polymerization in endocytosis are membrane bound [ 28 ] . We calculate the effects of inhomogeneous actin growth by FE simulation of a continuum mechanics model , as shown in Fig . 5 . The initial conﬁguration of the actin network is a hemisphere with radius R A . After each step of growth , material is added , and the actin network deforms to satisfy elastic equilibrium . Deformations from the growth result in a stress f A at the network - membrane interface . We assume that the actin network always remains attached to the membrane . We ignore the effect of the small initial membrane bending on the shape of the actin network , keeping the membrane - bound surface ﬂat . This is legitimate because the forces induced by the bending are much smaller than those induced by the actin growth . We thus apply a boundary condition ( BC ) at the network surface that prevents displacement in the z direction . We do , however , allow free motion in the r direction . In addition , the actin network is likely highly permeable to the osmolytes creating the turgor pressure , so a zero - force BC is imposed on the cytosolic boundary of the actin network . 1 . Growth methodology We treat the growth mechanics as in our previous model [ 16 ] . The total deformation tensor ( including growth and elastic deformation ) is deﬁned as F ij = ∂x i ∂X j , ( 14 ) where (cid:7) X is the initial location of a particle and (cid:7) x is the location of the particle after deformation [ 29 ] . Total deformation results from a combination of both growth and elastic strain . The relationship between these tensors is ˆ F = ˆ F e ˆ G , ( 15 ) where the hat indicates a tensor , ˆ F e is the elastic deformation , and ˆ G is the growth tensor . In the special case in which no elastic deformation occurs , the total deformation is equal to the growth tensor . The elastic strains [ 29 ] are given by ˆ (cid:14) = 12 (cid:10) ˆ F T e ˆ F e − ˆ I (cid:11) . ( 16 ) The growth distribution is built up gradually using a ﬁctitious time variable t : dG ZZ dt = g ( r ) exp (cid:12) − z 2 Z 2 p (cid:13) . ( 17 ) Here , r is the radial coordinate along the membrane and z is the distance from the membrane . We focus on z - direction growth , as in our previous work [ 16 ] . The Gaussian decay factor implements our assumption that growth occurs near the membrane . The term g ( r ) gives the radial dependence of the estimated growth distribution , and the parameter Z p is the width of the growth zone away from the membrane . The growth distribution g ( r ) = 1 gives growth that is uniform across the z = 0 surface of the actin network . Then , the network simply moves backwards with essentially zero force because the viscous drag force is very small . We incorporated growth into FE simulations of the axisym - metric model using COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS software ( V . 5 . 1 ) [ 27 ] . All geometry , moduli , and forces were nondimension - alized using reference values of R 0 = 25 nm for lengths and κ 0 = 20 k B T for the curvature modulus . The simulations for the linear growth models were run until a maximum strain of 0 . 1 was reached . The simulations for the fully nonlinear models were run until the peak stress reached the required peak stress estimated from the experimental data . Simulations were performed with the domain discretized into 2298 triangular elements with a size equivalent to 2 nm or less on the membrane boundary , using quartic interpolation functions for the displacement ﬁeld . The quasistatic , time - dependent studies were solved using the COMSOL backward differentiation formula algorithm with absolute error tolerance less than 10 − 5 and relative tolerance less than 10 − 6 . We compared solution results for various mesh sizes , interpolation functions , and tolerances to conﬁrm the robustness of the results . 2 . Actin material model We use a slightly compressible , hyperelastic [ 29 ] material model for the actin network . Hyperelastic models describe materials that respond elastically under large deformations . 052414 - 6 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) TABLE I . Parameter values . Parameter Deﬁnition Value Comments h W Cell wall thickness 100 nm E W Cell wall Young’s modulus 110 MPa Baseline ν W Cell wall Poisson’s ratio 0 . 49 Baseline h M Membrane thickness 6 nm μ M Membrane shear modulus 10 MPa K M Membrane bulk modulus 2 μ M σ Membrane tension 1 × 10 − 4 Nm − 1 κ B Membrane - bending modulus 20 k B T H 0 CGP curvature 0 . 02 nm − 1 Baseline κ CGP CGP bending modulus 285 k B T Baseline R A Actin network radius 100 nm Baseline μ A Actin shear modulus 0 . 02 MPa Baseline K A Actin bulk modulus 10 μ A α Nonlinear Fung model parameter 0 . 01 Baseline Z p Growth region thickness 25 nm Baseline P 0 Turgor pressure 0 . 5 MPa Baseline Their constitutive laws take into account both material nonlin - earity and nonlinearity due to changes in shape , in contrast to linear elastic models , which capture neither effect . Soft tissue and gels are commonly modeled with this approach [ 29 ] . We model the the actin network as a hyperelastic material because we expect it to undergo large deformations during endocytosis . We use a Fung - type variant [ 30 , 31 ] as a general framework to describe a variety of nonlinear material behaviors . When the parameter α is very small ( 0 . 01 ) , the Fung model behaves similarly to the classical Neo - Hookean material model , which is widely used to model isotropic soft tissues , gels , and rubber [ 29 ] . The strain energy density function is as follows : W = 1 2 K A ( 1 − J e ) 2 + μ A 2 α { exp [ α ( II 1 − 3 ) ] − 1 } , ( 18a ) II 1 = J − 2 / 3 e I 1 , and ( 18b ) I 1 = C 11 + C 22 + C 33 , ( 18c ) where ˆ C = ˆ F T e ˆ F e is the elastic , right Cauchy - Green deforma - tion tensor and J e = det ˆ F e is the elastic volume ratio [ 29 ] . The actin shear modulus μ A , bulk modulus K A , and nonlinearity constant α are the key parameters . The strain energy is quadratic for small deformations , and increases exponentially for large deformations . The actin force density f A is then obtained as the z - direction stress at the membrane - bound surface of the actin network at the end of the simulation run . E . Parameter values The parameter values are given in Table I . The cell wall thickness h W and Young’s modulus E W are the lower values measured by Smith et al . [ 32 ] . For the cell wall Poisson’s ratio ν W we chose 0 . 49 which corresponds to a slightly compressible material . We chose a membrane thickness h M used in our previous study [ 16 ] , which is consistent with measured values [ 33 ] . We chose a membrane shear modulus μ M larger than previously used [ 16 ] , to improve the simulation efﬁciency . The ratio K M / μ M = 2 for the membrane is typical for close - packed materials . For membrane tension σ we selected 1 × 10 − 4 N m − 1 , which is the largest value in the range given by Liu et al . [ 10 ] . The bending modulus of the bare membrane κ B is the middle of the range of 10 k B T to 30 k B T measured by Rawicz et al . [ 34 ] . The values for the bending modulus of the curvature - generating proteins , κ CGP , and the preferred curvature of CGP , H 0 , come from the experimental study by Jin et al . [ 35 ] . We selected the actin shear modulus μ A and bulk modulus K A from our previous growth study [ 16 ] . The growth depth Z p was chosen as a the smallest value compatible with computational efﬁciency . The turgor pressure selected is near the middle of the range of literature values [ 36 – 40 ] . III . RESULTS A . Distribution of actin force required to drive membrane bending Figure 6 ( a ) shows the combination of turgor pressure and wall force , − ( P 0 + f W ) , estimated from the model of Fig . 4 , as well as the combination − ( P 0 + f W + f M ) , where f M is obtained from Eq . ( 2 ) . The shape of − ( P 0 + f W ) reveals a balance of forces from turgor pressure and cell wall at large r , while at small r the turgor pressure force dominates . The difference induced by including f M is small . Figure 6 ( b ) shows the total actin force density f A = − P 0 − f W − f M − f CGP obtained by combining the forces from Fig . 6 ( a ) with the forces generated by the different CGP coat transition proﬁles from Fig . 3 , using Eq . ( 10 ) . The shape of f A is on the whole quite similar to that of − ( P 0 + f W ) , with a transition from negative ( tensile ) to a positive ( compressive ) force density near the point where the membrane separates from the cell wall . The maximum required pulling force is very close to P 0 , about 500 kPa . This shape is consistent with the “vertical distributed load” model considered in Ref . [ 12 ] . The actin force integrates to zero over the area of the actin network . Therefore , since the tensile force acts over a smaller area than the compressive force , the tensile force density is larger than the compressive force density . Figure 6 ( c ) compares f A with and without CGP . We selected the transition described by Eq . ( 11 ) with parameter γ = 0 . 10 nm − 1 for the f CGP in this comparison as well as the following plots . It is seen that f CGP makes noticeable , but not dominant , corrections , reducing marginally the maximum force density that the actin must supply . B . Calculation of actin growth proﬁle As a starting point for calculating the actin growth distri - bution that generates the required forces , and as a tool for obtaining improved growth proﬁles by iteration , we use a simpliﬁed approach based on linear elasticity . We analyze growth at the ﬂat boundary between a semi - inﬁnite elastic medium described by a bulk modulus K and a shear modulus μ , corresponding to the actin network , and an inﬁnitely hard solid , corresponding to the combination of the cell wall and membrane . The boundary is at z = 0 . The growth of the actin network is taken to be along the z direction . For simplicity , we take the growth to be completely localized z = 0 . This is an approximation since growth in the simulations is distributed over a distance Z p away from the boundary . The approximation should be accurate since Z p is much smaller than the actin network thickness . We denote the total extent 052414 - 7 D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) A ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) FIG . 6 . ( a ) Wallreactionforceplusturgorpressure ( solidline ) and with inclusion of the internal membrane forces ( dashed line ) . ( b ) Total actin forces including the CGP force estimated from the Gaussian transition [ solid line , Eq . ( 12 ) ] and the hyperbolic tangent transitions [ broken lines , Eq . ( 11 ) ] ; (cid:10)s is in nm and γ is given in units of nm − 1 . ( c ) Total actin force f A with ( dotted line ) and without ( dashed line ) f CGP obtained from Eq . ( 11 ) with γ = 0 . 10 nm − 1 ( dotted line ) . All curves generated from Eq . ( 11 ) have a transition radius of s 0 = 46 nm . of growth by h ( r ) = (cid:14) ∞ 0 G ZZ ( r , z ) dz , where we have assumed circular symmetry and r = [ x 2 + y 2 ] 1 / 2 . The growth imposes 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 r [ nm ] g ( r ) g g g FIG . 7 . Growth distributions using the linearized growth theory ( LGT ) . The dashed line is the growth distribution g calculated using LGT directly from the estimated actin force f A . The dotted line is a growth distribution A(cid:10)g , where (cid:10)g is the growth distribution resulting from using the difference between the simulated and estimated actin force as the input to the LGT . The solid line is the linearly corrected growth distribution g (cid:8) = A (cid:10)g + g , with A = 35 . a displacement u z ( r ) = h ( r ) at the boundary of the actin network . The relationship between u z ( and thus h ) and the force density f A is given by elasticity theory [ 41 ] : h ( r ) = 3 K + μ μ ( 3 K + 7 μ ) (cid:6) f A ( r (cid:8) ) | (cid:7) r − (cid:7) r (cid:8) | d (cid:7) r (cid:8) , ( 19 ) where the integral is independent of the orientation of (cid:7) r ; (cid:7) r and (cid:7) r (cid:8) are two - dimensional vectors in the plane of the boundary . Since g has circular symmetry and the two - dimensional Fourier transform of 1 / r is 2 π / k , the Fourier transform of this equation is ˜ h ( k ) = 3 K + μ μ ( 3 K + 7 μ ) ˜ f A ( k ) k , ( 20 ) where k = ( k 2 x + k 2 y ) 1 / 2 . We use this result , together with our estimates of f A ( r ) and a numerical Fourier transform , to calculate h ( r ) . We then take g ( r ) in Eq . ( 17 ) to be proportional to h ( r ) in our initial estimates and iterative improvements of our growth proﬁles . Note that in Eq . ( 20 ) , uniform growth corresponds to k = 0 . Inverting Eq . ( 20 ) shows that ˜ f A ( k ) is proportional to k ˜ h ( k ) , which vanishes as k → 0 . Therefore , uniform growth produces no forces . This is consistent with the physical picture that uniform growth of the actin network gives uniform retrograde motion of the network , which requires essentially no force because of the small velocity and physical size of the network . The prediction of Eq . ( 20 ) is approximate in two ways . First , it is based on a semi - inﬁnite actin network , as opposed to the hemispherical network in our simulations . Second , it is valid only for sufﬁciently small amplitudes of growth and force that small - strain approximations of linear elasticity are accurate . The resulting growth proﬁle shown in Fig . 7 is normalized by its maximum value to facilitate convenient comparisons between multiple growth proﬁles . We incorporated this growth proﬁle into our fully nonlinear FE simulations and calculated 052414 - 8 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) ( a ) / m a x | f | A f A 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 r [ nm ] Estimate Simulation ( b ) Estimate Simulation 0 20 40 60 80 1 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 r [ nm ] / m a x | f | A f A 100 FIG . 8 . Comparison of simulated ( dotted lines ) force density generated by FE code from LGT growth proﬁles ( Fig . 7 ) , with force density estimated from experimental observations [ 8 ] ( solid lines ) . ( a ) Actin force density resulting from linear growth proﬁle g . ( b ) Actin force density resulting from corrected growth proﬁle g (cid:8) . the resulting force distribution . In Fig . 8 ( a ) , these simulation results are compared to the “estimated” forces obtained from Eq . ( 1 ) , with both forces normalized by their largest magnitude . The force distribution from the simulations is reasonably close to the estimated one . But a much closer estimate of the growth distribution can be achieved by making iterative corrections to the original estimate . First , the difference between the normalized simulated and estimated actin forces is found by (cid:10)f = f sim A max (cid:15)(cid:15) f sim A (cid:15)(cid:15) − f A max | f A | , ( 21 ) where f sim A is the simulated force and f A is the estimated force . Second , the differential growth distribution (cid:10)g needed to account for (cid:10)f is estimated from (cid:10)f using the LGT . Next , the adjusted growth proﬁle is calculated using g (cid:8) ( r ) = A(cid:10)g ( r ) + g ( r ) , ( 22 ) where A is a ﬁtting parameter . Finally , the adjusted growth proﬁle g (cid:8) ( r ) is normalized before being implemented in the growth simulation . We repeated the correction process twice to achieve a better ﬁt . Figure 7 shows the proﬁles g and g (cid:8) , with g (cid:8) and the difference term (cid:10)g both obtained from the second correction . As seen in Fig . 8 ( b ) , applying multiple corrections to the growth proﬁle gives close agreement between the force obtained from the FE simulations and the experimentally estimated proﬁle . Thus , an iterated solution based on a linear starting point can closely reproduce the shape of the required actin force density f A . However , the magnitudes of the force densities obtained by the linear theory are too small . To obtain a force density with the correct magnitude an iterative approach with a more accurate starting growth proﬁle is required . To develop such an approach to matching both the shape and magnitude of f A , we used an initial guess to the growth distribution , followed by an iteration procedure based on the linear theory . To obtain an accurate force density , it was necessary to increase the actin shear modulus by a factor of 4 , to 0 . 08 MPa . We started by implementing a number of arbitrary growth proﬁles in the FE simulation and comparing the simulated actin forces at full magnitude with the estimated actinforce . Thebest results camefrom usingagrowthproﬁleof g ( r ) = 12 { tanh [ η ( r − r 0 ) ] + 1 } , ( 23 ) where r 0 = 52 . 5 nm is the transition radius and η = 0 . 16 nm − 1 determines the slope at r 0 . This proﬁle was then corrected using the LGT as in Eq . ( 22 ) . The correction process was repeated three times resulting in the corrected growth proﬁle g ( r ) in Fig . 9 ( a ) . The linearly corrected growth proﬁle g (cid:8) ( r ) from Fig . 7 is included for comparison , and the two growth proﬁles are notably different . Figure 9 ( b ) shows a close agreement between the actin force density estimated from the experimental proﬁle and that simulated using the nonlinear - strain growth model . Since we found that the turgor pressure P 0 is the main factor opposing the initial stages of endocytosis , we studied the effect of varying P 0 from 0 . 25 to 2 . 0 MPa . We expected these changes to affect both the total actin pulling force F A , which must be supplied by actin polymerization , and the point R W at which the membrane separates from the cell wall . F A is found by integrating f A from r = 0 to R W . Note that F A corresponds to the point force assumed in other models [ 11 ] required to initiate endocytosis and R W is nearly the point at which the membrane separates from the cell wall . As shown in Table V , turgor pressures between P 0 = 0 . 25 and 1 . 0 MPa result in F A values ranging from 1500 to 5000 pN . Such a large variation is expected because the turgor pressure directly opposes invagination . The F A values are larger than we found previously [ 16 ] , most likely because in our previous work the crossover to actin occurred at a smaller radius . R W is relatively insensitive to P 0 . Since the width of our calculated polymerization hole is mainly determined by R W , this means that the shape of g ( r ) is insensitive to the turgor pressure that is assumed . IV . DISCUSSION The general shape of the growth distribution g ( r ) shown in Fig . 9 ( a ) is similar to that assumed in our earlier study [ 16 ] . The main difference is that the transition in the current g ( r ) occurs at larger r ( 45 – 50 nm vs 30 nm ) . The width of the transition is quite similar to the earlier one ; in both 052414 - 9 D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) ( a ) ( b ) Estimated g µ A g 4 µ A with g 4 µ A with with g g 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 r [ nm ] g ( r ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] f A [ k P a ] FIG . 9 . ( a ) Corrected fully nonlinear growth proﬁle g from a general growth calculation ( solid line ) , compared with normalized linearly corrected growth proﬁle g (cid:8) ( dashed line ) . Calculations performed with a shear modulus of 4 μ A = 80 kPa . ( b ) Direct , full - magnitude comparison of actin forces estimated from the exper - imental proﬁle ( solid line ) and simulated using the nonlinear - strain growth model ( broken lines ) . cases , taking g ( r ) from 20 % to 80 % of its maximum value requires an increase of about 30 % in r . Our ﬁnding that g ( r ) in Fig . 9 ( a ) generates the forces required to overcome turgor pressure and membrane - bending forces supports the general picture of endocytic invagination being driven by a ring of rapid growth around a central core where growth is slower . This ﬁnding relies on two key assumptions : ( i ) That F - actin at endocytic sites in yeast has a shear modulus much higher than cortical actin networks in other cell types . This is supported by the high density of F - actin and crosslinkers in the patches . If we assume a hemispherical patch of radius 0 . 1 μ m [ 16 ] , the volume of the patch is ( 2 π / 3 ) ( 0 . 1 μ m ) 3 = 2 . 1 × 10 − 3 μ m 3 . If we assume 6000 F - actin molecules in this patch [ 42 ] , the actin concentration is 4700 μ M . Previous measurements [ 43 ] of the Young’s modulus of branched actin gels at a density of 170 μ M obtained values of about 5 kPa . If we assume that the Young’s modulus is proportional to the density , the resulting Young’s modulus for the endocytic actin patch is 140 kPa , substantially higher the the value of 80 kPa required for invagination in our model . Simple theoretical estimates give similar values . Each actin subunit has a length increment of 2 . 7 nm , so the total length of F - actin is 19 μ m . Treating the ﬁlament as a cylinder of radius 2 . 5 nm taken as the average of the minor and major radii [ 44 ] , we ﬁnd a total actin volume of 3 . 7 × 10 − 4 μ m 3 , giving a packing fraction of 18 % . If we assume that the network deforms afﬁnely under shear deformations , the deformation of the individual actin ﬁlaments is the same as that bulk deformation . Then , the Young’s modulus of the network is the Young’s modulus of the material constituting an actin ﬁlament ( estimated at 2 . 6 GPa in Ref . [ 44 ] ) times the packing fraction , or 470 kPa . The assumption of afﬁne deformation is supported by the high density of crosslinkers : 1 molecule of the crosslinker ﬁmbrin for approximately every 10 molecules of polymerized actin [ 45 ] . These will tend to inhibit sliding of ﬁlaments parallel to each other . Thus , both experimental measurements and theoretical estimates suggest that the high densities of F - actin and crosslinkers can produce a Young’s modulus high enough to drive membrane invagination . ( ii ) That actin network growth can proceed against the very large opposing forces resulting from the turgor pressure . We ﬁnd that even after the forces from the curvature - generating proteins are accounted for , the total pulling force required from the actin network ( obtained by integrating the portion of Fig . 6 where f A is negative ) is 2800 pN . This value is consistent with Ref . [ 11 ] ; Ref . [ 6 ] obtained a smaller value of 900 pN for a very narrow mature pit , but indicated that the force could be much larger for the initial indentation . The number of growing ﬁlaments is 100 – 150 [ 46 ] , so forces on the order of 15 pN per growing ﬁlament are required . Within the Brownian - ratchet theory [ 47 ] , the stall force estimated for a 2 μ M free actin concentration A [ 46 ] is only f stall = ( k B T / δ ) ln ( A / A c ) (cid:4) 5 pN [ 48 ] , using a critical concentration of 0 . 1 μ M [ 49 ] and a polymerization step size δ = 2 . 7 nm . One possibility for making up the missing 10 pN of force per ﬁlament is that type - I myosins enhance force generation [ 6 ] . They could bind the ﬁlaments to the membrane and move to the growing tips of the actin ﬁlaments after each polymerization event . This would keep them far enough from the membrane that new subunits can be added freely [ 21 ] despite the opposing force . The force - generating capability of yeast type - I myosins is not known , but mammalian type - I myosins can generate up to 5 pN of force per molecule [ 50 ] . The number of type - I myosins is about 150 [ 46 ] , comparable to the number of growing ﬁlaments . If each actin ﬁlament tip has a myosin aiding its polymerization by supplying 5 pN of force , a total force of 10 pN per actin ﬁlament could be achieved . Note that the actin ﬁlaments will not buckle even at this high a force . Quantitative ﬂuorescence measurements [ 51 ] suggest that the actin network contains 300 ﬁlaments ( capped plus force generating , taken as the number of Arp2 / 3 complexes ) . Then , 7000 actin subunits ( the upper end of the range quoted in Ref . [ 42 ] ) correspond to an average ﬁlament length of l = 7000 × 2 . 7 nm / 300 = 63 nm . The Euler buckling force [ 52 ] for a ﬁlament of this length is f b = π 2 k B T l 0 / ( 2 l ) 2 = 38 pN , where l p (cid:4) 15 μ m is the persistence length of actin ﬁlaments [ 44 ] . The fractional discrepancy between the 10 pN estimate and the 15 pN required to overcome turgor pressure is smaller than the fractional error in the turgor pressure , whose measured values have ranged from 0 . 2 to 1 . 0 Mpa . Recent experiments 052414 - 10 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) [ 40 ] using rapid indentation to avoid the confounding effects of osmoregulation suggest that the lower end of the range may be more accurate . Finally , the turgor pressure at the endocytic site may not be as large as is generally believed . Channel clusters [ 53 ] might occur at the endocytic site and thereby reduce turgor pressure by the local release of osmolytes [ 16 , 54 ] . Thus , 10 pN of force per ﬁlament may well be enough to drive invagination . We also found that turgor pressure makes the dominant contribution to the force distribution that actin growth must overcome , if commonly accepted estimates of turgor pressure are used . In Fig . 6 , it is clear that the baseline turgor pressure force is an order of magnitude larger than either the membrane - bending force or the CGP force . This ﬁnding is consistent with those of Refs . [ 11 ] and [ 6 ] , but disagrees with the ﬁndings of Ref . [ 12 ] , who used a much lower turgor pressure and found that the membrane bending forces played a large role . Finally , we found that the forces generated by the CGP proﬁles with a sharp transition from patch to bare membrane , as in Eq . ( 11 ) , produce a force couple as shown in Fig . 3 ( b ) . These forces tend to “round off” the sharp transitions in the actin force where the membrane separates from the wall . This effect lowers the overall required forces and may aid the actin by allowing a smoother growth distribution at the membrane surface . They reduce the total pulling force required from actin , but do not have a large effect at the center of the invagination . How could the distribution of actin growth be measured ? One possible approach is based on the fact that the shape of the actin network should closely reﬂect the growth proﬁle , if external stresses on the surface of the network are absent . Since the turgor pressure causes the dominant opposing force , eliminating the turgor pressure would eliminate most of the external stresses . Thus , in principle , one could measure the growth proﬁle as follows . One ﬁrst allows actin to polymerize up to a point where the membrane is about to detach from the wall , and then abruptly reduces or eliminates the turgor pressure by adding osmolyte to the medium . Alternatively , simply waiting for a short time before freezing in an electron microscopy study might allow a drop in turgor pressure . The three - dimensional shape of the actin distribution after the turgor pressure is reduced would then be nearly that dictated by its growth . The shape could be measured by either electron tomography or 3D super - resolution microscopy measurements of the actin distribution . We have evaluated the robustness of our results by perform - ing a number of studies to determine the effect of changes in the model parameters on both the simulated and estimated actin forces . As discussed above in Sec . III , changes in the turgor pressure affect the magnitude of the required actin pulling force , but do not strongly impact the shape of the growth distribution g ( r ) . For the simulated actin force , we varied the parameters R A , α , and Z p . We found that the quality of ﬁt of themodel was sensitiveonlytovalues of Z p smaller than25nm ( see Table III ) , which is likely due to the increased distortion of elements at the actin surface for a smaller Z p . We found that large percentage changes in the parameters E W , ν W , κ CGP , s 0 , and H 0 relative to our baseline model resulted in rel - atively modest changes in F A and R W ( see Tables IV and V ) . TABLE II . Curves from the experimental study by Kukulski et al . [ 8 ] that have less than the maximum invagination of 11 nm and have a clear axis of symmetry . Proﬁle numbers are those of Ref . [ 8 ] . The maximum displacement of the invagination at the axis of symmetry is givenforeachproﬁle . Forthe“outlierrejection”set , thesidesincluded in the averaged proﬁle are indicated . The “symmetric selection” set includes both sides of the selected proﬁles . Maximum Outlier Symmetric Proﬁle Disp . ( nm ) rejection selection 120 7 . 5 left & right left & right 1013 6 . 9 left 1014 6 . 7 left & right left & right 1017 9 . 2 left & right left & right 1018 10 . 4 left 1021 10 . 8 left 1023 10 . 2 right ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Grant No . R01 GM107667 . APPENDIX 1 . Fitting membrane proﬁles to experimental data We selected membrane proﬁles from the experimental study by Kukulski et al . [ 8 ] to estimate a mean membrane proﬁle during the initial stage of endocytosis . Proﬁles that had invaginations of 11 nm or less and a clear peak were initially collected . These proﬁles were labeled by the authors of the experimental study [ 8 ] as 120 , 1013 , 1014 , 1017 , 1018 , 1021 , and 1023 . The maximum invaginations of each proﬁle are listed in Table II . Three of these proﬁles are clearly symmetrical ( proﬁles 120 , 1014 , and 1017 ) , and this set of TABLE III . Effect of growth and material parameters on quality of ﬁt . R A is the radius of the actin network , α determines the nonlinearity in the Fung model , and Z p is the width of the growing region of the actin network . For each set of parameters , the error E A between the simulated and estimated actin force is given . The error E A is the normalized , absolute - mean error integrated over the surface of the actin as deﬁned by Eq . ( A3 ) . Normalized forces are used to calculate E A for simulations with linear strains , and the full - magnitude forces are used to calculate E A for simulations with nonlinear strains . E A Section in text Parameter Linear strains Nonlinear strains 2a R A = 100 nm 0 . 05 0 . 11 R A = 150 nm 0 . 04 0 . 11 R A = 200 nm 0 . 04 2b α = 0 . 001 0 . 05 0 . 12 α = 0 . 01 0 . 05 0 . 11 α = 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 11 2c Z p = 20 nm 0 . 05 0 . 16 Z p = 25 nm 0 . 05 0 . 11 Z p = 30 nm 0 . 04 0 . 12 052414 - 11 D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) TABLE IV . Sensitivity of results to the cell wall Poisson’s ratio ν W , cell wall Young’s modulus E W , and actin network radius R A . The pulling force F A is the total actin force required to initiate endocytosis , and is calculated by integrating the force f A from r = 0 to R W . R W is deﬁned as the location where f A = 0 . Note that the spring bed model results do not include f M or f CGP , and this model has no Poisson’s ratio by deﬁnition . F A ( pN ) R W ( nm ) Section in text Parameter Continuum Spring bed Continuum Spring bed 3b ν W = 0 . 0 2800 47 ν W = 0 . 3 2700 46 ν W = 0 . 49 2800 48 3c E W = 0 . 25 × 110 MPa 2100 1800 42 43 E W = 0 . 5 × 110 MPa 2500 2300 46 46 E W = 1 . 0 × 110 MPa 2800 2800 48 48 E W = 2 . 0 × 110 MPa 3000 3300 51 51 3d R A = 100 nm 2800 2800 48 48 R A = 150 nm 2900 3000 51 53 R A = 200 nm 3000 3100 53 56 proﬁles is referred to as the “symmetric selection” set in Table II . Of the remaining proﬁles , one side or the other ( from the peak displacement ) ﬁts the general shape of the symmetric selection set . We refer to the set of proﬁles including both the symmetric selection set and the partial proﬁles as the “outlier rejection” set . Table II indicates which sides of the proﬁles are included in the outlier rejection set . To ﬁnd a mean proﬁle , the proﬁles are ﬂipped vertically to follow the convention shown in Fig . 2 ( b ) , and the axis of rotation is taken to be the maximum displacement point . Before averaging , proﬁles are normalized by their respective peak invaginations and interpolated using a cubic spline along a common grid . The invagination depth of the resulting mean proﬁles , shown in Fig . 10 ( a ) , is the mean depth of the original proﬁles . The mean proﬁles from the outlier rejection and symmetric selection sets are similar . 2 . Sensitivity studies In this section , we discuss a number of parameter studies we performed to assess the effects of parameters on the growth simulations and the estimated actin force . ( 1 ) Fitting of membrane proﬁle . Figure 10 ( b ) shows a Gaussian ﬁt [ see Eq . ( 7 ) ] of the two mean proﬁles from Fig . 10 ( a ) . The symmetric selection set results in a displace - ment proﬁle with a slightly narrower dimple . Note that the TABLE V . Effects of turgor pressure on actin force f A and force crossover radius R W . The pulling force F A is the total force required to initiate endocytosis , and is calculated by integrating the force f A from r = 0 to R W . The spring bed model results do not include f M or f CGP . F A ( pN ) R W ( nm ) P 0 ( MPa ) Continuum Spring bed Continuum Spring bed 0 . 25 1500 1700 53 51 0 . 5 2800 2800 48 48 1 . 0 5000 4600 45 45 2 . 0 8000 7200 41 42 ﬁtting parameter B from Eq . ( 7 ) , which does not affect the curvature , has been discarded in both cases . The resulting force densities − ( f W + P 0 ) from the FE simulations for both the outlier rejection and symmetric selection sets are compared in Fig . 10 ( c ) . The force density from the symmetric selection 0 20 40 60 80 100 10 5 0 5 r [ nm ] w [ n m ] Outlier Symmetric ( a ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 10 5 0 5 r [ nm ] w [ n m ] Outlier Symmetric ( b ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 600 400 200 0 200 R [ nm ] + f W [ k P a ] P 0 - ( ) Outlier Symmetric ( c ) FIG . 10 . Comparisons of ( a ) the mean proﬁles , ( b ) Gaussian ﬁts of the mean proﬁles , and ( c ) the resulting wall reaction forces using the displacement sets deﬁned in Table II . The curves found using the “outlier rejection” displacement sets are represented by solid lines , and those found using the “symmetric selection” displacement sets are represented by dashed lines . 052414 - 12 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) 0 20 40 60 80 10 5 0 5 r [ nm ] w [ n m ] Gaussian Integrated 100 FIG . 11 . Comparison of the Gaussian ﬁt of the mean displace - ment proﬁle [ see Fig . 2 ( c ) ] and the integrated polynomial ﬁt of the mean displacement proﬁle in the arc length domain . The integration of the polynomial ﬁt is only continuous to a radius of r ≈ 46 nm . set is about 4 nm narrower at the point R (cid:8) W ( deﬁned here as the location where f W + P 0 = 0 ) than for the outlier rejection set . This indicates that R (cid:8) W is not particularly sensitive to the selection criteria of the membrane proﬁles . In the spatial domain ( r and z ) , we ﬁt the mean displacement proﬁle from Fig . 2 ( c ) using a Gaussian function . A Gaussian curve provides a continuous ﬁt to the full radius of the actin patch ( 100 nm or more ) . Since the mean data from Fig . 2 is continuous to about 46 nm , a Gaussian ﬁt is more convenient than a polynomial ﬁt for the full actin patch . We chose a polynomial ﬁt in the arc length coordinates [ s and ψ ( s ) ] for convenience in implementing the boundary conditions for Eq . ( 2 ) . For the polynomial ﬁt , the BCs could be met by constraining the odd terms to vanish . In order to compare these two ﬁts , we transformed the polynomial ﬁt into the spatial domain by numerically integrating the following two relationships : r = (cid:6) s 0 cos [ ψ ( s ) ] ds , ( A1 ) z = − (cid:6) S s sin [ ψ ( s ) ] ds + z 0 , ( A2 ) where S is the maximum curve length ( S ≈ 46 nm ) . For the integration constant z 0 in Eq . ( A2 ) , we chose the parameter A from the Gaussian ﬁt in the spatial domain [ see Eq . ( 7 ) ] . Figure 11 provides a comparison of the Gaussian and inte - grated polynomial ﬁts in the spatial domain . The comparison between the two ﬁts is quite close , and the choice of two different ﬁtting functions for the spatial and arc length coordinates appears reasonable . ( 2 ) Growth parameters . For a numerical assessment of the agreement between the estimated and simulated actin forces , we use a normalized , absolute - mean error E A . This error is deﬁned as E A = (cid:14) R A 0 (cid:15)(cid:15) f sim A ( r ) − f A ( r ) (cid:15)(cid:15) 2 πr dr (cid:14) R A 0 | f A ( r ) | 2 πr dr , ( A3 ) where f sim A ( r ) is the simulated actin force , f A ( r ) is the estimated actin force , and R A is the radius of the actin patch . ( a ) Effect of the actin network radius on calculated growth forces . We tried increasing the actin patch radius to 150 nm . The shape of the calculated force proﬁle was / m a x | f | A f A r [ nm ] 0 50 100 150 200 1 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 R A = 100 nm R A = 150 nm R A = 200 nm 0 50 100 150 200 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] f A [ k P a ] R A = 100 nm R A = 150 nm ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 12 . Comparison of actin force f A obtained from growth simulations for increasing radii of the actin patch . ( a ) Normalized actin forces for linear strains . ( b ) Full - magnitude comparisons of actin forces for nonlinear strains . similar to the 100 nm baseline case , as shown in Fig . 12 . The compressive force density is lower for the actin radius of R A = 150 nm , as expected for the larger area . Table III shows that the actin radius has almost no effect on the agreement between simulated and estimated actin forces for simulations with linear or nonlinear strains . ( b ) Effect of the parameter α in the Fung model . We ran growth simulations with α taking the values 0 . 001 , 0 . 01 , and 0 . 02 , using the same growth proﬁles as in the baseline simulations . The change in α resulted in no appreciable difference in the simulated actin force density f A . Table III shows no signiﬁcant changes in agreement between simulated and estimated actin forces due to changes in α . ( c ) Effect of the polymerization region thickness . We ran growth simulations with polymerization region thicknesses of Z p = 20 , 25 , and 30 nm , again using growth proﬁles from the baseline simulations . The differences in f A for Z p = 25 and 30 nm were insigniﬁcant as is apparent from Fig . 13 and Table III . As seen in Fig . 13 , the differences in f A between the simulations with Z p = 20 and 25 nm were more noticeable . Table III also indicates a poorer ﬁt between 052414 - 13 D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) 0 20 40 60 80 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] f A [ k P a ] Z p = 20 n Z p = 25 n Z p = 30 n Estimated m m m 100 FIG . 13 . Comparison of actin force f A from actin growth sim - ulations for nonlinear strains and polymerization region thicknesses of Z p = 20 , 25 , and 30 nm . The corrected growth proﬁle g ( r ) from Fig . 9 ( a ) was used for all three simulations . “Estimated” denotes force proﬁle obtained from experimental data . simulated and estimated actin force for Z p = 20 nm . Thus , the nonlinear - strain growth model is sensitive to Z p parameters below 25 nm , but it is not particular sensitive to larger values of Z p . ( d ) Effect of shape of growth proﬁle . Finally , we simu - lated the actin force density generated by several arbitrarily chosen growth proﬁles shown in Fig . 14 ( a ) . We tried several parameters for the proﬁle deﬁned in Eq . ( 23 ) and a ﬁtted proﬁle based on our previous work [ 16 ] : g ( r ) = (cid:2) 1 π tan − 1 (cid:3) r − r 0 0 . 1 r 0 (cid:4) + 1 2 (cid:5) 2 . ( A4 ) It is clear that the different forms and parameters generate substantial differences in the calculated force densities . Thus , the calculated actin force density is sensitive to the form and width of the growth proﬁle . Therefore , a growth proﬁle that generates the correct actin force density is likely to be reasonably correct . ( 3 ) Wall parameters , turgor pressure , and geometry ( a ) Effect of mechanical model of cell wall . We modeled the cell wall as both a continuous material ( using FE simulation ; see Fig . 6 ) and with a linear - spring bed model ( not shown ) , and calculated f W using each model . The spring bed model assumes that the displacement of the cell wall at any particular point along the wall is independent the displacements at other points . A comparison of the force − ( f W + P 0 ) between both models for a turgor pressure of P 0 = 0 . 5 MPa is shown in Fig . 15 ( a ) . The sharp transition that occurs at r ≈ 38 nm for the spring bed model is the location at which the membrane separates from the cell wall . The transition is smooth for the continuous material model because displacements at any particular point along the cell wall impact the displacements at other points . The two cell wall models represent extremes in treating the cell wall as acontinuous or spatiallyuncoupledmaterial . We expect that the behavior of the cell wall to fall somewhere within these two approaches . To estimate the sensitivity 0 20 40 60 80 100 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] f A [ k P a ] Estimated tanh , r 0 = 42 . 0 nm tanh , r 0 = 52 . 5 nm tanh , r 0 = 63 . 0 nm atan 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 r [ nm ] g ( r ) tanh , r 0 = 42 . 0 nm tanh , r 0 = 52 . 5 nm tanh , r 0 = 63 . 0 nm atan ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 14 . ( a ) Growth proﬁles used for simulating actin forces . The tanh curves are deﬁned by Eq . ( 23 ) with parameter values of η = 0 . 16 nm − 1 and r 0 = 42 . 0 , 52 . 5 , and 63 . 0 nm . The atan curve is based on Eq . ( A4 ) with r 0 = 39 . 5 nm , and 0 . 1 r 0 is replaced with a ﬁtted value of 14 . 5 nm . ( b ) Comparison of simulated actin force f A using the growth proﬁles from ( a ) ( broken lines ) , and the actin force density estimated from experiments ( solid line ) . to the mechanical properties assumed for the cell wall , we performed a sensitivity analysis using both cell wall models and three turgor pressures . We used an error propagation approach [ 55 ] to estimate the sensitivity to the two types of models . We deﬁne the standard error or sensitivity at a given r as α 2 T ( r ) = N (cid:16) n = 1 (cid:15)(cid:15) f FE W ( r , P n ) − f spring W ( r , P n ) (cid:15)(cid:15) 2 (cid:3) P 0 P n (cid:4) 2 , ( A5 ) where P n = 0 . 25 , 0 . 50 , and 0 . 75 MPa are the three turgor pressures in the study , and N = 3 for three pressures . Figure 15 shows the force ( f W + P 0 ) ± α T for P 0 = 0 . 5 MPa . The largest sensitivities tend to occur at the transitions at r ≈ 38 and 58 which are the locations where the continuous assumption makes the largest impact . The sensitivity of R (cid:8) W to the cell wall model is less than 6 nm . The term R (cid:8) W is deﬁned here as the location at which f W + P 0 = 0 , and is expected to be the location where the membrane separates from the cell wall . This indicates 052414 - 14 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 800 600 400 200 0 200 400 r [ nm ] 0 20 40 60 80 100 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] FEM Spring Bed - ( ) - ( ) ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 15 . ( a ) Comparison between the cell wall reaction force and turgor pressure ( f W + P 0 ) using elastic continuum ( solid line ) and linear - spring bed ( dashed line ) models of the cell wall . The turgor pressure in both simulations was P 0 = 0 . 5 MPa . ( b ) Sensitivity analysis comparing the continuum and linear - spring bed cell wall models . Theforces f W + P 0 fromthecontinuummodelwith P 0 = 0 . 5 MPa ( solid line ) and ( f W + P 0 ) ± α T ( dotted lines ) are shown . The sensitivity α T is calculated from Eq . ( A5 ) . that the location at which the membrane separates from the cell wall is not particularly sensitive to the cell wall model chosen in the analysis . ( b ) Effect of Poisson’s ratio . In addition to comparing the different cell wall models , we also performed a study changing the Poisson’s ratio in the continuum model of the cell wall . The baseline Poisson’s ratio of ν = 0 . 49 assumes that the cell wall is nearly incompressible . For a turgor pressure of P 0 = 0 . 5 , we ran additional FE simulations for Poisson’s ratios of ν = 0 and 0 . 3 . For all three cases , the actin force f A was nearly identical . We also calculated the pulling force F A and location R W where f A crosses from positive to negative . For all of the following cell wall parameter studies we deﬁne the pulling force as the total actin force f A integrated over the area from r = 0 to R W . Table IV shows only small variations in F A and R W due to large changes in the Poisson’s ratio . Based on these results , 0 50 100 150 200 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] f A [ k P a ] R A = 100 nm R A = 150 nm R A = 200 nm FIG . 16 . Comparison of actin force proﬁles f A estimated from experiments for increasing radii of the actin network . The model from Fig . 4 was used to estimate the actin force for R A = 100 , 150 , and 200 nm with a matching cell wall and membrane radius in each case . the main results of the continuum mechanics model of the cell wall are not sensitive to Poisson’s ratio . ( c ) Effect of Young’s modulus . We varied the Young’s modulus E W of the cell wall to assess the effect on both F A and R W . Table IV shows F A and R W for both the continuum and linear - spring bed models of the cell wall with Young’s moduli of E = 1 / 4 × 110 , 1 / 2 × 110 , 110 , and 2 × 110 MPa . Based on this study , neither F A nor R W are particularly sensitive to the cell wall Young’s modulus . ( d ) Effect of actin network radius on force proﬁle obtained from experiments . The required actin force densi - ties f A calculated for the actin network radii of R A = 100 , 150 , and 200 nm are shown in Fig . 16 . Table IV shows the corresponding values of F A and R W for both the continuum and linear - spring models for all three radii . The continuum model is insensitive to the width of the actin network , with almost no change in F A or R W for large changes in R A . The total pulling force F A for the linear - spring bed model is also insensitive to changes in actin network radius . The radius R W in the spring bed model does vary for different actin radii . However , with a maximum change of 8 nm for a 300 % increase in actin network area , this model does not appear to be particularly sensitive to the actin network radius . ( e ) Effect of turgor pressure . The turgor pressure study summarized in Table V is discussed in the main text describing the continuum model of the cell wall . The results for the spring bed model are similar . ( 4 ) Membrane and CGP parameters ( a ) CGP bending modulus . To observe the effect of changes in the CGP bending modulus on the actin force obtained from the growth simulations , we calculated the total actin force for several bending moduli : κ CGP = 20 k B T , 285 k B T , and 500 k B T . Figure 17 shows that for a small bending modulus comparable to the bare membrane - bending modulus κ CGP = 20 k B T , the CGP continue to generate a relatively small force . On the other hand , nearly 052414 - 15 D . J . TWETEN , P . V . BAYLY , AND A . E . CARLSSON PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] f A [ k P a ] CGP = 20k B T CGP = 285k B T CGP = 500k B T FIG . 17 . Study of the effect of the bending modulus κ CGP on the actin force f A estimated from experiments . The CGP forces were generated from the hyperbolic tangent transition from Eq . ( 11 ) with γ = 0 . 1 and s 0 = 46 nm . doubling the CGP bending modulus to κ CGP = 500 k B T results in a noticeably more rounded actin force density . Further increases in CGP bending modulus result in an actin force that is no longer smooth at the transition point at s 0 = 46 nm . Table VI shows that the changes in CGP bending modulus have a minimal effect on both F A and R W . For all membrane and CGP parameter studies we deﬁne the pulling force as the total actin force f A , integrated over the area from r = 0 to R W , where R W is the radial position at which f A = 0 . On the whole , the results are not strongly sensitive to changes in κ CGP . ( b ) Transition radius . We treated the transition radius s 0 of the preferred curvature of the CGP as a ﬁtting parameter when estimating the total actin force . The transition radius was approximately equal to the radius where the ﬁrst derivative of the force f W + P 0 was maximized , which resulted in a transition radius of s 0 = 46 nm . In Fig . 18 , actin forces with transition radii of s 0 = 36 , 46 , and 56 nm are compared to highlight the effect of this parameter . Selecting a transition radius larger or smaller than s 0 = 46 nm results TABLE VI . Effect of CGP parameters on the total required actin force F A and the endocytic width R W . F A is calculated by integrating the force f A from r = 0 to R W . R W is deﬁned as the location where the experimentally estimated actin force f A = 0 . Study Parameter F A ( pN ) R W ( nm ) 4a κ CGP = 20 k B T 3100 48 κ CGP = 285 k B T 2800 48 κ CGP = 500 k B T 2600 51 4b s 0 = 36 nm 3000 48 s 0 = 46 nm 2800 48 s 0 = 56 nm 3000 46 4c H 0 = 36nm − 1 2900 48 H 0 = 46nm − 1 2800 48 H 0 = 56nm − 1 2700 49 0 20 40 60 80 100 600 400 200 0 200 r [ nm ] f A [ k P a ] s 0 = 36 nm s 0 = 46 n s 0 = n m m 56 FIG . 18 . Study of the effect of center of the transition radius s 0 of the CGP on the experimentally estimated actin force f A . The CGP forces were generated from the hyperbolic tangent transition from Eq . ( 11 ) with γ = 0 . 1 . in enhanced spatial ﬂuctuations in the actin force density . In addition , Table VI shows that the changes in transition radius have a minimal effect on both F A and R W . However , our chosen value minimizes the required force F A . Thus , we feel that this choice of transition radius makes physical sense . ( c ) Preferred curvature . We also considered the effect on the actin force of changing the preferred curvature H 0 of the CGP . We observed the effect of a selected range of preferred curvatures ( H 0 = 0 . 016 , 0 . 02 , and 0 . 024 nm − 1 ) on the estimated actin force . We found that for this range , the change in shape of the actin force was minimal . In addition , Table VI shows that the changes in preferred curvature have a minimum effect on both F A and R W . ( 4 ) Alternative CGP patch transition . Finally , an alternative approach to modeling the transition of the CGP patch is to vary the preferred curvature and keep the bending modulus constant . The CGP forces are then deﬁned by f CGP ( s ) = 1 2 r ∂ ∂s (cid:8) r ∂ ∂s [ − 2 κ CGP H C ( s ) ] (cid:9) , ( A6 ) where H C is preferred curvature of the CGP proteins . The preferred curvature is modeled with the tanh function H C ( s ) = H 0 2 { 1 − tanh [ γ ( s − s 0 ) ] } , ( A7 ) where H 0 is the maximum preferred curvature . When the CGP forces are calculated using Eqs . ( A6 ) and ( A7 ) for the same baseline parameters , the resulting actin force is nearly identical to the baseline case which uses Eq . ( 11 ) . Using the transition curvature in Eqs . ( A6 ) and ( A7 ) results in a pulling force and endocytic width of F A = 2800 pN and R W = 48 nm , respectively . 052414 - 16 ACTIN GROWTH PROFILE IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED . . . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 95 , 052414 ( 2017 ) [ 1 ] H . T . McMahon and E . Boucrot , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 517 ( 2011 ) . [ 2 ] M . Kaksonen , C . P . Toret , and D . Drubin , Cell 123 , 305 ( 2005 ) . [ 3 ] S . Boulant , C . Kural , J . - C . Zeeh , F . Ubelmann , and T . Kirchhausen , Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1124 ( 2011 ) . [ 4 ] J . Weinberg and D . G . Drubin , Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 1 ( 2012 ) . [ 5 ] O . L . Mooren , B . J . Galletta , and J . A . Cooper , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 81 , 661 ( 2012 ) . [ 6 ] R . Basu , E . L . Munteanu , and F . Chang , Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 679 ( 2014 ) . [ 7 ] S . Aghamohammadzadeh and K . R . Ayscough , Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1039 ( 2009 ) . [ 8 ] W . Kukulski , M . Schorb , and J . A . Briggs , Cell 150 , 508 ( 2012 ) . [ 9 ] F . - Z . Idrissi , A . Blasco , A . Espinal , and M . I . Geli , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E2587 ( 2012 ) . [ 10 ] J . Liu , Y . Sun , D . G . Drubin , and G . F . Oster , PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000204 ( 2009 ) . [ 11 ] S . DmitrieffandF . Nédélec , PLoSComputat . Biol . 11 , e1004538 ( 2015 ) . [ 12 ] N . Walani , J . Torres , and A . Agrawal , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E1423 ( 2015 ) . [ 13 ] A . Collins , A . Warrington , K . A . Taylor , and T . Svitkina , Curr . Biol . 21 , 1167 ( 2011 ) . [ 14 ] M . Kaksonen , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 ( 2006 ) . [ 15 ] B . J . Galletta and J . A . Cooper , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 20 ( 2009 ) . [ 16 ] A . Carlsson and P . Bayly , Biophys . J . 106 , 1596 ( 2014 ) . [ 17 ] J . J . Baggett , K . E . D’Aquino , and B . Wendland , Genetics 165 , 1661 ( 2003 ) . [ 18 ] Y . Sun , M . Kaksonen , D . T . Madden , R . Schekman , and D . G . Drubin , Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 717 ( 2004 ) . [ 19 ] M . Skruzny , T . Brach , R . Ciuffa , S . Rybina , M . Wachsmuth , and M . Kaksonen , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E2533 ( 2012 ) . [ 20 ] W . Helfrich , Z . Naturforsch . C 28 , 693 ( 1973 ) . [ 21 ] Y . Sun , A . C . Martin , and D . G . Drubin , Develop . Cell 11 , 33 ( 2006 ) . [ 22 ] F . Jülicher and U . Seifert , Phys . Rev . E 49 , 4728 ( 1994 ) . [ 23 ] F . Jülicher and R . Lipowsky , Phys . Rev . E 53 , 2670 ( 1996 ) . [ 24 ] M . P . do Carmo , Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces ( Dover , New York , 1976 ) . [ 25 ] P . Rangamani , K . K . Mandadap , and G . Oster , Biophys . J . 107 , 751 ( 2014 ) . [ 26 ] O . - Y . Zhong - Can and W . Helfrich , Phys . Rev . Lett . 59 , 2486 ( 1987 ) . [ 27 ] COMSOL AB , COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS v . 5 . 1 , 2015 , www . comsol . com [ 28 ] A . Picco , M . Mund , J . Ries , F . Nédélec , and M . Kaksonen , eLife 4 , e04535 ( 2015 ) . [ 29 ] G . A . Holzapfel , Nonlinear Solid Mechanics . A Continuum Approach for Engineering ( Wiley , New York , 2000 ) . [ 30 ] Y . C . Fung , Biomechanics . Mechanical Properties of Living Tissue ( Springer , New York , 1993 ) . [ 31 ] A . Delﬁno , N . Stergiopulos , J . E . Moore , Jr . , and J . J . Meister , J . Biomech . 30 , 777 ( 1997 ) . [ 32 ] A . E . Smith , Z . Zhang , C . R . Thomas , K . E . Moxham , and A . P . J . Middelberg , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9871 ( 2000 ) . [ 33 ] R . Schneiter , B . Brgger , R . Sandhoff , G . Zellnig , A . Leber , M . Lampl , K . Athenstaedt , C . Hrastnik , S . Eder , G . Daum et al . , J . Cell . Biol . 146 , 741 ( 1999 ) . [ 34 ] W . Rawicz , K . C . Olbrich , T . McIntosh , D . Needham , and E . Evans , Biophys . J . 79 , 328 ( 2000 ) . [ 35 ] A . J . Jin , K . Prasad , P . D . Smith , E . M . Lafer , and R . Nossal , Biophys . J . 90 , 3333 ( 2006 ) . [ 36 ] N . Minc , A . Boudaoud , and F . Chang , Curr . Biol . 19 , 1096 ( 2009 ) . [ 37 ] J . Schaber , M . Ángel Adrover , E . Eriksson , S . Pelet , E . Petelenz - Kurdziel , D . Klein , F . Posas , M . Goksör , M . Peter , S . Hohmann et al . , Eur . Biophys . J . 39 , 1547 ( 2010 ) . [ 38 ] A . J . Meikle , R . H . Reed , and G . M . Gadd , Microbiology 134 , 3049 ( 1988 ) . [ 39 ] I . De Marañon , P . - A . Marechal , and P . Gervais , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 227 , 519 ( 1996 ) . [ 40 ] B . Goldenbogen , W . Giese , M . Hemmen , J . Uhlendorf , A . Herrmann , and E . Klipp , Open Biol . 6 , 160136 ( 2016 ) . [ 41 ] I . S . Sokolnikoff , R . D . Specht et al . , Mathematical Theory of Elasticity ( McGraw - Hill , New York , 1956 ) , Vol . 83 . [ 42 ] B . L . Goode , J . A . Eskin , and B . Wendland , Genetics 199 , 315 ( 2015 ) . [ 43 ] T . Pujol , O . du Roure , M . Fermigier , and J . Heuvingh , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 10364 ( 2012 ) . [ 44 ] F . Gittes , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard , J . Cell Biol . 120 , 923 ( 1993 ) . [ 45 ] V . Sirotkin , J . Berro , K . Macmillan , L . Zhao , and T . D . Pollard , Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 2894 ( 2010 ) . [ 46 ] X . Wang , B . J . Galletta , J . A . Cooper , and A . E . Carlsson , Biophys . J . 110 , 1430 ( 2016 ) . [ 47 ] C . S . Peskin , G . M . Odell , and G . F . Oster , Biophys . J . 65 , 316 ( 1993 ) . [ 48 ] T . L . Hill and M . W . Kirschner , Int . Rev . Cytology 78 , 1 ( 1982 ) . [ 49 ] T . D . Pollard , J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2747 ( 1986 ) . [ 50 ] M . J . Greenberg , T . Lin , Y . E . Goldman , H . Shuman , and E . M . Ostap , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E2433 ( 2012 ) . [ 51 ] B . J . Galletta , A . E . Carlsson , and J . A . Cooper , Biophys . J . 103 , 2145 ( 2012 ) . [ 52 ] L . D . Landau and E . Lifshitz , Theory of Elasticity , Course of Theoretical Physics Vol . 7 ( Elsevier , New York , 1986 ) . [ 53 ] M . J . Tamás , K . Luyten , F . C . W . Sutherland , A . Hernandez , J . Albertyn , H . Valadi , H . Li , B . A . Prior , S . G . Kilian , J . Ramos et al . , Mol . Microbiol . 31 , 1087 ( 1999 ) . [ 54 ] J . K . Scher - Zagier and A . E . Carlsson , Biophys . J . 111 , 2747 ( 2016 ) . [ 55 ] I . Hughes and T . Hase , Measurements and their Uncertainties ( Oxford University Press , Oxford , 2010 ) . 052414 - 17