Book review Real Options : Managing Strategic Investment in an Uncertain World ; Martha Amram , Nalin Kulatilaka ; Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA , 1999 , 246 pages ( $ 35 . 00 ) The purpose of this text is to understand the circumstances where option methodology is applicable to strategic investment . In other words , it is a manual to teach decision - makers how to think in a real - options framework . Although the text makes reference to some option - pricing techniques , no true option - pricing training is given . However , wherever computational rigor exists , the reader is referenced to the book (cid:213) s website : www . real - options . com for downloadable spreadsheets . The book also carefully notes the relevant academic research . The text is refreshing in that it does create a method of logic for the study of real options without an excessive amount of new vocabulary . In a sense , the method is a standardization of real - options thought . However , it is disap - pointing to need a second reference to actually do the computational work to ﬁnd the value of a real option . Although I am delighted by this text (cid:213) s contri - bution , I am also disappointed in that it only gives me half of what I really need to apply real - options techniques . The text consists of three parts : the real - options potential , the real - options solution process , and a portfolio of applications . A concluding chapter sum - marizes the text . The ﬁrst part has six chapters and behaves as an extended introduction . The second part , with three chapters , produces the standardized technique for implementing a real - options framework . Each of the 10 chapters in part three provides a mini case study of particular real - options techniques . More speciﬁcally , Chapters 1 – 3 introduce the concept of a real option . The reader is made aware that ‘uncertainty creates opportunity’ and how an op - tion - pricing framework captures this issue . Chapter 3 does a nice job of ex - plaining option payo(cid:128)s and option pricing without the aid of an equation . The presentation is clear and particularly good for a novice . Chapters 4 – 6 further develop the use of option techniques to real assets . Chapter 4 discusses ‘tracking error’ in relation to using a tracking portfolio to replicate an option . Since a real option is generally not an exchange - traded security nor does it have an underlying security that is exchange - traded , the issue of tracking error is signiﬁcant . Chapters 5 and 6 shape the actual focus of Journal of Banking & Finance 24 ( 2000 ) 828 – 829 www . elsevier . com / locate / econbase 0378 - 4266 / 00 / $ - see front matter (cid:211) 2000 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . PII : S 0 3 7 8 - 4 2 6 6 ( 0 0 ) 0 0 0 8 2 - 0 the text . The book is not about techniques of real - options pricing but how to think in a real - options framework . Given the sentiment of these two chapters , the second part of the text launches into a solution process without mathe - matical solutions . Chapter 7 develops the solution process as essentially four steps : frame the application , implement the option - valuation model , review the results , and re - design . The fourth step , ‘Redesign’ , is to determine if you need to repeat steps one through three again . The chapter mainly focuses on the ﬁrst , third and fourth steps . The third and fourth steps essentially make the reader aware that one generally does not get an appropriate solution on the ﬁrst attempt . When an inappropriate solution occurs , it is usually step one that needs to be adjusted . Chapters 8 and 9 are devoted entirely to step 2 : implement an option - val - uation model . The techniques discussed are covered in a cursory manner making an option - pricing reference text necessary for complete understanding . However , the end - of - chapter notes are rather good in directing the reader to such reference material . Again , the treatment is appropriate for developing intuition , which is the goal of the book . Chapters 10 – 19 are a set of mini cases involving real - options concepts . The calculations are scant at best but the framing of the context in which real options emerge is clear . In essence , the authors bring the reader through step one of the solution process in each case . As with Chapters 8 and 9 , the end - of - chapter notes provide the reference material necessary for a more rigorous treatment of the given case . As to the subject matter of each mini case , the chapter titles tell the story : Valuing a Start - up , Investing in a Start - up , Ex - ploring for Oil , Developing a Drug , Investing in Infrastructure , Valuing Va - cant Land , Buying Flexibility , Combining Real and Financial Flexibility , Investing to Preempt Competitors , and Writing a License . Although the main issue of the text is to get the manager to think in a real - options framework , a second aspect extends this notion to developing corpo - rate strategy by using the real - options framework . This second notion emerges in Chapter 5 but really comes alive in the latter mini cases . Chapter 20 echoes these two aspects to conclude the text . Overall , this book does accomplish its goal of developing a framework for attacking corporate decisions using real options . However , if the reader desires a text that explains the mathematical rigor of ﬁnding a real - options solution , this text is not su(cid:129)cient . The text is recommended for the classroom at the graduate level but a second text for actual option pricing is necessary to pro - duce a full treatment of the subject matter . Tom Arnold Department of Finance , College of Business Administration , Louisiana State University , Baton Rouge , LA 70803 - 6388 , USA Book review 829