Molecular Recognition Imaging and Force Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules FERRY KIENBERGER , § ANDREAS EBNER , § HERMANN J . GRUBER , AND PETER HINTERDORFER * Institute for Biophysics , Johannes Kepler University of Linz , Altenbergerstrasse 69 , A - 4040 Linz , Austria Received July 27 , 2005 ABSTRACT In recent years , considerable attention has focused on biological applications of the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) , in particular on high - resolution imaging of individual biological molecules and on the measurement of molecular forces under near - physiological conditions . The detection of intermolecular forces in the pico - newton range has paved the way to investigate details on structural parameters of the binding pockets and the energy landscapes of many biomolecular interactions . The capability of AFM to resolve nanometer - sized details , together with its force detection sensitivity , led to the development of molecular recognition imaging . By a combination of topographical imaging with force measurements , receptor sites are localized with nanometer accuracy . Topography and recognition of target molecules are thereby simultaneously mapped . Thus the AFM can identify specific components in a complex biological sample and retain its high resolution in imaging . Introduction Since its invention in the late 1980s , the atomic force microscope 1 ( AFM ) has increasingly been used for the visualization of biomolecules and complex biological structures . 2 The main advantage compared to other high - resolution methods such as electron microscopy and X - ray diffraction is that the measurements can be carried out in a fluid environment , including physiological medium , which is crucial to study the structure and function of biomolecules . In particular , the specimen can be imaged in its native state , that is , there is no need to stain , freeze , or crystallize biological samples . The exceptional signal - to - noise ratio of the AFM allows individual biomolecules to be imaged at sub - nanometer resolution , 3 making it possible to observe single biomolecules at work 4 and to study the function of biomolecular assemblies . 5 In addi - tion to high - resolution imaging of proteins , nucleotides , membranes , and living cells , 6 the measurement of me - chanical forces at the molecular level has provided detailed insights into the function and structure of many biomolecular systems . 7 - 9 Inter - and intramolecular inter - actions can be studied directly at the molecular level , as exemplified by analysis of the binding potentials of receptor - ligand pairs involved in cell adhesion , 10 polysac - charide elasticity , 11 DNA mechanics , 12 and the function of molecular motors . 13 In case of receptor - ligand com - plexes , defined forces are exerted on a receptor - ligand complex and the dissociation process is followed over time . Dynamic aspects of recognition are addressed in force spectroscopy experiments , where distinct force - time profiles are applied to monitor changes of conformations and states during receptor - ligand dissociation . Dynamic force spectroscopy , therefore , allows one to detect energy barriers that are difficult or impossible to detect by conventional , near - equilibrium assays and to probe the free energy surface of proteins and molecular complexes . 14 In the past decade , the resolution of topographical imaging and the force sensitivity have been much im - proved , mainly due to continuous developments of AFM instrumentation . By combination of topographical imag - ing with force measurements , receptor sites on a surface are localized with nanometer positional accuracy ; thus , topographical images and recognition images are recorded at the same time . 15 AFM also allows one to select particular molecules from a large population . Time - dependent bio - molecular processes can be followed on the single mol - ecule level , which allows one to study transient interme - diate states and individual reaction pathways without synchronizing large populations of molecules . 16 This Account details the use of molecular recognition studies for exploring fine kinetic and structural details of molecular recognition processes . Furthermore , the com - bination of topographical imaging with single molecule force measurements is presented as a new tool for the localization of binding sites on various surfaces . With this methodology , topography and recognition images can be obtained at the same time and distinct receptor sites in the recognition image can be assigned to structures from the topography image . It is applicable to almost any kind of ligand ; thus many types of proteins or other biomol - ecules can be specifically recognized and mapped on cells , membranes , or other subcellular structures . Single Molecule Recognition In molecular recognition experiments , the binding of ligands immobilized on AFM tips toward surface bound * Corresponding author . Tel : 0043 732 2468 9265 . Fax : 0043 732 2468 9270 . E - mail : peter . hinterdorfer @ jku . at . § Contributed equally to this work . Ferry Kienberger received his Ph . D . in biophysics from the University of Linz in 2002 . His postdoctoral work ( 2002 - 2003 ) at the Center for Applied Molecular Engineering and Proceryon Biosciences GmbH , University of Salzburg , focused on structural bioinformatics . He is currently a postdoctoral fellow at University of Linz , working in the field of atomic force microscopy . Andreas Ebner is an undergraduate student in chemistry working on topography and recognition imaging using the atomic force microscope . Hermann Gruber obtained his Ph . D . in chemistry from the University of Graz in 1983 . After 3 years of postdoctoral research at Purdue University , Indiana ( 1983 - 1985 ) , he moved to the Institute of Biophysics at University of Linz to build up the chemistry group . Since 2001 , he has been associate professor for bio - analytics working in the field of single - molecule microscopy . Peter Hinterdorfer received his Ph . D . in biophysics from the University of Linz in 1992 . His postdoctoral work at University of Virginia ( 1992 - 1993 ) focused on fluorescence microscopy studies of membrane proteins . He then built up the atomic force microscopy group at the Institute of Biophysics , University of Linz , acting as associate Professor since 1999 . His research involves the investigation of single molecular interactions using atomic force microscopy . Acc . Chem . Res . 2006 , 39 , 29 - 36 10 . 1021 / ar050084m CCC : $ 33 . 50 ª 2006 American Chemical Society VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006 / ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH 29 Published on Web 12 / 02 / 2005 receptors ( or vice versa ) is studied by applying a force to the receptor - ligand complex until the bond breaks at a measurable unbinding force . Such experiments require that one or few ligand molecules are permanently tethered to the apex of the AFM tip , usually by covalent bonding via a flexible linker molecule . 17 The ligand on the linker molecule can freely orient and diffuse within a certain volume provided by the length of the tether , thereby achieving unconstrained binding to its receptor . In the first step of the anchoring protocol , amino groups are generated at a low surface density on the tip , correspond - ing to few sites per tip apex , 18 as needed for single molecule experiments ( Figure 1 ) . In the second step , one end of a distensible and flexible linker ( poly ( ethylene glycol ) , PEG ) is attached to the amino group on the tip ( Figure 1a ) . In the third step , the ligand ( e . g . , an antibody ) is linked to the outer end of PEG . Cross - linkers with 6 - 8 nm length ( corresponding to 18 ethylene glycol units plus termini ) gave a good compromise between high mobility of the ligand and narrow lateral resolution of the target site . The typical PEG linker has one amino - reactive end for attachment to the tip and one thiol - reactive end for linking of ligands with reactive sulfhydryls ( exemplified in Figure 1a ) . 19 Since the latter are absent in native antibodies , prederivatization of the antibody’s lysine residues with the short linker N - succinimidyl - 3 - ( S - acetylth - io ) propionate ( SATP ) is required . Subsequent deprotection with NH 2 OH led to reactive SH groups ( Figure 1a ) . A disadvantage with this method is that it does not allow for site - specific coupling of the cross - linker , since lysine residues are quite abundant . An attractive alternative to covalent coupling is provided by the widely used nitrilo - triacetate ( NTA ) - Ni 2 + - His 6 system ( Figure 1b ) . Fortunately , the binding force of this system is significantly larger than that between most ligand - receptor pairs . 20 Since a His 6 tag is readily appended to proteins , a cross - linker contain - ing a NTA residue is well suited for coupling proteins to the AFM tip ( Figure 1b ) . This generic , site - specific cou - pling strategy also allows for rigorous and ready control of binding specificity by using Ni 2 + as a molecular switch of the NTA - His 6 bond . Interaction forces of single ligand - receptor pairs are measured in force - distance cycles using a ligand - carrying tip and a target surface with firmly attached receptor molecules . As a typical example , a force - distance cycle of tip - bound biotin and mica - bound avidin is shown in Figure 2 . At a fixed lateral position , the tip vertically approaches the surface and is subsequently retracted . During this cycle , the cantilever deflection , x , which can be directly converted into a force , f , according to Hook’s law ( f ) kx , k being the cantilever spring constant ) , is continuously measured and plotted versus tip - surface separation . At the beginning of the tip - surface approach ( Figure 2a , black curve ) , the cantilever deflection remains zero . Upon tip - surface contact ( i . e . , at a distance of 0 nm ) and further approach , the cantilever bends upward , consistent with a repulsive force that linearly increases with the negative distance . Subsequent tip - surface re - traction ( Figure 2a , red curve ) first leads to relaxation of cantilever bending until the repulsive force drops to zero . Upon further retraction ( i . e . , at a distance of > 0 nm ) , the cantilever progressively bends downward , reflecting an attractive force between tip - bound biotin and immobilized avidin that increases with increasing tip - surface separa - tion . The shape of this nonlinear force - distance profile is determined by the elastic properties of the flexible PEG cross - linker , whereas the strength of the interaction ( termed the unbinding force , f u ) is governed by the type of receptor - ligand pair . If the ligand on the tip does not form a bond with the receptor on the surface , the recognition event ( i . e . , the parabolic shaped curve ) is missing and the retrace looks like the trace ( Figure 2b ) . The specificity of ligand - receptor binding is usually demonstrated by blocking experiments with free ligands , which are injected into the solution to block the receptor sites on the surface . 21 As a consequence , all specific recognition signals completely disappear , and only oc - casionally nonspecifc adhesion events are observed . FIGURE 1 . Linkage of ligands to AFM tips . Ligands were linked to AFM tips via heterobifunctional poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG ) derivatives of (cid:24) 8 nm length . Silicon nitride tips were functionalized with ethanolamine ( step 1 ) . ( a ) Covalent linkage via disulfide bond : The amino group on the tip was reacted with the NHS ester function on the PEG linker ( step 2 ) . This tip was immersed in a solution of antibody that had been prederivatized with anS - acetylthiopropionyl ( SATP ) group . Removal of the acetyl group with hydroxylamine gave a free thiol , which formed a disulfide bond with the PEG linker ( step 3 ) . ( b ) Noncovalent linkage of His6 - tagged proteins : The amino groups on the tip were derivatized with SATP groups ( step 2 ) , the S - acetyl group was removed with hydroxylamine , and the resulting thiol reacted with the pyridyldithio group on the PEG linker ( step 3 ) . The His 6 - tagged protein was then bound in the presence of nickel salt ( step 4 ) . Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules Kienbergeretal . 30 ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH / VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006 Molecular Recognition Force Spectroscopy When ligand - receptor binding is viewed on the single - molecule level , the average lifetime of a ligand - receptor bond at zero force , (cid:244) ( 0 ) , is given by the inverse of the kinetic off - rate constant , (cid:244) ( 0 ) ) 1 / k off . Therefore , ligands will dissociate from receptors even without any force applied to the bond at times larger than the average lifetime . In contrast , if molecules are pulled apart very fast , the bond will resist and require a measurable force for detachment . 22 Accordingly , unbinding forces do not con - stitute unitary values but depend on the dynamics of the unbinding experiments . On the millisecond to second time scale of AFM experiments , thermal impulses govern the unbinding process . In the thermal activation model , the lifetime of a complex in solution is described by a Boltzmann ansatz , (cid:244) ( 0 ) ) (cid:244) osc exp ( E barr / ( k B T ) ) , 23 where (cid:244) osc is the inverse of the natural oscillation frequency and E barr is the energy barrier for dissociation , yielding a simple Arrhenius dependency of dissociation rate on barrier height . A force acting on a binding complex deforms the interaction energy landscape and lowers the activation energy barrier . The lifetime (cid:244) ( f ) of a bond loaded with a constant force f is given by (cid:244) ( f ) ) (cid:244) osc exp ( E barr - fx / ( k B T ) ) , 24 with x being the distance of the energy barrier from the energy minimum along the direction of the applied force . The lifetime under constant force , therefore , compares to the lifetime at zero force , according to (cid:244) ( f ) ) (cid:244) ( 0 ) exp ( - fx / ( k B T ) ) . With the use of AFM , ligand - receptor unbinding is commonly measured in force - distance cycles , where an effective force increase or loading rate , r , can be deduced from r ) d f / d t , being equal to the product of pulling velocity and effective spring constant . The combination of the Boltzmann ansatz with the stochastic description of the unbinding process predicts the unbinding force distributions at different loading rates r ( Figure 3a ) . 25 The maximum of each force distribution , f * ( r ) , thereby reflects the most probable unbinding force at the respective loading rate r . f * is related to r through f * ( r ) ) k B T / x ln - ( rx / ( k B Tk off ) ) . Apparently , the unbinding force f * scales linearly with the logarithm of the loading rate . For a single barrier , this would give rise to a simple linear dependence of the force on the logarithm of the loading rate ( Figure 3b ) . In cases where more barriers are involved along the escape path , the curve will follow a sequence of linear regimes , each of which marks a particular barrier . 26 In force spectroscopy experiments , the variation in the pulling speed applied to specific ligand - receptor bonds will lead to detailed structural and kinetic information of the interaction . Length scales of energy barriers are obtained from the slope of the spectroscopy plot ( i . e . , force versus loading rate ) and extrapolation to zero forces yields the kinetic off - rate for the dissociation of the complex in solution . Various biomolecular interactions have been studied by measuring the loading rate dependence of the unbind - ing force by changing the pulling velocity of the force exerted to the interaction . The avidin - biotin complex is thereby often regarded as the prototype of a receptor - ligand pair , due to its enormously high affinity ( K D ) 10 - 13 M ) and long bond lifetime ( (cid:244) ( 0 ) ) 80 days ) . First realiza - tions of single - molecule recognition force detections were therefore done with biotin and its cognate receptor avidin , yielding an unbinding force of 160 pN . 7 Recent force - spectroscopy experiments of the avidin - biotin interaction revealed an energy landscape with more than one promi - nent energy barrier . 26 Using bio - force probe measure - ments , the loading rate was varied over 8 orders of magnitude , yielding a detailed picture of the force - spectroscopy curve with unbinding forces from 5 pN ( at smallest loading rates ) to 200 pN ( at highest loading rates ) . Distinct linear regimes that demonstrate the thermally activated nature of the bond breakage are visible , and abrupt changes in slope imply a number of sharp ener - getic barriers along the dissociation pathway . In a different study , single - molecule dynamic force spectroscopy was applied to get insights into the binding of Ran , a molecule that regulates assembly and dis - assembly of the receptor - cargo complexes in the nuclear pore to the nuclear import - receptor importin (cid:226) 1 . 27 By use of recognition force spectroscopy , it was found that the FIGURE 2 . Principles of single - molecule force measurements . Avidin was adsorbed onto mica , and biotin was attached to an AFM tip via a PEG linker . A force - distance cycle was acquired under buffer conditions . The approach curve ( black line ) and the retracting curve ( red line ) are shown . ( a ) The force - distance cycle exhibits an avidin - biotin unbinding event in the retracting curve with an unbinding force of (cid:24) 80 pN ( arrow ) . The parabolic retraction force curve reflects the extension of the distensible cross - linker - avidin - biotin connection . ( b ) The specificity of the avidin - biotin unbinding events is shown in blocking experiments where avidin is injected into the solution to block the biotin sites on the AFM tip . As a consequence , the specific recognition signals disappear , and the trace looks like the retrace . Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules Kienbergeretal . VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006 / ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH 31 complex of Ran - GTP and importin (cid:226) 1 alternates between two distinct conformational states with different interac - tion strength . The force distributions shifted to higher forces by increasing the loading rate , a behavior that fits to the above - mentioned models ( Figure 3a ) . For Ran - GTP , these distributions also had a unique bimodal appearance ( two Gaussian fits shown in black at each loading rate in Figure 3a ) , which cannot be described by the escape from a single potential well . In contrast , a model involving the independent dissociation of two distinct molecular com - plexes , each leading to a force distribution of its own , accurately fitted the data . The two force populations were shifted to higher forces at increasing loading rates ( black curves in Figure 3b ) and also changed in their relative size , with the second ( higher - force ) population representing a greater fraction at higher loading rates . The results thus indicate that the interaction between Ran - GTP and im - portin (cid:226) 1 can lead to two distinctly different bound states , each associated with an individual dissociation pathway . Combined Imaging and Force Measurements Besides measuring interaction strengths , localizing bind - ing sites on biological surfaces such as cells or membranes is also of great interest . To achieve this goal , force detection is combined with topographical imaging . High - resolution imaging together with single - molecule force spectroscopy , therefore , opens new possibilities for ana - lyzing the assembly and function of biomolecular struc - tures . 28 Using a ligand - carrying tip and receptor molecules immobilized onto a flat surface , a complete map of recognition sites can be generated by recording force - distance cycles in every pixel of a defined scan area . This mode , called force - volume , has extensively been used to study adhesion forces of polymer and cell surfaces , 29 ligand - receptor interactions , 30 and specific molecular interactions on living cells . 31 Figure 4a shows a typical recognition force map using an antibody - conjugated tip on a mica substrate with separated lysozyme molecules . The unbinding forces of the individual pixels are shown in gray scale values . Many binding sites on the lysozyme layer were detected , with an average binding probability of 20 % in the whole scan area ( i . e . , 20 out of 100 force - distance cycles showed an unbinding event ) . The specific - ity of the binding was shown by adding free antibody in solution , resulting in an effective block of the antibody / antigen interaction ( Figure 4b ) . The binding probability was thereby significantly lowered , as expected for a specific interaction . The measured forces were analyzed and empirical probability density functions ( pdf’s ) were constructed from the unbinding force values ( Figure 4c , solid line ) . The maximum of the distribution ( (cid:24) 60 pN ) reflects the most probable unbinding force . Upon block - ing , binding probabilities were dramatically reduced , as evidenced by the comparison of the pdf before ( Figure 4c , solid line ) and after blocking ( Figure 4c , dotted line ) . Topography and Recognition Imaging , Principles Although the recognition force map in Figure 4 does indicate the lateral positions of lysozyme molecules on the surface , single molecule resolution is obviously not achieved . The low lateral resolution of force - volume can be overcome by oscillating a modified tip close to its resonance frequency while scanning along the surface . This mode is termed recognition imaging . 32 In this first realization , a tip modified with anti - lysozyme antibodies was used in the dynamic force microscopy mode to scan along a surface loosely covered with lysozyme ( Figure 5 ) . Imaging with the antibody - functionalized tip gave strik - ingly different images than with a bare silicon - nitride tip . Antigenic molecules imaged with the antibody - modified FIGURE 3 . Dynamic force spectroscopy . Ran and importin (cid:226) ( imp (cid:226) ) were immobilized onto the AFM cantilevered tip and mica , respec - tively , and the interaction force was measured at different loading rates . ( a ) Unbinding force distributions obtained for imp (cid:226) - Ran - GDP ( red line ) and imp (cid:226) - Ran - GTP ( black line ) complexes at different pulling velocities ( ranging from 20 to 2000 nm / s ) . Association of imp (cid:226) with Ran loaded with GDP or with GTP gives rise to uni - or bimodal force distributions , respectively , reflecting the presence of one and two bound states . ( b ) Force spectra obtained for complexes of imp (cid:226) with RanGDP ( red line ) and RanGTP ( black lines ) , respectively , together with the thermal noise level of the experiments ( thick line ) ( see text for details ) . Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules Kienbergeretal . 32 ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH / VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006 tip differed significantly both in height and in diameter . The profiles of single lysozyme molecules appeared (cid:24) 1 nm higher and (cid:24) 10 nm broader than profiles from the purely topographical image ( i . e . , acquired with a bare silicon - nitride tip ) . Increased heights reflect the amplitude reduction owing to antibody - antigen recognition , whereas increased diameters are due to the additional length of the antibody plus cross - linker molecule . In a row of consecutive images with an antibody - carrying tip and free antigen in solution ( Figure 5 ) , the instantaneous switching from recognition images to purely topographical images can be observed . Bright enlarged dots in the first image ( Figure 5a ) indicate that the antibody on the tip recognizes the antigens on the surface . After some time ( Figure 5b , blue arrow ) , the dots became abruptly smaller both in size and height , that is , the recognition image turned into a simple topography image . The switching was caused by binding of free lysozyme to the anti - lysozyme on the tip ( sketch in Figure 5 ) , thereby blocking the tip - bound antibody and its recognition capability . Subsequent im - ages showed the raw topography of single lysozyme molecules ( Figure 5c ) . A detailed analysis of the time course of the cantilever oscillations while scanning along the surface is shown in Figure 6 . In this experiment , a tip modified with anti - lysozyme antibodies was scanned over mica with ad - sorbed lysozyme molecules ( Figure 6a ) . 15 As expected , the cantilever oscillated in a nearly sinusoidal fashion accord - ing to the preset frequency ( (cid:24) 7 kHz ) and amplitude ( (cid:24) 5 nm peak to peak ) , Figure 6b . However , both the maxima and minima of the oscillation periods were not strictly constant but were influenced by interactions between tip and sample . On a compressed time scale , only the envelope of the oscillations with its characteristic maxima and minima remained visible ( Figure 6c , d ) . Figure 6c was obtained with a bare tip lacking the anti - lysozyme anti - body . The minima varied significantly , showing singly distributed bulges with 10 - 15 nm width and (cid:24) 1 nm height along the scan axis . These bulges reflect single lysozyme molecules that resisted the further downward movement of the tip toward the surface . In contrast , the positions of the oscillation maxima remained constant , except for minor random variations caused by the thermal noise of the cantilever . Obviously , the information of the surface topography measured with a bare tip is solely contained in the minima of the cantilever oscillations , and cross talk between minima and maxima does not exist at the conditions used ( cantilever spring constant 0 . 1 N / m ; Q - factor (cid:24) 1 ; resonance frequency (cid:24) 7 kHz ) . With a func - tionalized tip , however ( Figure 6d ) , the maxima were also affected , reflecting restricted tip motion when the PEG linker was bound to the substrate by receptor - ligand recognition . It is important to note that the functionalized tip is still able to yield topographic information , as can be seen from the contour line of the minima in Figure 6d . In conclusion , topographic features and recognitions sites can simultaneously be recorded in a single scan process without mutual interference . Topography and Recognition Imaging , Applications With use of a special electronic circuit ( Figure 7a ) , the minima and the maxima of each sinusoidal cantilever deflection period were separately used for the topography and the recognition image , respectively . 15 With this meth - odology , topography and recognition images are inde - pendently but simultaneously acquired . The topographic image of avidin molecules immobilized onto mica and the simultaneously acquired recognition image using a biotin - modified tip are shown in Figure 7b . 33 Almost all avidin molecules visible in the topographical image ( Figure 7b , left panel ) were also recognized as dark spots by the biotin - PEG functionalized tip ( Figure 7b , right panel ) , FIGURE 4 . Combined imaging and force measurements using the force - volume mode . ( a ) Force - volume data using lysozyme adsorbed onto a mica surface and an anti - lysozyme antibody attached to the tip . Binding sites on the lysozyme layer were detected , and the unbinding forces are scaled in each pixel with gray values ( 0 - 100 pN ) . ( b ) After blocking with free antibody in solution , the binding probability dropped significantly . ( c ) Probability density function of the unbinding forces observed in absence ( solid line ) and in the presence ( dotted line ) of free antibody in solution . Areas are scaled to binding probabilities . Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules Kienbergeretal . VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006 / ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH 33 yielding an overall success rate of (cid:24) 90 % . The good correlation between topography and recognition images is highlighted on some single molecules ( marked with solid white circles ) . Some avidin molecules were not recognized by the biotinylated tip ( dashed white circle ) , which could be caused by a partial loss in the functionality of avidin . The specificity of the recognition signals was proven by a block of the tip with free avidin and repeating of recognition imaging ( Figure 8 ) . Figure 8a shows the recognition image prior to blocking , with a high efficiency of recognition at a high signal - to - noise ratio . Injection of free avidin into the solution resulted in the disappearance of the dark spots in the recognition image ( Figure 8b ) , while the corresponding topography image remained unchanged ( not shown ) . Before blocking , almost all avidin molecules were recognized , while after the block only five FIGURE 5 . Antibody recognition imaging . ( a ) Recognition imaging of single lysozymes using anti - lysozyme antibodies bound to the tip . Antibodies are bound to the tip by a flexible linker ( jagged line ) for the recognition of lysozyme ( shown in green ) . Due to antibody - antigen interaction , the lysozyme molecules appear higher and broader than in the purely topographical image . ( b ) Switching of recognition imaging ( left part ) to pure topography imaging ( right part ) at a certain time ( arrow ) in the presence of free antigen in solution . ( c ) Subsequent images with the blocked tip show the topography of singly distributed lysozyme molecules . FIGURE 6 . Principles of recognition imaging . ( a ) By combination of dynamic force microscopy with single - molecule recognition force spectroscopy , the topography can be investigated together with specific molecular recognition . ( b ) Deflection signal of a magnetically oscillated cantilever during scanning along the surface ( time range 4 ms ) . The peak to peak amplitude was 5 nm . ( c ) Deflection signal of a bare tip over a full scan line ( time range 1 s ) . Due to the resulting compression of the time axis , only the extrema of the oscillation periods remain visible . ( d ) Deflection signal of an anti - lysozyme antibody coated tip scanned over lysozyme molecules ( see text for details ) . FIGURE 7 . Simultaneous topography and recognition imaging . ( a ) Signal processing for simultaneously obtaining topography and recognition images . The raw cantilever deflection signal of the oscillating cantilever is thereby split via the TREC - box into upper parts ( corresponding to the recognition image ) and lower parts ( corresponding to the topography image ) . ( b ) Topographical image of avidin molecules adsorbed to mica acquired with a biotin - tethered tip . ( c ) Simultaneously acquired recognition image . A good correlation between topography and recognition was found ( solid circles ) . Topographical spots without recognition denote structures lacking specific interaction ( dashed circle ) . Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules Kienbergeretal . 34 ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH / VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006 spots remained in the recognition image , probably due to adhesive locations on the surface . This specific block demonstrates that the recognition events arise from the interaction of biotin on the tip with avidin on the surface , proving the overall specificity of the detected molecular recognition signals . In another study , a specific type of molecule ( histone H3 ) in a complex sample of chromatin adsorbed onto a surface was recognized by an anti - histone H3 function - alized tip while simultaneously recording a high - resolution image of the same sample . 34 The recognition spots in the recognition image revealed the locations of histone H3 in the topographical image with high lateral resolution and high efficiency . In addition to the localization of histone H3 in the complex biological sample of chromatin , the compositional changes during histone remodeling were also recorded in the topography and recognition images . The simultaneous investigation of both topography and recognition will open a wide field of applications for investigating biological structure - function relationships in native environments on the nanometer scale , because the technique can map composition on top of a topo - graphical image and can detect compositional changes occurring during biological processes . Concluding Remarks Atomic force microscopy has evolved into an imaging method that yields fine structural details on native bio - logical samples such as proteins , nucleotides , membranes , and cells in their physiological environment and at ambient conditions . Due to its high lateral resolution and sensitive force detection capability , the exciting option of measuring intramolecular forces on the single - molecule level has also become possible . The proof - of - principle stage of the pioneering experiments has already evolved into established methods for exploring kinetic and struc - tural details of interactions and molecular recognition processes . Data obtained from force spectroscopy include physical parameters not measurable by other methods and opens new perspectives in exploring the regulation of the dynamics of biological processes . New instrumental developments such as the recently developed recognition imaging mode allow the biochemical composition of the sample to be investigated . Together with improvements of the sensitivity and acquisition speed , this has paved the way to exciting fields in nano - bioscience and nano - biotechnology . This work was supported by Austrian Science Foundation Projects P14549 / P15295 , the GEN - AU initiative of the Austrian Ministry of Education , Science and Culture , the Human Frontier Science Program ( Grant RG - P0053 / 2004 ) , and the European Commission ( STREP program ) . References ( 1 ) Binnig , G . ; Quate , C . F . ; Gerber , C . Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 1986 , 56 , 930 - 933 . ( 2 ) Hoerber , J . K . ; Miles , M . J . Scanning probe evolution in biology . Science 2003 , 302 , 1002 - 1005 . ( 3 ) Engel , A . ; Muller , D . J . Observing single biomolecules at work with the atomic force microscope . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2000 , 7 , 715 - 718 . ( 4 ) Ando , T . ; Kodera , N . ; Takai , E . ; Maruyama , D . ; Saito , K . ; Toda , A . A high - speed atomic force microscope for studying biological macromolecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2001 , 98 , 12468 - 12472 . ( 5 ) Kienberger , F . ; Muller , H . ; Pastushenko , V . ; Hinterdorfer , P . Following single antibody binding to purple membranes in real time . EMBORep . 2004 , 5 , 579 - 583 . ( 6 ) Frederix , P . L . ; Akiyama , T . ; Staufer , U . ; Gerber , C . ; Fotiadis , D . ; Muller , D . J . ; Engel , A . Atomic force bio - analytics . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 2003 , 7 , 641 - 647 . ( 7 ) Florin , E . L . ; Moy , V . T . ; Gaub , H . E . Adhesion forces between individual ligand receptor pairs . Science 1994 , 264 , 415 - 417 . ( 8 ) Lee , G . U . ; Chrisey , A . C . ; Colton , J . C . Direct measurement of the forces between complementary strands of DNA . Science 1994 , 266 , 771 - 773 . ( 9 ) Hinterdorfer , P . ; Baumgartner , W . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Schilcher , K . ; Schindler , H . Detection and localization of individual antibody - antigen recognition events by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1996 , 93 , 3477 - 3481 . ( 10 ) Benoit , M . ; Gabriel , D . ; Gerisch , G . ; Gaub , H . E . Discrete interac - tions in cell adhesion measured by single - molecule force spec - troscopy . Nat . CellBiol . 2000 , 2 , 313 - 317 . ( 11 ) Marzsalek , P . E . ; Oberhauser , A . F . ; Pang , Y . P . ; Fernandez , J . M . Polysaccharide elasticity governed by chair - boat transitions of the glucopyranose ring . Nature 1998 , 396 , 661 - 664 . ( 12 ) Smith , S . ; Cui , Y . ; Bustamante , C . Overstretching B - DNA : the elastic response of individual double - stranded and single - stranded DNA molecules . Science 1996 , 271 , 795 - 799 . FIGURE 8 . Demonstrating the specificity of recognition imaging . ( a ) Recognition image of avidin molecules adsorbed to mica acquired with a biotin - tethered tip , prior to blocking . ( b ) Recognition image after blocking the tip by adding free avidin into the solution while scanning the same position . Almost all black recognition spots disappeared , proving the specificity of the molecular interaction underlying the recognition image . Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules Kienbergeretal . VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006 / ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH 35 ( 13 ) Veigel , C . ; Coluccio , L . M . ; Jontes , J . D . ; Sparrow , J . C . ; Milligan , R . A . ; Molloy , J . E . The motor protein myosin - I produces its working stroke in two steps . Nature 1999 , 398 , 530 - 533 . ( 14 ) Evans , E . Probing the relation between force - lifetime and chem - istry in single molecular bonds . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 2001 , 30 , 105 - 128 . ( 15 ) Stroh , C . M . ; Ebner , A . ; Geretschla ¨ ger , M . ; Freudenthaler , G . ; Kienberger , F . ; Kamruzzahan , A . S . M . ; Smith - Gill , S . J . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Hinterdorfer , P . Simultaneous topography and recognition imaging using force microscopy . Biophys . J . 2004 , 87 , 1981 - 1990 . ( 16 ) Viani , M . B . ; Pietrasanta , L . I . ; Thompson , J . B . ; Chand , A . ; Gebeshuber , I . C . ; Kindt , J . H . ; Richter , M . ; Hansma , H . G . ; Hansma , P . K . Probing protein - protein interactions in real time . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2000 , 7 , 644 - 647 . ( 17 ) Hinterdorfer , P . ; Kienberger , F . ; Raab , A . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Baum - gartner , W . ; Kada , G . ; Riener , C . ; Wielert - Badt , S . ; Borken , C . ; Schindler , H . Poly ( ethylene glycol ) : An ideal spacer for molecular recognition force microscopy / spectroscopy . SingleMol . 2000 , 1 , 99 - 103 . ( 18 ) Hinterdorfer , P . ; Schilcher , K . ; Baumgartner , W . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Schindler , H . A mechanistic study of the dissociation of individual antibody - antigen pairs by atomic force microscopy . Nanobiology 1998 , 4 , 39 - 50 . ( 19 ) Riener , C . ; Kienberger , F . ; Hahn , C . D . ; Buchinger , G . M . ; Egwim ; I . O . C . ; Haselgruebler , T . ; Ebner , A . ; Romanin , C . ; Klampfl , C . ; Lackner , B . ; Prinz , H . ; Blaas , D . ; Hinterdorfer , P . ; Gruber , H . J . Heterobifunctional cross - linkers for tethering single ligand mol - ecules to scanning probes . Anal . Chim . Acta 2003 , 497 , 101 - 114 . ( 20 ) Kienberger , F . ; Kada , G . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Pastushenko , V . P . ; Riener , C . ; Trieb , M . ; Knaus , H . G . ; Schindler , H . ; Hinterdorfer , P . Recogni - tion force spectroscopy studies of the NTA - His6 bond . SingleMol . 2000 , 1 , 59 - 65 . ( 21 ) Riener , C . K . ; Stroh , C . M . ; Ebner , A . ; Klampfl , C . ; Gall , A . ; Romanin , C . ; Lyubchenko , Y . L . ; Hinterdorfer , P . ; Gruber , H . J . Simple test system for single molecule recognition force micros - copy . Anal . Chim . Acta 2003 , 479 , 59 - 75 . ( 22 ) Grubmu ¨ ller , H . ; Heymann , B . ; Tavan , P . Ligand binding : Molecular mechanics calculation of the streptavidin - biotin rupture force . Science 1996 , 271 , 997 - 999 . ( 23 ) Bell , G . I . Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells . Science 1978 , 200 , 618 - 627 . ( 24 ) Evans , E . ; Ritchie , K . Dynamic strength of molecular adhesion bonds . Biophys . J . 1997 , 72 , 1541 - 1555 . ( 25 ) Strunz , T . ; Oroszlan , K . ; Schumakovitch , I . ; Gu ¨ ntherodt , H . G . ; Hegner , M . Model energy landscapes and the force - induced dissociation of ligand - receptor bonds . Biophys . J . 2000 , 79 , 1206 - 1212 . ( 26 ) Merkel , R . ; Nassoy , P . ; Leung , A . ; Ritchie , K . ; Evans , E . Energy landscapes of receptor - ligand bonds explored by dynamic force spectroscopy . Nature 1999 , 397 , 50 - 53 . ( 27 ) Nevo , R . ; Stroh , C . ; Kienberger , F . ; Kaftan , D . ; Brumfeld , V . ; Elbaum , M . ; Reich , Z . ; Hinterdorfer , P . A molecular switch between two bound states in the RanGTP - importin (cid:226) 1 interaction . Nat . Struct . Biol . 2003 , 10 , 553 - 557 . ( 28 ) Willemsen , O . H . ; Snel , M . M . E . ; van der Werf , K . O . ; de Grooth , B . G . ; Greve J . ; Hinterdorfer , P . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Schindler , H . ; van Kyook Y . ; Figdor C . G . Simultaneous height and adhesion imaging of antibody antigen interactions by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 1998 , 57 , 2220 - 2228 . ( 29 ) Radmacher , M . ; Cleveland , J . P . ; Fritz , M . ; Hansma , H . G . ; Hansma , P . K . Mapping interaction forces with the atomic force micro - scope . Biophys . J . 1994 , 66 , 2159 - 2165 . ( 30 ) Ludwig , M . ; Dettmann , W . ; Gaub , H . E . AFM imaging contrast based on molecular recognition . Biophys . J . 1997 , 72 , 445 - 448 . ( 31 ) Almqvist , N . ; Bhatia , R . ; Primbs , G . ; Desai , N . ; Banerjee , S . ; Lal . R . Elasticity and Adhesion Force Mapping Reveals Real - Time Clustering of Growth Factor Receptors and Associated Changes in Local Cellular Rheological Properties . Biophys . J . 2004 , 86 , 1753 - 1762 . ( 32 ) Raab , A . ; Han , W . ; Badt , D . ; Smith - Gill , S . J . ; Lindsay , S . M . ; Schindler , H . ; Hinterdorfer , P . Antibody recognition imaging by force microscopy . Nat . Biotechnol . 1999 , 17 , 902 - 905 . ( 33 ) Ebner , A . ; Kienberger , F . ; Kada , G . ; Stroh , C . M . ; Geretschla ¨ ger , M . ; Kamruzzahan , A . S . M . ; Wildling , L . ; Johnson , W . T . ; Ashcroft , B . ; Nelson J . ; Lindsay , S . M . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Hinterdorfer , P . Localization of single avidin biotin interactions using simulta - neous topography and molecular recognition imaging . Chem - PhysChem 2005 , 6 , 897 - 900 . ( 34 ) Stroh , C . ; Wang , H . ; Bash , R . ; Ashcroft , B . ; Nelson , J . ; Gruber , H . J . ; Lohr , D . ; Lindsay , S . M . ; Hinterdorfer , P . Single - molecule recognition imaging microscope . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2004 , 101 , 12503 - 12507 . AR050084M Imaging and Spectroscopy of Single Biomolecules Kienbergeretal . 36 ACCOUNTSOFCHEMICALRESEARCH / VOL . 39 , NO . 1 , 2006