Strategic knowledge acquisition : a case study of learning through prototyping Takashi Kiriyama * , Takashi Yamamoto Research into Artifacts , Center for Engineering , The University of TokyoKomaba 4 - 6 - 1 , Meguro - ku , Tokyo 153 - 8904 , Japan Received 18 September 1998 ; accepted 19 September 1998 Abstract To understand useful strategies for guiding the design process , we analyze the relationship between the use of prototypes and design knowledge acquisition . Prototyping in ﬁve design projects at a science museum is analyzed and compared . We also extract situations in which design knowledge is acquired from prototyping . q 1998 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Knowledge acquisition ; Prototyping 1 . Introduction Design can be most simply deﬁned as specifying a set of attributes that performs the requirements . In reality , however , it is after starting to design when a vaguely expressed need is interpreted to clearer requirements [ 1 ] . In this process , the designer acquires knowledge about what the user expects and what kind of interactions may happen in the environment [ 2 ] . To plan the process for design , it is important to understand a strategy for effective knowledge acquisition that tells how to create situations in which knowledge can be effectively acquired [ 3 ] . In this paper , we focus on the process of knowledge acquisition through prototyping . We are particularly inter - ested in the acquisition of knowledge that is problem speci - ﬁc and directly connected to the goal of design . When designing completes , the designer has accumulated such knowledge through prototyping . We observed projects in a graduate level design course at the University of Tokyo . The project goal was to improve an exhibition of Science Museum Tokyo ( SMT ) , by extending or re - making an exist - ing exhibition . SMT’s own goal is to provide visitors ( most of them are school children and their parents ) with experi - ences related to science and technology . This location was chosen because the reaction of the user , and thus the effect of design improvement , can be easily observed . A similar project setting can be found in [ 4 ] . Prototyping in exhibition design is a means of ﬁnding needs for customization . The importance of interaction with the user in need ﬁnding has been intensively studied by other groups . Brandt and Binder [ 5 ] , for instance , reported the effect of user participation in a workshop for ﬁnding customization needs of food production machines . The ﬁeld of exhibition design that we study in this paper is similar to that of food production , since need ﬁnding is essential for successful design . The projects we analyze in this paper were basically carried out in a science museum during the service time . This setting can be compared with a typical one of protocol analysis [ 6 ] . In protocol analysis , subjects sit in a room in which they usually do not have access to materials and never observe users . This setting is good to examine a pure thinking process without being disturbed by external factors . But keeping the subjects away from testing a concept sacriﬁces the improvement of design beyond the scope of their own knowledge . By this reason we did not use protocol analysis to study the strategy of knowledge acquisition . We assume the condition for a project being done in an open world setting is necessary for observing the use of prototypes . 2 . Projects The design project ran for 20 weeks from April to September 1997 . In weeks 1 – 3 , students individually observed user behaviors and proposed initial concepts for improvement . In weeks 4 – 7 , they formed ﬁve project teams of three to four members , by selecting design concepts out Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 399 – 404 0950 - 7051 / 98 / $ - see front matter q 1998 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . PII : S0950 - 7051 ( 98 ) 00086 - 0 * Tel . 1 81 - 3 - 5453 - 5891 , Fax . 1 81 - 3 - 3467 - 0648 ; e - mail : kiriyama @ race . u - tokyo . ac . jp of the initial proposals . In weeks 8 – 12 , they worked on the most functionally critical part . In weeks 13 – 19 they contin - ued making prototypes toward the ﬁnal design . Week 20 was used for writing a report of the design process . They made four presentations at the end of each stage . In addition to university instructors , technical staff of SMT and three industrial designers advised students . The recognized problems and proposed concepts of the ﬁve projects are as follows ; 2 . 1 . P1 : picture projection on a mean landing ( Fig . 1 ) Situation : Still pictures are projected on the ﬂoor from the ceiling of a mean landing . Problem : the pictures are obscure and hardly noticed . Proposal : To make the landing space attractive by projecting motion pictures . To use pictures relevant to the theme of the adjacent ﬂoor . 2 . 2 . P2 : demonstration support of the ﬂame reaction ( Fig . 2 ) Situation : The ﬂame reaction is demonstrated by programmed gas burners . There is also a human instructor , who performs interactive demonstrations a few times a day . Problem : There is no explanation about the ﬂame reaction at the machine . The instructor wants but has no means to present the spectrum of ﬂames . Proposal : To place a PC next to the automatic burner to present explanation for visitors . To build a spectroscope connected to a video camera , so that the instructor can show spectrums on a monitor . 2 . 3 . P3 : A lifting machine ( Fig . 3 ) Situation : A miniature model demonstrates the Pascal’s law . Problem : Force conversion can not be bodily experi - enced . Proposal : To build a lifting machine on which the user can lift him / herself by pumping air into cylinders . 2 . 4 . P4 : Surroundings of a cloud chamber ( Fig . 4 ) Situation : There is a large cloud chamber showing the trajectory of charged particles . Problem : The surroundings of the cloud chamber are too bright and noisy to observe the faint trajectory . T . Kiriyama , T . Yamamoto / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 399 – 404 400 Fig . 1 . P1 : Picture projection on a mean landing . Fig . 2 . P2 : Demonstration equipment of the ﬂame reaction . Fig . 3 . P3 : A lifting machine . Fig . 4 . P4 : Surroundings of a cloud chamber . Proposal : Isolate the cloud chamber to control light . Place posters inside the curtain and illuminate them by black light . 2 . 5 . P5 : Mobile robot navigation ( Fig . 5 ) Situation : There is no mobile object that visitors can control . Problem : Interaction is needed to entertain visitors . Proposal : To construct a mobile robot visitors can navi - gate over radio . Prototyping is important for all projects , though there is a difference in the purposes . P1 , P2 , and P4 are mainly concerned with human behaviors . These teams repeated user observation and prototyping frequently to obtain ideas for improvement . On the other hand , technical problems are more critical for P3 and P5 . They worked mostly on models and programming than physical proto - types until they started manufacturing and testing . 3 . Analysis of prototyping 3 . 1 . Project activity We analyzed the activity of the ﬁve projects by looking at the sources of design reports , e - mail messages , interviews with students , and compared them with grades given by advisors . The overall activities of each project is summarized in Table 1 . P3 was graded the best , though the number of prototypes was not the largest . P4 was the third in grade , though the number of meeting and e - mail were the largest . This summary shows that the performance and the number of prototype or other activities can not immediately be correlated . We need a more detailed analysis in prototyping . 3 . 2 . Classiﬁcation of prototypes Ulrich and Eppinger classify prototypes along two dimen - sions of comprehensive - focused and physical - analytical [ 7 ] . A focused prototype represents only a part of the product whereas a comprehensive prototype represents the whole concept . An analytical prototype is an intangible , usually mathematical model whereas a physical prototype is an entity in a physical world . In addition to these types , we also distinguish between closed and open prototypes . A closed prototype is used within a team mainly for internal communication , whereas an open prototype is tested by unspeciﬁed users . The combination of these three properties as Focused versus Comprehensive , Analytical versus Physical , and cLosed versus Open makes eight types . These types are labelled according to their properties , such as , F – A – L ( Focused – Analytical – cLosed ) , F – P – L ( Focused – Physical – cLosed ) , C – A – L ( Comprehensive – Analytical – cLosed ) , C – P – L ( Comprehensive – Physical – cLosed ) , and C – P – O ( Comprehensive – Physical – Open ) . Among the eight possible types , other three types of F – A – O , F – P – O and C – A – O do not exist because by deﬁni - tion an Open prototype can not be Focused or Analytical . In the rest of this paper , we use these ﬁve types for discussion . 3 . 3 . Number of prototypes Fig . 6 shows the total number of prototypes of each type . The largest number is F – A – L , followed by C – P – O and F – P – L . The number of prototypes used by each project is shown in Fig . 7 . It shows that a team that was evaluated well ( P3 . P1 . P4 . P5 . P2 ) built a larger number of closed prototypes to study the design concept . Although the ﬁnal prototype built by P3 ( C – P – O ) is counted only once in the graph , it gave a large impact to the evaluation by advi - sors . If we take it into account and increase the number of C – P – O prototypes , the order of the total numbers of proto - types of each team becomes in proportional to the grade . 3 . 4 . Knowledge fragments In the ﬁnal report students wrote what they found in the design process . In this paper we refer to a piece of knowledge stated in the ﬁnal report a knowledge fragment . T . Kiriyama , T . Yamamoto / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 399 – 404 401 Fig . 5 . P5 : The mobile robot project . Table 1 Project activity P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 Meeting 15 13 13 16 15 E - mail 166 76 103 273 175 Prototype 23 6 12 14 8 Grade 2 . 75 0 . 20 3 . 32 2 . 00 1 . 07 Examples of knowledge fragments include ﬁndings such as the fact that it is difﬁcult to generate waves on the surface of shallow water and that the light source of a spectrum must be screened by a slit though the light becomes darker . We associated each knowledge fragment to the prototype from which it was obtained . Fig . 8 shows the number of obtained knowledge fragments from each type of proto - types . P1 and P4 , that built the largest number of prototypes , also acquired the largest number of knowledge fragments . Physical prototypes ( C – P – O , C – P – L , and F – P – L ) produced the largest number of knowledge fragments . P1 and P3 , which were awarded the highest grade , acquired knowledge fragments from closed prototypes . It suggests that acquiring knowledge before building an open prototype is important for a successful result . 3 . 5 . Vocabulary analysis The use of a word at a certain time during the design process is considered to reﬂect knowledge acquisition related to the word . We analyzed how new words appear in the design process . We listed the words to describe the design object in the ﬁnal reports of ﬁve projects . The words are sorted according to the time they started being used . Fig . 9 shows the number of new words that appeared in each month . This result shows that four out of ﬁve projects have a peak in July , when functional prototypes were built . It can be understood that the majority of new words were acquired in the periods of interaction with physical objects . New words are found less frequently in August and Septem - ber when prototypes were basically reﬁned . P3 is the only project whose number of new vocabulary continuously decreases . This may be because P3 built the ﬁnal prototype in a mechanical shop and did not improve it on the site . It suggests the importance of physical interaction in knowl - edge acquisition . 3 . 6 . Situations of knowledge acquisition There are some common situations in which knowledge fragments are acquired . We identiﬁed six situations as listed below . Situation 1 : Recognition of a new need Prototyping brings a new perspective of user need to the designer’s attention . For instance , P5 originally assumed that it was good enough to navigate a robot around the user . After building a prototype system , however , they discovered that visitors who came across to the robot wanted to play with it . This discovery made them to add interactive features . Situation 2 : Inappropriate interpretation of a need The designer notices an inappropriate or insufﬁcient interpretation of user need into requirement . For instance , P4 used a large blackout curtain to surround the cloud cham - ber so the light could be controlled . Since the lining of the curtain was exposed to visitors’ eyes , it looked like under renovation . User observation showed that appearance was important to let visitors come inside . Situation 3 : Reﬁnement of the requirements By examining problems with a prototype , requirements become clear . P4 made a panel concerned with how a trajec - tory is illuminated in the cloud chamber . Though the team thought that the panel was plain enough , user observation showed that it was still too difﬁcult . It made them recognize the requirement for an understandable explanation . They replaced words with more illustrations . Situation 4 : Recognition of a physical constraint T . Kiriyama , T . Yamamoto / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 399 – 404 402 Fig . 6 . Total number of prototypes . Fig . 7 . The number of prototypes used by each project . A concept may turn out to be physically or technically infeasible . P1 used a slide projector to cast pictures on the ﬂoor . In an experiment , when the projector was placed straight downward to the ﬂoor , the carousal fell out . So they decided to use a mirror to reﬂect horizontal projection down to the ﬂoor . Situation 5 : Recognition of an existing function Prototyping helps to notice a useful function hidden in the environment . During the running of a robot , P5 noticed that the ﬂoor was actually a corridor and the radio Ethernet could reach the far end of the ﬂoor . So they created a goal for the user to navigate the robot around the ﬂoor . The users were excited because the robot could travel to the invisible side of the ﬂoor . Situation 6 : User ﬁnds a problem The user recognizes a problem of the prototype . P2 asked the instructor of the ﬂame reaction to use the spectroscope setup . The instructor reported a problem with a joint that could not hold the spectroscope . At this feedback , they reinforced the arm . And there is one more situation that actually prevents the team from knowledge acquisition . Situation 7 : Lock - in effect Earlier prototypes determine the direction of design and thus block a path to a potential solution . The spectroscope setup of P2 could only show a small image on the monitor . Since the team were already satisﬁed with the construction of the mechanical joint between the spectroscope and a video camera , they hesitated when it came to inserting a magnifying lens into the arm . 6 . Prototyping - centered design strategy From the observation above , we can draw a several stra - tegies of knowledge acquisition from prototyping . Firstly , prototypes must be made in multiple forms , as indicated by the fact that the teams that used two to three types of closed prototypes performed well . Using multiple types of proto - type is useful to look at the design in various perspectives . Secondly , though prototyping is important , the situation of being locked in the earlier prototype must be carefully avoided . The case of P2 in situation 7 shows that reluctance of change prevents the team from reaching at a better concept . Some industrial designers emphasizes the impor - tance of making many rapid prototypes rather than a T . Kiriyama , T . Yamamoto / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 399 – 404 403 Fig . 8 . Knowledge Fragments acquired from Prototypes . Fig . 9 . New vocabulary . complete prototype . Quickness in prototyping is important to explore many possibilities while avoiding lock - in effect . Thirdly , one should observe the use of the product even after installation . This is supported by the fact that open prototypes contributed most to the acquisition of knowl - edge . We can illustrate the effectiveness of prototyping - based design by comparing two permanent exhibitions of SMT . Most exhibitions in the SMT are designed by subcon - tractors . In the conceptual design phase , they present many drawings and documents . But once the concept has been agreed , the process jumps into detailed design phase without prototype testing . After the exhibition has been installed , it is basically not modiﬁed though the end of service . On the other hand , SMT recently did a new project directed by so - called producers . In this project , problems and ideas found in the implementation were reﬂected to the modiﬁcation . Some problems found during the use have been ﬁxed by maintenance engineers . This approach can be called contin - uous design , in which improvement continues over the life time . Of course , . this design approach costs more than the standard one and the project organization has to be ﬂexible . But the cost can be justiﬁed by the success of exhibition , which has become the most popular exhibition in SMT since it started three years ago . 7 . Conclusions In this paper we viewed prototyping as a means of knowl - edge acquisition and analyzed the relationship between them . By classifying prototypes , we showed that physical prototypes contributed most to the acquisition of knowledge and that using multiple closed prototypes made successful results . We also identiﬁed some patterns of situations in which knowledge was acquired . We are planning to further investigate knowledge acquisition patterns to understand useful strategies for guiding design processes . References [ 1 ] S . Pugh , Creating Innovative Products using Total Design , Addison – Wesley , Reading , MA , 1996 . [ 2 ] T . Winograd ( Ed . ) , Bringing Design to Software , ACM Press , New York , 1996 . [ 3 ] T . Kiriyama , S . Yoshimura , S . Burgess , Study on the design process for a micro accelerometer , in : 11th International Conference on Engineer - ing Design , 1997 , pp . 429 – 432 . [ 4 ] B . Chan , S . Finger , Bringing virtual and physical prototyping into the classroom , in : 11th International Conference on Engineering Design , 1997 , pp . 427 – 432 . [ 5 ] E . Brandt , T . Binder , Customer / user workshops in product develop - ment , in : 11th International Conference on Engineering Design , 1997 , pp . 111 – 116 . [ 6 ] N . Cross , H . Christiaans , K . Dorst ( Eds . ) , Analysing Design Activity , Wiley , New York , 1995 . [ 7 ] K . Ulrich , S . Eppinger , Design and Development , McGraw – Hill , 1995 . T . Kiriyama , T . Yamamoto / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 399 – 404 404