Lessons Learnt from Deploying an End - User Development Platform for Physical Rehabilitation Daniel Tetteroo 1 , Paul Vreugdenhil 1 , Ivor Grisel 1 , Marc Michielsen 2 , Els Kuppens 3 , Diana Vanmulken 4 , Panos Markopoulos 1 1 Eindhoven University of Technology Eindhoven , The Netherlands { d . tetteroo , p . e . vreugdenhil , i . g . j . grisel , p . markopoulos } @ tue . nl 2 Revalidatiecampus St . Ursula Herk - de - Stad , Belgium marc . michielsen @ jessazh . be 3 MS - Reva Overpelt Overpelt , Belgium els . kuppens @ msreva . be 4 Adelante Centre of Expertise in Rehabilitation Hoensbroek , The Netherlands d . vanmulken @ adelante - zorggroep . nl ABSTRACT Clinical researchers in rehabilitation technology have often called for exercise customization to address patient specific needs . Where such customization transcends simple parameter setting , the need for End - User Development ( EUD ) arises . EUD in this field can potentially tap on the expertise of highly skilled workers , but presents serious challenges regarding acceptance by end users and the feasibility of embedding EUD in their professional practice . This paper describes the deployment and adoption process of TagTrainer , a physical rehabilitation technology that supports EUD . TagTrainer was deployed in four rehabilitation clinics and was used by 24 rehabilitation therapists . We analyze how they engaged in EUD activities and we discuss decisions that we took in the design and deployment of TagTrainer . Based on these case studies , we present guidelines for the deployment of EUD systems . Author Keywords End - user development ; physical rehabilitation ; field study ; socio - technical environment ; meta - design ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous ; J . 3 Life and medical sciences : Health INTRODUCTION End - user development ( EUD ) is a socio - technical paradigm focused on enabling end - users of interactive systems to engage in the modification , extension , and even creation of interactive artifacts [ 20 ] . The aspiration for this field is that EUD shall bridge the divide between design - time and use - time by extending the evolution of interactive systems beyond the initial software development , allowing continuous adaptation of these systems to evolving and context specific end - user needs [ 21 ] . Although the evolution of end - users’ needs is a phenomenon occurring in almost any domain , certain domains have been identified as especially suitable for the application of EUD practices [ 10 ] . One of these domains is healthcare , were the greatly varying needs of individual patients present a design problem of a scale unmanageable with a traditional technology design process . The specific domain that we address in this paper is that of physical rehabilitation after stroke , multiple sclerosis ( MS ) , and spinal - cord injury ( SCI ) . Persons who have been diagnosed with stroke , MS or SCI often suffer from cognitive and / or motoric function loss . In order to regain some of the lost functionality , they usually engage in a physical rehabilitation program as soon as possible . Previous research points at the importance of patient customized exercises and sufficient exercise variability in physical rehabilitation [ 7 , 32 ] . Patients might have their own , personal goals for rehabilitation ( e . g . , relearning to eat with knife and fork , relearning to play the guitar , etc . ) and will vary in the extent to which their cognitive and motoric functions are affected . Customization can be supported at multiple levels . To start with , therapists typically do not rely on a singular device or exercise approach for a patient , but combine one or more of these to address the patient’s condition and training needs . Increasingly over the last decade , a task - oriented training approach is adopted in which patients train on specific daily skills of their choice , that can provide them benefits in terms of their ability to function independently and to integrate socially [ 31 ] . For technologies that are integrated in such a training program , the level of challenge should ideally be adapted to the patients’ needs [ 1 ] , or even adjusted automatically as patients progress through a game [ 18 ] . Such parameter adaptations pertaining to range of movements , or the speed and accuracy required , do not fully address the pragmatic concerns of patients relating to the very content and nature of exercises . Being able to change the content , purpose , and difficulty of exercises to match patient interests requires a higher level of customizability that can better be thought of as EUD . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2015 , April 18 - 23 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04… $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702504 Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4133 Dsiracpeemrpoph ( daf TTtrTthththotoe Iinthcl R MeEinds eainEtoeus Fd as o o Designing EUD several challen s to enable no rehabilitation , t any affinity challenge , the u programming p easily map con expertise to tha making progra regarding the f professional pr organizational productivity of has identified t ( e . g . , [ 11 ] ) , th document the i as a profession future design ef Therefore , we TagTrainer : an raining for pa TagTrainer ( se hrough the m herapists to au he needs of th of the four dep o identify the engage in EUD In the next se ntroducing EU hen present Ta clinical setting earnt and prov RELATED WO Many research enabled to eng EUD practices ntroduced the describes from suitability of EU engage in EUD analysis involv nvestment cos EUD process . W o quantify atte evidence has b useful starting systems . Further , other developed sub aspects of EUD socio - technical on a spectrum other end the m D solutions fo nges . An impor ovice program the vast majori with program usability of sys presents a low ncepts from the at of the progra amming easier feasibility of a ractice , pertain support , cult f health profes the importance here is as yet ssues at play , t nal practice in fforts . present a mu n EUD system atients sufferin ee [ 29 ] ) supp manipulation o uthor exercise c heir individual ployment studi factors that inf D practices . ctions we firs UD in differe agTrainer , and gs . Finally , we vide pointers fo RK hers have stu gage in EUD ( as they occu e Attention m a cognitive UD practices . D depends on ving costs for sts , EUD payo While this mod ention investm been presented point for the d s such as M bstantial know D . Meta - desig perspective , p with on one meta - designer o or professiona rtant one for th mming [ 30 ] : in ity of professio mming . To stems has to be threshold and e domain of th ammable envir , there are fu adopting EUD ning to motiv ture , and the sionals . While e of such a bro t little empiri to show the fea a clinical settin ulti - site deplo m to support up ng from strok ports arm - han of physical ob content , and ta patients . The es presented in fluence therapi st summarize r ent professiona d detail its dep e discuss the or future EUD d udied how en e . g . , [ 4 , 19 ] ) , a ur ( e . g . , [ 15 ] , [ Investment m psychology He claims th a n the result o doing a task off and risks a del is unspecifi ment and so far d to support design and eva Mehandjiev ( e wledge on the gn [ 11 ] looks putting the end end the end - u of an extensible l use represen he given doma n the domain onals do not hav overcome th e ensured , so th d allows them heir profession ronment . Beyon urther challeng as part of the vation , peer an effect on th e earlier resear oader perspectiv ical research asibility of EU ng , and to gui yment study pper extremiti ke , SCI or M nd rehabilitatio bjects . It allow ailor exercises overarching ai n this paper w ists’ decisions related work o al contexts . W ployment in fo overall lesso deployments . nd - users can b and have studi [ 27 ] ) . Blackwe model [ 3 ] , th perspective th at the decision of a cost - bene manually , EU associated to th ic regarding ho r little empiric it , it presents aluation of EU e . g . , [ 22 ] ) hav e organization at EUD from d - user develop user , and on th e socio - technic nts ain of ve his hat to nal nd ges eir nd he ch ve to UD de of ies MS . on ws to im was to on We our ns be ed ell hat he to fit UD he ow cal a UD ve nal m a per he cal systemparticumay a spectrudevelothat oc Althouvaluabthey m which undersadoptereport their a systemenhancAmongview o contexplatforwidgetsmall a can lea take o ‘widgewhat F TAGTR TagTraplatforconsistx 24cm able to boardsas the Patien exercis feedba TagTr programof exer Figuc m . Rather than ular species of assume and sw um , depending opment may b ccupy different ugh the before ble insights on mostly study EU EUD is alread stand what is ed in the first p on the deploy adoption . For e m that allows ca ce the indepen gst others , they on EUD – thu xt . Another stu rm that allow ts [ 27 ] . The a and medium e ad to a self - sus on different r et creators’ , to Fischer et al . ca RAINER ainer is a tan rm for arm ting of : 1 ) Tag m ) that can giv o detect RFID s provide feedb possibility to nt Interface ( se programs ( ack to patien rainer Exer mming tool th rcises to be ex ure 1 : A TagTra connected to a l n treating the f its own , in m witch between g on the contex become a shar t positions on th e mentioned re factors that inf UD in a lab se dy practiced , a required for place . There ar yment of EUD example , [ 6 ] s aretakers to cr ndence of cogn y confirm the us considering udy reports o ws business u authors conclu enterprises , a p stainable EUD roles , from ‘w o ‘service crea all ‘meta - design ngible , extensi m - hand rehabi gTile boards : ve visual and D - tagged objec back through o playback aud ( TTPI ) , which ( i . e . series of nts about th rcise Creato hat supports au xecuted on the ainer system wi laptop running end - user deve meta - design th n multiple rol t . In this theory red effort amo he developer - s esearch provid fluence the EU etting , or in si and therefore d EUD technol re just a few s environments studied the ado reate prompting nitively disable importance of g technology on the deploy users to crea ude that , for th properly led d D environment widget consum ators’ that are ners’ [ 11 ] . ible , interactiv ilitation thera interactive boa audio feedbac cts ( see Figur full - color LED dio . 2 ) The T h manages pe exercises ) and heir progress . or ( TEC ) : uthoring and m board ( see Fi ith three TagTil g the TTPI softw eloper as a heory users les on this y , end - user ongst users spectrum . des us with UD process , ituations in do not help logy to be studies that s and study option of a g scripts to ed persons . f a holistic as well as yment of a ate custom he case of deployment were users mers’ and similar to ve training apy [ 29 ] , ards ( 24cm ck , and are re 1 ) . The Ds , as well TagTrainer ersonalized d provides . 3 ) The a visual modification gure 2 ) . 4 ) le boards ware . Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4134 AR Tpcbcr Ethaasba toae F C C C C An extensible RFID - tags attac TagTrainer wa patient - tailorabl clinics . Althoug base set of abou create custom rehabilitation go Exercises for ar herapist creates a sequence of o and repetitions such as placing board . In princi an exercise and o each of the actions , instruc exercise ( see Fi Figure 2 : The T a timeline with action ( in thi dragged from Locati Case 1 HoensNether Case 2 Herk - d Belgiu Case 3 OverpBelgiu Case 4 Hoens Nether T and customiza ched to them . as developed le rehabilitatio gh TagTrainer ut 150 exercise exercises tha oals of individu rm - hand trainin s a simple mod object movemen thereof . The g , moving , remo iple , any numbe d an unlimited a e objects . In tions , pauses a igure 2 – D , E ) . TagTrainer Exe h actions associa is case ‘lift obje the library ( C ) board ion L sbroek , rlands 3 de - Stad , um 8 elt , um 5 sbroek , rlands 8 Table 1 : Chara able collection in response to n technology is by default es , the TEC all at match the ual patients . ng involve phy del of an exerci nts on target ar board recogn oving or rotatin er of objects ca amount of actio addition to th and sound can ercise Creator ( ated with the ob ect’ ) such as pos ) into the works d , other actions Length Parti w 8 w Aged 5 w Aged 8 w Aged acteristics of the of objects wi o a request f by rehabilitatio provided with ows therapists skill level an ysical objects ; th se using TEC , reas on the boa nizes movemen ng objects on th an be used with ons can be add he object - relat n be added to ( TEC ) software bjects ( ‘measur sition on the bo space to extend such as giving cipants Path SCI , 25 - 32 Stro 24 - 54 MS , 26 - 44 SCI , e four case studi ith for on h a to nd he as ard nts he hin ed ed an TagTrausers w and e evaluatcontrolstepwisbased s softwarof an e compleprogramaided b about e patientincorreroutine step ) an . The center are ring cup’ and ‘c oard are display an exercise . No instructions ( D hology Note , stroke Resedeve ke Aimsystereha stroke Aimorga , stroke Follo ungu ies ( / = physio ainer is design while still acco engaging train tion of an earl l structures ar se execution o scripting - sim re . For exampl exercise can on eted . Repetitio mmed to incre by an automa errors or incon ts in the exec ect object ) are es ( such as rep nd need not be ea ( A ) shows th cup’ ) involved in yed to the right ote that beyond D ) and pausing ( es earch team had elopment of Ta m : to assess EUD em and organiz abilitation of str m : to study a dif anizational con ow up to case uided use of th otherapist , / = ned to present ommodating fo ning content . ly version of t re not support of actions is p milar to what ca le , actions sch nly happen aft ons of ( parts ease training in ated validation nsistencies in t cution of an handled autom peating the ins addressed by t he workspace w n the exercise . P ( B ) . Finally , ad actions involvi ( E ) can be used d participated in agTrainer [ 29 ] . D practices in zational contex roke patients . fferent patient ntext . 1 . Aim : to ass e he system , post = occupational a low - thresho or the creation Following a the system [ 17 ted and only possible using an be found in eduled to occu ter the first ste of ) an exerci ntensity . Users n tool that not their creations . exercise ( e . g . matically throu structions for t the creator of an with the exercise Properties of th dditional actions ing manipulatio d . n the design an . a different hea xt . We focused population and ess the spontan initial deploym therapist ) . ld for new of relevant a usability 7 ] , complex sequential , a timeline n animation ur in step 2 p has been ise can be are further tifies them . Errors by . using an ugh default the current n exercise . e , featuring he selected s can be ons on the nd alth d on the d neous and ment . Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4135 METHODS A field study consisting of four cases was carried out to evaluate whether and how therapists can act as end - user developers of training content , in the context of their daily work . The case studies lasted for three to eight weeks , and took place in The Netherlands and Belgium , see Table 1 . An important motivation for the fourth study was that the simultaneous introduction of a new technological artefact and EUD practices in the first three cases made it hard to distinguish to what extent the observed practices related to the introduction of EUD , versus the use of a new training technology . Therefore , a follow - up study was performed at the clinic of the first case study , to see whether prolonged use of TagTrainer would cause a change in EUD practices . Participating professionals Therapists working in the clinics could participate on a voluntary basis after agreement with their management . In total 24 health professionals participated , see Table 1 . Participating therapists had no previous experience with TagTrainer , except for two participants in Case 4 , who had also participated in Case 1 . The participants’ computer experience was limited to using general office software , email , internet and online social networks . Materials In the first three cases , which studied initial deployment , two systems per clinic were deployed consisting of one TagTile board connected to a laptop and an initial set of about 150 exercises that were ready to be used . For case 1 this was in two different treatment rooms , while in the 2 nd and 3 rd case the boards were available in a space in between treatment rooms . The exercise set was iteratively improved between deployments . Importantly , beyond the initial set of exercises , the therapists in the latter three cases were also provided with the ( unaltered ) exercises created by therapists in earlier studies . For the 4 th case , upon request of the therapists , three boards were combined into a single system , providing the therapists with greater flexibility in the design of therapy exercises . This system was placed on a table with wheels such that it could be moved between the two treatment rooms in which the participating therapists worked . Procedures The procedures for the four studies varied slightly , gradually reducing the involvement of the non - clinical researchers . In the first three case studies , therapists received at the start of the study a two - hour long introduction to the TagTrainer system that included simple hands - on practice . One week after the start of these studies , therapists received additional training for the creation and modification of therapy exercises . Therapists were free to decide whether and when they would use TagTrainer during their therapy sessions . In the first case study the designer and developer of TagTrainer was on site , holding a scheduled weekly information session , observing the use of TagTrainer and conducting fixes and iterative design of the system as this was necessitated in practice . In the 2 nd and 3 rd case study a researcher was present one to three times weekly for trouble shooting , observations , and situated interviews . In the fourth case , a researcher was only present for initial training , data collection , and remote technological assistance . Measures In their stepwise guidance to facilitate successful implementation of technology in therapy , [ 17 ] argue that after the initial phases , during which awareness and insight about the new technology are spread amongst therapists , a phase of acceptance follows . During this phase , therapists’ attitude , motivation , and willingness to change are crucial factors in the success of the implementation process . Since we were interested in factors that influence therapists’ decisions to engage in EUD practices , the focus of the research efforts has been on measuring factors that predict technology acceptance and on collecting in - depth information about the practices , events , and opinions that underlie the therapists’ decisions . Logging – We logged the use of TagTrainer ( storing time of use , exercises used and the therapist using TagTrainer ) and the creation and modification of exercises , including the time of creation / modification , the content created and the author . Self - efficacy – The degree to which therapists felt able to create exercises with the program was measured using a questionnaire based on [ 2 ] , which measures self - efficacy on thirteen scales , ranging from 0 to 100 . We took measurements at three different moments , see Figure 3 . Technology acceptance – Technology acceptance refers to the intent of individuals to use a particular technology , and to a number of determinant factors . These were measured using UTAUT questionnaire [ 33 ] was administered three times during the studies , see Figure 3 . Credibility / expectancy – A credibility / expectancy questionnaire [ 9 ] was administered at the end of each study that measures the degree to which therapists believe that TagTrainer is credible as a therapy aid and that they expect it will help patients recover . Observations – A researcher was present for at least one day a week at every clinic to observe TagTrainer use by Case 1 S + T S + T S + T + CE Case 2 S + T S + T S + T + CE Case 3 S + T S + T S + T Case 4 S + T S + T S + T + CE Week ( relative ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Figure 3 : Administration of self - efficacy ( S ) , UTAUT ( T ) and credibility / expectancy ( CE ) questionnaires . Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4136 participating therapists . Field notes and photographic records were kept as a reference . Semi - structured interviews were conducted with individual therapists , as well as in groups . These interviews discussed therapists’ general experience of using TagTrainer , as well as their experiences with modifying and creating exercises . Depending on their availability and level of involvement in the study , up to four interviews per therapist were conducted . RESULTS Quantitative results Table 2 shows the most important statistics on TagTrainer usage and exercise creation / modification . Table 3 shows the results from the questionnaires . The UTAUT scores for effort expectancy , facilitating conditions and behavioral intent were slightly above average for all cases . Social influence and performance expectancy were slightly negative in all cases . Overall , little change can be observed over the course of each case . Only during the second case , behavioral intent dropped significantly as was shown by a Wilkoxon signed - rank test ( Z = - 2 . 041 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Interviews revealed that therapists in this case were unaware that the TagTrainer systems would remain at their clinic post - study , hence they gave low scores for behavioral intent . Credibility scores were between neutral and positive , while expectancy scores ranged from neutral to slightly negative . Overall , self - efficacy increased significantly in all cases apart from the last , where it decreased somewhat from moderately high to neutral . However , when excluding one participant not actively involved for the last part of the study , the results show a slight increase in self - efficacy ( M = 69 . 2 , SD = 9 . 3 ) . The low score at the start of case 3 is caused by the therapists’ interpretation of the questionnaire ; since they had not yet worked with TagTrainer , they gave a score of 0 for all self - efficacy questions at the start of the study . Motivation towards EUD The first case resulted in a lot more exercise creation than the latter three studies . One possible explanation could be a possible ‘demand effect’ ( see [ 23 ] ) because therapists were instructed on how to modify and create therapy exercises with TagTrainer , regardless of their actual need to do so . To probe whether EUD practices could develop spontaneously , participants in the fourth case were instructed on how to create exercises only upon their specific request . Although therapists created and modified exercises , they mentioned that this took a considerable share of the already limited time they had for patient treatment ( cases 1 and 2 ) . Despite the benefits they expected for training patients , they would not be willing to divert time from patients to programming in the future . As they do not spend much time behind a computer , for therapists the threshold for engaging in EUD was higher compared to office workers with whom EUD is typically studied . Furthermore , therapists remarked that many of the exercise modifications they required could be achieved in less time by using different objects , or by modifying the physical context in which the systems were located ( cases 2 and 4 ) . In case 3 , where therapy sessions often involved one therapist attending to multiple patients simultaneously , therapists indicated that TagTrainer allowed patients to work independently , which gave therapists the opportunity to look after other patients . They also indicated to be content with the option to create patient - tailored exercises . One therapist remarked : “The return - on - investment is clear to me . By creating patient - tailored exercises , I can have patients work independently . For example , I might spend five minutes on the creation of an exercise . If a patient uses the exercise twice for five minutes , I save five minutes . ” In case 3 , therapists were spontaneously and actively exploring the limits of what they could use TagTrainer for . For example , one therapist created an exercise in which TagTrainer was placed on the floor and used to train a patient’s legs rather than his hands . In another case , a therapist created an exercise in which two patients would train together ; the exercise was designed so that it would only progress if both patients would perform a given movement . Although not planned by design , the technology supported these uses . However , therapists in the fourth case doubted the usefulness of TagTrainer for lower - limb training . Mostly therapists were content with the existing set of generic exercises and saw no need for additional ones ( except for personalized exercises ) . In case 4 however , Case study # 1 2 3 4 Total Participants 4 5 9 6 24 Exercises carried out n / a * 203 171 92 466 * Training sessions 34 50 34 28 146 Patients treated 13 19 5 8 45 New exercises 20 3 11 1 35 Modified exercises 3 1 0 1 5 Table 2 : Usage and EUD statistics . * Software used in case 1 did not allow for logging use of individual exercises . Case study # 1 2 3 4 Effort exp . startend 5 . 20 ( 1 . 39 ) 5 . 30 ( 1 . 08 ) 4 . 70 ( 0 . 76 ) 4 . 60 ( 1 . 14 ) 4 . 60 ( 1 . 18 ) 5 . 00 ( 0 . 71 ) 5 . 00 ( 0 . 57 ) 4 . 00 ( 1 . 04 ) Facilit . cond . startend 4 . 60 ( 1 . 27 ) 4 . 80 ( 1 . 47 ) 5 . 10 ( 1 . 08 ) 4 . 80 ( 1 . 20 ) 4 . 50 ( 1 . 22 ) 4 . 90 ( 0 . 48 ) 5 . 00 ( 1 . 14 ) 5 . 00 ( 1 . 49 ) Behav . intent startend 4 . 80 ( 1 . 29 ) 5 . 50 ( 1 . 23 ) 6 . 00 ( 1 . 00 ) 2 . 00 ( 1 . 00 ) 4 . 50 ( 0 . 93 ) 3 . 80 ( 2 . 22 ) 6 . 00 ( 1 . 09 ) 5 . 00 ( 1 . 91 ) Social infl . startend 3 . 90 ( 0 . 78 ) 4 . 00 ( 1 . 34 ) 2 . 50 ( 1 . 27 ) 2 . 20 ( 1 . 30 ) 4 . 40 ( 1 . 20 ) 3 . 90 ( 0 . 25 ) 3 . 00 ( 1 . 15 ) 3 . 00 ( 1 . 58 ) Perform . exp . startend 3 . 60 ( 1 . 03 ) 3 . 80 ( 0 . 98 ) 2 . 60 ( 1 . 47 ) 1 . 70 ( 0 . 76 ) 3 . 30 ( 0 . 92 ) 3 . 30 ( 0 . 87 ) 4 . 00 ( 1 . 04 ) 3 . 00 ( 1 . 19 ) Credibility 14 . 8 ( 5 . 70 ) 19 . 5 ( 3 . 11 ) n / a 18 . 0 ( 3 . 60 ) Expectancy 10 . 1 ( 3 . 00 ) 13 . 9 ( 5 . 22 ) n / a 11 . 0 ( 5 . 60 ) Self - efficacy start end 52 . 3 ( 37 . 60 ) 75 . 4 ( 19 . 10 ) 23 . 2 ( 14 . 20 ) 64 . 1 ( 13 . 50 ) 0 . 0 ( 0 . 00 ) 61 . 7 ( 3 . 94 ) 61 . 7 ( 11 . 00 ) 54 . 6 ( 32 . 10 ) t - test SE start / end t = - 2 . 356 p = 0 . 05 t = - 3 . 434 p < 0 . 05 t = - 68 . 783 p < 0 . 001 t = 0 . 439 p = 0 . 704 Table 3 : Means ( standard - deviations ) for UTAUT , credibility , expectancy and self - efficacy . Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4137 some therapists expressed a wish for more generic exercises , especially ones that would use all three TagTile boards . In case 4 , the two therapists with previous TagTrainer experience were regarded as experts in exercise creation , both by themselves and by their colleagues . These therapists were willing to support colleagues and even create exercises for them , provided that they would receive managerial support , and time would be reserved for these activities . One of the ‘expert therapists’ had even trained an intern in exercise creation with TagTrainer , without this intern having received any training by the researchers . The decision to train an intern was fueled both by the therapist’s drive to spread knowledge about TagTrainer , as well as the intern’s curiosity . Therapists also sketched another scenario for exercise creation : the appointment of a dedicated ‘technology manager’ . This person , not necessarily a therapist , but someone within the clinic and knowledgeable about rehabilitation therapy would be assigned the task of creating and modifying exercises . Usability The successful use of the TEC by therapists who had never received formal training by the researchers confirms the usability of the tool . However , some of the exercises that therapists created had poor usability . E . g . , in one exercise the visual confirmation provided upon the correct placement of an object was covered by the object itself . Further therapists lacked programming skills and had no expertise in interaction design ; as a consequence they were unable to provide the level of usability that is required by their patients . Moreover , the resulting training content has to bear two levels of correctness : software quality ( i . e . being ‘bug - free’ and being usable as argued by [ 14 , 25 ] ) and clinical effectiveness ( i . e . helping rather than hampering a patient’s recovery process ) . Sharing EUD creations Therapists expressed varying opinions about sharing custom - created exercises . They reported that in principle they had no objections to sharing their creations with colleagues within or outside their own clinic , as long as other therapists would share as well . One participant ( case 4 ) especially liked the idea of other therapists being able to review the exercises that she created , such that she would learn to create better exercises . However , they doubted the further usefulness of sharing , since they expected that working out the details of a colleague’s exercise would cost them more time than creating an appropriate exercise from scratch . Additionally , participants expected that a lack of knowledge about the local patient population would make it harder for external colleagues to interpret the meaning and value of a given exercise . Rather than sharing exercises , therapists proposed an inter - clinic collaboration aimed at identifying ‘gaps’ in the exercise database that could be filled by the therapists themselves . Reuse One would expect therapists to prefer the use of existing exercises over creating new exercises . Paradoxically , therapists were less enthusiastic about reusing peer - created exercises . For example , one therapist in case 3 remarked : “Finding out the details about a peer - created exercise would take me more time than creating a suitable exercise myself . ” Therapists expected reuse to be difficult , since exact knowledge about an exercise ( e . g . , tag placement on an object ) is required to get the desired effects of an exercise . Additionally , they envisioned problems in standardizing the categorization of exercises . Nevertheless , they used extensively the exercises pre - installed in TagTrainer at the start of the study , which had been created by other therapists . DISCUSSION We have examined the challenges surrounding the introduction of EUD to support therapists in creating and customizing exercises on TagTrainer , a tangible interactive platform for rehabilitation training . Contrary to situations where EUD practices emerge bottom up , amongst communities and individuals with a high exposure to informatics , the context of rehabilitation training is characterized by relatively low familiarity and affinity to programming and informatics , and by a higher level of formality and management involvement in inserting new technologies in daily work . Still it is a professional context in which a lot of major benefits can be reaped from EUD , because of the need to tailor training programs to individual patients and local clinical practices of highly specialized and trained professionals . By means of four case studies we studied the deployment and adoption of TagTrainer . The aim of these studies was to identify the factors that influence therapists’ decisions to engage in EUD practices . In all cases the results of the UTAUT questionnaire show a positive acceptance of TagTrainer : therapists used TagTrainer extensively as a tool for daily therapy , illustrating the potential of tangible rehabilitation technology . Furthermore , we have demonstrated the feasibility of EUD in a clinical environment , as in all four studies new exercises were created independently by participating therapists . These exercises complemented the collection of exercises available to them at the start of the study period , and matched the needs of the specific patients they were working with . Interestingly , our studies revealed several challenges that need to be overcome before therapists engage successfully in EUD . Therapists reported to be confident about their EUD skills ; nevertheless , the amount of development taking place in the three latter studies was less than had been anticipated based on the initial deployment study . Over a combined duration of 21 weeks , the 20 participants from the three latter studies created just 15 new exercises , compared to 20 new exercises in three - week long first case study . Furthermore , the results on self - efficacy and the Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4138 reported and observed EUD behavior are remarkably consistent amongst all three latter studies , despite considerable differences of culture , healthcare system , socio - technical context and deployment strategy . In the following paragraphs we discuss more closely the EUD related decisions that our participants have been making , and the options that we provided them through the deployment of TagTrainer . Finally , we discuss , based on our experiences and previous work , the need for deployment guidelines for designers of future EUD environments . To develop or not to develop – that is a question Our studies have provided many examples of end - users that faced decisions related to EUD . These decisions often had the nature of a trade - off : the user would face a number of options with different costs and benefits , from which the best option needed to be selected . Often , these choices were not binary , but multinomial . For example , a therapist might face the need for a patient - tailored exercise . At this point , the therapist might have the following four options : modifying an exercise in his collection to fit the patient’s needs , creating an entirely new exercise , finding a matching exercise created by a colleague , or taking an existing exercise and accept that it is non - optimal for the patient . The Attention Investment model by Blackwell [ 3 ] considers the decision of end - users to engage in programming on a cognitive level . Blackwell argues that people constantly have to evaluate the tradeoff between investing time in automation and performing a task manually , since our cognitive resources are limited . However , Blackwell’s model takes the perspective of a single user facing a very clear and well - contained choice . Many EUD systems , such as TagTrainer , are part of more complex socio - technical environments where decision options become fuzzy . Although a similar tradeoff plays out in our cases , we think the factors involved transcend the cognitive effort as discussed by [ 3 ] . Further , a positive evaluation of the tradeoff may not be enough : our participants indicated that they see a positive return - on - investment for EUD activities with TagTrainer regarding the effort they spend on it . In the terms of [ 3 ] , the cognitive resources spent on creation activities are perceived to be less than the resources that they would spend to train patients without TagTrainer . Still , therapists often did not engage in EUD activities because of external reasons : for example because the clinic’s management did not free them from part of their regular activities to perform EUD activities . On the other hand , therapists saw the opportunity to provide patients with better treatment by offering patient - tailored exercises with TagTrainer . Therefore , an alternative tradeoff appears to emerge between the treatment quality versus compliance with the culture of the clinic and performance indicators adopted by the management ( in this case fully allocating the therapists’ time to patient treatment ) . This tradeoff is not about efficient use of one’s cognitive resources , but cost - benefit equity at an organizational level . The presence of other factors beyond end - users’ cognitive resources that influence their decision to engage in EUD implies that units of attention , the ‘currency’ used in the Attention Investment model , might not be the only one for determining an end - user’s decision to engage in EUD in context . Examples of non - cognitive factors that influenced therapists’ decisions to ( not ) engage in EUD are plentiful : managerial issues , caring about a patient’s wellbeing , plain curiosity , etc . Such a broader perspective on EUD practices has been discussed by Fischer et al . , in their manifesto for end - user development [ 11 ] . Based on results from several surveys , they propose a model which , further to the trade - off between user costs and user motivations , acknowledges management issues , context issues , technology etc . Fischer et al . [ 11 ] argue that critical success factors for the adoption of EUD depend very much on the domain considered . In cultures with high end - user motivation and low managerial influence ( such as in engineering and scientific domains , or creative communities ) , EUD practices might simply develop by end users taking development into their own hands . In other cultures that are usually the domain of non - information workers [ 30 ] , a larger distance has to be bridged for EUD to take place . The unifying property that characterizes this latter group is that interacting with computer technology is not the main focus of its members’ work , with the majority of their work happening off - screen , embedded in social interactions , communicating , observing etc . ( e . g . , primary school teachers , rehabilitation therapists ) . Our study seems to confirm Fischer et al . ’s argument in [ 11 ] that for domains dominated by non - information workers in general , contextual and managerial issues play a large role in an end - user’s decision to engage in EUD . Further the model of [ 11 ] is in line with general models of technology acceptance [ 33 ] and the more general model of theory of reasoned action ( TRA , [ 13 ] ) ; contrary to the literature on technology acceptance , there has been little attempt to validate this model quantitatively . On the one hand this calls for future empirical research to fill this gap . On the other , we note that technology acceptance models provide little guidance to designers as to how to design EUD technology to ensure acceptance . Therefore , in the following paragraphs we elaborate on some of the tasks that our participants faced , as well as on the particular design choices that enabled our users to perform these tasks . End - user tasks in EUD environments Using existing exercises Some therapists remarked that because a substantial set of exercises was already available , there was less of a need to create new exercises . Although not all participants shared this opinion , it highlights an important design decision that was made for the deployment of TagTrainer . An initial set of about 150 exercises was included upon deployment of the TagTrainer systems in our studies . These exercises were developed in close collaboration with therapists , to cater for Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4139 a set of basic arm - hand therapy demands . The idea was that , as described in [ 12 ] , these exercises would act as the ‘seed’ from which TagTrainer could grow , through the development of additional exercises by therapists . In hindsight , it might have been that our ‘seed’ had satisfied the current demands of some therapists – thus the system that we deployed was not sufficiently ‘underdesigned’ [ 11 ] for EUD practices to occur amongst all therapists . Reusing others’ exercises While therapists found exercise reuse beneficial in principle , they feared that assessing whether the content of peer - created exercises was suitable for any particular patient would take longer than it would take them to create an exercise from scratch . The difficulty in re - using code and sharing code between programmers is well known [ 16 ] , and has motivated engineering practices such as component based software development [ 28 ] , API usability [ 8 ] , and at a more operational level commenting and documenting of source code . However , it is questionable whether such engineering practices should be expected by health professionals . Moreover , there are major differences to how therapists will explain an exercise , versus what could constitute a suitable documentation of the relevant software . Indeed one of the most prominent problems that therapists encountered in the exercise creation process was the translation between different ‘languages’ applying to their problem : i . e . handling the translation between intrinsic meaning ( what does the exercise do ? ) , programming language ( how was it built ? ) and natural language ( how can I explain it to a colleague ? ) , see also [ 24 , 26 ] . Though therapists voiced negative opinions concerning exercise reuse , these opinions form an apparent discrepancy with the behavior displayed by participants . The therapists’ attitude would lead one to expect that therapists would engage vigorously in EUD and use their own exercises , rather than those made by others . However , for most of the training carried out during the study , participants relied on the exercises already available in the TagTrainer system . There could be several explanations for this , the most obvious one that attitudes do not always succeed in predicting behavior , which is emergent and contextualized . Another one would be that software creation was just not thought to be feasible in the time available for training a patient ( one session typically lasts 30 minutes ) . Perhaps a therapist would need more time to organize a training session in such a way that creating a new exercise would not take away any training time from the patient ( e . g . , while the patient is carrying out another task ) . Consistently with the TRA , a person’s belief in their ability to engage in a specific behavior is a major predictor of them actually engaging in it . But this belief depends on a very specific behavior and context ( following the behavior compatibility principle discussed in [ 13 ] ) , rather than the more general conception of self - efficacy of EUD that was measured in this study . An alternative explanation is that our own expectations of what constitutes re - use are different than those held by therapists . Surely , the ‘ready exercises’ that were made available in TagTrainer at the start of the studies described here , had been tested and refined to remove technical or usability errors . However , these exercises also had been developed by rehabilitation therapists . Could then the therapists’ reservations towards reusing end - user software be a matter of perception regarding the software creation process and trust towards its outcomes , rather than having its roots in any negative experiences ? The intent to use TagTrainer is largely affected by its perceived credibility and this seems to be , at least in part , influenced by the perceptions therapists have about how it was created . For example , evidence of clinical effectiveness in terms of clinical trials was often mentioned as a prerequisite for using TagTrainer , which is consistent with the standard approach for implementing technology in healthcare [ 17 ] . Even though pre - installed exercise content was to our eyes the product of EUD as much as what was created during the study period , therapists perceived this very differently . Future research could shed light into these considerations by measuring credibility and expectancy specifically for end - user developed software itself , versus one that others have created . It could also consider how end - users evaluate any curation process by software professionals . More generally , technology acceptance models for EUD need to account for perceptions of the software creation process held by end - users . Modifying exercises An interesting phenomenon that occurred in all of our studies was the modification of therapy exercises by substitution of the physical objects involved . The ‘tags’ included in TagTrainer can quickly be attached to any object of choice , and thus allows therapists to use different objects with the same exercise software . Therapists remarked that these ‘modifications’ allowed them to create patient - tailored exercises without the need for delving into the software , thereby allowing them to save time . Although traditionally the physical modification of TagTrainer would not be considered EUD , we argue to broaden the scope of this term for interactive physical systems [ 30 ] . We believe that the possibility of physical modifications has facilitated the EUD engagement by smoothing the transition between exercise consumerism and exercise creation . Creating new exercises Not all customization needs can be addressed by just using different physical objects . For example , in the fourth case , two existing TagTrainer systems with each one TagTile were merged into a new system with three TagTiles . However , all pre - installed exercises had been created for a single - TagTile system and did not make use of the two additional TagTiles . Therapists felt that more multi - TagTile exercises were required – especially for training the relatively skilled patients . Still , only two new exercises were created for the three - board TagTrainer system during Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4140 the fourth case study . Therapists remarked that , although they had a need for new exercises , they were unable to create them because they would not divert from patient treatment to engage in exercise creation . They suggested , beyond providing them with time dedicated to the development of new exercises , to employ a dedicated TagTrainer responsible with whom they together could develop new exercises . Cabitza et al . have recently proposed such an extension to the meta - design paradigm , in which a maieuta - designer ( derived from maieutics , a Socratic form of inquiry and discussion between individuals ) acts as a complementary role to the meta - designer [ 11 ] , but “more oriented to the social aspects of EUD practice than to the technical ones” [ 5 ] . Such a maieuta - designer would be tasked with facilitating the shift from consumerism to EUD on a social and managerial level , just as a meta - designer does on a technical level . This relates to the role of contact person that Spahn and Wulf [ 27 ] have introduced in their work on the deployment of an EUD environment in mid - sized German companies . The contact person acts as an evangelist , promoting and supporting the use of an EUD environment , and assisting end - users in the creation of new software artifacts . Curation In all studies , therapists remarked that it was hard to find the right exercise for a particular patient . Although exercises are described and categorized by means of a title , a category and keywords , therapists had difficulties finding applicable exercises . One reason was the lack of a uniform classification scheme to categorize and describe exercises ; as a result , suitable exercises might have been available , but would not be found because therapists described their needs in terms different from those used in exercise descriptions . Furthermore , the value of certain exercises was contested by some therapists . For example , therapists who were part of the third study had developed exercises that used TagTrainer for training a patient’s legs . However , when therapists from the fourth study were confronted with these exercises , they dismissed them as being ‘not useful’ , and ‘not in line with their intended use for TagTrainer’ . These notions indicate that there is a need for curation in EUD environments like TagTrainer . This curation , that relates to the ‘reseeding’ phase in Fischer et al . ’s SER model [ 12 ] , could be implemented in many different ways , such as through a community review , by a dedicated curator , or by an external validation body . Success or failure ? Although the adoption of TagTrainer as a rehabilitation technology can be considered successful by all means ( e . g . , usage statistics , questionnaire ratings ) , it is hard to qualify its success as a tool for EUD . After all , what constitutes a successful EUD deployment ? If it is simply a high number of EUD creations , then what would be the minimal value for this number to declare success ? Indeed , the sheer number of EUD creations in our studies ( 40 ) was somewhat limited compared to the number of participants ( 24 ) and the lengths of the case studies . We argue however , that such numbers have little value in determining the success of an EUD deployment . Rather , we think that the success of an EUD system depends on its impact on the goals its users want to accomplish . In our case , EUD did help therapists to provide personalized training content to their patients - a goal that could not have been achieved without EUD . Whether more patients could have been helped , and whether the efficiency of the EUD process could have been improved are equally important questions , though currently hard to answer . The difficulty in defining the success of TagTrainer as an EUD environment illustrates the discrepancy between our expectations as researchers and designers ( success meaning widespread uptake of EUD activities ) and those of the our end - users ( success meaning improved treatment quality and efficiency ) . Acknowledging the existence of this discrepancy for the larger EUD community ( and in particular in environments with non - information workers ) should be a first step towards a set of guidelines for future EUD deployments . Currently , such guidelines are lacking , and the result of EUD deployments is based largely on the experience and intuition of the researchers , rather than scientific evidence . We call upon the research community to collect experiences from EUD deployment studies and to use these experiences to formulate a set of general guidelines for the deployment of EUD environments . CONCLUSION This paper has demonstrated the feasibility of EUD in the context of rehabilitation training through four case studies extending from three to eight weeks , in three different rehabilitation clinics located in two different countries . Through these field studies , we have gathered significant experience in what it means to deploy EUD environments in the context of a domain that is dominated by non - information workers , such as rehabilitation therapists . Our studies have revealed the relatively large influence of external ( e . g . managerial and contextual ) factors on an end - user’s decision to engage in EUD practices . We have also shown that what constitutes end - user development is different from the first person perspective of the therapist compared to what we anticipated , showing how important their perceptions and evaluations of the software creation process are for adoption . For improving the EUD systems created , more attention needs to be paid towards guiding end - users to address usability , as well as towards supporting the browsing , locating , and comprehension of existing solutions . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We acknowledge the support of the Innovation - Oriented Research Programme ‘Integral Product Creation and Realization ( IOP IPCR ) ’ of the Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs . Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4141 REFERENCES 1 . Alankus , G . , Lazar , A . , May , M . , and Kelleher , C . Towards Customizable Games for Stroke Rehabilitation . Proc . CHI ’10 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 2113 – 2122 . 2 . Bandura , A . Guide for constructing self - efficacy scales . Self - efficacy beliefs of adolescents 5 , ( 2006 ) , 307 – 337 . 3 . Blackwell , A . F . First Steps in Programming : A Rationale for Attention Investment Models . Proc . HCC ’02 , IEEE Computer Society ( 2002 ) , 2 – 10 . 4 . Burnett , M . M . and Myers , B . A . Future of End - user Software Engineering : Beyond the Silos . Proc . ICSE 2014 , ACM ( 2014 ) , 201 – 211 . 5 . Cabitza , F . , Fogli , D . , and Piccinno , A . Fostering participation and co - evolution in sentient multimedia systems . J . Vis . Lang . Comput . 25 , 6 ( 2014 ) , 684 – 694 . 6 . Carmien , S . P . and Fischer , G . Design , adoption , and assessment of a socio - technical environment supporting independence for persons with cognitive disabilities . Proc . CHI ’08 , ACM ( 2008 ) , 597 – 606 . 7 . Cott , C . A . Client - centred rehabilitation : client perspectives . Disabil Rehabil 26 , 24 ( 2004 ) , 1411 – 1422 . 8 . Daughtry , J . M . , Farooq , U . , Stylos , J . , and Myers , B . A . API usability : CHI’2009 special interest group meeting . CHI ’09 Extended Abstracts , ACM ( 2009 ) , 2771 – 2774 . 9 . Devilly , G . J . and Borkovec , T . D . Psychometric properties of the credibility / expectancy questionnaire . J Behav Ther Exp Psy 31 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 73 – 86 . 10 . Fischer , G . Understanding , fostering , and supporting cultures of participation . ACM interactions 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 42 – 53 . 11 . Fischer , G . , Giaccardi , E . , Ye , Y . , Sutcliffe , A . G . , and Mehandjiev , N . Meta - design : a manifesto for end - user development . Commun . ACM 47 , 9 ( 2004 ) , 33 – 37 . 12 . Fischer , G . , McCall , R . , Ostwald , J . , Reeves , B . , and Shipman , F . Seeding , evolutionary growth and reseeding : supporting the incremental development of design environments . Proc . CHI ’94 , ACM ( 1994 ) , 292 – 298 . 13 . Fishbein , M . and Ajzen , I . Predicting and Changing Behavior : The Reasoned Action Approach . Taylor & Francis , 2011 . 14 . Fisher , II , M . , Rothermel , G . , Brown , D . , Cao , M . , Cook , C . , and Burnett , M . Integrating automated test generation into the WYSIWYT spreadsheet testing methodology . ACM Trans . Softw . Eng . Methodol . 15 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 150 – 194 . 15 . Gantt , M . and Nardi , B . A . Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among CAD users . Proc . CHI ’92 , ACM ( 1992 ) , 107 – 117 . 16 . Haefliger , S . , Krogh , G . von , and Spaeth , S . Code Reuse in Open Source Software . Manage Sci 54 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 180 – 193 . 17 . Hochstenbach - Waelen , A . and Seelen , H . A . Embracing change : practical and theoretical considerations for successful implementation of technology assisting upper limb training in stroke . J Neuroeng Rehabil 9 , ( 2012 ) , 52 . 18 . Jacobs , A . , Timmermans , A . , Michielsen , M . , Vander Plaetse , M . , and Markopoulos , P . CONTRAST : Gamification of Arm - hand Training for Stroke Survivors . CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts , ACM ( 2013 ) , 415 – 420 . 19 . Ko , A . J . , Abraham , R . , Beckwith , L . , et al . The state of the art in end - user software engineering . ACM Comput . Surv . 43 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 21 : 1 – 21 : 44 . 20 . Lieberman , H . , Paternò , F . , Klann , M . , and Wulf , V . End - User Development : An Emerging Paradigm . In H . Lieberman , F . Paternò and V . Wulf , eds . , End User Development . Springer Netherlands , 2006 , 1 – 8 . 21 . Maceli , M . and Atwood , M . E . From Human Crafters to Human Factors to Human Actors and Back Again : Bridging the Design Time – Use Time Divide . Proc . IS - EUD 2011 , Springer Berlin Heidelberg ( 2011 ) , 76 – 91 . 22 . Mehandjiev , N . , Sutcliffe , A . , and Lee , D . Organizational View of End - User Development . In End User Development . Springer , 2006 , 371 – 399 . 23 . Orne , M . T . Demand characteristics and the concept of quasi - controls . In Artifacts in Behavioral Research : Robert Rosenthal and Ralph L . Rosnow’s Classic Books . Oxford University Press , 2009 , 110 – 137 . 24 . Pane , J . F . , Ratanamahatana , C . , and Myers , B . A . Studying the language and structure in non - programmers’ solutions to programming problems . Int J Hum - Comput St 54 , 2 ( 2001 ) , 237 – 264 . 25 . Rothermel , G . , Burnett , M . , Li , L . , Dupuis , C . , and Sheretov , A . A methodology for testing spreadsheets . ACM Trans . Softw . Eng . Methodol . 10 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 110 – 147 . 26 . De Souza , C . S . , Garcia , A . C . B . , Slaviero , C . , Pinto , H . , and Repenning , A . Semiotic traces of computational thinking acquisition . Proc . IS - EUD 2011 , Springer - Verlag ( 2011 ) , 155 – 170 . 27 . Spahn , M . and Wulf , V . End - User Development of Enterprise Widgets . In V . Pipek , M . B . Rosson , B . de Ruyter and V . Wulf , eds . , End - User Development . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2009 , 106 – 125 . 28 . Szyperski , C . Component software : beyond object - oriented programming . ACM Press / Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . , New York , NY , USA , 1998 . 29 . Tetteroo , D . , Markopoulos , P . , Timmermans , A . , and Seelen , H . Rehabilitation Therapists as Software Creators ? Introducing End User Development in a Healthcare Setting . Int J of Sociotechnology and Knowledge Development 6 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 36 – 50 . 30 . Tetteroo , D . , Soute , I . , and Markopoulos , P . Five Key Challenges in End - User Development for Tangible and Embodied Interaction . Proc . ICMI ’13 , ( 2013 ) . 31 . Timmermans , A . A . , Seelen , H . A . , Willmann , R . D . , et al . Arm and hand skills : training preferences after stroke . Disabil Rehabil 31 , ( 2009 ) , 1344 – 52 . 32 . Timmermans , A . , Seelen , H . , Willmann , R . , and Kingma , H . Technology - assisted training of arm - hand skills in stroke : concepts on reacquisition of motor control and therapist guidelines for rehabilitation technology design . J Neuroeng Rehabil 6 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 1 . 33 . Venkatesh , V . , Morris , M . G . , Gordon B . Davis , and Davis , F . D . User Acceptance of Information Technology : Toward a Unified View . MIS Quarterly 27 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 425 – 478 . Home Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 4142