Articles https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 019 - 0313 - 6 Department of Biology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , USA . * e - mail : svitkina @ sas . upenn . edu M itochondria in eukaryotic cells play key roles in energy production and cellular homeostasis . Proper regulation of mitochondrial fission and fusion is essential for mito - chondrial health and , consequently , for cellular functions , whereas abnormal mitochondrial dynamics are linked to many human diseases including neurodegenerative , cardiac and metabolic disorders 1 – 3 . Mitochondrial fission is a multistep process 4 . A late step in this process is largely executed by the dynamin family GTPase Drp1 ( ref . 5 ) although classical dynamin 2 can also contribute 6 . Estimates of the intrinsic diameter of helical Drp1 oligomers , which need to wrap around the mitochondrion to mediate fission , vary broadly from only ~ 30 nm ( ref . 7 ) to ~ 60 nm ( ref . 8 ) to ~ 200 nm ( ref . 9 ) . However , even at the upper estimate , the oligomer diameter seems insufficient to circumscribe typical mitochondria with diameters ≥ 200 nm . Recruitment of Drp1 is therefore thought to require pre - constriction of the mitochondrion 10 . Prefission sites on mitochon - dria often associate with the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) before Drp1 recruitment 11 . Furthermore , mitochondrial preconstriction has been functionally linked to the actin cytoskeleton , specifically to the activities of two actin filament nucleators—formin INF2 - CAAX 10 and Spire1C 12 —that reside on the ER and mitochondria , respectively . One mechanism by which the ER can contribute to mitochondrial constriction is via the association of INF2 - CAAX with the ER . Other studies suggest that non - muscle myosin II ( NMII ) also has fission - promoting roles 13 , 14 . There is still no satisfactory mechanistic model to explain the role of the actin cytoskeleton in mitochondrial constriction . The actin cytoskeleton in cells can generate both pushing and pulling forces 15 . Therefore , one possibility is that polymerizing actin fila - ments push on the mitochondrion to induce constriction . In cells , a pushing force is usually generated by actin filaments nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . However , no local enrichments of the Arp2 / 3 complex were observed at mitochondrial constriction sites 16 . Alternatively , a pushing force could be generated by actin filaments nucleated by INF2 - CAAX from the ER surface 10 and / or by Spire1C from the mitochondrial surface 12 . In both cases , however , actin fila - ments are predicted to abut the mitochondrion with their pointed ends , which is a rather unconventional mode for generating push - ing forces . Another possibility is that the actin cytoskeleton applies a pulling force through NMII activity 17 . An apparently straightfor - ward scenario for this model is that NMII builds and constricts a circumferential actin ring around the mitochondrion , in a process analagous to cytokinesis 18 . A weakness of this model is that NMII assembles into ~ 300 nm long bipolar filaments to generate con - traction 19 , 20 . This length is substantially larger than the diameter of a typical mitochondrion . As NMII filaments do not exhibit any detectable bending either in cells 20 or in vitro 19 , the smallest ‘con - tractile ring’ they can form would represent an equilateral triangle with a side length of 300 nm , which can constrict a mitochondrion to a diameter of ~ 350 nm , but not smaller . These considerations make it geometrically challenging to employ an actin − NMII con - tractile ring to constrict mitochondria to a diameter suitable for Drp1 binding . The mechanism of actin - dependent mitochondrial constriction might be understood if the actual structure of the actin cytoskeleton at mitochondrial constriction sites was known . For example , the presence of actin filaments that abut the mitochondrial constriction site with their ends at nearly right angles would favour the pushing model , whereas the presence of actin filaments that circumscribe the constriction site would support the contractile ring model . However , there is no technique capable of simultaneously revealing the high - resolution structure of the cytoskeleton and membrane organelles . Despite remarkable developments in super - resolution fluorescence microscopy 21 , electron miscroscopy ( EM ) is still the only method that can obtain single - filament resolution of the actin cytoskel - eton . Among various EM approaches , only a few can properly pre - serve and resolve individual actin filaments . Platinum replica EM ( PREM ) has been particularly productive in this respect 22 . In PREM , a transmission electron microscope is used to visualize the fine three - dimensional ( 3D ) topography of the sample , which is rotary shadowed with a thin layer of platinum after detergent - mediated Ultrastructure and dynamics of the actin − myosin II cytoskeleton during mitochondrial fission Changsong Yang and Tatyana M . Svitkina * Mitochondrial fission involves the preconstriction of an organelle followed by scission by dynamin - related protein Drp1 . Preconstriction is facilitated by actin and non - muscle myosin II through a mechanism that remains unclear , largely due to the unknown cytoskeletal ultrastructure at mitochondrial constrictions . Here , using platinum replica electron microscopy , we show that mitochondria in cells are embedded in an interstitial cytoskeletal network that contains abundant unbranched actin fila - ments . Both spontaneous and induced mitochondrial constrictions typically associate with a criss - cross array of long actin filaments that comprise part of this interstitial network . Non - muscle myosin II is found adjacent to mitochondria but is not specifically enriched at the constriction sites . During ionomycin - induced mitochondrial fission , F - actin clouds colocalize with mitochondrial constriction sites , whereas dynamic myosin II clouds are present in the vicinity of constrictions . We propose that myosin II promotes mitochondrial constriction by inducing stochastic deformations of the interstitial actin network , which applies pressure on the mitochondrial surface and thus initiates curvature - sensing mechanisms that complete mitochondrial constriction . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 603 Articles Nature Cell BIology exposure of the cytoskeleton , fixation and critical point drying of the sample . Although critical point drying can lead to some shrink - age of the cell , the relative arrangement of the intracellular struc - tures remains largely preserved , as evidenced by correlative light microscopy and PREM 23 – 29 . However , detergent extraction would dissolve membrane organelles . Alternatively , the cell interior can be exposed by mechanical ‘unroofing’ of the cells 30 , 31 , but most com - mon unroofing protocols lead to a loss of most intracellular organ - elles , including mitochondria . Here , we developed protocols to expose the cell interior , while preserving both membrane organelles and the associated cytoskel - eton , and used PREM to reveal the organization of the actin − NMII cytoskeleton at mitochondrial constriction sites . Our observations are not consistent with either the polymerization - mediated push - ing or contractile ring models . Instead , they suggest that NMII - dependent stochastic contractions of the interstitial cytoskeletal network induce deformations of mitochondria , which eventually lead to mitochondrial constriction and fission . results Visualization of membrane organelles and the cytoskeleton by PREM . To reveal the cytoskeletal organization at mitochondrial constriction sites using PREM , we tested various approaches that remove the apical plasma membrane but preserve the organelles and the associated cytoskeleton . Our two most effective approaches were ( 1 ) extraction with a mild detergent , saponin , in cold conditions ( Fig . 1a – d and Supplementary Fig . 1a – d ) and ( 2 ) ripping off the apical membrane using a lightly attached nitrocellulose membrane ( Fig . 1e , f and Supplementary Fig . 1e , f ; see Methods ) . Both methods produced openings in the apical surface through which a nearly intact cell interior with membrane organelles could be visualized . Mitochondria and the ER were recognized by their distinc - tive morphology in successfully exposed interiors of glial cells in mixed cultures of dissociated rat hippocampal cells ( Fig . 1 and Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Mitochondria often had an elongated tubu - lar shape with smooth outlines and were characterized by their relatively high electron density , probably due to dense contents . Although PREM primarily reveals surface topography , the biologi - cal material retained underneath the metal layer creates additional contrast , especially after fixation with uranyl acetate . The ER was more polymorphic and consisted of relatively translucent mem - brane structures , such as thin anastomosing tubules with irregular contours , as well as larger sacs and sheets . The shapes and dimen - sions of the ER components varied broadly , both within a cell and among different cells , so that in some cases the ER could not be definitively identified . The two complementary methods of open - ing up the cell—chemical extraction and mechanical rupture— produced similar results , suggesting that they faithfully report the overall organization of membrane organelles and the cytoskeleton in the cell interior . In subsequent experiments , we predominantly employed nitrocellulose - based unroofing , because it was faster and more efficient across different cell types . To unambiguously identify the mitochondria and ER in unroofed PREM samples , we performed correlative light and EM ( CLEM ) on COS - 7 cells transfected with the mitochondrial marker Mito − blue fluorescent protein ( BFP ) , either alone ( Fig . 2a – d ) or in combination with the ER marker mCherry − Sec61 β ( Fig . 2e – h ) . Under our cul - ture conditions , most mitochondria in COS - 7 cells—either unroofed ( Fig . 2 ) or living ( Fig . 3a ) —were short and only a few of them had a typical elongated shape . CLEM showed that morphologically identifiable mitochondria colocalized with the Mito − BFP - labelled structures visualized by confocal microscopy . Similarly , a network of thin electron - translucent tubules visible in the PREM images closely matched the fluorescently labelled ER network in confocal images of the same cells ( Fig . 2 ) . These results validate our morphology - based identification of mitochondria and the ER in PREM samples . Structural organization of the cytoskeleton and ER around mito - chondria . We observed different modes of ER − mitochondria inter - action in glial cells ( Fig . 1 ) , which were more apparent in 3D views of PREM stereo pairs ( Supplementary Fig . 1b – d , f ) . ER tubules could cross a mitochondrion at different angles to form underpass c d b a e b c d f ff ER ER ER ER m m 2 2 1 1 Fig . 1 | Ultrastructure of the cell interior in glial cells revealed by PreM . a – d , Exposure of the cell interior by saponin extraction . See additional examples in Supplementary Fig . 1 . a , A broad window in the apical plasma membrane reveals both membrane organelles and the cytoskeleton in the cell interior . The boxed regions in a are enlarged in b and c . b − d , The organization of the cytoskeleton in the vicinity of mitochondria ( m ) and the ER . b , Mitochondrial constrictions ( white arrows ) are associated with a slightly increased density of associated actin filaments . Constriction 1 is intersected by an ER tubule , whereas constriction 2 is located further from the nearest ER tubule . The upper mitochondrion has no prominent constrictions and interacts with filaments relatively uniformly along its length , except for the tip ( white arrowhead ) , which associates with a relatively dense actin filament array . Red arrows indicate microtubules . A 3D version of this image with pseudocoloured mitochondria and ER is presented in Supplementary Fig . 1c . c , An elongated mitochondrial constriction between arrows 1 and 2 is associated with intersecting actin filaments and ER tubules . Putative mitochondria and the ER are pseudocoloured in purple and yellow , respectively . A 3D version of this image is presented in Supplementary Fig . 1d . The boxed region in c is enlarged in d . d , Some actin filaments ( pseudocoloured green ) originate from the ER surface and eventually intersect the mitochondrion . e , f , Exposure of the cell interior by nitrocellulose - mediated unroofing . The boxed region in e is enlarged in f . See additional examples in Supplementary Fig . 1 . f , Some actin filaments ( green ) originate from the ER tubule , continue downwards and intersect the mitochondrion at the constriction site . A few actin filaments ( red ) seem to originate at the mitochondrial surface . Magenta arrowheads indicate intermediate filaments . Branched actin filaments in the interstitial network are shaded blue . Scale bars : 2 µ m ( a ) , 200 nm ( b , c ) , 100 nm ( d , f ) and 1 µ m ( e ) . The images are representative of n = 6 independent experiments , which gave similar results . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 604 Articles Nature Cell BIology or overpass intersections and could end at the mitochondrion or wrap around it . We defined constrictions as sites at which the width of a mitochondrion decreased by ≥ 20 % . Most ER − mitochondrion interactions ( 95 % , 355 sites in 92 cells from 6 independent experi - ments ) occurred at unconstricted mitochondrial sites , while some ER tubules contacted a mitochondrion close to a constriction site ( Fig . 1b , c , white arrows ) . On the other hand , ~ 75 % ( n = 111 ) of mito - chondrial constrictions were intersected by ER tubules , consistent with reported light microscopy data 11 . The average length of mito - chondrial constrictions , measured between half - maximal widths on each side of the constriction , was 701 ± 21 nm ( mean ± s . e . m . ; n = 113 constrictions from 10 cells ) , when estimated from fluores - cence images , and 763 ± 24 nm ( n = 132 constrictions from 37 cells ) , when measured using PREM images . The similarity of these values ( P = 0 . 11 , two - tailed nonparametric Mann − Whitney test ) further supports the proper preservation of the mitochondrial shape in the course of PREM preparation . Both the mitochondria and the ER were entangled with the cytoskeleton , which formed a loose 3D network in the cell inte - rior . This network predominantly consisted of actin filaments , but also included microtubules and intermediate filaments that could be recognized by their distinct thicknesses . Some actin filaments that comprised this interstitial network seemed to emanate from the ER and could extend to mitochondria or another ER structure ( Fig . 1d , f , green ) . Actin filaments appeared to originate at the mito - chondrial surface less frequently ( Fig . 1f , red ) . Most actin filaments in the interstitial network appeared unbranched ( no detectable branches over the visible length ) , although occasional branched actin filaments could be detected ( Fig . 1f , blue ) . Importantly , we did not encounter the stereotypical bush - like networks of short branched filaments , which are characteristic of sites of intense Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent nucleation 23 , 32 , at the mitochondrial surface . The average length of the actin filaments in the intersti - tial network , measured over distances that allowed us to clearly Mito – BFP a e f h g b c d Mito – BFP + mCherry – Sec61 β PREM PREM Overlay Fig . 2 | CleM of CoS - 7 cells . a − d , CLEM images of a COS - 7 cell expressing Mito − BFP . a , A fluorescence microscopy image of Mito − BFP in the cell after unroofing . b , An overlay of Mito − BFP fluorescence and PREM images of the same cell . c , d , PREM ( c ) and fluorescence − PREM overlay ( d ) images of the boxed region in b . e − h , CLEM images of a COS - 7 cell expressing Mito − BFP and mCherry − Sec61 β . e , An unroofed cell expressing Mito − BFP and mCherry − Sec61 β is imaged by fluorescence microscopy ( left ) and PREM ( middle ) and shown as a fluorescence − PREM overlay ( right ) . f , g , The enlarged boxed region from e is shown as a fluorescence − PREM overlay ( f ) and as a PREM image with visually identified ER shaded in yellow ( g ) . The enlarged boxed region from g is shown in h . Scale bars : 10 μ m ( a , b , e ) , 1 μ m ( c , d ) and 500 nm ( f − h ) . The images are representative of n = 2 independent experiments , which gave similar results . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 605 Articles Nature Cell BIology visualize individual filaments between their overlaps with other structures , was 203 ± 91 nm ( mean ± s . d . ; n = 535 filaments in 12 cells from 2 independent experiments ) . This result is close to the observed ~ 270 nm length of actin filaments assembled in vitro in the presence of constitutively active INF2 and profilin 33 . We cannot exclude the possibility that very short filaments that were not incor - porated into larger cytoskeletal systems could be lost as a result of opening up the cell interior . However , such filaments , if they exist , are poorly suited to force generation because they would be unable to gain traction without associating with more stable structures . Mitochondrial constriction sites were not frequent in glial cells , consistent with relatively rare fission events at the steady state 10 . However , the density of actin filaments seemed to be greater at mitochondrial constrictions , defined as described above ( 20 . 8 ± 1 . 8 µ m µ m − 2 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; n = 12 constrictions with a total area of 0 . 88 µ m 2 in 6 cells from 3 independent experiments ) , than at adjacent regions on both sides of the constriction ( 5 . 2 ± 0 . 9 µ m µ m − 2 ; n = 24 regions with a total area of 1 . 8 µ m 2 ; P < 0 . 0001 ; paired Student’s t - test ; Fig . 1b , c , f ) . Notably , these actin filaments exhib - ited neither end - on abutting nor circumferential orientation , which would be predicted by the pushing - based and contractile ring - based models , respectively . Instead , the actin filaments from the interstitial network intersected the mitochondrial constriction sites at a variety of angles , but mostly diagonally ( Fig . 1b , c , f ) . Another conspicuous feature of mitochondria − cytoskeleton interactions was that some mitochondrial ends ( 9 % , n = 355 ends ) were tightly associated with an array of actin filaments that was denser than at the adjacent mitochondrial regions ( Fig . 1b , white arrowhead ) . Together , these results do not support the existence of mitochon - drion - associated actin arrays that would be specifically dedicated to generating mitochondrial constriction . Instead , our observations raise the possibility that actin - dependent promotion of mitochon - drial constriction could be mediated by actin filaments from the interstitial cytoskeletal network . Organization of the cytoskeleton at mitochondrial constriction sites after the inhibition of Drp1 - mediated scission . The low intrinsic frequency of mitochondrial fission is a challenge for our PREM analysis , because of a low probability that two rare events— mitochondrial fission and unroofing—would occur at the same location . This problem also means that we might miss constriction - specific actin arrays . Therefore , we used a dominant negative Drp1 mutant , Drp1 - K38A 34 , to inhibit mitochondrial fission , as reported previously 8 , 35 , 36 , without affecting cytoskeleton - dependent precon - striction mechanisms ; the frequency of mitochondrial constrictions should be increased in such cells . We used a construct that simultaneously expresses short - hairpin RNA against endogenous Drp1 and short - hairpin RNA - insensitive green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) − Drp1 - K38A . Expression of GFP − Drp1 - K38A in COS - 7 cells , which normally have short mitochon - dria , resulted in the formation of many elongated mitochondria ( Fig . 3a , b ) , probably due to stalled fission . PREM analysis of these cells revealed multiple constrictions along the length of elongated mitochondria ( Fig . 3c – h ) . Actin filaments at the mitochondrial constriction sites again formed denser arrays ( 18 . 3 ± 2 . 1 µ m µ m – 2 ; mean ± s . e . m . ; n = 49 constrictions with a total area of 4 . 2 µ m − 2 in 21 cells from 3 independent experiments ) than at the neighbouring mitochondrial regions ( 4 . 1 ± 0 . 4 µ m µ m − 2 ; n = 98 constrictions with a total area of 7 . 7 µ m 2 ; P < 0 . 0001 ; Wilcoxon two - tailed paired test ) . Most actin filaments were unbranched , but some branched fila - ments were also present ( Fig . 3e ) . Actin filaments could be oriented along , across or diagonally to the mitochondrion axis ( Fig . 3f – h ) . Highly constricted sites tended to be associated with diagonal actin filaments , which criss - crossed the constriction site above and below the mitochondrion ( Fig . 3g , h and Supplementary Fig . 4 ; Supplementary Video 1 ) . We sometimes observed mitochondria that formed a prominent bulge near the constriction site ( Fig . 3c and Supplementary Fig . 4 ) , as if experiencing longitudinal pressure from the constriction area . More shallow mitochondrial constrictions had a less distinct criss - cross orientation of actin filaments at the constriction site ( Fig . 3e , f ) . We again observed a fraction of mito - chondrial ends associating with arrays of relatively dense actin fila - ments that contain both unbranched and branched actin filaments Mito – BFP ( i ) g h d e a b c f ( ii ) ( i ) e f ( ii ) * GFP – K38A - Drp1 Fig . 3 | actin filament organization at mitochondrial constriction sites induced in CoS - 7 cells by expression of the gFP − K38a - Drp1 construct . a , b , Confocal microscopy images of COS - 7 cells expressing mitochondrial marker Mito − BFP , either alone ( a ) or with GFP − K38A - Drp1 ( b ) . The boxed regions are enlarged in ( i ) and ( ii ) , respectively . GFP − K38A - Drp1 expression results in the elongation of mitochondria . c − h , PREM images of unroofed GFP − K38A - Drp1 - expressing COS - 7 cells . Mitochondria and putative ER structures are colour - coded in purple and yellow , respectively . c , A PREM image showing a bulging mitochondrial region ( asterisk ) between adjacent constriction sites . Actin filaments originating from mitochondria are shaded red . A 3D version of this image is presented in Supplementary Fig . 4 . d − f , An overview of an unroofed cell ( d ) and enlargements of the boxed regions ( e , f ) from this cell . Mitochondrial constrictions ( arrows ) and mitochondrial tips ( arrowheads ) are associated with accumulations of actin filaments , which form a criss - cross pattern at constrictions . Some actin filament originate from mitochondria ( red ) . Most actin filaments are unbranched , but some branched filaments ( green in the inset panels in e ) are also present . The boxed regions in e are enlarged in the insets . g , h , Further examples of mitochondrial constrictions associated with a criss - cross pattern of actin filaments . See the animated series of tilt images for h in Supplementary Video 1 . Scale bars : 5 µ m ( a , b ) , 2 µ m ( i , ii , d ) , 200 nm ( c , f − h ) , 500 nm ( e ) and 100 nm ( insets in e ) . The images are representative of n = 3 independent experiments , which gave similar results . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 606 Articles Nature Cell BIology ( Fig . 3e ) . The ER could closely interact with the mitochondrion or be located at a distance from it , both at the constriction sites and at actin - enriched mitochondrial ends . Some actin filaments that asso - ciated with the mitochondrion in these cases appeared to extend from the nearby ER , whereas filaments that apparently originated at the mitochondrial surface were also present ( Fig . 3c , f , red ) . Thus , despite significantly increased constriction frequency after the expression of the dominant negative Drp1 , the actin cytoskel - eton at mitochondrial constriction sites still seemed to be a part of the interstitial cytoskeletal network , rather than a specialized actin array . Constitutively active INF2 - CAAX induces abundant actin filaments at the ER surface . Frequent instances of actin filaments emanat - ing from the ER , including those extending towards mitochondria , support the idea that actin filaments involved in mitochondrial constriction are nucleated , at least in part , by ER - associated INF2 - CAAX ( ref . 10 ) . A constitutively active form of INF2 - CAAX , INF2 - A149D - CAAX , induces actin assembly at the ER in U2OS cells 37 and stimulates mitochondrial fission 10 . To determine the precise localization and ultrastructural organization of actin filaments induced by INF2 - A149D - CAAX , we used COS - 7 cells trans - fected with INF2 - A149D - CAAX for confocal and PREM analyses ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . In COS - 7 cells coexpressing GFP − INF2 - A149D - CAAX , mCherry − Sec61 β and BFP - Mito and stained with Alexa 680 − phal - loidin to detect F - actin , GFP − INF2 - A149D - CAAX colocalized with a subset of ER structures , usually with abnormally thick ER tubules . F - actin was enriched in these cells , specifically at the GFP − INF2 - A149D - CAAX - positive ER components , but also extended from these regions into the interstitial space and could reach mito - chondria ( Supplementary Fig . 3a – c ) . Using CLEM on COS - 7 cells transfected with mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX , we found that the mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX - positive ER - like structures were densely covered with actin filaments ( Supplementary Fig . 3d – h ) . As expected for formin - mediated nucleation , most of these filaments were long and unbranched . They typically ran along the ER tubule as a loose bundle ( Supplementary Fig . 3h ) , although randomly oriented actin filaments extending from the ER into adjacent areas and towards mitochondria were also observed ( Supplementary Figs . 3h and 4 ) . Expression of INF2 - A149D - CAAX stimulates mitochondrial fission in U2OS cells 14 . As the mitochondria in COS - 7 cells are already short , the mitochondrial constriction sites in mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX - expressing cells were undetectable by PREM . Therefore , we expressed mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX in COS - 7 cells that had been transfected with GFP − K38A - Drp1 3 d earlier to inhibit mitochondrial fission ( Fig . 4 ) . Confocal microscopy of double - expressing cells ( Fig . 4a ) showed an ER - like distribution of mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX , as well as GFP − K38A - Drp1 aggregates 34 and faint puncta . As in cells with single INF2 - A149D - CAAX transfection ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) , CLEM of double - transfected cells showed numerous long actin filaments associated with mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX - positive ER structures . At a low magnification , mitochondria in these cells appeared short and round ( Fig . 4c ) . However , high - magnification views showed that they were con - nected by thin bridges , some of which were marked by faint GFP − K38A - Drp1 puncta ( Fig . 4d , e ) . The presence of long mitochondria with ‘bead - on - a - string’ morphology due to multiple constrictions allowed us to identify double - transfected cells even by non - correl - ative PREM ( Fig . 4f , g ) . The mitochondrial constrictions in double - transfected cells were significantly deeper ( Fig . 4 ) , compared with cells expressing K38A - Drp1 alone ( Fig . 3 ) , suggesting that extensive actin polymerization induced by constitutively active INF2 - CAAX enhances mitochondrial constriction . These narrow mitochondrial constrictions were crossed by unbranched actin filaments , some of which could be traced back to ER structures , whereas other fila - ments had no obvious connection with the ER . The population of actin filaments that extend from the ER towards a mitochondrial constriction represented only a small fraction of the ER - associated filaments ( Fig . 4d – f ) . The mixed origin of constriction - associated actin filaments suggests that INF2 - A149D - CAAX can enhance mitochondrial constriction by producing more interstitial actin filaments , which can then be used stochastically for mitochondrial constriction . Organization of the cytoskeleton at mitochondrial constriction sites after drug - induced mitochondrial fission . Several drugs have previously been used to stimulate mitochondrial fission , includ - ing the electron transport chain complex I inhibitor rotenone 38 , 39 and the calcium ionophore ionomycin 36 , 40 . We analysed rotenone - treated glial cells by confocal microscopy and PREM . AD - INF2 KA - Drp1 c g d e Mito Mito Mito Mito Mito Mito a c e f g b d Mito Mito Fig . 4 | actin filament organization at mitochondrial constriction sites formed in CoS - 7 cells coexpressing gFP − K38a - Drp1 and mCherry − INF2 - a149D - CaaX . a − e , CLEM images of a double - expressing COS - 7 cell . a , b , Fluorescence ( a ) and PREM ( b ) images of the same cell . c , A fluorescence − PREM overlay of the boxed region in b . d , e , Enlarged boxed regions from c overlaid with fluorescence signals from mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX and GFP − K38A - Drp1 . The INF2 - positive ER ( red ) is covered by abundant actin filaments , some of which extend towards mitochondrial constrictions ( arrows ) marked by GFP − K38A - DRP1 spots ( green ) . f , g , Another PREM example of an unroofed COS - 7 cell coexpressing mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX and GFP − K38A - Drp1 shows a long mitochondrion with several constrictions intersected with multiple actin filaments . The boxed region in f is enlarged in g . Putative mitochondria and the ER are pseudocoloured in purple and yellow , respectively . A 3D version of f is presented in Supplementary Fig . 4 . Scale bars : 10 µ m ( a , b ) , 2 µ m ( c ) and 500 nm ( d − g ) . The images are representative of n = 2 independent experiments , which gave similar results . AD - INF2 , mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX ; KA - Drp1 , GFP − K38A - Drp1 ; Mito , mitochondria . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 607 Articles Nature Cell BIology Fluorescence microscopy of mitochondrial marker Tom20 − mCherry revealed that mitochondrial constriction and fission were efficiently induced by rotenone treatment ( Fig . 5a ) . PREM showed that the mitochondria in cells that were unroofed 8 − 20 min after rotenone application contained many constriction sites that were often associated with a criss - cross array of actin filaments extending from the surrounding interstitial network and sometimes attached to putative ER components located nearby ( Fig . 5b – e ) . Actin fila - ments could also intersect a mitochondrion at other places , whereas mitochondrial ends were often associated with relatively dense actin filaments , some of which extended from adjacent ER segments ( Fig . 5b , d ) . Overall , the cytoskeletal organization at the rotenone - induced mitochondrial constrictions was similar to that observed at the less - frequent constrictions in untreated cells , although mito - chondria in rotenone - treated cells appeared to be more extensively intertwined with the cytoskeleton . As PREM images suggested a more dense interstitial actin network after rotenone treatment relative to basal conditions ( see Fig . 1 ) , we monitored rotenone - induced changes in F - actin density in live HeLa cells expressing an F - actin reporter , GFP − F - tractin , and Mito − BFP . Imaging was performed at the cell midplane along the z axis to specifically observe F - actin in the cytoplasm away from abundant cortical F - actin . Rotenone treat - ment induced F - actin assembly in the cytoplasm and progres - sive mitochondrial fission ( Fig . 5f – h , Supplementary Video 2 ) . Moreover , the newly formed F - actin structures exhibited sub - stantial overlap with mitochondria ( Fig . 5g ) , raising the intrigu - ing possibility that rotenone induces actin polymerization off mitochondria . The rotenone - induced F - actin signal probably corresponds to the interstitial actin network observed by PREM in the cell interior , which suggests that drug - induced actin accu - mulation plays a role in enhanced mitochondrial fission . Dynamics of cytoplasmic F - actin and non - muscle myosin IIA ( NMIIA ) at mitochondrial fission sites . The diagonal criss - cross pattern of unbranched actin filaments that was often observed at mitochondrial constriction sites could form effective tracks for myosin motors . As NMII stimulates mitochondrial fission 14 , 36 , we examined the localization and dynamics of NMII during ionomy - cin - induced mitochondrial fission . For live - cell imaging , HeLa cells were triple - transfected with Mito − BFP , mCherry − NMIIA and GFP − F - tractin ( Fig . 6 ) . Ionomycin treatment has been shown to stimulate F - actin assem - bly in the cytosol 36 due to INF2 - CAAX activation at the ER 41 . Accordingly , we observed significant accumulation of F - actin in the cytoplasm after ionomycin application ( Fig . 6a , b ) and partial colo - calization of this cytoplasmic F - actin with the ER ( Supplementary Fig . 5a , Supplementary Video 3 ) . Ionomycin treatment also induced a significant increase in the fluorescence intensity of NMIIA in the cytoplasm , which slightly lagged behind the increase in F - actin ( Fig . 6a , b ) . The mitochondrial lengths decreased in parallel with the accumulation of F - actin and NMIIA in the same cells ( Fig . 6b ) , supporting the idea that increased density of the interstitial actin − NMII network correlated with mitochondrial fission . Detailed analysis of the time - lapse sequences showed that ini - tial mitochondrial constrictions were usually accompanied by the arrival of an F - actin cloud that traversed the mitochondrion at the constriction site . Although these clouds exhibited dynamic behaviour , they usually remained at the constriction site until fis - sion occurred ( Fig . 6c , Supplementary Fig . 5b and Supplementary Videos 4 and 5 ) . These F - actin clouds probably corresponded to the criss - cross arrays of actin filaments at mitochondrial constriction sites that were revealed by PREM . Clouds of NMIIA also fluctu - ated around the mitochondria during their constriction and fission and could occasionally overlap with the constriction site . However , most of the time , the NMII clouds flanked the mitochondrion rather than overlapping with it ( Fig . 6c , Supplementary Fig . 5b and Supplementary Videos 4 and 5 ) . We also analysed the dynamics of another NMII isoform , NMIIB , during mitochondrial fission in COS - 7 cells , which have NMIIB as their major NMII isoform 42 . In COS - 7 cells express - ing GFP − NMIIB , mCherry − F - tractin and Mito − BFP , ionomycin treatment induced F - actin assembly and mitochondrial fission ( Supplementary Fig . 6 and Supplementary Video 6 ) . The observed behaviour of NMIIB and F - actin clouds at mitochondrial fission sites in these cells was similar to those described for HeLa cells and NMIIA ( Fig . 6 and Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . These data show that NMII does not exhibit specific enrich - ments at mitochondrial constrictions during ionomycin - induced mitochondrial fission , as would be expected for contractile ring - mediated force generation . Instead , the NMII signals fluctuate in the vicinity of the mitochondrion suggesting that NMII exerts force from the mitochondrial neighbourhood to stimulate constriction , but does not specifically accumulate at the constriction sites . Functions and ultrastructural organization of NMII at mito - chondrial constriction sites . Inhibition of NMII activity in U2OS cells was previously shown to result in the elongation of mitochon - dria , suggesting impaired fission 14 . We evaluated the roles of NMII in mitochondrial constriction using NMII inhibitors ( Fig . 7a – c ) . Untreated or DMSO - treated COS - 7 cells expressing GFP − K38A - Drp1 exhibited long mitochondria with multiple constrictions ( Fig . 7a , left ) . Treatment with an inhibitor of NMII ATPase , blebbi - statin ( Fig . 7a , middle ) , or an inhibitor of myosin light chain kinase ML - 7 ( Fig . 7a , right ) resulted in the dramatic relaxation of con - strictions , as validated by the quantification of constriction depths ( Fig . 7b ) . Live - cell imaging of COS - 7 cells expressing GFP − K38A - Drp1 also demonstrated rapid relaxation of pre - existing constric - tions after ML - 7 treatment ( Fig . 7c ) . To determine NMII localization at the mitochondrial constriction sites at high resolution , we performed immunogold PREM with an NMIIA antibody of unroofed ionomycin - treated HeLa cells ( Fig . 7d – f and Supplementary Video 7 ) . As expected , the NMIIA immuno - gold particles were associated with actin filaments throughout the cell . Although some gold particles could have been present at the exact site of mitochondrial constriction , we did not detect an enrichment of NMIIA at mitochondrial constrictions . In fact , the average density of gold particles at mitochondrial constrictions ( 103 ± 40 per µ m 2 ; mean ± s . d . ; n = 20 regions with a total area of 1 . 2 µ m 2 in 7 cells from 2 independent experiments ) was slightly lower than the average density of gold particles associated with actin networks surrounding mitochondria ( 116 ± 42 per µ m 2 ; n = 20 regions with a total area of 3 . 9 µ m 2 from 7 cells ; P = 0 . 0083 , Wilcoxon paired two - tailed test ) . When a constriction site was crossed by actin filaments , NMIIA immunogold tended to concentrate on these intersecting actin filaments , usually on one or both sides of the mitochondrial constriction and only occasionally overlapping with the constriction ( Fig . 7e ) . Similarly , immunogold staining of COS - 7 cells with NMIIB antibody did not show an enrichment of NMIIB at mitochondrial constriction sites ( Supplementary Fig . 6c ) , although the overall density of NMIIB staining was significantly lower . The specificity of NMII immunogold staining was validated previously 43 . As additional controls , we stained COS - 7 cells with only the second - ary antibody , or with NMIIA antibody , which should not recognize any endogenous proteins in this cell type . These control samples contained 1 . 4 ± 0 . 2 ( mean ± s . e . m . ; n = 25 cells ) and 1 . 7 ± 0 . 2 ( n = 11 cells ) particles per µ m 2 , respectively , which were not significantly different from each other ( P = 0 . 73 , Games − Howell’s posthoc mul - tiple comparisons test ) , but dramatically lower than in HeLa cells stained with NMIIA antibody ( 100 ± 8 particles per µ m 2 ; n = 44 cells ; P < 0 . 0001 ; Welch’s analysis of variance test ) , demonstrating a high specificity of staining . These data suggest that in both HeLa NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 608 Articles Nature Cell BIology 02 : 21 a b c d f h g e 05 : 45 c e Mito Time ( min : s ) 2 3 4 1 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 1 1 . 0 0 . 9 R e l a t i v e i n t en s i t y Leng t h ( µ m ) 5 F - actin – 8 : 22 – 4 : 19 – 0 : 253 : 387 : 3811 : 4115 : 4019 : 4123 : 4627 : 45 07 : 42 10 : 20 Fig . 5 | rotenone treatment induces mitochondrial fission and actin reorganization in cells . a , The time course of rotenone - induced mitochondrial constriction ( yellow arrows ) and fission ( red arrows ) in a glial cell expressing mitochondrial marker Tom20 − mCherry and exposed to rotenone at time 0 . Left : an overview of the cell after 2 min 21 s . Right : time - lapse sequence of four time points ( min : s after rotenone addition ) for the boxed region . b , d , PREM images of constricted mitochondria ( purple ) in unroofed glial cells treated with rotenone for 8 min . Membranous structures that probably represent the ER are shaded yellow . Actin filaments from the relatively dense surrounding network intersect the constriction sites ( boxed regions ) or enwrap the mitochondrial ends ( arrowheads ) . c , e , Enlarged views of the boxed regions in b and d , respectively . f , g , Confocal microscopy images of HeLa cells coexpressing GFP − F - tractin ( green ) and Mito − BFP ( magenta ) before ( f ) and 2 min 32 s after ( g ) rotenone treatment . Left , midplane confocal slices of the F - tractin fluorescence images show an increase in cytosolic F - actin after rotenone treatment . Right , enlarged views showing partial colocalization of mitochondria and F - actin . Mitochondrial fission after rotenone treatment is also evident . h , Relative mean fluorescence intensity of GFP − F - tractin ( green , left y axis ) and the average mitochondrial length ( purple , right y axis ) over time in rotenone - treated HeLa cells . Rotenone was added at time 0 . Average fluorescence intensity of GFP − F - tractin from ten cells was normalized against the pretreatment values for individual cells . Mitochondrial lengths were measured for ~ 100 to ~ 400 mitochondria per time point from 10 cells . Error bars show the s . e . m . Scale bars : 5 µ m ( a , left ) , 1 µ m ( a , right ) , 200 nm ( b − e ) , 5 µ m ( f , g , left ) and 2 µ m ( f , g , right ) . The images are representative of n = 2 independent experiments , which gave similar results . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 609 Articles Nature Cell BIology and COS - 7 cells NMII contributes to mitochondrial constriction without the formation of a contractile ring , by acting as part of the surrounding interstitial network . NMII probably creates tension in the interstitial actin filaments that cross the mitochondrion . Discussion Insufficient structural information on actin organization at mito - chondrial constriction sites precluded the formulation of an explicit model for actin - stimulated mitochondrial constriction . To over - come this bottleneck , we developed an optimized PREM protocol to visualize both the membrane organelles and the cytoskeleton in an apparently intact state . Although we cannot exclude the pos - sibility of occasional ruptures , the similarity of the intracellular organization after chemical ( saponin extraction ) and mechanical ( nitrocellulose sheet ) exposure suggests that the extent of potential damage is relatively minor . The two major models of actin - dependent mitochondrial con - striction predict the specific organization of actin filaments at mito - chondrial constrictions . However , our PREM data are not consistent with these predictions . We predominantly observe diagonally ori - ented unbranched actin filaments that intersect the mitochondrion near constriction sites . At relatively deep mitochondrial constric - tions , the diagonal actin filaments appeared straight and taut , as if they were under tension , and were often associated with NMII . Branched actin filaments , although present , were not abundant at the mitochondrial surface , consistent with the reported lack of effect of Arp2 / 3 inhibition on mitochondrial length 14 . The reported positive roles of the Arp2 / 3 complex in mitochondrial fission 16 can be potentially explained by the contribution of Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation to the formation of the interstitial actin network . Our data suggest the following mechanistic model for actin - mediated mitochondrial constriction ( Fig . 7d ) . In the cytoplasm , lono – 0 : 31 1 : 07 0 . 8 Time ( min : s ) 1 : 13 3 : 13 5 : 17 7 : 09 9 : 05 11 : 00 12 : 54 14 : 45 16 : 38 M i t o c hond r i a l l eng t h ( µ m ) R e l a t i v e i n t en s i t y 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 lonomycin , – 0 . 5 min a b c Mito + F - actin + NMIIA Merge c F - a c t i n N M II A M i t o M e r ge lonomycin , 15 min 3 : 17 5 : 18 7 : 21 9 : 18 11 : 09 13 : 03 14 : 58 16 : 49 0 1 2 3 4 5 Fig . 6 | The dynamics of F - actin and NMIIa in the course of ionomycin - induced mitochondrial fission in Hela cells . a , A midplane confocal slice of cells expressing GFP − F - tractin ( F - actin ) , mCherry − NMIIA ( NMIIA ) and Mito − BFP ( Mito ) before ( left ) and after ( right ) ionomycin addition . The fluorescence intensities of both GFP − F - tractin and mCherry − NMIIA in the internal cytoplasm increase after ionomycin application , while mitochondria undergo fission . b , Relative mean fluorescence intensity ( left y axis ) of GFP − F - tractin ( green ) and mCherry − NMIIA ( red ) in the internal cytoplasm ( n = 37 regions from 15 cells for each marker ) and the mitochondrial length ( blue , right y axis , n = 34 individual mitochondria from 5 cells ) over time in the course of ionomycin treatment . Error bars show s . e . m . Data show one representative experiment out of two . The second experiment gave qualitatively similar results but was not quantified . c , A detailed time course of the boxed region in a showing the dynamics of Mito − BFP , GFP − F - tractin and mCherry − NMIIA during mitochondrial fission after the application of ionomycin at time 0 . Time ( min : s ) is shown after ionomycin addition . Initiation of mitochondrial constriction is accompanied by the appearance of F - actin and , occasionally , NMIIA clouds that intersect the constriction ( arrows and arrowheads ) . Subsequently , F - actin remains at the constriction sites until mitochondrial fission , whereas NMIIA mostly fluctuates in the vicinity of the mitochondrion . Scale bars : 5 µ m ( a , all subpanels ) and 1 µ m ( c , all subpanels ) . The images are representative of n = 2 independent experiments , which gave similar results . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 610 Articles Nature Cell BIology DMSO Blebbistatin NMIIA NMIIA NMIIA ML - 7 0’ 20’ 40’ Mitochondria P < 0 . 0001 n = 491 DMSO 100 a b c d f g e 80 60 40 20 C on s t r i c t i on I nde x ( % ) 0 Blebbistatin ML - 7 n = 567 n = 448 P < 0 . 0001 P = 0 . 24 ER NMII Actin filaments Fig . 7 | NMII associated with the interstitial actin network stimulates mitochondrial constrictions . a − c , Inhibition of NMII activity causes the relaxation of mitochondrial constrictions in K38A - Drp1 - expressing COS - 7 cells . a , COS - 7 cells expressing GFP − K38A - Drp1 and Mito − BFP were treated for 1 h with DMSO , 50 µ M blebbistatin or 50 µ M ML - 7 . The images are representative of n = 2 independent experiments with similar results . b , The quantification of the constriction index ( a degree of invagination ) for individual constrictions in the conditions shown in a . Thick horizontal lines and error bars represent the mean and s . d . , respectively . n = 491 constrictions from 16 DMSO - treated cells , 567 constrictions from 10 blebbistatin - treated cells and 448 constrictions from 10 ML - 7 - treated cells ( n = 2 independent experiments with similar results ) . P values were determined by the Kruskal − Wallis test with a posthoc Dunn’s test ; normality was determined by the Kolmogorov − Smirnov test . c , Time frames of COS - 7 cells expressing GFP − K38A - Drp1 , labelled with MitoTracker DeepRed in the course of treatment with 75 µ M ML - 7 . Time ( in min ) is shown relative to ML - 7 addition . Magenta arrowheads and arrows of different lengths mark individual constrictions that relax over time . The images are representative of n = 2 independent experiments with similar results . d − f , Immunogold PREM images of NMIIA localization at mitochondrial constrictions in HeLa cells treated with ionomycin for 2 min . Immunogold particles ( 12 nm ) are marked by yellow dots . Some NMIIA enrichment is seen on actin filaments intersecting the constriction ( arrows in e and boxed region in f ) . The inset in f shows an enlarged image of the boxed region with uncoloured gold particles . Scale bars : 2 µ m ( a , c ) , 200 nm ( d , e , f ) and 50 nm ( f , inset ) . The images are representative of n = 2 independent experiments with similar results . g , A model of actin − NMII - dependent mitochondrial constriction . The mitochondria and ER are embedded in the interstitial actin network , which includes many actin filaments nucleated at the ER by INF2 - CAAX . NMII filaments in the interstitial network cause stochastic distortions of the network , thereby applying pressure to mitochondria trapped in the network . Indentations on the mitochondrial surface that result from mechanical activity of the actin − NMII interstitial network eventually develop into constrictions in a mitochondrial fission factor ( Mff ) - dependent manner and lead to Drp1 - mediated fission . See text for details . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 611 Articles Nature Cell BIology mitochondria are suspended in the interstitial cytoskeletal net - work , which is formed primarily of unbranched actin filaments , but also contains NMII filaments , microtubules and intermedi - ate filaments . We suggest that the contractile activity of NMII causes stochastic inhomogeneous deformations of this interstitial network , such as stretching , bundling and twisting . A mitochon - drion trapped in this mechanically active network can be locally squeezed between taut actin filaments , which would cause local invaginations in the mitochondrial surface that probably act as the pivotal point for initiating mitochondrial constriction . This idea is supported by recent findings that mitochondrial fission can be induced by force application in the absence of the ER or a func - tional actin network 44 . The underlying mechanism was proposed to include the accumulation of the curvature - sensing Mff at the initial invagination and subsequent propagation of the invagina - tion into a constriction via curvature - inducing Mff properties 44 . As Mff is a mitochondrial receptor for Drp1 , the constriction - enriched Mff then recruits Drp1 to execute scission . In the context of our model , NMII can pull on actin filaments that intersect the mitochondrion from a distance . This process can be loosely compared to how pulling on corset strings can cause the constriction of a waistline . NMII filaments are probably more efficient if they localize in the mitochondrial neighbourhood . Otherwise , the force would be absorbed by network deformations in the intervening space . Accordingly , we often see fluctuating NMII clouds in the vicinity of constricting mitochondria . A posi - tive correlation between the accumulation of cytoplasmic F - actin induced by ionomycin 36 , 41 or rotenone ( this study ) and the drug - induced frequency of mitochondrial fission 36 , 38 , 39 can be explained by the greater probability of a mitochondrion being deformed by a denser interstitial actin − NMII network . The origin of intersti - tial actin filaments may not be critically important . For example , ionomycin induces actin polymerization through ER - associated INF2 - CAAX 41 , whereas rotenone - induced F - actin assembly may potentially involve the regulation of mitochondrion - anchored Spire1C 12 . The stochastic nature of our model does not exclude some degree of specificity for the location of constriction sites . For exam - ple , cross - talk between INF2 - CAAX and Spire1C at ER − mito - chondria juxtapositions 10 – 12 can induce local network densities and increase the chance of constriction . The internal organization of the mitochondrion can also be a contributing factor . Thus , mito - chondrial fission often occurs near a nucleoid 45 , probably because nucleoid - containing segments of mitochondria are denser—as can be inferred from nucleoid recovery from the bottom fractions of density gradients 46 , 47 —and therefore probably stiffer . If so , then tense actin filaments could ‘slip’ to the adjacent softer regions , where they could induce deformation . Similarly , in cases when the inner mitochondrial membrane is constricted before the outer membrane 48 , 49 , the separation of two mitochondrial membranes may locally soften the mitochondrion and make this site more sus - ceptible to deformation . In conclusion , using a newly developed PREM protocol , we revealed an interior structure of the cell that incorporates both membrane organelles and the cytoskeleton . Our data suggest a mechanism of actin - dependent mitochondrial constriction , in which stochastic deformations of the mechanically active interstitial actin network generate the force required for this process . online content Any methods , additional references , Nature Research reporting summaries , source data , extended data , supplementary informa - tion , acknowledgements , peer review information ; details of author contributions and competing interests ; and statements of data and code availability are available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 019 - 0313 - 6 . Received : 16 July 2018 ; Accepted : 14 March 2019 ; Published online : 15 April 2019 references 1 . Friedman , J . R . & Nunnari , J . Mitochondrial form and function . Nature 505 , 335 – 343 ( 2014 ) . 2 . Mishra , P . & Chan , D . C . Mitochondrial dynamics and inheritance during cell division , development and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 634 – 646 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Wai , T . & Langer , T . Mitochondrial dynamics and metabolic regulation . Trends Endocrinol . Metab . 27 , 105 – 117 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Pagliuso , A . , Cossart , P . & Stavru , F . The ever - growing complexity of the mitochondrial fission machinery . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 75 , 355 – 374 ( 2018 ) . 5 . Ramachandran , R . Mitochondrial dynamics : the dynamin superfamily and execution by collusion . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 76 , 201 – 212 ( 2018 ) . 6 . Lee , J . E . , Westrate , L . M . , Wu , H . , Page , C . & Voeltz , G . K . Multiple dynamin family members collaborate to drive mitochondrial division . Nature 540 , 139 – 143 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Basu , K . et al . Molecular mechanism of DRP1 assembly studied in vitro by cryo - electron microscopy . PLoS One 12 , e0179397 ( 2017 ) . 8 . Francy , C . A . , Alvarez , F . J . , Zhou , L . , Ramachandran , R . & Mears , J . A . The mechanoenzymatic core of dynamin - related protein 1 comprises the minimal machinery required for membrane constriction . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 11692 – 11703 ( 2015 ) . 9 . Macdonald , P . J . et al . Distinct splice variants of dynamin - related protein 1 differentially utilize mitochondrial fission factor as an effector of cooperative GTPase activity . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 493 – 507 ( 2016 ) . 10 . Korobova , F . , Ramabhadran , V . & Higgs , H . N . An actin - dependent step in mitochondrial fission mediated by the ER - associated formin INF2 . Science 339 , 464 – 467 ( 2013 ) . 11 . Friedman , J . R . et al . ER tubules mark sites of mitochondrial division . Science 334 , 358 – 362 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Manor , U . et al . A mitochondria - anchored isoform of the actin - nucleating Spire protein regulates mitochondrial division . eLife 4 , e08828 ( 2015 ) . 13 . DuBoff , B . , Gotz , J . & Feany , M . B . Tau promotes neurodegeneration via DRP1 mislocalization in vivo . Neuron 75 , 618 – 632 ( 2012 ) . 14 . Korobova , F . , Gauvin , T . J . & Higgs , H . N . A role for myosin II in mammalian mitochondrial fission . Curr . Biol . 24 , 409 – 414 ( 2014 ) . 15 . Svitkina , T . The actin cytoskeleton and actin - based motility . CSH Perspect . Biol . 10 , a018267 ( 2018 ) . 16 . Li , S . et al . Transient assembly of F - actin on the outer mitochondrial membrane contributes to mitochondrial fission . J . Cell Biol . 208 , 109 – 123 ( 2015 ) . 17 . Hatch , A . L . , Gurel , P . S . & Higgs , H . N . Novel roles for actin in mitochondrial fission . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 4549 – 4560 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Cheffings , T . H . , Burroughs , N . J . & Balasubramanian , M . K . Actomyosin ring formation and tension generation in eukaryotic cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 26 , 719 – 737 ( 2016 ) . 19 . Billington , N . , Wang , A . , Mao , J . , Adelstein , R . S . & Sellers , J . R . Characterization of three full - length human nonmuscle myosin II paralogs . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 33398 – 33410 ( 2013 ) . 20 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . Myosin II filament assemblies in the active lamella of fibroblasts : their morphogenesis and role in the formation of actin filament bundles . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 989 – 1002 ( 1995 ) . 21 . Requejo - Isidro , J . Fluorescence nanoscopy . Methods and applications . J . Chem . Biol . 6 , 97 – 120 ( 2013 ) . 22 . Svitkina , T . M . Platinum replica electron microscopy : imaging the cytoskeleton globally and locally . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 86 , 37 – 41 ( 2017 ) . 23 . Collins , A . , Warrington , A . , Taylor , K . A . & Svitkina , T . Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1167 – 1175 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Korobova , F . & Svitkina , T . Molecular architecture of synaptic actin cytoskeleton in hippocampal neurons reveals a mechanism of dendritic spine morphogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 165 – 176 ( 2010 ) . 25 . Svitkina , T . M . et al . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 ( 2003 ) . 26 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . in Cell Biology : A Laboratory Handbook 3rd edn , Vol . 3 ( ed . Celis , J . ) 277 − 285 ( Elsevier , 2006 ) . 27 . Svitkina , T . Electron microscopic analysis of the leading edge in migrating cells . Methods Cell Biol . 79 , 295 – 319 ( 2007 ) . 28 . Svitkina , T . Imaging cytoskeleton components by electron microscopy . Methods Mol . Biol 1365 , 99 – 118 ( 2016 ) . 29 . Yang , C . et al . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and filopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol . 5 , e317 ( 2007 ) . 30 . Heuser , J . The production of ‘cell cortices’ for light and electron microscopy . Traffic 1 , 545 – 552 ( 2000 ) . 31 . Sato , F . , Asakawa , H . , Fukuma , T . & Terada , S . Semi - in situ atomic force microscopy imaging of intracellular neurofilaments under physiological conditions through the ‘sandwich’ method . Microscopy 65 , 316 – 324 ( 2016 ) . NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 612 Articles Nature Cell BIology 32 . Efimova , N . & Svitkina , T . M . Branched actin networks push against each other at adherens junctions to maintain cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 1827 – 1845 ( 2018 ) . 33 . Gurel , P . S . et al . Assembly and turnover of short actin filaments by the formin INF2 and profilin . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 22494 – 22506 ( 2015 ) . 34 . Smirnova , E . , Griparic , L . , Shurland , D . L . & van der Bliek , A . M . Dynamin - related protein Drp1 is required for mitochondrial division in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2245 – 2256 ( 2001 ) . 35 . De Vos , K . J . , Allan , V . J . , Grierson , A . J . & Sheetz , M . P . Mitochondrial function and actin regulate dynamin - related protein 1 - dependent mitochondrial fission . Curr . Biol . 15 , 678 – 683 ( 2005 ) . 36 . Ji , W . K . , Hatch , A . L . , Merrill , R . A . , Strack , S . & Higgs , H . N . Actin filaments target the oligomeric maturation of the dynamic GTPase Drp1 to mitochondrial fission sites . eLife 4 , e11553 ( 2015 ) . 37 . Ramabhadran , V . , Hatch , A . L . & Higgs , H . N . Actin monomers activate inverted formin 2 by competing with its autoinhibitory interaction . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 26847 – 26855 ( 2013 ) . 38 . Barsoum , M . J . et al . Nitric oxide - induced mitochondrial fission is regulated by dynamin - related GTPases in neurons . EMBO J . 25 , 3900 – 3911 ( 2006 ) . 39 . Toyama , E . Q . et al . Metabolism . AMP - activated protein kinase mediates mitochondrial fission in response to energy stress . Science 351 , 275 – 281 ( 2016 ) . 40 . Sanmartin , C . D . et al . Ryanodine receptor - mediated Ca 2 + release underlies iron - induced mitochondrial fission and stimulates mitochondrial Ca ( 2 + ) uptake in primary hippocampal neurons . Front . Mol . Neurosci . 7 , 13 ( 2014 ) . 41 . Wales , P . et al . Calcium - mediated actin reset ( CaAR ) mediates acute cell adaptations . eLife 5 , e19850 ( 2016 ) . 42 . Bao , J . , Jana , S . S . & Adelstein , R . S . Vertebrate nonmuscle myosin II isoforms rescue small interfering RNA - induced defects in COS - 7 cell cytokinesis . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 19594 – 19599 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Shutova , M . S . et al . Self - sorting of nonmuscle myosins IIA and IIB polarizes the cytoskeleton and modulates cell motility . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 2877 – 2889 ( 2017 ) . 44 . Helle , S . C . J . et al . Mechanical force induces mitochondrial fission . eLife 6 , e30292 ( 2017 ) . 45 . Ban - Ishihara , R . , Ishihara , T . , Sasaki , N . , Mihara , K . & Ishihara , N . Dynamics of nucleoid structure regulated by mitochondrial fission contributes to cristae reformation and release of cytochrome c . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 11863 – 11868 ( 2013 ) . 46 . Bogenhagen , D . F . , Wang , Y . , Shen , E . L . & Kobayashi , R . Protein components of mitochondrial DNA nucleoids in higher eukaryotes . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 2 , 1205 – 1216 ( 2003 ) . 47 . Garrido , N . et al . Composition and dynamics of human mitochondrial nucleoids . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1583 – 1596 ( 2003 ) . 48 . Chakrabarti , R . et al . INF2 - mediated actin polymerization at the ER stimulates mitochondrial calcium uptake , inner membrane constriction , and division . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 251 – 268 ( 2018 ) . 49 . Cho , B . et al . Constriction of the mitochondrial inner compartment is a priming event for mitochondrial division . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15754 ( 2017 ) . acknowledgements We thank H . N . Higgs for helpful discussions and reagents , A . York and M . Schell for reagents and the members of the Svitkina lab , M . Shutova and N . Efimova , for comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by NIH grant nos . R01 GM 095977 and R01 GM 106000 to T . M . S . author contributions C . Y . performed all the experimental work and data analyses . C . Y . and T . S . prepared the figures and wrote the manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . additional information Supplementary information is available for this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 019 - 0313 - 6 . Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T . M . S . Publisher’s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019 NaTUre Cell BIologY | VOL 21 | MAY 2019 | 603 – 613 | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 613 Articles Nature Cell BIology Methods Cell culture . Primary dissociated cell cultures from embryonic rat hippocampi , isolated as described previously 50 , were obtained from the MINS Neuron Culture Service Center ( University of Pennsylvania ) and cultured as described previously 51 . In brief , hippocampi were dissected from the brains of Sprague − Dawley rat embryos at embryonic day 18 – 20 and dissociated into individual cells by incubation in a trypsin - containing solution . The cell suspensions , which contained both glial cells and neurons , were plated on poly - l - lysine - coated ( 1 mg ml − 1 , P6282 , Sigma ) glass coverslips at a concentration of 150 , 000 cells per 35 mm dish in 1 . 5 ml of neurobasal medium ( Gibco ) with 2 % B27 supplement and cultured for 7 − 14 d . Only glial cells were used for the experiments . COS - 7 and HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with GlutaMAX ( 10 - 569 - 010 , Gibco ) , 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and 1 % penicillin − streptomycin at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 . For the drug treatment , rotenone ( R8875 , Sigma ) was used at 250 ng ml − 1 for glial cells and 750 ng ml − 1 for HeLa cells . Ionomycin ( I0634 , Sigma ) was used at 4 µ M . Exposure of the cell interior for PREM . For saponin - mediated extraction , cells on glass coverslips were transferred into a solution ( prechilled to 4 °C ) of 0 . 01 % saponin ( 47036 , Sigma ) in PEM buffer ( 100 mM PIPES − KOH , pH 6 . 9 , 1 mM MgCl 2 and 1 mM EGTA ) that contained 2 µ M unlabelled phalloidin ( P2141 , Sigma ) , protease inhibitor cocktail ( I37786 , Sigma ) and 300 mM sucrose . After incubation on ice for 7 min , the cells were fixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde ( 01909 , Polysciences ) in 0 . 1 M Na - cacodylate buffer ( pH 7 . 3 ) at room temperature for 20 min . For mechanical unroofing , COS - 7 and HeLa cells were seeded on coverslips coated with poly - d - lysine ( 0 . 2 mg ml − 1 ) or HistoGrip ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , 008050 ) and cultured for 1 − 3 d . Neuronal cells were cultured as described above . A piece of nitrocellulose filter membrane ( 0 . 8 µ m pore size ; AABPC5000 , EMD Millipore ) was soaked in PEM buffer containing 2 µ M phalloidin and 10 µ M taxol ( T7402 , Sigma ) and placed on a wet 3MM filter paper to remove any extra buffer and to prevent it from drying quickly . A coverslip with cells was briefly dipped in PEM buffer with phalloidin and taxol . The excess buffer was removed by touching a piece of filter paper to the coverslip edge , and the coverslip was placed cell - side down on the nitrocellulose membrane for about 10 s . Gentle pressure was then applied to one corner of the coverslip to generate a gradient of nitrocellulose − cell adhesion and thus produce properly unroofed cells somewhere along this gradient . The coverslip was then lifted from the nitrocellulose membrane and immediately placed in 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde solution in 0 . 1 M Na - cacodylate buffer for fixation . After evaluation of the unroofing quality by phase contrast microscopy , the samples were postfixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde . As a control for the potential damage caused by our unroofing procedure , we confirmed that the incubation of living cells in cytoskeletal buffer for more than 5 min—much longer than the ~ 30 s required for nitrocellulose application and detachment—does not cause any apparent aberrations in the organization and dynamics of mitochondria and the actin cytoskeleton ( Supplementary Fig . 2a ) . We also found that the morphology of the fluorescently labelled ER and mitochondria was similar in unroofed and non - unroofed cells from the same CLEM preparations and comparable to control cells not subjected to the unroofing procedure ( Supplementary Fig . 2b ) . PREM and CLEM . Sample processing for regular and immunogold PREM and for CLEM was performed as described previously 28 , 52 . In brief , glutaraldehyde - fixed cells were postfixed by sequential treatment with 0 . 1 % tannic acid and 0 . 2 % uranyl acetate in water , critical - point dried , coated with platinum and carbon and transferred to EM grids for observation . For immunogold staining , unroofed unfixed cells were incubated for 30 min with NMIIA ( BT - 567 , BTI ) or NMIIB ( 3404 , Cell Signaling ) antibody diluted 1 : 20 in PEM buffer with phalloidin and taxol , washed with PEM buffer and fixed with 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde . After quenching with 2 mg ml − 1 NaBH 4 in PBS for 10 min , cells were blocked with 1 % BSA in buffer A ( 20 mM Tris − HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 5 M NaCl and 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ) , incubated with secondary antibodies conjugated with 12 or 18 nm colloidal gold ( 711 - 205 - 152 and 711 - 215 - 152 , respectively ; Jackson ImmunoResearch ) and , after washing , fixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde and processed for PREM . The specificity of NMII antibodies was previously validated using knockdown of either NMIIA or NMIIB in both immunofluorescence and western blotting assays 43 . For CLEM , COS - 7 cells expressing fluorescent protein ( s ) were grown on home - made coverslips with fiducial marks that were coated with poly - d - lysine or Histogrip . After nitrocellulose - mediated unroofing , cells were fixed with 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde , quenched with 2 mg ml − 1 NaBH 4 in PBS and washed with PBS . For fluorescence microscopy , coverslips were placed cell - side down in glass - bottomed dishes and imaged by epifluorescence or spinning disc confocal microscopy with a × 100 objective . Then , the samples were postfixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde and processed for PREM . PREM samples were examined using JEM 1011 transmission EM ( JEOL USA ) operated at 100 kV . Images were acquired by an ORIUS 832 . 10 W CCD camera ( Gatan ) and presented in inverted contrast . Stereo pairs were acquired at ± 11° tilt angles and combined into a red − cyan anaglyph image using Adobe Photoshop software . Use red − cyan anaglyph glasses with the red eye on the left to visualize a stereo image . Correlative light microscopy and PREM images were aligned using Adobe Photoshop by rotating and proportionally enlarging fluorescence images until the best match of individual cell regions was achieved . As a result of sample shrinkage after critical point drying , perfect alignment of whole cells could not be achieved , but images of smaller cell regions could be reliably matched . Plasmids and transfection . Mito − BFP ( Addgene plasmid no . 49151 ) and mCherry − Sec61 β ( Addgene plasmid no . 49155 ) were gifts from G . Voeltz . Tom20 − mCherry 53 was a gift from A . G . York ( NIH ) . The GFP − Drp1 - K38A construct expressing the H1 promoter - driven short - hairpin RNA for endogenous Drp1 , as well as GFP ( A206K ) - tagged , RNA interference - resistant rat Drp1 ( K38A ) 54 , was a gift from H . Higgs ( Dartmouth Medical School ) . The GFP − F - tractin plasmid 55 was a gift from M . Schell ( Uniformed Services University ) . mCherry − NMIIA that encodes the heavy chain of human NMIIA 56 was a gift from V . Betapudi ( Addgene plasmid no . 35687 ) . GFP − NMIIB that encodes the heavy chain of human NMIIA 57 was a gift from R . Adelstein ( Addgene plasmid no . 11348 ) . The mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX construct was prepared by recloning INF2 - A149D - CAAX from the GFP − INF2 - A149D - CAAX construct ( a gift from H . Higgs ) 37 in the mCherry − C1 vector ( Clontech ) . Transient cell transfection was performed using Lipofectamine LTX with Plus Reagent ( Invitrogen ) . For transfection , cells were cultured for 6 − 16 h after plating and used at ~ 80 % confluency . Transfected cells were used between 36 and 60 h after transfection , except for cells transfected with mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX or GFP − INF2 - A149D - CAAX , which were used within 24 h after transfection . For double transfection with GFP − K38A - Drp1 and mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX , cells were first transfected with GFP − K38A - Drp1 . After 3 d , cells were replated onto coverslips and , 6 h after plating , transfected with mCherry − INF2 - A149D - CAAX for 16 h before unroofing . Fluorescence microscopy . For the staining of F - actin with Alexa Fluor 680 phalloidin ( A22286 , Thermo Fisher Scientific ; 1 : 150 in PBS ) , cells were fixed with 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde , quenched 3 times with NaBH 4 in PBS and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin in PBS for 5 min . Stained samples were mounted with ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant ( P36961 , Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . For the live - cell imaging , cells were cultured in glass - bottomed MatTek dishes in phenol red - free Leibovitz’s L - 15 medium ( 21083027 , Gibco ) supplemented with 1 % FBS and maintained during observation at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere using a UNO stage - top incubator ( Okolab ) . For the treatment with ionomycin or rotenone during live - cell imaging , the drugs were first diluted in 200 µ l of prewarmed medium to 10 - fold the final concentration and added to the dish with cells , which contained 1 . 8 ml of medium . Epifluorescence microscopy was performed using an Eclipse TE2000 - U inverted microscope ( Nikon ) equipped with a PLAN APO × 100 1 . 3 NA objective and Cascade 512B CCD camera ( Photometrics ) driven by Metamorph imaging software ( Molecular Devices ) . Spinning disc confocal microscopy was performed using an Eclipse TiE inverted microscope ( Nikon ) equipped with a CSUX1 spinning disc ( Yokogawa Electric Corporation ) , a CFI60 Apochromat TIRF × 100 1 . 49 NA oil objective , a QuantEM 512SC digital camera ( Photometrics ) and a perfect focus system driven by NIS - Elements Advanced Research software ( Nikon ; version 4 . 50 ) . The 405 nm laser and ET455 / 50 M filter were used for BFP ; the 488 nm laser and 525 / 36 filter for GFP ; the 561 nm laser and 605 / 70 filter for RFP ; and the 640 nm laser and 700 / 75 filter for Alexa Fluor 680 . Time - lapse sequences were acquired at rates that ranged from 10 s to 2 min per frame . To minimize photobleaching , a low laser power , short exposure times and a digital gain were used . Three - dimensional reconstructions of confocal stacks were generated from 3 – 5 consecutive z slices with a thickness of 0 . 2 – 0 . 3 µ m using the alpha blending option in the NIS - Elements software . To determine the effect of the inhibition of NMII activity on mitochondrial constriction , COS - 7 cells expressing GFP − K38A - Drp1 and Mito − BFP were treated with DMSO ( D2650 , Sigma ) as a control , 50 µ M blebbistatin ( B592500 , Toronto Research Chemicals ) or 50 µ M ML - 7 ( I715000 , Toronto Research Chemicals ) for 1 h , fixed with 4 % formaldehyde in PBS and imaged with spinning disc confocal microscopy . The extent of mitochondrial constriction was determined using Mito − BFP fluorescence intensity profiles generated using the Plot Profile tool in ImageJ software after subtracting the background . Profiles of average fluorescence intensity were generated using lines drawn along the mitochondrial long axis and spanning the mitochondrial width . The mitochondrial constriction index ( MCI ) was calculated using the following equation :      = − ∕ + × I I I MCI 1 1 2 ( ) 100 min max1 max2 where I min is the local minimum of fluorescence intensity and I max1 and I max2 are local fluorescence intensity maxima within 0 . 4 – 2 µ m on each side of the local minimum . The MCI is close to 100 % for minimally constricted regions and decreases progressively with the extent of constriction . Data analyses . For the quantification of the localization of mitochondria − ER overlaps relative to mitochondrial constrictions in PREM images , a distance NaTUre Cell BIologY | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology Articles Nature Cell BIology of ≤ 100 nm between the narrowest part of the mitochondrion and the closest edge of the ER was considered to represent a colocalization of the ER with the mitochondrial constriction . To measure the lengths of actin filaments in the interstitial cytoskeletal network , individual filaments that had a diameter of ~ 10 nm ( including the platinum coating ) —which correspond to actin filaments—were traced with a line tool in ImageJ for as long as they could be distinguished from the neighbouring or overlapping filaments . Very short filaments ( < 50 nm ) were ignored for this quantification . For the evaluation of actin filament densities at mitochondrial constriction sites , an area of mitochondrial constriction was defined as extending from the narrowest region of the mitochondrion to the half - maximal width of the adjacent unconstricted regions on both sides of the constriction , whereas mitochondrial regions beyond this boundary were selected for the determination of actin filament densities at adjacent unconstructed mitochondrial regions . The total length of all actin filaments within the selected regions was measured using the ImageJ line tool and normalized to the area of the region of interest . For the quantification of NMII immunogold densities at mitochondrial constriction sites , an area of mitochondrial constriction was defined in the same way . The regions of the surrounding interstitial network were selected near to the constricted mitochondrion , but not overlapping with it and excluding other membrane structures in the region . The number of immunogold particles was counted and normalized to the area of the region of interest . The time course of F - actin or NMIIA accumulation following drug treatment was assessed on the basis of the cumulative fluorescence intensities of respective markers ( F - tractin or NMIIA ) in confocal slices with a total width of 0 . 9 − 1 µ m , taken from the midplane of the cells . Three regions of interest located away from the nucleus and the cortical region were selected for each cell . Average fluorescence intensities of these regions were determined after the background was subtracted for each time point , and then normalized against an average fluorescence intensity before drug treatment for each individual cell . The changes in the mitochondrial lengths after ionomycin treatment were monitored for individual mitochondria over time . Only easily distinguishable mitochondria longer than 0 . 5 µ m were measured . Statistics and reproducibility . Considering the large variations in the structural organization of mitochondria and the cytoskeleton among cells , we used very large sample sizes despite substantial technical challenges . At least two independent experiments were performed to confirm the consistency of the results . All the experiments gave consistent results when repeated . Numerical datasets were first evaluated for normality by the Kolmogorov − Smirnov test . For the normally distributed values , a two - tailed t - test was used to compare two datasets and Welch’s analysis of variance test with a posthoc Games − Howell test was used for multiple comparisons . For not - normally distributed values , the Mann − Whitney test was used to compare two unpaired datasets , the Wilcoxon test was used to compare two paired datasets and the Kruskal − Wallis test with a posthoc Dunn’s test was used for multiple comparisons . Reporting Summary . Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article . Data availability Source data for Figs . 5h , 6b and 7b and the statistical results presented in the text have been provided as Supplementary Table 1 . All other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request . references 50 . Wilcox , K . S . , Buchhalter , J . & Dichter , M . A . Properties of inhibitory and excitatory synapses between hippocampal neurons in very low density cultures . Synapse 18 , 128 – 151 ( 1994 ) . 51 . Efimova , N . et al . β III spectrin is necessary for formation of the constricted neck of dendritic spines and regulation of synaptic activity in neurons . J . Neurosci . 37 , 6442 – 6459 ( 2017 ) . 52 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . Correlative light and electron microscopy of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 , 570 – 592 ( 1998 ) . 53 . York , A . G . et al . Instant super - resolution imaging in live cells and embryos via analog image processing . Nat . Methods 10 , 1122 – 1126 ( 2013 ) . 54 . Strack , S . , Wilson , T . J . & Cribbs , J . T . Cyclin - dependent kinases regulate splice - specific targeting of dynamin - related protein 1 to microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 1037 – 1051 ( 2013 ) . 55 . Johnson , H . W . & Schell , M . J . Neuronal IP3 3 - kinase is an F - actin - bundling protein : role in dendritic targeting and regulation of spine morphology . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 5166 – 5180 ( 2009 ) . 56 . Dulyaninova , N . G . , House , R . P . , Betapudi , V . & Bresnick , A . R . Myosin - IIA heavy - chain phosphorylation regulates the motility of MDA - MB - 231 carcinoma cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 3144 – 3155 ( 2007 ) . 57 . Wei , Q . & Adelstein , R . S . Conditional expression of a truncated fragment of nonmuscle myosin II - A alters cell shape but not cytokinesis in HeLa cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3617 – 3627 ( 2000 ) . NaTUre Cell BIologY | www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 1 n a t u r e r e s e a r c h | r e p o r t i n g s u mm a r y A p r il 2018 Corresponding author ( s ) : Tatyana M . Svitkina Reporting Summary Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish . This form provides structure for consistency and transparency in reporting . For further information on Nature Research policies , see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist . Statistical parameters When statistical analyses are reported , confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location ( e . g . figure legend , table legend , main text , or Methods section ) . n / a Confirmed The exact sample size ( n ) for each experimental group / condition , given as a discrete number and unit of measurement An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly The statistical test ( s ) used AND whether they are one - or two - sided Only common tests should be described solely by name ; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section . A description of all covariates tested A description of any assumptions or corrections , such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons A full description of the statistics including central tendency ( e . g . means ) or other basic estimates ( e . g . regression coefficient ) AND variation ( e . g . standard deviation ) or associated estimates of uncertainty ( e . g . confidence intervals ) For null hypothesis testing , the test statistic ( e . g . F , t , r ) with confidence intervals , effect sizes , degrees of freedom and P value noted Give P values as exact values whenever suitable . For Bayesian analysis , information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings For hierarchical and complex designs , identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes Estimates of effect sizes ( e . g . Cohen ' s d , Pearson ' s r ) , indicating how they were calculated Clearly defined error bars State explicitly what error bars represent ( e . g . SD , SE , CI ) Our web collection on statistics for biologists may be useful . Software and code Policy information about availability of computer code Data collection For PREM samples , images were acquired by an ORIUS 832 . 10W CCD camera ( Gatan , Warrendale , PA ) driven by Gatan Digital Micrograph software ( Version 1 . 8 . 4 ) . The original files in dm3 format were converted into tiff files using the same software . Light microscopy images were acquired using either Cascade 512B CCD camera ( Photometrics ) driven by Metamorph imaging software ( Molecular Devices ) ( Version 6 . 2r6 ) or using QuantEM 512SC digital camera ( Photometrics ) driven by Nikon ( NIS ) - Elements Advanced Research software ( Version 4 . 50 ) . Subsequent image processing and figure preparation was done by Adobe Photoshop software ( Version CS5 . 1 or version CS4 ) . Data analysis Nikon ( NIS ) - Elements Advanced Research software ( Version 4 . 50 ) and ImageJ software ( Version 1 . 51v , NIH ) were used for quantification of fluorescence images . 3D reconstructions of confocal stacks were generated using the alpha blending option in Nikon ( NIS ) - Elements Advanced Research software ( Version 4 . 50 ) . Morphometry of electron microscopy data was done using ImageJ software ( Version 1 . 51v , NIH ) with common tools , such as length and area measurements and intensity profiles . Statistical analyses were done using GraphPad Prism ( Version 8 . 0 . 1 ) . For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature , software must be made available to editors / reviewers upon request . We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository ( e . g . GitHub ) . See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information . 2 n a t u r e r e s e a r c h | r e p o r t i n g s u mm a r y A p r il 2018 Data Policy information about availability of data All manuscripts must include a data availability statement . This statement should provide the following information , where applicable : - Accession codes , unique identifiers , or web links for publicly available datasets - A list of figures that have associated raw data - A description of any restrictions on data availability All data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request . Field - specific reporting Please select the best fit for your research . If you are not sure , read the appropriate sections before making your selection . Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological , evolutionary & environmental sciences For a reference copy of the document with all sections , see nature . com / authors / policies / ReportingSummary - flat . pdf Life sciences study design All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative . Sample size No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size because no human or animal subjects were used in this study . Sample size was chosen based on previous experience and standards in the field . Considering large variations in structural organization of mitochondria and the cytoskeleton among cells , we used large sample sizes that were often well above what is standard in the field . We have been able to do so despite significant technical challenges . Sample sizes are indicated in the main text and figure legends , as well as in the supplementary table 1 ( “Statistics Source Data” ) . Extremely high significance values indicate that these samples sizes were more than sufficient . Data exclusions No data were excluded from analyses in light microscopy experiments or in technically successful PREM experiments involving unroofing . However , if the unroofing procedure resulted in unsatisfactory exposure of the cell interior , thus precluding visualization structures of interest , such experiments were discarded . These exclusion criteria were pre - established . Replication Repetitive experiments ( at least two independent experiments ) have been done to confirm consistency of results . All repetitive experiments gave consistent results without exceptions . Also , different approaches have been used to induce mitochondrial constrictions to confirm the mechanism . Hundreds of individual examples from many cells and experiments have been examined by PREM to account for individual biological variations . Only one experiment was performed in this study as a negative control to validate specificity of immunogold staining , but many such controls were done for our previous projects . Randomization No randomization was applied as there were no human or animal subjects used in this study . The samples were organized according to cell types and treatment conditions . Blinding Not applicable as human or animal subjects were not used in this study . Reporting for specific materials , systems and methods Materials & experimental systems n / a Involved in the study Unique biological materials Antibodies Eukaryotic cell lines Palaeontology Animals and other organisms Human research participants Methods n / a Involved in the study ChIP - seq Flow cytometry MRI - based neuroimaging Antibodies Antibodies used NMIIA antibody was from Biomedical Technologies ( # BT - 567 ) and NMIIB was from Cell Signaling ( # 3404 ) . They were diluted 1 : 20 in the PEM buffer . 3 n a t u r e r e s e a r c h | r e p o r t i n g s u mm a r y A p r il 2018 The secondary antibodies conjugated to 12 nm or 18 nm colloidal gold ( # 711 - 205 - 152 and # 711 - 215 - 152 , respectively , from Jackson ImmunoResearch ) were diluted 1 : 10 . Validation Rabbit anti - NMIIA antibody ( # BT - 567 ) has been previously validated by the Biomedical Technologies ( more information is available at https : / / fnkprddata . blob . core . windows . net / domestic / data / datasheet / BTI / BT - 567 . pdf ) . It was also validated by RNAi - mediated knockdown assay ( Rai et al . , 2017 JBC , 292 ( 8 ) : 3099 - 3111 ) . In addition , we further validated its specificity by staining NMIIA - negative Cos - 7 cells in this study . Rabbit anti - NMIIB antibody ( # 3404 ) has been validated by the Cell Signaling ( more information is available at https : / / media . cellsignal . com / pdf / 3404 . pdf ) . We have previously validated this antibody by RNAi - mediated knockdown and Western blotting ( Shutova et al . , 2017 , JCB , 216 ( 9 ) 2877 - 2889 ) . Eukaryotic cell lines Policy information about cell lines Cell line source ( s ) COS - 7 cells were from ATCC . Hela cells were from Dr . Giorgio Scita ( Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare ) , Italy ( Disanza et al . , 2006 , Nat Cell Bio 8 : 1337 - 1347 ) . Authentication Cell lines were not authenticated by ourselves . Mycoplasma contamination Cell lines were regularly tested for mycoplasma contamination by DAPI staining and were found negative . Commonly misidentified lines ( See ICLAC register ) No cell lines used in this study were found in the database of commonly misidentified cell lines that is maintained by ICLAC and NCBI Biosample .