J . S . Linsey Innovation , Design Reasoning , Engineering Education & Methods ( I - DREEM ) Lab , Department of Mechanical Engineering , Texas A & M University , 3123 TAMU , College Station , TX 77843 , e - mail : jlinsey @ tamu . edu A . B . Markman The Similarity and Cognition Lab , Department of Psychology , The University of Texas at Austin , 1 University Station A8000 , Austin , TX 78712 , e - mail : markman @ psy . utexas . edu K . L . Wood Professor and Head of Pillar Engineering and Product Development ( EPD ) Pillar , and Co - Director of the International Design Center , Singapore University of Technology and Design , 20 Dover Drive , Changi , Singapore 138682 e - mail : kristinwood @ sutd . edu . sgring Design by Analogy : A Study of the WordTree Method for Problem Re - Representation This paper presents a novel approach , referred to as the WordTree design - by - analogy method , for identifying distant - domain analogies as part of the ideation process . The WordTree method derives its effectiveness through a design team’s knowledge and read - ily available information sources ( e . g . , patent databases , Google ) and does not require specialized computational knowledge bases . A controlled cognitive experiment and an evaluation of the method with redesign projects illustrate the method’s inﬂuence in assist - ing engineers in design - by - analogy . Individuals using the WordTree method identiﬁed signiﬁcantly more analogies and searched outside the problem domain as compared to the control group . The team redesign projects demonstrate the WordTree method’s effec - tiveness in longer - term , more realistic , higher validity team projects and with a variety of different design problems . Teams successfully identiﬁed effective analogies , analogous domains , and analogous patents . Unexpected and unique solutions are identiﬁed using the method . For example , one of the teams identiﬁed a dump truck and panning for gold as effective analogies for the design of a self - cleaning cat litter box . In the controlled experiment , a cherry pitter was identiﬁed and implemented as a solution for designing a machine to shell peanuts . The experimental results also highlight potential improvements for the method and areas for future research in engineering design theory . [ DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4006145 ] Keywords : analogy , conceptual design , innovation , design method , idea generation 1 Introduction Recently much attention has been focused on increasing the capacity of engineers to innovate in design [ 1 , 2 ] . Successful prod - ucts often have multiple innovative features [ 3 ] . Analogies are fre - quently a source for innovative design as demonstrated by both anecdotal and empirical sources [ 4 – 8 ] . This paper presents a new method for increasing engineering innovation through design - by - analogy . The method systematically guides the engineer to new linguistic representations for their design problems leading to potential analogies and analogous domains . This paper begins with a discussion of the cognitive processes involved during ana - logical reasoning , explores the empirical evidence highlighting the extensive use of analogy in design , and ﬁnally , describes the currently available methods and tools supporting analogous design . Next , the WordTree design - by - analogy method is presented along with the guiding principles derived from experi - mental evidence . A controlled experiment then measures the effectiveness of the method . Results from implementing the WordTree method on a series of redesign projects are also shown to provide data with greater validity . Finally , conclusions are drawn , and directions for future work are explored . 2 Motivation and Prior Work The WordTree method is guided by substantial research in cog - nitive psychology on how people reason with analogies , informed through empirical work on design - by - analogy and moves beyond existing methods for design - by - analogy . Each of these areas is detailed in the following sections . 2 . 1 Cognitive Process Model for Analogical Reasoning . Extensive research in psychology [ 4 – 7 ] has sought to understand how people reason by analogy ( see Fig . 1 ) . Analogy has tradition - ally been viewed as a comparison between two items in which their relational or causal structure match [ 9 – 13 ] . The problem do - main is typically called the target of the analogy and the domain of prior knowledge provides a potential solution to the problem , the source . Sources are often retrieved from memory , but external resources such as databases could also be used . The human rea - soning by analogy process begins with the source analogs being stored in memory , encoded . The next , and often most difﬁcult , step is to retrieve an appropriate analog from memory [ 9 , 10 , 14 – 18 ] . Next , the person must ﬁnd a mapping between the Fig . 1 Steps in human reasoning by analogy Contributed by the Design Education Committee of ASME for publication in the J OURNAL OF M ECHANICAL D ESIGN . Manuscript received November 21 , 2010 ; ﬁnal manuscript received January 26 , 2012 ; published online March 28 , 2012 . Assoc . Editor : Janis Terpenny . Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2012 , Vol . 134 / 041009 - 1 Copyright V C 2012 by ASME Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm design problem ( target ) and the source analog . Inferences ( design solutions ) are then generated . Retrieval of an appropriate source poses difﬁculties , and thus databases along with other retrieval tools have great potential to enhance design by analogy . Even expert designers have limited knowledge and thus can beneﬁt from the vast resources available in various databases . The WordTree method assists designers with this step to retrieve appropriate source analogs from both their own memory and from databases . The WordTree method guides the designers in identifying key words in cross - domains so that existing databases can be leveraged to identify potential sources for analogies . 2 . 2 Empirical Work on Design - By - Analogy . Empirical work on design - by - analogy demonstrates that professional design - ers often use analogies [ 5 , 6 , 13 , 19 , 20 ] . Engineers in particular of - ten employ cross - domain analogies in their idea generation process [ 4 , 6 , 19 ] . Close - domain analogies in the form of references to past design are often used in process planning , cost estimation , and evaluation of concepts for a new product [ 5 ] . Both novices and expert designers employ analogies , but the impact can be dif - ferent [ 20 ] . Visual analogies can improve design problem solving for both novice and expert architects but has greater impact for novices [ 4 ] . Experts use signiﬁcantly more analogies than novices do and novices tend toward more case - driven analogies ( analogies where a speciﬁc concrete example was used to develop a new solution ) rather than schema - driven analogies ( more general design solutions derived from a number of examples ) [ 20 ] . Controlled experiments also provide guidance on how analog retrieval may be enhanced . Analogs are more easily retrieved when they are remembered within more general linguistic repre - sentation that applies both in the source and target domains [ 21 , 22 ] . The analogies and problems used in these experiments were not speciﬁc to any domain of expertise and used fantasy problems relying only on linguistic descriptions . Results were replicated with engineering students and representation can increase the probability of success up to 40 % [ 23 – 25 ] . Further work explored the interaction between the problem and source analog representation [ 23 – 25 ] . The representation of the design problems has a clear effect on the ability of the designer to retrieve and use an analogy but the representation with the highest probability of success depends on how the analogous product was learned initially . Controlled experiments also provide insight , cross - domain ana - logs , and reasons why designers may not implement identiﬁed analogs . Cross - domain ( far - ﬁeld ) analogs increase the novelty of solutions produced from the analogs [ 26 ] . The timing of when analogically similar information is presented affects how fre - quently it is incorporated into an open - ended design problem . A distant domain analogy is most likely to be implemented if it is presented after the problem has been presented and while the par - ticipant has been unable to solve the design problem [ 27 ] . This suggests that distant domain analogies are most likely to be imple - mented by designers when they are having difﬁculty solving a design problem . 2 . 3 Formal Design - By - Analogy Methods . Formal design - by - analogy methods and tools have the potential to enhance experts’ abilities and minimize the effects of experience gaps . A number of methods and tools have been developed including Syn - ectics [ 28 ] , French’s work on inspiration from nature [ 29 , 30 ] , bio - mimetic concept generation [ 31 , 32 ] , IDEA - INSPIRE [ 33 , 34 ] , and analogous design through the use of the Function and Flow Basis [ 35 ] . Synectics is a group idea generation method that uses four types of analogies to solve problems : personal ( be the problem ) , direct ( functional or natural ) , symbolic , and fantasy . Synectics gives little guidance to designers about how to ﬁnd successful analogies . French’s work shows the importance of analogies to nature and series of examples [ 28 ] but provides little guidance on the process . Recent work assists designers in ﬁnding analogies . Biomimetic concept generation provides a systematic tool to index biological phenomena through functional requirements and then referencing to an introductory college textbook [ 31 , 32 ] . Analogies can also be retrieved based on customer needs and the Functional Basis [ 31 , 32 , 36 ] . Biological analogies can further be identiﬁed through the Functional Basis and the use of the newly developed Biology Thesaurus [ 35 , 37 ] . Specialized tools and databases have been cre - ated for analogy retrieval [ 38 ] . IDEA - INSPIRE [ 33 , 34 ] , based on the function or behavior of a device , retrieves analogies from nature or other devices . DANE [ 39 ] also retrieves biologically inspired analogies based on the function , structure , or behavior of a system . All of these tools either do not provide assistance on retrieving analogies or require specialized databases that must be created . The WordTree method is designed to leverage existing databases . 3 Wordtree Design - By - Analogy Method Overview There is signiﬁcant anecdotal and experimental evidence [ 6 , 19 , 40 ] for the importance of analogy in design , but there is lit - tle work on systematic methods for promoting the retrieval and use of analogies to facilitate innovation . The lack of applicable design methods causes the teaching of this inﬂuential technique to be limited to little more than interesting examples with accompa - nying direction to simply “try to ﬁnd analogies . ” Simply trying to “think of” analogies and analogous domains is difﬁcult even for experienced engineers . Yet this ability , based on both anecdotal and empirical evidence , is clearly important and a critical path to innovation . One of the main principles for enhancing analogical retrieval provided by prior experimental work is that design problems need to be represented in multiple forms ranging from very domain speciﬁc to domain independent , thereby providing a variety of related effective retrieval cues [ 23 – 25 ] . By creating a variety of related retrieval cues at various levels of abstraction , the like - lihood of identifying relevant analogies is increased . The Word - Tree method creates multiple linguistic representations by focusing on alternative functional representations . The WordTree design - by - analogy method systematically re - represents a design problem , assisting the designer in identifying analogies and analogous domains . Figure 2 overviews the meth - od’s basic steps : re - represent key problem functions at multiple levels of abstract through a WordTree , identify and research potential analogies along with analogous domains , and ﬁnally use this information to generate ideas . Example analogies for the design problem of laundry folding include dousing a sail , reeﬁng a sail , and cogging . The two identi - ﬁed analogous domains are sailing ( speciﬁcally mechanisms for Fig . 2 Basic steps of WordTree design - by - analogy method 041009 - 2 / Vol . 134 , APRIL 2012 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm collapsing and storing a sail ) and smoothing machining processes . The next step in the WordTree method is to research potential analogies and the analogous domains . In parallel , new problem statements ranging from very domain speciﬁc in multiple domains to very general statements are also written . Finally the analogies , patents , analogous domains , and new problem statement are implemented in a group idea generation session . This session fur - ther reﬁnes the method’s results into conceptual solutions to a design problem and provides additional inspiration for the designers . 3 . 1 Details of the WordTree Design - By - Analogy Method . This section will provide a detailed application of the method to the problem of a device to fold laundry ( Fig . 3 ) . The WordTree method begins by deﬁning the key problem descriptors . The key problem descriptors are single word action verbs derived from the functions and customer needs for a design problem . Prior research found that transitive verbs , which are action verbs , are more effec - tive stimuli for idea generation than other verbs [ 41 ] . The key problem descriptors are deﬁned from the customer needs , mission statement , function structure , and black box model . Key problem descriptors that should be considered are the following : ( 1 ) single word describing the overall function of the device ( often in the Box Black ) , ( 2 ) critical or difﬁcult to solve functions , and ( 3 ) im - portant customer needs transformed into single action verbs . Nor - mally the customer needs are a combination of an adjective and a noun . To be used in the WordTree method , they must be con - verted to equivalent verbs . For example , the verb form of the cus - tomer need “easy to open a door” would be “change force . ” Some of the customer needs for a device to fold laundry are to smooth the laundry , to be rugged , to be easy to use , and to be easily porta - ble . Some of the key problem descriptors for this device are fold , prepare ( laundry for storage ) , store , and smooth . The next step is to re - represent the key problem descriptors using WordTrees through both the knowledge of the design team and using a database , WordNet 1 . First , the design team use rota - tional brainwriting to create sticky note WordTrees ( Fig . 4 ) divid - ing the key problem descriptors evenly . Rotational brainwriting is very similar to 6 - 3 - 5 [ 42 ] except that each team member receives three sheets of paper and develops one WordTree per sheet ( Fig . 5 ) . Each person spends ten minutes creating the WordTrees . The WordTrees are then rotated clockwise around the table and the next person spends ﬁve minutes adding to the WordTrees . The goal is to generate new linguistic representations of the problem that will later lead to more ideas . The sticky notes allow for addi - tional layers to be added and words to be rearranged . Verbs within the English language tend to be hierarchically structured with more general verbs and more speciﬁc verbs . More speciﬁc verbs for a given word are known as troponyms , and more general instances are known as hypernyms . For example , some of the tro - ponyms for the word “fold” are “bend , 1 / 2 fold , and crease” and hypernyms are “change surface” and “change shape . ” More gen - eral verbs are placed above , and more speciﬁc are placed at lower levels ( Fig . 4 ) . A rotational brainwriting method was chosen , because a prior group idea generation experiment showed this type of approach results in a greater number of ideas [ 43 ] . After the team generates the sticky note WordTrees using rota - tional brainwriting , WordNet is used to ﬁnd additional results . The sticky note WordTrees can also serve as additional seed words for WordNet since some words in WordNet produce few results . The WordNet and sticky note WordTrees are then com - bined . WordNet was originally developed as a database to support natural language processing and computational linguistics [ 44 ] . It is similar to a thesaurus since it gives synonyms for words but hierarchically structured with general word meanings at the top and more domain speciﬁc below . Prior research has shown the potential for lexical database to assist in identifying linguistic analogies [ 45 ] , but WordNet has not been used previously to Fig . 3 Detailed View of the WordTree design - by - analogy method 1 Please see http : / / wordnet . princeton . edu / perl / webwn . Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2012 , Vol . 134 / 041009 - 3 Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm identify design analogies . If the words are unusual or unfamiliar , it is useful to include these in the WordTree since they are fre - quently very domain speciﬁc verbs ( functions ) in distant but anal - ogous domains . If working with a multilingual team , WordTrees can be created in multiple languages using both the team’s knowl - edge and WordNet available in many languages ( e . g . , German , Hindi , French ) . Each language will produce a different representa - tion , different analogies , and will inspire different ideas . Both the design teams’ knowledge and WordNet create differ - ent re - representations . WordNet provides similar words based on how verbs are used within the English language . The design team will implicitly incorporate their prior experience and knowledge of the design problem . For example for the folding device , a more general representation of “fold” within the context of the design problem is “to prepare for storage . ” This particular re - representation would not be provided by WordNet because WordNet does not account for the context of the design problem . In contrast , unlike taxonomies of nouns ( e . g . , from biology - mammals , reptiles , etc . ) , people cannot typically describe hierar - chies of verbs [ 46 ] . Next , the team reviews the WordTrees looking for potential analogies and analogous domains . The team also uses the Word - Tree to assist them in creating a multiple problem statement . An analogy is a potential solution that shares functional similarity with the design problem and an analogous domain is a category of solutions that share similar relationships . Analogies can occur anywhere in the WordTree and frequently occur as words that are both nouns and verbs or as verbs whose meaning is unfamiliar ( e . g . , “brail , to roll up sails” ) ( Fig . 6 ) . Many analogies occur at the ends of the branches , the “leaves of the tree . ” Analogous domains frequently occur on parallel branches , which contain multiple potential analogies . In Fig . 6 , potential analogies are highlighted in yellow , and sets of analogies that form analogous domains are circled . For example , “douse a sail” and “reef a sail” indicate that sailing is an analogous domain for the problem of folding laundry . Many mechanisms for dousing a sail are also effective solutions for folding laundry since they fold , roll , or otherwise compact fab - ric . These unexpected analogies and analogous domains are in areas likely unfamiliar to most designers make the WordTree method highly effective . The WordTree method is only one possi - ble linguistic re - representation , and others should be researched including visual representations . TRIZ also linguistically re - represents a design problem as the conﬂict between generalized engineering parameters [ 47 , 48 ] . Very often designers will not be familiar with the basic princi - ples of the identiﬁed analogies , and therefore the analogies are researched along with searching for solutions in analogous domains . Google Image is an effective and efﬁcient tool for iden - tifying information about a potential analogy . Figure 6 illustrates two mechanisms identiﬁed as analogies for the laundry folding problem . Patents in analogous domains should be searched also . Design ﬁxation is a potential risk anytime a solution is presented to a designer . The search results have the potential to cause ﬁxa - tion , but prior experimental results suggest it is unlikely for this method . Searching for analogies and patents in analogous domains can be completed prior to idea generation by a team since uncom - mon solutions , the type of solutions analogies should provide , tends to increase the number of ideas generated , the novelty of the ideas , and does not cause ﬁxation [ 49 , 50 ] . Finally , teams use the analogy results to generate more ideas . Any idea generation method is acceptable but a rotational brainwriting ( a graphical version of 6 - 3 - 5 ) is recommended to maximize results [ 43 ] . Two separate teams of designers are rec - ommended to base their idea generation sessions on the results from the WordTree method ( bottom of Fig . 3 ) . The ﬁrst team is the original team who owns the design problem and who gener - ated the WordTree . The second team is unfamiliar with the prob - lem and is given the general and alternative domain problem statements along with the WordTrees . When using analogies , indi - viduals tend to focus too much on the surface and unimportant features of the problem rather than the causal structure [ 17 , 51 ] . It is believed that the second team will be less likely to focus on unimportant features of the original design problem because they will be shown a series of analogous problems , which will tend to focus them on the deep structure and not the surface information . After each team’s idea generation , the results are summarized using any number of methods such as morph matrices or mind maps [ 47 ] . The team combines the results with other ideation techniques and then continues with the design process moving on to idea selection . 4 Research Questions Regarding the WordTree Method The WordTree Method is founded on prior experimental results [ 23 , 25 ] and theory . This basis increases the likelihood of an effec - tive technique but does not guarantee it . A series of evaluations is thus needed to understand the outcomes of the WordTree method and provide guidance for further reﬁnement . This need is addressed through two studies based on the following research questions : • Question 1 : Does the WordTree method increase the number of analogies identiﬁed relative to a control group who are asked to generate analogies intuitively ? The hypothesis is that the WordTree method does increase the number of analo - gies identiﬁed since this is what the method was designed to do . It will ease analogy retrieval by identifying cross - domain functions . • Question 2 : Does the WordTree method produce unexpected , useful analogies ? It is possible that the WordTree method could produce analogies that are either typical solutions that would be thought of without the method or analogies that are not useful for solving the design problem . Fig . 5 Rotational brainwriting Fig . 4 Sticky - note WordTree 041009 - 4 / Vol . 134 , APRIL 2012 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm • Question 3 : Does the WordTree Method change the search terms designers use with databases thus seeking more cross - domain analogies ? The WordTree method was evaluated using two approaches : ( 1 ) a controlled experiment of individual designers solving a novel design problem and ( 2 ) with teams working on the redesign of commercial products . The teams working on the redesign of com - mercial products provided a more realistic design setting but afforded less control . The experiment facilitated good control but also limited the time that could be spent on a design problem . The team design projects also allowed the effects of the WordTree method to be evaluated on a wider range of design problems and over a longer time period since teams worked on their own . 5 Controlled Experiment Method The controlled experiment compared the WordTree method to having participants generate ideas without the method . Both groups were familiar with design - by - analogy and had been exposed to a few different idea generation techniques as a part of their mechanical engineering junior year design methods class . 5 . 1 Procedure . The WordTree Method was taught to the sen - ior capstone design course during one 50 min lecture ( Fig . 7 ) . Par - ticipants were recruited from the senior capstone design course prior to the lecture on the WordTree method . They were given extra credit for their participation and were told the amount of extra credit would depend on their effort and results . The opportu - nity was offered at the University of Texas at Austin approxi - mately one month into the semester and approximately half of the students chose to participate . The control group session occurred pre - lecture and the WordTree conditions occurred post - lecture . To reduce biases due to when participants chose to sign - up for sessions , half of the participants were randomly emailed sessions that occurred as control groups prior to lecture and the other half received session times after the WordTree method lecture . Partici - pants who missed their ﬁrst session time or signed up later were assigned to available time slots . Two participants assigned to the WordTree group sessions did not attend the WordTree method lecture , so they were run in the control condition , and their data were not included in the results . Participants knew this was a new method being evaluated . The design problem was to develop a device to shell peanuts for use in third world countries ( Fig . 8 ) and had been used in pre - vious experiments ( see Fig . 9 ) [ 25 , 43 ] . Both conditions were guided by the experimenter using scripted instructions . The ver - sion of the method implemented for the experiments did not include idea generation with a design team who had not seen the original design problem ( this aspect of the method was not eval - uated ) . The limited experimental time did not allow for these aspects of the method to be tested . The experiment was completed with individuals rather than teams . The reduced method explored in this experiment is shown in Fig . 8 . Fig . 6 Creation of the WordTree allows analogies and analogous domains to be identiﬁed . A partial WordTree for the function of “fold” is shown . Analogous domains for folding include sailing ( douse a sail , reef a sail ) and machining processes ( cog : roll steel ingots ) . Two analogies based on mechanism for dousing a sail that are effective for solving the laundry folding problem are shown . Fig . 7 WordTree method as presented to the experiment par - ticipants during lecture Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2012 , Vol . 134 / 041009 - 5 Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm Participants in both conditions were told they could end idea generation at any time , moving on to the next task or they could spend the entire time generating ideas . They were also reminded their amount of extra credit depended on effort and results . After 45 min , participants were also allowed to use a computer to search for ideas and solutions . If they found a useful idea , they were asked to reference it . When participants decided to end idea gen - eration , the time was recorded , they were given a sheet asking them why they ended the sessions , and then a second sheet stating that most people could generate ideas after they thought they had run out of ideas . It was hoped that this could give a measure of time on task and the inﬂuence of other participants’ actions would be minimal . Instead , the other participants’ actions had a large inﬂuence on when participants decided to end the idea generation session . One to ﬁve participants worked individually in the same room . They were given a 5 min break after 60 min . This ﬁrst ses - sion lasted about two hours . At the end of the session , participants were asked to record their search strategy including a list of the terms they searched for and the search engines they used . If participants left the web browser open on the computer , the webpage history was recorded to pro - vide further insights into their search approach . Participants in the control group were told to generate ideas and analogies whereas the WordTree group was guided through WordTree . The control group was also instructed that they could use any method they learned in the design methods class if desired . The control group had a total of 90 min for idea genera - tion and database search , but only the ﬁrst 60 min is included in the analysis to match the WordTree group . Throughout the entire session for both groups , the color of pens being used was switched every ﬁfteen minutes so that temporal changes were documented . The ﬁrst 60 min was designed for comparison between the condi - tions , and the additional time in the control was to observe their behavior over a longer time period . Both conditions required two hours during the ﬁrst session and a one - hour follow - up session . Our experience has been that it is difﬁcult to obtain participants for more than three hours , and therefore both conditions were lim - ited to this . A series of slides with a script guided the participants through the WordTree method . Each step in the process had a time limit as follows : • Create sticky note WordTrees for the following key problem descriptors ( 20 min ) : • Shell • Remove • Separate • Import energy • Combine sticky note WordTrees with WordNet WordTree ( 5 min ) • Identify and list potential analogies and analogous domains ( 10 min ) • Write new problem statements ( 10 min ) • Generate ideas ( 45 min ) • Generate ideas and use database support if desired ( 15 min ) The sticky note WordTrees were recorded prior to combination with the provided WordNet WordTree . Two WordNet WordTrees for “shell” and “separate” were created by the experimenter and provided in ﬁnished form ( Fig . 10 ) . The WordTrees are ﬁltered versions of the words provided by WordNet and were chosen as a combination of possibly relevant and random words . During a second hour - long session , participants in both groups documented the analogies they had generated , put all of their ideas into a morph matrix [ 47 ] , and ﬁlled out a post experiment survey . The matrix contained some common predeﬁned functions for the peanut shelling machine , but participants were encouraged to add additional functions as needed . The participants’ documen - tation facilitated measurement . When participants ﬁnished the list of analogies , morph matrix , and the survey , they were told to spend any remaining time generating ideas . This step prevented participants from rushing through these ﬁnal steps . 5 . 2 Measures . The controlled experimental setup allowed for quantitative and qualitative measures to be made including the number of ideas , number of analogies , within or outside domain search strategy , and quality of concepts . The condition informa - tion was removed as much as possible during evaluation . The number of ideas generated was based on the number of boxes ﬁlled in for the morph matrix by the participants . The number of analogies identiﬁed by the participants is critical for the evaluation of the WordTree method . An analogy was deﬁned to the participants during class lecture as “The mapping of features of one thing to a design problem you are trying to solve . ” It was further explained as anytime you take information from an example you have seen before and a series of examples were pre - sented including : a sail for a cargo ship based on a bat wing [ 52 – 54 ] , the Oxo Good measuring cup and a previous patent showing a very similar design , and an inch worm built from Legos based on a child’s wind - up toy . The number of analogies was calculated with two approaches . The ﬁrst was based on all analogies the participants listed during the second session . It was noticed that many of the participants in the WordTree condition did not list the potential analogies and analogous domains they had identiﬁed during the ﬁrst session . A second measure was made of the number of nonredundant analo - gies listed in either the ﬁrst or second session . The number of analogies was scored by one of the authors and a second evalua - tor . Evaluation by the second evaluator for the number of Fig . 8 Modiﬁed WordTree design - by - analogy method imple - mented for the controlled study Fig . 9 Peanut sheller design problem for the experiment 041009 - 6 / Vol . 134 , APRIL 2012 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm analogies revealed a mistake for the number of analogies for one participant as reported in Ref . [ 55 ] , but inter - rater agreement for the number of nonredundant analogies was still very high with a Pearson’s correlation of 0 . 97 . The search strategy used by the participants was scored for con - taining words outside the domain of peanut shelling or not . For example , searching for “pitting cherries” ( see Fig . 11 ) or “pod peas” was outside the domain and “nut cracker” was within the domain . Not all of the participants chose to use databases to assist them and a few of the participants’ search strategies could not be determined based on the information they provided . The two par - ticipants who missed the lecture on The WordTree method were included in the search strategy data but not for the rest of the measures . Quality , as deﬁned by Shah et al . [ 56 , 57 ] , is a measure of a con - cept’s feasibility and how well it meets design speciﬁcations . In this paper , quality is measured on a three - point rating scale . Each concept generated by a participant received a quality score . Prior work [ 43 ] has shown this scale to be reliable with Cohen’s Kappa [ 58 ] of 0 . 42 demonstrating fair level of inter - rater agreement . Two participants included Mindmaps [ 59 ] in their concept genera - tion and each was evaluated as a single concept . A coarse ( three - point ) highly deﬁned rating scale is used rather than an unanch - ored rating scale since our prior work showed difﬁculties in apply - ing an unanchored scale ( low correlation between raters ) [ 60 ] . An unanchored rating scale has an expert evaluator rate a concept on a spectrum , for example , 1 - 7 with 1 lowest quality and 7 highest quality , without speciﬁcally deﬁning each point on the scale . 5 . 3 Participants . The participants were senior undergraduate students at the University of Texas at Austin taking their capstone design course . There were two females . All students had com - pleted a design method course the prior semester . The partici - pants’ average GPA of 3 . 4 for their design methods class and 3 . 7 overall is higher than the general class average . Participants’ sur - vey results indicated that they had an average of half a year of work experience in engineering . 5 . 4 Controlled Experiment Results and Discussion . The number of ideas generated , number of analogies , and the percent - age of implemented analogies measured the WordTree Method’s Fig . 10 Part of the WordTree provided to the participants Fig . 11 Another analogy identiﬁed and implemented by a participant in the WordTree group was a cherry pitting device . The participant’s solution is shown on the right . Table 1 Number of Analogies as Scored by the Participants and the Evaluator Number of Analogies ( S . D . ) N Mean Control 7 . 6 ( 4 . 8 ) 10 Mean WordTree 23 . 3 ( 12 . 2 ) a 10 a Statistically signiﬁcant difference p < 0 . 01 . Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2012 , Vol . 134 / 041009 - 7 Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm effects on idea generation . Participants in the WordTree condition found signiﬁcantly more analogies than the control group , ( t ( 18 ) ¼ 3 . 8 , p < 0 . 01 , Table 1 ) . The participants were asked to list analogies at two different stages , after ﬁnishing the WordTree Method and after generating ideas . Often participants would list analogies on one but not both lists even though participants were instructed to list all analogies on the ﬁnal list . An evaluator com - bined the two lists removing redundant analogies , and this was the score used for analysis . While the WordTree method assists in identifying more analogies , participants are not using the potential analogies to ﬁnd solutions to the design problem ( Table 2 ) . All results shown are calculated for the ﬁrst 60 min of idea generation . The control group had 90 min , whereas there was only 60 min for the WordTree group . There are a number of reasons why the participants may not be implementing the presented analogies and further work needs to explore this issue . They may be having trouble mapping from the source analog to the target problem . Novices may not have sufﬁ - cient knowledge of the problem domain in order to make the con - nection to the analogs or to re - represent the problem domain to align with the source analog . Similar the ﬁnding of Tseng et al . [ 27 ] , participants may need to work on the design problem for some time and be in a state of being unable to solve it before they will attempt to use distant domain analogies . Other studies have shown that participants may judge distant domain analogies as not relevant , but in reality they are just as relevant as closer domain analogies [ 61 ] . An experiment by Benami and Jin showed a simi - lar result with participants having difﬁculty creating design solu - tions based on linguistic functional descriptions [ 62 ] . Participants may need visual images and additional information about the analogies before they can create solutions . The team design proj - ects allow for additional information to be gathered on the reasons why participants may not have implemented the analogies in the controlled experiment . A coarse evaluation of the results indicated no difference in novelty , variety , or quality was likely between the two conditions and since the participants appear to not be using their listed analo - gies to ﬁnds solutions ; therefore , no difference between conditions is expected for these metrics . A more robust quantitative assess - ment of novelty , variety , and quality was not undertaken . 5 . 4 . 1 Results From Database Searches . Table 3 summarizes the number of participants in each condition who searched outside the domain of peanut shelling and those who only searched within the domain . Examples of the search results from both conditions are shown in Figs . 11 – 14 . The WordTree method supports partici - pants in ﬁnding novel cross - domain analogies and substantially modiﬁed their search strategy . Semantic distance using Word - Net : : Similarity [ 63 ] would be one quantitative approach for deter - mining the degree of similarity between two concepts . Unfortunately , semantic distances cannot be calculated for sets of words , which is what is needed for determining if certain search terms are very close to the original problem domain or not . Terms that were considered within domain were the terms contained within the original problem statement including “peanut , shell , remove” along with their common synonyms of “sheller ¼ nut cracker . ” Example terms that were considered outside the domain were peel , panning , and winnowing , which are not obvious analo - gies for peanut shelling . Participants in the control conditions did ﬁnd useful information for the peanut shelling problem , but the in - formation they found was all closely related to peanut shelling . Participants in the control condition located the current solution for this problem , the Malian peanut shelling machine ( Fig . 14 ) , and industrial large - scale solutions for peanut shelling . All available data are shown for the entire time participants spent searching databases to highlight the signiﬁcant impact the WordTree method had on participants’ search strategies . Even though the WordTree group had a maximum of 15 min whereas the control group had 45 min with most using at least 30 min , the control group still did not search outside the peanut shelling domain . It was expected that participants would ﬁrst search a close domain and then expand their search to other domains so participants in the control group would be more likely to search outside the domain . Not all participants chose to use the assistance of databases . Web history information was also used to evaluate Table 2 The participants implemented only a small fraction of the analogies that they identiﬁed Percentage of identified analogies that were used to find solutions Mean Usage 42 % Min . Usage 15 % Max . Usage 64 % Table 3 Number of participants who searched outside the do - main of peanut shelling Outside Peanut Shelling Domain Only Within Domain of Peanut Shelling Control 0 4 WordTree 6 2 Fig . 12 An analogous solution found ( right ) based on an egg peeling device ( left ) by a participant in the WordTree group 041009 - 8 / Vol . 134 , APRIL 2012 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm the search strategy . Web histories were available for six of the participants . 6 Team Design Project Results To further evaluate the WordTree design - by - analogy method and explore it in a more realistic design setting with a longer time scale , it was taught in the senior design methods course . Multiple - case studies from the team design projects allows additional data to be gathered , which can be compared with the results from the controlled experiment . The team project data demonstrates the WordTree method’s effectiveness on a broader range of design problems . Hypotheses about why the participants did not imple - ment the analogies into solutions in the controlled study can be further explored with the multicase studies . One of the authors taught the WordTree method as part of a lecture series on idea generation , which included brainstorming , 6 - 3 - 5 , MindMapping , and TIPS / TRIZ [ 47 ] . The method was not presented as a new method . 6 . 1 Team Design Projects : Procedure . As part of their design methods class , 92 senior mechanical engineering students were required to use the WordTree Method . In the senior design methods class , teams of four to six students redesign a commercial product that they choose . The entire semester is spent learning and applying various design methods starting with identifying the customer needs through embodiment design [ 47 ] . To simplify the WordTree method for the class , the steps of creating new problem statements and using a second team to assist in generating ideas were not included ( Fig . 7 without the create multiple problem statement step ) . The teams learned the method in one 50 min lec - ture and then spent a second lecture to complete the method . Dur - ing the second lecture , an author reminded the teams of the process steps , answered questions , and guided them through the method . Many of the teams had their WordTrees ﬁnished and were left to research the analogies at the end of the second lecture Fig . 14 Participants in the control group only found within do - main solutions to the peanut shelling problem . This solution is a hand - powered device that removes the shell from the peanuts ( “Full Belly Project , ” 2006 ) . Fig . 15 Analogies and analogous domains identiﬁed by a team who was redesigning a self - cleaning cat litter box Fig . 13 A device to split bean and pea pods ( left ) , located by one of the WordTree con - dition participants , provides an analogous solution ( right ) to the peanut shelling problem Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2012 , Vol . 134 / 041009 - 9 Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm period . Teams were required to hand in , as a part of their design report , at least one WordTree with at least thirty words , ﬁve analo - gies , two analogous domains , and ﬁve useful patents from their research . For extra credit , teams individually ﬁlled out an opinion survey . 6 . 2 Team Design Projects : Results and Discussion . In gen - eral , the teams were able to identify useful analogies , analogous domains , and patents using the WordTree method . Each team was required to identify ﬁve analogies , two analogous domains , and three patents . Eleven out of twelve teams identiﬁed at least ﬁve analogies ( mean 7 . 4 , minimum 4 , and maximum 12 ) . Nine teams identiﬁed at least two analogous domains ( mean 1 . 6 , minimum 0 , and maximum 3 ) . Nine teams also found at least three useful pat - ents for their design problem ( mean 1 . 6 , minimum 0 , and maxi - mum 3 ) . There were a total of thirteen teams , but one team’s results were not recorded before being returned to the students . Fig . 15 shows one team’s resulting analogies and analogous domains for the redesign of an automatic cat litter box and Table 4 lists examples for other teams . The team who redesigned the auto - matic cat litter box sought analogies for cleaning a cat litter box and created a WordTree for “clean . ” The WordTree method pro - vided the team with analogies to a dump truck , panning for gold , and dredging items from the sea ﬂoor . Panning for gold suggests using water to separate the cat waste and litter . The CatGenie V R self - washing self - ﬂushing cat box is a commercially available solution , which uses this principle . These results are one example of a handful of very good results obtained by the teams . Table 4 displays the variety of results obtained by the teams . The Word - Tree generation was generally carried out correctly and teams pro - duced useful results , but there was also some variation in the resulting analogies and solutions . Some teams had more disap - pointing results for a number of different reasons . Other teams , like the cat litter box team , found very novel analogies and unex - pected analogous domains . A few teams obtained poor sets of analogies such as the domain of “pull in” for an improved vacuuming robot ( Table 4 ) , even though the procedure of the method was correctly applied . Many teams had difﬁculty identifying distant analogous domains within the WordTrees . They tended to identify close - domain analogies . One reason for this may be the teams were focused on ﬁnishing this method quickly , and the choice of more distant analogies has a higher risk of not obtaining useful results but greater potential for innovation . One solution to this issue is to alter the grading structure such that students believe the reward is worth the possi - ble risk . Correctness of the method implementation varied . One team focused on changing the esthetics , usability , or ergonomics of the device rather than the function . Analogies can be made to the aes - thesis of a device , but the WordTree method is tuned for function . Other difﬁculties arose with using the wrong sense of the verb or creating WordTrees using the constraints of the design problem rather than functions or customer needs . Some of the customer needs , which are adjectives , were not converted to verbs and therefore WordNet provided a dismal set of results . Another team used the team generated , “sticky note” WordTree to identify their analogous domain rather than the WordNet generated one . In addition , most teams had very focused problem statements , such as “extending battery life” or “reducing weight” rather than focus - ing on more general problems . There was one generally consistent issue for almost all of the teams with the WordTree method with a few exceptions such as the cat litter box team . The resulting words , analogies , analogous domains , and patents were usually not carried to the next step in the process of 6 - 3 - 5 brainwriting . The teams did not connect their idea generation sessions to their previously generated analogies and possible solutions . This also likely means the ideas provided by the WordTree Method will not appear in the ﬁnal solutions . From this evaluation , it is not clear why this occurred , but the issue will be investigated . The cat litter box team carried the results from WordTree through to idea generation . 7 Addressing the Research Questions The results from the controlled study and implementation of the WordTree method with design teams provide insights into the effectiveness and beneﬁts of the WordTree method . These results provide answers to the research questions . Question 1 : Does the WordTree Method increase the number of analogies identiﬁed ? The WordTree method provides designers with a systematic tool to identify effective analogies for obtaining innovative solutions . It increases the number of analogies identi - ﬁed by the designers through linguistic re - representation of a design problem that also allows for the location of analogous domains . Analogous domains provide an avenue to search for existing solutions that are outside the problem domain . The con - trolled experiment showed a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the number of analogies identiﬁed . Question 2 : Does the WordTree method produce unexpected , useful analogies and solutions ? The WordTree method does assist designers in producing unexpected , useful analogies and solutions . Participants redesigning existing commercial products identiﬁed a number of unusual and effective analogies found for the design problems . One team redesigning a cat litter box identiﬁed dredg - ing and panning for gold as analogies for their problem of clean - ing a litter box . These are not analogies that most designers would expect . In a controlled experiment , a series of unique and effective analogies were identiﬁed for the peanut shelling problem . Table 4 Additional Typical Examples of Analogies and Analogous Domains Identiﬁed Using the WordTree Method Design Problem Identified Analogies Patents Analogous Domains An automatic casting system for a ﬁshing rod (cid:2) catapult (cid:2) hurl (cid:2) 5 , 383 , 442 pump action pellet gun (cid:2) catapult (cid:2) loft (cid:2) hurtle (cid:2) cross - bow (cid:2) shoot (cid:2) throw (cid:2) gun (cid:2) pellet and paint ball (cid:2) shoot (cid:2) machine gun (cid:2) sling Improved cleaning capacity robotic vacuum (cid:2) brush (cid:2) retract (cid:2) brush assembly in vacuum 6381802 (cid:2) pull in (cid:2) sterilize (cid:2) sponge up (cid:2) liquid sprays in a battery operated hand vacuum 5970572 (cid:2) spray (cid:2) suck (cid:2) sterilizing system in a vacuum 20060236496 (cid:2) water - wash A portable washing machine which runs on alternative power (cid:2) hydrate (cid:2) drilling machine with pneumatic control - pre - ﬁlled compressed air tank (cid:2) nature (cid:2) sporulate (cid:2) mechanical - thermal solar power system (cid:2) prefabricate (cid:2) feed (cid:2) wind energy apparatus (cid:2) heat 041009 - 10 / Vol . 134 , APRIL 2012 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm Unexpected analogies included an egg peeling machine and cherry pitting . The control group did not produce this . Question 3 : Does the WordTree method change the search terms designers use with databases thus seeking more cross - domain analogies ? Designers who were using the WordTree Method as compared to the control used a distinctly different strategy for seeking analogous solutions . They expanded their searches to analogous domains , which then provided novel analo - gies for them . 8 Conclusions and Future Work The WordTree design - by - analogy method provides a systematic approach for identifying analogies and analogous domains for a given design problem . It leverages a design team’s knowledge and existing databases to provide unexpected , effective analogies and analogous domains . Through the re - representation of a design prob - lem , unexpected analogies and analogous domains can be explored . This is consistent with prior data that indicates representation affects the retrieval of analogies [ 21 – 23 , 25 ] . The controlled experi - ment shows that this method allows designers to identify a greater number of analogies and alters their search approaches leading to more unusual analogous solutions being located . Teams working on the redesign of commercial products successfully implemented the WordTree method on their projects locating unexpected analo - gies and analogous domains . One team redesigning a cat litter box identiﬁed dredging and panning for gold as analogies for their prob - lem of cleaning a litter box . The WordTree method is a powerful approach for the re - representation of design problems . Many other avenues for enhancing design - by - analogy are possi - ble and will be future research . For example , even though the WordTree method guided the participants in identifying analo - gies , only a small percentage were incorporated into solutions even though participants felt they had run out of ideas before time was over . Referencing the cognitive model for analogical retrieval [ 12 , 15 , 18 ] , based on the fact that participants are listing the analo - gies , it is likely they are having difﬁculty in either mapping between the source analogy and the design problem or they are not drawing inferences . Future research will focus on understand - ing why designers quickly disregard provided information and evaluate if designer experience is a factor . Future work will also explore in more detail how the WordTree method modiﬁed the participants search strategies . As with any new method , there are avenues for improvement . Many steps of the WordTree method can be automated or facili - tated by an automated , computational tool . For example , the entire process of creating the WordTrees from WordNet , selecting anal - ogies , and researching them could be completed by an automated tool . The results including images could then be presented to the designer to immediately provide inspiration and by - passing most steps of WordTree . For reasons that are not completely clear , the engineers are not effectively using the analogies they identify , and these reasons must be explored with further work . The WordTree method needs to support this process better . Acknowledgment The authors would like to acknowledge the support provided from the Cullen Endowed Professorship in Engineering , The Uni - versity of Texas at Austin , and the National Science Foundation under Grant No . CMMI - 0555851 . This research was also sup - ported by a Fellowship in the IC 2 Institute given to Dr . Arthur Markman . This work was a part of Dr . Julie Linsey’s dissertation . References [ 1 ] National Academy of Engineering , 2005 , Educating the Engineer of 2020 : Adapting Engineering Education to the New Century , The National Academies Press , Washington , DC . [ 2 ] National Academy of Engineering , 2004 , The Engineer of 2020 : Visions of En - gineering in the New Century , The National Academies Press , Washington , DC . [ 3 ] Saunders , M . N . , Seepersad , C . C . , and Holtta - Otto , K . , 2011 , “The Characteris - tics of Innovative , Mechanical Products , ” J . Mech . Des . , 133 ( 2 ) , 021009 . [ 4 ] Casakin , H . , and Goldschmidt , G . , 1999 , “Expertise and the Use of Visual Anal - ogy : Implications for Design Education , ” Des . Stud . , 20 ( 2 ) , pp . 153 – 175 . [ 5 ] Eckert , C . M . , Stacey , M . , and Earl , C . , 2005 , “References to Past Designs , ” Proceedings of Studying Designers 2005 , Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition , Sydney , Australia . [ 6 ] Christensen , B . T . , and Schunn , C . , 2007 , “The Relationship of Analogical Dis - tance to Analogical Function and Pre - Inventive Structures : The Case of Engi - neering Design , ” Mem . Cognit . , 35 ( 1 ) , pp . 29 – 38 . [ 7 ] Kelley , T . , and Littman , J . , 2001 , The Art of Innovation , Doubleday , New York . [ 8 ] Linsey , J . , Tseng , I . , Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , and Schunn , C . , 2010 , “A Study of Design Fixation , Its Mitigation and Perception in Engineering Design Faculty , ” ASME J . Mech . Des . , 132 ( 4 ) , 041003 . [ 9 ] Falkenhainer , B . F . , Forbus , K . D . , and Gentner , D . , 1989 , “The Structure Map - ping Engine : Algorithm and Examples , ” Artif . Intell . , 41 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 63 . [ 10 ] Gentner , D . , and Markman , A . B . , 1997 , “Structure Mapping in Analogy and Similarity , ” Am . Psychol . , 52 , pp . 45 – 56 . [ 11 ] Hummel , J . E . , and Holyoak , K . J . , 1997 , “Distributed Representations of Struc - ture : A Theory of Analogical Access and Mapping , ” Psychol . Rev . , 104 ( 3 ) , pp . 427 – 466 . [ 12 ] Gentner , D . , Holyoak , K . J . , and Kokinov , B . , 2001 , The Analogical Mind , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 13 ] Blanchette , I . , and Dunbar , K . , 2001 , “Analogy Use in Naturalistic Settings : The Inﬂuence of Audience , Emotion , and Goals , ” Mem . Cognit . , 29 ( 5 ) , pp . 730 – 735 . [ 14 ] Holyoak , K . J . , and Thagard , P . , 1989 , “Analogical Mapping by Constraint Sat - isfaction , ” Cogn . Sci . , 13 ( 3 ) , pp . 295 – 355 . [ 15 ] Gentner , D . , 1983 , “Structure Mapping - A Theoretical Framework , ” Cogn . Sci . , 7 , pp . 155 – 177 . [ 16 ] Holyoak , K . J . , and Koh , K . , 1987 , “Surface and Structural Similarity in Ana - logical Transfer , ” Mem . Cognit . , 15 ( 4 ) , pp . 332 – 340 . [ 17 ] Gick , M . L . , and Holyoak , K . J . , 1980 , “Analogical Problem Solving , ” Cogn . Psychol . , 12 , pp . 306 – 355 . [ 18 ] Markman , A . B . , and Gentner , D . , 1993 , “Structural Alignment During Similar - ity Comparisons , ” Cogn . Psychol . , 25 ( 4 ) , pp . 431 – 467 . [ 19 ] Leclercq , P . , and Heylighen , A . , 2002 , “5 , 8 Analogies Per Hour , ” Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design 2002 . [ 20 ] Ball , L . J . , Ormerod , T . C . , and Morley , N . J . , 2004 , “Spontaneous Analogising in Engineering Design : A Comparative Analysis of Experts and Novices , ” Des . Stud . , 25 ( 5 ) , pp . 495 – 508 . [ 21 ] Clement , C . A . , Mawby , R . , and Giles , D . E . , 1994 , “The Effects of Manifest Relational Similarity on Analog Retrieval , ” J . Mem . Lang . , 33 ( 3 ) , pp . 396 – 420 . [ 22 ] Clement , C . A . , 1994 , “Effect of Structural Embedding on Analogical Transfer : Manifest Versus Latent Analogs , ” Am . J . Psychol . , 107 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 39 . [ 23 ] Linsey , J . , Wood , K . , and Markman , A . , 2008 , “Modality and Representation in Analogy , ” Art . Intell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 22 ( 2 ) , pp . 85 – 100 . [ 24 ] Linsey , J . , 2007 , “Design - by - Analogy and Representation in Innovative Engi - neering Concept Generation , ” Ph . D . thesis , The University of Texas at Austin , Austin , TX . [ 25 ] Linsey , J . , Laux , J . , Clauss , E . F . , Wood , K . , and Markman , A . , 2007 , “Increasing Innovation : A Trilogy of Experiments Towards a Design - by - Anal - ogy Method , ” Proceedings of ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference . [ 26 ] Chan , J . , Fu , K . , Schunn , C . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , and Kotovsky , K . , 2011 , “On the Beneﬁts and Pitfalls of Analogies for Innovative Design : Ideation Perform - ance Based on Analogical Distance , Commonness , and Modality of Examples , ” J . Mech . Des . , 133 ( 8 ) , 081004 . [ 27 ] Tseng , I . , Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , and Kotovsky , K . , 2008 , “The Role of Timing and Analogical Similarity in the Stimulation of Idea Generation in Design , ” Des . Stud . , 29 ( 3 ) , pp . 203 – 221 . [ 28 ] Gordon , W . J . J . , 1961 , Synectics : The Development of Creative Capacity , Harper and Brothers , New York . [ 29 ] French , M . , 1996 , Conceptual Design , Springer - Verlag , London , UK . [ 30 ] French , M . , 1988 , Invention and Evolution : Design in Nature and Engineering , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . [ 31 ] “Proceedings of the ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computer and Information in Engineering Conference , ” Montreal , QC , Canada , August 15 – 18 , 2010 . [ 32 ] Chiu , I . , and Shu , L . H . , 2007 , “Biomimetic Design Through Natural Language Analysis to Facilitate Cross - Domain Information Retrieval , ” Artif . Intell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 21 ( 1 ) , pp . 45 – 59 . [ 33 ] Chakrabarti , A . , Sarkar , P . , Leelavathamma , B . , and Nataraju , B . S . , 2005 , “A Behavioural Model for Representing Biological and Artiﬁcial Systems for Inspiring Novel Designs , ” Proceedings of the International Conference on Engi - neering Design . [ 34 ] Chakrabarti , A . , Sarkar , P . , Leelavathamma , B . , and Nataraju , B . S . , 2005 , “A Functional Representation for Aiding Biomimetic and Artiﬁcial Inspiration of New Ideas , ” Artif . Intell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 19 ( 2 ) , pp . 113 – 132 . [ 35 ] Mcadams , D . , and Wood , K . , 2002 , “A Quantitative Similarity Metric for Design by Analogy , ” ASME J . Mech . Des . , 124 ( 2 ) , pp . 173 – 182 . [ 36 ] Shu , L . H . , Hansen , H . N . , Gegeckaite , A . , Moon , J . , and Chan , C . , 2006 , “Case Study in Biomimetic Design : Handling and Assembly of Microparts , ” Proceed - ings of the ASME IDETC ( International Design and Engineering Technical Conferences ) . Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2012 , Vol . 134 / 041009 - 11 Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm [ 37 ] Shu , L . H . , Cheong , H . , Stone , R . B . , Mcadams , D . A . , and Chiu , I . , 2011 , “Biologically Meaningful Keywords for Functional Terms of the Functional Basis , ” J . Mech . Design . , 133 , 021007 , in press . [ 38 ] Nagel , J . K . S . , Stone , R . , and Mcadams , D . , 2010 , “An Engineering - to - Biology Thesaursus for Engineering Design , ” Proceedings of the ASME IDETC . [ 39 ] Goel , A . K . , and Bhatta , S . R . , 2004 , “Use of Design Patterns in Analogy - Based Design , ” Adv . Eng . Inf . , 18 ( 2 ) , pp . 85 – 94 . [ 40 ] Ahmed , S . , and Christensen , B . T . , 2009 , “An in Situ Study of Analogical Reason - ing in Novice and Experience Design Engineers , ” J . Mech . Des . , 131 ( 11 ) , 111004 . [ 41 ] Chiu , I . , and Shu , L . H . , 2007 , “Understanding the Use of Language Stimuli in Concept Generation , ” Proceedings of the ASME IDETC . [ 42 ] Pahl , G . , and Beitz , W . , 1996 , Engineering Design - A Systematic Approach , Springer , New York . [ 43 ] Linsey , J . , Clauss , E . F . , Kurtoglu , T . , Murphy , J . T . , Wood , K . L . , and Mark - man , A . B . , 2011 , “An Experimental Study of Group Idea Generation Techni - ques : Understanding the Roles of Idea Representation and Viewing Methods , ” ASME J . Mech . Des . , 133 ( 3 ) , p . 031008 . [ 44 ] Veale , T . , 2006 , “Re - Representation and Creative Analogy : A Lexico - Semantic Perspective , ” New Gener . Comput . , 24 ( 3 ) , pp . 223 – 240 . [ 45 ] Fellbaum , C . , 1998 , Wordnet , An Electronic Lexical Database , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 45 ] Gentner , D . , 1981 , “Some Interesting Differences Between Nouns and Verbs , ” Cogn . Brain Theory , 4 ( 2 ) , pp . 161 – 178 . [ 47 ] Otto , K . , and Wood , K . , 2001 , Product Design : Techniques in Reverse Engi - neering and New Product Development , Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ . [ 48 ] Altshuller , G . S . , 1984 , Creativity as an Exact Science , Gordon and Breach Publishers , Luxembourg . [ 49 ] Dugosh , K . L . , and Paulus , P . B . , 2005 , “Cognitive and Social Comparison Processes in Brainstorming , ” J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . , 41 , pp . 313 – 320 . [ 50 ] Perttula , M . , and Sipila , P . , 2007 , “The Idea Exposure Paradigm in Design Idea Generation , ” J . Eng . Des . , 18 ( 1 ) , pp . 93 – 102 . [ 51 ] Gentner , D . , and Landers , R . , 1985 , “Analogical Remindings : A Good Match Is Hard to Find , ” Proceedings of the International Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics . [ 52 ] “Wings Take to the Water , ” 2000 , BBC News , http : / / news . bbc . co . uk / 1 / hi / sci / tech / 1011107 . stm [ 53 ] Reed , J . , 2006 , “The Future of Shipping , ” Pop . Sci . May , pp . 50 – 51 [ 54 ] Dryden , R . , 2004 , “A Proposal : Modular Sailing Rigs to Provide Wind Assis - tance for Larger Vessels , ” The Naval Architect , September , pp . 112 – 114 . [ 55 ] Linsey , J . , Wood , K . , and Markman , A . , 2008 , “Increasing Innovation : Presen - tation and Evaluation of the Wordtree Design - by - Analogy Method , ” Proceed - ings of the ASME IDETC Design Theory and Methodology Conference . [ 56 ] Shah , J . J . , Kulkarni , S . V . , and Vargas - Herna´ndez , N . , 2000 , “Evaluation of Idea Generation Methods for Conceptual Design : Effectiveness Metrics and Design of Experiments , ” J . Mech . Des . , 122 , pp . 377 – 384 . [ 57 ] Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . M . , and Vargas - Hernandez , N . , 2003 , “Metrics for Meas - uring Ideation Effectiveness , ” Des . Stud . , 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 111 – 134 . [ 58 ] Clark - Carter , D . , 1997 , Doing Quantitative Psychological Research : From Design to Report , Psychology Press , UK . [ 59 ] Buzan , T . , and Buzan , B . , 1996 , The Mind Map Book : How to Use Radiant Thinking to Maximize Your Brain’s Untapped Potential , Plume , New York . [ 60 ] Kurtoglu , T . , Campbell , M . , and Linsey , J . , 2009 , “An Experimental Study on the Effects of a Computational Design Tool on Concept Generation , ” Des . Stud . , 30 ( 6 ) , pp . 676 – 703 . [ 61 ] Lopez , R . , Linsey , J . S . , and Smith , S . , 2011 , “Characterizing the Effect of Do - main Distance in Design - By - Analogy , ” Proceedings of the ASME IDETC - Design Theory and Methodology Conference . [ 62 ] Benami , O . , and Jin , Y . , 2002 , “Creative Stimulation in Conceptual Design , ” Proceedings of the ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computer and Information in Engineering Conference , Montreal , QC . , Canada . [ 63 ] Pedersen , T . , 2011 , “Wordnet : : Similarity , ” http : / / wn - similarity . sourceforge . net / 041009 - 12 / Vol . 134 , APRIL 2012 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 21 Jul 2012 to 128 . 83 . 63 . 20 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm