a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 9904419v2 [ c ond - m a t . s t a t - m ec h ] 6 M a y 1999 Scaling and percolation in the small - world network model M . E . J . Newman and D . J . Watts Santa Fe Institute , 1399 Hyde Park Road , Santa Fe , NM 87501 ( May 6 , 1999 ) In this paper we study the small - world network model of Watts and Strogatz , which mimics some aspects of the structure of networks of social interactions . We argue that there is one non - trivial length - scale in the model , analogous to the correlation length in other systems , which is well - deﬁned in the limit of inﬁnite system size and which diverges continuously as the randomness in the network tends to zero , giving a normal critical point in this limit . This length - scale governs the cross - over from large - to small - world behavior in the model , as well as the number of vertices in a neighborhood of given radius on the network . We derive the value of the single critical exponent controlling behavior in the critical region and the ﬁnite size scaling form for the average vertex – vertex distance on the network , and , using series expansion and Pad´e approximants , ﬁnd an approximate analytic form for the scaling function . We calculate the eﬀective dimension of small - world graphs and show that this dimension varies as a function of the length - scale on which it is measured , in a manner reminiscent of multifractals . We also study the problem of site percolation on small - world networks as a simple model of disease propagation , and derive an approximate expression for the percolation probability at which a giant component of connected vertices ﬁrst forms ( in epidemiological terms , the point at which an epidemic occurs ) . The typical cluster radius satisﬁes the expected ﬁnite size scaling form with a cluster size exponent close to that for a random graph . All our analytic results are conﬁrmed by extensive numerical simulations of the model . 05 . 40 . - a , 05 . 50 . + q , 05 . 70 . Jk , 64 . 60 . Fr I . INTRODUCTION Networks of social interactions between individuals , groups , or organizations have some unusual topological properties which set them apart from most of the net - works with which physics deals . They appear to display simultaneously properties typical both of regular lattices and of random graphs . For instance , social networks have well - deﬁned locales in the sense that if individual A knows individual B and individual B knows individual C , then it is likely that A also knows C—much more likely than if we were to pick two individuals at random from the population and ask whether they are acquainted . In this respect social networks are similar to regular lattices , which also have well - deﬁned locales , but very diﬀerent from random graphs , in which the probability of connec - tion is the same for any pair of vertices on the graph . On the other hand , it is widely believed that one can get from almost any member of a social network to any other via only a small number of intermediate acquaintances , the exact number typically scaling as the logarithm of the total number of individuals comprising the network . Within the population of the world , for example , it has been suggested that there are only about “six degrees of separation” between any human being and any other [ 1 ] . This behavior is not seen in regular lattices but is a well - known property of random graphs , where the aver - age shortest path between two randomly - chosen vertices scales as log N / log z , where N is the total number of vertices in the graph and z is the average coordination number [ 2 ] . Recently , Watts and Strogatz [ 3 ] have proposed a model which attempts to mimic the properties of social networks . This “small - world” model consists of a net - work of vertices whose topology is that of a regular lat - tice , with the addition of a low density φ of connections between randomly - chosen pairs of vertices [ 4 ] . Watts and Strogatz showed that graphs of this type can indeed possess well - deﬁned locales in the sense described above while at the same time possessing average vertex – vertex distances which are comparable with those found on true random graphs , even for quite small values of φ . In this paper we study in detail the behavior of the small - world model , concentrating particularly on its scal - ing properties . The outline of the paper is as follows . In Section II we deﬁne the model . In Section III we study the typical length - scales present in the model and argue that the model undergoes a continuous phase transition as the density of random connections tends to zero . We also examine the cross - over been large - and small - world behavior in the model , and the structure of “neighbor - hoods” of adjacent vertices . In Section IV we derive a scaling form for the average vertex – vertex distance on a small - world graph and demonstrate numerically that this form is followed over a wide range of the parameters of the model . In Section V we calculate the eﬀective dimen - sion of small - world graphs and show that this dimension depends on the length - scale on which we examine the graph . In Section VI we consider the properties of site percolation on these systems , as a model of the spread of information or disease through social networks . Finally , in Section VII we give our conclusions . 1 ( b ) ( a ) FIG . 1 . ( a ) An example of a small - world graph with L = 24 , k = 1 and , in this case , four shortcuts . ( b ) An example with k = 3 . II . THE SMALL - WORLD MODEL The original small - world model of Watts and Strogatz , in its simplest incarnation , is deﬁned as follows . We take a one - dimensional lattice of L vertices with connections or bonds between nearest neighbors and periodic bound - ary conditions ( the lattice is a ring ) . Then we go through each of the bonds in turn and independently with some probability φ “rewire” it . Rewiring in this context means shifting one end of the bond to a new vertex chosen uniformly at random from the whole lattice , with the exception that no two vertices can have more than one bond running between them , and no vertex can be con - nected by a bond to itself . In this model the average coordination number z remains constant ( z = 2 ) dur - ing the rewiring process , but the coordination number of any particular vertex may change . The total number of rewired bonds , which we will refer to as “shortcuts” , is φL on average . For the purposes of analytic treatment the Watts – Strogatz model has a number of problems . One problem is that the distribution of shortcuts is not completely uni - form ; not all choices of the positions of the rewired bonds are equally probable . For example , conﬁgurations with more than one bond between a particular pair of vertices are explicitly forbidden . This non - uniformity of the dis - tribution makes an average over diﬀerent realizations of the randomness hard to perform . A more serious problem is that one of the crucial quan - tities of interest in the model , the average distance be - tween pairs of vertices on the graph , is poorly deﬁned . The reason is that there is a ﬁnite probability of a por - tion of the lattice becoming detached from the rest in this model . Formally , we can represent this by saying that the distance from such a portion to a vertex else - where on the lattice is inﬁnite . However , this means that the average vertex – vertex distance on the lattice is then itself inﬁnite , and hence that the vertex – vertex distance averaged over all realizations is also inﬁnite . For numeri - cal studies such as those of Watts and Strogatz this does not present any substantial diﬃculties , but for analytic ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 2 . ( a ) An example of a k = 1 small - world graph with an underlying lattice of dimension d = 2 . ( b ) The pattern of bonds around a vertex on the d = 2 lattice for k = 3 . work it results in a number of quantities and expressions being poorly deﬁned . Both of these problems can be circumvented by a slight modiﬁcation of the model . In our version of the small - world model we again start with a regular one - dimensional lattice , but now instead of rewiring each bond with probability φ , we add shortcuts between pairs of vertices chosen uniformly at random but we do not remove any bonds from the regular lattice . We also ex - plicitly allow there to be more than one bond between any two vertices , or a bond which connects a vertex to itself . In order to preserve compatibility with the results of Watts and Strogatz and others , we add with probabil - ity φ one shortcut for each bond on the original lattice , so that there are again φL shortcuts on average . The av - erage coordination number is z = 2 ( 1 + φ ) . This model is equivalent to the Watts – Strogatz model for small φ , whilst being better behaved when φ becomes compara - ble to 1 . Fig . 1 ( a ) shows one realization of our model for L = 24 . Real social networks usually have average coordination numbers z signiﬁcantly higher than 2 , and we can arrange for higher z in our model in a number of ways . Watts and Strogatz [ 3 ] proposed adding bonds to next - nearest or further neighbors on the underlying one - dimensional lattice up to some ﬁxed range which we will call k [ 5 ] . In our variation on the model we can also start with such a lattice and then add shortcuts to it . The mean number of shortcuts is then φkL and the average coordination number is z = 2 k ( 1 + φ ) . Fig . 1 ( b ) shows a realization of this model for k = 3 . Another way of increasing the coordination number , suggested ﬁrst by Watts [ 6 , 7 ] , is to use an underlying lat - tice for the model with dimension greater than one . In this paper we will consider networks based on square and ( hyper ) cubic lattices in d dimensions . We take a lattice of linear dimension L , with L d vertices , nearest - neighbor bonds and periodic boundary conditions , and add short - cuts between randomly chosen pairs of vertices . Such a graph has φdL d shortcuts and an average coordination number z = 2 d ( 1 + φ ) . An example is shown in Fig . 2 ( a ) for d = 2 . We can also add bonds between next - nearest or 2 further neighbors to such a lattice . The most straightfor - ward generalization of the one - dimensional case is to add bonds along the principal axes of the lattice up to some ﬁxed range k , as shown in Fig . 2 ( b ) for k = 3 . Graphs of this type have φkdL d shortcuts on average and a mean coordination number of z = 2 kd ( 1 + φ ) . Our main interest in this paper is with the properties of the small - world model for small values of the shortcut probability φ . Watts and Strogatz [ 3 ] found that the model displays many of the characteristics of true random graphs even for φ ≪ 1 , and it seems to be in this regime that the model’s properties are most like those of real - world social networks . III . LENGTH - SCALES IN SMALL - WORLD GRAPHS A fundamental observable property of interest on small - world lattices is the shortest path between two vertices—the number of degrees of separation—measured as the number of bonds traversed to get from one vertex to another , averaged over all pairs of vertices and over all realizations of the randomness in the model . We de - note this quantity ℓ . On ordinary regular lattices ℓ scales linearly with the lattice size L . On the underlying lat - tices used in the models described here for instance , it is equal to 14 dL / k . On true random graphs , in which the probability of connection between any two vertices is the same , ℓ is proportional to log N / log z , where N is the number of vertices on the graph [ 2 ] . The small - world model interpolates between these extremes , showing lin - ear scaling ℓ ∼ L for small φ , or on systems small enough that there are very few shortcuts , and logarithmic scaling ℓ ∼ log N = d log L when φ or L is large enough . In this section and the following one we study the nature of the cross - over between these two regimes , which we refer to as “large - world” and “small - world” regimes respectively . For simplicity we will work mostly with the case k = 1 , although we will quote results for k > 1 where they are of interest . When k = 1 the small - world model has only one in - dependent parameter—the probability φ —and hence can have only one non - trivial length - scale other than the lat - tice constant of the underlying lattice . This length - scale , which we will denote ξ , can be deﬁned in a number of diﬀerent ways , all deﬁnitions being necessarily propor - tional to one another . One simple way is to deﬁne ξ to be the typical distance between the ends of shortcuts on the lattice . In a one - dimensional system with k = 1 , for example , there are on average φL shortcuts and there - fore 2 φL ends of shortcuts . Since the lattice has L ver - tices , the average distance between ends of shortcuts is L / ( 2 φL ) = 1 / ( 2 φ ) . In fact , it is more convenient for our purposes to deﬁne ξ without the factor of 2 in the denominator , so that ξ = 1 / φ , or for general d ξ = 1 ( φd ) 1 / d . ( 1 ) For k > 1 the appropriate generalization is [ 8 ] ξ = 1 ( φkd ) 1 / d . ( 2 ) As we see , ξ diverges as φ → 0 according to [ 9 ] ξ ∼ φ − τ , ( 3 ) where the exponent τ is τ = 1 d . ( 4 ) A number of authors have previously considered a di - vergence of the kind described by Eq . ( 3 ) with ξ deﬁned not as the typical distance between the ends of short - cuts , but as the system size L at which the cross - over from large - to small - world scaling occurs [ 10 – 13 ] . We will shortly argue that in fact the length - scale ξ deﬁned here is precisely equal to this cross - over length , and hence that these two divergences are the same . The quantity ξ plays a role similar to that of the corre - lation length in an interacting system in standard statis - tical physics . Its leaves the system with no length - scale other than the lattice spacing , so that at long distances we expect all spatial distributions to be scale - free . This is precisely the behavior one sees in an interacting sys - tem undergoing a continuous phase transition , and it is reasonable to regard the small - world model as having a continuous phase transition at this point . Note that the transition is a one - sided one since φ is a probability and cannot take values less than zero . In this respect the transition is similar to that seen in the one - dimensional Ising model , or in percolation on a one - dimensional lat - tice . The exponent τ plays the part of a critical exponent for the system , similar to the correlation length exponent ν for a thermal phase transition . De Menezes et al . [ 13 ] have argued that the length - scale ξ can only be deﬁned in terms of the cross - over point be - tween large - and small - world behavior , that there is no deﬁnition of ξ which can be made consistent in the limit of large system size . For this reason they argue that the transition at φ = 0 should be regarded as ﬁrst - order rather than continuous . In fact however , the arguments of de Menezes et al . show only that one particular deﬁni - tion of ξ is inconsistent ; they show that ξ cannot be con - sistently deﬁned in terms of the mean vertex – vertex dis - tance between vertices in ﬁnite regions of inﬁnite small - world graphs . This does not prove that no deﬁnition of ξ is consistent in the L → ∞ limit and , as we have demonstrated here , consistent deﬁnitions do exist . Thus it seems appropriate to consider the transition at φ = 0 to be a continuous one . Barth´el´emy and Amaral [ 10 ] have conjectured on the basis of numerical simulations that τ = 23 for d = 1 . As 3 we have shown here , τ is in fact equal to 1 / d , and speciﬁ - cally τ = 1 in one dimension . We have also demonstrated this result previously using a renormalization group ( RG ) argument [ 12 ] , and it has been conﬁrmed by extensive numerical simulations [ 11 – 13 ] . The length - scale ξ governs a number of other proper - ties of small - world graphs . First , as mentioned above , it deﬁnes the point at which the average vertex – vertex distance ℓ crosses over from linear to logarithmic scal - ing with system size L . This statement is necessarily true , since ξ is the only non - trivial length scale in the model , but we can demonstrate it explicitly by noting that the linear scaling regime is the one in which the average number of shortcuts on the lattice is small com - pared with unity and the logarithmic regime is the one in which it is large [ 6 ] . The cross - over occurs in the region where the average number of shortcuts is about one , or in other words when φkdL d = 1 . Rearranging for L , the cross - over length is L = 1 ( φkd ) 1 / d = ξ . ( 5 ) The length - scale ξ also governs the average number V ( r ) of neighbors of a given vertex within a neighborhood of radius r . The number of vertices in such a neighbor - hood increases as r d for r ≪ ξ while for r ≫ ξ the graph behaves as a random graph and the size of the neigh - borhood must increase exponentially with some power of r / ξ . To derive the speciﬁc functional form of V ( r ) we consider a small - world graph in the limit of inﬁnite L . Let a ( r ) be the surface area of a “sphere” of radius r on the underlying lattice of the model , i . e . , it is the number of points which are exactly r steps away from any ver - tex . ( For k = 1 , a ( r ) = 2 d r d − 1 / Γ ( d ) when r ≫ 1 . ) The volume within a neighborhood of radius r in an inﬁnite system is the sum of a ( r ) over r , plus a contribution of V ( r − r ′ ) for every shortcut encountered at a distance r ′ , of which there are on average 2 ξ − d a ( r ′ ) . Thus V ( r ) is in general the solution of the equation V ( r ) = r X r ′ = 0 a ( r ′ ) [ 1 + 2 ξ − d V ( r − r ′ ) ] . ( 6 ) In one dimension with k = 1 , for example , a ( r ) = 2 for all r and , approximating the sum with an integral and then diﬀerentiating with respect to r , we get d V d r = 2 [ 1 + 2 V ( r ) / ξ ] , ( 7 ) which has the solution V ( r ) = 12 ξ ( e 4 r / ξ − 1 ) . ( 8 ) Note that for r ≪ ξ this scales as r , independent of ξ , and for r ≫ ξ it grows exponentially , as expected . Eq . ( 8 ) also implies that the surface area of a sphere of radius r on the graph , which is the derivative of V ( r ) , should be 0 50 100 150 200 distance r 1 10 100 1000 s u rf ace a r ea A ( r ) FIG . 3 . The mean surface area A ( r ) of a neighborhood of radius r on a d = 1 small - world graph with φ = 0 . 01 for L = 128 . . . 131 072 ( solid lines ) . The measurements are av - eraged over 1000 realizations of the system each . The dotted line is the theoretical result for L = ∞ , Eq . ( 9 ) . A ( r ) = 2e 4 r / ξ . ( 9 ) These results are easily checked numerically and give us a simple independent measurement of ξ which we can use to conﬁrm our earlier arguments . In Fig . 3 we show curves of A ( r ) from computer simulations of systems with φ = 0 . 01 for values of L equal to powers of two from 128 up to 131 072 ( solid lines ) . The dotted line is Eq . ( 9 ) with ξ taken from Eq . ( 1 ) . The convergence of the simulation results to the predicted exponential form as the system size grows conﬁrms our contention that ξ is well - deﬁned in the limit of large L . Fig . 4 shows A ( r ) for L = 100 000 for various values of φ . Eq . ( 9 ) implies that the slope of the lines in the limit of small r is 4 / ξ . In the inset we show the values of ξ extracted from ﬁts to the slope as a function of φ on logarithmic scales , and a straight - line ﬁt to these points gives us an estimate of τ = 0 . 99 ± 0 . 01 for the exponent governing the transition at φ = 0 ( Eq . ( 3 ) ) . This is in good agreement with our theoretical prediction that τ = 1 . IV . SCALING IN SMALL - WORLD GRAPHS Given the existence of the single non - trivial length - scale ξ for the small - world model , we can also say how the mean vertex – vertex distance ℓ should scale with sys - tem size and other parameters near the phase transition . In this regime the dimensionless quantity ℓ / L can be a function only of the dimensionless quantity L / ξ , since no other dimensionless combinations of variables exist . Thus we can write ℓ = Lf ( L / ξ ) , ( 10 ) 4 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 distance r 1 10 100 1000 s u rf ace a r ea A ( r ) 0 . 0001 0 . 001 0 . 01 φ 100 1000 10000 ξ FIG . 4 . The mean surface area A ( r ) of a neighborhood of radius r on a d = 1 small - world graph with L = 100 000 for φ = 10 − 4 . . . 10 − 2 . The measurements are averaged over 1000 realizations of the system each . Inset : the value of ξ extracted from the curves in the main ﬁgure , as a function of φ . The gradient of the line gives the value of the exponent τ , which is found by a least squares ﬁt ( the dotted line ) to be 0 . 99 ± 0 . 01 . where f ( x ) is an unknown but universal scaling function . A scaling form similar to this was suggested previously by Barth´el´emy and Amaral [ 10 ] on empirical grounds . Substituting from Eq . ( 1 ) , we then get for the k = 1 case ℓ = Lf ( φ 1 / d L ) . ( 11 ) ( We have absorbed a factor of d 1 / d into the deﬁnition of f ( x ) here to make it consistent with the deﬁnition we used in Ref . [ 12 ] . ) The usefulness of this equation derives from the fact that the function f ( x ) contains no dependence on φ or L other than the explicit dependence introduced through its argument . Its functional form can however change with dimension d and indeed it does . In order to obey the known asymptotic forms of ℓ for large and small systems , the scaling function f ( x ) must satisfy f ( x ) ∼ log x x as x → ∞ , ( 12 ) and f ( x ) → 14 d as x → 0 . ( 13 ) When k > 1 , ℓ tends to 14 dL / k for small values of L and ξ is given by Eq . ( 2 ) , so the appropriate generalization of the scaling form is ℓ = L k f (cid:0) ( φk ) 1 / d L (cid:1) , ( 14 ) with f ( x ) taking the same limiting forms ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) . Previously we derived this scaling form in a more rigorous way using an RG argument [ 12 ] . 0 . 1 1 10 100 φ kL 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 l k / L 0 . 1 1 10 φ 1 / 2 L 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 FIG . 5 . Data collapse for numerical measurements of the mean vertex – vertex distance on small - world graphs with d = 1 . Circles and squares are results for k = 1 and k = 5 respectively for values of L between 128 and 32 768 and values of φ between 1 × 10 − 6 and 3 × 10 − 2 . Each point is averaged over 1000 realizations of the randomness . In all cases the errors on the points are smaller than the points themselves . The dashed line is the second - order series approximation with exact coeﬃcients given in Eq . ( 18 ) , while the dot - dashed line is the ﬁfth - order approximation using numerical results for the last three coeﬃcients . The solid line is the third - order Pad´e approximant , Eqs . ( 21 ) and ( 23 ) . Inset : data collapse for two - dimensional systems with k = 1 for values of L from 64 to 1024 and φ from 3 × 10 − 6 up to 1 × 10 − 3 . We can again test these results numerically by measur - ing ℓ on small - world graphs for various values of φ , k and L . Eq . ( 14 ) implies that if we plot the results on a graph of ℓk / L against ( φk ) 1 / d L , they should collapse onto a single curve for any given dimension d . In Fig . 5 we have done this for systems based on underlying lattices with d = 1 for a range of values of φ and L , for k = 1 and 5 . As the ﬁgure shows , the collapse is excellent . In the inset we show results for d = 2 with k = 1 , which also collapse nicely onto a single curve . The lower limits of the scaling functions in each case are in good agreement with our theoretical predictions of 14 for d = 1 and 12 for d = 2 . We are not able to solve exactly for the form of the scaling function f ( x ) , but we can express it as a series expansion in powers of φ as follows . Since the scaling function is universal and has no implicit dependence on k , it is adequate to calculate it for the case k = 1 ; its form is the same for all other values of k . For k = 1 the probability of having exactly m shortcuts on the graph is P m = (cid:18) dL d m (cid:19) φ m ( 1 − φ ) dL d − m . ( 15 ) 5 m ℓ m / L 0 1 / 4 1 5 / 24 2 131 / 720 3 0 . 1549 ± 0 . 0003 4 0 . 1365 ± 0 . 0003 5 0 . 1232 ± 0 . 0003 TABLE I . Average vertex – vertex distances per vertex ℓ m / L on d = 1 small - world graphs with exactly m shortcuts and k = 1 . Values up to m = 2 are the exact results of Strang and Eriksson [ 14 ] . Values for m = 3 . . . 5 are our numerical results . Let ℓ m be the mean vertex – vertex distance on a graph with m shortcuts in the limit of large L , averaged over all such graphs . Then the mean vertex – vertex distance aver - aged over all graphs regardless of the number of shortcuts is ℓ = dL d X m = 0 P m ℓ m . ( 16 ) Note that in order to calculate ℓ up to order φ m we only need to know the behavior of the model when it has m or fewer shortcuts . For the d = 1 case the values of the ℓ m have been calculated up to m = 2 by Strang and Eriksson [ 14 ] and are given in Table I . Substituting these into Eq . ( 16 ) and collecting terms in φ , we then ﬁnd that ℓ L = 14 − 124 φL + 111440 φ 2 L 2 − 111440 φ 2 L + O ( φ 3 ) . ( 17 ) The term in φ 2 L can be dropped when L is large or φ small , since it is negligible by comparison with at least one of the terms before it . Thus the scaling function is f ( x ) = 14 − 124 x + 111440 x 2 + O ( x 3 ) . ( 18 ) This form is shown as the dotted line in Fig . 5 and agrees well with the numerical calculations for small values of the scaling variable x , but deviates badly for large values . Calculating the exact values of the quantities ℓ m for higher orders is an arduous task and probably does not justify the eﬀort involved . However , we have calculated the values of the ℓ m numerically up to m = 5 by eval - uating the average vertex – vertex distance ℓ on graphs which are constrained to have exactly 3 , 4 or 5 shortcuts . Performing a Taylor expansion of ℓ / L about L = ∞ , we get ℓ L = ℓ m L h 1 + c L + O (cid:0) L − 2 (cid:1)i , ( 19 ) where c is a constant . Thus we can estimate ℓ m / L from the vertical - axis intercept of a plot of ℓ / L against L − 1 for large L . The results are shown in Table I . Calculating higher orders still would be straightforward . Using these values we have evaluated the scaling func - tion f ( x ) up to ﬁfth order in x ; the result is shown as the dot – dashed line in Fig . 5 . As we can see the range over which it matches the numerical results is greater than before , but not by much , indicating that the se - ries expansion converges only slowly as extra terms are added . It appears therefore that series expansion would be a poor way of calculating f ( x ) over the entire range of interest . A much better result can be obtained by using our se - ries expansion coeﬃcients to deﬁne a Pad´e approximant to f ( x ) [ 15 , 16 ] . Since we know that f ( x ) tends to a con - stant f ( 0 ) = 14 d for small x and falls oﬀ approximately as 1 / x for large x , the appropriate Pad´e approximants to use are odd - order approximants where the approximant of order 2 n + 1 ( n integer ) has the form f ( x ) = f ( 0 ) A n ( x ) B n + 1 ( x ) , ( 20 ) where A n ( x ) and B n ( x ) are polynomials in x of degree n with constant term equal to 1 . For example , to third order we should use the approximant f ( x ) = f ( 0 ) 1 + a 1 x 1 + b 1 x + b 2 x 2 . ( 21 ) Expanding about x = 0 this gives f ( x ) f ( 0 ) = 1 + ( a 1 − b 1 ) x + ( b 21 − a 1 b 1 − b 2 ) x 2 + [ ( a 1 − b 1 ) ( b 21 − b 2 ) + b 1 b 2 ] x 3 + O ( x 4 ) . ( 22 ) Equating coeﬃcients order by order in x and solving for the a ’s and b ’s , we ﬁnd that a 1 = 1 . 825 ± 0 . 075 , b 1 = 1 . 991 ± 0 . 075 , ( 23 ) b 2 = 0 . 301 ± 0 . 012 . Substituting these back into ( 21 ) and using the known value of f ( 0 ) then gives us our approximation to f ( x ) . This approximation is plotted as the solid line in Fig . 5 and , as the ﬁgure shows , is an excellent guide to the value of f ( x ) over a large range of x . In theory it should be pos - sible to calculate the ﬁfth - order Pad´e approximant using the numerical results in Table I , although we have not done this here . Substituting f ( x ) back into the scaling form , Eq . ( 14 ) , we can also use the Pad´e approximant to predict the value of the mean vertex – vertex distance for any values of φ , k and L within the scaling regime . We will make use of this result in the next section to calculate the eﬀective dimension of small - world graphs . 6 V . EFFECTIVE DIMENSION The calculation of the volumes and surface areas of neighborhoods of vertices on small - world graphs in Sec - tion III leads us naturally to the consideration of the dimension of these systems . On a regular lattice of di - mension D , the volume V ( r ) of a neighborhood of radius r increases in proportion to r D , and hence one can cal - culate D from [ 17 ] D = d log V d log r = rA ( r ) V ( r ) , ( 24 ) where A ( r ) is the surface area of the neighborhood , as previously . We can use the same expression to calculate the eﬀective dimension of our small - world graphs . Thus in the case of an underlying lattice of dimension d = 1 , the eﬀective dimension of the graph is D = 4 r ξ e 4 r / ξ e 4 r / ξ − 1 , ( 25 ) where we have made use of Eqs . ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) . For r ≪ ξ this tends to one , as we would expect , and for r ≫ ξ it tends to 4 r / ξ , increasing linearly with the radius of the neighborhood . Thus the eﬀective dimension of a small - world graph depends on the length - scale on which we look at it , in a way reminiscent of the behavior of multifractals [ 18 , 19 ] . This result will become important in Section VI when we consider site percolation on small - world graphs . In Fig . 6 we show the eﬀective dimension of neighbor - hoods on a large graph measured in numerical simula - tions ( circles ) , along with the analytic result , Eq . ( 25 ) ( solid line ) . As we can see from the ﬁgure , the numerical and analytic results are in good agreement for small radii r , but the numerical results fall oﬀ sharply for larger r . The reason for this is that Eq . ( 24 ) breaks down as V ( r ) approaches the volume of the entire system ; V ( r ) must tend to L d in this limit and hence the derivative in ( 24 ) tends to zero . The same eﬀect is also seen if one tries to use Eq . ( 24 ) on ordinary regular lattices of ﬁnite size . To characterize the dimension of an entire system therefore , we use another measure of D as follows . On a regular lattice of ﬁnite linear size ℓ , the number of vertices N scales as ℓ D and hence we can calculate the dimension from D = d log N d log ℓ . ( 26 ) We can apply the same formula to the calculation of the eﬀective dimension of small - world graphs putting N = L d , although , since we don’t have an analytic so - lution for ℓ , we cannot derive an analytic solution for D in this case . On the other hand , if we are in the scal - ing regime described in Section IV—the regime in which ξ ≫ 1—then Eq . ( 14 ) applies , along with the limiting forms , Eqs . ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) . Substituting into ( 26 ) , this gives us 1 10 100 1000 10000 radius 0 2 4 6 8 e ff ec ti v e d i m e n s i on D 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 x 0 2 4 6 D FIG . 6 . Eﬀective dimension D of small - world graphs . The circles are results for D from numerical calculations on an L = 1 000 000 system with d = 1 , k = 1 and φ = 10 − 3 using Eq . ( 24 ) . The errors on the points are in all cases smaller than the points themselves . The solid line is Eq . ( 25 ) . The squares are calculated from Eq . ( 27 ) by numerical diﬀeren - tiation of simulation results for the scaling function f ( x ) of one - dimensional systems . The dotted line is Eq . ( 27 ) evalu - ated using the third - order Pad´e approximant to the scaling function derived in Section IV . Inset : eﬀective dimension from Eq . ( 27 ) plotted as a function of the scaling variable x . The dotted lines represent the asymptotic forms for large and small x discussed in the text . 1 D = d log ℓ d log L d = 1 d (cid:20) 1 + d log f ( x ) d log x (cid:21) , ( 27 ) where x = ( φk ) 1 / d L ∝ L / ξ . In other words D is a uni - versal function of the scaling variable x . We know that f ( x ) tends to a constant for small x ( i . e . , ξ ≫ L ) , so that D = d in this limit , as we would expect . For large x ( i . e . , ξ ≪ L ) , Eq . ( 12 ) applies . Substituting into ( 27 ) this gives us D = d log x . In the inset of Fig . 6 we show D from numerical calculations as a function of x in one - dimensional systems of a variety of sizes , along with the expected asymptotic forms , which it follows reasonably closely . In the main ﬁgure we also show this second mea - sure of D ( squares with error bars ) as a function of the system radius ℓ ( with which it should scale linearly for large ℓ , since ℓ ∼ log x for large x ) . As the ﬁgure shows , the two measures of eﬀective dimension agree reasonably well . The numerical errors on the ﬁrst measure , Eq . ( 24 ) are much smaller than those on the second , Eq . ( 26 ) ( which is quite hard to calculate numerically ) , but the second measure is clearly preferable as a measure of the dimension of the entire system , since the ﬁrst fails badly when r approaches ℓ . We also show the value of our second measure of dimension calculated using the Pad´e approximant to f ( x ) derived in Section IV ( dotted line 7 in the main ﬁgure ) . This agrees well with the numerical evaluation for radii up to about 1000 and has signiﬁcantly smaller statistical error , but overestimates D somewhat beyond this point because of inaccuracies in the approx - imation ; the Pad´e approximant scales as 1 / x for large values of x rather than log x / x , which means that D will scale as x rather than log x for large x . VI . PERCOLATION In the previous sections of this paper we have exam - ined statistical properties of small - world graphs such as typical length - scales , vertex – vertex distances , scaling of volumes and areas , and eﬀective dimension of graphs . These are essentially static properties of the networks ; to the extent that small - world graphs mimic social net - works , these properties tell us about the static structure of those networks . However , social science also deals with dynamic processes going on within social networks , such as the spread of ideas , information , or diseases . This leads us to the consideration of dynamical models de - ﬁned on small - world graphs . A small amount of research has already been conducted in this area . Watts [ 6 , 7 ] , for instance , has considered the properties of a number of simple dynamical systems deﬁned on small - world graphs , such as networks of coupled oscillators and cellular au - tomata . Barrat and Weigt [ 20 ] have looked at the proper - ties of the Ising model on small - world graphs and derived a solution for its partition function using the replica trick . Monasson [ 21 ] looked at the spectral properties of the Laplacian operator on small - world graphs , which tells us about the time evolution of a diﬀusive ﬁeld on the graph . There is also a moderate body of work in the mathemat - ical and social sciences which , although not directly ad - dressing the small - world model , deals with general issues of information propagation in networks , such as the adop - tion of innovations [ 22 – 25 ] , human epidemiology [ 26 – 28 ] , and the ﬂow of data on the Internet [ 29 , 30 ] . In this section we discuss the modeling of informa - tion or disease propagation speciﬁcally on small - world graphs . Suppose for example that the vertices of a small - world graph represent individuals and the bonds between them represent physical contact by which a disease can be spread . The spread of ideas can be similarly modeled ; the bonds then represent information connections between individuals which could include letters , telephone calls , or email , as well as physical contacts . The simplest model for the spread of disease is to have the disease spread be - tween neighbors on the graph at a uniform rate , starting from some initial carrier individual . From the results of Section IV we already know what this will look like . If for example we wish to know how many people in total have contracted a disease , that number is just equal to the number V ( r ) within some radius r of the initial carrier , where r increases linearly with time . ( We assume that no individual can catch the disease twice , which is the case with most common diseases . ) Thus , Eq . ( 8 ) tells us that , for a d = 1 small - world graph , the number of individuals who have had a particular disease increases exponentially , with a time - constant governed by the typical length - scale ξ of the graph . Since all real - world social networks have a ﬁnite number of vertices N , this exponential growth is expected to saturate when V ( r ) reaches N = L d . This is not a particularly startling result ; the usual model for the spread of epidemics is the logistic growth model , which shows initial exponential spread followed by saturation . For a disease like inﬂuenza , which spreads fast but is self - limiting , the number of people who are ill at any one time should be roughly proportional to the area A ( r ) of the neighborhood surrounding the initial carrier , with r again increasing linearly in time . This implies that the epidemic should have a single humped form with time , like the curves of A ( r ) plotted in Fig . 4 . Note that the vertical axis in this ﬁgure is logarithmic ; on linear axes the curves are bell - shaped rather than quadratic . In the context of the spread of information or ideas , similar be - havior might be seen in the development of fads . By a fad we mean an idea which is catchy and therefore spreads fast , but which people tire of quickly . Fashions , jokes , toys , or buzzwords might be expected to show popular - ity proﬁles over time similar to the curves in Fig . 4 . However , for most real diseases ( or fads ) this is not a very good model of how they spread . For real diseases it is commonly the case that only a certain fraction p of the population is susceptible to the disease . This can be mimicked in our model by placing a two - state variable on each vertex which denotes whether the individual at that vertex is susceptible . The disease then spreads only within the local “cluster” of connected susceptible ver - tices surrounding the initial carrier . One question which we can answer with such a model is how high the density p of susceptible individuals can be before the largest con - nected cluster covers a signiﬁcant fraction of the entire network and an epidemic ensues . Mathematically , this is precisely the problem of site percolation on a social network , at least in the case where the susceptible individuals are randomly distributed over the vertices . To the extent that small - world graphs mimic social networks , therefore , it is interesting to look at the percolation problem . The transition corresponds to the point on a regular lattice at which a percolating cluster forms whose size increases with the size L of the lattice for arbitrarily large L [ 31 ] . On random graphs there is a similar transition , marked by the formation of a so - called “giant component” of connected vertices [ 32 ] . On small - world graphs we can calculate approximately the percolation probability p = p c at which the transition takes place as follows . Consider a d = 1 small - world graph of the kind pic - tured in Fig . 1 . For the moment let us ignore the short - cut bonds and consider the percolation properties just of the underlying regular lattice . If we color in a fraction p of the sites on this underlying lattice , the occupied sites will form a number of connected clusters . In order for 8 two adjacent parts of the lattice not to be connected , we must have a series of at least k consecutive unoccupied sites between them . The number n of such series can be calculated as follows . The probability that we have a series of k unoccupied sites starting at a particular site , followed by an occupied one is p ( 1 − p ) k . Once we have such a series , the states of the next k sites are ﬁxed and so it is not possible to have another such series for k steps . Thus the number n is given by n = p ( 1 − p ) k ( L − kn ) . ( 28 ) Rearranging for n we get n = L p ( 1 − p ) k 1 + kp ( 1 − p ) k . ( 29 ) For this one - dimensional system , the percolation transi - tion occurs when we have just one break in the chain , i . e . , when n = 1 . This gives us a k th order equation for p c which is in general not exactly soluble , but we can ﬁnd its roots numerically if we wish . Now consider what happens when we introduce short - cuts into the graph . The number of breaks n , Eq . ( 29 ) , is also the number of connected clusters of occupied sites on the underlying lattice . Let us for the moment suppose that the size of each cluster can be approximated by the average cluster size . A number φkL of shortcuts are now added to the graph between pairs of vertices chosen uni - formly at random . A fraction p 2 of these will connect two occupied sites and therefore can connect together two clusters of occupied sites . The problem of when the percolation transition occurs is then precisely that of the formation of a giant component on an ordinary random graph with n vertices . It is known that such a component forms when the mean coordination number of the random graph is one [ 32 ] , or alternatively , when the number of bonds on the graph is a half the number of vertices . In other words , the transition probability p c must satisfy p 2 c φkL = 12 L p c ( 1 − p c ) k 1 + kp c ( 1 − p c ) k , ( 30 ) or φ = ( 1 − p c ) k 2 kp c [ 1 + kp c ( 1 − p c ) k ] . ( 31 ) We have checked this result against numerical calcu - lations . In order to ﬁnd the value of p c numerically , we employ a tree - based invasion algorithm similar to the in - vaded cluster algorithm used to ﬁnd the percolation point in Ising systems [ 33 , 34 ] . This algorithm can calculate the entire curve of average cluster size versus p in time which scales as L log L [ 35 ] . We deﬁne p c to be the point at which the average cluster size divided by L rises above a certain threshold . For systems of inﬁnite size the tran - sition is instantaneous and hence the choice of threshold makes no diﬀerence to p c , except that p c can never take a 10 −6 10 −5 10 −4 10 −3 10 −2 10 −1 10 0 shortcut density φ 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 p e r c o l a ti on t h r e s ho l d p c FIG . 7 . Numerical results for the percolation threshold on L = 10 000 small - world graphs with k = 1 ( circles ) , 2 ( squares ) , and 5 ( triangles ) as a function of the shortcut density φ . The solid lines are the analytic approximation to the same quantity , Eq . ( 31 ) . value lower than the threshold itself , since even in a fully connected graph the average cluster size per vertex can be no greater than the fraction p c of occupied vertices . Thus it makes sense to choose the threshold as low as possible . In real calculations , however , we cannot use an inﬁnitesimal threshold because of ﬁnite size eﬀects . For the systems studied here we have found that a threshold of 0 . 2 works well . Fig . 7 shows the critical probability p c for systems of size L = 10 000 for a range of values of φ for k = 1 , 2 and 5 . The points are the numerical results and the solid lines are Eq . ( 31 ) . As the ﬁgure shows the agreement between simulation and theory is good although there are some diﬀerences . As φ approaches one and the value of p c drops , the two fail to agree because , as mentioned above , p c cannot take a value lower than the threshold used in its calculation , which was 0 . 2 in this case . The results also fail to agree for very low values of φ where p c becomes large . This is because Eq . ( 29 ) is not a correct expression for the number of clusters on the underlying lattice when n < 1 . This is clear since when there are no breaks in the sequence of connected vertices around the ring it is not also true that there are no connected clusters . In fact there is still one cluster ; the equality between number of breaks and number of clusters breaks down at n = 1 . The value of p at which this happens is given by putting n = 1 in Eq . ( 28 ) . Since p is close to one at this point its value is well approximated by p ≃ 1 − L − 1 / k , ( 32 ) and this is the value at which the curves in Fig . 7 should roll oﬀ at low φ . For k = 5 for example , for which the 9 roll - oﬀ is most pronounced , this expression gives a value of p ≃ 0 . 8 , which agrees reasonably well with what we see in the ﬁgure . There is also an overall tendency in Fig . 7 for our an - alytic expression to overestimate the value of p c slightly . This we put down to the approximation we made in the derivation of Eq . ( 31 ) that all clusters of vertices on the underlying lattice can be assumed to have the size of the average cluster . In actual fact , some clusters will be smaller than the average and some larger . Since the shortcuts will connect to clusters with probability pro - portional to the cluster size , we can expect percolation to set in within the subset of larger - than - average clusters before it would set in if all clusters had the average size . This makes the true value of p c slightly lower than that given by Eq . ( 31 ) . In general however , the equation gives a good guide to the behavior of the system . We have also examined numerically the behavior of the mean cluster radius ρ for percolation on small - world graphs . The radius of a cluster is deﬁned as the aver - age distance between vertices within the cluster , along the edges of the graph within the cluster . This quantity is small for small values of the percolation probability p and increases with p as the clusters grow larger . When we reach percolation and a giant component forms it reaches a maximum value and then drops as p increases further . The drop happens because the percolating cluster is most ﬁlamentary when percolation has only just set in and so paths between vertices are at their longest . With further increases in p the cluster becomes more highly connected and the average shortest path between two vertices de - creases . By analogy with percolation on regular lattices we might expect the average cluster radius for a given value of φ to satisfy the scaling form [ 31 ] ρ = ℓ γ / ν e ρ (cid:0) ( p − p c ) ℓ 1 / ν (cid:1) , ( 33 ) where e ρ ( x ) is a universal scaling function , ℓ is the radius of the entire system and γ and ν are critical exponents . In fact this scaling form is not precisely obeyed by the current system because the exponents ν and γ depend in general on the dimension of the lattice . As we showed in Section V , the dimension D of a small - world graph de - pends on the length - scale on which you look at it . Thus the value of D “felt” by a cluster of radius ρ will vary with ρ , implying that ν and γ will vary both with the percola - tion probability and with the system size . If we restrict ourselves to a region suﬃciently close to the percolation threshold , and to a suﬃciently small range of values of ℓ , then Eq . ( 33 ) should be approximately correct . In Fig . 8 we show numerical data for ρ for small - world graphs with k = 1 , φ = 0 . 1 and L equal to a power of two from 512 up to 16 384 . As we can see , the data show the expected peaked form , with the peak in the region of p = 0 . 8 , close to the expected position of the percola - tion transition . In order to perform a scaling collapse of these data we need ﬁrst to extract a suitable value of p c . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 percolation probability p 0 20 40 60 80 a v e r a g e c l u s t e r r a d i u s ρ −20 0 20 40 60 y 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 04 ρ / l γ / ν FIG . 8 . Average cluster radius ρ as a function of the perco - lation probability p for site percolation on small - world graphs with k = 1 , φ = 0 . 1 and L equal to a power from 512 up to 16 384 ( circles , squares , diamonds , upward - pointing trian - gles , left - pointing triangles and downward - pointing triangles respectively ) . Each set of points is averaged over 100 real - izations of the corresponding graph . Inset : the same data collapsed according to Eq . ( 33 ) with ν = 0 . 59 , γ = 1 . 3 and p c = 0 . 74 . We can do this by performing a ﬁt to the positions of the peaks in ρ [ 36 ] . Since the scaling function e ρ ( x ) is ( approx - imately ) universal , the positions of these peaks all occur at the same value of the scaling variable y = ( p − p c ) ℓ 1 / ν . Calling this value y 0 and the corresponding percolation probability p 0 , we can rearrange for p 0 as a function of ℓ to get p 0 = p c + y 0 ℓ − 1 / ν . ( 34 ) Thus if we plot the measured positions p 0 as a function of ℓ − 1 / ν , the vertical - axis intercept should give us the corresponding value of p c . We have done this for a single value of ν in the inset to Fig . 9 , and in the main ﬁgure we show the resulting values of p c as a function of 1 / ν . If we now perform our scaling collapse , with the restriction that the values of ν and p c fall on this line , then the best coincidence of the curves for ρ is obtained when p c = 0 . 74 and ν = 0 . 59 ± 0 . 05—see the inset to Fig . 8 . The value of γ can be found separately by requiring the heights of the peaks to match up , which gives γ = 1 . 3 ± 0 . 1 . The collapse is noticeably poorer when we include systems of size smaller than L = 512 , and we attribute this not merely to ﬁnite size corrections to the scaling form , but also to variation in the values of the exponents γ and ν with the eﬀective dimension of the percolating cluster . The value p c = 0 . 74 is in respectable agreement with the value of 0 . 82 from our direct numerical measure - ments . We note that ν is expected to tend to 12 in 10 0 1 2 1 / ν 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 p c 0 . 002 0 . 003 0 . 004 l −1 / ν 0 . 80 0 . 82 0 . 84 0 . 86 0 . 88 0 . 90 p 0 FIG . 9 . Best ﬁt values of p c as a function of 1 / ν . Inset : the values are calculated from the vertical - axis intercept of a plot of the position p 0 of the peak of ρ against ℓ − 1 / ν ( see Eq . ( 34 ) ) . the limit of an inﬁnite - dimensional system . The value ν = 0 . 59 found here therefore conﬁrms our contention that small - world graphs have a high eﬀective dimension even for quite moderate values of φ , and thus are in some sense close to being random graphs . ( On a two - dimensional lattice by contrast ν = 43 . ) VII . CONCLUSIONS In this paper we have studied the small - world network model of Watts and Strogatz , which mimics the behav - ior of networks of social interactions . Small - world graphs consist of a set of vertices joined together in a regular lat - tice , plus a low density of “shortcuts” which link together pairs of vertices chosen at random . We have looked at the scaling properties of small - world graphs and argued that there is only one typical length - scale present other than the fundamental lattice constant , which we denote ξ and which is roughly the typical distance between the ends of shortcuts . We have shown that this length - scale governs the transition of the average vertex – vertex dis - tance on a graph from linear to logarithmic scaling with increasing system size , as well as the rate of growth of the number of vertices in a neighborhood of ﬁxed radius about a given point . We have also shown that the value of ξ diverges on an inﬁnite lattice as the density of short - cuts tends to zero , and therefore that the system pos - sesses a continuous phase transition in this limit . Close to the phase transition , where ξ is large , we have shown that the average vertex – vertex distance on a ﬁnite graph obeys a simple scaling form and in any given dimension is a universal function of a single scaling variable which depends on the density of shortcuts , the system size and the average coordination number of the graph . We have calculated the form of the scaling function to ﬁfth order in the shortcut density using a series expansion and to third order using a Pad´e approximant . We have deﬁned two measures of the eﬀective dimension D of small - world graphs and ﬁnd that the value of D depends on the scale on which you look at the graph in a manner reminiscent of the behavior of multifractals . Speciﬁcally , at length - scales shorter than ξ the dimension of the graph is simply that of the underlying lattice on which it is built , and for length - scales larger than ξ it increases linearly , with a characteristic constant proportional to ξ . The value of D increases logarithmically with the number of vertices in the graph . We have checked all of these results by exten - sive numerical simulation of the model and in all cases we ﬁnd good agreement between the analytic predictions and the simulation results . In the last part of the paper we have looked at site per - colation on small - world graphs as a model of the spread of information or disease in social networks . We have derived an approximate analytic expression for the per - colation probability p c at which a “giant component” of connected vertices forms on the graph and shown that this agrees well with numerical simulations . We have also performed extensive numerical measurements of the typi - cal radius of connected clusters on the graph as a function of the percolation probability and shown by performing a scaling collapse that these obey , to a reasonable ap - proximation , the expected scaling form in the vicinity of the percolation transition . The characteristic exponent ν takes a value close to 12 , indicating that , as far as per - colation is concerned , the graph’s properties are close to those of a random graph . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Luis Amaral , Alain Barrat , Marc Barth´el´emy , Roman Koteck´y , Marcio de Menezes , Cris Moore , Cristian Moukarzel , Thadeu Penna , and Steve Strogatz for helpful comments and conversations , and Gilbert Strang and Henrik Eriksson for communicating to us some results from their forthcoming paper . This work was supported in part by the Santa Fe Institute and by funding from the NSF ( grant number PHY – 9600400 ) , the DOE ( grant number DE – FG03 – 94ER61951 ) , and DARPA ( grant number ONR N00014 – 95 – 1 – 0975 ) . [ 1 ] S . Milgram , “The small world problem , ” Psychol . Today 2 , 60 – 67 ( 1967 ) . [ 2 ] B . Bollob´as , Random Graphs , Academic Press , New York ( 1985 ) . 11 [ 3 ] D . J . Watts and S . H . Strogatz , “Collective dynamics of ‘small - world’ networks , ” Nature 393 , 440 – 442 ( 1998 ) . [ 4 ] In previous work the letter p has been used to denote the density of random connections , rather than φ . We use φ here however , to avoid confusion with the percola - tion probability introduced in Section VI , which is also conventionally denoted p . [ 5 ] Watts and Strogatz used the letter k to refer to the aver - age coordination number , but we will ﬁnd it convenient to distinguish between the coordination number , which we call z , and the range of the bonds . In one dimension z = 2 k and in general z = 2 dk for networks based on d - dimensional lattices . [ 6 ] D . J . Watts , The Structure and Dynamics of Small - World Systems , Ph . D . thesis , Cornell University ( 1997 ) . [ 7 ] D . J . Watts , Small Worlds : The Dynamics of Networks Between Order and Randomness , Princeton University Press , Princeton ( 1999 ) . [ 8 ] The exact deﬁnition of ξ depends on how you measure lengths in the model . The deﬁnition given here is appro - priate if ξ is measured in terms of the lattice constant of the underlying lattice . It would however be reasonable to measure it in terms of the number of bonds traversed be - tween the ends of two shortcuts . Since we are measuring lattice size L in terms of the underlying lattice constant rather than number of bonds , the present deﬁnition is the more appropriate one in our case , but it would be perfectly consistent to deﬁne both ξ and L to be a factor of k smaller ; all the physical results would work out the same . [ 9 ] In a system of ﬁnite size the average distance between the ends of two shortcuts cannot be larger than 12 L , so we cannot observe this divergence once ξ is larger than this . [ 10 ] M . Barth´el´emy and L . A . N . Amaral , “Small - world net - works : Evidence for a crossover picture , ” Phys . Rev . Lett . 82 , 3180 – 3183 ( 1999 ) . [ 11 ] A . Barrat , “Comment on ‘Small - world networks : Evi - dence for a crossover picture’ , ” submitted to Phys . Rev . Lett . Also cond - mat / 9903323 . [ 12 ] M . E . J . Newman and D . J . Watts , “Renormalization group analysis of the small - world network model , ” sub - mitted to Phys . Rev . Lett . Also cond - mat / 9903357 . [ 13 ] M . Argollo de Menezes , C . F . Moukarzel and T . J . P . Penna , “First - order transition in small - world networks , ” submitted to Phys . Rev . Lett . Also cond - mat / 9903426 . [ 14 ] G . Strang and H . Eriksson , in preparation . [ 15 ] D . S . Gaunt and A . J . Guttmann , “Asymptotic Anal - ysis of Coeﬃcients , ” in Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena , Vol . 3 , C . Domb and M . S . Green ( eds . ) , Academic Press , London ( 1974 ) . [ 16 ] We are indebted to Prof . S . H . Strogatz for suggesting the use of a Pad´e approximant in this context . [ 17 ] We use the capital letter D to denote the dimension here , to distinguish it from the dimension d of the underlying lattice deﬁned in Section II . [ 18 ] B . B . Mandelbrot , “Intermittent turbulence in self - similar cascades : Divergence of high moments and di - mension of the carrier , ” J . Fluid Mech . 62 , 331 – 358 ( 1974 ) . [ 19 ] T . C . Halsey , M . H . Jensen , L . P . Kadanoﬀ , I . Procaccia , and B . I . Shraiman , “Fractal measures and their singu - larities : The characterization of strange sets , ” Phys . Rev . A 33 , 1141 – 1151 ( 1986 ) . [ 20 ] A . Barrat and M . Weigt , “On the properties of small - world network models , ” submitted to Eur . Phys . J . B . Also cond - mat / 9903411 . [ 21 ] R . Monasson , “Diﬀusion , localization and dispersion re - lations on small - world lattices , ” submitted to Eur . Phys . J . B . Also cond - mat / 9903347 . [ 22 ] E . M . Rogers , Diﬀusion of Innovations , Free Press , New York ( 1962 ) . [ 23 ] J . S . Coleman , E . Katz and H . Menzel , Medical Inno - vation : A Diﬀusion Study , Bobbs – Merrill , Indianapolis ( 1966 ) . [ 24 ] D . Strang , “Adding social structure to diﬀusion models , ” Sociological Methods and Research 19 , 324 – 353 ( 1991 ) . [ 25 ] T . W . Valente , “Social network thresholds in the diﬀusion of innovations , ” Social Networks 18 , 69 – 89 ( 1996 ) . [ 26 ] L . Sattenspiel and C . P . Simon , “The spread and per - sistence of infectious diseases in structured populations , ” Math . Biosciences 90 , 367 – 383 ( 1988 ) . [ 27 ] M . Kretschmar and M . Morris , “Measures of concurrency in networks and the spread of infectious disease , ” Math . Biosci . 133 , 165 – 195 ( 1996 ) . [ 28 ] I . M . Logini , Jr . , “A mathematical model for predicting the geographic spread of new infectious agents , ” Math . Biosci . 90 , 341 – 366 ( 1988 ) . [ 29 ] J . O . Kephart and S . R . White , “Directed - graph epi - demiological models of computer viruses , ” in Proceedings of the 1991 IEEE Computer Science Symposium on Re - search in Security and Privacy , IEEE Computer Society Press , Los Alamitos ( 1991 ) . [ 30 ] J . E . Hanson and J . O . Kephart , “Combatting mael - stroms in networks of communicating agents , ” to appear in Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , American Association for Artiﬁ - cial Intelligence , Menlo Park ( 1999 ) . [ 31 ] D . Stauﬀer and A . Aharony , Introduction to Percolation Theory , 2nd edition . Taylor and Francis , London ( 1992 ) . [ 32 ] N . Alon and J . H . Spencer , The Probabilistic Method , Wiley , New York ( 1992 ) . [ 33 ] J . Machta , Y . S . Choi , A . Lucke , T . Schweizer , and L . V . Chayes , “Invaded cluster algorithm for equilibrium critical points , ” Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 2792 – 2795 ( 1995 ) . [ 34 ] G . T . Barkema and M . E . J . Newman , “New Monte Carlo algorithms for classical spin systems , ” in Monte Carlo Methods in Chemical Physics , D . Ferguson , J . I . Siep - mann , and D . G . Truhlar ( eds . ) , Wiley , New York ( 1999 ) . [ 35 ] A naive recursive cluster - ﬁnding algorithm by contrast takes time proportional to L 2 . [ 36 ] M . E . J . Newman and G . T . Barkema , Monte Carlo Methods in Statistical Physics , Oxford University Press , Oxford ( 1999 ) . 12