Review Understanding patch foraging strategies across development Alex Lloyd , 1 , * , @ Essi Viding , 1 Ryan McKay , 2 and Nicholas Furl 2 Patch foraging is a near - ubiquitous behaviour across the animal kingdom and characterises many decision - making domains encountered by humans . We re - view how a disposition to explore in adolescence may re ﬂ ect the evolutionary conditions under which hunter - gatherers foraged for resources . We propose that neurocomputational mechanisms responsible for reward processing , learn - ing , and cognitive control facilitate the transition from exploratory strategies in adolescence to exploitative strategies in adulthood – where individuals capitalise on known resources . This developmental transition may be disrupted by psycho - pathology , as there is emerging evidence of biases in explore / exploit choices in mental health problems . Explore / exploit choices may be an informative marker for mental health across development and future research should consider this feature of decision - making as a target for clinical intervention . Should youth explore ? Across the lifespan , individuals often face choices to either stay with familiar options or ex - plore new alternatives . Does a teenager stay at home during the holidays or attend a sum - mer camp where they may only know a few people ? Looking further back in evolutionary history , should a hunter - gatherer searching for fruits look in an area where they have previ - ously encountered these resources , or search a new clearing further away ? Such decisions can be understood in the context of patch foraging , a near - ubiquitous behaviour across the animal kingdom [ 1 ] . Although recent work has examined how foraging strategies change across development [ 1 – 6 ] and , separately , the neural correlates of foraging in adults [ 7 – 9 ] , these lines of research have not yet been integrated to consider how neural develop - ments might in ﬂ uence foraging strategies from childhood to adulthood . This is surprising , given that evolutionary pressures have likely shaped neurocognitive development to pre - pare the organism for developmentally relevant experiences , optimising their functioning across the lifespan [ 10 ] . Identifying the neurocognitive developments that give rise to age - related changes in foraging strategies can inform our understanding of how exploration and exploitation behaviours sup - port the individual to achieve important developmental goals , such as independence from caregivers [ 10 ] . This topic also has the potential to advance our understanding of behav - ioural phenomena associated with adolescence , such as heightened novelty - seeking and reduced uncertainty aversion [ 11 , 12 ] , which are both implicated in explore / exploit choices [ 13 ] . We propose that neurocognitive changes between childhood and adulthood shape explore / exploit strategies , leading to a reduction in exploration across development . Given our focus on how typical trajectories of explore / exploit choices have emerged to support de - velopmentally relevant goals , we pay particular attention to patch foraging paradigms , as these tasks resemble conditions under which cognitive abilities that support explore / exploit choices evolved [ 14 ] . Highlights Fromadolescencetoadulthood , thereis a decrease in exploration choices in for - aging decision - making problems . In youth , a disposition to explore when faced with explore / exploit choices can support the individual to learn the struc - ture of their environment , enabling them to effectively exploit rewards in maturity . Such age - related differences are likely driven by neurocognitive changes to re - ward processing , learning , and cognitive control across development . Individual differences in foraging strate - gies can be indicative of cognitive biases implicated in mental health outcomes . 1 Clinical , Educational , and Health Psychology , Psychology and Language Sciences , University College London , 26 Bedford Way , London , WC1H 0AP , UK 2 Department of Psychology , Royal Holloway , University of London , Egham Hill , Egham , TW20 0EX , UK * Correspondence : alexander . lloyd @ ucl . ac . uk ( A . Lloyd ) . @ Twitter : @ DrAlexLloyd Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2023 . 07 . 004 1085 © 2023The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Ltd . This is an openaccess article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS Understanding how exploration changes from childhood to adulthood can help us identify when indi - viduals deviate from developmentally appropriate explore / exploit strategies . Biases in foraging strat - egies are associated with mental health problems [ 15 ] , which may be particularly impactful for adolescents , who have a heightened risk of developing psychopathology relative to other age groups [ 16 ] . As such , we highlight directions for future research to examine how biases in explore / exploit choices may be informative in studying the development of mental health problems . De ﬁ ning patch foraging problems and their solutions Patch foraging is a sequential decision - making problem that requires the organism to optimise an explore / exploit trade - off [ 2 ] ( see Glossary ) . For example , animals foraging for food can allocate their ﬁ nite energetic resources to collecting items from the patch they are located at ( e . g . , a bush containing berries ) . Alternatively , animals can expend energy exploring to ﬁ nd a new patch , during which time no new food can be collected ( Figure 1 ) [ 17 ] . The amount of food available depletes the longer the organism remains at the patch , meaning that as the forager ’ s time within a patch increases , they accrue progressively fewer rewards per exploit decision [ 18 ] . There is a point at which the overall reward intake from exploring to ﬁ nd a new patch with a fresh distribution of re - sources surpasses the potential rewards acquired from further depleting the current patch and , therefore , exploration becomes the rational choice [ 2 ] . A prominent theory of optimal foraging is the marginal value theorem ( MVT ) [ 19 ] . MVT states that the forager should explore when the rewards expected from exploiting the current patch fall TrendsTrends inin CognitiveCognitive SciencesSciences Figure 1 . Patch foraging task . The individual at a patch ( in this example , a tree ) can choose between exploiting the patch they are currently at ( top panels ) and collecting rewards ( in this example , apples ) . The longer the forager remains within the patch , the fewer rewards are available to collect . The rate at which rewards deplete within patches is known as the depletion rate . Alternatively , the forager can choose to leave their current patch and explore to ﬁ nd a new patch ( bottom panels ) . The travel time between patches is a period during which no rewards can be collected . The number of rewards on the ﬁ rst harvest of a new patch is the initial richness of the patch . Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS 1086 Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 Glossary Background reward rate : average reward rate available in the foraging environment . The individual must estimate this quantity from previous encounters with patches in that environment . Cooling off : a theory of development that proposes exploration becomes less stochastic from childhood to adulthood , suchthat inmaturity , adultsexploit high - reward options . Depletion rate : the rate at which rewards deplete within a single patch , which can be steep ( i . e . , quickly depleting ) or shallow ( i . e . , slowly depleting ; see Figure 2 in the main text ) . Expected value : the reward value expected from selecting a particular option available to the decision - maker . Reinforcement learning models provide an explanation of how the decision - maker estimates the expected value of options available to select . Explore / exploit trade - off : a decision - making problem in which the individual must choose between exploiting an option with a known history of rewards and exploring a novel option with an unknown reward value . Marginal value theorem ( MVT ) : a formal model of optimal patch foraging . The model prescribes that the forager should leave their current patch when the rewards expected from the next exploit decision fall below the background reward rate for the environment . n - Armed bandit : explore / exploit decision - making tasks where the participant decides between n ( usually two or more ) bandits or slot machines that probabilistically yield a reward . The participant must learn which of the bandits has the highest likelihood of yielding a reward by sampling the options available to them . Prediction error : discrepancy between the reward predicted from sampling an action or stimulus , and the reward received . Reinforcement learning ( RL ) : a formal computational model of how humans and non - human animals learn from reward and punishment . RL models quantify how the individual integratesfeedbackfromtheir actions to estimate the outcomes associated with available stimuli . Reproductive fitness : describes the organism ’ s ability to pass their genetic material to their offspring . below the background reward rate of the environment [ 7 ] . The forager estimates this quantity from the average rewards encountered on patches in that environment , which inform whether the environment is richer or poorer in quality ( Figure 2 ) . In richer environments where the background reward rate is higher , organisms should exploit individual patches less extensively , whereas in poorer environments where the background reward rate is lower , organisms should exploit patches until fewer rewards remain [ 20 ] . Adjusting explore / exploit choices to changes in the background reward rate is an important skill for foragers to maximise reward intake [ 21 ] . MVT has provided a powerful explanation of patch foraging behaviour . Humans and non - human animals exhibit behaviour that approximates the predictions made by MVT [ 2 , 3 , 7 , 20 , 22 , 23 ] , in - cluding when making decisions about romantic partnerships [ 24 ] , online information seeking [ 25 ] , and retail purchasing [ 26 ] . These ﬁ ndings suggest patch foraging problems and their under - lying computations are prevalent across human decision - making . Building on MVT , recent work has utilised reinforcement learning ( RL ) models to explain how organisms learn the back - ground reward rate [ 27 , 28 ] . Drift diffusion models have been used to explain how evidence about the reward availability within patches is accumulated [ 18 , 29 ] ( Box 1 ) . TrendsTrends inin CognitiveCognitive SciencesSciences Figure 2 . Marginal value theorem in different quality environments . Simulated data demonstrating how manipulating the initial richness and depletion rate change thequalityoftheenvironment . Theblueverticallineshighlightthetime , denotedonthexaxis , thattheforagershouldstaywithinpatchesineachenvironmenttype . PanelA denotesa singlepatchin arichenvironment , withahigh initialrichness , anda shallowdepletionrate . Insuchan environment , theforagershouldleavewhenthe numberof rewardsexpectedfrom staying withinthe patchisstillhigh , as thetruebackgroundrewardrate ( denotedbythehorizontal greenline ) isalso high . Panel B denotes a patch inamediumqualityenvironment , wheretheinitialrichnessofpatchesishigh , butthedepletionrateissteep . Insuchanenvironment , theforagershouldexploitpatchesuntil fewer rewards remain on the patch , as the true background reward rate of the environment ( denoted by the horizontal teal line ) is lower in such an environment . Panel C indicatesanother medium quality patch where the initial richness is low , but the depletionrate is shallow . The true background reward rate for this environment is denoted by the horizontal orange line . Panel D denotes a patch in a poor environment , where the initial richness is low , and the depletion rate is steep . In a poor environment , the forager should exploit patches until there are fewer rewards remaining on the patch , as the background reward rate ( denoted by the horizontal red line ) is low . Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 1087 Stochasticity : the degree to which an individual deviates from selecting the option that , to their knowledge , has the highest expected value . An individual who is highly stochastic will more often divert from the option they expect to yield the highest reward , whereas individuals that are not stochastic will more reliably select the option expected to yield the highest reward . Temperature : the reference to temperature in cooling off accounts is based on annealing in metallurgy . At high temperatures , large adjustments can be made to the parameters . As the material cools off , the range of possible adjustments becomes smaller , as some parameters have already been set at a higher temperature . Human and non - human animals also estimate the background reward rate in other explore / exploit tasks , such as the n - armed bandit task [ 6 , 30 ] . In n - armed bandit tasks , options are presented simultaneously , and the reward value is estimated from sampling available options [ 31 ] . The com - putational solution to such tasks relies on estimating the maximal expected value for individual bandits , though the likelihood of selecting the bandit with the highest expected value can be in ﬂ u - enced by the background reward rate , estimated from the average rewards acquired from bandits . Speci ﬁ cally , organisms are more likely to persist with higher value bandits in environments with a higher background reward rate . This observation is consistent with MVT , as it suggests organisms have a higher threshold for exploring novel bandits in richer environments ( Figure 2 ) [ 6 , 30 ] . Estimat - ing the background reward rate is an important cognitive skill present across real - world decision - making . For example , the decision to accept a job offer relies on the individual ’ s estimate of the Box 1 . Formal models of patch foraging decisions MVT MVT prescribes thatthe foragershouldexplorewhen the rewards expected from the nextexploitdecision on theircurrent patch fall below the background reward rate of the environment . Formally , this can be expressed as [ 2 , 28 ] : ks i < ph ½ I (cid:2) ks i referstorewards ( s ) ontrial ( i ) multipliedbythe depletionrate ( k ) toestimatetherewardsexpectedfromthenextexploit decision . p refers to the background reward rate multiplied by the time taken to harvest rewards from the patch ( h ) . RL models of patch foraging RL models explain how individuals learn reward contingencies by sampling available options and updating expectations associated with those options based on reward feedback . Unlike Equation I , RL - informed models specify how individuals estimatekeyquantities involvedin MVT , including thebackgroundreward rate ( ph inEquationI ) . Here , we summarise one example of how RL models can be applied to foraging tasks [ 28 ] ( however , see [ 13 , 20 , 27 , 119 ] ) . RL models propose that foragers learn the background reward rate by integrating reward feedback from explore / exploit decisions [ 28 ] : p i ¼ 1 − α ð Þ T i s i T i þ 1 − 1 − α ð Þ T i (cid:1) (cid:3) p i − 1 ½ II (cid:2) p denotes the background reward rate and α refers to the learning rate , which is the degree to which foragers use recent versushistoricfeedbacktoupdatethebackgroundrewardrateestimate . s referstotherewardsreceivedonatrial ( i ) , subject to the time associated with explore / exploit decisions ( T ) . The background reward rate is then entered into Equation III : P a i ¼ stay ð Þ ¼ 1 = 1 þ exp − ð c þ β k i − 1 s i − 1 − p i − 1 h ½ (cid:2) ð Þ ð ÞÞ ½ III (cid:2) Equation III gives the probability that foragers will exploit on trial ( i ) . This decision relies on comparing the value expected from the next exploit decision ( ks i ) with the forager ’ s estimate of the background reward rate of the environment ( p i h ) . β measures stochasticity . Evidence accumulation models Evidence accumulation models suggest that foragers determine whether to stay with their current patch using a decision threshold rule [ 18 , 29 ] . The rate at which foragers reach this threshold is subject to the availability of rewards on patches , the estimate of the reward distribution on patches , and decision stochasticity [ 120 ] : dx ¼ pe − t τ − α (cid:1) (cid:3) dt þ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 B p dW t ð Þ ½ IV (cid:2) d referstoadecisionthresholdthat , oncereached , meanstheforagerwillleavetheircurrentpatch . x referstotheforager ’ s motivationtostaywithinapatch . pe (cid:3) t τ referstotheforager ’ sintakeoffoodand α referstotheenergylossassociatedwith foraging [ 120 ] . B represents the stochasticity in how the foragerencounters food on the patch and t refers to the lengthof timetheforagerremainswiththepatch . Evidenceaccumulationmodelshavenotyetbeenappliedtostudydevelopmental differences in patch foraging but could provide insight into the threshold adolescents require before exploring . Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS 1088 Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 average quality of other positions available on the market [ 28 ] . However , unlike n - armed bandits , the rewards collected while foraging typically deplete the longer the organism remains with a patch and therefore the forager must also estimate the rewards expected from continuing to exploit the current patch [ 28 ] . Further , there is a time cost to exploration in foraging tasks , whereas bandit tasks do not incur such costs [ 7 ] . The additional features of patch foraging tasks , such as their de - pleting rewards and cost for exploring , make these tasks more reminiscent of the conditions under which explore / exploit strategies evolved to maximise reproductive fitness [ 22 ] . Cognitive development supports optimal exploration strategies across the lifespan Optimising explore / exploit choices requires the integration of multiple sources of information , in - cluding rewards expected from continuing to exploit the current option and the background re - ward rate [ 7 ] . Due to their complexity , explore / exploit problems rely on a combination of cognitive processes , including reward - based decision - making and cognitive control [ 6 , 8 , 32 ] . No - tably , these processes undergo signi ﬁ cant development during adolescence ( i . e . , ages 10 – 24 ) [ 33 ] , a period of profound neurocognitive change [ 12 , 34 , 35 ] . Here , we review how explore / exploit strategies vary between childhood and adulthood , and how age - related differences in explore / exploit strategies may be driven by neurocognitive development . Exploration ‘ cools - off ’ across development Exploration declines from childhood to adulthood in foraging [ 2 , 5 , 23 , 36 – 40 ] ( however , see [ 1 , 41 ] ) and other explore / exploit paradigms [ 31 , 42 , 43 ] . This trajectory is also seen in non - human ani - mals , as adolescent primates explore their surroundings more than adults , who exploit known foraging options [ 4 ] . Humans are adept at adjusting their foraging behaviour to the richness of the environment . Consistent with MVT , adolescents and adults explore more in richer foraging environments but exploit patches more extensively in poorer foraging environments [ 2 , 3 , 7 , 20 , 28 , 44 ] . Notably , the heightened exploration exhibited by adolescents produces more optimal patch foraging behaviour according to MVT [ 2 , 5 ] , whereas adults overexploit patches [ 3 , 7 , 20 , 28 ] . Compared with adults , adolescents also exhibit improved decision - making in n - armed bandit tasks , which is driven by adolescents ’ exploratory tendencies [ 43 , 45 ] . Cross - species evidence from humans and other primates indicates that exploration declines from child - hood to adulthood [ 2 , 4 , 23 ] . Age - related changes in explore / exploit strategies can be illuminated by theories that propose a shift from highly exploratory strategies in youth to more exploitative strategies in maturity – referred to as a cooling off process [ 46 ] . Derived from formal models of simulated annealing [ 47 ] , cooling off ac - counts propose that a naive learner placed in a new environment should initially explore the avail - able options in a stochastic manner , randomly sampling stimuli without expecting to maximise reward intake ( Figure 3 , Key ﬁ gure ) . Through this process , the learner develops knowledge of op - tions expected to yield greater or fewer rewards [ 48 ] . Over time , the learner explores less , instead utilising the knowledge they have gained about the environment to exploit options expected to yield more rewards [ 46 ] . While this account places emphasis on the single parameter responsible for choice stochasticity , an alternative account has suggested that cooling off refers to an optimisation process whereby multiple parameters responsible for learning are adjusted across development , with the temperature of the optimisation algorithm cooling off into maturity [ 38 ] . On this account , children and adolescents make greater adjustments to the parameters , trialling a wider range of con ﬁ gurations , whereas adults make smaller , more precise adjustments , having converged on more optimal con ﬁ gurations over the course of their development [ 38 ] . Applied to human development , it has been suggested that children and adolescents engage in more exploration either due to the single parameter responsible for stochastic exploration [ 49 ] or Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 1089 through making large adjustments to several parameters responsible for learning [ 38 ] , with both accounts suggesting this produces noisier goal - directed behaviour . As the individual matures into adulthood , they accumulate experience - based knowledge , allowing them to identify actions that lead to more rewarding outcomes [ 50 ] . However , studies have found that adolescents collect more rewards than adults on foraging and n - armed bandit tasks [ 2 , 43 , 45 ] , which may appear in - consistent with cooling off accounts that propose adults should be more effective at acquiring re - wards than adolescents [ 46 ] . Adults ’ suboptimal performance on explore / exploit tasks is due to their overexploitation bias [ 2 , 31 ] , indicating exploitation strategies can be disadvantageous in ar - ti ﬁ cial , experimental environments . Indeed , adolescents adapt faster than adults when faced with new environments , supported by exploratory strategies [ 43 , 51 ] . The developmental transition from exploratory to exploitative strategies is thought to provide the organism with the opportunity to learn about their real - world environment so that in maturity , they can effectively exploit their en - vironment to maximise reward acquisition [ 38 ] . Cooling off accounts are supported by evidence that children and adolescents are more explor - atory than adults across other cognitive domains . Compared with adults , children and adoles - cents sample unknown stimuli more noisily to learn whether they produce rewarding or aversive outcomes [ 48 , 52 ] and explore more diverse hypotheses about the causal relationships between cues and outcomes [ 36 ] . Behavioural changes from adolescence to adulthood , such as the reduction of novelty - seeking [ 53 ] , are consistent with a shift from exploratory to exploitative strategies described by cooling off theories . Key figure Cooling off across development TrendsTrends inin CognitiveCognitive SciencesSciences Figure 3 . Imagedepictingthecoolingoffaccountofrewardlearningacrossdevelopmentthatattributesreducedexploration to the single parameter measuring stochasticity . In childhood ( leftmost panel ) , the individual is naive about the reward structure of their environment and explores options , or patches , with a higher degree of randomness ( orange arrows ) . This process provides information about options that yield greater or fewer rewards ( green circles ) . As the individual matures into adolescence ( middle panel ) , they have developed some experiential knowledge of their surroundings , allowing them to sometimes exploit high value patches ( blue lines ) , though they still exhibit some randomness , or stochasticity , in their choices . In adulthood ( rightmost panel ) , the organism has acquired the experiential knowledge to exploit only high reward options , or patches , avoiding those with fewer rewards . In this example , we assume that the individual can choose between patches to move between ( as in some paradigms [ 119 ] and real - world patch foraging contexts [ 22 ] ) , whereas in other tasks the individual can only choose when to explore to ﬁ nd a new patch ( e . g . [ 2 ] ) . Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS 1090 Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 Formal models , such as RL models [ 27 , 54 ] , can be used to test different conceptualisations of cooling off theories . These models have provided evidence that age - related changes in explora - tion are associated with a decline in stochasticity from childhood to adulthood . In RL models , de - terministic decision - makers always select the option that , to their current knowledge , will yield the highest reward [ 43 ] . Yet , occasionally diverting from the option expected to yield the highest reward ( i . e . , exhibiting more stochasticity ) can be an effective strategy to learn the structure of en - vironments [ 5 , 55 ] . Indeed , some versions of cooling off accounts propose that stochastic responding is a crucial mechanism whereby the individual learns the reward structure of their en - vironment . Stochastic responding can be advantageous , as in environments where the associa - tions between stimuli and rewards are changeable , exploring options with a lower expected value can uncover changes to the reward structure faster than exploiting options expected to yield the highest return [ 42 , 43 , 55 ] . The association between stochasticity and exploration has been con - ﬁ rmed in a free - moving patch foraging task , where rodents ’ increased exploration was attributed to the model parameter measuring stochasticity [ 56 ] . Developmentally , stochastic exploration declines from childhood to adulthood in foraging [ 38 ] , n - armed bandit [ 49 , 57 , 58 ] , and other explore / exploit tasks [ 42 ] . Stochastic decision - making can lead younger participants to forfeit rewards , as they do not always select the option ex - pected to yield the highest reward [ 42 ] . This ﬁ nding is consistent with evidence that adoles - cents evaluate risk similarly to adults [ 59 ] but are still more likely to sample risky options compared with adults [ 60 ] . Adolescents ’ more stochastic choices , relative to adults , can also confer bene ﬁ ts in environments with changeable or volatile reward contingencies [ 43 ] . These ﬁ ndings suggest adults exploit high - reward options , whereas adolescents are more likely to stochastically explore their environment [ 36 ] . However , it will be important to consider how ad - ditional forms of exploration , such as uncertainty - or novelty - directed exploration [ 61 , 62 ] , are used across development to solve explore / exploit foraging problems . For example , adults ’ bias to overexploit can be explained by their representation of the environment structure , and their degree of uncertainty in this representation [ 13 ] . Adolescents ’ reduced uncertainty aversion compared with adults may therefore explain their heightened exploration while forag - ing [ 2 ] . Methodological developments in the design of explore / exploit and foraging paradigms will be necessary to advance our understanding of the processes involved in these behaviours ( e . g . , meta - learning about the environment structure ) and of how the ‘ cooling off ’ account is best conceptualised [ 38 ] . Developmental experiences in ﬂ uence foraging strategies in maturity Heightened exploration in adolescence , relative to adulthood , can support reward maximisation in maturity by providing the organism with information about the background reward rate of their environment . Cooling off accounts propose exploration is used in development to learn the re - ward structure of the environment . However , options considered to be high reward are dictated by the richness of the environment . A bush with ten berries is a highly rewarding patch in a desert , but less valuable in a rainforest , as the latter environment has a higher background reward rate [ 19 ] . Studies have demonstrated that adult organisms use foraging strategies that are well adapted to their rearing environments . Juvenile Caenorhabditis elegans deprived of food exhibit reduced exploration in maturity relative to controls [ 63 ] , an effect also found in Drosophila [ 64 ] . As the absence of food indicates a low background reward rate , this information should direct the forager to exploit patches more extensively , indicating the reduced exploration of starved juvenile organisms is consistent with MVT [ 19 ] . This adaptation persists even when adult C . elegans are placed in a new , plentiful environment , and the juvenile strategy is no longer adaptive [ 63 ] . Similar effects are also present in humans : adults exposed to childhood trauma ( including neglect ) explore less while foraging relative to those without these experiences [ 3 ] . Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 1091 Reduced exploration in humans with experience of childhood trauma [ 3 ] may be informed by ev - idence that has examined how perceived ( in ) stability in the association between cues and out - comes during development can affect outcomes in maturity . Early instability leads to a poorer ability to estimate the temporal association ( i . e . , when to expect an outcome following a stimulus ) between cues and outcomes in maturity . The impoverished ability to estimate the temporal asso - ciation following early instability has been implicated in reduced anticipation of reward following these experiences [ 65 ] , which may extend to the organism ’ s anticipation of rewards in the envi - ronment ( i . e . , the background reward rate ) . Evidence from hunter - gatherer communities has suggested that the ability to effectively forage in maturity is supported by exploration in youth , perhaps indicating that the transition from explora - tion in adolescence to exploitation in adulthood has arisen from evolutionary pressures . A recent analysis of 28 hunter - gatherer societies found that the number of resources individual foragers re - turn increases during development , with foragers reaching adult - like pro ﬁ ciency by age 20 years [ 66 ] . Childhood and adolescence provide juvenile foragers with the opportunity to learn the distri - bution of patches containing foods [ 66 – 69 ] and skills for more complex foraging behaviours ( e . g . , hunting , which , like laboratory - based patch foraging tasks , is also informed by the back - ground reward rate ) [ 70 , 71 ] . The increased exploration observed in adolescence may , therefore , re ﬂ ect a period of skill acquisition whereby organisms learn to exploit their foraging niche [ 66 ] . For example , adolescents from a Tanzanian hunter - gatherer group known as the Hadza roam over a wider geographical distance during foraging excursions compared with pre - adolescent children ( although no data were reported for adults ) [ 72 ] . Similar age - related changes in roaming have been evidenced in humans in industrialised societies , primates , and rodents [ 4 , 73 , 74 ] . These studies indicate that heightened exploration in adolescence is a cross - species and crosscultural phenomenon , allowing juvenile organisms to develop skills required to collect resources in their foraging niche . Neurocognitive development facilitates age - related changes to explore / exploit strategies As resources collected through foraging relate to the organism ’ s likelihood of survival , and therefore their reproductive ﬁ tness , it has been proposed that aspects of human cognition have evolved to solve patch foraging problems [ 75 ] . Speci ﬁ cally , it has been proposed that reward processing and cognitive control have partly evolved to optimise patch foraging decisions [ 14 , 76 ] . Compared with other primates , humans have a protracted period of childhood and adolescence [ 77 ] , which supports the development of complex cognitive abilities that allow humans to exploit their foraging environment [ 66 ] . The developmental reduction in exploration coincides with signi ﬁ cant changes to neural regions implicated in explore / exploit decision - making , which undergo their most rapid de - velopment during adolescence [ 33 ] . Several explanations have been offered for these changes , in - cluding dual systems models [ 12 ] , developmental mismatch [ 78 ] , and circuit - based accounts [ 79 ] . These accounts propose there is heterogeneity in the rate at which different regions of the brain de - velop during adolescence , with several of these regions implicated in explore / exploit choices [ 80 , 81 ] . We suggest that the developmental trajectories of the anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) and ventral striatum facilitate age - related changes to explore / exploit strategies , supporting adoles - cents to learn about their environment through exploration . The transition from exploration in youth to exploitative strategies in maturity may be supported by developments in cognitive control , which includes processes such as goal selection . Cognitive control improves from childhood to adulthood , reaching maturity around age 24 [ 82 ] , and has been associated with protracted synaptic pruning across the prefrontal cortex and ACC [ 83 , 84 ] . Regions involved in cognitive control have been implicated in solving foraging problems . Seminal work in adults has identi ﬁ ed the role of the ACC in estimating the background reward rate Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS 1092 Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 [ 80 ] , ﬁ ndings that have been replicated in subsequent studies [ 8 , 9 , 85 ] . Activity in the ACC posi - tively correlates with estimates of the background reward rate and negatively correlates with the value of the current patch [ 80 ] ( however , see [ 86 ] ) . The ability to estimate the value of unknown options in patch foraging tasks recruits different neural regions to those implicated in exploration in n - armed bandit tasks ( e . g . , the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex [ 87 ] ) . The development of cognitive control abilities from childhood to adulthood may improve pro ﬁ - ciency in explore / exploit tasks , as cognitive control is responsible for utilising reward feedback to inform future decision - making . Children collect fewer rewards than adults on n - armed bandit tasks [ 88 ] due to their inability to generalise previous experience to inform future decisions ( a man - ifestation of cognitive control abilities ) [ 48 ] . In computational models of patch foraging choices ( Box 1 ) , estimating the background reward rate relies on utilising experiences of encountered op - tions ( i . e . , generalising encounters to estimate the quality of other options ) [ 6 , 89 ] . Therefore , the maturation of regions responsible for cognitive control from childhood to adulthood may facilitate improved accuracy when estimating the background reward rate in real - world settings , where information gained during development is used to maximise reward acquisition in maturity . Consistent with dual process models [ 12 ] , the protracted increase in cognitive control abilities during adolescence coincides with rapid developments in the dopaminergic reward system . At the onset of puberty , gonadal hormones are released causing signi ﬁ cant synaptic pruning in neural regions responsible for processing reward , which reach adult - like maturity around age 16 – 17 years [ 90 , 91 ] . Development within the dopaminergic reward system produces higher ac - tivity in the ventral striatum and nucleus accumbens in adolescence relative to adulthood and childhood [ 90 , 92 , 93 ] . Increased striatal activity also supports improved learning in adolescence , relative to childhood [ 81 , 94 , 95 ] , which can aid adolescents to learn the reward structure of their environment [ 43 , 95 , 96 ] ( Box 2 ) . While no work to date has examined the neural correlates of patch foraging choices across de - velopment , the ventral striatum is responsible for estimating the value of explore / exploit choices [ 97 ] . Pharmacological work in adults has further demonstrated that dopamine agonists increase participants ’ estimate of the background reward rate [ 7 ] . According to MVT , a higher perceived Box 2 . Learning and the dopaminergic reward system The dopaminergic system is vital for learning reward contingencies associated with environmental cues . The method by which individuals learn reward contingencies can be explained by theories of RL [ 121 ] . In RL models , the decision - maker learns that a stimuluscan be used to predict reward outcomes . To learn the reward values associated with available stim - uli , thedecision - makercomparestheexperiencedrewardwiththerewardthatwasexpected . Whenanindividual ’ sbehav - iour results in a different reward than expected , the individual should update their estimate of the association between stimulus and reward - outcome associated with that behaviour . The degree to which individuals update their knowledge of the association between behaviours and reward outcomes is controlled by a learning rate , which measures how much emphasis the individual places on recent versus more historic reward feedback [ 57 ] . The discrepancy between expected andactualrewardisknownasa predictionerror , whichcanbepositiveiftherewardsreceivedarehigherthanexpected , ornegativeiftherewardsreceivedarelowerthanexpected [ 43 , 122 ] . Predictionerrorselicitneuralactivationinthebilateral ventral striatum , part of the dopaminergic reward system [ 123 ] . The dopaminergic reward system comprises several neural regions implicated in foraging choices , including the striatum , nucleusaccumbens , andprefrontalcortex [ 107 , 124 , 125 ] . Thesenetworkshavebeenshowntocontroleffortandvigourin thepursuitofrewardsinhumanandnon - humananimals [ 126 , 127 ] . Functionalmagneticresonanceimaging ( fMRI ) studies have reliably foundactivityin thedopaminergic rewardsystemin thepursuitof rewardsacrossthehumanlifespan , includ - ingwithintheventralstriatumandnucleusaccumbens [ 128 ] . Notably , thereisgreateractivityintheseareasduringreward - baseddecision - makinginadolescencecomparedwithotheragegroups [ 92 ] . Severalstudieshavedemonstratedthatthe dopaminergic reward system contributes to explore / exploit decisions during patch foraging [ 7 , 129 ] , speci ﬁ cally through estimating the background rate of rewards [ 7 ] . Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 1093 background reward rate signals a greater availability of rewards and therefore that the forager should exploit patches less extensively [ 3 ] . Evidence for the role of dopamine in estimating the background reward rate could indicate that adolescents have an increased estimate of the background reward rate due to hyperactivity in the dopaminergic reward system relative to adults [ 90 , 92 , 94 ] , motivating them to explore regardless of the true background reward rate of their environment and re ﬂ ecting the stochastic exploration proposed by some cooling off ac - counts . However , activity of neural regions responsible for reward processing exhibits a qua - dratic developmental trajectory [ 93 ] , unlike exploration choices which decline from childhood to adulthood [ 38 ] . This discrepancy may be due to exploration strategies being in ﬂ uenced by factors beyond dopaminergic activity , such as improved goal selection throughout adoles - cence [ 82 , 90 ] . Adolescents ’ unique combination of improved reward learning compared with children [ 81 , 94 ] and heightened exploration compared with adults [ 4 , 43 ] can support the individual to learn the reward structure of their environment [ 2 ] . Indeed , such abilities may be facilitated by the onset of puberty , which is associated with increased neuroplasticity that can support experience - dependent learning [ 98 ] . The reduction of activity within the dopaminergic reward system from adolescence to adulthood can support the transition from exploratory foraging in youth to strat - egies that exploit high reward options , which the adolescent has learned through exploration , in adulthood [ 2 , 5 , 99 ] . In contrast to evidence that has identi ﬁ ed the role of the dopaminergic reward system in estimat - ing the background reward rate [ 7 ] , studies leveraging computational modelling suggest that dif - ferences in adolescents ’ and adults ’ use of exploratory strategies are linked to reduced stochasticity in adults [ 38 ] . Indeed , adolescents ’ greater stochasticity relative to adults may be driven by the hyperactivity of their dopaminergic reward system , as pharmacological and chemo - genetic manipulation that increases dopaminergic activity causes more stochastic exploration in n - armed bandit and foraging tasks [ 56 , 100 ] . A question for future research is whether dopami - nergic activity increases adolescents ’ exploration through their estimate of the background re - ward rate and / or through increasing stochasticity . Further , not all learning occurs in an asocial context , and adolescents can effectively use information from peers to learn about their environ - ment [ 50 , 59 , 101 ] . Future research should examine how social learning affects the ability to learn appropriate explore / exploit choices , and whether there are developmental differences in the de - gree to which social in ﬂ uence affects this behaviour . Explore / exploit strategies and developmental psychopathology Explore / exploit strategies may serve as an informative marker of psychopathology . For example , research in adults has revealed that symptoms of depression and substance use disorders are associated with overexploitation on patch foraging tasks [ 15 , 102 – 107 ] , which has been attributed to reduced motivation in depression [ 108 ] and behavioural in ﬂ exibility in substance use disorders [ 109 ] . By contrast , anxiety disorders are associated with under - exploitation of patches [ 110 , 111 ] , which has been attributed to the intolerance of uncertainty associated with these disorders [ 112 ] . Yet , only a handful of studies have examined the association between explore / exploit strategies and psychopathology in developmental samples [ 1 , 5 , 104 ] . This dearth of evidence is notable , as adolescence is a period during which we see the onset of the majority of psychopathology [ 16 ] . Exploration serves a developmental purpose by providing adolescents with experiential knowl - edge about their environment that is utilised in maturity [ 38 ] . Biases in exploration associated with psychopathology may have profound consequences for adolescents , as they can deprive Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS 1094 Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 them of developmentally important opportunities to learn from their surroundings in ways that prepare them for later life . For example , overexploitation biases associated with psychopathology [ 15 , 105 ] may prevent adolescents from engaging in novel , formative experiences that support mental health , such as going to a summer camp and forming new friendships . Early adversity , a known risk factor for mental health problems [ 113 , 114 ] , is associated with biased foraging strategies [ 3 ] . Early adversity can confer a latent vulnerability for psychopathol - ogy by impacting cognitive abilities , such as RL [ 115 ] . As foraging relies on learning the reward structure of one ’ s environment [ 27 , 28 ] , childhood adversity may disrupt computational mech - anisms used to learn from reward feedback , thus increasing the risk for psychopathology . Fu - ture research should consider the genetic basis for individual differences in explore / exploit strategies , as genetic differences substantially contribute to individual differences in mental health [ 116 ] . One study has identi ﬁ ed a candidate gene ( PRKG1 ) associated with reduced foraging exploration in humans [ 117 ] . Variations in PRKG1 have also been implicated in the association between childhood trauma and alcoholism [ 118 ] , suggesting there are genetic vul - nerabilities that may interact with childhood adversity to bias foraging strategies and increase the risk of substance use disorders . Longitudinal research into foraging that incorporates assessments of genetic and environmental risk is needed to advance our understanding of how explore / exploit strategies may increase the risk of mental health problems across development . Concluding remarks Patch foraging is a pervasive context of decision - making across species and has been forma - tive in the evolution of human cognition [ 1 ] . Recent evidence suggests there are developmental changes in explore / exploit choices , with younger organisms exploring more whereas older or - ganisms utilise more exploitative strategies , consistent with cooling off accounts [ 36 , 46 ] . Such effects may be driven by developmental changes , including neural pruning within the dopami - nergic reward system and ACC during adolescence , as well as the decline in stochastic explo - ration across development [ 57 , 82 , 92 ] . Recent research has yielded insight into how exploration and exploitation behaviours can support human development , although it will be important for future research to examine foraging strategies , and their neurocomputational cor - relates , longitudinally ( see Outstanding questions ) . We have suggested that exploration in youth can assist the individual in learning the structure of their environment , allowing them later , during maturity , to better navigate their surroundings independently of caregivers . Under - standing the typical developmental trajectory of exploration strategies may also be informative for studying how mental health problems develop , though more research is required to under - stand how individual differences in explore / exploit strategies are associated with different out - comes across the lifespan . Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank ﬂ aticon . com for the icons used in the ﬁ gures . Declaration of interests No interests are declared . References 1 . Bach , D . R . etal . ( 2020 ) Predictorsofriskyforagingbehaviourin healthy young people . Nat . Hum . Behav . 4 , 832 – 843 2 . Lloyd , A . et al . ( 2021 ) Are adolescents more optimal decision - makers in novel environments ? Examining the bene ﬁ ts of heightened exploration in a patch foraging paradigm . Dev . Sci . 24 , e13075 3 . Lloyd , A . et al . ( 2022 ) Individuals with adverse childhood expe - riences explore less and underweight reward feedback . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 119 , e2109373119 4 . Perry , S . ( 2020 ) Behavioural variation and learning across the lifespan in wild white - faced capuchin monkeys . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 375 , 20190494 Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 1095 Outstanding questions Does the hyperactivity of neural regions responsible for reward processing ( i . e . , the ventral and nucleus accum - bens ) motivate greater exploration in adolescence , relative to other age groups ? If so , is this through in ﬂ ating adolescents ’ estimate of the back - ground reward rate or by motivating more stochastic choices compared with other age groups ? Does the development of the ACC from childhood to adulthood coincide with an improved ability to estimate the background reward rate of the environment ? What arethelongitudinaltrajectoriesof foraging choices across the lifespan and are these associated with structural and functional changes to the dopaminergic reward system ? To what extent do non - human animals demonstrate cooling off across devel - opment and can comparative studies be leveraged to inform our under - standing of the evolution of age - relatedchangestoforagingstrategies ? Are there developmental differences in how explore / exploit choices are affected by social in ﬂ uence and can estimates of the background reward rate be in ﬂ uenced through social learning ? Are biases in foraging explore / exploit choices a transdiagnostic predictor of mental health problems in adolescence and adulthood ? Do experiences of childhood adversity impact foraging strategies in adolescence , and are these associated with later mental health outcomes ? 5 . Lloyd , A . et al . ( 2022 ) Stochastic decisions support optimal for - aging of volatile environments , and are disrupted by anxiety . PsyArXiv Published on line September 13 , 2022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 31234 / osf . io / ty6j2 6 . Wittmann , M . K . etal . ( 2023 ) Localandglobalrewardlearningin the lateral frontal cortex show differential development during human adolescence . PLoS Biol . 21 , e3002010 7 . Le Heron , C . et al . ( 2020 ) Dopamine modulates dynamic decision - making during foraging . J . Neurosci . 40 , 5273 – 5282 8 . Kane , G . A . et al . ( 2022 ) Rat anterior cingulate cortex continu - ously signals decision variables in a patch foraging task . J . Neurosci . 42 , 5730 – 5744 9 . Zacharopoulos , G . et al . ( 2023 ) Dissecting the neurocomputational bases of patch - switching . Cereb . Cortex 33 , 7930 – 7940 10 . Del Giudice , M . et al . ( 2009 ) The juvenile transition : a develop - mental switch point in human life history . Dev . Rev . 29 , 1 – 31 11 . Ellis , B . J . etal . ( 2012 ) Theevolutionarybasisofriskyadolescent behavior : Implications for science , policy , and practice . Dev . Psychol . 48 , 598 – 623 12 . Steinberg , L . et al . ( 2018 ) Around the world , adolescence is a time of heightened sensation seeking and immature self - regulation . Dev . Sci . 21 , e12532 13 . Harhen , N . C . and Bornstein , A . M . ( 2023 ) Overharvesting in human patch foraging re ﬂ ects rational structure learning and adaptive planning . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 120 , e2216524120 14 . Hills , T . T . et al . ( 2010 ) The central executive as a search pro - cess : priming exploration and exploitation across domains . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 139 , 590 – 609 15 . Byrne , K . A . et al . ( 2022 ) Examining the relationship between substance use and exploration – exploitation behavior in young adults . Exp . Clin . Psychopharmacol . 30 , 897 – 906 16 . Solmi , M . et al . ( 2022 ) Age at onset of mental disorders world - wide : large - scale meta - analysis of 192 epidemiological studies . Mol . Psychiatry 27 , 281 – 295 17 . Corrales - Carvajal , V . M . etal . ( 2016 ) Internalstatesdrivenutrient homeostasis by modulating exploration - exploitation trade - off . eLife 5 , e19920 18 . Davidson , J . D . and El Hady , A . ( 2019 ) Foraging as an evidence accumulation process . PLoS Comput . Biol . 15 , e1007060 19 . Charnov , E . L . ( 1976 ) Optimal foraging , the marginal valuetheo - rem . Theoret . Popul . Biol . 9 , 129 – 136 20 . Garrett , N . and Daw , N . D . ( 2020 ) Biased belief updating and suboptimal choice in foraging decisions . Nat . Commun . 11 , 3417 21 . Eisenreich , B . R . et al . ( 2019 ) Macaques are risk - averse in a freely moving foraging task . Sci . Rep . 9 , 15091 22 . Pacheco - Cobos , L . et al . ( 2019 ) Nahua mushroom gatherers use area - restricted search strategies that conform to marginal value theorem predictions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 10339 – 10347 23 . Gil - Gómez de Liaño , B . et al . ( 2022 ) Quitting rules in hybrid for - aging search : from early childhood to early adulthood . Cogn . Dev . 64 , 101232 24 . Cohen , S . E . andTodd , P . M . ( 2018 ) Relationshipforaging : does time spent searching predict relationship length ? Evol . Behav . Sci . 12 , 139 – 151 25 . Yoon , T . et al . ( 2018 ) Control of movement vigor and decision making during foraging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 115 , E10476 – E10485 26 . Bentall , R . P . et al . ( 2021 ) Pandemic buying : testing a psycho - logical model of over - purchasing and panic buying using data from the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland during the early phase of the COVID - 19 pandemic . PLoS One 16 , e0246339 27 . Kolling , N . and Akam , T . ( 2017 ) ( Reinforcement ? ) Learning to forage optimally . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 46 , 162 – 169 28 . Constantino , S . M . and Daw , N . D . ( 2015 ) Learning the opportu - nity cost of time in a patch - foraging task . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 15 , 837 – 853 29 . Kilpatrick , Z . P . et al . ( 2021 ) Uncertainty drives deviationsinnor - mative foraging decision strategies . J . R . Soc . Interface 18 , 20210337 30 . Wittmann , M . K . etal . ( 2020 ) Globalrewardstateaffectslearning and activity in raphe nucleus and anterior insula in monkeys . Nat . Commun . 11 , 3771 31 . Xia , L . et al . ( 2021 ) Modeling changes in probabilistic reinforce - ment learning during adolescence . PLoS Comput . Biol . 17 , e1008524 32 . Ramakrishnan , A . etal . ( 2019 ) Local ﬁ eldpotentialsindorsalan - terior cingulate sulcus re ﬂ ect rewards but not travel time costs during foraging . Brain Neurosc . Adv . 3 , 239821281881793 33 . Sawyer , S . M . et al . ( 2018 ) The age of adolescence . Lancet Child Adolesc . Health 2 , 223 – 228 34 . Larsen , B . and Luna , B . ( 2018 ) Adolescence as a neurobiolog - icalcriticalperiodforthedevelopmentofhigher - ordercognition . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 94 , 179 – 195 35 . Ferguson , H . J . et al . ( 2021 ) The developmental trajectories of executive function from adolescence to old age . Sci . Rep . 11 , 1382 36 . Gopnik , A . et al . ( 2017 ) Changes in cognitive ﬂ exibility and hy - pothesissearchacrosshumanlifehistoryfromchildhoodtoad - olescence to adulthood . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 7892 – 7899 37 . Smirnov , K . and Sitnikova , E . ( 2019 ) Developmental milestones and behavior of infant rats : the role of sensory input from whis - kers . Behav . Brain Res . 374 , 112143 38 . Giron , A . P . et al . ( 2022 ) Developmental changes in learning re - semble stochastic optimization . PsyArXiv Published online April 4 , 2022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 31234 / osf . io / 9f4k3 39 . Mata , R . etal . ( 2013 ) Foragingacrossthelifespan : isthereare - duction in exploration with aging ? Front . Neurosci . 7 , 53 40 . Wiegand , I . et al . ( 2019 ) Hybrid foraging search in younger and older age . Psychol . Aging 34 , 805 – 820 41 . Pelz , M . andKidd , C . ( 2020 ) Theelaborationofexploratoryplay . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 375 , 20190503 42 . Somerville , L . H . etal . ( 2017 ) Chartingtheexpansionofstrategic exploratorybehaviorduringadolescence . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 146 , 155 – 164 43 . Eckstein , M . K . et al . ( 2022 ) Reinforcement learning and Bayes - ianinferenceprovidecomplementarymodelsfortheuniquead - vantage of adolescents in stochastic reversal . Dev . Cogn . Neurosci . 55 , 101106 44 . Lloyd , A . et al . ( 2021 ) Delay discounting and under - valuing of recent information predict poorer adherence to social distanc - ing measures during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Sci . Rep . 11 , 19237 45 . Davidow , J . Y . et al . ( 2016 ) An upside to reward sensitivity : the hippocampussupports enhancedreinforcement learninginad - olescence . Neuron 92 , 93 – 99 46 . Gopnik , A . ( 2020 ) Childhood as a solution to explore – exploit tensions . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 375 , 20190502 47 . Kirkpatrick , S . etal . ( 1983 ) Optimizationbysimulatedannealing . Science 220 , 671 48 . Schulz , E . etal . ( 2018 ) Searchingforrewardslikeachildmeans less generalization and moredirected exploration . Psychol . Sci . 30 , 1561 – 1572 49 . Meder , B . et al . ( 2021 ) Development of directed and random exploration in children . Dev . Sci . 24 , e13095 50 . Ciranka , S . and van den Bos , W . ( 2021 ) Adolescent risk - taking in the context of exploration and social in ﬂ uence . Dev . Rev . 61 , 100979 51 . Waltmann , M . et al . ( 2023 ) Diminished reinforcement sensitivity in adolescence is associated with enhanced response switching and reduced coding of choice probability in the me - dial frontal pole . Dev . Cogn . Neurosc . 60 , 101226 52 . Liquin , E . G . and Gopnik , A . ( 2022 ) Children are more explor - atory and learn more than adults in an approach - avoid task . Cognition 218 , 104940 53 . Lloyd , A . and Döring , A . K . ( 2019 ) Whendo peers in ﬂ uence ado - lescentmales ’ risktaking ? Examiningdecisionmakingundercon - ditions of riskand ambiguity . J . Behav . Dec . Mak . 32 , 613 – 626 54 . Morimoto , J . ( 2019 ) Foraging decisions as multi - armed bandit problems : applying reinforcement learning algorithms to forag - ing data . J . Theoret . Biol . 467 , 48 – 56 55 . Wilson , R . C . etal . ( 2021 ) Balancingexplorationandexploitation withinformation andrandomization . Curr . Opin . Behav . Sci . 38 , 49 – 56 Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS 1096 Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 56 . Delevich , K . et al . ( 2022 ) Activation , but not inhibition , of the in - direct pathway disrupts choice rejection in a freely moving , multiple - choice foraging task . Cell Rep . 40 , 111129 57 . Chierchia , G . et al . ( 2022 ) Con ﬁ rmatory reinforcement learning changes with age during adolescence . Dev . Sci . 3 , e13330 58 . Dubois , M . et al . ( 2022 ) Exploration heuristics decrease during youth . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 22 , 969 – 983 59 . Knoll , L . J . et al . ( 2017 ) Age - related differences in social in ﬂ u - ence on risk perception depend on the direction of in ﬂ uence . J . Adolesc . 60 , 53 – 63 60 . Duell , N . et al . ( 2018 ) Age patterns in risk taking across the world . J . Youth Adolesc . 47 , 1052 – 1072 61 . Schulz , E . andGershman , S . J . ( 2019 ) Thealgorithmicarchitectureof explorationinthehumanbrain . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 55 , 7 – 14 62 . Gershman , S . J . ( 2019 ) Uncertaintyand exploration . Decision 6 , 277 – 286 63 . Pradhan , S . et al . ( 2019 ) Environmental programming of adult foraging behavior in C . elegans . Curr . Biol . 29 , 2867 – 2879 . e4 64 . Burns , J . G . et al . ( 2012 ) Gene – environment interplay in Dro - sophila melanogaster : chronic food deprivation in early life af - fects adult exploratory and ﬁ tness traits . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 17239 – 17244 65 . Harhen , N . andBornstein , A . ( 2023 ) Intervaltimingasacompu - tational pathway from early life adversity to affective disorders . PsyArXiv Published online March 2 , 2023 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 31234 / osf . io / 42bwn 66 . Pretelli , I . et al . ( 2022 ) Foraging complexity and the evolution of childhood . Sci . Adv . 8 , abn9889 67 . Crittenden , A . N . et al . ( 2013 ) Juvenile foraging among the Hadza : implications for human life history . Evol . Hum . Behav . 34 , 299 – 304 68 . Kramer , K . L . ( 2021 ) Childhood teaching and learning among Savanna Pumé hunter - gatherers : mismatch between foraging and postindustrial societies . Hum . Nat . 32 , 87 – 114 69 . Nauta , J . et al . ( 2020 ) Hybrid foraging in patchy environments using spatial memory . J . R . Soc . Interface 17 , 20200026 70 . Lew - Levy , S . et al . ( 2017 ) How do hunter - gatherer children learn subsistence skills ? : a meta - ethnographic review . Hum . Nat . 28 , 367 – 394 71 . Bugir , C . K . et al . ( 2021 ) Prey preferences of modern human hunter - gatherers . Food Webs 26 , e00183 72 . Crittenden , A . N . et al . ( 2021 ) Harmavoidance andmobility dur - ingmiddlechildhoodandadolescenceamongHadzaForagers . Hum . Nat . 32 , 150 – 176 73 . Saragosa - Harris , N . M . et al . ( 2022 ) Real - world exploration in - creases across adolescence and relates to affect , risk taking , and social connectivity . Psychol . Sci . 33 , 1664 – 1679 74 . Bishnoi , I . R . et al . ( 2021 ) Sex and age differences in locomotor and anxiety - like behaviors in rats : from adolescence to adult - hood . Dev . Psychobiol . 63 , 496 – 511 75 . Migliano , A . B . and Vinicius , L . ( 2022 ) The origins of human cu - mulative culture : from the foraging niche to collective intelli - gence . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 377 , 20200317 76 . Hills , T . T . et al . ( 2008 ) Search in external and internal spaces : evidence for generalized cognitive search processes . Psychol . Sci . 19 , 802 – 808 77 . Kuzawa , C . W . et al . ( 2014 ) Metabolic costs and evolutionary implications of human brain development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , 13010 – 13015 78 . Mills , K . L . et al . ( 2014 ) The developmental mismatch in structural brainmaturationduringadolescence . Dev . Neurosci . 36 , 147 – 160 79 . Casey , B . J . ( 2015 ) Beyond simple models of self - control to circuit - based accounts of adolescent behavior . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 66 , 295 – 319 80 . Kolling , N . etal . ( 2012 ) Neuralmechanismsofforaging . Science 336 , 95 – 98 81 . Westhoff , B . etal . ( 2021 ) Increasedventromedialprefrontalcor - tex activity in adolescence bene ﬁ ts prosocial reinforcement learning . Dev . Cogn . Neurosci . 52 , 101018 82 . Insel , C . etal . ( 2019 ) Neurodevelopmentalshiftsinlearnedvalue transfer on cognitive control during adolescence . Dev . Cogn . Neurosci . 40 , 100730 83 . Calabro , F . J . et al . ( 2020 ) Development of hippocampal – prefrontal cortex interactions through adolescence . Cereb . Cortex 30 , 1548 – 1558 84 . van Duijvenvoorde , A . et al . ( 2019 ) A three - wave longitudinal study of subcortical – cortical resting - state connectivity in ado - lescence : testing age - and puberty - related changes . Hum . Brain Mapp . 40 , 3769 – 3783 85 . Silston , B . et al . ( 2021 ) Neural encoding of perceived patch value during competitive and hazardous virtual foraging . Nat . Commun . 12 , 5478 86 . Shenhav , A . etal . ( 2014 ) Anteriorcingulateengagementinafor - aging context re ﬂ ects choice dif ﬁ culty , not foraging value . Nat . Neurosci . 17 , 1249 – 1254 87 . Tomov , M . S . et al . ( 2020 ) Dissociable neural correlates of un - certainty underlie different exploration strategies . Nat . Commun . 11 , 2371 88 . Blanco , N . J . and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2021 ) Systematic exploration and uncertainty dominate young children ’ s choices . Dev . Sci . 24 , e13026 89 . Wu , C . M . et al . ( 2018 ) Generalizationguides humanexploration in vast decision spaces . Nat . Hum . Behav . 2 , 915 – 924 90 . Ladouceur , C . D . etal . ( 2019 ) Neuralsystemsunderlyingreward cue processing in early adolescence : the role of puberty and pubertal hormones . Psychoneuroendocrinology 102 , 281 – 291 91 . Kuhn , C . etal . ( 2010 ) Theemergenceofgonadalhormonein ﬂ u - ences on dopaminergic function during puberty . Horm . Behav . 58 , 122 – 137 92 . Schreuders , E . et al . ( 2018 ) Contributions of reward sensitivity to ventral striatum activity across adolescence and early adult - hood . Child Dev . 89 , 797 – 810 93 . Barkley - Levenson , E . and Galván , A . ( 2014 ) Neural representa - tionofexpectedvalueintheadolescentbrain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , 1646 – 1651 94 . Cohen , J . R . et al . ( 2010 ) A unique adolescent response to re - ward prediction errors . Nat . Neurosci . 13 , 669 – 671 95 . Habicht , J . et al . ( 2022 ) Children are full of optimism , but those rose - tinted glasses are fading – reduced learning from negative outcomes drives hyperoptimism in children . J . Exp Psychol . Gen . 151 , 1843 – 1853 96 . Rutledge , R . B . et al . ( 2009 ) Dopaminergic drugs modulate learningratesandperseverationinParkinson ’ spatientsinady - namic foraging task . J . Neurosci . 29 , 15104 – 15114 97 . Costa , V . D . et al . ( 2019 ) Subcortical substrates of explore - exploit decisions in primates . Neuron 103 , 533 – 545 . e5 98 . Laube , C . et al . ( 2020 ) The relationship between pubertal hor - mones and brain plasticity : Implications for cognitive training in adolescence . Dev . Cogn . Neurosci . 42 , 100753 99 . Jepma , M . etal . ( 2020 ) Uncertainty - drivenregulationoflearning andexplorationinadolescents : acomputationalaccount . PLoS Comput . Biol . 16 , e1008276 100 . Cinotti , F . et al . ( 2019 ) Dopamine blockade impairs the exploration - exploitation trade - off in rats . Sci . Rep . 9 , 6770 101 . Rodriguez Buritica , J . M . et al . ( 2019 ) The computational basis of following advice in adolescents . J . Exp . Child Psychol . 180 , 39 – 54 102 . Radell , M . L . et al . ( 2018 ) Intolerance of uncertainty and condi - tioned place preference in opioid addiction . PeerJ 6 , e4775 103 . Trimmer , P . C . et al . ( 2015 ) Adaptive learning can result in a fail - ure to pro ﬁ t from good conditions : implications for understand - ing depression . Evol . Med . Public Health 2015 , 123 – 135 104 . Dubois , M . andHauser , T . U . ( 2022 ) Value - freerandomexplora - tion is linked to impulsivity . Nat . Commun . 13 , 4542 105 . Bustamante , L . A . et al . ( 2022 ) Effort foraging task reveals positive correlation between individual differences in the cost of cognitive and physical effort in humans and relationship to self - reported motivation and affect . bioRxiv Published online November 22 , 2022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 11 . 21 . 517394 106 . Raio , C . M . et al . ( 2022 ) Suboptimal foraging decisions and in - volvement of the ventral tegmental area in human opioid addic - tion . bioRxiv Published online March 27 , 2022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 03 . 24 . 485654 107 . Abram , S . V . etal . ( 2019 ) Learningfromlossafterrisk : dissociat - ingrewardpursuitandrewardvaluationinanaturalisticforagingtask . Front . Psychiatry 10 , 359 108 . Proulx , C . D . et al . ( 2018 ) A neural pathway controlling motiva - tion to exert effort . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 115 , 5792 – 5797 Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11 1097 109 . Poulton , A . and Hester , R . ( 2020 ) Transition to substance use disorders : impulsivity for reward and learning from reward . Soc . Cogn . Affect . Neurosci . 15 , 1182 – 1191 110 . Heinz , D . E . et al . ( 2021 ) Exploratory drive , fear , and anxiety are dissociable and independent components in foraging mice . Transl . Psychiatry 11 , 318 111 . Kane , G . A . et al . ( 2017 ) Increased locus coeruleus tonicactivity causes disengagement from a patch - foraging task . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 17 , 1073 – 1083 112 . Hunt , C . et al . ( 2019 ) Anxiety sensitivity and intolerance of un - certainty facilitate associations between generalized Pavlovian fearandmaladaptiveavoidancedecisions . J . Abnorm . Psychol . 128 , 315 – 326 113 . Hogg , B . etal . ( 2022 ) Psychologicaltraumaasatransdiagnosticrisk factor for mental disorder : an umbrella meta - analysis . Eur . Arch . PsychiatryClin . Neurosci . 273 , 397 – 410 114 . Baldwin , J . R . et al . ( 2023 ) Childhood maltreatment and mental health problems : a systematic review and meta - analysis of quasi - experimental studies . Am . J . Psychiatry 180 , 117 – 126 115 . McCrory , E . et al . ( 2022 ) Social thinning and stress generation after childhood maltreatment : a neurocognitive social transac - tional model of psychiatric vulnerability . Lancet Psychiatry 9 , 828 – 837 116 . Harden , K . P . et al . ( 2020 ) Genetic associations between exec - utive functions and a general factor of psychopathology . J . Am . Acad . Child Adolesc . Psychiatry 59 , 749 – 758 117 . Struk , A . A . et al . ( 2019 ) Self - regulation and the foraging gene ( PRKG1 ) inhumans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 4434 – 4439 118 . Polimanti , R . et al . ( 2018 ) A genome - wide gene - by - trauma in - teraction study of alcohol misuse in two independent cohorts identi ﬁ es PRKG1 as a risk locus . Mol . Psychiatry 23 , 154 – 160 119 . Hall - McMaster , S . et al . ( 2021 ) Control over patch encounters changes foraging behavior . iScience 24 , 103005 120 . Bidari , S . et al . ( 2022 ) Stochastic dynamics of social patch for - aging decisions . Phys . Rev . Res . 4 , 033128 121 . Sutton , R . S . and Barto , A . G . ( 1998 ) Reinforcement Learning : An Introduction , MIT Press 122 . Master , S . L . etal . ( 2020 ) Disentanglingthesystemscontributing to changes in learning during adolescence . Dev . Cogn . Neurosci . 41 , 100732 123 . Cao , Z . et al . ( 2019 ) Mapping adolescent reward anticipation , receipt , and prediction error during the monetary incentive delay task . Hum . Brain Mapp . 40 , 262 – 283 124 . Sosa , M . andGiocomo , L . M . ( 2021 ) Navigatingforreward . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 22 , 472 – 487 125 . Mehta , P . S . et al . ( 2019 ) Ventromedial prefrontal cortex tracks multiple environmental variables during search . J . Neurosci . 39 , 5336 – 5350 126 . Michely , J . et al . ( 2020 ) The role of dopamine in dynamic effort - rewardintegration . Neuropsychopharmacology 45 , 1448 – 1453 127 . Yang , J . - H . et al . ( 2020 ) Pharmacological studies of effort - relateddecisionmakingusingmousetouchscreenprocedures : effectsofdopamineantagonismdonotresemblereinforcerde - valuation by removal of food restriction . Psychopharmacology 237 , 33 – 43 128 . Wang , M . et al . ( 2022 ) Risk - taking in the human brain : an acti - vation likelihood estimation meta - analysis of the balloon analog risk task ( BART ) . Hum . Brain Mapp . 43 , 5643 – 5657 129 . Cremer , A . et al . ( 2022 ) Disentangling the roles of dopamine andnoradrenalineintheexploration - exploitationtradeoffduring human decision - making . Neuropsychopharmacology 48 , 1076 – 1086 Trends in Cognitive Sciences OPEN ACCESS 1098 Trends in Cognitive Sciences , November 2023 , Vol . 27 , No . 11