Special Issue – Imaging Cell Biology Imaging endocytic clathrin structures in living cells Tom Kirchhausen Harvard Medical School / Immune Disease Institute , W . Alpert Building Room 128 , 200 Longwood Ave , Boston , MA 02115 , USA Our understanding of the clathrin - dependent endocytic pathway owes much to new visualization techniques . Budding coated pits and clathrin - coated structures are transient molecular machines with distinctive morpho - logical characteristics , and ﬂuorescently labeled ver - sions of a variety of marker proteins have given us a tantalizing glimpse of the dynamics of the system in living cells . Recent live - cell imaging studies have revealed unexpected modes of coat assembly , with distinct kinetics , distinct recruitment of associated proteins , distinct requirements for the participation of actin and its accessory proteins , and apparently distinct mechanisms of membrane deformation . A crucial issue is to connect the events detected by light microscopy with the structures and properties of the molecular constituents . Here , I outline descriptions of coat assem - bly in different circumstances that are consistent with what is known from X - ray crystallography and electron microscopy . The need to analyze endocytosis in live cells Cells require ordered movement of proteins and lipids from one membrane - bound compartment to another . The most common mechanism for such transport is the formation and budding of a vesicle from the membrane of a donor compart - ment and fusion of the vesicle with the membrane of an acceptor compartment . This process maintains the organ - ization , function and heterogeneity of the donor and accep - tor membranes . The molecular machinery scaffolded by clathrin is a particularly well - deﬁned and physiologically important example of vesicle formation . Assembly of a clathrin coat at a donor membrane deforms and invaginates a membrane patch , which , after pinching and scission , becomes a carrier of membrane trafﬁc . Clathrin - coated vesicles are the most prominent form of trafﬁc from the plasma membrane to endosomes ( endocytosis ) , a pathway by which ligands , such as hormones and other signaling molecules , transferrin , immunoglobulins , low - density lipo - proteins ( LDLs ) , viruses and their receptors , enter cells . Clathrin coats are also important for trafﬁc between endo - somes and the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) [ 1 – 9 ] . The ‘life cycle’ of a clathrin - coated vesicle , from coat assembly and cargo loading to coat disassembly and cargo delivery , involves a large number of structural and regu - latory proteins and lipids . These components are often present in small amounts . They participate in a series of rapid , regulated events ( Figure 1 ) ( Box 1 ) , and their study , therefore , poses particular challenges , both for the strat - egies required to trap a deﬁned state of a dynamic assem - bly and the technologies needed to follow its normal cycle in cells . Cellular , biochemical and high - resolution structural approaches have deﬁned the molecular properties of cla - thrin and many of its associated proteins [ 1 , 10 – 17 ] . Bio - chemical and structural approaches , however powerful , can only provide snapshots or ensemble - averaged infor - mation about the properties of objects within a hetero - geneous population . They are not sufﬁcient to resolve important steps in vesicle formation and uncoating . Advanced imaging methods can now achieve high temporal resolution in the context of a living cell [ 18 , 19 ] , allowing one to localize components during a given step to deter - mine the order in which components are incorporated or released and analyze the way the composition of an assem - bling vesicle affects its behavior [ 20 – 34 ] . So far , most studies have focused on endocytosis . This is a particularly favorable membrane trafﬁc pathway for such studies because labeled cargo can be prepared and followed , thereby identifying functional uptake , and because events at the cell surface are particularly accessible to live - cell imaging methods . This review focuses on the interpretation of results from live - cell imaging , rather than on the data obtained using ﬁxed samples that , in principle , could provide improved spatial resolution [ 35 , 36 ] but at the cost of losing the temporal component . Gathering data over time is essential for analyzing highly dynamic systems such as those that direct membrane trafﬁc . A central issue in developing models to describe the dynamics of clathrin coat formation is how to relate the data from live - cell imaging to the static morphological information obtained from cells by electron microscopy and the high - resolution structures obtained from X - ray crystallography and advanced electron cryo - microscopy ( cryoEM ) . Correlation between distinguishable classes of clathrin - based endocytic events detected by ﬂuor - escence microscopy with their corresponding morphologies asseenbyelectronmicroscopyresolvesanumberofpreviousconﬂictsandmisconceptions . These distinctions make our picture of clathrin dynamics consistent with the molecular structures deﬁned by high - resolution methods . Live - cell imaging of clathrin - coated structures The advent of GFP combined with time - lapse wide - ﬁeld epiﬂuorescence microscopy ( Box 2 ) provided the ﬁrst Review Corresponding author : Kirchhausen , T . ( kirchhausen @ crystal . harvard . edu ) . 596 0962 - 8924 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2009 . 09 . 002 glimpse of assembling clathrin - coated structures in cells expressing the clathrin light chain LCa fused to GFP and demonstrated their transient character [ 29 ] . Although the time series were obtained from an optical plane close to the cell surface attached to the coverslip , thereby providing images of endocytic clathrin structures assembling at the plasma membrane , ﬂuorescent objects located further inside the cell , probably clathrin coats on endosomal mem - branes , also contributed signiﬁcantly to the data sets , leading to ambiguities in the interpretation . This limita - tion was soon overcome by the use of total internal reﬂec - tion ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy , a powerful approach that is naturally suited to observing ﬂuorescent events at the cell surface in contact with the glass coverslip [ 25 ] . Time - lapse TIRF of cells expressing the clathrin light chain fused to dsRED conﬁrmed the dynamic character of endocytic structures and revealed their inward movement before the dissolution of the clathrin coat [ 25 , 26 ] . To obtain temporal information regarding the time of membrane scission from the donor plasma membrane of the budding clathrin - coated membrane , a visual method was used to detect the exposure or protection from the incubation medium of the ectodomain of the transferrin ( Tf ) receptor [ 26 ] . A chimeric protein was constructed from the Tf re - ceptor , fused in its ectodomain with pHluorin , a GFP - based ﬂuorescent pH sensor . With this probe , the ﬂuorescence of pHluorin - tagged Tf receptors located at the cell surface is sensitive to the pH of the incubating medium , whereas the ﬂuorescence of those present in completely sealed intra - cellular vesicles is not . By cyclically alternating the pH of the incubating medium between pH 7 . 4 and 5 . 5 , it was possible to detect a sudden loss in pH - dependence in the ﬂuorescence signal of a subset of chimeric Tf receptor clusters associated with clathrin coats . The combined used of TIR and wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence imaging revealed that a pH - independent spot of the Tf receptor chimera appeared just as its associated ﬂuorescent clathrin patch underwent abrupt inward movement . These observations provided the ﬁrst direct link between the invagination step of a clathrin - coated structure and membrane scission [ 26 ] . Figure 1 . Formation of endocytic clathrin - coated structures on the plasma membrane of mammalian cells . The continuous line represents the plasma membrane of a cell grownin culture ; the thick , pink stripe representsthe clathrincoat ( clathrinplus the AP - 2 adaptor ) ; yellowdots representdynamin ; red dots , the uncoatingATP Hsc70 and its cofactorauxilin ; short thin lines , short - branchedactin polymersplus the Arp2 / 3 complex , cortactinandN - Wasp . The stippled thick pink striperepresentsthe ATP - dependent dissolution of the clathrin coat mediated by Hsc70 and auxilin . TIR , wide - field and spinning disc confocal microscopy were all used to obtain live - cell imaging data ; the vertical arrows indicate the z - positions accessible to each imaging method . Stable and transient expression of recombinant , fluorescently - tagged constructs were used to follow the dynamicbehaviorof plasmamembranestructurescontaining differentcombinations of clathrin , AP - 2 , auxilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , cortactinand dynamin . Canonical clathrin - coated pits form at both the free and attached cell surfaces ; clathrin - coated plaques form only at the attached surface . Coated pit formation proceeds by the sequential addition of clathrin triskelions to an initial nucleus , generating a sharply curved coat ; adaptor - mediated interactions with membrane - bound proteins ( and lipids ) deform the underlying membrane ; dynamin mediates scission when the deformation has created a suitably narrow neck ; auxilin , which arrives immediately following scission , recruits the uncoating ATPase Hsc70 . The relatively long - lasting clathrin - coated plaques probably initiate in a fashion similar to coated pits , but the subsequent addition of clathrin triskelions maintains a relatively flat structure with mainly hexagonal facets . The number of clathrin triskelions and AP - 2 complexes associated with a clathrin - coated plaque can fluctuate during its lifetime . Coated plaques drive membrane invagination when the entire coat moves rapidly inwards , a step that requires the formation of short - branched actin filaments ; by contrast , actin polymerization does not generally accompany the assembly or budding of coated pits . Abortive clathrin coats are incomplete , short - lived structures that fail to associate with cargo . Inset : diagram illustrating an older model , in which a flat coated plaque deforms into a sharply invaginated coated pit . Such a transformation is structurally implausible , as discussed in the text and illustrated by the exercise in Figure 5 . Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 597 Other studies based on TIRF or spinning disc confocal microscopy followed the temporal recruitment of dyna - min , the large GTPase required for the scission of the membrane neck connecting invaginating clathrin - coated pits from the plasma membrane [ 25 , 30 , 37 , 38 ] . The live - cell imaging data obtained alone or in combination with dynasore , a cell - permeable chemical compound that acutely inhibits the function of dynamin , revealed both the expected burst of dynamin recruitment upon com - pletion of coat assembly and unexpected recruitment of a small amount of dynamin during the clathrin coat assembly process [ 37 ] . Although it is clear that the func - tion of dynamin recruitment at the end of coat assembly is directly linked to the scission of the neck between the plasma membrane and the underlying coated membrane , the role of dynamin recruited before membrane scission remains to be determined . Motivated by the observation that , in yeast cells , endo - cytosis requires both clathrin - and actin - based components [ 39 , 40 ] , several studies used TIRF , mainly in HeLa cells and ﬁbroblasts , to explore the temporal recruitment of actin and a subset of regulators of short - branch actin assembly , in - cluding Arp2 / 3 , cortactin and N - Wasp [ 26 , 27 , 41 – 43 ] . In general , most of the clathrin - containing ﬂuorescent objects tracked in these experiments were relatively long - lived , with life spans of two minutes or more , and they seldom showed a steady increase in ﬂuorescence during the lifetime of the clathrin - coated structure ; the remaining clathrin objects were either shorter - lived , with life spans of approximately oneminute , or appeared as small ( diffraction Box 1 . Clathrin and its partners Abortive clathrin coat : a short - lived clathrin assembly that dissoci - ates without internalizing membrane . Actin , cortactin , Arp2 / 3 complex , N - Wasp : the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin polymerization into short - branched filaments . Proteins that regulate this process include cortactin , N - Wasp and Cdc42 . AP - 2 : the main endocytic clathrin adaptor . It comprises four subunits : the large a - and b - adaptins ; the medium m 2 adaptin ; and the small s 2 - adaptin . AP - 2 has a key role in coat assembly under physiological conditions , a process mediated by its interactions with clathrin . AP - 2 selectively binds to the phosphoinositide phosphati - dylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ] and to short peptide motifs present in the cytosolic tail of membrane - bound cargo receptors . It also binds to a number of other proteins , some of which can also interact with cargo receptors . The function AP - 2 is , therefore , essential for the specific entrapment and sorting of cargo into clathrin - coated structures . Auxilin , Hsc70 : auxilin is a J - domain - containing protein that binds to the chaperone Hsc70 , clathrin , AP - 2 and phosphoinositides . The recruitment of auxilin to clathrin coats occurs after membrane scission ; it in turn recruits Hsc70 to the clathrin coat , so that an ATP - dependent uncoating reaction can ensue . Clathrin : a trimer of three (cid:2) 190 kDa heavy chains , each with an associated 23 – 26 kDa light chain . The heavy chain has a very elongated structure , approximately 450 A˚ in contour length , with 42 a - helical zig - zags connecting a globular N terminal domain with a C terminal trimer hub . The light chains bind near the hub . The overall shape resembles the three - legged ‘triskelion’ in various traditional emblems . A clathrin triskelion is the assembly unit of a vesicular coat . It forms a curved polygonal lattice , with open hexagonal and pentagonal facets and the hub of a triskelion centered at each vertex . Each leg of a clathrin triskelion extends around three lattice edges . Clathrin - coated pit : a sharp membrane invagination produced by the assembly of a clathrin coat . The radius of membrane curvature can range from 200 A˚ to more than 800 A˚ , and the radius of the polymerized coat from approximately 350 A˚ to more than 1000 A˚ . The coat ultimately closes in on itself , driving the formation of a narrow membrane neck . Clathrin - coated plaque : an extended , relatively flat clathrin array , often found at an adherent surface of a cell in culture . Dynamin : a large GTPase recruited to clathrin coats when the lattice is nearly complete ; its function is essential for membrane scission . Dynasore : the term originates from combining ‘dyna’ ( dynamin ) and ‘sore’ ( pain ) . A cell - permeable small molecule that rapidly ( and reversibly ) inhibits dynamin function . It is widely used to interfere acutely with the cellular function of dynamin . Hot spot : a more - or - less diffraction - limited region on a cell surface from which repeated clathrin - coated vesicles are seen to emanate . The hot - spot area can also contain a more stationary , long - lived clathrin assembly . Box 2 . A close - up view of microscopy terms Diffraction limit : the resolution of an optical system , as defined by the classical Rayleigh criterion . In practical terms , the diffraction limit for fluorescence microscopy is (cid:2) 250 nm in the xy - plane and (cid:2) 500 – 800 nm in the z plane . DiNa : ‘differential evanescence nanometry’ , a method based on TIR and wide - field illumination to determine the axial separation of the centroids of two different fluorophore distributions with a precision of (cid:2) 10 nm . This method was used in real time for the differential localization of AP - 2 and epsin with respect to clathrin during the formation of clathrin - coated pits and plaques [ 22 ] . Laser - scanning confocal microscopy : in a confocal microscope , the illuminating beam converges on the focal plane ; fluorescent radiation from the point of illumination will then converge on the conjugate point in the image plane , and a pinhole can be used to eliminate fluorescence from out - of - focus planes . Scanning the beam on an xy - raster over a succession of suitably spaced focal planes allows one to build up a 3D image . Data are collected with a photomultiplier detector and the image reconstructed computa - tionally . Spinning disc confocal microscopy : by arranging a set of microlenses and pinholes in an appropriate array on a rapidly rotating wheel , a confocal microscope can be constructed that repeatedly scans many points in parallel , thereby greatly increasing the rate of data acquisition , while decreasing phototoxicity . An image for each focal plane is collected on a standard CCD camera . With currently available laser illumination , it is possible to acquire single frame images in a few milliseconds . This makes spinning disc confocal microscopy a relatively straightforward way to achieve high temporal and spatial resolution for dynamic structures . Total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy : total internal reflection ( TIR ) occurs when a beam of light is incident at a suitably small angle from a medium of higher refractive index onto an interface with a medium of lower refractive index . In particular , light is totally reflected when incident from a glass coverslip ( n (cid:2) 1 . 5 ) onto the aqueous medium of a cell in culture ( n (cid:2) 1 . 35 ) . There is nonetheless an ‘evanescent wave’ produced in the lower refractive index medium , with an intensity that falls off exponentially as the distance from the interface grows . Thus , if the excitation illumina - tion in a fluorescence microscope is so directed that it is totally reflected from the interface between the coverslip and adherent cell , fluorophores located within 100 – 200 nm of the coverslip are strongly excited , but those further away are not . Thus , the images of the layer at or near the cell surface contain little or no interference from fluorescent molecules elsewhere in the cytosol . Wide - field illumination fluorescence microscopy : visualization using excitation illumination propagating parallel to the z - axis . The intensity of fluorescent molecules is directly proportional to their number within the illuminated volume . Images generated in this way have significant contributions from objects located above or below the focal plane . Spatial deconvolution is required for accurate representation of the image . Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 598 limited ) structures detaching from larger ones . Many of thesestructuresrecruited actin , Arp2 / 3complexorcortactin at or near the time of membrane scission , but others did not [ 21 , 25 , 26 ] . These studies led to the conclusion that , in mammalian cells as in yeast , actin is a key participant in clathrin - based endocytosis and its assembly is required to drive the inward movement of the budding clathrin - coated vesicle [ 21 , 26 ] . The observations summarized above were at odds with the variable dependence of clathrin trafﬁc on actin polymerization , as deﬁned by pharmacological criteria ( sensitivity to actin depolymerizers , etc . ) [ 44 ] . In some cases , for example the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles in presynaptic terminals of giant synapses from lampreys [ 45 , 46 ] , or in the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells [ 47 , 48 ] , and in the internalization of vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) by clathrin - coated structures [ 49 ] , actin polymerization is indeed linked to membrane deformation in clathrin - coated pits . However , in many other cases – for example endocytosis in the presynapse of rat hippocampal neurons [ 50 ] or transferrin uptake by coated pits of non - polarized BSC1 ﬁbroblastic cells in culture [ 34 , 51 ] – actin polymerization is clearly not essential . We can now dis - tinguish between at least two modes of clathrin coat for - mation at the plasma membrane , with different mechanisms for coat internalization ( Figure 1 ) . At one end of the spectrum , the actin cytoskeleton is not required for the normal formation and budding of the rapidly grow - ing pits , whereas at the other it is essential for the for - mation , inward movement and dissolution of longer - lived clathrin structures . That is , clathrin is a scaffold for at least two kinds of membrane - associated processes . This distinction allows the resolution of apparent contradictions between the high - resolution structural data and some models put forward to explain how the invagination of clathrin - coated structures might occur ( Figure 1 , inset ) . Distinct forms of endocytic clathrin - coated structures Spinning disc confocal microscopy – another sensitive and rapid imaging approach – has been used to observe the assembly and disassembly dynamics of ﬂuorescent clathrin structures as they form at the free plasma membrane at the free ( top ) and attached ( bottom ) surfaces of cells in culture ( Figure 2a ) . These studies began with BSC1 cells , taking advantage of the observation that more than 95 % of the plasma – membrane clathrin - coated pits in these cells are rapidly forming , diffraction - limited structures [ 30 ] . The experiments were conducted in cells stably expressing ﬂuorescently - tagged forms of clathrin light chain or s 2 - adaptin , the small subunit of the endocytic clathrin adaptor AP - 2 . They were later extended to other cell types [ 22 , 34 ] . Regardless of cell type , the clathrin and AP - 2 signals always colocalize . In imaging studies of cells growing on a coverslip it is particularly important to distinguish the properties of cla - thrin - relatedprocessesatthefreesurfaceofacellfromthose at the coverslip - attached surface . Clathrin - containing ﬂuor - escent structures detected at the free surface are , with rare exceptions , diffraction limited ( below the (cid:2) 250 nm optical resolution of the imaging setup ) . They show a characteristic steady protein accumulation , typically for a period of 40 – 70 s . They disappear suddenly at the end of the accumu - lationperiodbecause coat disassemblyrapidlyfollows mem - brane budding . These events correspond to ‘canonical’ - coated pits , in which the sequential recruitment of clathrin and its adaptors results in a coat that assembles progress - ively into a curved lattice , deforming the membrane as it grows ( Figure 1 ) . In canonical - coated pits , adaptors selec - tively capture membrane - bound proteins destined for endo - cytosis ; membrane pinching , mediated by dynamin , separates the fully formed coated vesicle from its parent membrane , and an ATP - dependent Hsc70 chaperone uncoats the released vesicle . A subset of these coated pits forms sequentially at preferred sites or ‘hot spots’ [ 29 ] ( Figure 1 ) . Clathrin and AP - 2 structures at the coverslip - attached surface have more diverse characteristics ( Figure 2b ) . One set comprises diffraction - limited objects with the same dynamic properties as the canonical - coated pits observed on the top surface . Members of a second set are of variable size , sometimes slightly larger than diffraction limited , and they have relatively long lifetimes , usually greater than two minutes and sometimes longer than 15 minutes [ 21 , 25 , 28 – 30 ] . Just before dissolution , the full coat moves inwards towards the cell interior , bringing with it a portion of the underlying membrane , which then buds off in a Figure 2 . Different types of clathrin - coated structures detected on the attached surface of cells . The upper panels are single frames from time series recorded from : ( a ) a monkey BSC1 cell expressing s 2 – EGFP of the adaptorAP - 2 ; ( b ) a human HeLa cell expressing the Tomato – LCa light chain of clathrin . The live - cell images are from optical sections , acquired with a spinning disc confocal microscope , at the level at which plasma membrane adheres to the glass coverslip . The white and red arrows single out short - and long - lived fluorescent objects , whose dynamic behavior corresponds to coated pits and coated plaques , respectively . The bottom panels are electron micrographs obtained from the attached surfaces of ‘unroofed’ preparations of the corresponding cell type . Whereas BSC1 cells display only deeply curved clathrin - coated structures ( pits ) , HeLa cells contain both deeply curved and relatively flat clathrin lattices ( pits and plaques , respectively ) . The clathrin lattices in coated pits contain both hexagonal and pentagonal facets ; the coated plaques contain mostly hexagonal facets . Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 599 dynamin - dependent manner [ 26 , 34 ] . Classical images from electron microscopy ( Figure 3 ) have shown extended clathrin lattices , approximately planar or moderately domed and with mostly hexagonal facets [ 52 , 53 ] , called in one paper ‘coated plaques’ [ 54 ] . Recent work shows that the long - lived clathrin structures studied by live - cell ima - ging correspond , at least in many cases , to coated plaques ( Figure 2 ) [ 34 ] . The relative abundance of coated plaques and canonical - coated pits depends strongly on cell type . For example , coated plaques are hard to observe in freshly plated BSC1 cells , whereas plaques lasting more than 15 minutes are dominant features on the adherent surface of HeLa cells . ‘Non - terminal events’ [ 25 ] is a phrase used to describe those cases in which a long - lived ﬂuorescent clathrin structure remains in place , whereas a small drop in cla - thrin ﬂuorescence in the overall object coincides with the formation and inward movement of a vesicular carrier marked ( for example ) by a ﬂuorescent Tf receptor . The departing carrier contains only a small fraction of the total Tf receptor associated with the long - lived clathrin struc - ture [ 26 ] . This type of event probably represents the for - mation and budding of a small clathrin - coated structure that is not spatially resolved from the coated plaque ( i . e . , separated from it by less than the 250 nm resolution limit of the light microscope ) . Indeed , electron micrographs of ‘unroofed’ cells often show deeply invaginated pits close to ﬂat clathrin arrays ( Figure 3 ) . Further experimental distinction between clathrin - coated pits and plaques comes from use of differential nanometry ( DiNa ) , a high - z - precision ( (cid:2) 10 nm ) imaging technique that correlates the time dependence of ﬂuor - escence , recorded both by total internal reﬂection ( TIR ) and wide - ﬁeld illumination , from two distinct components in an assembling structure [ 22 ] . DiNa , when applied to cells expressing ﬂuorescently - tagged clathrin , AP - 2 and epsin , has allowed the determination , with a temporal resolution of (cid:2) 1 s , of the relative displacement of AP - 2 or epsin with respect to clathrin in endocytic structures forming on the attached membrane of mammalian cells [ 22 , 34 ] . DiNa measurements show that a canonical - coated pit grows continuously as an invaginating shell , which pinches off immediately upon completion . The entire process takes typically 30 – 60 seconds . AP - 2 concentrates in the older part of the curved coat , away from the plasma membrane , whereas epsin resides primarily at the growing rim of the pit , closer to the plasma membrane . This polarized distri - bution of AP - 2 corresponds to the asymmetric distribution of electron density in cryoEM tomographic reconstructions of coated vesicles isolated from the brain [ 55 ] . The polar - ized location of AP - 2 with respect to clathrin in a budding coated pit explains why , under TIR conditions of illumina - tion , the relative ﬂuorescence of AP - 2 decreases more rapidly than the corresponding ﬂuorescence of clathrin , as the coated pit moves in the evanescent ﬁeld away from the coverslip and towards the cell interior . Clathrin and AP - 2 signals always disappear together when determined by spinning disc confocal or wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence micro - scopy . Thus , an earlier loss of the AP - 2 signal determined by TIR does not imply a proposed alternative interpretation , in which AP - 2 dissociates from the coat before disassembly of the clathrin lattice [ 23 , 56 ] . The well - established presence of both clathrin and AP - 2 in coated vesicles isolated from tissues or cells also contradicts this alternative model . By contrast , DiNa measurements show that a coated plaque grows initially at about the same rate as a coated pit , but without displacement from the cell surface . Its growth reaches a ﬂuctuating plateau of ﬂuorescence inten - sity , generally 2 – 3 times that of a typical pit , and the plaque remains in place for up to several minutes before moving uniformly inwards , a few seconds before mem - brane pinching . The ﬂuctuation in the ﬂuorescence signal might represent the partial addition and / or removal of clathrin and AP - 2 from the coat , a behavior that is fully consistent with the partial ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) of clathrin assemblies located at the bottom surface of HeLa cells [ 57 ] . In contrast to the relative displacement ( with respect to clathrin ) of AP - 2 and epsin in coated pits , AP - 2 and epsin have the same mean z - position as the bulk of the clathrin during the whole process of coated plaque formation [ 34 ] . Sharply curved pits and relatively ﬂat , extended arrays have both been seen by electron microscopy ( Figure 3 ) , but there was no direct way to link the shape of the clathrin coats with their dynamic characteristics . The distinction between coated pits and coated plaques , derived from live - cell imaging , correlates with two kinds of lattices seen by standard transmission electron microscopy of thin sections or by freeze – etch electron microscopy on the inward - facing surface of adherent plasma membranes from ‘unroofed’ cells [ 53 , 54 , 58 , 59 ] . Recent work shows that the relative frequency of the two kinds of structures , as detected by electron microscopy , correlates well with their relative frequencies determined by live - cell imaging criteria . Speciﬁcally , BSC1 cells that display primarily short - lived clathrin events at the cell surface show only sharply curved pits when prepared for electron microscopy ( Figure 2a , white arrows ) , whereas HeLa cells , which display both Figure 3 . Morphologyof clathrin - coatedstructureson the attachedsurface of cells . Electron micrograph obtained from an ‘unroofed’ preparation of human A4321 cells imaged by electron microscopy after quick - freeze deep - etching to show a range of different shapes of deeply curved and relatively flat clathrin structures on the adherent plasma membrane . ( Reproduced , with permission , from [ 52 ] ) . Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 600 short - and long - lived coated structures ( Figure 2b , white and red arrows , respectively ) , show both sharply curved pits and extended clathrin lattices [ 34 ] . This correlation be - tween clathrin lattice morphology and clathrin coat dynamics is fully consistent with the clathrin assembly model put forward more than 16 years ago [ 60 ] ; this model also conforms to the structural constraints imposed by high - resolution cryoEM reconstructions of clathrin coats [ 17 ] . Many investigators assume that the ﬂat clathrin sheets are an initial stage for coated pit formation and that curved ‘domes’ emerge by transforming hexagons into pentagons in the middle of an array . But the introduction of the proper number of pentagons ( 12 ) or combinations of heptagons – pentagons for curvature requires major molecular re - arrangements . The intricate and extended association of legs from six different clathrin triskelions along any one edge makes the introduction of curvature ( pentagons ) into a ﬂat ( hexagonal ) sheet exceptionally unlikely ( see Figure 4 for an illustration of how clathrin triskelions are packed into the lattice and Figure 5 for an ‘origami’ exercise showing why such a rearrangement from hexagons to pentagons is implausible ) . The acquisition of a pentagon would require the stepwise removal of a 60 8 clathrin ‘pie slice’ ( Figure 5 ) , an operation that would have to be repeated 12 times . Not only are there no live - cell exper - imental data supporting such events , but also none of the necessary intermediates has ever been observed by elec - tron microscopy . The internalization of a membrane coated by an extended , ﬂat clathrin array , as occurs with coated plaques , involves an abrupt inwards movement into the cell of the entire coat [ 25 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 61 ] . Membrane invagination by a curved clathrin lattice , by contrast , involves the continuous deformation linked to sequential addition of soluble triskelions [ 22 , 62 ] . Another distinction among different clathrin - based endocytic structures is their substantially different depen - dence on actin for the invagination and internalization of membrane . The assembly , budding and uncoating of cano - nical clathrin - coated pits in non - polarized cells such as BSC1 or HeLa are all insensitive to pharmacological inter - ference with actin dynamics , at both the free and attached surfaces [ 51 ] . Canonical pits do not recruit actin - assembly regulators such as the Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin [ 49 ] . By contrast , the formation and internalization of clathrin - coated plaques do involve the recruitment of these regu - lators but rather require normal actin dynamics [ 34 ] . Although coated pits and coated plaques seem to represent distinct assembly modes , there might also be ‘hybrid’ modes . VSV entry seems to be based on such a hybrid form of clathrin - mediated uptake . In that case , coat assembly proceeds normally in the absence of actin dynamics , as in canonical - coated pit formation , but bud - ding does not occur until actin activity is restored [ 49 ] . Electron microscopy of endocytic VSV uptake suggests that the curved coat formation ‘stalls’ when the coated pit curves back against the shaft of the bullet - shaped virus particle [ 49 ] . These ﬁndings with VSV have parallels with the clathrin - dependent uptake of the bacterium Listeria monocytogenes [ 63 , 64 ] . Speciﬁcally , clathrin , dynamin , auxilin and actin are recruited during entry of both patho - gens , and actin polymerization is crucial for their endocy - tosis but not for initial clathrin assembly . In addition , the localization of the actin machinery to sites of L . monocy - togenes invasion requires the prior recruitment of clathrin and dynamin [ 64 ] . In summary , canonical - coated pits are invaginating structures , in which the assembly of a curved clathrin lattice , linked by adaptors and other proteins to the defor - mation of the underlying membrane , gives rise , by con - striction and ( dynamin - catalyzed ) scission , to a coated vesicle ( Figure 1b ) . After the early electron micrographs of yolk and LDL uptake [ 65 , 66 ] , much subsequent work on a great variety of other cargo [ 67 ] and countless studies of membrane reuptake at presynaptic nerve endings [ 68 ] all illustrate this process . Extended clathrin lattices of low curvature ( enriched in hexagonal arrays ) , now called cla - thrin - coated plaques , have also been observed for many years at the attached surface of cells [ 53 , 54 , 58 , 59 ] , and their relationship to the canonical , curved assembly has now been resolved . The coated plaques internalize , but by a mechanism requiring actin remodeling , probably similar to the one proposed for clathrin - mediated membrane uptake in yeast cells [ 39 ] . In contrast to events in yeast cells , however , membrane scission in metazoan cells is catalyzed by dynamin . Abortive clathrin coats Clathrin assemblies that fail to bud , referred to as ‘abortive clathrin coats’ , can also be seen ( Figure 1 ) . First detected by global analysis of data obtained by spinning disc confocal microscopy [ 30 ] , and later conﬁrmed by global analysis of TIRF time series [ 69 ] , abortive clathrin coats have typical lifetimes of less than 20 s . They contain less clathrin and Figure 4 . Receptor sorting and clathrin - coated pit formation . Schematic representation of a clathrin lattice during the assembly of a deeply invaginated coated pit , obtained from the accompanying animation Movie 1 . The shape and location of the triskelions are based on the map ( resolution 0 . 8 nm ) of a clathrin coat obtained by cryoEM [ 17 ] . The position of AP - 2 within the coat is approximate . The shape of AP - 2 is based on X - ray crystallographic data [ 10 ] . AP - 2 adaptor complexes bind selectively to the plasma membrane by interacting both with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in the membrane bilayer and sorting motifs in the cytosolic tails of membrane - bound cargo receptors . Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 601 AP - 2 than do canonical - coated pits at completion , and they are in some cases even more abundant than coated pits and plaques . It is currently believed that abortive clathrin coats represent nucleation and / or initiation events of coat components that start to assemble but then dissolve and fail to progress to invaginating structures because they do not associate with cargo . Evidence supporting this model comes from absence of LDLs , VSV or reovirus colocaliza - tion with abortive structures [ 30 , 49 ] and from the decrease in the number of abortive coats upon conditions of extreme overexpression of a Tf receptor [ 69 ] , a membrane cargo actively internalized by clathrin - coated pits and plaques . Figure 5 . Rearrangements of clathrin triskelions in a flat hexagonal lattice that wouldbe requiredto transforma singlehexagon into a pentagon . This figureis adaptedfrom [ 60 ] . If hexagonal sheets are indeed intermediates in the budding of coated pits , major rearrangements of this kind would be necessary . High - resolution structural data show that a triskelion is centered at every vertex , with each of its three legs spanning three consecutive edges [ 17 , 79 ] . To simplify the drawing , only a subset of color - coded triskelions is shown , depicting just their proximal and distal legs ( those spanning the two edges closestto the vertex ) . Thick lines highlight a subsetof triskelions that would need to refold into the new lattice ; the color - coded stippled lines indicate the new positions adopted by the legs after the rearrangement . The reader is invited to print the diagram ( adapted from [ 60 ] ) , cut out the gray triangular region and fold it along the lines indicated to generate a curved sheet . To make an approximately spherical clathrin lattice , 12 such rearrangementsare requiredat preciselocations within the lattice . This lattice contains 154 triskelions , and 72 would need to be removed ( under the gray pie section ) to transform a singlehexagoninto a pentagon . Elevenadditionalreductions ( of differentamounts , depending on the locationof the new pentagons ) are requiredto generate a completely enclosed structure . No such reductions have ever been detected during the formation of clathrin - coated structures . Clathrin is a relativelystiff protein ( especially considering its contour length ) , with legs disposed at orientations relatively close to those adopted in the final coat [ 17 ] . Overall , coat formation can readily be understood by the sequential assembly of triskelions into a curved lattice . There is no need to postulate a flat , hexagonal intermediate , most of which would have to disassemble to generate curvature . Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 602 Role of actin The relationship between clathrin and actin in endocytic membrane trafﬁc seems to depend on the cell type and the kinds of clathrin structures involved . The relevant recruit - ment and switching mechanisms have not yet been fully worked out . Genetic and imaging data clearly show a strong link between clathrin and actin dynamics for endo - cytosis in yeast cells [ 31 , 32 , 39 ] . Live - cell imaging exper - iments that follow the recruitment of a large number of ﬂuorescently - tagged proteins at locations marked by the transient appearance of clathrin demonstrate early tran - sient accumulation of Las17 , followed by the recruitment of clathrin and associated proteins such as Sla1 , Pan1 , End3 , Sla2 or myosin V , and of actin and regulators of its assem - bly such as the Arp2 / 3 complex , Abp1 , Cap1 / 2 and Sac6 [ 39 ] . These observations have been extended to metazoan cells , leading to the assumption that actin dynamics are essential both during early stages of clathrin coat for - mation and for budding . The assembly of endocytic clathrin coats at the free surface of non - polarized cells is actin - independent , however , just as for canonical - coated pits at the attached surface of the same cells . The formation of coated plaques at the attached surface does require actin dynamics [ 34 ] , as does coat formation in some polarized cells [ 48 , 70 ] . Actin and clathrin dynamics are also linked during the internalization of VSV , even though the clathrin coat surrounding the virus is highly curved , and in the AP - 2 adaptor - independent mode of clathrin array formation induced during phagocytic uptake of L . monocytogenes [ 64 ] . Hip1R is a regulator of actin dynamics that associates with the clathrin light chains cortactin and F - actin [ 71 – 74 ] . Like the loss of clathrin endocytic activity in yeast cells , interference with the clathrin light chains or Hip1R associ - ation with the clathrin light chains in ( non - polarized ) mammalian cells minimally affects the clathrin - mediated uptake of transferrin [ 74 ] and has no effect on the dynamics of canonical - coated pits , but does prevent the assembly of plaques [ 34 ] . These observations , that actin - dependent and actin - independent modes of clathrin assembly co - exist in the same cells , suggest that there are molecular signals that determine which mechanism of membrane defor - mation and budding will prevail . In VSV entry , there seems to be a switch , in which clathrin coat assembly proceeds normally in the absence of actin dynamics , but budding followed by coat disassembly does not [ 49 ] ; in the same cells , canonical - coated pits form and pinch normally . Thus , the actin cytoskeleton has a variable role in clathrin - based endocytosis , and we expect that future analysis will reveal the mechanism ( s ) required to switch from one form to the other . Live - cell imaging designed to monitor single endocytic events has been instrumental in uncovering these relationships , which would otherwise have been confounded by the results of ensemble biochemical meth - odologies or the unconnected snapshots obtained from ﬁxed cells . Future directions The availability of improved imaging hardware , including fast , reliable and sensitive digital cameras for data acqui - sition , automated motorized microscopes , correction of spherical aberration , strong light sources , in situ expres - sion of chimeric ﬂuorescent proteins , increased compu - tational power , improved spatial resolution during live - cell imaging [ 22 , 75 – 77 ] and new analytical tools for unbiased detection of weak ﬂuorescent events [ 78 ] should now allow investigators to gather information on early events in the initiation of coat formation , the regulation of assembly and disassembly , the relationships between the content of coat components and properties of different classes of clathrin - coated structures and whether the characteristics of endocytic clathrin coats in cells within tissues is the same as in cultured cells . Perhaps it will be possible to work out in detail how receptors are captured by adaptors , when SNAREs are recruited to a forming coat and the functions of the various ‘ﬂavors’ of a clathrin coat . The availability of more robust data sets will also permit the generation of detailed kinetic and / or stochastic math - ematical models that can then be used to test ideas and hypotheses of how clathrin coats form . Unbiased methods are crucial for the proper analysis of a large population of relatively heterogeneous , spatio - temporal events , especially those that give relatively weak ﬂuorescent signals . These approaches are particularly crucial when monitoring the kinds of single events detected by live - cell imaging . The ﬁrst application of such an approach to clathrin - coated structures was based on the computational selection of events that satisﬁed the com - bined criteria of having a ﬂuorescence intensity statisti - cally higher than that of the surrounding background and a lifetime longer than 15 s [ 30 ] . This method allowed the detection of all clathrin - based endocytic events and the presence of abortive structures , but it was not sufﬁciently robust to track them . A more recent improved particle - tracking approach , also designed for unbiased detection , now allows both the detection and tracking of all clathrin - based endocytic processes [ 69 , 78 ] . Concluding remarks High - resolution ﬂuorescence imaging techniques have made it possible to classify distinct kinds of clathrin - con - taining endocytic objects : abortive , non - invaginating events ; relatively shorter - lived , continuously invaginating , canonical - coated pits ; and longer - lived , generally larger , non - curved structures ( coated plaques ) . The coated pla - ques appear to be similar to the clathrin - containing , endo - cytic structures found in yeast cells . Different roles for actin dynamics have been identiﬁed for each of these modes of clathrin assembly , and there is a regulated inter - play between clathrin assembly and actin dynamics . We now have an internally consistent mechanistic picture of how clathrin coats form , derived from the spatio - temporal characteristics of assembling clathrin objects obtained by live - cell imaging and the structural constraints imposed by high - resolution descriptions of the clathrin lattice . Acknowledgements I thank the members of my laboratory , current and past , for helping create and sustain a stimulating environment . I thank my colleagues , Stephen C . Harrison in particular , for the opportunity to share good science and for many enlightening discussions . Our visualization efforts have been supported by NIH grants GM075252 and NERCE U54 A1057159 . Finally , I apologize to colleagues whose work I have inadvertently failed to quote . Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 603 References 1 McMahon , H . T . and Mills , I . G . ( 2004 ) COP and clathrin - coated vesicle budding : different pathways , common approaches . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 379 – 391 2 Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) Three ways to make a vesicle [ Review ] . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 187 – 198 3 Robinson , M . S . ( 2004 ) Adaptable adaptors for coated vesicles . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 167 – 174 4 Bonifacino , J . S . and Traub , L . M . ( 2003 ) Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 395 – 447 5 Hirst , J . and Robinson , M . S . ( 1998 ) Clathrin and adaptors . Biochem . Biophys . Acta 1404 , 173 – 193 6 Brodsky , F . M . et al . ( 2001 ) Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 7 Ungewickell , E . J . and Hinrichsen , L . ( 2007 ) Endocytosis : clathrin - mediated membrane budding . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 417 – 425 8 Duncan , M . C . and Payne , G . S . ( 2005 ) Cell biology : protein choreography . Nature 438 , 571 – 573 9 Traub , L . M . ( 2005 ) Common principles in clathrin - mediated sorting at the Golgi and the plasma membrane . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1744 , 415 – 437 10 Owen , D . J . et al . ( 2004 ) Adaptors for clathrin coats : structure and function . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 , 153 – 191 11 Motley , A . M . et al . ( 2006 ) Functional analysis of AP - 2 alpha and mu2 subunits . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 5298 – 5308 12 Keyel , P . A . et al . ( 2006 ) A single common portal for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of distinct cargo governed by cargo - selective adaptors . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 4300 – 4317 13 Gaidarov , I . and Keen , J . H . ( 2005 ) Membrane targeting of endocytic adaptors : cargo and lipid do it together . Dev . Cell 8 , 801 – 802 14 Edeling , M . A . et al . ( 2006 ) Life of a clathrin coat : insights from clathrin and AP structures . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 32 – 44 15 Brett , T . J . and Traub , L . M . ( 2006 ) Molecular structures of coat and coat - associated proteins : function follows form . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 395 – 406 16 Miwako , I . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2006 ) A cell - free biochemical complementation assay reveals complex and redundant cytosolic requirements for LRP endocytosis . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 1335 – 1344 17 Fotin , A . et al . ( 2004 ) Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 432 , 573 – 579 18 Murray , J . M . et al . ( 2007 ) Evaluating performance in three - dimensional ﬂuorescence microscopy . J . Microsc . 228 , 390 – 405 19 Waters , J . C . ( 2009 ) Accuracyandprecisioninquantitativeﬂuorescence microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 1135 – 1148 20 Zoncu , R . et al . ( 2007 ) Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 3793 – 3798 21 Yarar , D . et al . ( 2005 ) A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 964 – 975 22 Saffarian , S . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2008 ) Differential evanescence nanometry : live - cell ﬂuorescence measurements with 10 nm axial resolution on the plasma membrane . Biophys . J . 94 , 2333 – 2342 23 Rappoport , J . Z . et al . ( 2005 ) Analysis of the AP - 2 adaptor complex and cargo during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trafﬁc 6 , 539 – 547 24 Rappoport , J . Z . et al . ( 2006 ) Dynamics of clathrin and adaptor proteins during endocytosis . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 291 , C1072 – 1081 25 Merriﬁeld , C . J . et al . ( 2002 ) Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 26 Merriﬁeld , C . J . et al . ( 2005 ) Coupling between clathrin - coated pit invagination , cortactin recruitment and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 27 Le Clainche , C . et al . ( 2007 ) A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J . 26 , 1199 – 1210 28 Keyel , P . A . et al . ( 2004 ) Endocytic adaptor molecules reveal an endosomal population of clathrin by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 13190 – 13204 29 Gaidarov , I . et al . ( 1999 ) Spatial control of coated pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 30 Ehrlich , M . et al . ( 2004 ) Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 31 Kaksonen , M . et al . ( 2005 ) A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 , 305 – 320 32 Newpher , T . M . et al . ( 2005 ) In vivo dynamics of clathrin and its adaptor - dependent recruitment to the actin - based endocytic machinery in yeast . Dev . Cell 9 , 87 – 98 33 Mettlen , M . et al . ( 2009 ) Endocytic accessory proteins are functionally distinguishedbytheirdifferentialeffects onthematurationof clathrin - coated pits . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3251 – 3260 34 Saffarian , S . etal . ( 2009 ) Distinctdynamicsofendocyticclathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000191 35 Hofmann , M . et al . ( 2005 ) Breaking the diffraction barrier in ﬂuorescence microscopy at low light intensities by using reversibly photoswitchable proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 17565 – 17569 36 Huang , B . et al . ( 2008 ) Whole - cell 3D STORM reveals interactions between cellular structures with nanometer - scale resolution . Nat . Methods 5 , 1047 – 1052 37 Macia , E . et al . ( 2006 ) Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev . Cell 10 , 839 – 850 38 Rappoport , J . Z . et al . ( 2008 ) Dynamics of dynamin during clathrin mediated endocytosis in PC12 cells . PLoS ONE 3 , e2416 39 Kaksonen , M . et al . ( 2006 ) Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 – 414 40 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 – 332 41 Merriﬁeld , C . J . et al . ( 2004 ) Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - Wasp ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediatedendocytosis inculturedﬁbroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 13 – 18 42 Benesch , S . et al . ( 2005 ) N - Wasp deﬁciency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3103 – 3115 43 Zhu , J . et al . ( 2005 ) Regulation of cortactin / dynamin interaction by actin polymerization during the ﬁssion of clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 807 – 817 44 Lamaze , C . et al . ( 1997 ) The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20332 – 20335 45 Bourne , J . et al . ( 2006 ) Actin polymerization regulates clathrin coat maturation during early stages of synaptic vesicle recycling at lamprey synapses . J . Comp . Neurol . 497 , 600 – 609 46 Shupliakov , O . etal . ( 2002 ) Impairedrecyclingofsynapticvesiclesafter acute perturbation of the presynaptic actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 14476 – 14481 47 Sun , X . and Whittaker , G . R . ( 2007 ) Role of the actin cytoskeleton during inﬂuenza virus internalization into polarized epithelial cells . Cell Microbiol . 9 , 1672 – 1682 48 Gottlieb , T . A . et al . ( 1993 ) Actin microﬁlaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 695 – 710 49 Cureton , D . K . et al . ( 2009 ) Vesicular stomatitis virus enters cells through vesicles incompletely coated with clathrin that depend upon actin for internalization . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000394 50 Sankaranarayanan , S . et al . ( 2003 ) Actin has a molecular scaffolding , not propulsive , role in presynaptic function . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 127 – 135 51 Boucrot , E . et al . ( 2006 ) Role of lipids and actin in the formation of clathrin - coated pits . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 4036 – 4048 52 Fujimoto , L . M . et al . ( 2000 ) Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Trafﬁc 1 , 161 – 171 53 Heuser , J . ( 1980 ) Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 , 560 – 583 54 Maupin , P . and Pollard , T . ( 1983 ) Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin ﬁlaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin ﬁxation . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 51 – 62 55 Cheng , Y . et al . ( 2007 ) Cryo - electron tomography of clathrin - coated vesicles : structural implications for coat assembly . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 892 – 899 56 Rappoport , J . Z . et al . ( 2003 ) The AP - 2 complex is excluded from the dynamic population of plasma membrane - associated clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 47357 – 47360 Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 604 57 Wu , X . et al . ( 2001 ) Clathrin exchange during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 291 – 300 58 Aggeler , J . et al . ( 1983 ) High - resolution three - dimensional views of membrane - associated clathrin and cytoskeleton in critical point - dried macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 1452 – 1458 59 Aggeler , J . and Werb , Z . ( 1982 ) Initial events during phagocytosis by macrophages viewed from outside and inside the cell : membrane – particle interactions and clathrin . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 613 – 623 60 Kirchhausen , T . ( 1993 ) Coated pits and coated vesicles – sorting it all out . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 3 , 182 – 188 61 Idrissi , F . Z . et al . ( 2008 ) Distinct acto / myosin - I structures associate withendocyticproﬁlesattheplasmamembrane . J . CellBiol 180 , 1219 – 1232 62 Perera , R . M . et al . ( 2006 ) Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 19332 – 19337 63 Veiga , E . and Cossart , P . ( 2006 ) The role of clathrin - dependent endocytosis in bacterial internalization . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 499 – 504 64 Veiga , E . etal . ( 2007 ) Invasive and adherent bacterial pathogens co - opt host clathrin for infection . Cell Host & Microbe 2 , 340 – 351 65 Anderson , R . G . et al . ( 1977 ) Role of the coated endocytic vesicle in the uptake of receptor - bound low density lipoprotein in human ﬁbroblasts . Cell 10 , 351 – 364 66 Roth , T . F . and Porter , K . R . ( 1964 ) Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti . L . Cell Biol . 20 , 313 – 331 67 Hanover , J . A . et al . ( 1985 ) Transit of receptors for epidermal growth factor and transferrin through clathrin - coated pits . Analysis of the kinetics of receptor entry . J . Biol . Chem . 260 , 15938 – 15945 68 Newton , A . J . et al . ( 2006 ) Inhibition of dynamin completely blocks compensatory synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 17955 – 17960 69 Loerke , D . et al . ( 2009 ) Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol . 7 , e57 70 Buss , F . et al . ( 2001 ) Myosin VI isoform localized to clathrin - coated vesicles with a role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J . 20 , 3676 – 3684 71 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . et al . ( 2001 ) The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1209 – 1223 72 Chen , C - Y . and Brodsky , F . M . ( 2005 ) Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby inﬂuence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 6109 – 6117 73 Legendre - Guillemin , V . et al . ( 2005 ) Huntingtin interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) regulates clathrin assembly through direct binding to the regulatory region of the clathrin light chain . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 6101 – 6108 74 Poupon , V . et al . ( 2008 ) Clathrin light chains function in mannose phosphate receptor trafﬁcking via regulation of actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 168 – 173 75 Hein , B . et al . ( 2008 ) Stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) nanoscopy of aﬂuorescent protein - labeledorganelleinsidealivingcell . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sc . i U . S . A . 105 , 14271 – 14276 76 Eggeling , C . et al . ( 2009 ) Direct observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids in a living cell . Nature 457 , 1159 – 1162 77 Manley , S . et al . ( 2008 ) High - density mapping of single - molecule trajectories with photoactivated localization microscopy . Nat . Methods 5 , 155 – 157 78 Jaqaman , K . et al . ( 2008 ) Robust single - particle tracking in live - cell time - lapse sequences . Nat . Methods 5 , 695 – 702 79 Musacchio , A . et al . ( 1999 ) Functional organization of clathrin in coats : combining electron cryomicroscopy and X - ray crystallography . Mol . Cell 3 , 761 – 770 Review Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 19 No . 11 605