Supplementary data for : Pseudomonas aeruginosa lectin LecB inhibits tissue repair processes by triggering β - catenin degradation Catherine Cott , Roland Thuenauer , Alessia Landi , Katja Kühn , Samuel Juillot , Anne Imberty , Josef Madl , Thorsten Eierhoff , Winfried Römer Suppl . Fig . 1 Suppl . Fig . 1 : LecB induces NF - kB p65 phosphorylation but no apoptosis ( A ) H1299 cells were treated with 4 . 3 µ M LecB for indicated time periods and with 10 ng / ml TNF - α as positive control . Separate Western blots of NF - kB p65 pan and the phosphorylation of NF - kB p65 on Serine 536 and 468 are shown . ( B ) Densitometric quantification of Western blots using ImageJ from samples treated as described in ( A ) . Phosphorylation levels were normalized to actin , and then to p65 pan . Values represent the mean of at least three independent experiments ± SEM . ( C ) Cells were left untreated ( control ) or stimulated for different time periods with 4 . 3 µ M LecB or 1 µ M staurosporine as positive control for apoptosis . Afterwards a Caspase - Glo® 3 / 7 Assay ( Promega ) was performed according to the instructions of the manufacturer . Graph presents normalized luminescence read outs from three independent experiments run in triplicate ± SEM . Asterisks indicate the statistical significance compared to control samples . Suppl . Fig . 2 Suppl . Fig . 2 : LecB attenuates migration and induces NF - kB p65 nuclear translocation and β - catenin degradation in H1975 cells ( A ) H1975 cells were allowed to form confluent cell layers . After scratching the cell layers with a pipet tip , closure of the cell gap was monitored in presence or absence of 4 . 3 µ M LecB . As control , LecB binding to cell surface receptors was blocked by addition of 43 mM L - fucose ( Fuc ) . ( B ) H1975 cells were grown on glass cover slips and were left untreated or treated with 4 . 3 µ M LecB or 43 mM L - fucose or both for 5 hours . Cells were analyzed by confocal fluorescence microscopy after immunostaining for NF - kB p65 ( red ) and counterstaining for DNA ( DAPI , blue ) . Representative confocal microscopy images are shown . ( C ) Microscopy samples were prepared as described in ( B ) and nuclear location of p65 was quantified by estimating the nuclear mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of p65 . Median values of three independent experiments with lower and higher quartile are shown . Error bars represent 1 . 5 interquartile range ( IQR ) values ( statistical analysis was performed using Kruskal - Wallis test with Dunn´s post - hoc test , asterisks indicate statistical significance compared to the untreated control ) . ( D ) H1975 cells were treated with 4 . 3 µ M LecB for the indicated time periods and subjected to Western blot analysis . Representative images of β - catenin and β - actin staining are shown below . The graph shows densitometric quantification of β - catenin level of Western blots using ImageJ . Beta - catenin levels were normalized to actin . Values represent the mean of a two independent experiments ± SEM . Suppl . Fig . 3 Suppl . Fig . 3 : LecB - induced β - catenin degradation is not influenced by cycloheximide , results in less transcriptional activity of β - catenin and regulates cyclin D1 - associated proteins ( A ) H1299 cells were treated as indicated with 4 . 3 µ M LecB in the presence or absence of 100 µ g / ml cycloheximide for different time periods and subjected to Western blot . Representative images of β - catenin and β - actin staining are shown . ( B ) The graph presents a densitometric quantification of β - catenin protein levels of corresponding blots ( A ) of three independent experiments ± SEM . The β - catenin / actin ratio of LecB - treated cells was normalized to untreated cells and values of LecB + cycloheximide - treated cells were normalized to cycloheximide - only - treated cells . Asterisks indicate the statistical significance compared to corresponding control samples . ( C ) H1299 cells were co - transfected with a firefly luciferase - based Topflash reporter ( 7TFP ) and a renilla luciferase reporter with a CMV - promoter as expression control using Lipofectamine2000® . After 12 hours of expression , cells were treated with LecB for the indicated time periods , lysed , and assayed for firefly and renilla luciferase activity . For each condition , three technical replicates were analysed . The graph shows the firefly luciferase readout normalized to the renilla luciferase values for each time point , relative to the 0 hours value , which was set to 100 . ( D ) H1299 cells were stimulated with 4 . 3 µ M LecB for indicated time periods . Protein levels of cyclin E2 and B1 and phosphorylation levels at Ser795 of the Rb protein were determined by Western blot analysis , densitometric quantification using ImageJ and normalization to actin . Representative blots and quantification data ( E ) are depicted . Values represent the mean of at least three independent experiments ± SEM . Asterisks indicate the statistical significance compared to the untreated control .