11 Exploring End User Programming Needs in Home Automation JULIA BRICH , MARCEL WALCH , MICHAEL RIETZLER , and MICHAEL WEBER , Ulm University FLORIAN SCHAUB , Ulm University , Carnegie Mellon University , and University of Michigan Home automation faces the challenge of providing ubiquitous , unobtrusive services while empowering users with approachable conﬁguration interfaces . These interfaces need to provide sufﬁcient expressiveness to support complex automation , and notations need to be devised that enable less tech - savvy users to express such scenarios . Rule - based and process - oriented paradigms have emerged as opposing ends of the spectrum ; however , their underlying concepts have not been studied comparatively . We report on a contextual inquiry study in which we collected qualitative data from 18 participants in 12 households on the current potential and acceptance of home automation , as well as explored the respective beneﬁts and drawbacks of these two notation paradigms for end users . Results show that rule - based notations are sufﬁcient for simple automation tasks but not ﬂexible enough for more complex use cases . The resulting insights can inform the design of interfaces for smart homes to enable usable real - world home automation for end users . CCS Concepts : (cid:2) Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in interaction design ; Ubiqui - tous and mobile computing systems and tools ; (cid:2) Software and its engineering → Software notations and tools ; Additional Key Words and Phrases : Conﬁguration interfaces , contextual inquiry , qualitative analysis , smart home ACM Reference Format : Julia Brich , Marcel Walch , Michael Rietzler , Michael Weber , and Florian Schaub . 2017 . Exploring end user programming needs in home automation . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 24 , 2 , Article 11 ( April 2017 ) , 35 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3057858 1 . INTRODUCTION Home automation as a concept has been around since the 1960s , while the term “smart house” was coined in 1984 [ Aldrich 2003 ] . The purpose of home automation is to support inhabitants in their daily lives via technological means . Areas of interest include secu - rity functions like access control and surveillance systems , resource management with regard to water and electricity , multimedia functions for ubiquitous content stream - ing , and comfort functions like light and heat management [ Bartram et al . 2011 ; Ur et al . 2013 ; Takayama et al . 2012 ; Yang and Newman 2013 ] . The proﬁles of smart home users are naturally diverse . With regard to technical interest and investment , the spectrum ranges from highly involved Do - It - Yourselfers to pure consumers of the Plug‘n’Play mentality . Related to this , solutions for various budget sizes have been developed . Since the state of a building is an impacting factor for home automation , Authors’ addresses : J . Brich , M . Walch , M . Rietzler , and M . Weber , Institute of Media Informatics , Ulm Uni - versity , Germany ; emails : { julia . brich , marcel . walch , michael . rietzler , michael . weber } @ uni - ulm . de ; F . Schaub , School of Information , University of Michigan , USA ; email : fschaub @ umich . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers , to redistribute to lists , or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept . , ACM , Inc . , 2 Penn Plaza , Suite 701 , New York , NY 10121 - 0701 USA , fax + 1 ( 212 ) 869 - 0481 , or permissions @ acm . org . c (cid:2) 2017 ACM 1073 - 0516 / 2017 / 04 - ART11 $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3057858 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 2 J . Brich et al . home automation systems exist in various degrees of building integration , ranging from ﬁxed home installations for new buildings to lightweight wireless solutions that can be added without modifying the actual infrastructure . With regard to age and ability of inhabitants , the specialized segment of Assisted Living [ Chan et al . 2008 ; Kleinberger et al . 2007 ] deals with the additional requirements of senior users or in - home patients . This diverse user proﬁle makes interaction design and development for smart homes challenging . On the one hand , solutions should be ubiquitous and refrain from impact - ing the user’s life ; on the other hand , people expect a certain degree of control over what is going on in their own homes [ Bernheim Brush et al . 2011 ; Costanza et al . 2014 ; Mennicken and Huang 2012a ; Mennicken et al . 2014 ; Rodden et al . 2013 ] . A number of commercial home interfaces have thus opted to expose the underlying technology in staggering detail to enable users full access to the home’s functions [ HomeSeer 2016 ; Insteon 2016 ; Loxone 2016 ; myGEKKO 2016 ] . This however conﬂicts with the reality that only part of the user population is both tech - savvy and interested enough to pro - gram their home from the ground up [ Bartram et al . 2011 ; Bernheim Brush et al . 2011 ; Poole et al . 2008 ; Rodden et al . 2013 ; Rode et al . 2005 ; Yang and Newman 2013 ] . Home automation interfaces thus need to provide control solutions that also cater to the re - quirements of less tech - savvy users that still want to enjoy the beneﬁts of an automated home . Current attempts for simpliﬁed interfaces usually provide home conﬁguration in the form of if – then rule - based approaches [ De Russis and Corno 2015 ; Dey et al . 2006 ; IFTTT 2016 ; Ur et al . 2014 ; Zamora - Izquierdo et al . 2010 ] . Other works have tried process - oriented approaches in the hope of providing increased expressiveness while still retaining easy - to - comprehend visualizations [ Dahl and Svendsen 2011 ; Rietzler et al . 2013 ; Walch et al . 2013 ] . In their strictest form , these two paradigms can be seen as opposing ends of the home programming spectrum , and provide cornerstones for in - teraction research focused on end user needs . The fundamental principles underlying these two paradigms have however not yet been studied with regard to their effects on expressiveness and usability . Also , it is yet unclear how far - reaching end users’ automation needs truly are . Research focused on the beneﬁts and drawbacks of these basic paradigms can help to identify useful features and strategies for usable home automation interfaces targeting end users . We conducted a contextual inquiry study with 18 participants in 12 households in order to gain a better understanding of end user needs for home automation and respective conﬁguration . Through a process consisting of multiple home visitations and semi - structured interviews , we encouraged participants to think of and model home automation use cases in the context of their own home and daily activities . In a between - subjects design , participants either used a rule - based or a process - oriented notation to record automation tasks in order to study practical expressiveness , complexity , and ease of use of the two approaches . We opted for a pen and paper study to encourage creativity and the identiﬁcation of automation use cases relevant to their own daily routines and household devices , without artiﬁcially restricting the elicitation process to a speciﬁc user interface implementation of either notation . Additionally , we also investigated general notions and perceptions on home automation in order to identify real - world deployment issues and requirements . Our results show that rule - based notations are generally sufﬁcient to express simple automation tasks but are not ﬂexible enough to support more complex use cases . Participants that used the process - oriented notation valued its expressiveness and presented us with more complex use cases involving more devices in their homes . We further discuss how our results can inform the design of end user conﬁguration interfaces for smart home technology in order to enable usable real - world home automation for end users . The remainder of this article is structured as follows . First , we discuss related work dealing with the acceptance and requirements of home automation by end users . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 3 Furthermore , we detail various projects that have developed conﬁguration interfaces following the rule - based and process - oriented paradigms . From this analysis , we de - rive the research questions that were addressed in our study . We then outline the particulars of our study and present the resulting insights . 2 . RELATED WORK Several previous studies aimed to elicit relevant factors for the adoption of smart home technology . We ﬁrst discuss their results before focusing on proposed rule - based and process - oriented conﬁguration approaches . 2 . 1 . Requirements for Successful Home Automation As the adoption of home automation in the general populace has been reluctant , re - search has been conducted over the years to better understand the requirements of potential users . 2 . 1 . 1 . NotableCharacteristicsofHomeAutomation . To provide designers with an easy and reusable means of grouping home automation solutions targeting certain routines , Crabtree et al . [ 2002 ] expand on Alexander’s approach of architectural design patterns inspired by social behavior [ Alexander et al . 1977 ] . They designed a pattern - based approach to structure the domestic behavior of home automation study participants and introduced the notion of activity centers as the basis of domestic routines involving technology . Zhang et al . [ 2009 ] , in their work on home automation interface complexity , identiﬁed home automation tasks as belonging to one of three categories , namely skill - based ( e . g . , turning on the lights ) , rule - based ( e . g . , If it is dark outside , close the blinds ) , and knowledge - based tasks . The latter comprises a more complex network of rule - based tasks and requires choices to be made depending on more than one context condition . With regard to the static nature of task automation , several works have pointed out how home automation will have to deal with irregular behavior or user routines changing over time [ Davidoff et al . 2006 ; Chan et al . 2008 ; Kaasinen et al . 2012 ; Costanza et al . 2014 ] . 2 . 1 . 2 . Diverse Target Population . Davidoff et al . [ 2006 ] put their focus on researching the requirements of families with regard to home automation . They found ﬂexibility of the system to be paramount as participants expressed a need for their system to accommodate their ever - changing routines . According to Davidoff et al . , automation systems should provide users with capabilities to easily create and modify automation behavior . The survey conducted by Kaasinen et al . [ 2012 ] concerns itself with the gen - eral notion of user acceptance and expectations in intelligent environments . Among other things , they point out the importance of ease of use and giving the user a sense of being in control . They deﬁne the user as an active co - crafter in intelligent environments rather than a passive consumer and advise designers of intelligent environments to create technology that ﬁts into their users’ routines . Furthermore , smart technology should be designed for all kinds of users and neither exclusively for experts nor novices . With similar results , Mennicken and Huang [ 2012a ] conducted an in - the - wild study that followed home automation professionals and end users in the process of estab - lishing and inhabiting smart homes . Their ﬁndings include the notion of supporting and involving end users through all phases , from smart home conception to daily use . Regarding the latter , they also point out that capabilities need to be present to support both users with a high interest in modifying the home on a technical level as well as more passive users of the infrastructure . Pierce and Paulos [ 2012 ] reviewed HCI literature with a focus on energy - related home automation approaches . They found that upcoming smart grid technology will have a huge impact on home users who previously had little contact with energy technology due to the centralized nature of ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 4 J . Brich et al . current provider systems . Aside from the persuasive aspect of getting users to reduce or shift energy consumption commonly associated with smart energy technology , they found that interaction research also needs to account for cultural aspects surrounding energy usage in the home . Special attention will have to be payed to the reconcili - ation of users’ personal energy needs and routines with requirements characteristic of smart grids , such as peak avoidance . Further suggestions point toward automat - ing everyday appliances like thermostats and dishwashers—a notion that has since been taken up by the industry . Pierce and Paulos further encourage research on new interactions to empower end users and leading them into their new role of energy sup - plier and distributor facilitated by an increasingly ﬂexible energy grid . Costanza et al . [ 2014 ] conducted an in - the - wild study to research the impact and reception of an agent - based system designed to help users organize their laundry sessions in the context of smart grid technology . They found that doing laundry is an especially delicate use case illustrating the area of potential conﬂict between user routines and automation technology as users have rituals as well as necessities surrounding the laundry task that cannot easily be shifted to accommodate , for example , the goals of energy - aware appliances . 2 . 1 . 3 . BarrierstoAdoption . Harper [ 2003 ] identiﬁed cost and outdated building struc - tures as potential impediments . Chan et al . [ 2008 ] point toward the large variety of connection technology and protocols . They also address legal and ethical issues rel - evant for the eHealth sector . Newman et al . [ 2008 ] identify “piecemeal interaction” as a central problem , i . e . , that functionality is often scattered across various devices , services , and interfaces with narrowly deﬁned responsibilities . Eckl and MacWilliams [ 2009 ] have found smart homes to be either too complex to use ( stemming from the intention to be a general purpose system ) , too restricted in their functions ( special - ized niche products ) or too “clever” by trying to take the user out of the control loop . They also note cost as a relevant factor . Brush et al . [ 2011 ] conducted an in - the - wild study with DIY households and more consumer - oriented households that had out - sourced their home automation technology to speciﬁcally identify potential barriers for the widespread adoption of home automation technology . They identiﬁed four bar - riers , namely high cost of ownership , inﬂexibility , poor manageability , and difﬁculty achieving security . Poor manageability in particular addresses how complex user in - terfaces can confuse and irritate users . While their participants successfully incor - porated home automation into their lives , they had to overcome diverse challenges that might keep less enthusiastic end users entirely from adopting home automation technology . 2 . 1 . 4 . InterfaceConsiderations . Several studies have found that full automation is not necessarily in the interest of users [ Koskela et al . 2004 ; Koskela and V¨a¨an¨anen - Vainio - Mattila 2004 ; Hwang and Hoey 2012 ; Leitner et al . 2013 ] , because they may fear losing control over the technology . Instead of full and invisible automation , end user conﬁgu - ration of automation behavior is proposed . Harper [ 2003 ] however found the usability of interfaces lacking and criticized the missing involvement of users in the design process . In the context of Assisted Living , Chan et al . [ 2008 ] also advocate user involvement at the design stage . Zhang et al . [ 2009 ] studied the effect of interfaces varying with regard to presented complexity on the completion metrics of home automation tasks and found that skill - based tasks as described above can be accomplished more effec - tively with a less complex , direct control style interface , while rule - based tasks are better supported by a more complex , task - oriented interface . They recommend the use of both approaches in home automation interfaces to adequately support the variety of tasks . Mennicken et al . ’s [ 2014 ] survey compiles further challenges from related work . They identify the need to provide users with the ability to model what they ﬁnd ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 5 useful instead of what is technically feasible or interesting from the researcher’s point of view . However , information needs to be visualized in a reduced way so even less tech - savvy users can make sense of it . They further point out the opportunities that could arise from users sharing their automation ideas and behaviors . They emphasize the importance of studying home automation interaction in the wild to uncover user requirements in more detail . In relation to this , Costanza et al . [ 2014 ] point out that interaction touching upon user routines needs to be designed in a way that allows users to incorporate the technology into their everyday lives instead of building their life around the automation system . 2 . 1 . 5 . DeviceIntegration . Another issue for the successful adoption of home automation is centered around the issue of ﬁrst bringing smart devices into the home . While this has been pointed out by research for some time [ Poole et al . 2008 ; Mennicken and Huang 2012a ; Chong et al . 2014 ] and various approaches have been proposed , it has not been fully addressed . Recently , Jewell et al . [ 2015 ] conducted usability studies on how to design conﬁguration interfaces for the integration of smart devices aimed at less tech - savvy users . They found that end users require the interfaces to be unobtrusive , self - explanatory , and primarily robust . Summarily , the following areas can be identiﬁed from the related work as critical for the successful adoption of home automation by end users . External factors related to the infrastructure deal with the potentially high cost and effort to turn current buildings into smart homes . In conjunction with this , surrounding infrastructure like high - speed internet and smart grid access need to be up to par . Furthermore , current smart home solutions are often niche products advertised for assisted living , entertain - ment , or security rather than holistically integrated systems . This also leads to issues with installing and managing home automation systems that serve multiple purposes as their combination tends to be complex and comprised of heterogeneous technologies . Setting up a smart home requires expertise that either needs to come from an external contractor or be acquired by end users themselves . In this regard , it needs to be kept in mind that not all end users are interested in managing the technology ; often they “just want it to work . ” Systems should thus make sure to appeal to users with different levels of expertise . Also relating to technology is the issue that most current systems fail to embody multi - user settings that regularly occur in reality . And ﬁnally , for in - ternal factors like acceptance and trust , home automation systems have to be reliable , inform users about their inner workings , and be ﬂexible enough to be integrated into users’ routines and everyday lives . The quality of user interfaces is paramount for the adoption of highly complex , distributed systems like home automation—users need to be able to monitor and interact with the automation system ; however , the available information needs to be condensed and presented in a usable fashion . In our study , we approach the issue of requirements for successful home automation from the user’s perspective . We are interested in how prospective end users themselves evaluate the potential of home automation for their personal lives and what they per - ceive as inhibiting or facilitating factors of the technology . This can help to either verify and strengthen the points addressed in the related work and help identify additional areas of concern . Based on our results , both researchers and industry can gain a bet - ter understanding of how to take home automation from interesting novelty to broad adoption in the general population . In addition , we found it beneﬁcial to study more closely the design of current smart home conﬁguration interfaces as the related work presented so far has highlighted that empirical research targeting the underlying interaction paradigms is missing . Related work pertaining to smart home conﬁguration interfaces in general , and rule - based and process - oriented approaches in particular , is presented in the following . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 6 J . Brich et al . 2 . 2 . Smart Home Conﬁguration Interfaces Prior work on end user conﬁguration of home automation has uncovered interesting aspects with regard to programming metaphors and user requirements . Rode et al . [ 2004 ] deﬁne device programming as an extension of direct manipulation . They iden - tiﬁed “ahead of time” ( i . e . , scheduling the execution of an activity ) and “repeats easy” ( i . e . , the automation of recurring tasks ) as main programming functions . They also ﬁnd that users only choose programming over direct manipulation if there is a powerful necessity for it . Truong et al . [ 2004 ] studied how users conceptualize automation ap - plications without a pre - given model . Their participants tended to specify desires by abstracting from devices and adopt a more task - centric perspective . They presented CAMP , a conﬁguration interface introducing the fridge magnet metaphor . Newman [ 2006 ] and Newman et al . [ 2008 ] collected information on the adequacy of classic pro - gramming constructs for use by non - tech - savvy users and came up with the notion of digital recipes for their OSCAR interface , which encapsulate scenes in which users may specify device settings to be executed in combination . Koskela et al . [ 2004 ] , Koskela and V¨a¨an¨anen - Vainio - Mattila [ 2004 ] , and Leitner et al . [ 2013 ] also focused on scene - based end user conﬁguration . Both approaches initially focused on time triggers for the execution of scenes , Koskela et al . ’s participants however suggested the addition of context event - based triggers . They further uncovered two distinct activity patterns desired by users : pattern control and instant control . Pattern control denotes cases where users create automation settings , whereas instant control refers to remote con - trol options . Participants preferred to use computers for pattern control and mobile phones for instant control . Eckl and MacWilliams [ 2009 ] also propose a system where users can invoke scenes ; however , the respectively available selection of scenes depends on the current context . They advocate that the user should make a conscious choice instead of invisible background automation . Both Brush et al . [ 2011 ] and Leitner et al . [ 2013 ] ﬁnd existing commercial home automation interfaces lacking in usability . Even computer science ( CS ) students had difﬁculties mastering the evaluated programming interfaces [ Leitner et al . 2013 ] . In summary , the related work has identiﬁed that automation interaction can con - stitute either direct manipulation / remote control functionality , or occur in the form of programming . Both are demanded by users , the more complex programming variant is however only attractive if it offers clear additional value over the remote control alter - native . With regard to abstraction , users tend to be task - oriented rather than focusing on the speciﬁc smart device . Scenes constitute a common automation construct that has also been adapted in the industry ; thereby , a combination of related settings can be triggered at a given time or via determined context . This is however a very basic form of automation ; its characteristics are closer to remote control functionality than to home programming . We will focus instead on the latter to gain a better understand - ing of the human computer interaction required to create more complex automation scenarios . With regard to user involvement , related work from this paragraph and the section before both ﬁnd that fully hidden background automation can be detrimental to user acceptance and trust . Instead , end users want and need to be involved with the automatic processes happening in their homes . For users to be involved in the conﬁguration of their smart homes , however , interfaces need to be easy to understand and usable even for less tech - savvy users . 2 . 2 . 1 . Rule - BasedConﬁguration . Many recently developed end user conﬁguration inter - faces of home automation systems focus primarily on rule - based approaches follow - ing the if – then paradigm ( also referred to in the related work as trigger - action or event - action paradigm ) . The Stick - e Note architecture [ Pascoe 1997 ] early on com - bined context conditions as annotations with desired actions “written” on Post - It notes ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 7 to raise awareness for context - aware computing . The iCAP system [ Dey et al . 2006 ] provides a visual programming interface for context - aware applications , which allows the speciﬁcation of if – then rules that are triggered by certain context conﬁgurations . An iCAP rule may combine up to three conditions to trigger one action . The interface of the DOMOSEC prototype home [ Zamora - Izquierdo et al . 2010 ] , among other things , enabled users to conﬁgure scenarios in which a number of device actions could be ex - ecuted under certain conditions . While those scenarios were not termed as rules , they exhibit if – then semantics . Garc´ıa - Herranz et al . [ 2010 ] developed a system - level rule engine to provide an application - independent mechanism for end user speciﬁcation of rules . They intended to ameliorate the trade - off between ﬂexibility and simplicity for users , with the vision of generating situation - speciﬁc interfaces for the underlying rule system . In addition to the if – then rules , they introduced triggers ( a when condition ) and timers for time - dependent functions . This can be considered a hybrid approach combining aspects from both conventional rule - based and process - oriented notations as introduced in the next section . The HomeMaestro application [ Salzberg 2011 ] for Microsoft’s HomeOS [ Dixon et al . 2012 ] extends the explicit programming concept by enabling users to record rules from interaction within their actual environment . Ur et al . [ 2014 ] examined the capabilities of rule - based programming for end user conﬁg - uration in the smart home context . They asked participants to freely submit desired smart home behaviors and extracted those that could be expressed as rules via one trigger – one action or multiple triggers – multiple actions patterns . They found end user conﬁguration to be feasible as well as necessary due to the high variety in desired behaviors . A recent analysis of 200 , 000 rules deﬁned by users of the web service IFTT [ 2016 ] shows the real - world proliferation and acceptance of rule - based programming [ Ur et al . 2016 ] . De Russis and Corno [ 2015 ] developed HomeRules to test a set of guidelines for rule - based programming derived from related work . HomeRules is a tangible interface similar to HomeMaestro that combines real - world device interaction with rule - based programming . They evaluated the concept in a qualitative study and found participants both capable of and enthusiastic about rule - based programming . To summarize , rules are constructed of conditions comprised from context and result - ing automation actions , following the structure of “if THIS , then THAT . ” In addition to this basic version , several variations have been proposed where the number and combination of conditions can vary , where an additional “when” construct has been introduced or where actions can be triggered by a timer . As large rule systems can become complex and difﬁcult to oversee , some projects have conceived workarounds like context ﬁlters or recording functionality . All in all , rule - based conﬁguration is the most widespread home automation programming paradigm in research and industry and has been well - received by users . However , as rules follow a strict pattern and are not naturally adequate for automation chains , another paradigm has evolved—process - oriented conﬁguration . 2 . 2 . 2 . Process - OrientedConﬁguration . Process - oriented notations have emerged for the expression of temporal and loosely time - synchronized activities . However , the expres - siveness of process - oriented notations is often coupled with complex user interfaces . Although some of the above mentioned rule - based solutions support sequences of ac - tions , it is not an inherent characteristic of rule - based notations as deﬁned by Ur et al . [ 2014 ] and employed in many current home automation systems where one or more trigger events are directly responsible for the execution of one or more actions . Humble et al . [ 2003 ] propose a more process - oriented approach based on a jig - saw metaphor to enable users to create multi - stage connections of sensors and devices as an information ﬂow pipeline . In accordance with the source - to - sink control ﬂow paradigm , this introduces a timing aspect as a device’s action and subsequent state ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 8 J . Brich et al . change trigger the next action in the process . Dahl and Svendsen [ 2011 ] investigated the jig - saw metaphor , ﬁltered lists , and wiring diagrams to elicit usability factors for end user conﬁguration . Filtered lists constitute a basic rule - based interface where users specify a trigger and resulting action in strict order . Wiring diagrams allow for the placement and connection of component blocks via directed arrows and the subsequent speciﬁcation of the desired behavior . While they ﬁnd that ﬁltered lists were rated as most effective , participants found the more process - oriented notations to be more enjoyable . Rietzler et al . [ 2013 ] and Walch et al . [ 2013 ] propose a process - oriented graphical end user conﬁguration approach for smart homes , similar to wiring diagrams , which reduces the complexity of process - oriented notations while retaining their expressiveness . However , the work reports only preliminary usability results of this approach based on a prototype implementation of the homeBLOX system . In summary , processes - oriented conﬁguration can be seen as the creation of multi - stage automation chains where one set of conditions and actions can trigger one or more following sets . Process - oriented conﬁguration introduces a temporal aspect by nature and allows conditional branching . While some interesting approaches for the paradigm have been proposed , it has not been thoroughly explored from an interaction research perspective . It is yet unclear whether the beneﬁts of process - oriented conﬁguration warrant a more complex user interface from an end user’s point of view . 2 . 2 . 3 . Discussion of Conﬁguration Approaches . It can be concluded that existing home automation conﬁguration approaches have a number of drawbacks . Scene and sched - ule programming [ Koskela et al . 2004 ; Koskela and V¨a¨an¨anen - Vainio - Mattila 2004 ; Leitner et al . 2013 ; Newman et al . 2008 ; Rode et al . 2004 ] , which is used by the commercial Control4Home [ 2016 ] and e - Domotica [ 2016 ] systems , is limited in ex - pressiveness . Existing interfaces also tend to suffer from Newman et al . ’s “piecemeal interaction , ” e . g . , users have to control settings for lights , thermostats , etc . , separately . Rule - based interfaces further tend to be rather programming - oriented ( e . g . , Leitner et al . [ 2013 ] or Loxone [ 2016 ] ) , which may introduce barriers for less tech - savvy users . More visual systems like Ninja Blocks [ 2016 ] and If - This - Then - That [ IFTTT 2016 ] lose clarity when an automation task requires multiple rules . Rule - based approaches have also been found to limit the user’s overall creativity and expressiveness [ Dahl and Svendsen 2011 ; Garc´ıa - Herranz et al . 2010 ] , whereas process - oriented notations need to focus more on supporting clarity of control ﬂow mechanics [ Dahl and Svendsen 2011 ] . With regard to programming notations rather than scene setting , both rule - based and process - oriented conﬁguration seem to have the potential to be employed for effective end user programming . The respective advantages and drawbacks of the two paradigms have however not formally been researched . Doing so can lead to a sound understanding of end user interaction requirements and inform the design of future home automation interfaces . The next section gives a summary of our rationale and details the research questions we derived from our analysis of related work . 3 . RESEARCH QUESTIONS While home automation has been extensively researched and many home automation systems and conﬁguration interfaces have been proposed , the concept has not yet pen - etrated the consumer market on a larger scale [ Bernheim Brush et al . 2011 ; Kaasinen et al . 2012 ; Newman et al . 2008 ] . Current solutions are marked by high costs , high com - plexity , low ﬂexibility , and low usability [ Bernheim Brush et al . 2011 ; Harper 2003 ] . To further the adoption of smart home technology by end users , home automation systems need to offer intuitive , easy - to - use conﬁguration capabilities and interfaces that enable users to tailor their home’s behavior to their individual needs . However , home automa - tion interfaces are faced with the challenge of presenting highly technical automation ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 9 procedures in a way that is intelligible to non - expert users , yet being expressive enough to support their automation needs . Both in industry and research , primarily if - this - then - that rules are used to specify home automation behavior : Based on time - or event - based triggers , certain automa - tion actions are performed , e . g . , “when the alarm clock rings , turn on the lights . ” While rule - based approaches allow for accessible automation of simple tasks , more complex automation scenarios—that need to assume the form of extensive rule systems—are both difﬁcult to create and potentially difﬁcult to understand or recognize upon re - visitation . Recent research has proposed to employ a more process - oriented approach to smart home end user conﬁguration [ Dahl and Svendsen 2011 ; Rietzler et al . 2013 ; Walch et al . 2013 ] in order to enhance the expressiveness of automation tasks . To unearth the inherent beneﬁts and drawbacks characteristic of the rule - based and process - oriented conﬁguration paradigms , we designed a contextual inquiry study in which participants worked with notations designed to be representative of each of the paradigms for one week in a natural setting surrounded by their own devices and everyday routines . We felt that this would yield more meaningful results than evaluating the notations in a lab setting with artiﬁcial use cases that were of no personal relevance to participants . Also , we hypothesized that we could gain more in - depth feedback if we let participants engage with the notation for a longer period of time . In addition , we also investigated the general attitude of our participants toward home automation to identify real - world deployment issues and requirements for the successful adoption of home automation by the general population . The underlying research questions of our study are as follows . Potential of Home Automation : Both as a survey of the current technological state of households and to get participants to start imagining home automation in their own life , we were interested in recording device inventories . In these inventories , we col - lected information on both appliances and electronic devices that participants already owned or that they desired to have . We further noted whether participants owned devices that were already network - enabled to estimate how much and what kind of home automation could potentially be established in current households . We used the compilation of these inventories further to get participants to think about use cases for the devices they mentioned in combination with their daily routines . The aim of this was to potentially reveal common use case clusters that should be the target of home automation industry efforts in the future . Acceptance of Home Automation : To be able to put our results into perspective , we inquired about participants’ general feelings toward home automation , as we expected a variety of attitudes , ranging from highly enthusiastic to very reserved . Related to this notion , we wanted to determine the conceptual and technological prerequisites necessary for end users to embrace home automation . Rule - Based vs . Process - Oriented Notation : As the main focus of our study , we pre - sented participants with either a rule - based notation for home automation or a process - oriented one to determine which features and strategies of each can be employed to create usable home automation interfaces . We expected rule - based notations to be suf - ﬁcient for simple automation scenarios but were interested in whether participants would feel limited by it . Vice versa , we expected that process - oriented notations were more difﬁcult to grasp but yield a higher expressiveness . Related to this , it was our goal to determine whether users even feel the need for complex home automation scenarios . 4 . STUDY PROCEDURE To address the research questions , we devised the following study design . We visited participants in their home to conduct a home tour and spark their creativity toward home automation by letting them formulate use cases in an unrestricted manner , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 10 J . Brich et al . Fig . 1 . Distribution of the research tasks between the two study conditions . including those devices , appliances , and objects identiﬁed during the home tour as well as any other kind of sensor , device , or actuator they could imagine . Afterwards , we exposed them to a pen and paper notation kit following either the rule - based or process - oriented paradigm . Participants were instructed to try out the notation with one think aloud use case , while the experimenters were present to help with misunderstandings and getting participants acquainted with the respective notation . We would then leave participants alone with the notation for one week to allow them to think about and create desired automation procedures as they noticed them in their daily lives . In this , they were not restricted to the devices or sensors they owned ; we encouraged them to model whatever behavior they would want their ideal smart home to have . During a subsequent visit , participants were encouraged to present their devised use cases followed by a semi - structured interview . The interview was basically the same for both conditions aside from the terminology of rules and processes . Condition - speciﬁc were those questions that dealt with the particulars of each notation as detailed below . To conclude , participants were given a recognition task . This task comprised three interpretation exercises , i . e . , participants were given one unfamiliar use case recorded in the notation that was previously introduced to them , one from the respective other study condition and one use case recorded in an adapted process notation for additional results . Participants were then instructed to tell the experimenter what home behavior they thought would result from each of the automation procedures . This task was added to examine the understandability of the notations . The distribution of the research tasks between the two study conditions can be seen in Figure 1 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 11 In the following , we ﬁrst present the deﬁnitions of rule - based and process - oriented notations that were employed in this study . Furthermore , we introduce the methods and materials that were used during the study to gather information from partici - pants relating to the research questions formulated above . To conclude , we present the recruitment process and participant demographics . 4 . 1 . Deﬁnition of Notations Our goal was to gain a deeper understanding of the characteristic beneﬁts and draw - backs of rule - based and process - oriented notations in relation to end user conﬁguration of smart homes . For this purpose , we ﬁrst derived the relevant characteristics of each notation approach based on our analysis of existing research and commercial inter - faces . We then proceeded to deﬁne generalized notations being representative for the respective approach . This was done to be able to focus on the underlying principles distinctive of each paradigm and to avoid implementation - speciﬁc issues that would have been introduced by comparing existing notations . While for example rule - based notations can be extended with “when” constructs or chaining of rules to serve similar purposes as process - oriented notations , we wanted to explore the fundamental concep - tual differences between the paradigms and thus chose to present participants with a strict version of rule - based notations in our study . 4 . 1 . 1 . Rule - BasedNotation . In strict rule - based notations , automation behavior is de - ﬁned in an if THIS , then THAT form . The if - clause may contain points of time ( e . g . , 8 a . m . ) , device events ( e . g . , bedroom lights on ) , or contextual events ( e . g . , Alice entered living room ) . The then - clause describes device actions ( e . g . , turn on the radio ) to be executed after successful evaluation of the if - clause . The vocabulary for the elements of rule notations varies . We deﬁned the if - clause as a trigger and the then - clause as resulting actions , similar to Ur et al . [ 2014 ] . Commonly , triggers can be constructed by combining several events via the use of AND - operators . OR - constructs are represented by separate rules with a complementary set of trigger events . Actions can be combined with AND - constructs , i . e . , a trigger results in the execution of multiple actions . We did not include additional timing elements , like those suggested by Garc´ıa - Herranz et al . [ 2010 ] , as they constitute speciﬁc extensions not found in most rule - based conﬁgura - tion interfaces for home automation . Similarly , we did not include chaining of rules ( e . g . , if THIS , then RULE X ) , because it constitutes a timing - dependent pre - condition for rule x—a feature found in some rule - based notations , but not common in existing conﬁguration interfaces and thus not representative of the underlying paradigm . An example of our generalized rule - based notation can be seen in Figure 2 . In the upper left corner , a name for the respective rule has to be speciﬁed . Triggers and actions can then be speciﬁed in dedicated columns . The AND semantic is used implicitly on both sides , i . e . , if more than one trigger is speciﬁed , then all triggers need to evaluate true to trigger the action column ; similarly , all actions in the action column are activated in parallel . For the OR semantic , a new rule has to be created . Both triggers and actions are device - speciﬁc and need to be speciﬁed in the format device ( event ) or device ( action ) . Sensors , which are essential for smart environments , are not necessarily treated as dedicated devices in our notation ; instead , they have been abstracted into the concept of context . This adheres to the task - centric perspective of end users as postulated by Truong et al . [ 2004 ] and is deemed to be easier to understand for non - tech - savvy users . Context events are to be assigned either to their respective sensing devices as understood by the user like clock ( between 6 and 8 am ) for time or thermometer ( > 32 ◦ C ) for temperature or they can be labeled with their associated variable , i . e . , humidity ( high ) . More advanced sensing is supported but is dependent on the respective technical knowledge of the user . In general , participants are free to come up with any ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 12 J . Brich et al . Fig . 2 . Example of rule - based notation . kind of context they can imagine—regardless of technical understanding or feasibility . Additionally , we included a timer construct where events in rule A could trigger the virtual device timer ( set to x minutes ) and timer ( elapsed ) could in turn trigger the actions in rule B . This is a feature used in most current rule - based approaches and does not break the integral “if THIS , then THAT” structure of the paradigm . 4 . 1 . 2 . Process - OrientedNotation . Process - oriented notations allow for the speciﬁcation of control graphs . Devices and context elements can be depicted as nodes , while edges denote control ﬂow . For every connection , triggering event and resulting action have to be speciﬁed . Logical operators ( AND and OR ) can be used between the nodes to create arbitrarily complex automation processes . Since the control ﬂow is dependent on the triggering and completion of previous elements , time dependencies are introduced . Thus , a chain of events and actions accrues a growing context description statement for later elements . Consider the process “ When I wake up in the morning , brew a cup of coffee . On weekends , turn on the radio when coffee is ready , otherwise the TV news channel . If my partner is still asleep 20 minutes later , open the bedroom blinds . ” The coffee maker action is triggered every time the user wakes up , while the blinds action requires the respective aggregated context to be executed . It is further possible to fully or partially encapsulate processes as reusable subprocesses , which corresponds to the concept of rule chaining . An example of our process - oriented notation can be seen in Figure 3 . In the upper left corner , a name for the respective process has to be speciﬁed . Every process has a designated starting point . Arrows start at that point and connect to the ﬁrst order of devices . More devices can be added by adding more arrows , both horizontally and vertically . Each device has events and actions , e . g . , alarm clock has the action “set alarm” and the event “ringing . ” Events and actions need to be speciﬁed in the format device ( event ) or device ( action ) . Mirroring the rule - based notation , context events are to be assigned to their respective sensing devices like clock ( between 6 and 8 am ) for time or thermometer ( > 32 ◦ C ) for temperature . Based on the same argumentation as before , advanced sensing is possible but depends on the user’s technical understanding . AND and OR operators can be placed at the appropriate positions of a process . All incoming edges of an AND operator need to be fulﬁlled for progression while for an OR operator one sufﬁces . We also included a timer device with the action “set to x minutes” and the event “elapsed . ” Processes can further be reused as subprocesses , referred to with their name . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 13 Fig . 3 . Example of process - oriented notation . 4 . 2 . Methods and Materials To address the research questions regarding acceptance and potential of home automa - tion as well as interaction with the programming notations , we opted for a qualitative study design . We created a number of supporting materials that are introduced in the following . Originally , all materials were in German to accommodate our participants . 4 . 2 . 1 . HomeTour . To start off the study , we introduced participants to the general idea of home automation and gave them an example to familiarize themselves with the concept . We chose the example of “When the alarm clock rings in the morning , coffee is automatically made . ” Participants were informed that they could stop participating at any time but that they would receive the compensation of 30 Euros only upon completion of the entire study . They had to consent to audio recordings of the interviews as well as to having pictures taken of their handwritten notations . Subsequently , they were given the opportunity to ask questions before signing a consent form . Following the formalities , participants were asked to guide the experimenters through their home . For this , we devised a supporting questionnaire for the experi - menter to note the participating household’s ID , what kind of appliances and electronic devices already existed in the household or were desired and what use cases the par - ticipants could imagine in their environments . For the device inventory , we devised a matrix of the most common rooms ( e . g . , living room , kitchen , bathroom , home ofﬁce , etc . ) and potentially automatable devices ( e . g . , lights , windows , stove , multimedia equipment , door locks , etc . ) with extra ﬁelds for additional rooms or devices so the experimenter could note existing devices quickly without disrupting the natural ﬂow of the home tour . The experimenter could also note whether devices ( 1 ) exist , whether they ( 2 ) exist and are already network - enabled , or whether they ( 3 ) do not exist but are desired by the participants . As for the use cases , participants were encouraged to formulate these in a free form manner while disregarding any technical constraints . They should state whatever be - havior they would want from an automation system—including additional devices , sen - sors and actuators—and not be limited by what they thought feasible . Experimenters could point out existing devices to elicit further use cases but should not suggest any ; i . e . , they could ask participants if they would ﬁnd it useful to automate a particular device x , but not tell them what automation in that case could look like so as not to prime them towards the experimenter’s notion of home automation . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 14 J . Brich et al . The home tour was generally conducted with two experimenters present , so one could lead the tour while the other took notes . Exceptions were made when necessary . If the participating household consisted of two participants , the home tour was conducted together . During the tour , audio data was collected for later use case analysis . 4 . 2 . 2 . NotationKits . Afterward , the participants were introduced to the notation kits and given the opportunity to ask questions . For both notations , we devised paper - based notation kits . Paper - based approaches are especially helpful in the early stages of interaction research to ensure that participants can complete tasks in a way that feels intuitive to them . Rodden et al . [ 2013 ] , building upon the work of Tohidi et al . [ 2006 ] , determine the advantages of sketches to be that they are ( 1 ) disposable —which encourages participants to criticize aspects without fear of insulting a researcher’s work as could be the case with fully developed interfaces , ( 2 ) minimalist —which helps both researchers and participants to focus on the core aspects of the research ques - tions instead of having to deal with additional aspects introduced by technology , ( 3 ) explorative —which allows participants to come up with creative solutions that are not fenced in by what is possible or not in a speciﬁc prototype , and last ( 4 ) ambiguous —in a way that participants can appropriate the sketched content more easily and make it their own . It has to be noted that paper - based notations can only go so far to support the design of future interfaces . While conclusions can be drawn concerning the appli - cability of certain interaction metaphors , implementations of the notations will have to prove their merits by themselves . Usability testing will then reveal whether a given interface is indeed capable of conveying its underlying interaction paradigm to end users in a usable way both with regard to clarity and efﬁciency . This will be especially crucial once features from different paradigms are combined in the hope of capitalizing on their varying advantages . Paper - based research is however helpful to include the intended end user in the design process early on and then guide the initial design choices of future implementations . In the following , we will describe the notation kits that were devised for this study in detail . The rule - based notation kit consisted of a 1 - page manual detailing the notation as laid out above , a pen , large sheets of paper , yellow sticky notes , and an adhesive tape . Participants were instructed to use one sheet of paper per rule and think of meaning - ful names same as those that would have to be used in an actual home automation interface to identify the rule . Devices with triggers and actions were to be noted on the sticky notes and placed on the large sheets of paper . The manual illustrated the rule notation with an exemplary picture but also stated that the layout shown was merely a suggestion . A translation of the manual can be found in Appendix A . 1 . The process - oriented notation kit consisted of a 2 - page manual detailing the notation as laid out above , a pen , large sheets of paper , three colors of sticky notes ( green , pink , and orange ) , and an adhesive tape . Participants were instructed to use one sheet of paper per process and think of meaningful names the same as those that would have to be used in an actual home automation interface to identify the process . Devices with triggers and actions were to be noted on green sticky notes , logic operators should be noted on pink sticky notes , and for subprocesses , the re - used process’s name should be written on an orange sticky note . All notes should be placed on the large sheets of paper and connected with arrows to form an automation process . The manual illustrated the notation with an exemplary picture but also stated that the layout shown was merely a suggestion . A translation of the manual can be found in Appendix A . 2 . Instructions were designed so that participants understood the presented notations but were neither expressly instructed to follow them strictly nor forbidden to deviate from them . Participants then—each , in case of a household with two participants—had to com - plete one predetermined use case with the notation plus one to three of the ideas they ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 15 expressed during the home tour . Experimenters deliberately did not try to “correct” the notation to match the instructive materials as it was also of interest to see how participants would change their respective notation to make it their own . Deviations were noted and discussed during appointment 2 in the semi - structured interview . To conclude the appointment , experimenters would take pictures of the participants’ use cases but leave the originals for the time being . Before leaving , they would encourage participants to record more use cases until appointment 2 one week later . 4 . 2 . 3 . Think Aloud and Interviews . The beginning of appointment 2 then depended on whether participants had recorded more use cases on their own . If so , they were asked to explain their mental processes retrospectively . If not , they were asked to record use cases using the think aloud approach . Participants could either decline or accept this request . If they accepted , they had to come up with their own ideas and work through the notation on their own . The goal of this section was to explore participants’ mental model while creating processes and rules . Two things were of interest there : Is there a potential dissonance between the instructive material and the participants’ understanding of it and is the noted down use case the same as the one participants originally envisioned ? This phase was used to gather information for the subsequent interview to unearth which observed effects were due to the differing notations and which were due to misgivings in the mental model they constructed of the notation . Following the think - aloud task , the semi - structured interview was conducted . The interview dealt with the efﬁciency of the given notation for participants’ use cases ﬁrst : How fast did they feel they were in noting down single or complex use cases with their notation ? Could they come up with meaningful names ? In what ways did the notation support or not support clarity of overview for complex scenarios ? Did participants feel they were given enough information to work with the notation ? Afterwards , condition - speciﬁc questions were asked to elicit participants’ opinion on the elements speciﬁc to their given notation and their opinion on the notation as a whole . If they had created potential conﬂicts in their use cases , e . g . , one rule that turns the lights on after 8 pm and one that turns them off when no - one is home , they were asked if they were aware of this and if so , what stopped them from solving the problem . The same was done if they modeled potentially unintended side effects like one behavior closing the blinds when the TV is on and one behavior to turn on the lights when the blinds are closed . Subsequently , participants should evaluate whether they felt that the given notation supported all their envisioned use cases . We were also interested to see whether par - ticipants would use in - between steps , i . e . , more than one order of trigger and action . In the rule condition , this would constitute a violation of the notation that could lead us to potential deﬁciencies of rule - based notations for home automation . Vice versa , if participants in the process group saw no need for in - between steps , process notations might be unnecessarily complex for automation scenarios . To conclude the interview , general questions about home automation were posed : Do participants feel as if they would use home automation in their everyday lives and what would their requirements for home automation software be like ? The complete interview script can be found in Appendix B . Afterwards , the recognition task was conducted . All participants were shown a use case modeled by a different participant of the same condition , as well as one use case from the other condition . In addition , an alternative of the process notation was shown that lacked a starting point and placed the event information on the edges instead of the device nodes . This notation came up in previous user testing with the homeBLOX user interface [ Rietzler et al . 2013 ; Walch et al . 2013 ] , and we were interested in how it would compare with the standard notations . An illustration of the adapted process notation can be seen in Figure 4 . With this task , we wanted to ﬁnd out how ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 16 J . Brich et al . Fig . 4 . Example of adapted process notation . well participants could reconstruct unknown use cases , both from the notation they were familiar with as well as the respective other paradigm . The recognition task was designed to gain insight into the understandability of each notation but also served as a point of comparison where participants could discuss the beneﬁts and drawbacks they perceived in each notation . Use cases for process and rule notation were chosen by the experimenters in each case from the available pool of use cases created by the participants and transferred into a digital representation . Important in this case were similar complexity and also , that use cases were chosen that did not stray too far from the initially devised notations . The use case for the adapted process notation was “ If the TV is turned on , close the blinds . If then a movie is being played and someone leaves the room , pause the movie until the person returns . ” Audio data was recorded all through appointment 2 and upon completion , experi - menters took all recorded use cases and leftover material . Participants were thanked for their participation and received the compensation . If the household consisted of two participants , then appointment 2 was conducted with each in private . 4 . 3 . Recruitment We recruited potential participants through a number of channels , i . e . , Twitter , Face - book , and various university channels . Due to the potentially sensitive nature of the study that required participants to invite the experimenters into their own home and show them around , we also chose to recruit potential participants from our own social circles to reduce that barrier . However , we ensured that , whenever logistically possible , participants later would not be interviewed by the team member they knew personally . We aimed for a diverse group of participants in our study showing different levels of interest in home automation and technological afﬁnity to be able to deduce what characteristics home automation interfaces need to have to be appealing to the general populace . To be able to select a balanced pool of participants for our study , we used a demographic questionnaire on our pool of potential participants ﬁrst . The characteris - tics that were of interest to us were : Computer Science ( CS ) background ( yes / no ) , age , living situation ( alone , shared apartment , or living as a couple ) , self - proclaimed level of tech - savviness on a 5 - point Likert scale , and self - proclaimed level of technophilia on a 5 - point Likert scale . Based on this , we chose pairs with similar characteristics from the pool and randomly assigned them to the two conditions . Family households could not be included in this sample as none volunteered . The speciﬁcs are detailed in the following section . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 17 Table I . Overview of the 18 Participants and Their Respective Characteristics ID Condition Background (cid:2) / (cid:3) Age Living situation Tech - savviness Technophilia R24b Rule CS (cid:3) 25 Shared 4 5 R24a Rule Not CS (cid:3) 25 Shared 4 4 R31 Rule Not CS (cid:2) 26 Shared 1 4 R23 Rule Not CS (cid:2) 21 Shared 4 4 R29a * Rule Not CS (cid:2) 66 Couple 2 2 R29b * Rule Not CS (cid:3) 65 Couple 4 5 R26a * Rule Not CS (cid:2) 23 Couple 3 3 R26b * Rule Not CS (cid:3) 24 Couple 5 5 R27 * Rule Not CS (cid:3) 24 Alone 5 5 S19a Process CS (cid:3) 25 Shared 5 5 S19b Process Not CS (cid:2) 22 Shared 3 3 S22 Process Not CS (cid:2) 23 Shared 2 2 S11 * Process Not CS (cid:2) 22 Shared 4 4 S28a * Process Not CS (cid:2) 54 Couple 1 2 S28b * Process Not CS (cid:3) 57 Couple 3 4 S30a * Process Not CS (cid:3) 25 Couple 3 5 S30b * Process Not CS (cid:2) 28 Couple 1 5 S8 * Process Not CS (cid:3) 21 Alone 3 3 Starred entries denote participants that were interviewed by someone they knew personally . 4 . 4 . Demographics We chose 12 households with one or two members each to participate in our study . The demographics of our 18 participants total are detailed according to the characteristics mentioned before and can be seen summarized in Table I . The irregular participant IDs are remnants from the recruitment pool . Of the 18 participants , 9 were female and 9 male . Their age ranged from 21 to 67 years . All participants were German . Each group contained 1 one - person household , 4 participants living in a shared apartment , and 2 couples living together . The rules condition comprised 4 women and 5 men with an average age of 33 years ( Mdn = 25 , SD = 17 . 3 ) . The process condition comprised 5 women and 4 men with an average age of 31 years ( Mdn = 25 , SD = 13 . 4 ) . Only one person in each condition had a CS background , the others had academic as well as non - academic backgrounds . Regard - ing tech - savviness and technophilia , participants in the rule condition had an average savviness rating of 3 . 8 and technophilia rating of 3 . 8 ; participants in the process con - dition had a savviness rating of 3 . 1 and technophilia rating of 3 . 0 . Post - study analysis showed that low technophilia or little interest in home automation did not have a sig - niﬁcant impact on participants’ engagement with the study in terms of the number of modeled use cases . Post - study analysis further showed that having a familiar interviewer did not signif - icantly impact the number of use cases modeled in the study nor skewed participants towards a certain opinion on home automation . Both groups gave equal praise of their respective notation ; however , participants that did not know their interviewer person - ally were more reluctant to criticize the notations . 5 . STUDY RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In the following , we present our method of analysis and the results of the study clus - tered by the respective research questions . Results are shortly discussed where appro - priate , while an overarching summary of the resulting insights for home automation interfaces is given in the next section . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 18 J . Brich et al . Table II . Interview Categories Resulting From Coding Use cases Home automation Notation Comfort / home control ( 18 ) General interest , yes ( 18 ) / no ( 8 ) Criticism ( 18 ) Security ( 7 ) Desire for automation ( 12 ) Praise ( 18 ) Energy saving ( 6 ) Desire for remote control ( 8 ) Recognition task ( 18 ) Pets ( 2 ) Desire for remote access ( 3 ) Deviations ( 14 ) Plants ( 2 ) Desire for notiﬁcations ( 3 ) Problems with own use case ( 1 ) Remote access ( 1 ) Preferred interface device smartphone ( 10 ) Health ( 1 ) Preferred interface device tablet ( 9 ) Other ( 3 ) Preferred interface device laptop ( 9 ) Preferred interface device desktop ( 4 ) Preferred interface device other ( 7 ) Presumed software requirements ( 17 ) Aspect concerning deployment ( 10 ) Numbers indicate how many of the 18 participants made a mention in this category . Table III . Device Types Participants Would Like to Automate Lights Audio playback Central heating Stove / oven control Refrigerator 12 12 12 11 11 Window automation Coffee maker TV Smartphone 11 9 9 8 Numbers indicate how many of the 12 households mentioned this type . 5 . 1 . Method of Analysis From the home tours , we analyzed the device inventory sheets compiled for each house - hold , as well as the collection of 249 freely formulated use cases to determine clusters . With regard to the notation modeling , we analyzed 65 rule and 64 process recordings , including use cases modeled at the end of the ﬁrst session . We recorded 13 hours of interview audio from the second sessions . Qualitative analysis of the interview recordings was conducted by three coders in an iterative coding process . Inter - rater reliability was determined using Fleiss’ Kappa coefﬁcient . The coding taxonomy was iteratively reﬁned to obtain a taxonomy consistent across groups . We iterated over one randomly selected rule and process participant each to make sure categories were applicable for both . After each coding , the annotators discussed and reconciled annotation discrepancies . Eventually , we settled on three major categories : Use Cases ( κ = 0 . 70 ) , Home Automation ( κ = 0 . 74 ) , and Notation ( κ = 0 . 60 ) . Corresponding subcategories and number of mentions can be seen in Table II . In the following , we detail the results of our study with regard to potential and acceptance of home automation as well as the comparison of notations . 5 . 2 . Current Potential of Home Automation Overall , households named on average 21 ( SD = 5 . 9 ) device types , e . g . , lighting , heating , media devices , and so on . During the hometour , households came up with 6 – 43 informal use cases ( avg . 20 . 8 , SD = 9 . 9 ) and 249 in total . As for the notation modeling task , participants recorded 3 – 12 use cases on their own ( rules avg . 7 . 2 , SD = 2 . 9 ; processes avg . 7 . 1 , SD = 2 . 6 ) with 65 rule and 64 process recordings in total . The device inventories revealed what device types participants would like to auto - mate . The results can be seen in Table III . All households were interested in automating lights , to either illuminate the house in the evening or when needed upon entering a speciﬁc room or location within a room . Household 19 explained that their combined home ofﬁce / bedroom would beneﬁt from selective lighting where one inhabitant could go to bed and have this area darkened , while the other could continue working at the ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 19 Fig . 5 . Distribution of devices that interviewers prompted in more than two households during home tours . desk . Audio playback also played a dominant role with use cases focusing on media streams following the user around the home or accompanying activities like relaxation or cooking with characteristic music . S30b suggested the idea of creating a shower setting where a relaxing light setting was complemented with the sounds of the rain forest . Automated central heating was also mentioned by all households , either to sim - plify thermostat routines like heating the bathroom before taking a bath or to save energy more efﬁciently with heating schedules based on user presence . Eleven house - holds wanted to automate windows , either to control the quality of air in the house with regard to staleness and humidity or to make sure that all windows were closed when no one was home . Unfavorable weather conditions like heat , rain , or strong winds were also a concern . With regard to the kitchen , households mostly favored stove and oven control , which would allow for automated cooking , and smart fridges able to manage their contents and compile grocery lists . Interesting ideas were fridges capable of de - tecting spoiled goods and a calories management system for the household . Automated coffee makers were also high on the list , usually in combination with breakfast - making routines triggered by inhabitants getting out of bed or ﬁnishing their bathroom routine . Automating TVs received moderate attention with a variety of use cases ; media stream - ing was a topic , but also the use of the TV as part of a surveillance / door opening system and also as an additional display for content otherwise displayed on smaller laptop screens . Smartphones mostly played a role with regard to functioning as a universal remote for the home or as a source of sensor and context information . As participants mentioned that they would prefer notiﬁcations over full automation in some use cases , the smartphone was deemed the best ﬁt for receiving and displaying these in a timely manner . In addition to letting participants name devices on their own during the home tours , we sometimes prompted them about whether common devices were to be found in their home as well or when we could see devices that they had neglected to mention . A distribution of the devices most commonly prompted can be seen in Figure 5 . It has to be mentioned though that from their reaction alone we cannot tell for sure whether participants simply forgot mentioning a device or whether they neglected it because they thought it was not suitable for home automation . However , participants ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 20 J . Brich et al . were often very outspoken in telling us when they did not want a speciﬁc device to be automated or could see no use in it . All in all – while not being conclusive – these results can help indicate which devices participants currently associate intuitively with home automation and which would need to be promoted more . In general , participants showed a large interest in automating kitchen , bathroom and cleaning equipment ( 96 of 249 mentions ) . We identiﬁed kitchen , bathroom , front door , the living room couch , and pets and plants as respective activity centers of the home using the approach devised by Crabtree et al . [ 2002 ] . This classiﬁcation can help designers ﬁnd reusable automation solutions for common use cases aggregating around these activity centers . Participants especially liked the idea of automating devices for morning and coming home routines . They showed comparatively little interest in automating entertainment and access control ( 56 ) . This contrasts starkly with the home industry’s current focus on marketing automatable devices in this area like the seamless music solution Sonos 1 or Link Interactive’s 2 door lock and glass - break monitoring . In accordance with related work , participants did not aim for full - ﬂedged building automation but rather placed emphasis on everyday appliances like water heaters , alarm clocks and coffee makers , which have largely been neglected by manufacturers both with regard to automation and integration with the home . Since we did not re - strict participants to use cases that were feasible with current technology , we expected to encounter a number of futuristic ideas as well—especially from participants that had little technical knowledge ; however , we only observed few futuristic ideas , namely “backpack packer , ” “cereal preparer , ” “mind remote control for TV and music , ” “com - pletely automatic shaving where I don’t have to do anything anymore , ” and a fridge that can move from one ﬂoor to the other to save inhabitants a trip down the stairs . Overall , participants strongly favored comfort / home control use cases , e . g . , automa - tion that would spare them tedious , everyday tasks like turning things on or off , setting alarms or pushing device buttons . For example , participants would like to automate behavior such as “When I go to bed , remind me to charge my phone and set my alarm according to my next - day appointments . As soon as I’m asleep , make sure all lights are turned off and windows and doors are locked . When the alarm rings , open the blinds , turn on lights in the bathroom and brew me a cup of coffee . ” Participants were also of the opinion that automation should help manage personal preferences in multi - person households by tailoring for example lighting atmosphere , music taste , and room or bath water temperature . Household S30 expected the smart home to be aware of their preferences with regard to news interest , TV shows and music in order to present them with a personalized media mix that should also take their current mood into account . They also brought up the idea of interleaving their content streams when they were both present . The two participants from shared household R24 also added that they would like a smart home to help them schedule laundry and bathroom routines , espe - cially when not only all inhabitants are present but also house guests . They imagined a solution where the smart home would coordinate based on everyone’s waking time and morning appointments . S19b would like the smart home to manage her extensive library in a way that she could locate a book by searching for its title and having the shelf indicate its position by a blinking light . Pet owners S19 and R27 would like the smart home to take over the duty of feeding the animals . Plant owners would generally want their plants to be watered automatically . Two participants also showed concern for software updating needs . R29b wants device updates in the home to be installed seamlessly , in contrast to , for example , his current navigation system that 1 http : / / www . sonos . com / . 2 https : / / www . linkinteractive . com / . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 21 needs to be taken out of the car , connected to the laptop to update , and then be brought back . S19b remarked that she would need an exception for energy saving routines to make sure that updating devices were not suddenly turned off when people left the home . Participants also showed concern for others ; R29a and S28a wanted the home to automatically limit music or TV volume so as not to bother their partners , while households S19 and R24 were concerned about bothering the neighbors . S30b in turn wanted the home to help her take care of herself with regard to separating work from free time by managing her calls . Private calls during work hours or work calls during off time should be hidden , but notiﬁcations should be available upon explicit request . Exceptions should be made for private emergency calls , which should always be patched through until the user picks up the call . Regarding energy use cases , the idea of “turn off appliances when we are away or sleep” was paramount . Participants were however also concerned about charging their devices . With regard to smartphones , many were worried about forgetting to do so , while with electric toothbrushes , participants were aware that always putting them back in the charger would damage the battery . Several participants would prefer to have the smart home take care of these issues . 19a wanted the smart home to provide him with detailed resource monitoring so that he could optimize his routines . Participants had a general awareness of security issues ; the prominent use case here focused on supporting access control via identifying sensors or by employing a combina - tion of cameras and smartphones to implement a remote door opener . Participants also frequently brought up the need to be sure that automatic windows would reliably close again to prevent break ins . Both R29 and S30 additionally wanted “vacation settings” for blinds and lights that would make the home look inhabited even if the owners were away on a trip . Participants also thought of appliance surveillance ; household S19 imagined an emergency stop and notiﬁcation system for their washer in case of ﬂooding , while S22 wanted to keep tabs on her gas - powered water heater to prevent dangerous carbon monoxide build - up . S30b also wants the smart home to take on an educational role : In general , she wants to remember to turn off devices like stove or lights by herself before she leaves the home ; if she forgets , she wants the home to tell her that she did , even if no emergency was detected . Overall , 70 . 5 % of the modeled use cases fell into the comfort / home control category , followed by energy saving at 7 . 0 % and security at 6 . 2 % . These results should be mirrored by both research and industry which have both hitherto put their focus more on energy saving and security use cases and less on the convenience aspect of automation desired by current home owners . 5 . 3 . Current Acceptance of Home Automation With regard to the current acceptance of home automation , we present our partici - pants’ opinion on the perceived utility of home automation in general as well as their requirements for potential home automation software . 5 . 3 . 1 . PerceivedUtilityofHomeAutomation . The majority of participants stated that they would use home automation in their own home ( 15 ) . Prominent reasons were “saves time and frees me from tedious work” ( 9 ) and “is fun & entertaining” ( 3 ) . R19a felt that “it would be very comfortable and I would get to be lazy . ” Also , S11 was enthusiastic : “I have a ton of use cases . ” Both S30b and 29a stated “It would make my life easier and I would feel safer . ” R27 liked the idea of both saving time and trips throughout the house . However , participants also voiced reservations , e . g . , due to associated costs . Participant R29b noted that switching to home automation should not incur huge ﬁnancial or structural imposition . Four participants saw home automation at best as a “nice to have . ” Most participants stated at some point—and regardless of their general ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 22 J . Brich et al . opinion of home automation—that they felt they did not really need it in their lives . S8 stated that his household did not warrant automation due to its small size ; he could however imagine things to be different with an increasing number of devices . Reasons for wanting to use smart home technology were diverse in the areas Au - tomation , Remote Control , Remote Access , and Notiﬁcation . R29b summarized the ad - vantages of home automation as ( 1 ) prevention of forgetfulness , ( 2 ) sparing people unnecessary trips just to start or stop something , and ( 3 ) enabling things to happen in the user’s absence . S30b noted that she had previously had no desire for home automa - tion but after contemplating it for a week , saw large potential for it in her personal life . Sixteen participants voiced speciﬁc automation needs , focused on comfort / home con - trol , energy saving , and security in a way that matched results from the home tours . Participants would also like systems to be able to recognize different users and execute the corresponding set of preferences ( music , lighting , temperature , etc . ) when they are on their own , e . g . , relaxing in the living room . Several would like a generic remote con - trol to automate devices in the home , while R31 emphasized the use of remote control for entertainment purposes . S28a stated that a remote control would be her favorite for interacting with electronic devices in the home . S28b saw the beneﬁt in “being able to control the home comfortably from the couch . ” Four participants liked the idea of re - mote access to the home’s digital infrastructure , for example , to remotely monitor and control potential dangers like open windows or unattended stoves , or to request status messages from devices like the fridge or the answering machine . R26b found the idea of combining remote control capabilities with remote access to the house’s functionality “amazing . ” Eight participants preferred notiﬁcations over automation , while three em - phasized the importance of memory assistance , e . g . , for reminding people about wallets or keys when leaving the home . Another three participants stressed that they wanted to be informed in case of potential security problems at home . Statements against home automation ( 12 ) focused primarily on the notion that au - tomation was unnecessary because tasks could be completed without . S11 for instance stated quite energetically “Some things [ . . . ] would just be silly . I can really do that on my own ! ” Participants often felt that things like ﬂicking a switch just did not warrant the necessary overhead to create a smart home . Two participants also observed that their lives were more exception than regularity and could not imagine them expressed as automation behavior . S22 worried about forgetting “the non - automated bits” like reﬁlling the water tank of the plant watering system . She felt that notiﬁcations were a better ﬁt for her . Other rejections were grounded in the fear of becoming lazy , losing control , or a general dislike of technologized environments . S28a felt that an auto - mated home would be “too sterile , too mechanical” for her . S30b disliked automatic decisions and would prefer a system of notiﬁcations and explicit user interaction . The participant described a scenario as critical where automation was set up for guests ; in case of a break - in the automatic system might treat the intruder as a guest whereas the notiﬁcation system would attract the inhabitant’s attention to the intruder . R24a however conceded that contrary to his general dislike of home automation , he would “probably use it if it was installed anyway . ” Participants also commented on perceived real - world deployment issues . S19b was worried that automation behavior intended for the inhabitants might accidentally be triggered by their dog . Conﬂicts and side effects , especially in scenarios with several in - habitants , would cause signiﬁcant impairment and deduct from the overall usefulness of home automation . The preferred system behavior would be automatic correction or compromise , however participants conceded that a purely technical solution might not be feasible . S30b would like the automation system to be able to detect potential con - ﬂicts on its own and get back to the user to ask for help if that was the case . S19b and R31 would choose a pre - deployment collaborative approach with their cohabitants to ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 23 manually balance automation desires of inhabitants and avoid conﬂicts later on . Five participants stated that they would be willing to correct or adapt automation speciﬁ - cations manually when noticing unwanted automation effects in the home’s behavior . S30a felt that a thorough “debugging” phase of automation behavior might lead to ad - ditional work in the beginning but also improve the system’s performance in the long run . R29a stated that depending on the severity of conﬂicts and side effects , she “might not make the effort” to correct the behavior and instead learn to live with it . The idea of technology not working as expected however frustrated her immensely . All in all , participants supported the idea of home automation but were not overly convinced that home automation systems would work in a stable and predictable man - ner in real - world scenarios . This is an image issue both deeply rooted in end users’ previous experiences with home electronics as well as their lack of knowledge of the inner workings of smart technology . For home automation to succeed in the general market , end users will have to be convinced that allowing additional technology into their homes will be more than an integration and device management nuisance . 5 . 3 . 2 . HomeAutomationInterfaces . With regard to home automation interfaces , 14 par - ticipants would like to conﬁgure their homes manually . Two would only want to use conﬁguration software “if it was really easy , ” and R29b preferred to have a remote control with programmable codes . R29a conceded that she would probably not use the software on her own , but rather ask her partner to do it for her . When asked about requirements for a proposed user interface , participants came up with an abundance of ideas . With regard to ﬁrst steps , six participants said that the picture of the notation example in the introductory material of the notation kit had been the biggest help . Four liked being tutored by the experimenter , three found the introductory text in the instruction sheet helpful . R23 however stated that the text was too long and too complicated . S8 expressed the need for a more detailed explanation of context events and special functions . This suggests the need for a variety of support levels and modalities in home automation interfaces . With regard to clarity , participants remarked that colors helped to discern various elements ( 5 ) ; that a conﬁguration interface has to be easy to use without programming experience ( 4 ) ; that devices , actions , events , or rooms need to have expressive names or should be nameable by the user ( 4 ) ; that icons instead of text would be helpful ( four , in contrast to two participants preferring text ) , while two participants each favored easy ( de - ) activation of stored rules or processes , high clarity , and the abstraction from technical details . In addition , participants from the rule group stated that they did not expect large rule sets to get confusing after creating use cases . One however was of the opinion that he would only deﬁne one rule per device while another stressed the necessity to group related rules , e . g . , for lighting or heating controls . S8 , R24b , and S22 declared that a rule - based interface would not be sufﬁcient for their automation needs : “If you’re getting home automation , you want to do something complex . This notation [ rules ] would upset me . ” ( S8 ) and “complex conﬁgurations should deﬁnitely be possible . ” ( R24b and S22 ) . Further desired characteristics included editing and updat - ing previously deﬁned rules or processes ( 3 ) , freedom with regard to modeling direction on the canvas and the order of conﬁguration steps ( 2 ) , sufﬁcient security ( 2 ) and pri - vacy ( 1 ) , and consistency across several devices ( 1 ) . Two participants emphasized the importance of a visually appealing look . Interesting suggestions further included auto - matic detection of modeling mistakes , a simulation mode to test automation behavior before actual deployment , the ability to use standard functions like “turn device x on / off” in the form of templates that users could then extend , and intervention options to reset automation behavior at runtime . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 24 J . Brich et al . When asked about the preferred device for smart home conﬁguration , some partic - ipants explicitly preferred a laptop ( 4 ) or general computer ( 5 ) based software , since they already owned one or because it provides more structure and clarity compared to a mobile device ( ﬁve in favor of laptop and three in favor of a PC ) . For R24a and R26b , this was the only conceivable option , under the premise that they would use a home automation interface at all . While a tablet was considered optimal by a larger group ( 8 ) , participants would not want to buy one just for home automation ( 5 ) . Three participants would like to have a dedicated tablet for home automation so that all inhabitants could share it without having to share someone’s personal device . Nine participants could see advantages in utilizing a smartphone . However , six stated that the display size was too small . They advised to use the smartphone for special tasks ( mostly remote access ) in conjunction with one of the other options . S22 saw a beneﬁt in using the smartphone for quick check - ups that do not merit the boot time of other de - vices . S30b expressed concern that a smartphone could be seized too easily by strangers and compromise home security . Notions beyond well - established devices included mind control ( S11 ) , a remote control with display ( S11 ) , touch - based wall displays ( S28a and R29b ) and hard - wired control boxes ( S28b and R26a ) . Overall , participants stressed form factors that provided clarity and adequate display size ; also , they preferred touch interaction . 5 . 4 . Rule - Based vs . Process - Oriented Notation This section details the results from the analysis of participants’ use of the two notation variants . 5 . 4 . 1 . ComplexityofModeledAutomationTasks . On average , the rule group used 3 . 3 de - vices per use case , while the process group used 4 . 5 . A Mann – Whitney U test ( U = 14 , z = − 2 . 3 , p < 0 . 05 , r = − . 55 ) shows that the device count per use case was signiﬁcantly lower in the rule group ( M = 2 . 8 ) than in the process group ( M = 4 . 1 ) . Device count can be seen as an indicator of a use case’s complexity . In this case and based on our results , it can be said that participants from the process group tended to model more complex behaviors than participants from the rule group . Participants however also exhibited diverse modeling behaviors . The process group modeled automation behaviors with dedicated devices as instructed , while the rule group tended to describe vague contexts on a single sticky note instead of following the device ( event ) pattern for the trigger column . Therefore , we further evaluated the simple behavior count , which we deﬁned as the number of behaviors with only one trigger and exactly one action . The rule group overall modeled 17 simple behaviors ( 26 . 2 % , M = 1 . 0 ) . In contrast , the process group only modeled 4 simple behaviors ( 6 . 3 % , M = 0 ) . Using a Mann – Whitney U test , this constitutes a signiﬁcant difference ( U = 18 . 5 , z = − 2 . 1 , p < 0 . 05 , r = − . 49 ) . Both these metrics show that participants in the process group modeled more com - plex behaviors than the rule group , which supports the hypothesis that processes are more expressive . Additionally , the process group had the opportunity to reuse already recorded pro - cesses as subprocesses . Yet , only two participants made use of this concept and one of them used subprocesses simply as triggers for other processes . The rule group was not primed to reuse already modeled behaviors ; nonetheless , R29b modeled similar behav - ior for a vacation use case : “If on vacation , a ‘show signs of habitation’ ( e . g . , shutter - and light - control ) behavior should be activated . ” 5 . 4 . 2 . Participants’ Perceptions of the Notations . During the semi - structured interviews , participants could comment on their respective notations . It has however to be noted that these perceptions relate to the notation as used by individual participants , which ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 25 partially deviated from the given notation as detailed in the following section . Eight participants in the process group and four in the rule group indicated that their no - tation allowed for neatly arranging simple use cases ; six of them conﬁrmed this for complex processes , and three for complex rules . Rules were described as simple and straightforward by eight participants , processes by four . Both notations were perceived as efﬁcient ( seven from the process group , six from the rule group ) . Six participants described processes as intuitive and easy to understand , and two expressed the same for rules . The rules were considered as structured by four participants , while one par - ticipant voiced the same for processes . Five participants of the process group and three of the rule group stated they saw no restrictions in their notation . The statements of the rule group were weakened in two cases by adding the comment that this would involve “tremendous effort . ” These perceptions indicate that rules are sufﬁcient for simple tasks but become confusing for more complex use cases , while processes remain comprehensible . When asked to criticize their notations , half the rule group ( 4 ) stated they felt re - stricted by their notation . Two participants further described the rule notation as in - ﬂexible , confusing and uncomfortable for more complex use cases . Two participants described processes as confusing when lines crossed , difﬁcult , or unintelligible ; 2 noted that they lacked understanding concerning the logical joins . This indicates that both notations have potential drawbacks that need to be addressed in interfaces planning on employing these paradigms for home conﬁguration . We further asked participants to suggest improvements for their respective notation . In the process group , three participants felt that a deﬁned start point is unnecessary . It was also mentioned twice that no arrows would be needed and lines would be sufﬁcient , as directionality ( derived from the western reading system from left to right ) was intuitively clear . Individual suggestions were given about the design : conditions could be annotated on the lines , and the use of color or different types of strokes could help to distinguish one path from another . In the rule group , four participants stated they would like to be able to group rules in different ways , e . g . , by device , function , or room ; three also reported that they would like to model temporal dependencies . They suggested to introduce an “after” column , to deﬁne order based on the vertical position , or to offer the possibility to chain rules . 5 . 4 . 3 . ErrorsandDeviationsFromNotation . To assess how well participants could apply the given notations , we analyzed their created use cases for errors , inconsistencies , and deviations from the notation . Since participants were not restricted in their use of the given notation , errors can be interpreted as indicators for deviations between the recorded use case and what the participant had in mind . Deviations that clearly stray from general semantics are also seen as errors . In the process group , two participants had issues with the AND and OR semantics . This was to be expected as logic operators are an abstract construct whose application needs to be explicitly learned . In one case , joins were drawn with only one inbound arrow modeled , understood as sequential execution . Another participant misunderstood the semantics of arrows , and modeled start events that were independent from one another as a process . In the rule group , two participants did not grasp the separation of triggers and actions . For example , actions were entered into the list of triggers and vice versa . We did not identify any unintentional side effects between the created use cases in either group . This was probably due to the relatively closed - off character of the use cases provided by participants with few overlaps and the relatively low number of modeled use cases per participant . Distinct patterns however emerged in the participants’ deviations from the given notation . In the rule group , one deviation could be observed for all participants : ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 26 J . Brich et al . Fig . 6 . An example how lines were added to the rule notation ( participant R26b ) . Fig . 7 . A created rule as an example of how participants changed the notation ( participant R26a ) . Despite being instructed to use one sheet of paper per rule , rules that were considered to belong together were always modeled together , i . e . , one below the other . A related variation was the use of arrows or lines to connect triggers and actions ( which was not introduced as part of the notation ) , which were used to further distinguish between individual rules on a sheet with more than one rule ( ﬁve participants ) . One example of this is shown in Figure 6 . Observed difﬁculties related to the use of AND and OR operators ( four participants ) , which were modeled as single elements or stated as a condition next to an arrow . In three cases , temporal and hierarchical dependencies were modeled which were represented by arrows or lines . See Figure 7 for an example of a more complex rule . These deviations show that participants of the rule group adapted their notation to express more complex use cases leaning toward the process - oriented notation—without being formally introduced to that notation paradigm . These results support the hypotheses that some real - world home automation use cases require capabilities beyond those of a strict rule - based notation . Four participants had difﬁculties in representing OR semantics . These participants ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 27 Fig . 8 . Participant S30a modeled solid ( 1 ) , dashed ( 2 ) , and dotted ( 3 ) stroke types to distinguish the paths of the process ; strokes were digitally redrawn for clarity . were mostly unwilling to add additional rules ( 3 ) stating “it HAS to be possible to do it like this , ” while one did not think of modeling an OR relationship as multiple rules . For the process - oriented notation , the start and end points of processes were repeat - edly omitted by two participants ; instead , the beginning of the process was perceived as its start , and the respective last actions as well - deﬁned ends . In one case , arrows were entirely omitted , as it was assumed that the customary reading direction would sufﬁce . Two participants tried to distinguish different paths of the process by using distinct types of strokes , an example of which can be seen in Figure 8 . The implicit AND and OR - split , which was realized by several outgoing edges of a node , was explicitly used by one participant as a separate element . Elements without preconditions were modeled without an incoming edge by two participants . Two participants in this group were also unsure when to use the AND or the OR join during process creation . 5 . 4 . 4 . InterpretationofOthers’UseCases . In the ﬁnal recognition task , all 18 participants were shown a use case modeled by a different participant of the same condition , as well as one use case from the other condition . In addition , an alternative of the process notation was shown . The respective use cases were generally well interpreted . There were no differences between the respective notations , indicating that it is possible to interpret these notations even without prior knowledge . These results allowed us to draw a number of insights that can be useful when designing an end user programming interface for home automation . The insights are presented in the following section . 6 . INSIGHTS REGARDING END USER PROGRAMMING INTERFACES IN HOME AUTOMATION Since smart home technology aims to be ubiquitous and unobtrusive , any kind of interaction should be tailored especially to less tech - savvy users . This notion conﬂicts with our participants’ desire to understand and control their immediate environment to the fullest extent . Home automation interfaces will have to ﬁnd a way to mediate this conﬂict . Our ﬁndings show that process - oriented notations for conﬁguration could be a viable approach to achieve that . Davidoff et al . [ 2006 ] however state that strict routine models are insufﬁcient for end users as domestic routines are subject to change over time ; therefore , we propose to extend interface implementations in the fashion of Koskela et al . ’s “instant control” [ Koskela and V¨a¨an¨anen - Vainio - Mattila 2004 ] , e . g . , by additionally incorporating remote control aspects . Our results indicate that while strict rule - based notations are sufﬁcient for sim - ple automation tasks and are perceived as well structured , participants from the rule ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 28 J . Brich et al . group felt restricted when considering more complex automation tasks . In relation to that , Garc´ıa - Herranz et al . [ 2010 ] point out that limited capabilities could stress users . Participants provided us with real - life use cases that they could not model with the rule - based notation without extending it with features reminiscent of the process - oriented notation : grouping of rules , line connections , and temporal as well as hierarchical de - pendencies . Therefore , we propose to provide more expressive process - oriented notation for systems that are conducive of more complex automation tasks . Home automation interfaces should offer both simple and complex modeling options in order to capitalize on both clarity and expressiveness , as also suggested by Ur et al . [ 2014 ] . This could be achieved by allowing for simple rules to conﬁgure simple automation tasks with few triggers and actions , while a process - oriented approach could extend on this to support complex tasks with temporal dependencies . Alternatively , interfaces could of - fer tools and assistance for seamlessly expanding rules into processes . In our notation study , participants from the rule condition intuitively combined the two approaches in such a fashion by extending the rules notation with the additional features mentioned above—depending on the requirements of speciﬁc use cases . Concerning end user conﬁguration in general , Newman et al . [ 2008 ] state that de - signing for future states is easy for programmers , yet introduces a certain level of insecurity in end users . Several approaches [ Newman et al . 2008 ; Dahl and Svendsen 2011 ; Leitner et al . 2013 ] support the notion to provide a simulation mode for home automation interfaces that was also voiced by our participants . Simulation modes pro - vide a safe environment where users can get to know automation technology or try out new ideas . The difﬁculty with this will be how to represent the potentially large number of devices in a household in a comprehensive manner . To be meaningful , sim - ulation modes would have to reﬂect the individual home situation to at least a certain degree—by mirroring the ﬂoor plan or representing a throng of devices with different capabilities . Light automation alone would require a number of devices positioned all across a room , all of which can differ with regard to brightness , color , area of illumi - nance , and dimming capabilities . The amount of data increases exponentially as soon as several rooms or more device types should be considered for automation . It is yet un - clear how home automation interfaces could acquire this information without requiring the user to manually map their entire home . And even if users would be willing to do this once , it has to be kept in mind that home arrangements change over time with devices being replaced or rearranged . We envision that home interface designers will have to draw upon visualization techniques that were developed for depicting large datasets in other domains to make this amount of data manageable and intuitive to understand for end users . Furthermore , the strong desire for a veto right to automatic adaptations also conﬁrms prior work [ Koskela et al . 2004 ; Davidoff et al . 2006 ; Mennicken and Huang 2012b ] . In a home automation interface , this could be realized in various ways . One of our par - ticipants stated that he would be satisﬁed if the system allowed him to turn the lights back off after the automation had determined to turn them on . On part of the software , this does however require additional logic and some sort of memory . Otherwise , the system would just revert back to the automated settings the next time conditions were evaluated . Along a similar notion , haptic interaction could be conceived ; for instance , users could place a decorative element in a certain position to override automation for a speciﬁc room . This could also be used to solve conﬂicts , e . g . , one inhabitant could declare priority over the others in terms of current media choices or room settings . Another participant would like the system to ask questions if unsure how to proceed ; this can however raise the issue of having to ﬁnd a satisfactory compromise between smart ubiquity and continuously prompting the user . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 29 The number of deviations from the given notation also indicates that due to the complex nature of some automation tasks , home automation interfaces need to provide extensive assistance , especially for initial use . As expected , we observed a need for support especially for more advanced features of the process - oriented notation , i . e . , logic operators . However , our results also indicate that one - size - ﬁts - all solutions would likely not be effective due to our participants’ different ways of approaching conﬁgu - ration tasks . Instead , diverse assistance should be provided , such as instructions at different levels of granularity and software support for certain notation features , such as logical joins . Here , ideas can be drawn from classical software engineering . Intro - ductory information can be presented as text , video or step - by - step clickable tutorials . Information shown in the beginning should however always be retrievable ; either as an integrated compendium or in the form of tool tips . Our usability testing in previ - ous work also revealed that conﬁguration interface users employ different interaction strategies and appreciate the redundant implementations of features , for example , that a device icon can be deleted via an explicit garbage can area or simply by being dragged off the screen [ Rietzler et al . 2013 ; Walch et al . 2013 ] . Senior users also voiced additional requirements , such as adjustable font size and zoom capabilities . With regard to the general acceptance of home automation , participants voiced con - cerns over feasibility , cost , reliability , and security . Since home automation operates in a user’s personal territory , concerns for security and privacy are understandable and valid . Building user trust by informing inhabitants about the underlying rationale of the home automation system , offering effective veto options and making sure that private information is sufﬁciently protected will be paramount to the success of home automation technology . In addition , feedback from participants living in multi - person households suggests a need for moving away from the single - user paradigm which is often assumed as a default setting in home automation technology . While easier to deal with , it is not representative of real - world user requirements . Home automation interfaces will need to ﬁnd a way to deal with conﬂicts and offer strategies to arbitrate between the preferences of multiple users . 7 . STUDY LIMITATIONS A potential limitation of our study is the sample size of 12 households and 18 partic - ipants . However , it provides a sample of typical size for qualitative studies and our results provide rich insights on home automation needs and the design of conﬁgura - tion interfaces . We further aimed to balance our groups in terms of their demographics and recruited participants with diverse living situations , i . e . , single households , shared ﬂats , and couple households . Although the rule group showed slightly higher techni - cal interests and skills , we could not ﬁnd indications that it inﬂuenced our results . While our participants were likely not fully representative of the general population , especially since family households were missing from the sample , we believe that our results carry valuable insights for the design of home automation interfaces that are likely generalizable beyond our sample population and should be validated for different demographics . However , we have to point out that all our participants came from the same cultural background . Results may vary for different cultural settings . Concerning the study design , participants provided use cases with a wide range of complexity ; therefore , we conclude that the instructive examples did not prime participants toward a certain complexity . A limiting factor is that participants merely thought about potential use cases rather than using real - world home automation . While they did this in the context of their own home , participants still could only have a limited idea of what living with home automa - tion would truly look like . Coming into contact with the actual beneﬁts and drawbacks of the technology could change their perception of it . Furthermore , implementations ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 30 J . Brich et al . of home automation conﬁguration interfaces will presumably never be able to accom - modate all mental models or conﬁguration strategies of which our participants have likely just shown a few ; this will lead to usability issues that will have to be studied for each solution . This holds especially true when concepts from the two paradigms we researched separately are to be combined . Furthermore , some participants created only a few use cases during the week between assignments ; however , the majority pro - vided multiple use cases , which suggests that they took our assignment seriously and were engaged in the study . It has to be kept in mind though that this does not allow for making any assumptions about how seriously they would engage with real - world home automation which as - of - yet is a lot harder to set up and maintain than a piece of paper . Overall however , our results suggest that not bringing them in contact with actual home automation technology allowed them to be more creative in how they approached home automation and potential use cases for it , which matched our intention of elicit - ing their everyday requirements with no regard for current technological constraints . The insights we gained in this study can thus be a ﬁrst step in the design of home automation interfaces to better support end users in the programming of their homes . 8 . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Home automation faces the challenge of providing ubiquitous , unobtrusive services while also supporting end users with approachable programming interfaces . As these interfaces further need to provide sufﬁcient expressiveness to support complex automa - tion behaviors , proper notation styles for less tech - savvy users need to be devised . Over the last years , rule - based and process - oriented paradigms have emerged ; however , their underlying concepts had not been studied in a comparative manner . We reported on a contextual inquiry study that collected qualitative data from 18 participants in 12 households in their own homes . We gathered information on the current potential and acceptance of home automation in general , as well as explored the beneﬁts and drawbacks of the two programming notation paradigms for end users . Our results show that rule - based notations are sufﬁcient to express simple automation tasks but can be limiting for more complex use cases . Participants that used the process - oriented notation valued its expressiveness and presented us with more complex use cases in - volving more devices in their homes . We identiﬁed beneﬁts and drawbacks of the two paradigms that suggest that providing end users with a mix of the two approaches might be beneﬁcial to address a broad variety of automation desires . We discussed how our results can inform the design of end user conﬁguration interfaces for smart home technology in order to enable usable real - world home automation for end users . As a next step , approaches that bridge the analog – digital divide could be used to provide users with small - scale functional home automation that still retains the ben - eﬁts of intuitive , experimental pen and paper interaction . Hess et al . [ 2012 ] describe an approach for business process modeling where informal pen input can be combined with a rudimentary software , providing feedback similar to full - scale solutions . In the home context , this could lead to prototypes that enable conﬁguration input in the form of sketched rules or processes that are then transferred into actual sensing and actua - tion commands in the home . Compared to pen and paper approaches , this would allow participants to get a better grasp on what living with home automation will actually be like and improve their assessment . Researchers could leverage this to get new in - sights regarding programming metaphors without the need to develop fully functional , high - ﬁdelity interfaces for the participants to interact with the home automation pro - totypes . With regard to developing interfaces , once promising conﬁguration strategies have been identiﬁed , McCurdy et al . ’s [ 2006 ] approach of mixed - ﬁdelity prototypes can be used to break down the task of developing complex automation software into man - ageable units by iteratively focusing on various dimensions of interest . Transitioning ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 31 from the fully analog to the fully digital approach with these intermediary steps will help to ensure that the resulting interfaces for the home automation market fulﬁll end user requirements on a number of different levels . Traditional usability testing can then be used to evaluate how successful each interface solution is in conveying its underlying programming paradigm to the user . APPENDIXES A . NOTATION KIT MANUALS The manuals given to participants of the study to detail the characteristics and in - tended workﬂow of the respective notation are presented here . The materials were originally devised in German and are presented in translation . A . 1 . Instructions for Rule - Based Notation —Use one sheet of paper per rule . —Put a meaningful name for the rule in the upper left corner . —Rules consist of triggers ( stemming from events ) and resulting actions . Both triggers and actions are assigned to devices . Devices should be written down on the sticky notes and put on the paper . —A rule is executed when all triggering events happen . To use a device as trigger , you need to specify its appropriate event , e . g . , the alarm clock has the event “ringing . ” —To execute an action , you need to specify the desired action on the device sticky note , e . g . , coffee maker has the action “make one cup of coffee” or alarm clock has the action “set alarm , ” —Additionally , you may use a timer as device to model temporal dependencies . To do this , you may specify a rule A where the action “timer ( set × minutes ) ” is executed after a given event and another rule B where “timer from rule A elapsed” is used as triggering event . —An example for a rule is “if the alarm clock rings and it is between 6 and 8 am , then make one cup of coffee . ” ( This was illustrated with a picture similar to Figure 2 . ) —The layout shown in the picture is presented merely as a suggestion . A . 2 . Instructions for Process - Oriented Notation —Use one sheet of paper per process . —Put a meaningful name for the process in the upper left corner . —Every process consists of interconnected devices ; devices should be put on green sticky notes . Each device has events and actions , e . g . , alarm clock has the action “set alarm” and the event “ringing . ” Connect devices with arrows and note what events trigger what actions . —Every process has a designated starting point . Arrows start at that point and connect to the ﬁrst order of devices . More devices can be added by adding more arrows . —To execute an action , you need to specify the desired action on the device sticky note , e . g . , coffee maker has the action “make one cup of coffee . ” —To combine events and actions , you can put “and” and “or” on pink sticky notes and place them at the appropriate position in your process ; “and” means that all events need to happen to execute an action , “or” means that one of them sufﬁces . —Additionally , you may use a timer as device to model temporal dependencies . You can incorporate this element in your processes the same way you would include a device . For this , note the time that you want to postpone the following action execution for . —You can reuse already recorded processes as subprocesses . For this , note the name of the previously recorded process on an orange sticky note and incorporate this in your new process where appropriate . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 32 J . Brich et al . —An example for a process is “if the alarm clock rings and it is between 6 and 8 am , then make one cup of coffee . ” ( This was illustrated with a picture similar to Figure 3 . ) —The layout shown in the picture is presented merely as a suggestion . B . INTERVIEW SCRIPT The script of the semi - structured interview is detailed in the following . The questions were originally devised in German and are presented in translation . —Efﬁciency of the notation for use cases : How fast could you create processes / rules for single and complex use cases ? Could you come up with meaningful names ? —Clarity of overview : If so , what did you like ? If not , what was problematic ? How was clarity for simple processes / rules ? How for complex ones ? —Were you provided enough information to work with the notation ? What helped , what did you miss ? — ( Condition - speciﬁc ) Did you encounter difﬁculties working with the notation ? ( ask about all elements ) —What did you like about the system ? —What did you dislike about the system ? —Where there functionalities you missed ? — ( if they created potential conﬂicts in their use cases ) Were you aware that this might cause problems ? If yes : What were the reasons for not rectifying it ( did not know how , did not ﬁnd it necessary , . . . ) ? — ( if they modeled potentially unintended side effects ) Were you aware that this would trigger behavior other than intended ? If yes : Would that bother you ? If yes , what were the reasons for not rectifying it ? If no , why not ? What would you need from the system in terms of support to handle these situations ? —Did you feel that the notation supports all of your envisioned use cases ? If yes : how does it support ? If not : how does it inhibit ? —In - between steps : If used : Why and what for ? ( in case of rule condition : Did you explicitly ignore the given notation ? ) If not used : Why not ? ( in case of rule condition : Because it was not in the given notation or because it did not feel necessary ? ) —Do you feel as if you would use home automation in your daily life ? If so : Why ? If not : Why not ? —Do you feel as if you could use this system in the form of an automation software ? Why / why not ? What would you wish this software to be like ? What device would you like to use that software on ? ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank all our participants for inviting us into their homes . REFERENCES Frances Aldrich . 2003 . Smart homes : Past , present and future . In Inside the Smart Home . Springer , 17 – 39 . Christopher Alexander , Sara Ishikawa , and Murray Silverstein . 1977 . A Pattern Language : Towns , Buildings , Construction . Oxford University Press . Lyn Bartram , Johnny Rodgers , and Rob Woodbury . 2011 . Smart homes or smart occupants ? Supporting aware livinginthe home . In Proceedings ofConference onHuman - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT’11 ) . Springer , 52 – 64 . A . J . Bernheim Brush , Bongshin Lee , Ratul Mahajan , Sharad Agarwal , Stefan Saroiu , and Colin Dixon . 2011 . Home automation in the wild : Challenges and opportunities . In Proceedings of CHI’11 . ACM , 2115 – 2124 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979249 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 33 Marie Chan , Daniel Est ` eve , Christophe Escriba , and Eric Campo . 2008 . A review of smart homes—Present state and future challenges . Comput . MethodsProg . Biomed . 91 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 55 – 81 . Ming Ki Chong , Rene Mayrhofer , and Hans Gellersen . 2014 . A survey of user interaction for spontaneous de - vice association . ACM Comput . Surv . 47 , 1 ( May 2014 ) , Article 8 , 40 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2597768 Control4 . 2016 . Control4 App . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from http : / / www . control4 . com / solutions / products / control4 - app . Enrico Costanza , Joel E . Fischer , James A . Colley , Tom Rodden , Sarvapali D . Ramchurn , and Nicholas R . Jennings . 2014 . Doing the laundry with agents : A ﬁeld trial of a future smart energy system in the home . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 813 – 822 . Andy Crabtree , Terry Hemmings , and Tom Rodden . 2002 . Pattern - based support for interactive design in domestic settings . In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Prac - tices , Methods , and Techniques ( DIS’02 ) . ACM , 265 – 276 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 778712 . 778749 Yngve Dahl and Reidar - Martin Svendsen . 2011 . End - user composition interfaces for smart environments : A preliminary study of usability factors . In Proceedings of Conference on Design , User Experience , and Usability ( DUXU’11 ) . Springer , 118 – 127 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 21708 - 1 _ 14 Scott Davidoff , MinKyung Lee , Charles Yiu , John Zimmerman , and Anind K . Dey . 2006 . Principles of smart home control . In Proceedings of International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp’06 ) . Springer , 19 – 34 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 11853565 _ 2 Luigi De Russis and Fulvio Corno . 2015 . HomeRules : A tangible end - user programming interface for smart homes . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2109 – 2114 . Anind K . Dey , Timothy Sohn , Sara Streng , and Justin Kodama . 2006 . iCAP : Interactive prototyping of context - aware applications . In Proceedings of International Conference on Pervasive Computing ( Perva - sive’06 ) . Springer , 254 – 271 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 11748625 _ 16 Colin Dixon , Ratul Mahajan , Sharad Agarwal , A . J . Brush , Bongshin Lee , Stefan Saroiu , and Paramvir Bahl . 2012 . An operating system for the home . In Proceedings of USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation ( NSDI’12 ) . USENIX Association , 25 – 25 . e - Domotica . 2016 . Homepage . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from http : / / www . e - domotica . com / en / . Roland Eckl and Asa MacWilliams . 2009 . Smart home challenges and approaches to solve them : A practical industrial perspective . In Intelligent Interactive Assistance and Mobile Multimedia Computing . Springer , 119 – 130 . Manuel Garc´ıa - Herranz , Pablo A . Haya , and Xavier Alam´an . 2010 . Towards a ubiquitous end - user program - ming system for smart spaces . J . UCS 16 , 12 ( 2010 ) , 1633 – 1649 . Richard Harper . 2003 . Inside the smart home : Ideas , possibilities and methods . In Inside the Smart Home , Richard Harper ( Ed . ) . Springer , 1 – 13 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 85233 - 854 - 7 _ 1 Jan Hess , Christian Reuter , Volkmar Pipek , and Volker Wulf . 2012 . Supporting end - user articulations in evolving business processes : A case study to explore intuitive notations and interaction designs . Int . J . Coop . Inf . Syst . 21 , 04 ( 2012 ) , 263 – 296 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1142 / S0218843012500049 HomeSeer . 2016 . HSTouch . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from http : / / www . homeseer . com / hstouch - mobile - app . html . Jan Humble , Andy Crabtree , Terry Hemmings , Karl - Petter Åkesson , Boriana Koleva , Tom Rodden , and P¨ar Hansson . 2003 . “Playing with the bits” – User - conﬁguration of ubiquitous domestic environments . In Proceedings of International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp’03 ) . Springer , 256 – 263 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 39653 - 6 _ 20 Amy Hwang and Jesse Hoey . 2012 . Smart home , the next generation : Closing the gap between users and technology . In Proceedings of the Fall Symposium on Gerontechnology . AAAI . IFTTT . 2016 . Homepage . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from https : / / ifttt . com / wtf . Insteon . 2016 . Homepage . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from http : / / www . insteon . com / . MichaelO . Jewell , EnricoCostanza , andJacobKittley - Davies . 2015 . Connectingthethingstotheinternet : An evaluation of four conﬁguration strategies for wi - ﬁ devices with minimal user interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , 767 – 778 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2750858 . 2807535 Eija Kaasinen , Tiina Kym¨al¨ainen , Marketta Niemel¨a , Thomas Olsson , Minni Kanerva , and Veikko Ikonen . 2012 . A user - centric view of intelligent environments : User expectations , user experience and user role in building intelligent environments . Computers 2 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 1 – 33 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3390 / computers2010001 Thomas Kleinberger , Martin Becker , Eric Ras , Andreas Holzinger , and Paul M¨uller . 2007 . Ambient intel - ligence in assisted living : Enable elderly people to handle future interfaces . In Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Ambient Interaction . Springer , 103 – 112 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . 11 : 34 J . Brich et al . Tiiu Koskela and Kaisa V¨a¨an¨anen - Vainio - Mattila . 2004 . Evolution towards smart home environments : Em - pirical evaluation of three user interfaces . Pers . Ubiq . Comput . 8 , 3 – 4 ( 2004 ) , 234 – 240 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 004 - 0283 - x Tiiu Koskela , Kaisa V¨a¨an¨anen - Vainio - Mattila , and Lauri Lehti . 2004 . Home is where your phone is : Us - ability evaluation of mobile phone UI for a smart home . In Proceedings of International Conference on Mobile Human - Computer Interaction ( MobileHCI’04 ) . Springer , 74 – 85 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 28637 - 0 _ 7 Gerhard Leitner , Anton J . Fercher , and Christian Lassen . 2013 . End users programming smart homes – A case study on scenario programming . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Human - Computer Interac - tion and Knowledge Discovery in Complex , Unstructured , Big Data ( HCI - KDD’13 ) . Springer , 217 – 236 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 39146 - 0 _ 20 Loxone . 2016 . Loxone Conﬁg . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from http : / / www . loxone . com / enen / products / software / loxone - conﬁg . html . Michael McCurdy , Christopher Connors , Guy Pyrzak , Bob Kanefsky , and Alonso Vera . 2006 . Breaking the ﬁdelity barrier : An examination of our current characterization of prototypes and an example of a mixed - ﬁdelity success . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , 1233 – 1242 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124959 Sarah Mennicken and Elaine M . Huang . 2012a . Hacking the natural habitat : An in - the - wild study of smart homes , their development , and the people who live in them . In Proceedings of International Conference on Pervasive Computing ( Pervasive’12 ) . Springer , 143 – 160 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 31205 - 2 _ 10 Sarah Mennicken and Elaine M . Huang . 2012b . Why can’t I have both ? The tension between comfort and control in smart homes . In Proceedings of the Pervasive Intelligibility Workshop . Sarah Mennicken , Jo Vermeulen , and Elaine M . Huang . 2014 . From today’s augmented houses to tomorrow’s smart homes : New directions for home automation research . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Interna - tional Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , 105 – 115 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2632048 . 2636076 myGEKKO . 2016 . myGEKKO ConﬁguConﬁg Interface . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from http : / / www . my - gekko . com / en / products / mygekko - app - software / . Mark W . Newman . 2006 . Now were cooking : Recipes for end - user service composition in the digital home . In Proceedings of CHI’06 Workshop : IT @ Home . Mark W . Newman , Ame Elliott , and Trevor F . Smith . 2008 . Providing an integrated user experience of networked media , devices , and services through end - user composition . In Proceedings of International Conference on Pervasive Computing ( Pervasive’08 ) . Springer , 213 – 227 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 79576 - 6 _ 13 Ninja Blocks . 2016 . Homepage . Accessed April 5 , 2016 from http : / / ninjablocks . com / . Jason Pascoe . 1997 . The stick - e note architecture : Extending the interface beyond the user . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI’97 ) . ACM , 261 – 264 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 238218 . 238344 James Pierce and Eric Paulos . 2012 . Beyond energy monitors : Interaction , energy , and emerging energy systems . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 665 – 674 . Erika Shehan Poole , Marshini Chetty , Rebecca E . Grinter , and W . Keith Edwards . 2008 . More than meets the eye : Transforming the user experience of home network management . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , DIS’08 . ACM , 455 – 464 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1394445 . 1394494 Michael Rietzler , Julia Greim , Marcel Walch , Florian Schaub , Bj¨orn Wiedersheim , and Michael Weber . 2013 . homeBLOX : Introducing process - driven home automation . In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Con - ference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing Adjunct ( UbiComp’13 ) . ACM , 801 – 808 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2494091 . 2497321 Tom A . Rodden , Joel E . Fischer , Nadia Pantidi , Khaled Bachour , and Stuart Moran . 2013 . At home with agents : Exploring attitudes towards future smart energy infrastructures . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI’13 . ACM , New York , NY , 1173 – 1182 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466152 Jennifer A . Rode , Eleanor F . Toye , and Alan F . Blackwell . 2004 . The fuzzy felt ethnography – Understanding the programming patterns of domestic appliances . Pers . Ubiq . Comp . 8 , 3 – 4 ( 2004 ) , 161 – 176 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 004 - 0272 - 0 Jennifer A . Rode , Eleanor F . Toye , and Alan F . Blackwell . 2005 . The domestic economy : A broader unit of analysis for end user programming . In Proceedings of the CHI’05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1757 – 1760 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1057015 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 . Exploring End User Programming Needs In Home Automation 11 : 35 Shaun Salzberg . 2011 . HomeMaestro . Retrieved from http : / / www . shaunsalzbergdesign . com / folio / home - maestro / ; http : / / shaunsalzberg . com / medialab / homemaestro Leila Takayama , Caroline Pantofaru , David Robson , Bianca Soto , and Michael Barry . 2012 . Making technol - ogy homey : Finding sources of satisfaction and meaning in home automation . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing . ACM , 511 – 520 . Maryam Tohidi , William Buxton , Ronald Baecker , and Abigail Sellen . 2006 . User sketches : A quick , in - expensive , and effective way to elicit more reﬂective user feedback . In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic Conference on Human - computer Interaction : Changing Roles ( NordiCHI’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , 105 – 114 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1182475 . 1182487 Khai N . Truong , Elaine M . Huang , and Gregory D . Abowd . 2004 . CAMP : A magnetic poetry inter - face for end - user programming of capture applications for the home . In Proceedings of International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp’04 ) . Springer , 143 – 160 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 30119 - 6 _ 9 Blase Ur , Melwyn Pak Yong Ho , Stephen Brawner , Jiyun Lee , Sarah Mennicken , Noah Picard , Diane Schulze , and Michael L . Littman . 2016 . Trigger - action programming in the wild : An analysis of 200 , 000 IFTTT recipes . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3227 – 3231 . Blase Ur , Jaeyeon Jung , and Stuart Schechter . 2013 . The current state of access control for smart devices in homes . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Home Usable Privacy and Security ( HUPS’13 ) . Blase Ur , Elyse McManus , Melwyn Pak Yong Ho , and Michael L . Littman . 2014 . Practical trigger - action pro - gramming in the smart home . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’14 ) . ACM . Marcel Walch , Michael Rietzler , Julia Greim , Florian Schaub , Bj¨orn Wiedersheim , and Michael Weber . 2013 . homeBLOX : Making home automation usable . In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing Adjunct ( UbiComp’13 ) Adjunct Proceedings . ACM , 295 – 298 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2494091 . 2494182 Rayoung Yang and Mark W . Newman . 2013 . Learning from a learning thermostat : Lessons for intelligent systems for the home . In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . ACM , 93 – 102 . Miguel A . Zamora - Izquierdo , Jose Santa , and Antonio F . Gomez - Skarmeta . 2010 . An integral and networked home automation solution for indoor ambient intelligence . IEEE Perv . Comput . 9 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 66 – 77 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MPRV . 2010 . 20 Bin Zhang , Pei - Luen Patrick Rau , and Gavriel Salvendy . 2009 . Design and evaluation of smart home user interface : Effects of age , tasks and intelligence level . Behav . Inf . Technol . 28 , 3 ( 2009 ) , 239 – 249 . Received April 2016 ; revised January 2017 ; accepted January 2017 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 11 , Publication date : April 2017 .