Open Research Online The Open University’s repository of research publications and other research outputs Ambiguity is a double - edged sword : similarity references in communication Conference or Workshop Item How to cite : Eckert , Claudia ; Stacey , Martin and Earl , Christopher ( 2003 ) . Ambiguity is a double - edged sword : similarity references in communication . In : Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Engineering Design . For guidance on citations see FAQs . c (cid:13) [ not recorded ] Version : [ not recorded ] Copyright and Moral Rights for the articles on this site are retained by the individual authors and / or other copyright owners . For more information on Open Research Online’s data policy on reuse of materials please consult the policies page . oro . open . ac . uk INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING DESIGN ICED 03 STOCKHOLM , AUGUST 19 - 21 , 2003 AMBIGUITY IS A DOUBLE - EDGED SWORD : SIMILARITY REFERENCES IN COMMUNICATION Claudia Eckert , Martin Stacey , Christopher Earl Abstract Designers often explain new concepts and new ideas by reference to existing designs . This is parsimonious , as it only requires a pointer to the referent and a description of the modifications . Such descriptions can be extremely powerful , expressing the entire context of a design or a process in a few words . However similarity assertions are inherently ambiguous , because they depend not only on the chosen description but also on the intention behind the similarity comparison . In this paper we attempt to analyse the effect that the ambiguity of similarity references has on communication and idea generation in design . The reinterpretation of a similarity assertion can be extremely creative , where ambiguity allows for new interpretations of a problem . At the same time , it can make accurate communication extremely difficult because every assertion can be interpreted differently unless the context is fully shared . Keywords : Creativity , cooperative design , communication , ambiguity , similarity 1 Introduction When designers talk to each other , they frequently make reference to other designs that they have been involved in or that all are familiar with . This is entirely normal for members of a group that shares context – awareness of a range of other designs . But the same conversation can be very bewildering for novices or outsiders like design researchers . The common references and objects of discussion give the group a sense of cohesion . At the same time talking in references is a very powerful way of communicating . Instead of describing something accurately it is sufficient to refer to an object and the intended modification [ 1 ] . Moreover some concepts can only be expressed by naming examples , because the range of object or feature categories exceeds the available names , and they cannot easily be described in terms of their structures [ 1 , 17 ] . For example , designers discussing a diesel engine may say “we use the same arrangement of the cylinder head assembly as on the new 4 cylinder engine for the 6 cylinder engine” . This makes perfect sense to an insider explaining exactly the layout of the cylinder head assembly , fuel injection points and so on . For an outsider this is baffling . What did they mean by new engine ? How is the cylinder head assembly arranged ? What does this mean for the fuel injection ? What does it mean for the pistons ? However on closer inspection the implication of the statement might not be clear for an insider either . The new design will clearly inherit more than just the location of the cylinder head , but which of the design decisions that follow from this are kept ? Maybe the speaker meant really just where they wanted to put the cylinder head assembly , whereas the listener concluded that naturally this must mean the fuel injection system as well . At the same time the listener is reminded of the reference object and thinks about the 4 - cylinder engine . This might remind him that this engine had a very elegant solution or the location of the high pressure fuel pipes and he proceeds to think about fuel pipes , missing half the conversation about engine heads but coming closer to the solution to his problem . So communicating by reference to objects is ambiguous . The aim of this paper is to examine the ways in which the ambiguity in similarity assertions can lead to misunderstandings in communicating by reference . Our aim is to provide part of a conceptual toolkit for understanding design communication in a wide variety of situations as well as a wide variety of industries . This paper concentrates on the similarity references made in conversations between expert designers – between the people who share knowledge and understanding of the objects they refer to . Novices and outsiders apply the same cognitive processes to different knowledge , to interpret similarity references differently . The argument presented in the paper is based on our observations of design interactions and design meetings in several large engineering companies , where we studied change , planning and communication behaviour in complex organisations [ 2 ] . In a separate study [ 3 , 5 ] we have looked at the nature of ambiguity and its effects on asynchronous communication through writing and sketching . In some situations ambiguity can have a very detrimental effect . We have observed ambiguous descriptions of designs having very harmful effects in the knitwear industry , which we have studied in great detail [ 4 , 9 ] . The structure of similarity , its description , and implications for complexity in design are subject of ongoing research [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] . 2 Design Discussions In the complex engineering products , such as diesel engines , we have studied , the generation of solution concepts or details is often a solitary activity interspersed with meetings . Somebody defines a problem , it is discussed in a meeting , everybody goes away and thinks about it , and discussions are held as required . Then at a subsequent project meeting each designer presents one or more solutions to the problem allocated to them . Meetings are important for evaluating and making decisions about relatively well - developed proposals [ 12 ] . This is quite different to the relatively uncommon design situations that are frequently analysed by researchers [ 10 , 11 ] , where a group of designers is given a design task and kept together until the problem is solved or the time is up . Some of the meetings we have observed were convened as change meetings , where a creative solution to a problem needed to be found quickly before an emergent change could upset the design schedule [ 2 ] . In these meetings designers reported on their progress and brought open issues to the discussion , that were sometimes resolved in the meeting or actioned for following meetings . The meetings fulfilled several functions at once : ( a ) inform other participants of the progress of the design and alert them to future issues ; ( b ) negotiate the key parameters of the system and agree interfaces between different components ; ( c ) specify tasks for other people ; and ( d ) jointly design solutions for specific problems . Meetings slip fluidly between these different functions . When designers are specifying or negotiating for a mutually acceptable design decision , their utterances have quite different intentions to those they make when jointly developing design ideas . They are saying “my situation is X , what is yours ? ” or “I want X , make sure you have it ready by Monday” or “I need 4mm clearance , you only leave me 2mm . What shall we do ? ” In these situations they want to be understood clearly and express themselves unambiguously . While there will always be an element of negotiating for a shared understanding , with room for discussions arising from ambiguity , as Bucciarelli points out [ 12 ] , ambiguity is not desired . Communication is rather different when designers are developing designs together , especially for early conceptual design , where design ideas are typically vague , provisional , imprecise and incomplete . Such situations have been extensively studied from a variety of perspectives , primarily through experiments [ see for instance 11 ] . In conversations for joint designing , sketches , gestures and words are used in combination to explicate and disambiguate each other [ 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] . The participants in joint designing usually get rapid feedback on whether they have been understood ( though clarification is a major activity within meetings ) . So they can interactively negotiate an understanding of each other’s positions , as well as negotiate about decisions , before the ( provisional or imprecise ) decisions are represented in precise - seeming forms [ 10 ] . Designers use rhetorical techniques for argumentation , including subtleties of phrasing and tone , to modulate the degree of belief they express in ideas , and signal willingness to make trade - offs , as well as to express exactitude [ 10 , 16 ] . However there is no guarantee that all the participants will always pick up these signals . Some people use them badly or in idiosyncratic ways . We have observed participants disagreeing about the purposes of meetings , and listeners being mistaken about the function of an utterance as intended by the speaker . In consequence they do not recognise information that they are given as uncertain or provisional . The opposite possibility is that they might interpret a specification wildly . 3 The Structure of Similarity There are two problems in interpreting communications by reference , first determining the respects in which the new design suggestion is meant to be similar to the referent , and second determining how similar . 3 . 1 Understanding similarity statements Psychological research has long been concerned with the roles of similarity and analogy in reasoning . The mechanisms involved in interpreting similarity statements and analogies remain an active topic of research . While similarity can be described in terms of the number of features shared between two items [ 18 ] , similarity judgements depend crucially on which features are most salient when the comparisons are made [ 19 ] . What features people attend to , and how similar they judge two things to be , is influenced by the context – importantly what category both items are indicated to belong to , and what other contrasting items are also present for comparison . Similarity statements are interpreted to be informative [ 18 ] . There is evidence that the features of the items compared are aligned , and attention is directed to the features each shares with only some members of the category [ 19 ] . Comparisons like “a robin is like a question” , where there are no category - universal features to provide a ground for identifying relevant features , seem peculiar . These features include not only simple or perceptible attributes , but also structural relationships between elements of the items , so that the recognition of shared patterns of relationships which drives analogical reasoning [ 20 ] is also important in the perception of similarity [ 21 ] . But even directly perceived features are learned from deep understanding of structure and function – for instance what a diesel engine expert sees when looking at a cylinder head assembly is very different from a non - engineer – and mental representations of objects include behavioural characteristics as well as structure . For example a conceptual designer of diesel engines understands the trade - offs between heat and noise through the fan . The nature of this trade - off remains independent of the type of engine . Communication through metaphor and analogies depends on identifying correspondences between these abstract relational features when more concrete attributes are dissimilar . In design , inspiration is the unprompted recognition of such correspondences to the needs of a current problem – though in some industries designers actively search for inspirations , looking for relatively concrete similarities across object categories [ 17 ] . d c b a d c b a d c b a d c b a Tolerance group Range Versions Chain Figure 1 Different types of Similarity Groups 3 . 2 Types of similarity relationship How similarity assertions are interpreted depends on how target and referent are classified into one category , so that the attributes shared by all category members serve to identify the significant attributes shared by only some category members . But the relationship between items and category can vary , influencing interpretation . It is possible to identify several distinct formal types of similarity relationship that designs can have to each other , linking them into subcategories of similar designs [ 7 , 8 ] . Figure 1 shows some of these patterns . The black spots indicate common features among all designs in a population and are disregarded in a similarity analysis . The grey spots show the features shared by pairs of designs – the features that are the focus of attention in interpreting similarity assertions . Typical patterns of similarity based on shared features are : • • Tolerance classes are groups of elements where each pair shares at least one common feature [ 23 , 24 , 25 ] . • • Chains are groups where each pair of elements is connected by a sequence of elements such that neighbouring elements share at least one feature . A chain is a weaker similarity grouping than a tolerance class . In chains perceived similarity may not be based on directly shared features . Thus removing an intermediate link can alter perceptions of similarity , or make a reference unintelligible . Chains are significant when designs are linked historically through a sequence of intermediate developments . Knowing this may influence the features one thinks are relevant to the similarity assertion ; not knowing this may make a reference unintelligible , or lead to it being taken to indicate closer similarity than is intended . The recognition of pertinent features can also be influenced by recollection of a chain of comparisons in previous discussions , which other people might have missed . • • Versions of the same product , or a family of closely related products , share many common features , while each one has additional features which do not necessarily have any specific relationship to each other . • • Ranges – such as the ranges of complementary products produced by clothing manufacturers – span a variety of basic categories and so do not share any common basic attributes beyond being objects . What ties them into a common category is more abstract relational features such as having complementary functions within some larger scheme . Usually every design is linked to others in the range through several shared features , giving the range its coherence . 3 . 3 Instances , categories , and spaces for interpretation Perceived similarity relationships can change as the context for comparison changes [ 18 ] . In particular perceptions can shift of how different a design is from what is typical for its category , when new members are added to the category ( Figure 2 ) . Our interests include situations where designers’ mental representations of the spaces of possible designs are formed by remembering many different designs , recognising similarities , and creating category concepts [ 17 ] . The relationship between mental representations of instances and categories is difficult to unpick , but there is evidence that instances are represented at least partly in terms of how they vary from category - typical ; deviations that are recognised as significant are remembered and can be exaggerated , while other deviations are ironed out [ 17 , 26 ] . Smaller categories might be represented extensionally as aggregates of all their elements ; so if a new element is added then it is included in the list of the elements ( Figure 2 ( A ) . But for larger categories , representations of what is typical are primary ( Figure 2 ( B ) ) . A new element may influence this ; however the representation of category - typical is not merely the average of all instances . For example when people are asked to draw a car , they often draw old - fashioned saloons . In some cases the representation of category - typical may be a particularly important or memorable canonical example – this may be unrepresentative of the range of instances within the category ( Figure 2 ( C ) ) . When similarity to reference point statements are interpreted , the features that are compared are their deviations from category - typical . This can give a skewed or asymmetric character to the similarity relationships between pairs of non - canonical designs . c b a d c b a c b a A : Extensional represention by elements New elements change representation B : Represention by central element New element shifts central element c b a d c b a c b a d C : Canonical element represention New elements might not change representation of space c b a c b a D : New element excluded from space Figure 2 New elements in Similarity Spaces When a reference is made to a unique design within a very general class , or one of a set of equally well - known designs , then the differences between the referent and what is general for the category gives some indication of how close to the referent the new design is intended to be – though there is plenty of scope for ambiguity . But the scope of references to canonical elements can be unclear : is the comparison exact , or is the referent a placeholder for a broader class , in which case the intended space of possibilities for the new design is wider . In design conversations this can be extremely confusing for the recipient , who does not know the extent of the space or the role of the representative object ; if the canonical element is not recognised as such , the specification by reference might be interpreted too narrowly . Conversely , how far does a reference to a category include what is typical rather than just what is common to all members . Total misunderstanding arises when one person includes an object into a space and others exclude it . 4 The Nature of Ambiguity Ambiguity is created by the availability of alternative referents for words , symbols , and symbolic or deictic gestures [ 15 ] . What referents are available depends on the originator’s understanding of languages and notational conventions , and their expectations of the recipient , as well as of the design situation [ 27 ] . But the role of prior context in design communication goes beyond the need for the recipient to recognise the graphic codes used in sketches and diagrams , and ascribe the intended referents to words and symbols . Representations of designs are abstractions in which aspects of the design are not fully specified . Understanding how much of what is not described is fixed , and what can be varied , is as essential as understanding the explicit content of a representation [ 3 ] . This applies even more so to verbal references to other designs , which are barely specified at all . Research on ambiguity in design communication has largely concentrated on sketches . Understanding the ambiguity of sketches is relevant not only for their parallels to similarity references , but also because sketches are often used in conjunction with verbal references in an attempt to disambiguate each other . As is well known , people don’t mean exactly what they draw . Roughness in sketches expresses lack of certainty , but the viewers often cannot distinguish between intended imprecision and poor drawing , or between a qualitative placeholder and a relatively exact depiction , or between a simple form drawn roughly and a more subtle form drawn more accurately [ 3 , 28 ] . One sketch or drawing often stands for a whole space of possible designs , but the viewer and the creator cannot know whether they interpret this space in the same way . Idiosyncrasies and poor drawing in sketches and diagrams bias interpretation by others towards different central meanings , as well as towards different judgements of imprecision and provisionality . This is also well recognised in engineering companies . The head of new product development at a large UK engineering company has completely excluded sketches from communications with external people , because he is concerned about them forming wrong expectations from their interpretations of sketches . Instead of sketches they use CAD drawings for early external communication , where they draw the newly designed features and use parts of the old design partially stripped of detail as placeholders for their other newly designed parts . Some earlier discussions of imprecision , uncertainty and ambiguity in design communication [ 10 , 16 ] lump all these together under ‘ambiguity’ . This is confusing , and promotes the currently influential view that ambiguity ( more narrowly defined as the availability of more than one qualitatively distinct interpretation ) is beneficial in design communication , and that aiming to use computer tools to create unambiguous descriptions of designs is a discredited enterprise ; this we doubt [ 3 ] . However Minneman [ 10 ] argues that designers sometimes do exploit ambiguity . Nonetheless joint designing is very different from communication between activities ; handing over ambiguous representations can cause severe problems [ 24 , 4 ] . The view that ambiguity is beneficial in design communication is related to two doctrines . The first is that ambiguity facilitates creativity by enabling reinterpretation . Schön [ 29 ] views this as interacting with the sketches as in a conversation : the designers see more in their sketches than they put in when they draw them , and these insights drive further designing . The extensive body of research on how architects and other designers use sketches , has focused on how designers reinterpret elements of their sketches [ 30 ] . The other influential doctrine is that design is inherently social . One important contribution of sociologically oriented studies of design practice [ 10 , 12 , 27 ] is highlighting the role of ambiguity in providing negotiating space , which allows individual and group creativity to flourish . Henderson [ 27 ] puts it as : “Ambiguous communications provide an opportunity for designers to project and reflect – breathing room from rational concerns . Designers project a story onto suggestive fragments to make a whole , creating the shared understanding” . But the effect of ambiguous communication is rarely so clear cut in design – it can be very harmful [ 3 ] . It depends on the function of the design communication ( see section 2 ) and the stage of the design process at which the ambiguous communication takes place . 5 The Ambiguity of Similarity References Communicating by reference to other designs is a double edged sword . It is very quick , but the references can be harder to understand than people realise , and can bias creative thinking . But sometimes their imprecision and ambiguity can give designers space for flexibility . The spaces of possible new designs afforded by references to other designs have a similar structure to those of afforded by sketches . Usually “like” doesn’t mean “exactly like” , so some flexibility is allowed in mapping the old design into the new situation – some aspects will usually have to be different to meet the constraints of the current problem , and others will be free to vary to meet other needs . So how like is like ? Similarity references are inherently ambiguous . What aspects of the referred to or sketched design are significant ? How precisely are these aspects specified ? Are some aspects intended as accurate detail while others are rough indicators ? How committed is the speaker to the proposal ? Some aspects of similarity utterances make them harder to interpret than sketches or written documentation . Like all utterances they are quick and fleeting . A quick reference in a sentence can carry a huge amount of information including the reference point , the modification to it , and the history of change that they referenced design has gone through . With a sketch we have time to reflect about its uncertain nature and pick up the degree of uncertainty from the way it is drawn – people often confuse polished drawings with final design decisions . While verbal cues can signal imprecision or provisionality in analogous ways , uncertainty in a speaker ' s expression can be uncertainty about what they want to say , rather than an indication of the looseness with which it should be interpreted . When designers create and look at sketches , they are aware that they are looking at an incomplete representation ; but when they specify elements of designs or outline negotiation positions though verbal references to other designs , they can be unaware that they are actively constructing interpretations based on background knowledge and assumptions that the other parties might not fully share . The need to query assumptions and ask for clarification can be less obvious . Another fundamental source of ambiguity is abstraction . Any form of abstract description , whether it is verbal , written or pictorial affords many more interpretations at a low level of detail . When somebody says the engines needs a fuel pump as an abstract statement , then this says very little about the fuel pump , what make , what size etc . The details are often filled in by he listener from experience . A fuel pump might imply a certain make because it always does , or it could be the one used last time , but it could also be a logical placeholder for a certain functionality . Again this is often not clear to the listener , who might then fill in some details but not others according to their own experience . Similarity references can play a significant part in the generation of new ideas , because they allow a very fast exchange of imprecise or skeletal ideas . With the rich context of a similarity reference , people can very quickly pick up on a different feature of a design that they like . The influence of similarity references on creativity go deeper . Designers often get fixated on a certain type of solution and find it difficult to think of radically different solutions [ 31 ] . Designers encouraged to consider a source of inspiration for one aspect of the design can find it difficult to avoid thinking about it for another aspect of the design for which it is unhelpful . A reference to another design can help them to reframe the problem and think of a different type of solution . However problems can only be reframed this way within the range of existing designs . More radical solution either have to be introduced by analogy to other types of products , or derived from theoretical analysis . This is a potential problem in mature products , such as diesel engines , where there is little scope for improvement within established problem - solving approaches . The efficiency of similarity references depends a lot on how well the people know each other and how completely they share the concepts , techniques and examples with which they think about design – their object worlds [ 12 ] . On the other hand the more the members of a team share , the more they suffer from collective fixation . They are locked in their jointly created solution space and need outsiders to break it for them . Whether this is positive or negative overall depends on the nature of the product . We have observed very efficiently working knitwear design teams , who needed to bring in students or freelance designers to get new ideas ; as well as engineering teams where designers communicate effortlessly and quickly through shared object references . 6 Applications The general results in the body of this paper are the outcome of many individual observations in a variety of design contexts . These range from fashion to complex electromechanical engineering . The analysis of ambiguity and similarity in the design processes of these industries indicates some strengths and weaknesses of these processes as well as how they might be improved . The fashion industry demonstrates a strong reliance on similarity , whether creating garments in a fashionable style or drawing on inspiration from non - design sources such as natural phenomena or design sources from different domains . This was observed in detail for the knitwear industry . Although similarity is used extensively , communication especially in the knitwear industry between designers and technicians ( who realise prototype designs ) is fraught with difficulties because of extensive ambiguity . The analysis based on the general results above indicates why communication between disparate teams of technicians and designers and even among collaborating designers is prone to break down . In some cases this failure is because several parties do not share common interpretations for similar objects – similarity is used inappropriately . Other cases of failure in communication come from problems in actually realising the similarity . Then alternative interpretations or rough approximations are created , many of which are far away from initial intentions . The key conclusions in this industry example are that ( a ) similarity ( and ambiguity ) is essential for inspiration ; ( b ) ambiguity ( and similarity ) should be managed carefully if the whole design process is to deliver design intention to product . Another case from a highly contrasting domain confirms the usefulness of the analysis of similarity . This is the design of diesel engines , a largely mature product . Product development is driven by regulatory requirements . The analysis applies to groups of design specialists in particular features and functions of the product . These specialists are both inside the immediate company , in other divisions of the same company or in suppliers . Similarity of descriptions is widely used both at the broad conceptual level and for functional parts . Similarity to existing and previous company designs as well as with competitors ' engines is central to success of new designs in the market . Inspiration may be aided by ambiguity . However , ambiguity is generally avoided . In communication with third parties and suppliers only CAD representations are used in our collaborating company . Similarity although vital to these designers is used in a tightly controlled and analytical way . Competitive advantage is gained by small customer oriented changes rather than new styles and major revamps of the product range as takes place in fashion . In both examples the double edged sword is clear . Similarity is an effective mode of communication among designers but associated ambiguity needs to be managed closely . This is especially true when communicating parties operate at different stages of design ( eg knitwear designers and technicians ) or when designers work in different contexts ( eg designers and suppliers ) . The analysis of the paper shows why communication interfaces , say between product designers and part suppliers , or between knitwear designers and technicians , are sensitive to misinterpretation through ambiguity whilst interfaces within a shared context can exploit similarities and common meanings . Acknowledgements This research has been supported by the EPSRC GR / R64100 / 01 and GR / M23236 to the Cambridge University Engineering Design Centre and previously ESRC grant L12730100173 to Open University . Discussions with Jeanette McFadzean and Jennifer Wiley are gratefully acknowledged as are our industrial collaborators and informants . References [ 1 ] Eckert , C . M . and Stacey M . K . , “Sources of inspiration : a language of design” , Design Studies , vol . 21 , pp . 523 - 538 , 2000 . [ 2 ] Eckert , C . M . , Clarkson , P . J . and Zanker , W . , “ Change and Customisation in Complex Engineering Domains” , Research in Engineering Design , in press . [ 3 ] Stacey , M . K . and Eckert , C . M . , “Against Ambiguity” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , in press . [ 4 ] Eckert , C . M . , “The Communication Bottleneck in Knitwear Design : Analysis and Computing Solutions” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , v10 , pp29 - 74 , 2001 . [ 5 ] Stacey , M . K . and Eckert , C . M . , “Managing Uncertainty in Design Communication” , Proc 13 ICED 2001 , Glasgow , 2001 , pp . 441 - 448 . [ 6 ] Earl , C . F . , Eckert C . M . and Johnson , J . H . , “Complexity of Planning in Design” , Proc ASME 13 th Design Theory and Methodology Conf , Pittsburgh , 2001 , DTM - 21697 . [ 7 ] Earl , C . F . and Eckert , C . M . , “The structure of similarity in design” , in T . M . M . Shahin ( ed . ) , Proc Engineering Design Conference 2002 , London , pp . 527 - 536 . [ 8 ] Eckert , C . M . and Earl , C . F . , “Perspectives on Similarity in Design” , Proceedings of DESIGN 2002 , 7 th International Design Conference , Dubrovnik , Croatia , 2002 . [ 9 ] Eckert , C . M . and Stacey , M . K . , “Adaptation of Sources of Inspiration in Knitwear Design” , Creativity Research Journal , in press . [ 10 ] Minneman , S . L . , “The Social Construction of a Technical Reality : Empirical Studies of Group Engineering Design Practice” , PhD Thesis , Dept of Mechanical Engineering , Stanford University , 1991 also Xerox PARC report SSL - 91 - 22 . [ 11 ] Cross , N . G . , Christiaans , H . H . C . M . , and Dorst , K . ( eds . ) , “Analysing Design Activity” , John Wiley , Chichester , UK , 1996 . [ 12 ] Bucciarelli , L . L . , “Designing Engineers” , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 13 ] Bly , S . A . , “A Use of Drawing Surfaces in Different Collaborative Settings” Proc . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ’88 , ACM , Portland , 1988 , pp . 250 - 256 . [ 15 ] Tang , J . C . , “Listing , Drawing and Gesturing in Design : A Study of the Use of Shared Workspaces by Design Teams” , PhD Thesis , Department of Mechanical Engineering , Stanford University , Stanford , CA , 1989 . Xerox PARC report SSL - 89 - 3 . [ 15 ] Neilson , I . and Lee , J . “Conversations with graphics : implications for the design of natural language / graphics interfaces” Int J of Human - Computer Studies , Vol . 40 , pp . 509 - 541 , 1994 . [ 16 ] Brereton , M . F , Cannon , D . M . , Mabogunje , A . , Leifer , L . “Collaboration in Design Teams : Mediating Design Progress through Social Interaction”in [ 11 ] pp319 - 341 . [ 17 ] Eckert , C . M . and Stacey , M . K . , “Designing in the Context of Fashion – Designing the Fashion Context” , in P . Lloyd and H . H . C . M . Christiaans ( eds . ) , Designing in Context : Proceedings of Design Thinking Research Symposium 5 , Delft University Press , Delft , Netherlands , 2001 , pp . 113 - 129 . [ 18 ] Tversky , A . , “Features of Similarity” , Psychological Review , v84 , pp 327 - 352 , 1977 [ 19 ] Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . and Gentner , D . , “Respects for Similarity” , Psychological Review , vol . 100 , pp . 254 - 278 , 1993 . [ 20 ] Gentner , D . , “Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy” , Cognitive Science , vol . 7 , pp . 155 - 170 , 1983 . [ 21 ] Gentner , D . and Markman , A . B . , “Structure Mapping in Analogy and Similarity” , American Psychologist , vol . 52 no . 1 , pp . 45 - 56 , 1997 . [ 22 ] Bowdle , B . F . and Gentner , D . , “ Metaphor Comprehension : From Comparison to Categorization” , Proc 21 st Conf of the Cognitive Science Society , 90 - 95 , 1999 . [ 23 ] Carnap , R . , “The Logical Structure of the World” , Routledge , London , 1967 . [ 24 ] Schreider , J . , “Equality , resemblance and order” , Mir , Moscow , 1975 . [ 25 ] Zadeh , L . A . , “Similarity Relations and Fuzzy Orderings” , Information Sciences , vol . 3 pp . 177 - 200 . [ 26 ] Goldstone , R . L . , “Perceptual Learning” , Ann Rev of Psychology , 49 , 585 - 612 1998 . [ 27 ] Henderson , K . , “On line and on paper” , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1999 . [ 28 ] Stacey , M . K . , Eckert , C . M . and McFadzean , J . , “Sketch Interpretation in Design Communication” , Proc 12 th ICED , Munich , Vol . 2 , pp . 923 - 928 , 1999 . [ 29 ] Schön , D . A . , “The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action” , Basic Books , New York , 1983 . [ 30 ] Purcell , A . T . and Gero , J . S . , “Drawings and the design process” , Design Studies , vol . 19 , pp . 389 - 430 , 1998 . [ 31 ] Jansson , D . G . and Smith , S . M . , “Design fixation” Design Studies , v12 , pp3 - 11 , 1991 C . M . Eckert , Engineering Design Centre , Department of Engineering Cambridge University , Trumpington Street , Cambridge CB2 1PZ , UK + 44 1223 332758 cme26 @ eng . cam . ac . uk