Boundary - Object Trimming : On the Invisibility of Medical Secretaries ’ Care of Records in Healthcare Infrastructures Claus Bossen 1 , Lotte Groth Jensen 2 & Flemming Witt Udsen 3 1 Information Studies , Aarhus University , Helsingforsgade 14 , 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark ( Phone : + 45 - 87 - 161983 ; E - mail : imvcb @ hum . au . dk ) ; 2 Department of Health Technology Assessment , Institute of Public Health , Aarhus University , Oluf Palmes Alle 15 , 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark ( ; E - mail : Lotte . Groth @ stab . rm . dk ) ; 3 Danish Center for Health Care Improvements , Faculty of Social Sciences & Faculty of Medicine , Aalborg University , Fibigerstræde 11 , 9220 Aalborg Ø , Denmark ( ; E - mail : fwu @ business . aau . dk ) Abstract . As health care IT gradually develops from being stand - alone systems towards integrated infrastructures , the work of various groups , occupations and units is likely to become more tightly integrated and dependent upon each other . Hitherto , the focus within health care has been upon the two most prominent professions , physicians and nurses , but most likely other non - clinical occupations will become relevant for the design and implementation of health care IT . In this paper , we describe the cooperative work of medical secretaries at two hospital departments , based on a study evaluating a comprehensive electronic health record ( EHR ) shortly after implementation . The subset of data on medical secretaries includes observation ( 11 hours ) , interviews ( three individual and one group ) and survey data ( 31 of 250 respondents were medical secretaries ) . We depict medical secretaries ’ core task as to take care of patient records by ensuring that information is complete , up to date , and correctly coded , while they also carry out information gatekeeping and articulation work . The importance of these tasks to the departments ’ work arrangements was highlighted by the EHR implementation , which also coupled the work of medical secretaries more tightly to that of other staff , and led to task drift among professions . Medical secretaries have been relatively invisible to health informatics and CSCW , and we propose the term ‘ boundary - object trimming ’ to foreground and conceptualize one core characteristic of their work : maintenance and optimization of the EHR as a boundary object . Finally , we re ﬂ ect upon the hitherto relative invisibility of medical secretaries which may be related to issues of gender and power . Key words : boundary objects , cooperative work , electronic health records , gender , health care , medical secretaries , invisible work , non - clinical occupations 1 . Introduction 1 In this paper , we describe the work of medical secretaries , and their role in the cooperative work arrangements of hospitals . Medical secretaries are part of any 1 This is a revised and extended version of a paper presented at Conference on CSCW ’ 12 . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2014 ) 23 : 75 – 110 © Springer Science + Business DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 013 - 9195 - 5 Media Dordrecht 2013 larger medical practice or hospital , and schedule patients , transcribe physicians ’ notes , and ensure the completeness of records . The medical secretaries ’ importance became evident during the study of the implementation of a comprehensive electronic health record system ( EHR ) at a Danish regional hospital . Among other things , implementing the EHR slowed medical secretaries ’ process of writing - up physicians ’ notes , with repercussions for physicians and nurses in particular in terms of proceeding with their work . Consequently , the implementation plan changed radically ; the ﬁ rst scheduled upgrade consisted almost entirely of upgrades that mitigated the challenges the EHR presented to the medical secretaries . The implementation of the EHR was part of ongoing efforts in Denmark , where , since the mid - 1990s , national ITstrategies have set high goals for the development and implementation of cross - professional , structured records that enhance clinical work , planning , and research . Substantial capital and high expectations have also been , and continue to be invested in EHRs and health information systems in the USA ( Berner et al . 2005 ) , Canada ( Infoway , Canada Health 2011 ) , Australia ( Authority , National E - Health Transition 2011 ) , and in European countries , such as the UK ( General , Comptroller and Auditor 2011 ) , Austria ( Dorda et al . 2008 ) , and Norway ( Ellingsen and Røed 2010 ) . Comprehensive overviews of studies on health care IT can be found in Greenhalgh et al . ( 2009 ) and Fitzpatrick and Ellingsen ( 2012 ) . CSCW has contributed to the efforts to develop IT systems for health care , with studies of emergency departments , surgical wards , inpatient wards , and laboratories ( Bardram et al . 2006 ; Bjørn and Rødje 2008 ) , analyses of temporal and spatial aspects of cooperative work and awareness ( Heath et al . 2002 ; Bardram and Bossen 2005 ) , discussions of the role of representation and categorization in developing EHRs , and the challenges involved in their implementation ( Balka and Wagner 2006 ; Martin et al . 2006 ; Bossen 2011 ) . Most studies focus on the cooperative work of physicians and nurses , while non - clinical staff , such as pharmacists and hospital porters , receive less attention though radiologists have received some attention in connection with technological change ( Barley 1988 ; Cockburn 1986 ; Tellioglu and Wagner 2001 ) . In this paper , we argue that medical secretaries have a central role in hospital work arrangements and should be taken more into consideration . Along with other non - clinical groups , they are likely to become increasingly relevant to the design and implementation of health care IT , in the shift from stand - alone systems to integrated infrastructures . In this paper , we make two contributions . First , we describe the work of medical secretaries before and after the implementation of an EHR , describe the drifts in tasks between professions , and argue for the importance of medical secretaries to the work arrangement at the hospital . Second , we suggest the term ‘ boundary - object trimming ’ as a way to foreground and conceptualise one central aspect of medical secretaries ’ work : the maintenance and optimization of the EHR as a boundary object . Finally , as a meta - re ﬂ ection on the case study , we discuss the relative invisibility of medical secretaries within CSCW and medical informatics in general , and argue for the continued relevance of researchers being aware of the perspective and position from which they conduct their studies . 76 Claus Bossen et al . 2 . Background The focus on physicians and nurses in EHR - study design and implementation is understandable , considering the important and emblematic roles of these professions in health care . Central publications upon healthcare often used within CSCW such as , for example , those by Anselm Strauss ( Strauss et al . 1985 ) and Marc Berg ( 1997 ) , focus on physicians and nurses , as do the publications by the Institute of Medicine , whose reports have called for the development of ITas a solution to the challenges of quality and ef ﬁ ciency in health care ( Kohn et al . 1999 ; America , Committee on Quality of Health Care in and Institute of Medicine 2001 ; Aspden et al . 2007 ) . An indication of the relative absence of medical secretaries is also provided by GoogleScholar ; a search for articles with medical secretaries in the title results in 41 hits , whereas the results for physicians and nurses respectively give 35 , 900 and 54 , 600 hits . When browsing the ACM library portal and two medical informatics journals ( International Journal of Medical Informatics ; Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association ) , we found only three studies that focused on medical secretaries : Spence and Reddy ( 2007 ) describe the central role of the unit secretary in the information - seeking activities of a multidisciplinary team at an emergency department ; Møller and Dourish ( 2010 ) describe the central role of medical secretaries in scheduling and coordination of responsibility between hospital departments ; and Møller and Bjørn ( 2011 ) describe how medical secretaries along with physicians and radiologists engage in sorting practices . A fourth paper included medical secretaries together with physicians and nurses in a study of the effects of implementing an EHR in a Norwegian hospital ( Lium et al . 2006 ) . Medical secretaries are mentioned in passing in other research on collaborative information - seeking ( Reddy et al . 2001 ; Reddy and Spence 2008 ; Paul and Reddy 2010 ) , and we also found one study on patient transfers , which mentions an unspeci ﬁ ed group of non - clinical staff ( Abraham and Reddy 2008 ) . Searching more broadly upon medical secretaries and EHRs gave only meagre results . One study argues that medical secretaries are placed at the intersection of clinical and administrative work ( Møller and Vikkelsø 2012 ) . Another study describes the work tasks of medical secretaries with paper - based patient records in the context of future implementation of EHRs ( Bertelsen and Nøhr 2005 ) , and three studies included medical secretaries along with nurses and physicians in quantitative surveys of staff satisfaction with implemented EHRs ( Lærum et al . 2004 ; Lium and Faxvaag 2006 ; Palm et al . 2006 ) . In a survey of 89 papers based on a systematic search for papers on EHR between 1982 and 2002 , Häyrinen et al . ( 2008 ) found three papers labelled as dealing with secretarial staff , but neither describe their work and focus on transcription errors . Along with other non - clinical hospital staff , medical secretaries seem to be mostly invisible , a fate they share with secretaries and assistants more generally ( Karlsson 2011 ) . Erickson et al . ( 2008 ) found that ‘ There appear to be no studies that explicitly focus on the work of administrative assistants in the HCI or CSCW literature . ’ ( Erickson et al . 2008 : 610 ) . They describe the skills and knowledge required for 77 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries administrative assistant work , and suggest the term ‘ articulation workers ’ for administrative assistants . One reason for the invisibility of secretaries and administrative assistants in general may be that their work , like that of technicians , is typically regarded as routine , unskilled , or not ‘ knowledge work ’ ( Barley 1996 ; Glenn and Feldberg 1997 ) . Yet , there are several studies within CSCW upon ‘ routine work ’ and technicians , such as the work of telephone operators and photocopier technicians , which testify that their work requires knowledge and skill , and is important to their organisations ( Orr 1996 ; Blomberg et al . 1997 ; Muller 1999 ) . Since making work visible is pertinent to CSCW ( Suchman 1995 ; Star and Strauss 1999 ) , and the ﬁ eld of CSCW grew out of the ﬁ eld of Of ﬁ ce automation ( Grudin 1994 ; Schmidt 2011 , chpt 11 ) , the apparent invisibility of clerical work is something of an enigma to which we will return in Section 7 . 3 . 3 . Occupations , cooperative work , and tasks We see medical secretaries as part of hospitals ’ organizational orders that are the result of the actors ’ ongoing interactions and technologies , which facilitate and stabilize complex , cooperative work arrangements ( Strauss 1993 ; Schmidt and Wagner 2004 ) . Strauss ’ s interactional approach to action aims to make visible the efforts involved in the actions and interactions between actors and the establishment of orders ( Strauss 1993 ) . Cooperative action and work emerge as accomplishments arising from actors ’ alignment of their actions with those of co - actors , task articulation , and the coordination of work trajectories with the requirements of other co - actors ’ work and recursive interdependencies . The effort of alignment and articulation may be minimized by routinizing interaction , and working out standard operating procedures ( SOP ) , which may stipulate courses of action and interaction . As cooperation becomes more complex and broader in scope , actors may work out arrangements : temporarily stabilized agreements that may include division of work and work roles , including , for example , descriptions of responsibilities , required skills , and accountability ( Strauss 1993 ) . Similarly , standard operating con ﬁ gurations ( SOCs ) are set - up spatial arrangements that ensure that the right con ﬁ guration of people , resources , knowledge and place are available in order to reduce the amount of mobility work ( Bardram and Bossen 2005 ) . SOPs , SOCs and arrangements are often formalized and inscribed materially on paper , in computers or in buildings . As coordination mechanisms , they facilitate cooperative action , enable communication , and provide updated information on work status . Multiple coordination mechanisms may be organized into ordering systems : complexes of interrelated practices and artefacts . These enable cooperative , coordinated interactions of greater complexity and scope than otherwise possible ( Schmidt and Wagner 2004 ) . Cooperating groups of actors each have their stance and perspective , and may only be familiar with the perspectives , aims , and scope of other actors ’ work to the extent that this is required for cooperation to proceed . Hence , the importance of boundary 78 Claus Bossen et al . objects suggested by Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) to conceptualise phenomena , often artefacts , that facilitate communication and coordination across social worlds , by being “… both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints of the several parties employing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites ” ( ibid , p393 ) . Coordination mechanisms can become boundary objects that facilitate and stabilize cooperation between different social worlds , whose actors relate differently to , but cooperate through these . While boundary objects are related to by various actors or groups of actors , their role as work objects may not have the same signi ﬁ cance . An extreme , but analytically informative example of this is evident in the case of pregnant women , who , during foetal surgery , become two work objects : To surgeons , the unborn child is the primary work object , while the mother is secondary , a practical and juridical barrier to be addressed ; on the other hand , nurses regard the mother as their primary work object , and concern themselves with her survival and well - being ( Casper 1998 ) . From this perspective , hospitals emerge as temporarily stabilized orderings of actors and technologies , in which roles , groups , divisions of work , and so forth , are established through cooperative work arrangements , enabled and stabilized by coordination mechanisms and ordering systems . Professions such as medicine and nursing , and occupations such as medical laboratory technician , hospital porter , and medical secretary , align their tasks and actions , and cooperate through SOPs , SOCs and arrangements inscribed on whiteboards , paper , and in IT systems such as EHRs . As boundary objects , for example in the form of ‘ clinical pathways ’ ( e . g . Cabitza et al . 2007 ) , these enable cooperation across the various social worlds of professions and departments . Though often assumed neutral , organizational arrangements whether public or private often produce and reproduce themselves along lines of gender and ethnicity . The allocation of work roles , tasks and responsibilities often results in , for example , men and women holding different work roles and positions in organizational hierarchies ; in various occupations either men or women are the overwhelming majority , and more men than women are supervisors , managers or hold public of ﬁ ces of power . The processes that have effect may be complex , but such gendered hierarchies are nevertheless often the outcome ( Acker 2006 ; Alvesson and Billing 2009 ) . In healthcare , the allocation of work roles , tasks and responsibilities has been strongly in ﬂ uenced by gender and professions ( Kuhlmann and Annandale 2010 ; Riska 2010 ) . Though , in some countries such as Denmark , Finland , Sweden , and the USA there are as many female as male physicians , gender differences pop up internally to the profession with surgeons predominantly being men and paediatrics predominantly being women . Some professions such as nursing and midwifery are still predominantly taken on by women ( Riska 2010 ) , and medical secretaries in Denmark and , for example , the UK are also overwhelmingly women . Sustaining work arrangements requires ongoing effort , and they are under constant pressure for renegotiation . Changes in technologies are likely to entail changes in work arrangements , including work roles , task distribution , and responsibilities , since 79 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries the coordination mechanisms embedded in or required by technologies are constitutive of the complex arrangements . The outcome of the changes emerges from the interactional processes following the changes in technology , and may lead to the expanded or reduced role of a profession or group , with regard to responsibility , tasks , remuneration , and so on , depending , among other things , on the acumen and power of the various groups , including management ( Aydin and Rice 1996 ; Barley 1990 . For an example from nursing see Wagner 1993 ) . For clerks and secretaries , the introduction of typewriters , dictaphones , photocopiers , and computers has been seen as an opportunity of up - skilling and getting more interesting and rewarding jobs , as well as a threat either in the form of deskilling their job or making it entirely super ﬂ uous . The outcomes so far seem mainly to be a status quo with some secretaries becoming up - and others de - skilled ( Pringle 1988 : chapter 8 ; Truss et al . 2012 ) . For medical secretaries , voice recognition and EHRs have been seen as threats to their jobs , since these technologies may make transcription super ﬂ uous when physicians ’ talk is transcribed automatically or physicians enter diagnoses etc . into the EHR themselves ( For the situation in Denmark , see ( Perspektivgruppen 2006 ) ) . 4 . Research setting , context and methods The analysis of medical secretaries ’ work and its reorganisation after the implementation of an EHR is based on a qualitative and quantitative study at two departments – an endocrinology and an emergency department – at Regional Hospital in Central Region , one of ﬁ ve regions in Denmark . Regional Hospital has a staff of about 2 , 000 , including 300 physicians , 970 nurses , 130 medical secretaries , and 80 physiotherapists . It is one of the most effective hospitals nationally , has 360 beds , and 30 , 000 admissions annually , of which 85 % are acute cases . Yearly , the outpatient clinics receive 110 , 000 patients . The endocrinology department has 167 beds , and about 12 , 500 admissions yearly , of which 90 % are acute cases . It has a staff of 65 physicians , 169 nurses , eight physiotherapists , and 30 medical secretaries . It consists of eight wards : stroke services , dialysis , cardiology , rheumatology , gastroenterology , diabetes , outpatient cardiac care , respiratory medicine . Its outpatient clinic receives about 15 , 000 patients yearly . The emergency department treats 32 , 000 acute cases annually , and employs 40 nurses , 12 health - care workers , and ﬁ ve medical secretaries . 4 . 1 . Context : implementation of a comprehensive EHR The data on medical secretaries on which this paper is based came out as part of a larger study of the implementation of a ‘ comprehensive ’ EHR . The EHR comprises modules for booking , test requisitions and results , administration of medication , patient administration , and clinical documentation . The Booking , Requisition / Results , and Medication modules had already been implemented at Regional 80 Claus Bossen et al . Hospital some years earlier . A previous patient administrative system ( PAS ) called the GREEN SYSTEM was to be replaced by a new module , which we will henceforth call ‘ PAS ’ . The module for documenting clinical work , CLINICAL PROCESS , was entirely new , and replaced all paper - based records kept by physicians , nurses , physiotherapists , midwives , and so on . It was the ﬁ rst time the Central Region implemented an EHR that included such a broad and integrated range of functionalities . The EHR did not integrate the picture archiving and communi - cation systems or the microbiology system . Thus , the region described it as ‘ comprehensive ’ , and not ‘ complete ’ . Of special interest to this study is the PAS , since one of the core tasks of medical secretaries is patient administration . In the PAS , patient data ( name , civil registration number , address , relatives , etc . ) are registered along with admissions to , and discharges from departments at Regional Hospital , as are transfers to other hospitals . Of interest is also CLINICAL PROCESS , in which clinicians were to document treatment and care in a structured manner , using a wide range of menus and ﬁ elds shaped by staff at Regional Hospital . Where appropriate , codes for documenting treatment and care are linked to the menus and text ﬁ elds . For example , the new EHR automatically reports codes for Diagnosis Related Groups ( DRG ) ― used for reimbursing the hospital for its activities ― to the National Board of Health . Registration and reporting of DRG codes was , and to some extent remains , a core task of medical secretaries . The EHR was implemented in three phases in the spring of 2010 . The ﬁ rst phase which involved the endocrinology and emergency departments , comprising almost half of the hospitals ’ staff , is the focus of this paper . The ﬁ rst phase included both of these two departments , because physicians worked and patients were often transferred across these . The study aimed at generating ﬁ ndings which were consistent across the two departments , but also at identifying differences between them . However , physicians and physiotherapists work across the departments , and no signi ﬁ cant differences were found in interviews or in the questionnaire . Work tasks and routines of medical secretaries included in observations and interviews were very similar across the two departments . 4 . 2 . Data collection and analysis The larger study was conducted in the ﬁ rst half of 2010 and commissioned by the region which required an evaluation of the clinical applicability of the EHR and changes in work practices at the endocrinology and emergency departments at Regional Hospital . Because the region urgently needed to decide whether or not to implement the EHR at other hospitals , the study was conducted during the shakedown phase , just before and after implementation . It may take up to a year before an organization stabilizes , since further changes evolve , as work practices and arrangements are recursively aligned . However , evaluation studies during the shakedown phase are important , and may provide valuable insights into ﬁ t and mis ﬁ t 81 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries between IT system and work organisation , and inform the subsequent process of adaptation ( Häkkinen and Hilmola 2008 ) . The larger study was devised as a mixed - methods case study ( Yin 1994 ) , and focused on four professions ( physicians , nurses , physiotherapists , and medical secretaries ) as well as IT system suppliers . Physicians and nurses were included because they were the largest and most powerful professions and would be profoundly affected by the EHR even though they had previous experience with some modules of the EHR . Physiotherapists and medical secretaries are well - organised , though less powerful professions , and were included because their work practices were anticipated to become even more affected by the EHR of which they had little experience . The study combined qualitative interviews , ethnographic observation , and a quantitative survey based on DeLone and McLean model of IT success ( Delone and McLean 2003 ) . The latter focuses on system quality , information quality , service quality , intention to use , use , user satisfaction , and net bene ﬁ ts of IT systems ( For a summary of data generating methods , see Table 1 at the end of the paper . For a detailed description of the study including examples of interview guides and the survey questionnaire as well as results , see Bossen et al . ( forthcoming ) ) . Ethnographic observation of the four professional groups was conducted by the ﬁ rst author and immediately before and after implementation , to learn about their work practices and organization ( total , 64 hours ; 42 hours before , 22 hours after implementation ) . The observations included staff from all eight wards , and within the professional groups observation focused on physicians and nurses doing ward rounds ; physiotherapists attending to patients at the two departments ; and medical secretaries on the wards transcribing and taking care of records . Also included was observation of expert - user meetings ( ten ) , and implementation management meetings ( 14 ) , following implementation . Observation notes were written up as extended text immediately afterwards . This data also informed interview guides and the design of the survey . All interviews were conducted after implementation , to obtain the staff ’ s evaluation of the EHR : 13 semi - structured individual interviews covering the four professions were conducted before the survey , and were also used to inform its design , and seven semi - structured group interviews based on profession were conducted after the survey and were also used to validate survey results . The individual interviews before the survey were based on more than 40 questions of the survey base covering issues of pre - existing experience with IT and EHRs ; good and frustrating experiences of taking the EHR into use ; support ; performance and breakdown of the EHR ; information quality , ease of use , support of work practice , and expectations to the future . The group interviews focused on the same issues , but participants were asked to discuss results from the survey on these issues . The project was approved by the hospital directors and department heads , and presented at staff meetings , noting that participation was voluntary . Permission to observe and interview was obtained verbally , as research advanced . 82 Claus Bossen et al . In the larger study , all interviews were transcribed by an external party , and subsequently analysed by two of the authors and coded based on the Delone and McLean Model ( system quality , information quality , service quality , intention to use , use , user satisfaction , and net bene ﬁ ts ) supplied with additional categories ( good experiences , frustrations , signi ﬁ cant events ) . All interviews were gone over by the two authors and differences in coding resolved through discussion to increase coding con ﬁ dence . The quantitative survey was conducted 6 weeks after implementation ( n = 225 , 58 % response rate ) , and analysed for non - response bias by looking at differences between responses handed in before the ﬁ rst deadline and responses handed in between the ﬁ rst deadline and the second deadline a week later . No non - response bias was found . Questionnaire data were analysed for signi ﬁ cant patterns through ANOVA tests ( Analysis of Variance ) to highlight Table 1 . Overview of methods used in the larger EHR evaluation study . Table of methods in EHR evaluation Individualinterviews 13 Physicians 4 Nurses 5 Physiotherapists 1 Medical Secretaries 3 Group interviews Physicians 1 interview ( 3 participants ) Nurses 1 interview ( 3 participants ) Physiotherapists 1 interview ( 3 participants ) Medical secretaries 1 interview ( 4 participants ) Region ’ s IT department 1 interview ( 5 participants ) Hospital ’ s IT department 1 interview ( 3 participants ) Hospital ’ s IT implementation unit 1 interview ( 5 participants ) Surveyrespondents N = 225 , response rate = 58 % Physicians N = 35 , response rate = 54 % Nurses N = 124 , response rate = 56 % Physiotherapists N = 18 , response rate a Medical secretaries N = 31 , response rate = 86 % Observations Work practices ( medical rounds of physicians , nurses and physiotherapists . Medical secretaries at work at wards ) All in all : 16 times lasting 3 – 4 hours at 6 different wards ; app . 60 hours before implementation and 40 hours after implementation ; 6 different wards . Medical secretaries were observed 11 hours . Super - user meetings 13 meetings lasting each 1 hour Implementation group meetings 7 meetings lasting each 1 – 2 hours Individual and group interviews as well as the survey were conducted by all three authors . Observations were conducted by the ﬁ rst author . a Response rate is not calculated , because this profession of 80 staff covers the whole hospital and not just the two departments included in the survey . It is unknown how many physiotherapists treated patients at the two departments in this period . 83 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries issues across professions and departments that stand out relatively positively or negatively . Here physicians and medical secretaries are signi ﬁ cant for being most critical towards and for feeling most affected by the EHR . Nurses , therapists , physicians , and medical secretaries were generally satis ﬁ ed with the EHR , though there was room , and in some cases a need for improvements . Not all data from the survey ( 40 plus questions ) is relevant to this paper , and is only included where medical secretaries deviated from the general trend . Observations ﬁ rst informed the interview guides and questionnaire , and later , after questionnaire analysis was completed , they were re - read for examples and details upon work processes affected by the EHR . The analysis of the medical secretaries ’ responses draws on data generated by the larger study , as well as the data speci ﬁ cally concerning medical secretaries . This includes three individual interviews with medical secretaries ( lasting between 54 and 67 min ) and one group interview ( lasting 80 min ; four participating medical secretaries ) , 11 hours of observation , and the survey data ( n = 31 medical secretaries , response rate 87 % ) . These data have been re - read and analysed , in order to understand the work of medical secretaries , their cooperation with other professions , use of various artefacts , and the changes the EHRs involved . Analysis focused on identifying tasks and roles of medical secretaries and changes in these due to the implementation of the EHR . The categorization that evolved led to the sub - headings of sections ﬁ ve and six . No signi ﬁ cant differences were found in the work of medical secretaries between the two departments , though this could be due to limited data . As mentioned , the medical secretaries were included in the larger study , because we anticipated their work practices to be profoundly affected by the EHR along with the work practices of physicians , nurses and physiotherapists . However , immediately after implementation of the new EHR , it became apparent that medical secretaries ’ work was affected to a degree that almost brought the hospital to a halt : The secretaries could not transcribe as fast as previously and physicians ’ notes became less available , slowing down or making the work of physicians and nurses impossible . At super user meetings and at the implementation management meetings medical secretaries raised a number of concerns with the EHR which either , when possible , led to immediate software upgrades , and , notably , to a radical rescheduling of the ﬁ rst planned upgrade , 3 months after implementation . Instead of an upgrade addressing bugs and inadequate functionality in general , the upgrade was almost exclusively aimed at addressing the concerns of medical secretaries . Generalizability of the ﬁ ndings may be limited due to the small amount of data on medical secretaries . However , the work tasks of medical secretaries before implementation described in this study are similar to those described by Bertelsen ( 2005 ) more generally for Danish medical secretaries working at hospitals . The roles pertaining to coordination , information gatekeeping and booking found in this study are also similar to the result of previous studies that include medical secretaries ( Abraham and Reddy 2008 ; Møller and Dourish 2010 ; Møller and Vikkelsø 2012 ; Paul and Reddy 2010 ; Reddy et al . 2001 ; Reddy and Spence 2008 ; Spence and 84 Claus Bossen et al . Reddy 2007 ) . The work of medical secretaries associated with general practitioners may differ , as may the situation in North America which has a different division of work between professions ( See footnote ii ) . However , all but the second and third reference of the previous parenthesis are based on studies in North America . Work tasks of medical secretaries after implementation of EHRs will depend on the speci ﬁ c functionality of the EHR and on how tasks are reorganized and drift between professions , and may hence differ in other cases . Limitations especially concern that the study was conducted immediately after implementation of the EHR , since reorganisation and drift of work tasks may continue for a prolonged period afterwards . However , the events described above made the central role of medical secretaries for hospitals explicit and pertinent , and further made us re ﬂ ect upon the attention they have received so far within CSCWand medical informatics in general . 5 . Medical secretaries ’ work preceding the EHR To become a certi ﬁ ed medical secretary in Denmark , one must have a high school degree , followed by a certi ﬁ ed , 2 - year vocational education that includes courses in medical terminology , of ﬁ ce software , transcribing and information technology ( www . uddannelsesnaevnet . dk ) . In this section , we describe their work at Regional Hospital , prior to the implementation of the EHR . 5 . 1 . Maintaining accurate records Ruth arrives at her of ﬁ ce in the gastroenterology ward at 7 . 00 , and starts her computer . From a letter tray on her desk , she takes printed discharge summaries for patients discharged the previous day . She transcribed the summaries yesterday , but could not enter them into the record until the nurse had ﬁ nalized her notes , and left the record on Ruth ’ s desk . The discharge summary is ﬁ led under the appropriate tabs , ﬁ rst in the record , but also in the ﬁ le for physicians ’ ongoing notes , of which the summary is also part . She writes the discharge date on a table on the front page of the record , and places the record on one of two shelves . One shelf is for records with summaries dictated by junior physicians , which must be checked by a senior physician before an internal messenger takes them to the record archive . Another shelf is for records with summaries dictated by senior physicians , which the messenger may take directly to the archive . Ruth then turns to her computer , ﬁ nds the data ﬁ le for a given patient by entering her or his social security number , enters the discharge date , and closes the patient ’ s admission record . Medical secretaries participate in the cooperative work surrounding patients . Although they are only infrequently in contact with patients , they contribute to the 85 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries maintenance of patient records , and do so in a way that is aligned with departmental work arrangements . In the case of discharged patients , the medical secretaries ‘ tidy ’ the records before they go into the archives . ‘ Tidying ’ includes a number of tasks : Medical secretaries ensure that all transcribed physicians ’ notes and examination results are in the record folder . They enter the physicians ’ ﬁ nal diagnoses into the GREEN SYSTEM as DRG codes , based on the discharge summaries . The system accumulates codes , and , on a monthly basis , reports them to the National Board of Health , which uses them to reimburse the hospital , thus , entering the codes in the GREEN SYSTEM is one of the medical secretaries ’ crucial tasks , as far as the hospital administration is concerned . Tidying records also includes entering the status of a discharged patient in a table at the front of the paper - based record , and in the GREEN SYSTEM . Furthermore , records are sorted into two stacks , to facilitate a quality - control procedure between junior and senior physicians : Discharge summa - ries written by the former are read and evaluated by the latter . All records are kept in Ruth ’ s of ﬁ ce for a week following discharge , in case test results arrive , and have to be added to the record . Ruth and her colleagues are also in charge of communication between her department and the archive , and of requesting and returning records on behalf of nurses and physicians . Ruth accomplishes her work by using several ordering systems . One comprises paper - based records , and consists of folders , drawers , binders , and trolleys sized for A4 paper . Another consists of digital systems , such as the GREEN SYSTEM , the database in which patients ’ personal data and admissions and diagnosis codes are registered . Whereas paper - based records are primarily used by clinicians when treating and caring for patients , the GREEN SYSTEM is mainly used by medical secretaries , to track patient admissions , discharges , and bookings , and store transcribed physicians ’ notes . However , nurses may also use it , when the medical secretaries are busy . 5 . 2 . Locating patient records Continuing to go through the records , Ruth stops at one particular record . She enters the GREEN SYSTEM , and writes a message to the records archive , headed ‘ Write on the bag ’ : ‘ Hey archive girls ! I ’ m sending this record to the outpatient clinic ’ . ‘ The bag ’ is a record ’ s folder in the archives , whose staff Ruth addresses jocularly as ‘ archive girls ’ . Her message is intended to remind the archive staff to write the record ’ s destined location on the folder . It is quicker , and less work to send the record directly to the other department , instead of via the archive , which does , however , need to know the record ’ s location , should someone else need it . Locating patient records is often a challenge . Patients move between departments , and may have multiple admissions , and the location of the record is not always 86 Claus Bossen et al . noted on ‘ the bag ’ . According to Ruth , there are generally two ways to locate a record whose location is unknown : look it up in the GREEN SYSTEM to see whether the patient has admissions or bookings at other departments , or contact the department to which the patient was last admitted . 5 . 3 . Transcribing physicians ’ notes Having taken care of the records of discharged patients , Ruth returns to her computer , and enters the SPEECH DICTATE SYSTEM , to see whether there are physicians ’ notes that have not yet been transcribed . There are three sets . She listens to the ﬁ rst seconds of the ﬁ rst note , for the patient ’ s social security number , and enters the number in the GREEN SYSTEM , to ﬁ nd the patient ’ s ﬁ le in the system . In the patient ’ s ﬁ le , she clicks on a link to start the digital NOTE EDITOR , and begins writing . She puts on headphones , and starts and stops the SPEECH DICTATE SYSTEM by pressing a pedal . Having ﬁ nished the ﬁ rst dictation , she clicks on a button in the NOTE EDITOR , which sends the written text to the GREEN SYSTEM , from which Ruth prints it . She picks up the notes from the printer in the nurses ’ of ﬁ ce , and puts it into the patient ’ s record , in a letter tray on a shelf in the nurses ’ of ﬁ ce . One of the medical secretaries ’ core tasks is writing out physicians ’ notes . This is achieved by switching between three digital systems . The SPEECH DICTATE SYSTEM stores sound ﬁ les of physicians ’ dictation , using recorders kept in the nurses ’ of ﬁ ce , where the patient records are kept , and rounds planned and ﬁ nalized . The sound ﬁ les are stored centrally in a common database , though sorted according to priority and by department . Hence , medical secretaries can take care of their own department ’ s dictation , and also help colleagues at other departments if they fall behind , and they have spare time . Hence , transcribing is shared among medical secretaries at different departments . On the recorder , physicians must enter numerical codes , to identify the kind of note they have made . In order of priority , these are : ‘ 11 ’ for new or acute patients , ‘ 12 ’ forward round dictation , ‘ 22 ’ for outpatients , and ‘ 14 ’ for discharge summaries . The codes show up in the SPEECH DICTATE SYSTEM , and allow medical secretaries to prioritize transcribing , though they also consider the work pressure on their own ward . 5 . 4 . Transcribing is a skilled activity In her of ﬁ ce at the at the rheumatology department , Karen repeatedly listens to the same sound bite . The physician states a treatment , but Karen can only distinguish 87 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries the last part : ‘… [ incomprehensible ] manoeuvre …’ . She phones a colleague at another ward , who is better acquainted with the terminology of this medical specialty , and plays the sound bite into the receiver . However , the colleague cannot make out the term either , so Karen transcribes the rest of the note , prints it , marks the problematic term in red , and sends it by internal mail to the physician who dictated the note . Situations such as this abound , when medical secretaries transcribe . They have to check terms in medical dictionaries , or consult colleagues with more expertise in a particular medical area . Accuracy is crucial , since slight differences may completely alter a diagnosis . For example , as one physician explained : ‘ encephalitis ’ is an in ﬂ ammation of the brain , whereas ‘ ( hepatic ) encephalopathy ’ is caused by liver dysfunction , and the two diagnoses entail entirely different treatment . Hearing the difference between terms may be dif ﬁ cult , and requires a trained ear . As is typing in general ( Goodman and Perby 1985 ) , transcribing notes is a skilled activity : Secretaries switch between digital systems , and simultaneously listen , type , and use the pedal , while differentiating between similar , sometimes unintelligible medical terms . 5 . 5 . Booking At about 9 . 00 , Ruth starts to book patients for enteroscopy . She goes through the small stack of requisitions on her desk , checks that each enteroscopy requisition is registered in the GREEN SYSTEM , searches for a time slot in the BOOKING MODULE , and books the examination . Then she puts the requisitions into binders on one of the shelves in her of ﬁ ce . Because Ruth is working on a ward that also has an outpatient clinic , one of her tasks is to book examinations . After booking an examination , she prints a patient noti ﬁ cation letter , and sends it , together with informational folders about the examination , and dietary and fasting requirements , by ordinary post . Later , patients may phone to inquire about examinations , rescheduling , or cancellations . 5 . 6 . Information gatekeepers During her transcribing of physicians ’ notes , Karen is interrupted several times by phone calls . In one instance , a relative wants to hear more about what occurred when a now - discharged patient was on the ward . Karen puts the relative on hold , phones the nurses ’ of ﬁ ce , and is fortunate to be answered by a nurse who cared for that patient . She connects the relative and the nurse , and 88 Claus Bossen et al . terminates the call at her end . In another instance , the local suicide prevention centre would like to see the summary for a newly discharged patient . Luckily , the record is still on a shelf in her of ﬁ ce , and she can take the summary from the record , and fax it to the suicide prevention centre . Medical secretaries handle numerous inquiries by clinicians and other staff at the department , other departments , relatives , and other entities , external to the hospital . They are contacted about matters that concern the location of patient records , non - clinical data ( addresses , DRG codes , etc . ) , bookings , or more generally , connecting people with questions to people with answers . Thus , being information gatekeepers is one of their central tasks ( Spence and Reddy 2007 ) . 5 . 7 . Miscellaneous tasks Medical secretaries also take care of a range of other tasks , such as ordering and returning of ﬁ ce equipment , or special mattresses for patients with bedsores , and guiding relatives and taxi - drivers bringing ﬂ owers to the patients ’ rooms . 5 . 8 . The cooperative work of medical secretaries Medical secretaries may be said to handle the non - clinical aspects of patient treatment trajectories and patient records . They record and coordinate admissions , bookings , and discharges , register and report DRG codes to the National Board of Health , request and retrieve records from the archives , locate records , or pass them along to other staff . They transcribe physicians ’ notes , act as intermediaries between relatives , patients , and staff , and carry out various other tasks ( See also Bertelsen and Nøhr 2005 ) . Their work is not mere routine , but requires skill and applied knowledge . They are information gatekeepers , as well as articulation workers ( Spence and Reddy 2007 ; Erickson et al . 2008 ) . Since the 1980s , medical secretaries ’ work has been undergoing computeriza - tion , to which the GREEN SYSTEM , SPEECH DICTATE SYSTEM , and NOTE EDITOR testify . Though not integrated with the patient records , these systems are parts of the department ’ s ordering system . The medical secretaries ’ primary cooperative work arrangement is that of the department and its physicians and nurses , with whom they align and coordinate their work . But they are also part of a cooperative work arrangement of other medical secretaries , whom they help with transcribing and the handling of records . While patient records form an ordering system shared by medical secretaries , nurses , and physicians , their stances towards it differ . The primary work object of physicians and nurses is the patient , and the patient record secondary : It documents and records patient care , and may inform and direct their work through embedded guidelines and care paths , but their primary concern is the patient . To medical 89 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries secretaries , the records and associated information channels themselves are the primary work objects , whose completeness , integrity , and formal aspects they take care of . Whereas clinicians are patient caretakers , medical secretaries are record caretakers ( Figures 1 ) . 6 . The new work of medical secretaries The most apparent and immediate change for the medical secretaries was the replacement of the GREEN SYSTEM with the new PAS that was integrated into the EHR . The GREEN SYSTEM had been used at most hospitals in Denmark , including Regional Hospital , since the late 1980s . Thus , medical secretaries were very pro ﬁ cient in its use , and could manoeuvre about in it with optimal speed . Therefore , the implementation group and the secretaries themselves anticipated that deploying the EHR would cause frustration , since it was expected that it would take some time for the medical secretaries to recover their previous pro ﬁ ciency . The implementation strategy was based on minimal instruction in the new system prior to implementation , with extensive local support during the ﬁ rst 14 days of use . Nevertheless , the medical secretaries received more training than any other group , because their learning curve was expected to be steeper . As it turned out , that prediction was correct , and , along with the physicians , the secretaries were the most critical group in the survey . Their dif ﬁ culties had repercussions for the other groups , Figure 1 . Medical secretary doing cooperative work . 90 Claus Bossen et al . and included shifts in tasks and responsibilities , some being abolished , new ones emerging , and others shifting between occupations . 6 . 1 . Transcribing becomes more cumbersome One immediate effect of the new EHR was that transcribing notes took longer . Statistics from NOTE EDITOR reveal that during the ﬁ rst 12 weeks following implementation , the transcription ratio ( min . of writing / min . physician dictation ) rose from an average of 6 , preceding the implementation of the EHR , to 9 during the ﬁ rst week of use , then settled near an average of 7 , during weeks 5 to 12 after implementation . The total number of untranscribed notes grew steadily to 813 during the ﬁ rst 12 weeks following implementation , compared to about 50 to 60 unwritten notes previously . Since the statistics from NOTE EDITOR also show that neither the number nor the length of notes grew ( Figures 2 and 3 ) , the increase in untranscribed notes must be attributed to the rise in the transcription ratio caused by the PAS module . Hospital management initially asked the medical secretaries to work overtime , but later had to hire outside help . During our interviews , and in the reports to the hospital ’ s implementation group , the medical secretaries identi ﬁ ed a combination of human - computer interaction ( HCI ) issues and slow functionality as the causes of their predicament . For example , when writing discharge summaries , they ﬁ rst had to enter the current date and the physician ’ s name in ﬁ elds at the very bottom of the screen , and then write the actual note in a ﬁ eld at the very top of the screen . This meant scrolling up and down when writing each summary . They also complained of too many mouse - clicks , and a lack of keyboard short cuts . The new PAS also made some tasks more rigid . Previously , medical secretaries just wrote the name of a physician or a diagnosis code in a discharge summary , but they now had to upload these through a browser from a database . However , both the diagnosis and the physician identi ﬁ cation browsers were frustratingly slow : ‘ I start the browser , then I go to the shelves for records while I wait ’ , Karen stated . 0 2 4 6 8 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Figure 2 . Transcription ratio ( min . of transcribing / min . of dictation ) . Weeks 1 – 4 before implementation , weeks 5 – 16 after . 91 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries The untranscribed notes were a major problem for physicians and nurses , since the notes are the primary means of communication about patients among staff and across shifts . Without notes , they lacked access to previous diagnoses , plans , and prescriptions , unless they could contact the physician responsible for these . Proceeding with treatment and care became dif ﬁ cult , a serious situation with critically ill patients . As the problem of untranscribed notes was not resolved , despite investing more resources and hours in transcribing , the implementation group and the system supplier renegotiated the next upgrade of the EHR , scheduled for a few months later , and designed functionality that addressed medical secretaries ’ highest priorities , a move that stresses the importance of their work to the department . 6 . 2 . Tighter coupling to other professions The new EHR combined the GREEN SYSTEM and the paper - based physicians ’ and nurses ’ records into one integrated system . Medical secretaries , nurses , and physicians now shared the same artefact , and could respond immediately to updates . This also meant that their work practices became more tightly coordinated and interdependent . For example , previously , medical secretaries discharged patients via the GREEN SYSTEM , after having written up the physician ’ s discharge summary , while nurses ﬁ nalized their documentation in parallel to , and independently of that . The new , cross - professional record integrated nurses ’ and physicians ’ notes in CLINICAL PROCESS . Physicians often dictated their discharge summary before the nurses had completed their documentation of a patient ’ s care , and while the secretaries could write the summary , they could not send it until the nurses had ﬁ nished their documentation , and the patient was registered in the PAS as discharged . Hence , they had to check patient records occasionally , to see whether this had occurred , which entailed a bit more work for them . This tighter coupling also affected physicians ’ notes more generally . When dictating , physicians at the department usually followed a recommended structure for going through diagnosis , treatment , prescriptions , and so on . In the EHR , the elements of this structure appear as separate ﬁ elds , in order to X = weeks , Y : = length of notes ( sec . ) , = no . of notes per day 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Figure 3 . Average number and length of notes . 92 Claus Bossen et al . structure data on patients , diagnoses , treatment , and so forth . For example , a note of a physician ’ s round must have the following structure : Record for < patient name > , < patient social security number > , by < physician name > , Objective observations , Conclusion ( e . g . diagnosis ) , Plan , and Prescriptions . If physicians follow this structure , transcribing is no more complicated than previously , since they can ‘ jump ’ down the screen in the same order as that in the dictated notes . If physicians do not follow the template , transcribing takes signi ﬁ cantly longer , since medical secretaries have to scroll up and down to enter the information in the correct ﬁ elds . Physicians may not follow the template , either out of habit or because they think it leads to notes of lesser quality : For patients with multiple diagnoses , the template requires that these be listed separately from the prescriptions ( diagnoses in one ﬁ eld , prescriptions in another ) , which means that the reasoning behind prescriptions is listed separately , and must be inferred , instead of being explicated in the case narrative . Medical secretaries ’ and nurses ’ tasks also became more tightly coupled . For example , nurses are responsible for initiating the plans to which care , examinations , and treatment are linked , and which are basic elements of the EHR . Since nurses are often busy , they do not always register activities in the EHR in real time . To nurses , this makes little difference , since they seldom document in real time . However , for the medical secretaries this means that they cannot register the actual time of admission when transcribing admission notes . They have to either use the start time indicated in the EHR , which may be 3 hours late , or correct the time of admission in the EHR . The former is incorrect ; the latter requires more effort and time . 6 . 3 . Organizing records ‘… as a medical secretary , you ’ ve been taught that your work must be in order . Times must be exact . It is really important . When a patient dies , you register the exact time that it happens . Now it happens that nurses do not have time to register a death until sometime during the night . Then we register a death at 23 . 00 , even though the patient died at 19 . 00 . It is not right . It is frustrating , when you have been taught to register when things happen ’ . ( Head medical secretary ) The implementation of the EHR imposed changes that con ﬂ icted with the work ethic of the medical secretaries , as described in the statement above . They regarded the maintenance of orderly and accurate records as one of their core tasks . Not registering data at the correct time was one challenge to this ethic , while ﬁ nishing records following discharge was another . As mentioned , the EHR 93 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries makes use of plans that health care staff activate on admission , and when commencing new treatment or care activities . These plans must be closed once completed , but , particularly when patients are discharged , this is not always done . Medical secretaries tried to close them , and tidy the records as part of the process of writing the discharge summary , as they had done previously with the paper - based records . However , this was not always possible , because some plans were ongoing , and might be part of a patient ’ s visits to the outpatient clinic , for example . Only physicians and nurses have the clinical insight to judge whether or not plans should be closed , and therefore the medical secretaries could not tidy the records as accurately as they wished . This work ethic resounds with a study on Swedish medical secretaries for whom the core characteristic of their occupational identity is ‘… a mixture of carefulness , thoroughness , conscien - tiousness , exactitude and orderliness ’ ( Karlsson 2011 : 133 ) . 6 . 4 . Task drift among professions The problems related to initiating and closing plans are linked to task drift , that is , tasks originally performed by one group being executed by another group . Usually , the trend is for routine tasks to move down the hierarchy . With the EHR , PAS functionality is no longer a separate system like the GREEN SYSTEM , but integrated with other functionalities . Hence , these functionalities are more easily accessible to others , as well as to secretaries . For example , nurses can now access the functionality for discharging patients , which poses the question of whether nurses should register discharges , which would make sense if real - time registration is pursued , or whether the secretaries should continue to do this , which might mean that they are not be registered until the next morning , when they write the discharge summary . At the time of study , the question was open with some nurses doing discharges , while others left it to the medical secretaries . Similar examples of task drift are physicians themselves writing ( short ) notes or registering diagnosis codes in the EHR , and nurses printing labels . 6 . 5 . Discarding old tasks and acquiring new ones A funny incident occurred the other day . We have medical secretaries who work at home . This raised the question : Who is going to tidy , take transcriptions from the printer , and put them into record binders ? And I said : ‘ But there is nothing coming out of the printer ’ . ( Head medical secretary ) An important effect of the EHR is that medical secretaries no longer have to print and distribute notes into the ( paper - based ) records anymore : Transcriptions go directly into the EHR . This was appreciated , but often the topic only came up 94 Claus Bossen et al . when mentioned by the interviewers , and can be seen as an example of a quickly forgotten bene ﬁ t of change . Similarly , they do not have to spend as much time locating records as previously , though this still requires some of their attention , since paper records are still relevant for some patients . Another obsolete task is the registration of certain services by therapists and nurses , for which they previously had to register the codes , in order for the hospital to be reimbursed by the National Board of Health . Before , physiotherapists would document their work with patients in their own records , and leave a note in the nurses ’ of ﬁ ce . The medical secretary would pick it up , and register the service codes in the GREEN SYSTEM . Now , the therapists ’ records are part of the EHR , and the codes are automatically reported . As already mentioned , nurses did some of the same administrative tasks as medical secretaries , and still do . Nurses now transfer patients between departments at the hospital , or to other hospitals , and discharge them from the hospital . However , this creates more work for the secretaries : Nurses sometimes transfer patients incorrectly , and since only the receiving department can correct the error , medical secretaries have to wait for that to happen . Therefore , they maintain lists of incorrectly transferred or discharged patients , so that they can complete the administrative work on a patient , when the error has been corrected ( e . g . send a discharge summary to the general practitioner ) . Tidying has become more complicated , since the work arrangement surrounding it is more complex , and tasks and responsibilities drift between professions . Whether medical secretaries now have fewer or more tasks , and less or more work is dif ﬁ cult to assess , since the gains of not having to print , distribute print - outs , locate records , and request records and return them to the archives are currently overshadowed by the extra work needed for transcribing . Medical secretaries were the only group surveyed who did not think that the EHR had reduced their work load . 6 . 6 . The new cooperative work arrangement The problem of physicians ’ untranscribed notes made clear the importance of the medical secretaries ’ work to all at the two departments and to management , as evidenced by the revision of the ﬁ rst scheduled upgrade of the EHR to focus on the needs of the medical secretaries . The EHR involved a systemic integration of medical secretaries ’ work with that of physicians and nurses . The previous division of work had been partly effected and supported by the media used for patient administration . In the integrated , comprehensive EHR , the GREEN SYSTEM was replaced by the PAS , and physicians ’ and nurses ’ records were replaced by CLINICAL PROCESS , which was accessible to all groups . This more tightly coupled tasks , which became more dependent on one another , with regard to accuracy and timeliness . Also , some tasks , such as registering discharges , entering diagnosis codes , and assuming responsibility 95 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries for initiating the closing of plans in the EHR , tended to drift among groups of staff . While a major bene ﬁ t of the EHR for the medical secretaries was that they no longer had to print and distribute physicians ’ notes , or request , return , and locate patient records , they also acquired new tasks , such as keeping records of patient ﬁ les that were not yet in order . The tighter coupling , task drift , and new tasks meant that they could no longer tidy records as thoroughly as before , which challenged their work ethic . The formal distinctions among occupations and professions remain , but the new work arrangements that had to be established created possibilities for desirable and undesirable expansion and reduction of roles . For example , some physicians regarded the option of writing notes themselves as yet another effort on the part of management to delegate more tasks to them . Nurses did not reject the tasks of admitting and discharging patients in the PAS , because it integrates with the writing of care summaries . Medical secretaries , however , were more anxious during this process , since some of their tasks were now automated ( e . g . DRG coding ) or partly assumed by other groups ( e . g . note writing , admission , and discharge ) , and the extent of their new tasks was not entirely clear . How tasks will be redistributed and roles rede ﬁ ned remains to be been seen . At the time of our study , shortly after implementation , a new arrangement had not yet stabilized . 7 . Discussion In the above , we have argued that medical secretaries are part of the cooperative work arrangements at hospitals and have a central function in carrying out health care . Despite their importance and presence in almost any larger hospital or private medical practice , their work and role has remained unexplored as argued in Section 2 . However , as efforts to develop health care IT move from stand - alone systems to integrated infrastructures such as EHRs , medical secretaries ’ work is likely to become more tightly linked to that of physicians and nurses and task drift will most probably occur . This and a few other studies support this hypothesis and the subsequent consequence that medical secretaries work may and should receive more attention when developing health care IT such as EHRs and looking at the subsequent changes in the work arrangement at hospitals ( Bertelsen 2005 ; Bertelsen and Nøhr 2005 ; Møller and Vikkelsø 2012 ) . In the following we will ﬁ rst discuss the outcomes of health care IT for medical secretaries and then propose the concept of ‘ boundary object trimming ’ as one core element of that work . Finally , we will re ﬂ ect on the relative invisibility of medical secretaries within CSCW and medical informatics . 7 . 1 . Outcomes of comprehensive EHRs for medical secretaries The outcomes of implementing new technology including IT are not givens and contingent on the characteristics of the technology , how it is implemented , and the subsequent processes of recon ﬁ guring organisation , work practices and 96 Claus Bossen et al . technology ( Barley 1990 ; Aydin and Rice 1996 ) . The dissatisfaction of the medical secretaries in this study is contrasted by a survey by Lærum et al . ( 2004 ) conducted 1 year after implementation of an EHR partly based on scanning of documents and without an electronic medication module . Here , medical secretaries were more satis ﬁ ed with the EHR than physicians and nurses : They used the EHR more , perceived it to have made most of their tasks easier , but saw scanning of documents as a new and unwelcome task . Lærum et al . attribute the result to the fact that the EHR automated or got rid of more tasks of medical secretaries than of physicians and nurses . Also , the former had their own computers , whereas physicians and nurses shared computers which hindered their work . Lærum et al . also note almost in passing that 15 medical secretaries had been laid off since implementation of the EHR ( ibid : p8 ) . A follow - up survey at the same hospital 4 years after implementation largely showed a status quo though physicians used the EHR more than before ( Lium et al . 2006 ) . A study by Palm et al . ( 2006 ) conducted 4 years after taking an EHR into use also compared user satisfaction between medical secretaries , nurses and physicians with the former as the most satis ﬁ ed group . Neither of the latter two studies indicates whether the number of employed medical secretaries had been reduced after implementation of the EHRs . The difference in satisfaction of medical secretaries of these three studies to the present study may possibly be explained by the slow performance and missing or cumbersome functionality of the EHR for the medical secretaries in our case . Also , the broader implications of EHRs for medical secretaries probably remain open . We found no speci ﬁ c studies on medical secretaries and technological change except for the above , so indications of probable developments must be gathered elsewhere . For secretaries in general the outcomes of the introduction of new technology include deskilling , up - skilling as well as , mainly , a status quo , and women remain the overwhelming majority in the profession ( England and Boyer 2009 ; Truss et al . 2012 ) . However , the history of data processing where women initially were well - represented shows a repeating pattern of women being shedded off into less - skilled , less remunerated jobs in the development from punch card work and data processing to computing ( Haigh 2010 ) . On the other hand , the emergence of infrastructures such as EHRs is part of an increasing demand for accountability to other parties , such as management and health care authorities ( Power 1997 ) . This will demand continued work , to ensure the accuracy , completeness , and integrity of data . Since clinicians are costly , on call , and most often prefer clinical tasks to administrative ones , this could be an opportunity for medical secretaries . Indeed , in Denmark , the medical secretaries ’ union has repeatedly responded to complaints by nurses and physicians about too much documentation by pointing to the expertise of medical secretaries in this area . In 2011 , when 2 , 600 physicians signed a petition complaining that they spent too much time on slow IT systems and documentation , the chairwoman of medical secretaries ’ union stated that : 97 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries Medical secretaries are experts in the registration of information upon patients . … The tasks of registration should be with the medical secretary , who has the skills to do it . That will give more time to the physician and nurse , so that they can focus on patient treatment and care ( November 2011 ) Similarly , the British Association for Medical Secretaries and Administrators ( BSMSA ) reacted with the following statement when the Prime Minister in the UK urged nurses to do less documentation : We have been aware for some time now that in an effort to drive down costs there has been a gradual erosion of the support given to medical and nursing staff by the medical administrative staff . Paper work that , in the past , has been done by administrative staff has ultimately had to be taken on by the nursing staff . . . . For some time now representatives of the BSMSA have been lobbying MPs in an attempt to raise the rather neglected pro ﬁ le of medical secretarial / clerical staff . It is essential that a proper training and career structure to provide an ef ﬁ cient and caring service for this cohort of staff is encouraged by management and therefore ease the burden of the nursing staff from red tape and unnecessary paperwork . ( January 2012 ) Furthermore , the skills of registering and transcribing medical terms is unlikely to be fully replaceable by IT , and the roles of clerical staff as intermediaries , information gatekeepers , and articulation workers should not be underestimated ( Ehrlich and Cash 1999 ) . After all , medical secretaries may not become obsolete , and statistics , at least in Denmark , do not indicate that they are laid off in connection with the implementation of EHRs . In general , outcomes will depend on the ability of medical secretaries to in ﬂ uence the processes of change set off by the implementation of EHRs , including task drift and seizing new opportunities . 7 . 2 . Medical secretaries ’ work and ‘ boundary object trimming ’ Medical secretaries ’ work ranges from tasks often associated with secretaries , task requiring speci ﬁ c medical knowledge , tasks of clinical nature , to medical research : They do tasks in common with secretaries in general such as typing , organising , receiving visitors , coordinating and communicating ; tasks requiring specialised skills and medical knowledge such as transcribing , coding and scheduling treatments ; clinical work such as interpreting clinical information , correcting physicians ’ dictates and handling patient trajectories ; and participate in medical research when setting up protocols , writing proposals and reporting to research councils ( Bertelsen 2005 ; Bertelsen and Nøhr 2005 ; Møller and Dourish 2010 ; Møller and Bjørn 2011 ; Møller and Vikkelsø 2012 ; Spence and Reddy 2007 ) . This study did not ﬁ nd examples of medical secretaries engaged in research activities , 98 Claus Bossen et al . which probably is due to the focus on EHR implementation . However , we did ﬁ nd medical secretaries engaged in receiving patients and relatives ; communication and coordinating with patients , relatives and staff ; transcribing dictates , coding records , reporting to the National Board of Health ; scheduling and booking treatments ; and making sure records were accurate , complete and ‘ tidy ’ . Conceptually the work of medical secretaries can be seen as including ‘ articulation work ’ , ‘ information gate - keeping ’ and ‘ information seeking ’ . This involves more than ‘ merely ’ supporting the work of physicians and nurses , since the position at the intersection of administrative and clinical entails that medical secretaries actively contribute to the work processes at hospitals and patient trajectories ( Møller and Vikkelsø 2012 ) . In the following , we would like to contribute to the understanding and analysis of medical secretaries ’ work by suggesting that one core characteristic of this work is ‘ boundary object trimming ’ . We start by noting that the primary work object of the medical secretaries is the EHR , to which they attend in its formal aspects . Unlike physicians and nurses to whom the EHR is a secondary work object , medical secretaries are not concerned with actual diagnoses and care plans , but with whether diagnoses have been entered , care and treatment properly coded , and with the completeness of information : Has all dictation been transcribed and entered into the EHR ? Are all examination and test results recorded ? Have appropriate plans been initiated , followed up upon , and terminated ? We have previously contrasted medical secretaries ’ care of records with clinicians ’ care of patients , pointed to the core importance of maintenance of orderly and accurate records in medical secretaries ’ work ethic ( Section 6 . 3 ) , and informally called this work ‘ tidying ’ ( Section 5 . 1 ) . ‘ Tidying ’ includes a range of tasks that maintain and contribute to medical record as an optimal working tool for physicians , nurses and management . With the paper records , this involved inserting protocols , transcribed dictates , test results , correspondence , etc . into the proper sections of the record , and making sure records were either available at the ward or returned to the archive in complete state . While this aspect has almost disappeared with the transition from paper to the EHR , there are still correspondence and test results that have to be scanned and added to the record under the proper tab . What also remains is actively contributing to the EHR by transcribing dictates , adding codes , checking the accuracy and correctness of the notes and codes physicians themselves enter , and following up on prescribed treatments and tests . New tasks include checking whether transfers and discharges have been registered and properly , and whether activity plans created in the EHR have been properly terminated at discharge . While nurses and physicians regard their job as over at a patient ’ s discharge ( after having written discharge notes , checked medication , and prescribed eventual follow - up treatment ) , patients remain in the focus of medical secretaries until their records are orderly , completed and accurate . A characteristic of medical secretaries ’ work is hence the kind of attention and work they put into the EHR . Conceptually , the EHR is an exemplary boundary object enabling various professions and sites to cooperate . Proposed by Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) to 99 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries analyse how various social worlds may cooperate , the concept of boundary object has since been widely used within CSCW and organizational studies ( For one overview of the concept ’ s intellectual history , see Trompette and Vinck 2009 ) . Several studies have contributed to a nuanced understanding of boundary objects : Fujimura emphasizes the need to augment the robustness rather than the plasticity of boundary objects , when these have to travel between diverse social worlds , and suggested the term ‘ standardized package ’ to underscore this point ( Fujimura 1992 ) . Lee argues that not all objects that travel between social worlds are boundary objects , and that non - standardized , temporary objects may be used to negotiate and create boundaries between groups ( Lee 2007 . See also Pennington 2010 ) . Finally , boundary objects should not be considered static : Lutters and Ackerman describe boundary objects that are in ﬂ ux , as the work of which they are part changes . They are ‘ punctuated crystallizations ’ of information , interpreted in the context of their production ( Lutters and Ackerman 2007 ) . Similarly , Subrahmanian et al . describe how changes in organizations threaten to make boundary objects useless , as their information becomes irrelevant , and interpretations in different social worlds diverge ( Subrahmanian et al . 2003 ) . The two latter two studies are especially relevant here , since they point to how boundary objects may be incomplete , deteriorate and eventually be in need of repair , and hence deal with the central , but often , according to Star , disregarded dynamic of boundary objects ’ movement between the ill - and the well - structured ( Star 2010 : p605 ) . Standardization of methods is one of the essential characteristics of boundary objects ( See though Lee 2007 ) , and enabled in the original case described by Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) the collection of data by trappers , collectors , etc . , to be used by a zoological museum and its scientists in the shared goal of nature preservation . This was not without challenges : In working with amateur collectors , a major problem is to ensure that the data coming back in from the ﬁ eld is of reliable quality ; that it does not decay en route through sloppy collecting or preserving techniques that the collectors give enough information about where they got the beasts from so that the locations can be precisely identi ﬁ ed . On the other hand , directions for collectors cannot be made so complicated that they interfere with the already dif ﬁ cult job of camping out in the wilderness , capturing sneaky little animals or bribing reluctant farmers to preserve intact their saleable ( Ibid : p607 ) Only at a price that did not impair the pleasures of camping in the wild , hobby collecting , etc . , would trappers and collectors conform to the standardised data entry forms . There is hence a balance to be made between the extra work demanded by having to follow standardised methods and contributing to the overall project goal . This challenge is also a central point in Gar ﬁ nkel ’ s analysis of medical records : these records could not be used 100 Claus Bossen et al . for secondary , statistical purposes , because the clinicians were not concerned with recording all data , but rather with writing what was necessary for the hospital ’ s work arrangement for patient treatment and care to proceed ( Gar ﬁ nkel 1974 ) . Clinicians were not careless , but rather not concerned with entering everything into the records . Our suggestion is that sometimes organisations may want to shift the balance by paying the price of extra work and delegate it to another group of people . Strauss called actors ’ re ﬂ exive monitoring of their own and other actors ’ actions , and the projection of future ones , the ‘ gyroscopic source ’ for coordinating different courses of action for common goals ( Strauss 1993 : 37 ) . Boundary objects have a similar stabilizing effect on the interactional courses of cooperative work , as long as they are useful and appropriate to that work : Their structural forms and informational content must be maintained and updated , which may be accomplished during use , but may also become a core task of a work role or group of staff . In the same way , ‘ articulation work ’ may be an integral part of action , but may also be the main task of some ( e . g . secretaries and project managers ) . We suggest calling the upholding and keeping - on - course of boundary objects within interactional trajectories ‘ trimming ’ , not in the sense of reduction , but in the aeronautical sense of levelling an airplane to ensure smooth ﬂ ight , or in the nautical sense of distributing the load and adjusting the sails of a ship , to reach optimal speed and stay on course . ‘ Upkeeping ’ or ‘ maintenance ’ are alternative wording options , but suggest a more static extension of a given state and non - expert , routine tasks , than we think is adequate for designating what , for example , medical secretaries do : ‘ Trimming ’ stresses the dynamic and directional aspects of work efforts such work . We hence suggest ‘ boundary object trimming ’ as a way to characterise one core aspect of medical secretaries ’ work , and more generally as a way of directing attention to other possible case of maintenance and trimming of boundary objects . 7 . 3 . The background invisibility of medical secretaries As mentioned in Section 2 there only a few studies of medical secretaries ’ work within CSCWand HCI and academia more generally . Within the former , this may be attributed to physicians and nurses being the largest and strongest professions within health , and hence their crucial roles in the development of health care IT . Whether someone ’ s or a profession ’ s work is visible or not depends on the question ‘ to whom ? ’ , and the implications of being visible or invisible are not straightforward ( Suchman 1995 ) . However , making medical secretaries ’ work visible does seem bene ﬁ cial : Development of health care IT such as EHR would seem likely to encounter problems if not taking medical secretaries into account , since they have a central position within the work arrangements of hospitals . Missing out on essential functionality for this profession might well , as in our case , slow down or bring to a halt the work of physicians and nurses . Also , medical secretaries as a profession 101 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries would most likely bene ﬁ t from having their work recognised and incorporated in the development of EHRs . For these reasons , re ﬂ ections on why this profession has hitherto been almost invisible seem relevant . Star and Strauss ( 1999 ) propose three ways in which work may be invisible : The work , such as in the case of servants or cleaners , may be visible , but the persons performing fade into the background and become ‘ nonperson ’ ; the persons doing work may be clearly visible , but their contribution to the overall work is relegated to the background , such as in the case of nurses whose work for years was seen as an addendum to that of physicians ; and , ﬁ nally , both work and the persons performing it become invisible when both are turned in abstract categories and indicators upon which resource allocation and decision - making is based ( ibid , p15 ) . Often invisibility is linked to asymmetrical power relations , gender or ethnicity . The work of medical secretaries would seem to fall into the category of ‘ background work ’ : As persons placed at central places on wards they coordinate , communicate and transcribe , but their contribution to the overall work arrangement is relegated to the background . Health organisations and professions are both gendered and hierarchically organised ( Kuhlmann and Annandale 2010 ; Riska 2010 ) . Hence , medical secretaries may suffer from the same relative sparse attention paid to similar service jobs such as bank tellers , post of ﬁ ce cashiers and other secretaries ( Karlsson 2011 ) . Secretarial work is most often relegated to the background , and secretaries tend to be seen not for what they do , but rather as what they are : The person rather than the work receives attention , and probably for the same reason , public stereotypes of secretaries as ‘ of ﬁ ce wives ’ , or ‘ sexy ’ are prevalent ( Pringle 1988 ) . Secretaries have for decades strived for more recognition and , for example , tried to rebrand their job as managing – “ A secretary is a manager ” ( Anastasi 1970 ) – or as more epic than public stereotypes perceive – ‘ unsung heroines ’ ( Evans 1987 ) , and recently ‘ personal administrative assistant ’ has become a widespread job description ( Truss et al . 2009 ) . However , secretaries ’ work continues to be seen as routine and unskilled , and career prospects are still limited : the profession remains a ‘ female ghetto ’ ( Truss et al . 2012 ; Benét 1972 ) . Medical secretaries in Denmark would probably protest strongly against being labelled into the general category of ‘ secretaries ’ or ‘ clerks ’ , since they are certi ﬁ ed and have speci ﬁ c competence within healthcare ( Medical secretaries are also certi ﬁ ed in Norway and Sweden , for example , but not in the United Kingdom ) . But they may suffer from the same kind of invisibility nonetheless . As their job is labelled ‘ physician secretary ’ ( ‘ lægesekretær ’ ) , the traditional role of supporting physicians ’ work is stressed , and even though organised in a vocal , national union , their experience is not to be seen by management , who does not know their competencies and may talk about replacing them with general secretaries ( Perspektivgruppen 2006 ) . Spurred by the developments of EHRs and voice recognition technologies , which are feared to make various tasks of medical secretaries obsolete , the union engaged upon several initiatives : A study to made visible the wide range of tasks of medical secretaries ( Bertelsen 2005 ) , an ( unsuccessful ) rebranding project suggesting the re - labelling the job as ‘ mediconist ’ , and development of upgraded 102 Claus Bossen et al . vocational training that made EHRs and health care IT part of the curricula ( HK / Kommunal 2008 ) . In the UK in 2004 , the union similarly launched a campaign to bring attention to the “ hidden workforce ” of the National Health Service , and to counter a public image of clerks and medical secretaries as overpopulating and bringing no extra value to health care . Additionally , the union published a series of case studies that describe the work of medical secretaries . 2 Within CSCW , the relative invisibility of medical secretaries may be an unre ﬂ ective subscription to the above prevailing understandings of which professions and jobs are central and important and which are not ( Alvesson and Billing 2009 ; Karlsson 2011 ) . In the ﬁ eld of information systems , gender has been under - researched ( Adam et al . 2004 ; Wilson 2004 ) , and the computer sciences are themselves strongly gendered and have experienced a signi ﬁ cant and , in comparison with other technological ﬁ elds , unprecedented decline in the number of women studying the subject after having been initially attractive in the 1960s and 1970s ( Misa 2010 ) . More broadly across disciplines , for researchers interested in cooperative work medical secretaries may appear to work alone in their of ﬁ ces , cut off from the hum of other staff activity by headphones ( Figure 1 above , just before Section 6 ) in contrast to physicians ’ and nurses ’ more visible cooperative work ( Figure 4 , below ) . Finally , medical secretaries may have been perceived as holdovers from the ﬁ eld of Of ﬁ ce Automation , which faded in the mid - 1980s , when the ﬁ eld of 2 http : / / www . unison . org . uk / completingthepicture / pressrelease . asp Figure 4 . Nurse and physician doing cooperative work . 103 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries CSCW emerged ( Grudin 1994 ; Schmidt 2011 , chapter 11 ) . If this is the case , the present implementations of EHRs may spur an interest in medical secretaries and their of ﬁ ces , since EHRs are likely to entail more integration of more groups across more units , and a rediscovery of the discussions upon gender that took place with the ﬁ eld of Of ﬁ ce Automation . Whatever the reason , the relative invisibility of medical secretaries should be a caution for us as researchers constantly to be aware of the perspective and position from which we conduct our studies and the implicated ( in ) visibilities . 8 . Conclusion As information infrastructures in health care expand , more professions and units , including non - clinical ones , are likely to become part of the cooperative work arrangements . This pertains to the medical secretaries described here , but probably also to other non - clinicians , such as , for example , porters whose cell phones , linked to patient electronic booking systems , may inform them when to bring a patient to and from surgery . The case of medical secretaries shows that there is a research challenge – and opportunity – to make visible the work of these hitherto invisible groups . Understanding these occupations ’ work as such could be an undertaking in its own right as it might show how processes of technological change , drift of tasks , change of roles , gendering , etc . unfold . However , they also offer opportunities through which analyses of cooperative work may intervene in the design , development and implementation of health IT . As the case here shows , not taking non - clinical groups such as medical secretaries is done at the risk of a breakdown in hospitals ’ work arrangements . This may require some sensibility to hitherto backgrounded work and sharpening the ability of the researchers to pay attention to prevailing understanding of what kind of work is worthwhile of attention , instead of having to rely on technologically induced changes to produce breakdowns through which such work comes to the fore , as was the case in this paper . The concept of boundary - object trimming may direct the analytical gaze upon the work required to maintain , optimize , and keep boundary objects on course , as well as the work to make their informational content complete , structured and accurate . Hence , in the health care domain , the work of medical secretaries and other non - clinical groups may become more visible , though boundary objects in many other domains also might need trimming to travel smoothly . Acknowledgments Our sincere thanks to the staff at Regional Hospital for their cooperating in connection with the EHR evaluation , and to the reviewers for constructive comments . Notes i Of the 41 hits on medical secretaries 13 focused on work conditions broadly ; 7 were handbooks , manuals or voice recognition tools ; 5 point to medical secretaries as being undervalued ; 4 focus on neck and shoulder pain ; 3 deal 104 Claus Bossen et al . with EPRs ( Lærum et al . ( 2004 ) , Bertelsen and Nøhr ( 2005 ) , and Bossen et al . ( 2012 ) ) . The remaining 9 hits have various content ( obituaries , letters to the editor , minutes of meetings ) ( Search performed 6 th April 2012 ) ii Whereas such a search may not provide rigorous results upon scholarly work upon these professions , the tendency is clear . GoogleScholar was searched for [ “ medical secretary ” OR “ medical secretaries ” ] in the title from 1990 to 2012 , and identical searches were made for [ “ nurse ” OR “ nurses ” ] , and [ “ physician ” OR “ physicians ” ] . Adding “ electronic ” to similar searches on these three professions with the words anywhere in papers between1990 and 2012 provides the same clear pictures . Results for medical secretaries , nurses and physicians are 1 . 700 ; 351 . 000 ; and 444 . 000 hits respectively ( Searches performed 6 th of April 2012 ) . In the USA , there are no ‘ medical secretaries ’ as such since the tasks are divided between health information managers , transcriptionists , chart com - pletion , and medical coders . However , search results are meager : 65 , 59 , 5 , and 4 hits respectively ( Search as above . For the latter , search was conducted for ‘ diagnostic coder ’ , ‘ medical coder ’ or ‘ medical records technician ’ in singular and plural as for the other terms ) ( Searches performed 19 th of April 2012 ) . Adding ‘ electronic ’ to the searches , also from 1990 to 2012 , as above resulted in 397 hits for health information manager ; 2670 hits for transcriptionist ; 137 hit for chart completion ; 479 hits for medical coder ( all in singular and plural ) . iii Searches were conducted for ‘ medical secretary ’ , ‘ medical coder ’ , ‘ diagnostic coder ’ , ‘ medical records technician ’ , ‘ transcriptionist ’ , ‘ health information manager ’ in singular and plural . iv In Denmark 98 % ( Chairperson of the Danish association of medical secretaries , personal communication ) ; in the UK 99 % of members in the British Society of Medical Secretaries & Administrators are women ( Special Projects Manager , BSMSA , personal communication ) . v See their newsletters ( in Danish ) : http : / / www . hk . dk / kommunal / dit _ fag / dl / nyhedsarkiv ( accessed 10th of April 2012 ) vi http : / / www . hk . dk / kommunal / dit _ fag / dl / nyhedsarkiv / 2011 / arbejdsgange _ paa _ hospitaler _ traenger _ til _ fornyelse ( accessed 10th of April 2012 ) vii http : / / www . bsmsa . org . uk / index . cfm ? task = news & targetnewsid = 57 viii The number of medical secretaries is almost stable with a decrease of only 0 . 4 % from 2009 – 2011 ( http : / / www . hk . dk / kommunal / dit _ fag / dl / nyhedsarkiv / 2012 / laegesekretaerer _ slipper _ naadigt ) . References Abraham , J . and M . C . Reddy ( 2008 ) : Moving Patients Around : A Field Study of Coordination Between Clinical and Non - Clinical Staff in Hospitals . Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . San Diego , CA , USA : ACM , pp . 225 – 228 . 105 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries Acker , J . ( 2006 ) : Inequality Regimes : Gender , Class , and Race in Organizations . Gender & Society , vol . 20 , no . 4 , pp . 441 – 464 . Adam , A . , D . Howcroft and H . Richardson ( 2004 ) : A Decade of Neglect : Re ﬂ ecting on Gender and IS . New Technology , Work and Employment , vol . 19 , no . 3 , pp . 222 – 240 . Alvesson , M . and Y . D . Billing ( 2009 ) : Understanding Gender and Organizations . Los Angeles : Sage . America , Committee on Quality of Health Care in and Institute of Medicine . ( 2001 ) : Crossing the Quality Chasm : A New Health System for the 21st Century . The National Academies Press . Anastasi , T . E . ( 1970 ) : A Secretary is a Manager . Burlington , Mass : Management Center of Cambridge . Aspden , P . , J . Wolcott and J . L . Bootman ( eds ) ( 2007 ) : Preventing Medication Errors . Quality Chasm Series . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . Authority , National E - Health Transition . ( 2011 ) : eHealth . from http : / / www . ehealthinfo . gov . au / . Aydin , C . E . and R . E . Rice ( 1996 ) : Bringing Social Worlds Together : Computers as Catalysts for New Interactions in Health CareOrganizations . Journal of Health and Social Behavior , vol . 33 , no . 2 , pp . 168 – 185 . Balka , E . and I . Wagner ( 2006 ) : Making Things Work : Dimensions of Con ﬁ gurability as Appropriation Work . Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Banff , Alberta , Canada : ACM . Bardram , J . and C . Bossen ( 2005 ) : Mobility Work : The Spatial Dimension of Collaboration at a Hospital . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 14 , pp . 131 – 160 . Bardram , J . , T . R . Hansen and M . Søgard ( 2006 ) : AwareMedia — A Shared Interactive Display Supporting Social , Temporal , and Spatial Awareness in Surgery . Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Bannf , Canada . ACM . Barley , S . R . ( 1988 ) : Technology as an Occasion for Structuring : Evidence from Observations of CT Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments . Administration Science Quarterly , vol . 31 , pp . 78 – 108 . Barley , S . R . ( 1990 ) : The Alignment of Technology and Structure Through Roles and Networks . Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 35 , no . 1 , pp . 61 – 103 . Barley , S . R . ( 1996 ) : Technicians in the Workplace : Ethnographic Evidence for Bringing Work into Organizational Studies . Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 41 , no . 3 , pp . 404 – 441 . Benét , M . K . ( 1972 ) : Secretary . Enquiry into the Female Ghetto . London : Sidgwick & Jackson . Berg , M . ( 1997 ) : Rationalizing Medical Work . Decision - Support Techniques and Medical Practices . Cambridge ( Mass ) & London : MIT Press . Berner , E . S . , D . E . Detmer and D . Simborg ( 2005 ) : Will the Wave Finally Break ? A Brief View of the Adoption of Electronic Medical Records in the United States . Journal of American Medical Informatics Association , vol . 12 , no . 1 , pp . 3 – 7 . Bertelsen , P . ( 2005 ) : Hvad Laver Lægesekretårerne , når de Ikke er Sekretærer for Lægerne ? Aalborg : Virtuelt Center for Sundhedsinformatik , Aalborg Universitet . Bertelsen , P . and C . Nøhr ( 2005 ) : The Work Practice of Medical Secretaries and the Implementation of Electronic Health Records in Denmark . Health Information Management , vol . 34 , no . 4 , pp . 104 – 111 . Bjørn , P . and K . Rødje ( 2008 ) : Triage Drift : A Workplace Study in a Pediatric Emergency Department . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 17 , no . 4 , pp . 395 – 419 . Blomberg , J . , L . Suchman and R . Trigg ( 1997 ) : Re ﬂ ections on a Work - Oriented Design Project . In G . C . Bowker , S . L . Star , W . Turner and L . Gasser ( eds ) : Social Science , Technical Systems , and Cooperative Work . Beyond the Great Divide . Mahwah & London : Lawrence Earlbaum Associates , pp . 189 – 215 . Bossen , C . ( 2011 ) : Accounting and Co - Constructing : The Development of a Standard for Electronic Health Records . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , vol . 20 , no . 6 , pp . 473 – 495 . Bossen , C . , L . G . Jensen and F . Witt ( 2012 ) : Medical Secretaries ' Care of Records : The Cooperative Work of a Non - Clinical Group . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Seattle , Washington , USA : ACM , pp . 921 – 930 . 106 Claus Bossen et al . Bossen , C . , L . G . Jensen and F . Witt ( forthcoming ) : Evaluation of a Comprehensive EHR Based on the DeLone & McLean Model for IS Success : Approach , Results and Success Factors . International Journal of Medical Informatics . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijmedinf . Cabitza , F . , M . Sarini and C . Simone ( 2007 ) : Providing Awareness Through Situated Process Maps : The Hospital Care Case . Proceedings of the 2007 international ACM conference on Supporting group work . Sanibel Island , Florida , USA : ACM . pp . 41 – 50 . Casper , M . ( 1998 ) : Working on and Around Human Fetuses : The Contested Domain of Fetal Surgery . In M . Berg and A . Mol ( eds ) : Differences in Medicine . Unraveling Practices , Techniques , and Bodies . Durham and London : Duke University Press , pp . 28 – 52 . Cockburn , C . ( 1986 ) : The Machinery of Dominance : Women , Men , and Technical Know - How . London : Pluto . DeLone , W . H . and E . R . McLean ( 2003 ) : The DeLone and McLean Model of Information Systems Success : A 10 - Year Update . Journal of Management Information Systems , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 9 – 30 . Dorda , W . , G . Duftschmid , L . Gerhold , W . Gall and J . Gambal ( 2008 ) : Austria ’ s Path Toward Nationwide Electronic Health Records . Methods of Information in Medicine , vol . 47 , no . 2 , pp . 117 – 123 . Ehrlich , K . and D . Cash ( 1999 ) : The Invisible World of Intermediaries : A Cautionary Tale . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , vol . 8 , no . 1 , pp . 147 – 167 . Ellingsen , G . and K . Røed ( 2010 ) : The Role of Integration in Health - Based Information Infrastructures . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 19 , no . 6 , pp . 557 – 584 . England , K . and K . Boyer ( 2009 ) : Women ’ s Work : The Feminization and Shifting Meanings of Clerical Work . Journal of Social History , vol . 43 , no . 2 , pp . 307 – 340 . Erickson , T . , C . M . Danis , W . A . Kellogg and M . E . Helander ( 2008 ) : Assistance : The Work Practices of Human Administrative Assistants and Their Implications for it and Organizations . Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . San Diego , CA , USA : ACM , pp . 609 – 618 . Evans , M . K . ( 1987 ) : Department Secretaries : Unsung Heroines in the Resolution of Professional - Organizational Con ﬂ ict . Human Organization , vol . 46 , no . 1 , pp . 62 – 69 . Fitzpatrick , G . and G . Ellingsen ( 2012 ) : A Review of 25 Years of CSCW Research in Healthcare : Contributions , Challenges and Future Agendas . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , pp . 1 – 57 . Fujimura , J . ( 1992 ) : Crafting Science : Standardized Packages , Boundary Objects , and " Transla - tion " . In A . Pickering ( ed ) : Science as Culture and Practice . Chicago & London : University of Chicago Press , pp . 168 – 211 . Gar ﬁ nkel , H . ( 1974 ) : ' Good ' Organizational Reasons for ' Bad ' Clinic Records . In R . Turner ( ed ) : Ethnomethology . Middlesex : Penguin , pp . 109 – 127 . General , Comptroller and Auditor . ( 2011 ) : The National Programme for IT in the NHS : An Update on the Delivery of Detailed Care Records Systems . London : Department of Health , The Stationary Of ﬁ ce . Glenn , E . N . and R . L . Feldberg ( 1997 ) : Degraded and Deskilled : The Proletarianization of Clerical Work . Social Problems , vol . 24 , no . 1 , pp . 52 – 64 . Goodman , S . E . and M - L . Perby ( 1985 ) : Computerization and the Skill in Women ' s Work . In A . Olerup , L . Schneider and E . Monod ( eds ) : Women , Work and Computerization . Amsterdam : North - Holland , pp . 23 – 42 . Greenhalgh , T . , H . W . Potts , G . Wong , P . Bark and D . Swinglehurst ( 2009 ) : Tensions and Paradoxes in Electronic Patient Record Research : A Systematic Literature Review Using the Meta - narrative Method . Milbank Quarterly , vol . 87 , no . 4 , pp . 729 – 788 . Grudin , J . ( 1994 ) : Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : History and Focus . Computer , vol . 27 , no . 5 , pp . 19 – 26 . 107 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries Haigh , T . ( 2010 ) : Masculinity and the Machine Man . Gender in the History of Data Processing . In T . J . Misa ( ed ) : Gender Codes . Why Women are Leaving Computing . Hoboken : IEEE Computer Society / Wiley , pp . 51 – 71 . Häkkinen , L . and O - P . Hilmola ( 2008 ) : ERP Evaluation During the Shakedown Phase : Lessons from an After - Sales Division . Information Systems Journal , vol . 18 , no . 1 , pp . 73 – 100 . Häyrinen , K . , K . Saranto and P . Nykänen ( 2008 ) : De ﬁ nition , Structure , Content , use and Impacts of Electronic Health Records : A Review of the Research Literature . International Journal of Medical Informatics , vol . 77 , no . 5 , pp . 291 – 304 . Heath , C . , M . S . Svensson , J . Hindmarsh , P . Luff and D . vom Lehn ( 2002 ) : Con ﬁ guring Awareness . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 11 , pp . 317 – 347 . HK / Kommunal ( 2008 ) : HK / Kommunal Kongres ' 08 skriftlig beretning . HK / Kommunal . Infoway , Canada Health . ( 2011 ) : Canada Health Infoway . from https : / / www . infoway - inforoute . ca / lang - en / about - infoway . Karlsson , A . ( 2011 ) : Occupational Identity in Administrative Service Work : The Aspect of Carefulness . Gender , Work & Organization , vol . 18 , pp . e132 – e156 . Kohn , L . T . , J . M . Corrigan and M . S . Donaldson ( 1999 ) : To Err is Human – Building a Safer Health System . Washington , D . C . : Institute of Medicine , National Academy Press . Kuhlmann , E . and E . Annandale ( 2010 ) : The Palgrave Handbook of Gender and Healthcare . New York : Palgrave . Lærum , H . , T . H . Karlsen and A . Faxvaag ( 2004 ) : Use of and Attitudes to a Hospital Information System by Medical Secretaries , Nurses and Physicians Deprived of the Paper - Based Medical Record : A Case Report . BMC Medical Informatics & Decision Making , pp . 18 – 10 . Lee , C . P . ( 2007 ) : Boundary Negotiating Artifacts : Unbinding the Routine of Boundary Objects and Embracing Chaos in Collaborative Work . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 307 – 339 . Lium , J - T . and A . Faxvaag ( 2006 ) : Removal of Paper - Based Health Records from Norwegian Hospitals : Effects on Clinical Work ﬂ ow . Studies in Health Technology and Informatics , vol . 124 , pp . 1031 – 6 . Lium , J - T . , H . Laerum , T . Schulz and A . Faxvaag ( 2006 ) : From the Front Line , Report from a Near Paperless Hospital : Mixed Reception Among Health Care Professionals . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association vol . 13 , no . 6 , pp . 668 – 75 . Lutters , W . G . and M . S . Ackerman ( 2007 ) : Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , pp . 341 – 372 . Martin , D . , M . Hartswood , R . Slack and A . Voss ( 2006 ) : Achieving Dependability in the Con ﬁ guration , Integration and Testing of Healthcare Technologies . Comput . Supported Coop . Work , vol . 15 , no . 5 – 6 , pp . 467 – 499 . Misa , T . J . ( ed ) ( 2010 ) : Gender Codes . Why Women are Leaving Computing . Hoboken : IEEE Computer Soclety / Wiley . Møller , N . H . and P . Bjørn ( 2011 ) : Layers in Sorting Practices : Sorting out Patients with Potential Cancer . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 20 , no . 3 , pp . 123 – 153 . Møller , N . H . and P . Dourish ( 2010 ) : Coordination by Avoidance : Bringing Things Together and Keeping them Apart Across Hospital Departments . Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work . Sanibel Island , Florida , USA : ACM . pp . 65 – 74 . Møller , N . H . and S . Vikkelsø ( 2012 ) : The Clinical Work of Secretaries : Exploring the Intersection of Administrative and Clinical Work in the Diagnosing Process . In J . Dugdale , C . Masclet , M . A . Grasso , J . - F . Boujut and P . Hassanaly ( eds ) : From Research to Practice in the Design of Cooperative Systems : Results and Open Challenges . London : Springer , pp . 33 – 47 . Muller , M . J . ( 1999 ) : Invisible Work of Telephone Operators : An Ethnocritical Analysis . Comput . Supported Coop . Work , vol . 8 , no . 1 – 2 , pp . 31 – 61 . 108 Claus Bossen et al . Orr , J . E . ( 1996 ) : Talking about Machines . An Ethnography of a Modern Job . Ithaca & London : Cornell University Press . Palm , J . M . , I . Colombet , C . Sicotte and P . Degoulet ( 2006 ) : Determinants of User Satisfaction with a Clinical Information System . AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings . Paul , S . A . and M . C . Reddy ( 2010 ) : Understanding Together : Sensemaking in Collaborative Information Seeking . Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Savannah , Georgia , USA : ACM . Pennington , D . ( 2010 ) The Dynamics of Material Artifacts in Collaborative Research Teams . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , vol . 19 , no . 2 , pp . 175 – 199 . Perspektivgruppen . ( 2006 ) : The Future Medical Secretary [ in Danish ] . Available at http : / / www . hk . dk / stat / media / kommunals _ mediebibliotek / laegesekretaerer _ mediebibliotek / ﬁ ler / publikationer / rapport _ fremtidens _ laegesekretaer _ hele _ undersoegelsen / ( language ) / dan - DK . Power , M . ( 1997 ) : The Audit Socity . Rituals of Veri ﬁ cation . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Pringle , R . ( 1988 ) : Secretaries Talk . Sexuality , Power and Work . London : New York , Verso . Reddy , M . C . and P . R . Spence ( 2008 ) : Collaborative Information Seeking : A Field Study of a Multidisciplinary Patient Care Team . Information Processing and Management , vol . 44 , no . 1 , pp . 242 – 255 . Reddy , M . , P . Dourish and W . Pratt ( 2001 ) : Coordinating Heterogeneous Work : Information and Representation in Medical Care . In W . Prinz , M . Jarke , Y . Rogers , K . Schmidt and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . Netherlands : Klüver Academic Publishers , pp . 239 – 58 . Riska , E . ( 2010 ) : Health Professions and Occupations . In W . C . Cockerham ( ed ) : The New Blackwell Companion to Medical Sociology . Blackwell Publishing . Schmidt , K . ( 2011 ) : Cooperative Work and Coordinative Practices . London : Springer . Schmidt , K . and I . Wagner ( 2004 ) : Ordering Systems : Coordinative Practices and Artifacts in Architectural Design and Planning . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 13 , no . 5 – 6 , pp . 349 – 408 . Spence , P . R . and M . C . Reddy ( 2007 ) : The " Active " Gatekeeper in Collaborative Information Seeking Activities . Proceedings of the 2007 international ACM conference on Supporting group work . Sanibel Island , Florida , USA : ACM , pp . 277 – 280 . Star , S . L . ( 2010 ) : This is Not a Boundary Object : Re ﬂ ections on the Origin of a Concept . Science , Technology & Human Values , vol . 35 , no . 5 , pp . 601 – 617 . Star , S . L . and J . R . Griesemer ( 1989 ) : Institutional Ecology , ‘ Translations ’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ’ s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 – 39 . Social Studies of Science , vol . 19 , no . 3 , pp . 387 – 420 . Star , S . L . and A . Strauss ( 1999 ) : Layers of Silence , Arenas of Voice : The Ecology of Visible and Invisible Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 8 , pp . 9 – 30 . Strauss , A . ( 1993 ) : The Continual Permutations of Action . New York : Aldine de Gruyter . Strauss , A . , S . Fagerhaugh , B . Suczek and C . Wiener ( 1985 ) : Social Organization of Medical Work . Chicago & London : University of Chicago Press . Subrahmanian , E . , I . Monarch , S . Konda , H . Granger , R . Milliken , A . Westerberg , et al . ( 2003 ) : Boundary Objects and Prototypes at the Interfaces of Engineering Design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , vol . 12 , no . 2 , pp . 185 – 203 . Suchman , L . ( 1995 ) : Making Work Visible . Communications of the ACM , vol . 38 , no . 9 , pp . 56 – 63 . Tellioglu , H . and I . Wagner ( 2001 ) : Work Practices Surrounding PACS : The Politics of Space in Hospitals . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 10 , no . 2 , pp . 163 – 88 . Trompette , P . and D . Vinck ( 2009 ) : Revisiting the Notion of Boundary Object . Revue D ' anthropologie des Connaissances , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 3 – 25 . 109 Boundary - Object Trimming : The Invisibility of Medical Secretaries Truss , C . , A . Rosewarne , K . Alfes and R . Parr ( 2009 ) : Secretarial Work , Skills and Careers ( Executive Summary ) . Kingston upon Thames , U . K : Centre for Research in Employment , Skills and Society , Kingston Business School , Kingston University . Truss , C . , K . Alfes , A . Shantz and A . Rosewarne ( 2012 ) : Still in the Ghetto ? Experiences of Secretarial Work in the 21st Century . Gender , Work & Organization , vol . 20 , no . 4 , pp . s 349 – 363 . Wagner , I . ( 1993 ) : Women ' s Voice : The Case of Nursing Information Systems . AI & Society , vol . 7 , no . 4 , pp . 295 – 310 . Wilson , M . ( 2004 ) : A Conceptual Framework for Studying Gender in Information Systems Research . Journal of Information Technology , vol . 19 , no . 1 , pp . 81 Yin , R . K . ( 1994 ) : Case Study Research . Design and Methods . Thousand Oaks : Sage . 110 Claus Bossen et al .