T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : ARTICLE © The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 179 , No . 5 , December 3 , 2007 1011 – 1025 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200707073 JCB 1011 Introduction The dynamic remodeling of actin fi laments ( F - actin ) concen - trated at the cell periphery is responsible for cell translocation , for cell shape changes , and for cellular resistance to potentially disruptive mechanical stresses . These mechanical tasks depend in large measure on the coherence of three - dimensional ( 3D ) F - actin gel networks ( Discher et al . , 2005 ) , and cross - linking agents con - fer this coherence on intracellular F - actin ( Matsudaira , 1994 ) . The most potent among many F - actin cross - linking agents is the fi rst recognized nonmuscle F - actin - binding protein , now known as fi lamin A ( FLNa ) . FLNa expression is essential for mammalian development ( Feng et al . , 2006 ; Ferland et al . , 2006 ; Hart et al . , 2006 ) and even small FLNa deletions or point mutations lead to diverse congenital anomalies ( Robertson et al . , 2003 ; Robertson , 2005 ; Kyndt et al . , 2007 ) . Cultured cells lack - ing FLNa protein expression exhibit unstable surfaces , are in - capable of locomotion , and have impaired mechanical resistance ( Flanagan et al . , 2001 ; Kainulainen et al . , 2002 ) . FLNa confers elastic properties on F - actin networks subjected to prestress in vitro , and the network rigidities achieved simulate values ob - served for prestressed living cells ( Gardel et al . , 2006 ) . The power of FLNa as an F - actin gelation promoter re - sides in its effi ciency in recruiting F - actin into extended networks , and the source of this effi ciency is its ability to orient each cross - linked rod - like actin fi lament at right angles , there by minimizing redundant cross - linking ( Hartwig et al . , 1980 ; Hartwig and Shevlin , 1986 ) . In addition , the mechanical prop - erties of F - actin / FLNa networks depend on FLNa’s capacity to cross - link F - actin with high avidity while permitting suffi cient interfi lament fl exibility for networks to exhibit fully reversible elastic deformation in response to high stresses without rupturing ( Gardel et al . , 2006 ) . FLNa also binds numerous cellular components other than F - actin , including membrane receptors , enzymes , channels , sig - naling intermediates , and transcription factors , and it modulates the functional activities of these binding partners ( Stossel et al . , 2001 ; Feng and Walsh , 2004 ; Popowicz et al . , 2006 ) . Because many of these binding partners regulate actin assembly and dis - assembly , FLNa resides at the center of a complex feedback sys - tem in which signaling around it organizes actin architecture that , in turn , regulates signaling . A comprehension of the fi ne struc - ture of FLNa is essential to understand how this molecule can execute diverse and complex functions and to relate specifi c arrangements of these functions to a growing catalogue of bio - logical and clinical abnormalities ascribable to FLNa . FLNa is a homodimer with conserved F - actin – binding domains ( ABDs ) consisting of two calponin homology ( CH ) se - quences ( CH1 & CH2 ) at the amino termini ( N - T ) of its 280 . 7 - kD , 80 - nm - long subunits . The amino acid sequence of FLNa’s ABD is representative of ABDs of the α - actinin or spectrin superfamily ( Hartwig , 1995 ) , with the exception that the FLNa ABD has a Structural basis of ﬁ lamin A functions Fumihiko Nakamura , 1 Teresia M . Osborn , 1 , 2 Christopher A . Hartemink , 1 John H . Hartwig , 1 and Thomas P . Stossel 1 1 Translational Medicine Division , Department of Medicine , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 2 Department of Rheumatology and Inﬂ ammation Research , Göteborg University , Gothenburg , Sweden F ilamin A ( FLNa ) can effect orthogonal branching of F - actin and bind many cellular constituents . FLNa dimeric subunits have N - terminal spectrin family F - actin binding domains ( ABDs ) and an elongated ﬂ exible segment of 24 immunoglobulin ( Ig ) repeats . We gener - ated a library of FLNa fragments to examine their F - actin binding to deﬁ ne the structural properties of FLNa that enable its various functions . We ﬁ nd that Ig repeats 9 – 15 contain an F - actin – binding domain necessary for high avidity F - actin binding . Ig repeats 16 – 24 , where most FLNa - binding partners interact , do not bind F - actin , and thus F - actin does not compete with Ig repeat 23 ligand , FilGAP . Ig repeats 16 – 24 have a compact structure that suggests their unfolding may accommodate pre - stress – mediated stiffening of F - actin networks , partner binding , mechanosensing , and mechanoprotection properties of FLNa . Our results also establish the orientation of FLNa dimers in F - actin branching . Dimerization , mediated by FLNa Ig repeat 24 , accounts for rigid high - angle FLNa / F - actin branching resistant to bending by thermal forces , and high avidity F - actin binding and cross - linking . F . Nakamura and T . M . Osborn contributed equally to this paper . Correspondence to Fumihiko Nakamura : fnakamura @ rics . bwh . harvard . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : ABD , actin - binding domain ; C - T , carboxy terminal ; FLNa , ﬁ lamin A ; IgFLNa , immunoglobulin - like ﬁ lamin A domain ; K app , apparent dissociation constant : N - T , amino terminal . The online version of this article contains supplemental material . JCB • VOLUME 179 • NUMBER 5 • 2007 1012 unique calmodulin - binding site positioned in the CH1 , and calcium - activated calmodulin ( holocalmodulin ) competes at this site for F - actin binding ( Nakamura et al . , 2005 ) . 24 β pleated sheet repeat ( Ig ) segments separate the ABDs from a carboxyl - terminal ( C - T ) subunit self - association site , with two interven - ing calpain - sensitive “hinge” sequences separating repeats 15 and 16 ( hinge 1 ) and repeats 23 and 24 ( hinge 2 ) , hinge 1 con - tributes to the high elasticity of prestressed FLNa / F - actin gels ( Gardel et al . , 2006 ) . The series of repeats proximal and distal to hinge 1 are designated “rods 1 and 2” ( Gorlin et al . , 1990 ) . Most FLNa binding partners interact with rod 2 and the molecu - lar interfaces mediating some of these interactions at the atomic level are known ( Kiema et al . , 2006 ; Nakamura et al . , 2006 ) . Despite all of this information , how FLNa binds and architec - turally organizes F - actin and serves as a functional platform for multiple cellular constituents is completely obscure . We have therefore generated an extensive library of FLNa fragments and examined their individual and combined contri - butions to F - actin binding , F - actin branching , and interactions with a non - F - actin binding partner . The results inform a plausible model for how FLNa orthogonally cross - links F - actin with high avidity while simultaneously accommodating suffi cient fl exibil - ity to account for pre - stress – mediated elasticity and binding to other ligands . The identifi cation of specifi c FLNa domains re - sponsible for these diverse functions sets the stage for the engi - neering of targeted reagents for modifying these functions and sorting out their roles at the cell and organism level . Results Expression and puriﬁ cation of human FLNa C - T and N - T truncates We engineered FLNa cDNAs encoding unmodifi ed or FLAG - tagged full - length FLNa dimers or FLNa truncates encompassing defi ned sections of FLNa subunits , and expressed the recombi - nant proteins in Sf9 insect cells ( Fig . 1 ) . Truncations of the last C - T repeat , the dimerization site IgFLNa24 , result in mono - meric fragments , and further truncations between Ig repeat junc - tions lead to sequentially shorter constructs and eventually only the ABD . We also generated FLNa N - T truncates containing Ig Figure 1 . Recombinant FLNa constructs used in this study . Diagram of human FLNa and its recombinant fragments fused to a FLAG - tag . Color indicates the actin - binding domain ( black ) , the secondary actin - binding site found in this study ( red ) , the rod 2 segment ( blue ) , and the dimerization domain ( yellow ) . The right panel shows electron micrographs of rotary - shadowed molecules corresponding to the diagram on the left . FILAMIN A STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION • NAKAMURA ET AL . 1013 repeats 1 – 23 , Ig 1 – 24 lacking the ABD ( ∆ ABD ) , and full - length FLNa dimers lacking the hinge 1 or hinge 2 sequences . We iso - lated full - length FLNa by chromatography as previously de - scribed ( Nakamura et al . , 2002 ) and purifi ed constructs tagged at their N - T with the FLAG epitope using anti - FLAG mAb aga - rose affi nity chromatography followed by gel fi ltration . Fig . S1 C shows that all recombinant proteins evaluated by SDS - PAGE consisted of single polypeptides of predicted molecular weight , and Fig . S1 D depicts the inferred isoelectric points of FLNa Ig repeats ( Fig . S1 is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200707073 / DC1 ) . In addition to the sequentially trun - cated FLNa subunit constructs , we prepared and purifi ed His ( hexahistidine ) - tagged monomeric truncates encompassing 8 Ig - like repeats from the FLNa subunit ( His - IgFLNa1 - 8 , His - IgFLNa8 - 15 , His - IgFLNa16 - 23 ; Fig . 2 A ) , and versions of these segments containing hinge 2 plus Ig repeat 24 at the C - T with ( His - ABD - IgFLNa1 - 8 + 24 , His - ABD - IgFLNa8 - 15 + 24 and His - ABD - IgFLNa16 - 24 ; Fig . S5 , A and D ) or without the N - T ABD ( His - IgFLNa1 - 8 + 24 , His - IgFLNa8 - 15 + 24 and His - IgFLNa16 - 24 ; Fig . 2 , A and B ) . The constructs were of predicted sizes , and addition of hinge 2 and repeat 24 resulted in dimeric molecules ( Fig . 2 , A and B ; Fig . S2 ) . Figure 2 . Structures and topological properties of FLNa constructs . ( A ) Electron micrographs of rotary shadowed FLNa and truncated molecules fused to a His ( hexahistidine ) - tag . The 15 Ig repeats in the rod 1 domain are similar in structural composition as can be seen by comparing IgFLNa1 - 8 with IgFLNa8 - 15 . The rod 2 domain has a more globular and compact appearance . The dimerized IgFLNa16 - 24 is also compact and consists of globular subdomains . ( B ) Addition of hinge 2 and dimerization domain Ig repeat 24 to IgFLNa1 - 8 or IgFLNa8 - 15 duplicates the size ( C ) and retains the rod - like structures . Asterisk indicates insertion of Ala residue derived from restriction site in the N - terminal of hinge 2 ( see Materials and methods ) . ( C ) Contour length of FLNa truncates . The rod 2 segments are signiﬁ cantly shorter than the constructs that have the same number of Ig - like repeats but are derived from the rod 1 segment ( n > 1 , 000 molecules ) . P < 0 . 0001 ( * * * ) ( t test ) . ( D ) Angles at the dimerization sites of full - length FLNa and FLNa constructs ( n > 200 molecules ) . The aver - age angle of the C - terminal domain of FLNa is (cid:6) 80 ° . The dimerized constructs have similar angle and angle distribution as full - length FLNa ( see Fig . S3 , B and C ) . Data are means ± SD . JCB • VOLUME 179 • NUMBER 5 • 2007 1014 Structure of FLNa molecules : role of the subdomains Fig . S1 A compares the ultrastructures of intact FLNa mole - cules to the recombinant C - T and N - T truncated proteins . FLAG - tagged full - length FLNa molecules appear identical to native FLNa purifi ed from rabbit lung macrophages ( Hartwig and Stossel , 1981 ) and to untagged recombinant human FLNa ( Fig . 1 and Fig . S1 A ) ( Nakamura et al . , 2002 ) . All of the con - structs were monodisperse , and the lengths of truncates from the rod 1 segment are directly proportional to the number of re - peats expressed , as predicted ( Fig . S1 B ) . The contour lengths of rod 2 segments are signifi cantly shorter ( 19 . 2 ± 6 nm ) than subsegments of rod 1 containing equivalent numbers of FLNa Ig repeats ( 28 . 5 ± 7 and 28 . 8 ± 8 nm for His - IgFLNa1 - 8 and His - IgFLNa8 - 15 , respectively ; n > 1 , 000 , P < 0 . 0001 , Fig . 2 , A and C ) . Rod 2 segments appear more compact in electron mi - crographs than the elongated rod - like structures of rod 1 seg - ments , although they are somewhat fl exible as they take on variable shapes . Rod 2 dimers appear as three globular units that branch to form an L - shaped structure . Although individual FLNa subunits exhibit flexibility along their contour lengths , which accounts for their variable shape in electron micrographs , they diverge from their self - association site at one end with fairly fi xed high angles . There - fore , the N - T two - thirds of each subunit accounts for most of its fl exibility , which is similar along the subunit contour length with the exception of a hot spot for bending at a distance of (cid:6) 60 nm from the free end ( Fig . S3 A , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200707073 / DC1 ) . This location corre - sponds to the site of hinge 1 in the FLNa subunit sequence , and a subunit construct missing hinge 1 lacks this fl exible hot spot . The C - T segments of FLNa dimers diverge at nearly right an - gles irrespective of whether the subunits contain hinge 2 ( 79 . 8 ± 30 ° versus 85 . 1 ± 34 ; Fig . S3 B ) . Dimeric rod fragments con - sisting of 8 Ig repeat segments derived from the FLNa subunits branch at similar angles as full - length FLNa ( averaging (cid:6) 80 – 90 ° ) irrespective of the subunit location from which the branches originate ( Fig . 2 D ; Fig . S3 C ) . F - actin binding of FLNa and FLNa fragments reveals two F - actin binding sites on FLNa subunits and the importance of dimerization for high avidity F - actin binding We evaluated the actin - binding properties of purifi ed FLNa truncates by cosedimentation with 5 μ M F - actin using either 1 : 10 ( 0 . 5 μ M ) or 1 : 100 ( 0 . 05 μ M ) concentrations of the recom - binant FLNa proteins . Fig . 3 A shows Coomassie blue – stained SDS - PAGE gels of supernatant and pellet fractions prepared by centrifugation of FLNa after incubation with or without 5 μ M F - actin . Because a portion of the recombinant protein sedi - mented in the absence of actin , we estimated specifi c actin - bound protein after subtracting the nonspecifi c component and expressed it as the percentage bound versus total input ( Fig . 3 B ) . At a 1 : 10 ratio of FLNa to actin , 56 . 3 ± 6 . 3 % ( n = 3 ) of FLNa bound , whereas a signifi cantly higher percentage ( 83 . 6 ± 21 % , n = 3 ) of FLNa bound to F - actin when the ratio of FLNa to ac - tin was 1 : 100 . Recombinant FLNa proteins bound progressively less F - actin in inverse proportion to the number of rod Ig do - mains expressed , and only (cid:6) 10 % ( 8 . 7 ± 1 . 9 % and 11 . 7 ± 2 . 6 % at 1 : 10 or 1 : 100 actin , respectively ) of the ABD domains lacking attached Ig repeats bound F - actin . Deletion of the ABD from FLNa subunits ( ∆ ABDIg - FLNa1 - 24 ) greatly diminished F - actin binding , but did not completely abolish it ( Fig . 3 B ) . This binding was dependent on FLNa subunit dimer formation , because a construct lacking the self - association repeat , IgFLNa24 ( ∆ ABDIgFLNa1 - 23 ) hardly interacted with F - actin ( Fig . 3 B ) . These data suggest that FLNa can interact with F - actin in the absence of the ABD , and nega - tive staining of F - actin incubated with ∆ ABDIgFLNa1 - 24 at high ratios revealed the formation of actin fi lament bundles . IgFLNa8 - 15 + 24 could also induce bundling . This bundling was dependent on dimer formation , as ∆ ABDIgFLNa1 - 23 and IgFLNa8 - 15 did not have this effect ( Fig . 3 C ) . We also determined the binding affi nities ( K app ) and stoi - chiometries of the various FLNa truncates for F - actin . Fig . 4 A and Fig . S4 A show a representative binding assay of Coomassie blue – stained SDS - PAGE gels of supernatant and pellet fractions prepared by centrifugation of FLNa and its recombinant truncates after incubation with or without 5 μ M F - actin ( Fig . S4 is avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200707073 / DC1 ) . Binding of FLNa and its truncates to F - actin was specifi c and saturable . Fig . 4 , B and C ( note that Fig . 4 C is an enlarged view of Fig . 4 B ) , plot bound FLNa against free ( supernatant ) FLNa , and Fig . 4 , D and E , show these data in the form of a Scatchard plot . The nonlinearity of binding of full - length FLNa indicates either multiple binding sites or negative cooperativity ( Klotz and Hunston , 1971 ; Wilkinson , 2004 ) . A nonlinear regression analy - sis of the data reveals a high affi nity site of K app = 0 . 017 μ M and a low affi nity site of K app = 0 . 22 μ M , assuming a two indepen - dent site model justifi ed by additional fi ndings described below ( Fig . 4 E and Table I ) . The binding parameters reveal limited high affi nity sites for the binding of full - length FLNa protein to actin ( (cid:6) 1 FLNa dimer per 92 actin subunits in F - actin or 1 FLNa molecule for every 255 nm of F - actin contour length ) . Table I summarizes the binding affi nities and stoichiome - tries of the different FLNa truncates . These data reveal single classes of binding sites for F - actin on monomeric FLNa con - structs containing the N - T ABD . FLNa’s ABD alone binds F - actin at a 1 : 1 ratio ( mol / mol to each actin subunit in fi laments ) , although it has a K app that is 1 , 000 - fold less ( K app = 17 μ M ) than intact FLNa . Addition of the fi rst half of rod domain 1 ( IgFLNa1 - 8 ) to the ABD did not greatly increase its binding parameters . How - ever , further extension of the rod 1 domain with the addition of IgFLNa9 - 15 increased its K app for actin (cid:6) 25 - fold , implicating an additional F - actin binding region in the distal half of rod seg - ment 1 . Addition of rod 2 resulted in only a small enhancement in affi nity for F - actin compared with the ABD - rod 1 construct . We could not determine the affi nity and stoichiometry of monomeric or dimeric FLNa constructs containing N - terminal ABDs and 8 Ig repeats encompassing proximal or distal halves of rod segment 1 , because we could not prepare these proteins in suffi cient concentrations to enable formal affi nity measure - ments . However , we were able to take advantage of the effect of dimerization to increase binding avidity and use the low FILAMIN A STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION • NAKAMURA ET AL . 1015 Figure 3 . Binding of FLNa and FLNa truncates to F - actin . ( A ) Puriﬁ ed recombinant protein ( 0 . 5 or 0 . 05 μ M ) was incubated with or without 5 μ M rabbit skeletal muscle actin in a polymerization buffer for 1 h at 25 ° C . F - actin ( pellet ) was separated from soluble actin ( supernatant ) by centrifugation . The super - natant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) fractions were diluted to equivalent volumes in SDS - PAGE sample buffer and equal volumes of each were analyzed by SDS - PAGE . The slower migrating polypeptide ( arrow ) is the recombinant FLNa construct . The migration of actin is indicated . ( B ) The amount of free and bound recom - binant protein was determined by quantitative densitometric analysis from the slab gels ( A ) and is plotted as bound / total ( % ) for each of the FLNa recombi - nant proteins . Data are means ± SD for three separate measurements . ( C ) ABD deﬁ cient FLNa dimers and IgFLNa8 - 15 + 24 align F - actin into bundles . 2 μ M F - actin was incubated in the absence ( top left ) or presence of 0 . 4 μ M ∆ ABDIgFLNa1 - 23 ( monomer : top middle ) or 0 . 4 μ M ∆ ABDIgFLNa1 - 24 ( dimer : top right ) . Dimeric truncated molecules consisting each of 2 eight - domain monomers dimerized by repeat 24 were also incubated with F - actin ( bottom ) . Bar , 200 nm . JCB • VOLUME 179 • NUMBER 5 • 2007 1016 construct concentrations in F - actin gelation assays to demon - strate unequivocally the substantive contributions of the two ABDs in FLNa subunits . Fig . 5 A shows the apparent viscosity of 24 μ M actin poly - merized with various concentrations of FLAG - tagged FLNa or recombinant FLNa deletion constructs , for 1 h at room tempera - ture . A molar ratio of one FLAG - tagged full - length FLNa dimer per 800 actin monomers in F - actin was suffi cient to induce an abrupt and large viscosity increase indicative of gelation . This ratio is identical to that seen with non - FLAG - tagged recombinant human FLNa or of FLNa purifi ed from human tissues ( Nakamura et al . , 2002 ) , indicating that the FLAG - tag at the N - T of FLNa does not interfere with actin - binding activity . Deletion of the N - T ABD or the IgFLNa24 dimerization domain , however , com - pletely abolished gelation activity . Fig . 5 B shows that a dimeric construct containing the N - T ABD and Ig repeats 8 – 15 of rod segment 1 was nearly as effective as full - length FLNa in promoting F - actin gelation . Constructs with N - T ABDs and 8 Ig repeat cassettes from other regions than the distal half of rod segment 1 of FLNa subunits were less effi cient . As established by previous work , the more potent gelation activity of the mini - FLNa dimers containing both ABDs is refl ected in their ability to promote orthogonal F - actin branching , whereas the other constructs led to more F - actin bundle formation ( Fig . S5 C , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200707073 / DC1 ) . Presumably reduced F - actin binding permits actin fi laments to dissociate from the FLNa template and to rotate into bundle confi gurations . Orientation of FLNa - actin ﬁ lament cross - links in vitro To observe the dynamic behavior of FLNa / F - actin cross - links in real time , we polymerized actin in the presence of gelsolin , which nucleates actin in the slow - growing ( pointed ) direction and Figure 4 . Binding parameters of the different recombinant FLNa constructs for F - actin . ( A ) Representative cosedimentation experiment used to determine the apparent dissociation constant of FLNa for F - actin . The concentration of FLNa was varied in a ﬁ xed 5 μ M concentration of F - actin . ( B ) Amount of free and bound FLNa construct determined from panel A is plotted as indicated . The hyperbolic binding behavior displayed by intact FLNa indicates multiple bindings or negative cooperativity . Klotz plots are provided in Fig . S4 . ( C ) Enlargement of critical binding data between the X - axis values of 0 and 2 . 0 μ M of free FLNa . ( D ) Scatchard plot of binding data . ( E ) Enlargement of critical binding region on X - axis of 0 to 0 . 05 μ M for bound FLNa . Each graph plots the data resulting from a set of representative experiments . Each of these experiments was repeated at least three times . FILAMIN A STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION • NAKAMURA ET AL . 1017 caps the fast - growing ( barbed ) fi lament ends ( Yin et al . , 1981 ) , and attached these gelsolin - capped F - actins stabilized with Alexa488 phallodin to glass coverslips coated with anti - gelsolin IgG . We then added FLNa and a second population of gelsolin - capped , Alexa488 phalloidin – coated F - actin , and observed the mixture by fl uorescence microscopy . In the absence of FLNa , only individual actin fi laments , tethered at one end , attached to the surface . These filaments rotated rapidly around their attachment points ( Fig . 6 D ; Video 1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200707073 / DC1 ) . Addition of FLNa , however , in a dose - dependent fashion , generated a secondary population of fi laments cross - linked to the glass - attached fi la - ments ( Fig . 6 , A – C ) . These fi laments had a striking perpendicular orientation relative to the fi rst actin fi laments . Time - lapse pho - tography revealed that these perpendicular branches were ex - tremely rigid in contrast to the rapid oscillations of F - actin bound to the substrate ( Fig . 6 E ; Video 2 ) . Low angle rotary shadowed images of actin fi laments dec - orated with FLNa provide a closer picture of the interactions be - tween FLNa subunits and F - actin . Fig . 7 A shows a representative fi eld of F - actin with multiple FLNa molecules attached along the actin fi laments and a few cross - linked actin fi laments . Filamen - tous structures 65 ± 13 nm in length ( approximately half the contour length of a 158 ± 12 nm FLNa dimer ; Fig . 2 ) protrude at right angles from the actin fi laments ( Fig . 7 , B and C ) . In con - trast , FLNa truncates containing only the ABD and the fi rst 8 Ig repeats ( ABD - IgFLNa1 - 8 ) attach mainly through their N - T ABD ( Fig . 7 C ) , and the rod segments separate from the F - actin . We evaluated the effect of actin fi lament length on the amount of FLNa associated with F - actin ( Fig . 7 D ) . We poly - merized actin in the presence of increasing amounts of gelsolin , thereby generating populations of fi laments of decreasing lengths . The results show that as the average length decreased below 50 nm , the portion of FLNa molecules not associated with actin increases , consistent with the role of the FLNa subunit rod 1 segments in F - actin binding . Topography of FLNa binding to F - actin in situ We labeled detergent - extracted actin cytoskeletons of A7 mela - noma cells with a mixture of monoclonal anti - FLNa antibodies reactive against different FLNa epitopes ( catalogued in Fig . 8 ) . We visualized the antibodies bound in the electron microscope using 10 nm anti – mouse IgG - coated gold particles . As shown in Fig . 8 , B and C , this labeling reveals the contours of the FLNa molecules at orthogonal F - actin junctions in 3D reconstructions of stereo - paired micrographs . The immunogold labeling pattern shows that the rod domains of FLNa associate with the sides of the actin fi laments forming the vertices of the junctions . These observations are consistent with the in vitro binding studies and demonstrate that FLNa molecules bind F - actin by their ABD and the rod segment in situ . Effect of F - actin binding on FLNa binding partner interactions To test whether the binding of the rod segments along F - actin affects FLNa partner interactions , we used full - length recombinant human FilGAP , shown to bind IgFLNa23 in the rod 2 segment ( Ohta et al . , 2006 ) . Fig . 9 A demonstrates that purifi ed FLAG - FLNa stoichiometrically interacts with full - length FilGAP in vitro . Figure 5 . Gel points for actin polymerized with various recombinant FLNa constructs . Apparent viscosity of 24 μ M actin after polymerization in the presence of various concentrations of recombinant FLNa proteins as indi - cated in A and B . Error bars represent SD ( n = 3 ) . Error bars are smaller than the symbols in ( A ) . Table I . Dissociation constants and stoichiometries for the ﬁ lamin A constructs Constructs Dissociation constant [ 𝛍 M ] Stoichiometry [ ratio to actin , mol / mol ] FLNa ( high avidity ) 0 . 017 ( 0 . 013 – 0 . 021 ) a 46 b ( 39 – 54 ) a FLNa ( low afﬁ nity ) 0 . 22 ( 0 . 15 – 0 . 28 ) 10 . 5 b ( 9 . 5 – 11 . 4 ) ABD - IgFLNa1 - 23 0 . 31 ( 0 . 28 – 0 . 34 ) 12 ( 11 . 8 – 12 . 5 ) ABD - IgFLNa1 - 15 0 . 67 ( 0 . 38 – 0 . 97 ) 5 . 4 ( 4 . 8 – 6 . 5 ) ABD - IgFLNa1 - 8 7 . 1 ( 6 . 0 – 8 . 1 ) 1 . 8 ( 1 . 7 – 1 . 9 ) ABD - IgFLNa1 - 4 7 . 5 ( 6 . 2 – 8 . 9 ) 1 . 7 ( 1 . 6 – 1 . 8 ) ABD - IgFLNa1 - 2 11 . 8 ( 8 . 1 – 15 . 6 ) 1 . 3 ( 1 . 2 – 1 . 5 ) ABD 17 ( 14 . 5 – 20 . 4 ) 1 ( 0 . 95 – 1 . 05 ) a 95 % conﬁ dence interval . b Actin bound mol per FLNa subunit . JCB • VOLUME 179 • NUMBER 5 • 2007 1018 Addition of F - actin up to a 1 : 10 molar ratio to FLNa did not affect FLNa - FilGAP binding ( Fig . 9 B ) . Discussion We have collected internally consistent and mutually supportive kinetic and morphologic data informing as to how FLNa sub - units bind F - actin , how FLNa promotes perpendicular F - actin branching , how F - actin branching by FLNa dimers achieves high avidity binding to F - actin , and how FLNa provides inter - acting domains for its partners . Contributing importantly to these diverse properties are previously unrecognized structural and functional differences between FLNa’s rod segments 1 and 2 and between subsegments of rod 1 . Mechanism of FLNa subunit / F - actin binding The previously characterized ABD represents a key aspect of FLNa subunit attachment to F - actin , as FLNa subunits without it lack gelation activity . This fi nding is consistent with the effective - ness of calcium - calmodulin binding to this domain in dissociating FLNa / F - actin complexes in vitro ( Nakamura et al . , 2005 ) . However , the affi nity of the ABD for F - actin is relatively low if not attached to Ig repeats 9 – 15 in rod segment 1 . Although in the absence of the ABD , this rod subsegment does not induce gelation , binding is detectable by its F - actin bundling activity . Addition of the N - T ABD to the Ig8 - 15 + 24 segments , but not to the Ig1 - 8 + 24 or the Ig16 - 24 segments , reconstituted low stoichiom - etry orthogonal F - actin gelation , supporting the conclusion that the distal half of rod 1 augments F - actin binding . The restriction of binding to this segment of rod 1 suggests that specifi cs of the Ig repeats contribute to F - actin binding activity . Utrophin , a mem - ber of the same protein family as FLNa , binds F - actin through electrostatic interactions between a basic spectrin - repeat and acidic residues on actin ( Amann et al . , 1998 ) . The isoelectric points of repeats IgFLNa 9 to 15 are acidic , however ( Fig . S1 D ) , suggest - ing a different type of binding mechanism . Figure 6 . Orthogonal branching of F - actin by FLNa . ( A ) Relationship between FLNa concentration and ﬁ lament branching . Treatment of actin ﬁ laments tethered to a surface by gelsolin with FLNa and free F - actin results in the formation of orthogonal actin ﬁ lament crossings and branches . An increase in ﬁ lament junctions is observed with the addition of increasing FLNa concentrations . ( B ) Plot of branch number versus FLNa concentration added . For each experiment , junctions in 40 randomly selected areas in > 5 coverslips ( 3 experiments ) were analyzed . ( C ) Fluorescence microscopy of F - actin - FLNa junctions . The presence of FLNa at the junctions is detected using RFP or EGFP labeled FLNa and Alexa 488 - or Alexa 568 phalloidin - labeled F - actin , respectively . ( D ) Representative time - lapse images that record the movement of actin ﬁ laments bound to anti - gelsolin IgGs ( see Video 1 ) . Note that the gelsolin - tethered end of the ﬁ lament is immobile while the free end oscillates rapidly . The superimposed tracings to the left track the movement of the ﬁ lament with time . ( E ) Behavior of actin ﬁ laments cross - linked by FLNa molecules . FLNa creates stable orthogonal ﬁ lament cross - links that are not deﬂ ected by thermal motion . Filament junctions are at nearly perpendicular angles . Note that the addition of ﬁ lament stabilizes it in the vicinity of the cross - link . The images on the left record the ﬁ lament movements ( see Video 2 ) . FILAMIN A STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION • NAKAMURA ET AL . 1019 The additive contributions of the ABD and Ig repeats 9 – 15 to F - actin binding and the fl exibility of the N - T portion of the FLNa subunit suggest that when the ABD engages an actin mono - mer in F - actin the fl exibility of Ig repeats 1 – 8 enables repeats 9 – 15 to fi nd the proper alignments of actin monomers in F - actin downstream from the initial binding site . Accordingly , electron micrographs revealed that constructs containing the ABD and Ig repeats 1 – 8 only have a single point attachment to F - actin , whereas full - length subunits align along F - actin , implying mul - tiple attachments . Conversely , limiting the ability of Ig repeats 9 – 15 to bind F - actin by presenting FLNa subunits with short - ened actin fi laments also resulted in single point attachments . Immunohistochemical labeling of FLNa subunits showed that they align along actin fi laments at F - actin junctions of cell cyto - skeletons in situ . The overall linearity and fl exibility of rod segment 1 can ac - commodate the twist in the helix groove of F - actin to facilitate such binding . Previous work has shown that proteins known to bind in the helix groove compete with FLNs for F - actin binding ( Nomura et al . , 1987 ) . The participation of two F - actin interaction sites , involving the N - T two - thirds of the FLNa subunit contour length , accounts for the relatively tight binding of subunits to F - actin and the observation that FLNa / F - actin gels withstand much higher applied stresses than α - actinin / F - actin gels ( Gardel et al . , 2006 ) . Mechanism of FLNa dimerization and F - actin branching Perpendicular branching of F - actin by FLNa , initially inferred from its potent gelation activity , has been observed in static electron micrographs of FLNa / F - actin complexes and FLNa / F - actin networks prepared in vitro ( Hartwig et al . , 1980 ; Hartwig and Stossel , 1981 ; Niederman et al . , 1983 ) , and FLNa mole - cules reside at orthogonal F - actin branch points in the cell pe - riphery in situ ( Hartwig and Shevlin , 1986 ) . We have now shown such branching by video microscopy and that the F - actin branches are suffi ciently rigid to withstand deformation in the absence of imposed stress . The F - actin branching activity of FLNa resides at its C - T , consistent with the engagement of the N - T two - thirds of the sub - units with F - actin binding . In contrast to the extended fl exible structure of the FLNa rod 1 segment , the rod 2 segment in full - length or truncated FLNa dimers has a more compact confi gura - tion with three globular units . Moreover , the sub units diverge at fi xed high angles to form L - shaped structures . Although previous Figure 7 . Decoration of F - actin with FLNa molecules . Mixtures of F - actin in the presence or absence of gelsolin were stabilized with phallacidin and incu - bated with recombinant human FLNa and visualized by low angle metal casting . ( A ) Representative ﬁ eld of actin ﬁ laments both cross - linked and coated with FLNa molecules . The arrowheads identify FLNa molecules attached by one subunit . Bar , 100 nm . ( B ) Selected images of ﬁ laments showing the FLNa – actin interaction . Bar , 100 nm . ( C ) Quantiﬁ cation of the unbound portion of FLNa associated with the actin ﬁ lament . The unattached length is approximately equivalent to one subunit ( n = 23 ) . Identical experiments with the FLNa truncate FLAG - ABD - IgFLNa1 - 8 reveal that it attaches only by its ABD ( n = 38 ) . ( D ) Relationship of ﬁ lament length to the amount of the FLNa molecule associated . Actin ﬁ laments of lengths ranging from (cid:6) 400 nm to 14 nm were prepared by assembling actin in the presence of gelsolin and calcium ( G = gelsolin , A = Actin ) . As the length of the actin ﬁ lament becomes limiting , FLNa molecules attach only with one of their ABDs , P < 0 . 0001 ( t test ; n = 11 – 45 ) . JCB • VOLUME 179 • NUMBER 5 • 2007 1020 biochemical , morphological and structural studies localized the fi lamin dimerization site to its C - terminus and have implicated the self - association of Ig repeat 24 as essential for this function ( Gorlin et al . , 1990 ; Pudas et al . , 2005 ) , our systematic analysis of hybrid dimeric constructs revealed for the fi rst time that Ig repeat 24 is suffi cient to confer this branching morphology and that hinge 2 does not contribute to it . A recently reported X - ray analysis of repeat 23 – 24 dimers of fi lamin C ( FLNc ) is consis - tent with our fi ndings . The Ig - 24 repeats diverge with the same L - shape ( (cid:6) 90 degree angle ) observed in our electron micro - graphs , and interactions with repeat 23 did not appear to contrib - ute to this confi guration ( Sjekloca et al . , 2007 ) . Mechanism of F - actin cross - linking Our FLNa / F - actin binding studies revealed that dimeric FLNa has 2 classes of apparent binding affi nities for F - actin ( Table I ) . One class has a high affi nity , with a K app in the nM range , and a limited stoichiometry ( one FLNa subunit per (cid:6) 50 monomers in F - actin ) ; the other has a lower affi nity , with a μ M K app , and (cid:6) 10 - times more FLNa binding sites on F - actin . The simplest explanation for this differential binding behavior is that the tightness of association depends on whether one or both FLNa dimer subunits engage F - actin . It stipulates that each of the FLNa subunits can only bind to different fi laments , and that the second actin fi lament be positioned in the correct orientation to the fi rst to permit binding . Hence , when only one FLNa subunit binds F - actin , its cumulative binding affi nity is μ M ( 0 . 2 μ M ) , and the free subunit extends perpendicularly as observed in Fig . 7 , B and C . If a second actin fi lament is available in the correct perpendicular orientation , the unbound subunit engages it , and the apparent affi nity ( avidity ) of the interaction increases markedly , a phenomenon well exemplifi ed by IgG antibody Figure 8 . Visualization of the path made by FLNa molecules at F - actin cross - links in the actin cytoskeletons from A7 cells . ( A ) Location of the binding epitopes of anti - FLNa mouse monoclonal antibodies on the FLNa molecule . Detailed data mapping these sites is provided in D and E . ( B ) Anti - FLNa immuno - gold electron microscopy in the cortex of a cytoskeleton from a representative A7 melanoma cell . Bar , 200 nm . ( C ) Larger anti - FLNa immunogold electron microscopy image of an A7 melanoma cell cytoskeleton at the cortex . The columns are paired : the left column in each pair shows original images while the right shows the images with schematic gold - labeled ﬁ lamin arms superimposed . The red arms each measure 80 nm and have been placed following stereo three - dimensional analysis . Control treatment of M2 cells with this monoclonal cocktail did not result in labeling ( not depicted ) . ( D ) Isotypes and epi - topes of the FLNa mAbs . The epitopes were mapped by ELISA using various domains of recombinant FLNa . ( E ) Coomassie brilliant blue ( CBB ) stain of 7 . 5 % SDS - PAGE of M2 and A7 cell lysates ( left ) and Western blotting of the corresponding samples with the FLNa mAbs . FILAMIN A STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION • NAKAMURA ET AL . 1021 molecules with two antigen binding sites that bind at least 100 times more strongly than monovalent Fab subfragments to a polyvalent antigen ( Morris , 1995 ) . The higher affi nity of di - meric ABD - IgFLNa1 - 8 + 24 compared with monomeric ABD - IgFLNa1 - 8 for F - actin also supports the model that high - avidity binding of FLNa occurs only when both FLNa subunits engage F - actin ( Fig . S5 B ) . Previous reports of binding affi nities be - tween FLNa and F - actin documenting a K app in the μ M range ( Goldmann and Isenberg , 1993 ) used high FLNa to F - actin ratios , which dominantly report the low - affi nity and not the high affi nity interactions . Estimates of relative actin and FLNa concentrations in cells , assuming average F - actin lengths of 1 μ m ( Hartwig and Shevlin , 1986 ; Podolski and Steck , 1990 ) , are in the stoichiomet - ric range of the high - avidity binding interaction we measured in vitro . In addition , morphometric analysis of orthogonal F - actin cellular networks reveals an average inter - branch spacing of 100 nanometers , approximately the contour length of individual FLNa subunits ( Hartwig and Shevlin , 1986 ) . Therefore , FLNa dimers may act as templates for F - actin networks in the cell . Cross - link fl exibility and unfolding is an explanation of - fered to account for prestress - mediated elasticity increases of FLNa / F - actin networks ( Gardel et al . , 2006 ; DiDonna and Levine , 2007 ) . The lack of binding of FLNa subunit rod 2 to F - actin renders nearly a third of the FLNa subunit contour length available for unfolding , and the observable fl exibility of rod 2 in electron micrographs is consistent with the capacity to unfold . Moreover , we showed that hinge 1 , a requirement for the elas - ticity associated with prestress of FLNa / F - actin gels ( Gardel et al . , 2006 ) , truly is a hinge , a site of greater than average fl exi - bility within the FLNa subunit . Large but not small externally imposed strains increase FLNa / F - actin network elasticity , implying that unfolding re - quires high mechanical energy input . This idea fi ts the invariant perpendicular branching we observed for unstressed FLNa / F - actin complexes by video microscopy . Differential arrangement of IgFLNa domains in rod segment 2 The dimensions of the individual Ig domains that have been solved for FLN family proteins are 4 . 0 – 4 . 8 nm × 2 . 0 – 2 . 6 nm × 1 . 5 – 1 . 8 nm ( Gorlin et al . , 1990 ; Fucini et al . , 1997 ; Kiema et al . , 2006 ; Nakamura et al . , 2006 ) . Structural studies of three tandem repeats from dictyostelium FLN ( IgddFLN4 - 6 ) showed neigh - boring Ig domains to array in a zigzag confi guration ( Popowicz et al . , 2004 ) with an average spacing of (cid:6) 3 . 7 nm per repeat . This spacing along the long axis of the rod is in good agreement with our measurements of rod segment 1 ( IgFLNa1 - 8 : 28 . 5 nm / 8 (cid:6) 3 . 6 nm per IgFLNa , IgFLNa8 - 15 : 28 . 8 nm / 8 (cid:6) 3 . 6 nm per IgFLNa ) , suggesting that IgFLNa repeats in rod 1 of FLNa arrange in an overlapping confi guration . The repeat spacing in rod 2 , however , is 33 % shorter ( 19 . 2 nm / 8 (cid:6) 2 . 4 nm per IgFLNa ) , Figure 9 . F - actin - binding to FLNa does not affect the FLNa - FilGAP interaction . ( A ) Binding of full - length FilGAP to FLNa . Increasing amounts of FilGAP ( 2 . 5 – 500 nM ) were incubated with 20 nM FLAG - FLNa . The complex was pulled down with anti - FLAG M2 agarose beads . After washing the beads , bound proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE and the amount of bound FilGAP was determined densitometrically from immunoblotting using rabbit polyclonal anti - FilGAP antibodies . Graph plots the data resulting from a set of representative experiments . Each of these experiments was repeated three times . Inlet shows puriﬁ ed FLAG - FLNa and FilGAP stained with Coomassie blue after 8 – 16 % gradient SDS - PAGE . ( B ) Effect of F - actin on the FLNa - FilGAP binding was assessed by pull - down assays followed by immuno - blotting using anti - FilGAP antibodies . Gelsolin shortened ( (cid:6) 120 nm ) F - actin was added at 1 : 0 . 5 , 1 : 5 , or 1 : 10 ( FLNa : F - actin , mol / mol ) ratio ( N = 3 ) . ( C ) The model showing the coherent interaction of FLNa with actin ﬁ laments . The Ig9 - 15 rod 1 segments of FLNa ( red ) facilitate F - actin - binding and FLNa favors junctions of actin ﬁ laments because of its high avidity . The rod 2 seg - ment ( blue ) accommodates “breathing space” for partner interactions ( FilGAP , green , binds IgFLNa repeat 23 ) . JCB • VOLUME 179 • NUMBER 5 • 2007 1022 suggesting a more packed confi guration of Ig domains . Recently the atomic structure of FLNa repeats 19 – 21 has been solved demonstrating a nonlinear packing of these Ig repeats ( Lad et al . , 2007 ) . Differential roles of FLNa rod segments for partner interactions Since rod segment 2 does not contribute to F - actin binding or branching , it is potentially free to interact with other partner proteins , explaining why most partner interactions occur at this site in the FLNa subunit . Although the ability to cosediment FLNa with some of its partners such as Gp1b α or β - integrins with F - actin is consistent with this idea ( Sharma et al . , 1995 ; Kovacsovics and Hartwig , 1996 ) , it has not been formally tested . We now have shown that FilGAP maintains interactivity with rod 2 segments even in the presence of F - actin ( Fig . 9 ) . The same principle of bivalency underlying the high avid - ity interaction between FLNa and F - actin applies to the connec - tions between FLNa and its other binding partners , such as the von Willebrand factor receptor and integrins , that make for tight connections between extracellular matrix proteins and the actin cytoskeleton . Two Gp1b α subunits of the von Willebrand factor receptor complex and two β chain cytoplasmic tails of clustered integrins each bind sites on Ig repeat 17 or Ig repeat 21 , respec - tively on two FLNa dimer subunits ( Pfaff et al . , 1998 ; Kiema et al . , 2006 ; Nakamura et al . , 2006 ) . Whereas the widely sepa - rated N - T ABD and rod 1 segments of FLNa subunits can reach out to numerous submembrane actin fi laments , separations be - tween membrane receptor tails are small . Therefore , in addition to avoiding competition with F - actin binding , the placement of binding sites for these ligands in rod segment 2 near the C - termini of the FLNa subunits accommodates to the topography of mem - brane proteins . Many FLNa - binding partners may constitutively interact with the rod 2 domain of FLNa bound to F - actin , but mechani - cal stretching of the rod may , in some circumstances , regulate the availability of binding interfaces , possibly explaining the role of FLNa in mechanotransduction ( Kainulainen et al . , 2002 ) . The nonlinear alignment of repeats IgFLNa19 - 21 provides a mechanism by which paired domains can dissociate to reveal cryptic binding sites ( Lad et al . , 2007 ) . F - actin binding to FLNa , however , may regulate by competition the binding of certain part - ners thought to interact with rod segment 1 , such as furin ( Liu et al . , 1997 ) , cyclin B1 ( Cukier et al . , 2007 ) , the cystic fi brosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( Thelin et al . , 2007 ) , CD28 ( Tavano et al . , 2006 ) , and protein kinase C α ( Tigges et al . , 2003 ) . Materials and methods Recombinant FLNa constructs cDNA for human FLNa was expressed using a Baculovirus Expression System ( Invitrogen ) in Sf9 insect cells and recombinant protein was puriﬁ ed as previously described ( Nakamura et al . , 2002 ) . Full - length , and various N - T and C - T truncates of FLNa ( Fig . 1 ) , were fused at their N - T to the FLAG epi - tope in the pFASTBAC - FLAG vector . pFASTBAC - FLAG - FLNa was prepared by PCR . A cDNA fragment encoding the N - T of FLNa was ampliﬁ ed using pFASTBAC FLNa ( Nakamura et al . , 2002 ) as the template , with the for - ward primer G G A A T T C C A T A T G A G T A G C T C C C A C T C T C containing a NdeI site , and with the reverse primer G T C C A G A T G A G G C C C A G G A T C A G . The ampliﬁ ed fragment was puriﬁ ed , NdeII / SalI - digested , and ligated into NdeI / SalI sites in the pFASTBAC FLAG vector to generate pFASTBAC FLAG - FLNa / SalI , which was conﬁ rmed by sequencing . The 3 ′ - site in FLNa cDNA was prepared by cutting pFASTBAC FLNa with SalI and HindIII and ligating it into the pFASTBAC FLAG - FLNa / SalI opened with SalI and Hind III , thereby generating pFASTBAC FLAG - FLNa . Deletion constructs illustrated in Fig . 1 A were made by PCR with the appropriate primers . The His - tagged constructs were made by PCR using modiﬁ ed pET - 23a ( + ) - HT ( a or b ) plasmids that were generated by inserting NdeI / HindIII fragment of PCR product ampliﬁ ed from pFASTBAC - HT ( a or b ) ( Invitrogen ) with two primers , G G A A T T C C A T A T G T C G T A C T A C C A T C A C and C T A G T A C T T C T C G A C A A G C T T G G , into NdeI / HindIII sites of pET - 23a ( + ) ( Novagen ) . pET - 23a ( + ) - HT - IgFLNa1 - 8 , 8 – 15 , 16 – 23 , or 16 – 24 were generated by PCR . Dimerized constructs of IgFLNa1 - 8 + 24 , 8 – 15 + 24 or 16 – 23 + 24 were made inserting NheI / Not fragment of PCR product ampliﬁ ed from cDNA of hinge 2 and IgFLNa24 ( NheI / NotI ) . These dimer - ized constructs have , therefore , an additional alanine residue just before the hinge 2 domain . cDNA of FLNa ABD ( 1 – 278 aa ) were also added at their N - terminal by PCR . Expression and puriﬁ cation of FLNa fusion proteins FLAG - tagged fusion proteins were expressed in accordance with manufac - turer’s instructions in Sf9 cells ( 5 × 10 8 cells ) and the expressing cells were harvested 72 h post - infection . After washing with PBS , the cells were lysed in 20 ml of 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 100 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 5 mM EGTA , 2 mM PMSF , 10 μ g / ml aprotinin , and 10 μ g / ml leupeptin . The supernatant of this lysis , separated from insoluble material by centrifu - gation at 20 , 000 g for 30 min at 4 ° C , was loaded onto a HitrapQ column ( 5 ml ; GE Healthcare ) . Bound recombinant protein was eluted with a 100 ml linear gradient of 100 – 500 mM NaCl in 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH7 . 4 , 0 . 01 % Triton X - 100 , and 0 . 5 mM EGTA at a ﬂ ow rate of 2 ml / min . Fractions con - taining the recombinant fusion protein were absorbed on a 2 - ml anti - FLAG M2 agarose column ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and sequentially washed with 20 ml of 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , and 0 . 1 % Tri - ton X - 100 then 20 ml of TBS ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 and 150 mM NaCl ) . Bound protein was eluted using TBS containing 100 μ g / ml FLAG peptide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Puriﬁ ed proteins were concentrated using an Amicon Ultra - 15 ( Millipore ) , with a molecular weight retention of > 5 , 000 daltons , and gel - ﬁ ltered on Superose 6 or 12 columns ( GE Healthcare ) to remove the FLAG peptide . Protein concentrations were measured by UV spectro - photometry at 280 nm ( http : / / au . expasy . org / tools / protparam . html ) . Recombinant protein was stored at − 80 ° C and thawed and pre - cleared by centrifugation before use . The typical yield of each FLAG - tagged pro - tein was (cid:6) 5 mg . The purity of recombinant protein was assessed by Coomassie blue - staining of SDS - polyacrylamide gels and by immunoblot analysis with the anti - FLNa and anti - FLAG clone M2 monoclonal anti - bodies ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . His - tagged fusion proteins were expressed in BL21 Star ( DE3 ) Escherichia coli ( Invitrogen ) at 37 ° C . The fusion proteins were extracted from the E . coli by sonicating in lysis solution ( 20 mM sodium phosphate , pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl , 20 mM imidazole , 1 mM β - mercaptoethanol , 2 mM PMSF , 10 μ g / ml aprotinin , and 10 μ g / ml leupeptin ) at 4 ° C . The ex - tracts were centrifuged at 20 , 000 g for 30 min at 4 ° C and loaded onto a Ni - NTA column ( 1 ml ; QIAGEN ) . The column was washed with wash - ing solution I ( 20 mM sodium phosphate , pH 8 . 0 , 20 mM imidazole , 1 mM β - mercaptoethanol , 300 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) followed by washing solution II ( 20 mM sodium phosphate , pH 8 . 0 , 20 mM imid - azole , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM β - mercaptoethanol ) and bound recombinant proteins were eluted with 20 mM sodium phosphate , pH 8 . 0 , 200 mM imidazole , 1 mM β - mercaptoethanol . Puriﬁ ed proteins were concentrated using an Amicon Ultra - 15 ( Millipore ) with a molecular weight retention of > 5 , 000 daltons and gel - ﬁ ltered on Superdex 200 pg ( 16 / 600 ; GE healthcare ) column . Prediction of isoelectric points The isoelectric points of FLNa repeats were predicted using Iso - Electric Point Calculator ( http : / / maths . sci . shu . ac . uk / aramakum / cgi - bin / respond . pl ? hpdi = analysis ) . Stokes radius The Stokes’ radii of recombinant proteins were determined by gel ﬁ ltration chromatography on a Superdex 200 pg ( 16 / 600 ) column at a ﬂ ow rate of 1 ml / min in 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM β - mercaptoethanol , using ferritin , aldolase , ovalbumin , and ribo - nuclease A as a standard at 4 ° C . FILAMIN A STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION • NAKAMURA ET AL . 1023 Non - denaturing ( native ) and denaturing gel electrophoresis Non - denaturing and denaturing gel electrophoresis were performed using Novex Tris - glycine gel ( Invitrogen ) in accordance with manufacturer’s in - struction and proteins were stained with SimplyBlue safe stain ( Invitrogen ) . MALDI - TOF mass spectroscopy Molecular weights of recombinant proteins were determined by MALDI - TOF mass spectroscopy in linear mode with an accuracy of 0 . 1 % in Tufts University core facility . Mouse monoclonal antibodies Anti - FLNa mouse mAbs were prepared as previously described . Their reac - tive epitopes were mapped by enzyme - linked immunosorbent assays or immunoblotting . The antibody subtypes were determined using a kit ( Boeh - ringer Mannheim ) . Monoclonal IgG or IgM antibodies were puriﬁ ed from hybridoma supernatants using GammaBind G - Sepharose ( GE Healthcare ) or by KAPTIV - M afﬁ nity chromatography ( Genomics One International ) . Rotary shadowing of FLNa FLNa , FLNa truncates , or FLNa / F - actin mixtures containing 0 . 1 μ M phal - lacidin were mixed in a ﬁ nal glycerol concentration of 50 % and sprayed on the surface of freshly cleaved mica as previously described ( Tyler et al . , 1980 ) . Samples were dried under high vacuum in a CFE - 60 freeze - fracture apparatus ( Cressington , Inc . ) then metal cast with platinum at 5 ° with rotation and carbon at 90 ° without rotation . Metal ﬁ lms were separated from the mica in distilled water , picked up on 200 mesh car - bon grids , and viewed and photographed in a JEOL 1200 - EX trans - mission electron microscope . FLNa molecules were also monitored by stereo - pairing pictures taken from − 10 ° and + 10 ° angles upon metal cast with tantalum at 5 ° while rotating and carbon at 90 ° without rota - tion . This revealed that the molecule attaches ﬂ at to mica upon glycerol spraying . Therefore , angular measurements could be performed as well as length measurements . Measurements of FLNa and truncates length and C - T angles TEM pictures were analyzed using Scion Image 1 . 62a software . Length measurements of molecules were made by tracing along their contour from N - T to C - T . C - T angle measurements were done in Scion Image by using the angle tool . Since FLNa is a very ﬂ exible molecule , measurements were performed at the C - T ( extending only (cid:6) 10 – 15 nm along each rod ) . Deter - mination of the position of the dimerization site was done by tracing from the N - T along the molecule . For full - length FLNa , 80 nm from the N - T was measured and determined as the C - T . Shorter molecules were treated the same way but measurements to ﬁ nd the dimerization domain was adjusted to their shorter length . Measurements of FLNa bending points Full - length FLNa molecules containing or lacking hinge 1 were mixed with 50 % glycerol and sprayed onto freshly cleaved mica at a concentra - tion of 50 μ g / ml . Proteins were rotary shadowed using Pt at 5 ° angle and replicas monitored by TEM . Pictures were analyzed using Scion Image 1 . 62a software . Measurements of molecules were made by trac - ing their contour . Before determination of bending points , the entire length of the molecule ( N - T to N - T ) was measured to ensure full - length and dimeric state . Bending points were acquired by tracing the molecule from the N - T and measuring the length from the N - T at which sharp bending occurred . Both strands of dimeric proteins were measured for a total of 55 FLNa molecules . Actin cosedimentation assay Recombinant FLNa or FLNa truncates were mixed with or without 5 μ M G - actin in polymerization buffer ( solution F : 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 0 . 5 mM Na 2 ATP , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 120 mM NaCl , and 0 . 2 mM DTT ) and incu - bated for 1 h at 25 ° C . F - actin was collected by centrifugation at 200 , 000 g ( 70 , 000 rpm ; Beckman TLA - 100 ) for 30 min at 25 ° C . Proteins remaining in the resultant supernatant or in the pellet were solubilized in SDS gel sample buffer and displayed by SDS - PAGE . Polypeptides were visualized by Coomassie - staining and were scanned and quantiﬁ ed using the soft - ware program NIH ImageJ 1 . 37v for Mac . The amount of the FLNa con - structs bound to F - actin was ﬁ t to a single rectangular hyperbola using Prism ( ver . 4 ; GraphPad Software ) for Mac . Two independent site model was used for full - length FLNa ( see text ) and their apparent dissociation constants were independently calculated using Prism software . Klotz plots were generated as previously described ( Wilkinson , 2004 ) . Falling ball viscometry Gel point measurements were determined by falling ball viscometry as de - scribed previously ( Nakamura et al . 2002 ) . Immunogold labeling of cells in the electron microscope A7 and M2 melanoma cells , attached to 5 mm glass coverslips , were washed twice in PHEM buffer ( Schliwa et al . , 1981 ) and incubated for 2 min in PHEM buffer containing 0 . 75 % Triton X - 100 , 1 μ M phalloidin , prote - ase inhibitors , and 0 . 36 % formaldehyde . Without intermediate washing , the permeabilization buffer was removed and the detergent - insoluble resi - due was ﬁ xed for 10 min in PHEM buffer containing 3 . 6 % formaldehyde . After ﬁ xation , the samples were blocked for a minimum of 2 h with PBS ( pH 7 . 4 ) containing 1 % BSA . After blocking , coverslips were incubated with 10 μ l of solution containing a mixture of 6 monoclonal antibodies against FLNa ( 2 μ g / ml of each ) for 2 h at 37 ° C . After the incubation , the coverslips were washed three times with the blocking buffer to remove unbound anti - body and then incubated with secondary anti – mouse 10 - nm gold conjugates for 2 h at 37 ° C . The immunogold - labeled coverslips were washed three times in the PBS / BSA buffer to remove unbound reagents , ﬁ ve times in PBS to remove BSA , and then post - ﬁ xed by immersion in 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS for 10 min . Coverslips were washed three times in distilled , microﬁ l - tered water and stored at 4 ° C until they were processed by rapid - freezing , freeze - drying , and metal - casting with 1 . 2 nm of tantalum - tungsten at 45 ° and 2 . 5 nm of carbon at 90 ° . Stereo - paired micrographs were taken at ± 10 ° of tilt in a JEOL 1200 - EX electron microscope . Actin ﬁ lament junctions in the cytoskeletons from A7 cells were reconstructed in 3D by tracing the ﬁ la - ment paths in stereo - paired micrographs ( Niederman et al . , 1983 ) . Visualization of FLNa / F - actin cross - links Chambers , formed by mounting a glass coverslip onto a 35 - mm - diameter cell culture dish with a 1 - cm hole , were glow discharged in a Cressington 308R coating system , using an output current of < 20 mA for 40 s . The cover - slips were coated with 10 μ g / ml of monoclonal 2C4 anti - gelsolin antibody in PBS for 12 h at 4 ° C . Coverslips were blocked with 3 % BSA in PBS for 2 h at RT after ﬁ ve quick washes in PBS . F - actin , 10 μ M was polymerized in buffer B ( 0 . 1 M KCl , 0 . 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 . 5 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM ATP , 10 mM Tris , 0 . 5 mM mercaptoethanol , pH 7 . 4 ) in the presence of human recombinant plasma gelsolin ( Biogen Inc . ) at a molar ratio of 1 : 1 , 200 gelsolin / actin and stabilized with 0 . 1 μ M Alexa 488 phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . The F - actin - capped by gelsolin solution was diluted to 1 μ M and incubated on the 2C4 antibody - coated coverslips for 2h at RT after washing them with PBS followed by buffer B . Unbound F - actin was removed by washing three times in buffer B containing 0 . 5 % BSA and 0 . 1 μ M Alexa 488 phalloidin ( buffer C ) . Non - speciﬁ c FLNa binding sites were blocked by incubating the coverslips with 1 μ M of ∆ ABDIgFLNa1 - 23 for 15 min at RT . After three washes in buffer C , FLNa at a concentration of 30 nM was added for 10 min to the coverslip . A secondary layer of short ( (cid:6) 1 – 1 . 5 μ m ) F - actin , polymerized in buffer B in the presence of human recombinant plasma gelsolin at a molar ratio of 1 : 500 gelsolin / actin and stabilized with 0 . 1 μ M Alexa488 - conjugated phalloidin , was added for 2 min at RT . Specimens were washed once in buffer C and three times in buffer B . Stable F - actin - FLNa cross - links in 100 μ l buffer B were visualized at 22 ° C by ﬂ uorescence microscopy using a Zeiss Axiovert 200M microscope with a Zeiss 100 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) DIC oil - immersion objective lens and captured with an Orca II ER cooled CCD camera ( Hamamatsu ) equipped with an electronic shutter . Shutter and image acquisition was controlled by Metamorph software version 5 . 0r7 ( Universal Imaging Corporation ) . Movement of F - actin due to Brownian motion was captured at a rate of 0 . 3 – 2 frames per second with a 0 . 5 - s exposure time . To monitor the localization of FLNa in the cross - linked F - actin , red - ﬂ uorescent protein - ( RFP , DsRedmonomer ) or EGFP - tagged FLNa was used in combination with F - actin labeled with Alexa 488 or Alexa 568 phalloidin , respectively . The exposure time was increased to 5 – 10 s to visu - alize single EGFP - or RFP - tagged FLNa molecules at the junctions . Expression and puriﬁ cation of full - length human recombinant FilGAP The cDNA of full - length human FilGAP was cloned into pFASTBAC vector ( Invitrogen ) using EcoRI / HindIII restriction sites . The FilGAP protein was ex - pressed in Sf9 cells as described above and puriﬁ ed by a HitrapQ column followed by Superose 6 column . FLAG - FLNa pull - down assay The full - length FilGAP ( 2 . 5 - 500 nM ) was incubated with 10 μ l of anti - FLAG M2 agarose ( 50 % slurry ) in the presence or absence of 20 nM FLAG - FLNa and in binding / washing buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 mM b - mercaptoethanol , 0 . 1 mM EGTA , JCB • VOLUME 179 • NUMBER 5 • 2007 1024 pH 7 . 4 ; 400 μ l ) containing 1 % BSA for 1 h at 25 ° C . The beads were sedi - mented and washed four times in ice cold binding / washing buffer ( 600 μ l ) . Proteins bound to the beads were solubilized in SDS sample buffer and separated by 9 . 5 % SDS - PAGE followed by immunoblotting . To investigate an effect of F - actin on the FLNa - FilGAP binding , G - actin ( 58 μ M ) was polymerized at 25 ° C in the presence of human recombinant plasma gelsolin ( gift from Biogen Inc . ) at a ratio of 1 : 40 gelsolin / G - actin in buffer B ( 0 . 1 M KCl , 0 . 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 . 5 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM ATP , 10 mM Tris , 0 . 5 mM mercaptoethanol , pH 7 . 4 ) , stabilized with phalloidin ( 1 : 1 , mol / mol ) . F - actin was added to the binding assay described above with the exception that FLAG - FLNa ( 20 nM ) was preincubated with anti - FLAG M2 agarose and unbound FLNa washed away ( 4 washes in ice cold binding / washing buffer , 600 μ l ) before addition of F - actin and FilGAP . F - actin ( 10 – 200 nM ) was added to the binding assay 30 min before addition of FilGAP ( 1 nM ) . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows electron micrographs of the puriﬁ ed recombinant FLNa constructs . Fig . S2 shows characterization of His - FLNa constructs . Fig . S3 shows topological properties of FLNa constructs . Fig . S4 shows binding of FLNa truncates to F - actin . Fig . S5 shows differential roles of FLNa rod seg - ments for F - actin branching . Video 1 shows time - lapse capturing of actin ﬁ laments tethered to the bottom of a culture dish by gelsolin IgG , rotating freely around the axis of attachment . Video 2 shows time - lapse capturing of actin ﬁ laments cross - linked by FLNa . Online supplemental material is avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200707073 / DC1 . None of the authors have any ﬁ nancial interest related to this work . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants HL19429 and HL56252 ( J . H . Hartwig ) , an American Cancer Society Clinical Research Professorship and a gift from the Edwin S Webster Founda - tion to T . P . Stossel . T . M . Osborn was a recipient of the Göteborg University Jubileumsfond’s scholarship . Submitted : 10 July 2007 Accepted : 5 November 2007 References Amann , K . J . , B . A . Renley , and J . M . Ervasti . 1998 . A cluster of basic repeats in the dystrophin rod domain binds F - actin through an electrostatic inter - action . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 28419 – 28423 . Cukier , I . H . , Y . Li , and J . M . Lee . 2007 . Cyclin B1 / Cdk1 binds and phosphory - lates Filamin A and regulates its ability to cross - link actin . FEBS Lett . 581 : 1661 – 1672 . DiDonna , B . A . , and A . J . Levine . 2007 . Unfolding cross - linkers as rheology reg - ulators in F - actin networks . Phys . R ev . E . Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 75 : 041909 . Discher , D . E . , P . Janmey , and Y . L . Wang . 2005 . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science . 310 : 1139 – 1143 . Feng , Y . , and C . A . Walsh . 2004 . The many faces of fi lamin : a versatile molecular scaffold for cell motility and signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 1034 – 1038 . Feng , Y . , M . H . Chen , I . P . Moskowitz , A . M . Mendonza , L . Vidali , F . Nakamura , D . J . Kwiatkowski , and C . A . Walsh . 2006 . Filamin A ( FLNA ) is required for cell - cell contact in vascular development and cardiac morphogenesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 19836 – 19841 . Ferland , R . J . , J . N . Gaitanis , K . Apse , U . Tantravahi , C . A . Walsh , and V . L . Sheen . 2006 . Periventricular nodular heterotopia and Williams syndrome . Am . J . Med . Genet . A . 140 : 1305 – 1311 . Flanagan , L . A . , J . Chou , H . Falet , R . Neujahr , J . H . Hartwig , and T . P . Stossel . 2001 . Filamin A , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and the morphology and func - tion of cortical actin fi laments in human melanoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 511 – 517 . Fucini , P . , C . Renner , C . Herberhold , A . A . Noegel , and T . A . Holak . 1997 . The re - peating segments of the F - actin cross - linking gelation factor ( ABP - 120 ) have an immunoglobulin - like fold . Nat . Struct . Biol . 4 : 223 – 230 . Gardel , M . L . , F . Nakamura , J . H . Hartwig , J . C . Crocker , T . P . Stossel , and D . A . Weitz . 2006 . Prestressed F - actin networks cross - linked by hinged fi lamins replicate mechanical properties of cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 1762 – 1767 . Goldmann , W . H . , and G . Isenberg . 1993 . Analysis of fi lamin and alpha - actinin binding to actin by the stopped fl ow method . FEBS Lett . 336 : 408 – 410 . Gorlin , J . B . , R . Yamin , S . Egan , M . Stewart , T . P . Stossel , D . J . Kwiatkowski , and J . H . Hartwig . 1990 . Human endothelial actin - binding protein ( ABP - 280 , nonmuscle fi lamin ) : a molecular leaf spring . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1089 – 1105 . Hart , A . W . , J . E . Morgan , J . Schneider , K . West , L . McKie , S . Bhattacharya , I . J . Jackson , and S . H . Cross . 2006 . Cardiac malformations and midline skel - etal defects in mice lacking fi lamin A . Hum . Mol . Genet . 15 : 2457 – 2467 . Hartwig , J . H . 1995 . Actin - binding proteins . 1 : Spectrin super family . Protein Profi le . 2 : 703 – 800 . Hartwig , J . H . , and P . Shevlin . 1986 . The architecture of actin fi laments and the ultrastructural location of actin - binding protein in the periphery of lung macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 1007 – 1020 . Hartwig , J . H . , and T . P . Stossel . 1981 . Structure of macrophage actin - binding protein molecules in solution and interacting with actin fi laments . J . Mol . Biol . 145 : 563 – 581 . Hartwig , J . H . , J . Tyler , and T . P . Stossel . 1980 . Actin - binding protein promotes the bipolar and perpendicular branching of actin fi laments . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 841 – 848 . Kainulainen , T . , A . Pender , M . D’Addario , Y . Feng , P . Lekic , and C . A . McCulloch . 2002 . Cell death and mechanoprotection by fi lamin a in con - nective tissues after challenge by applied tensile forces . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 21998 – 22009 . Kiema , T . , Y . Lad , P . Jiang , C . L . Oxley , M . Baldassarre , K . L . Wegener , I . D . Campbell , J . Ylanne , and D . A . Calderwood . 2006 . The molecular basis of fi lamin binding to integrins and competition with talin . Mol . Cell . 21 : 337 – 347 . Klotz , I . M . , and D . L . Hunston . 1971 . Properties of graphical representations of multiple classes of binding sites . Biochemistry . 10 : 3065 – 3069 . Kovacsovics , T . J . , and J . H . Hartwig . 1996 . Thrombin - induced GPIb - IX central - ization on the platelet surface requires actin assembly and myosin II acti - vation . Blood . 87 : 618 – 629 . Kyndt , F . , J . P . Gueffet , V . Probst , P . Jaafar , A . Legendre , F . Le Bouffant , C . Toquet , E . Roy , L . McGregor , S . A . Lynch , et al . 2007 . Mutations in the gene encoding fi lamin A as a cause for familial cardiac valvular dystrophy . Circulation . 115 : 40 – 49 . Lad , Y . , T . Kiema , P . Jiang , O . T . Pentikainen , C . H . Coles , I . D . Campbell , D . A . Calderwood , and J . Ylanne . 2007 . Structure of three tandem fi lamin domains reveals auto - inhibition of ligand binding . EMBO J . 26 : 3993 – 4004 . Liu , G . , L . Thomas , R . A . Warren , C . A . Enns , C . C . Cunningham , J . H . Hartwig , and G . Thomas . 1997 . Cytoskeletal protein ABP - 280 directs the intra - cellular traffi cking of furin and modulates proprotein processing in the endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 1719 – 1733 . Matsudaira , P . 1994 . Actin crosslinking proteins at the leading edge . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 : 165 – 174 . Morris , R . J . 1995 . Antigen - antibody interactions : how affi nity and kinetics af - fect assay design and selection procedures . In Monoclonal Antibodies . M . A . Ritter and H . M . Ladyman , editors . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 34 – 57 . Nakamura , F . , E . Osborn , P . A . Janmey , and T . P . Stossel . 2002 . Comparison of fi lamin A - induced cross - linking and Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated branching on the mechanics of actin fi laments . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 9148 – 9154 . Nakamura , F . , J . H . Hartwig , T . P . Stossel , and P . T . Szymanski . 2005 . Ca2 + and calmodulin regulate the binding of fi lamin A to actin fi laments . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 32426 – 32433 . Nakamura , F . , R . Pudas , O . Heikkinen , P . Permi , I . Kilpelainen , A . D . Munday , J . H . Hartwig , T . P . Stossel , and J . Ylanne . 2006 . The structure of the GPIb - fi lamin A complex . Blood . 107 : 1925 – 1932 . Niederman , R . , P . C . Amrein , and J . Hartwig . 1983 . Three - dimensional structure of actin fi laments and of an actin gel made with actin - binding protein . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 1400 – 1413 . Nomura , M . , K . Yoshikawa , T . Tanaka , K . Sobue , and K . Maruyama . 1987 . The role of tropomyosin in the interactions of F - actin with caldesmon and actin - binding protein ( or fi lamin ) . Eur . J . Biochem . 163 : 467 – 471 . Ohta , Y . , J . H . Hartwig , and T . P . Stossel . 2006 . FilGAP , a Rho - and ROCK - regulated GAP for Rac binds fi lamin A to control actin remodelling . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 803 – 814 . Pfaff , M . , S . Liu , D . J . Erle , and M . H . Ginsberg . 1998 . Integrin beta cytoplas - mic domains differentially bind to cytoskeletal proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 6104 – 6109 . Podolski , J . L . , and T . L . Steck . 1990 . Length distribution of F - actin in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 1312 – 1318 . Popowicz , G . M . , R . Muller , A . A . Noegel , M . Schleicher , R . Huber , and T . A . Holak . 2004 . Molecular structure of the rod domain of Dictyostelium fi lamin . J . Mol . Biol . 342 : 1637 – 1646 . Popowicz , G . M . , M . Schleicher , A . A . Noegel , and T . A . Holak . 2006 . Filamins : promiscuous organizers of the cytoskeleton . Trends Biochem . Sci . 31 : 411 – 419 . Pudas , R . , T . R . Kiema , P . J . Butler , M . Stewart , and J . Ylanne . 2005 . Structural basis for vertebrate fi lamin dimerization . Structure . 13 : 111 – 119 . FILAMIN A STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION • NAKAMURA ET AL . 1025 Robertson , S . P . 2005 . Filamin A : phenotypic diversity . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 15 : 301 – 307 . Robertson , S . P . , S . R . Twigg , A . J . Sutherland - Smith , V . Biancalana , R . J . Gorlin , D . Horn , S . J . Kenwrick , C . A . Kim , E . Morava , R . Newbury - Ecob , et al . 2003 . Localized mutations in the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein fi lamin A cause diverse malformations in humans . Nat . Genet . 33 : 487 – 491 . Schliwa , M . , J . van Blerkom , and K . R . Porter . 1981 . Stabilization and the cyto - plasmic ground substance in detergent - opened cells and a structural and biochemical analysis of its composition . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 78 : 4329 – 4333 . Sharma , C . P . , R . M . Ezzell , and M . A . Arnaout . 1995 . Direct interaction of fi la - min ( ABP - 280 ) with the beta 2 - integrin subunit CD18 . J . Immunol . 154 : 3461 – 3470 . Sjekloca , L . , R . Pudas , B . Sjoblom , P . Konarev , O . Carugo , V . Rybin , T . R . Kiema , D . Svergun , J . Ylanne , and K . D . Carugo . 2007 . Crystal structure of hu - man fi lamin C domain 23 and small angle scattering model for fi lamin C 23 - 24 dimer . J . Mol . Biol . 368 : 1011 – 1023 . Stossel , T . P . , J . Condeelis , L . Cooley , J . H . Hartwig , A . Noegel , M . Schleicher , and S . S . Shapiro . 2001 . Filamins as integrators of cell mechanics and signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 138 – 145 . Tavano , R . , R . L . Contento , S . J . Baranda , M . Soligo , L . Tuosto , S . Manes , and A . Viola . 2006 . CD28 interaction with fi lamin - A controls lipid raft accumu - lation at the T - cell immunological synapse . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 1270 – 1276 . Thelin , W . R . , Y . Chen , M . Gentzsch , S . M . Kreda , J . L . Sallee , C . O . Scarlett , C . H . Borchers , K . Jacobson , M . J . Stutts , and S . L . Milgram . 2007 . Direct inter - action with fi lamins modulates the stability and plasma membrane ex - pression of CFTR . J . Clin . Invest . 117 : 364 – 374 . Tigges , U . , B . Koch , J . Wissing , B . M . Jockusch , and W . H . Ziegler . 2003 . The F - actin cross - linking and focal adhesion protein fi lamin A is a li - gand and in vivo substrate for protein kinase C alpha . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 23561 – 23569 . Tyler , J . M . , J . M . Anderson , and D . Branton . 1980 . Structural comparison of sev - eral actin - binding macromolecules . J . Cell . Biol . 85 : 489 – 495 . Wilkinson , K . D . 2004 . Quantitative analysis of protein - protein interactions . Methods Mol . Biol . 261 : 15 – 32 . Yin , H . L . , J . H . Hartwig , K . Maruyama , and T . P . Stossel . 1981 . Ca2 + control of ac - tin fi lament length . Effects of macrophage gelsolin on actin polymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 256 : 9693 – 9697 .