JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 195 No . 3 525 – 536 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201105152 JCB 525 Correspondence to Matteo Bonazzi : matteo . bonazzi @ cpbs . cnrs . fr ; Frances M . Brodsky : Frances . Brodsky @ ucsf . edu ; or Pascale Cossart : pcossart @ pasteur . fr Matteo Bonazzi’s present address is UMR 5236 , Centre d’études d’agents Pathogènes et Biotechnologies pour la Santé ( CPBS ) , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Université Montpellier 1 , Université Montpellier 2 , 34293 Montpellier , France . Abbreviations used in this paper : CHC , clathrin heavy chain ; CLC , clathrin light chain ; EPEC , enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ; MALDI , matrix - assisted laser desorption / ionization ; TOF , time of flight ; wt , wild type . Introduction Clathrin coats membranes of vesicles formed during receptor - mediated endocytosis and organelle biogenesis from the trans - Golgi network ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ) . Clathrin can also form extended lattices with no curvature at cell – substrate interfaces ( plaques ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) and patches on endosomes ( Popoff et al . , 2009 ; Raiborg and Stenmark , 2009 ) . The clath - rin coat itself is formed by self - assembly of triskelion - shaped molecules composed of three clathrin heavy chains ( CHCs ) and associated clathrin light chain ( CLC ) subunits ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ) . Clathrin coats form at membranes by binding a variety of adaptor molecules that select the cargo molecules sequestered into the coat for sorting . During internalization of receptors that stimulate Src family kinases , including the receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) EGF receptor ( EGFR ) and T and B lymphocyte receptors , CHC is modified by tyrosine phosphorylation ( Wilde et al . , 1999 ; Stoddart et al . , 2002 ; Crotzer et al . , 2004 ) . The function or molecular details of this modification have not been fully defined , but Src family kinase phosphorylation of CHC is specifically required for uptake of these signaling receptors ( Crotzer et al . , 2004 ) . Clathrin is also required for the inter - nalization of large objects such as bacteria ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ; Veiga et al . , 2007 ; Eto et al . , 2008 ; Chan et al . , 2009 ) , fungi hyphae ( Moreno - Ruiz et al . , 2009 ) , and large viruses ( Cureton et al . , 2009 ) in a process that involves cooperation with actin . In the case of Listeria monocytogenes ( Sousa et al . , 2007 ; Bonazzi et al . , 2008 ) , pathogenic adhesion and infection involve signaling through Src family tyrosine kinases triggered B acterial pathogens recruit clathrin upon interaction with host surface receptors during infection . Here , using three different infection models , we observed that host – pathogen interactions induce tyrosine phosphory - lation of clathrin heavy chain . This modification was critical for recruitment of actin at bacteria – host adhesion sites dur - ing bacterial internalization or pedestal formation . At the bacterial interface , clathrin assembled to form coated pits of conventional size . Because such structures cannot inter - nalize large particles such as bacteria , we propose that during infection , clathrin - coated pits serve as platforms to initiate actin rearrangements at bacteria – host adhesion sites . We then showed that the clathrin – actin interdepen - dency is initiated by Dab2 and depends on the presence of clathrin light chain and its actin - binding partner Hip1R , and that the fully assembled machinery can recruit Myosin VI . Together , our study highlights a physiological role for clathrin heavy chain phosphorylation and reinforces the increasingly recognized function of clathrin in actin cyto - skeletal organization in mammalian cells . Clathrin phosphorylation is required for actin recruitment at sites of bacterial adhesion and internalization Matteo Bonazzi , 1 , 2 , 3 Lavanya Vasudevan , 4 , 5 , 6 Adeline Mallet , 7 Martin Sachse , 7 Anna Sartori , 7 Marie - Christine Prevost , 7 Allison Roberts , 4 , 5 , 6 Sabrina B . Taner , 4 , 5 , 6 Jeremy D . Wilbur , 4 , 5 , 6 Frances M . Brodsky , 4 , 5 , 6 and Pascale Cossart 1 , 2 , 3 1 Institut Pasteur , Unité des Interactions Bactéries - Cellules , Paris F - 75015 , France 2 Inserm , U604 , Paris , F - 75015 France 3 Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique , USC2020 , Paris F - 75015 , France 4 Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences , 5 Department of Microbiology and Immunology , and 6 Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , The G . W . Hooper Foundation , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94143 - 0552 7 Institut Pasteur , Plateforme de Microscopie Ultrastructurale , Imagopole , Paris F - 75015 , France © 2011 Bonazzi et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 195 • NUMBER 3 • 2011 526 Figure 1 . Infection induces CHC phosphorylation . ( a ) Quantification of the intensity of chemiluminescence of three independent Western blots of Jeg3 cells treated as indicated or HeLa cells infected with EPEC for the indicated times . After each treatment , CHC was immunoprecipitated and tyrosine phos - phorylation was assayed with the anti - phosphotyrosine antibody PY20 . Error bars indicate mean ± SD . ( b ) MALDI - TOF mass spectrometry spectrum of in vitro phosphorylated CHC fragment ( 1074 – 1675 ) . Src kinase was incubated with recombinant CHC followed by digestion with trypsin . Tyr 1487 is 527 Clathrin in actin recruitment during bacterial infection • Bonazzi et al . found within a peptide with a predicted monoisotopic mass of 1942 . 9 D and within the phosphopeptide with a predicted mass of 2022 . 9 D . Tyr 1477 is found within a peptide with a predicted monoisotopic mass of 2355 . 1 D and within the phosphopeptide with a predicted mass of 2435 . 1 D . Arrows indicate the native and phosphorylated peptides . ( c ) Purified recombinant his - tagged - hub fragment of CHC ( residues 1074 – 1675 ) was treated with or without recombinantly purified Src kinase for 3 h at room temperature . Samples were immunoblotted with antibody against the histidine tag on the hub ( His , as loading control ) , 4G10 ( for phospho - tyrosine ) , and anti - phospho - CHC antibody ( pCHC ) purified by affinity column and by membrane - based deple - tion . ( d ) Anti - pCHC ( affinity purified by column ) was tested for binding to the 1477 & 1487 - phospho - peptide in the presence of the nonphospho - peptide , 1477 - phospho - peptide , 1487 - phospho - peptide , or 1477 & 1487 - phospho - peptide at the indicated dilutions by ELISA . ( e ) Jeg3 cells were infected with L . innocua ( InlA ) for 30 min and HeLa cells were infected with L . innocua ( InlB ) for 5 min or with EPEC for 6 h . After infections , cells were fixed and labeled for total CHC ( CHC , red ) and phospho - CHC ( pCHC , green ) , and F - actin was labeled with fluorescent phalloidin ( actin , blue ) . Arrows indicate colocaliza - tion between bacteria , pCHC , and actin . Bars 10 µm . by bacterial binding to host - cell receptors . Similarly to L . mono­ cytogenes , enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) require clathrin during infection , but unlike L . monocytogenes , EPEC are not internalized by host cells and form actin - based pedestals at the sites of interaction with the infected cell ( Wong et al . , 2011 ) . In this study , we address whether Src family kinase - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC occurs during bacteria – cell interaction and whether the infectious process might reveal a function for CHC phosphorylation in the context of clathrin – actin interactions . Our understanding of clathrin – cytoskeleton interac - tions during clathrin - mediated processes is evolving . The participation of clathrin in uptake of pathogens challenges the concept of a size limit for clathrin cargo and implicates clathrin – actin interactions in pathogen internalization path - ways ( Pizarro - Cerdá et al . , 2010 ) . During infection , clathrin and actin accumulate at sites of bacteria – host interactions , and clathrin recruitment precedes actin rearrangements that are critical both for bacterial internalization and for the for - mation of bacteria - induced actin pedestals ( Veiga et al . , 2007 ) . These observations coincide with an increasingly recognized connection between clathrin and the actin cytoskeleton in mammalian cells ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ; Hyman et al . , 2006 ) that goes beyond colocalization ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . The two mammalian CLCs ( LCa and LCb ) both interact with actin - binding proteins Hip1 and Hip1R via a shared 22 – amino acid sequence in their N terminus ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . Bind - ing of CLCs to Hip proteins regulates their interaction with actin and affects actin dynamics ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ; Wilbur et al . , 2008 ) . The importance of a functional link between clathrin and actin , via the CLC – Hip interaction , has been well - established in yeast , where the Hip homologue Sla2p is essential for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Newpher and Lemmon , 2006 ) ; its role in various forms of mammalian cell endocytosis is still being defined ( Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . Actin is present at clathrin plaques , which requires CLC – Hip interaction , and is also situated where the neck of a clathrin - coated pit elongates , apparently directing coated vesicles away from the plasma membrane ( Collins et al . , 2011 ) . This latter activity is needed for coated vesicles to form at membranes with high surface tension ( Boulant et al . , 2011 ) . The molecular details of how clathrin and actin coordinate during bacterial interaction with the host cell surface are defined in the investigation reported here . By analysis of clathrin coat formation , the role of clathrin phosphorylation , and the interaction of clathrin with actin during bacteria – host cell attachment and internalization , we establish the sequence of molecular events during early stages of infection . We show that bacteria – host adhesion involves the adaptor Dab2 to form clathrin - coated pits that support actin recruitment via CLC and Hip1R . The motor protein Myosin VI is then recruited to provide a pulling force for bacterial internalization . Moreover , we show that , similar to the endocytosis of signaling receptors , the phosphoryla - tion of CHC is triggered by bacterial infection and that this modification is critical for effective function of the clathrin platform as an actin organizer during bacterial internaliza - tion and pedestal formation . Results CHC phosphorylation is required for bacterial internalization or pedestal formation Signaling through tyrosine kinases promotes the localization of clathrin at the plasma membrane , dependent on tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC ( Wilde et al . , 1999 ; Crotzer et al . , 2004 ) . This phosphorylation is mediated by Src family kinases ( Src , Lyn , or Lck ; Wilde et al . , 1999 ; Stoddart et al . , 2002 ; Crotzer et al . , 2004 ) . The same kinases are also activated dur - ing the clathrin - dependent internalization of L . monocyto­ genes by the InlA pathway ( Sousa et al . , 2007 ; Veiga et al . , 2007 ; Bonazzi et al . , 2008 ) . We therefore tested the possibility that bacteria , which use clathrin to invade host cells ( Veiga et al . , 2007 ) , trigger the phosphorylation of CHC . Epithelial cells were incubated for 1 h with either L . monocytogenes , or with the noninvasive strain Listeria innocua expressing either one of the two Listeria invasion proteins InlA or InlB ( L . innocua ( InlA ) and L . innocua ( InlB ) ) to specifically fol - low the two internalization pathways used by Listeria during infection ( Jonquières et al . , 1999 ; Sousa et al . , 2007 ; Veiga et al . , 2007 ; Bonazzi et al . , 2008 ) . Alternatively , HeLa cells were infected with EPEC for 3 , 6 , and 8 h . In addition , to directly test the possibility that bacterial signaling is involved in CHC phosphorylation , cells were also incubated with either purified InlA or InlB for 1 h . CHC was then immunoprecipi - tated and tyrosine phosphorylation was analyzed by Western blotting . In all cases , we could detect a significant degree of CHC phosphorylation ( Fig . 1 a and Fig . S1 , a and b ) , with the strongest phosphorylation of CHC upon exposure to InlA and JCB • VOLUME 195 • NUMBER 3 • 2011 528 We next tested the role of the CHC phosphorylation in Listeria internalization and in the formation of EPEC - induced actin pedestal . To do so , endogenous CHC was depleted by siRNA in Jeg3 and HeLa cells , and CHC expression was res - cued by transfecting with either wild - type ( wt ) CHC - GFP or a mutant CHC - GFP with tyrosines 1477 and 1487 changed to phenylalanines ( Y1477 , 1487F ) . Both constructs carried point mutations to avoid siRNA sensitivity ( Fig . 2 a ) . Jeg3 and HeLa cells were then infected with L . monocytogenes or with EPEC , respectively . Bacterial internalization was evaluated by differential immuno - labeling , and actin - based pedestals were quantified by labeling F - actin with fluorescent phal - loidin . As previously reported ( Veiga et al . , 2007 ) , clathrin depletion inhibited both Listeria internalization and EPEC pedestal formation ( Fig . 2 , b and c ) . Strikingly , the expression of wt CHC - GFP restored bacterial entry and pedestal forma - tion to  70 % and 60 % of control cells , respectively , whereas the expression of the Y1477 , 1487F mutant CHC - GFP failed to do so ( Fig . 2 , b and c ) , establishing that CHC phosphoryla - tion is critical for efficient L . monocytogenes internalization and EPEC pedestal formation . Ultrastructural analysis of clathrin recruitment at bacterial adhesion and entry sites Since our first study of a role for clathrin in bacterial inter - nalization , a key issue has been to explain how structures that do not normally exceed a diameter > 200 nm can mediate the internalization of much larger particles such as bacteria and fungus hyphae ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ; Veiga et al . , 2007 ; Moreno - Ruiz et al . , 2009 ) . The optical resolution of conven - tional fluorescence microscopy is not sufficient to determine whether clathrin accumulation during infection corresponds to the formation of a homogeneous coat , of multiple coated pits , or represents the recruitment of clathrin - coated vesicles from other intracellular compartments . Here we investigated the ultrastructural organization of clathrin at the Listeria entry sites and at enteropathogenic E . coli ( EPEC ) - induced actin pedestals by electron microscopy . To study Listeria uptake , cells were infected with either L . innocua ( InlA ) or L . innocua ( InlB ) for 15 and 30 min . From previous studies , these correspond to the time points when clathrin was more frequently observed at Listeria after 8 h of EPEC infection ( Fig . 1 a ) . Because Src is activated during the InlA - mediated internalization of L . monocytogenes , we tested the possibility that , at least in this pathway , Src me - diates CHC phosphorylation . Indeed , treatment of Jeg3 cells with the Src family kinase inhibitor PP1 , before InlA binding , totally prevented CHC phosphorylation ( Fig . S1 c ) . We previously identified CHC tyrosine 1477 as a target site for Src family kinases by peptide mapping and mutagenesis ( Wilde et al . , 1999 ) . Further mass spectrometry analysis of the purified recombinant hub fragment of clathrin ( residues 1 , 074 – 1 , 675 ) incubated with purified Src kinase revealed that tyrosine 1487 is also a target phosphorylation site ( Fig . 1 b ) . To be able to specifically identify phosphorylated clathrin in vivo , we raised a polyclonal antibody against a phospho - peptide comprising these two target sites ( anti - pCHC ) . This antibody was purified by depletion with nonphosphorylated peptide , followed by affinity purification with the 1477 & 1487 - phospho - peptide . Western blotting showed a preferential affinity of this antibody for Src - phosphorylated clathrin hub fragment compared with unphosphorylated hub ( Fig . 1 c ) . By inhibition of antibody binding to the 1477 & 1487 - phospho - peptide with nonphospho - peptide or peptides phosphorylated only at 1477 or 1487 or the 1477 & 1487 - phospho - peptide , the affinity - purified antibody was shown to primarily recognize an epitope dependent on phosphorylation of both target sites ( Fig . 1 d ) . The anti - pCHC had minimal reactivity with pep - tides phosphorylated at each single site or the nonphospho - peptide . Analysis of cells stimulated with EGF showed that the anti - pCHC recognized the plasma membrane clathrin that accumulates upon EGF signaling and did not detect the intra - cellular clathrin recognized by the X22 monoclonal antibody ( Fig . S2 ; Brodsky , 1985 ) . The anti - pCHC antibody was then used to label cells dur - ing infection . In addition , F - actin was labeled by fluorescent phalloidin . Jeg3 cells were infected with L . innocua ( InlA ) for 30 min and HeLa cells were infected with L . innocua ( InlB ) or with EPEC for 5 min or 6 h , respectively . In all three cases , phospho - CHC was highly enriched around all bacteria that recruited F - actin , and the intracellular staining of phospho - CHC was neg - ligible ( Fig . 1 d ) . In contrast , as previously reported ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ) , the X22 antibody against total CHC labeled cyto - solic structures as well as bacteria cell adhesion sites ( Fig . 1 d ) . Figure 2 . CHC phosphorylation is required for bacterial infection and pedestal formation . ( a ) Representative Western blot of Jeg3 cells transfected with a control siRNA or with a CHC - targeted siRNA alone or in combination with the overexpression of wt CHC - GFP or the Y1477 , 1487F mutant of CHC - GFP ( non - pCHC - GFP ) . Comparable results were obtained in HeLa cells . Note that the GFP tag on the rescue constructs interferes with reactivity of the TD . 1 antibody against the CHC N - terminal domain ( Näthke et al . , 1992 ) used for immunoblotting . ( b and c ) Jeg3 cells and HeLa cells were then infected with L . monocytogenes and HeLa cells with EPEC . Bacterial internalization and EPEC pedestal formation were quantified by immunofluores - cence . In all cases , values are means ± SD of three independent experiments ( error bars ) . 529 Clathrin in actin recruitment during bacterial infection • Bonazzi et al . Jeg3 cells with L . innocua ( InlA ) , and used a candidate - based approach to investigate the molecular machinery that connects actin dynamics with clathrin coats . Cells were infected with L . innocua ( InlA ) or L . innocua ( InlB ) for 15 , 30 , and 45 min , and EPEC infections were performed for 4 , 5 , and 6 h . These time points correspond to the maximal frequency of clathrin recruitment during infection . As the identification of the clathrin adaptor involved in L . monocytogenes internalization remains elusive ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ; Pizarro - Cerdá et al . , 2007 ) , entry sites . By electron microscopy , we never observed homo - geneous clathrin coats around invading bacteria , but rather only isolated clathrin - coated pits , with a size similar to that previ - ously reported in literature ( Fig . 3 , a – c ) . To test the possibility that clathrin might form atypical coats at bacteria , clathrin local - ization was also established by immuno - labeling of thawed cryosections from HeLa cells infected with L . monocytogenes . Confirming our morphological analysis , clathrin labeling was never observed on flat membrane surfaces surrounding the bac - teria , but always in association with membranous invaginations ( Fig . 3 d ) . These results confirm previous early observations from our laboratory showing the presence of isolated clathrin - coated pits that formed at the Listeria entry site ( Mengaud et al . , 1996 ) . The observation of clathrin at membrane invaginations suggests that bacteria trigger the formation of clathrin - coated pits rather than the recruitment of clathrin - coated vesicles . Furthermore , complete clathrin - coated vesicles were rarely ob - served in the vicinity of the bacterial entry sites , which suggests the presence of stable clathrin - coated pits , rather than active zones of endocytosis . As the size of the observed clathrin - coated pits was in - compatible with that of bacteria , we hypothesized that during infection , clathrin may serve a different role rather than that of a vesicle coat protein for endocytosis . Our hypothesis was further strengthened by the study of EPEC infection . We pre - viously found that during EPEC infections , clathrin depletion impairs actin recruitment to bacterial adhesion sites , there - fore blocking the formation of pedestals ( Veiga et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , our electron microscopy analysis showed that clathrin also appeared as coated pits , but not vesicles , at EPEC - induced actin pedestals ( Fig . 3 e ) . As clathrin is required for actin recruitment during bacterial internalization and EPEC - induced pedestal formation , we suggest that , during infection , stable clathrin - coated pits may serve as a platform for cytoskeletal rearrangements . We next tested the possibility that clathrin recruitment by bacteria during infection affects conventional clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Jeg3 cells were preincubated with Cy3 - labeled transferrin for 30 min on ice , and transferrin was chased for 1 h at 37°C in noninfected as well as in L . innocua ( InlA ) - , L . innocua ( InlB ) - , and EPEC - infected cells . Cells were then acid washed before fixation to remove cell surface – bound transfer - rin , and the efficiency of transferrin internalization was assessed by fluorescence microscopy . Infected cells were able to inter - nalize transferrin as efficiently as noninfected cells ( Fig . S3 ) , which indicates that bacterial entry has no general effect on the overall active cycle of clathrin coat assembly and disassembly . Dab2 , Myosin VI , and Hip1R orchestrate actin association with clathrin coats We previously found that L . monocytogenes infections by the InlA – E - cadherin or the InlB – Met internalization pathways as well as EPEC infections require clathrin coat formation up - stream of the rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton that re - sult from host – pathogen interactions ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ; Veiga et al . , 2007 ) . To investigate these observations further , we infected HeLa cells with L . innocua ( InlB ) or EPEC and Figure 3 . Ultrastructure of clathrin coats during bacterial infections . ( a – c and e ) Jeg3 cells were incubated with L . innocua ( InlA ) ( a and b ) and HeLa cells with L . innocua ( InlB ) ( c ) or EPEC ( e ) , fixed , and processed for electron microscopy . ( d ) HeLa cells were infected with L . monocytogenes and processed for immuno - labeling on thawed cryosections where clathrin was localized by antibody labeling . Enlarged views of the boxed regions are shown on the right . Bars , 1 µm . JCB • VOLUME 195 • NUMBER 3 • 2011 530 with Dab2 at the Listeria entry sites , but interestingly , we could never observe the accumulation of Myosin VI at EPEC - induced actin - based pedestals ( Fig . 4 b ) . We then investigated the re - cruitment of Hip1R , a key player in actin dynamics at clathrin coats ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Carreno et al . , 2004 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ; Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Newpher and Lemmon , 2006 ; Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ; Wilbur et al . , 2008 ) , as well as a component of clathrin - coated plaques ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . Hip1R colocalized with actin at sites of L . innocua ( InlA ) and L . innocua ( InlB ) infection by both the InlA – E - cadherin and the InlB – Met entry pathways , and at the interface between EPEC and the actin - based pedestals ( Fig . 4 c ) . Also in this case , the frequency of Hip1R recruitment was maximal at 30 min of infection with L . innocua ( InlA ) and we first studied Dab2 , a nonclassical clathrin adaptor that has recently been associated with the formation of unusually large clathrin lattices at the plasma membrane ( Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . Dab2 localized , together with actin , at the entry site of both L . innocua ( InlA ) and L . innocua ( InlB ) , with a higher frequency of protein recruitment at 30 and 15 min , respectively ( Fig . 4 a ) . Dab2 was also present at the interface between EPEC and actin pedestals throughout the 4 – 6 - h period observed ( Fig . 4 a ) . In addition to its role as a clathrin adaptor , Dab2 regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis by interacting with the molecular motor Myosin VI ( Inoue et al . , 2002 ; Morris et al . , 2002 ) , which drives the internalization of clathrin - coated vesicles by mov - ing toward the minus end of actin cables ( Buss et al . , 2001a , b ) . In our infection models , the localization of Myosin VI coincided Figure 4 . Recruitment of actin - organizing machinery during infection . Jeg3 cells were in - cubated with L . innocua ( InlA , red ) for 15 , 30 , and 45 min , and HeLa cells were incubated with L . innocua ( InlB , red ) for 5 , 15 , and 30 min or with EPEC for 4 , 5 , and 6 h , then fixed and processed for immunofluorescence with antibodies recognizing Dab2 , myosin VI , or Hip1R ( all green ) . Actin was labeled with fluo - rescent phalloidin ( blue ) . At each time point of infection , the frequency of protein recruitment at bacteria adhesion sites was evaluated by immunofluorescence . Arrows point to sites of colocalization between bacteria , the labeled protein , and actin . Values are means ( ± SD ) of three independent experiments where 100 bacteria were counted for each condition . Error bars indicate mean ± SD . Bars , 10 µm . 531 Clathrin in actin recruitment during bacterial infection • Bonazzi et al . CHC , Dab2 , and Myosin VI recruitment ( Fig . 6 c ) . This par - tial effect is likely caused by decreased CHC stability in the absence of CLC , reducing CHC presence at the membrane . Despite its clear impact on Listeria internalization , Myosin VI depletion did not impair the recruitment of the other members of the clathrin – actin interaction machinery . These were even detected in higher quantities at the Listeria adhesion sites in the absence of Myosin VI , which reflects a lack of internal - ization ( Fig . 6 d ) . The depletion of Myosin VI also did not affect protein recruitment at EPEC pedestals ( Fig . 6 d ) . Hip1R depletion and cytochalasin D treatment had similar effects and both prevented the recruitment of actin and Hip1R at clath - rin coats ( Fig . 6 , e and f ) . This latter effect likely reflects the strong influence that Hip1R and actin have on each other ( Wilbur et al . , 2008 ) . We next used the clathrin rescue assay to investigate the role of CHC phosphorylation in the organization of the clathrin - actin machinery . After treatment with siRNA , the ectopic ex - pression of wt CHC - GFP efficiently rescued endogenous CHC depletion , and CHC - GFP was efficiently recruited at bacte - rial adhesion sites in all of the three infection models studied . Conversely , the Y1477 , 1487F CHC - GFP mutant was not de - tected at sites of bacterial entry and adhesion . As previously observed , Dab2 localization was not significantly affected by the depletion of endogenous CHC ( Figs . 6 and 7 ) , and conse - quently , the overexpression of either wt or mutant CHC did not alter Dab2 recruitment at bacterial adhesion sites ( Fig . 7 ) . Notably , however , the recruitment of CLC , Hip1R , Myosin VI , and actin was restored to control levels in the case of the ectopic expression of wt CHC and not by the expression of the Y1477 , 1487F mutant . Confirming our previous observa - tions , Myosin VI was never recruited at EPEC - induced actin pedestals , regardless of the experimental condition ( Fig . 7 c ) . Our data indicate that the tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC is required for the accumulation of clathrin coats at bacteria – cell interfaces , followed by the assembly of the clathrin – actin organizing machinery that mediates bacterial internalization or the formation of actin pedestals ( Fig . 8 ) . 15 min of infection with L . innocua ( InlB ) . Hip1R was found at the interface between EPEC and the actin pedestals throughout the infectious process . We then used an siRNA - based approach to study the re - spective roles of Dab2 , Myosin VI , and Hip1R in our infection models . The mean inhibition of protein expression was 80 % , and no off - target effects on other components of the machin - ery were observed ( Fig . S4 ) . The depletion of Dab2 , Myosin VI , or Hip1R efficiently inhibited L . monocytogenes internaliza - tion by the InlB pathway , whereas it had a milder but still significant effect the InlA - mediated internalization pathway ( Fig . 5 , a – c ) . This is in line with our previous observations of a compensatory role for caveolin that attenuates the clathrin knockdown phenotype in the InlA pathway ( Bonazzi et al . , 2008 ) . Similarly , the formation of EPEC - induced actin ped - estals was followed in cells depleted of Dab2 , Myosin VI , and Hip1R , and infected with EPEC for 4 , 5 , and 6 h . Hip1R depletion efficiently inhibited the formation of EPEC - induced actin pedestals , whereas the knockdown of Dab2 had a milder effect ( Fig . 5 , a – c ) . In line with its lack of colocalization , the knockdown of Myosin VI had no effect on the formation of actin pedestals ( Fig . 5 b ) . Hierarchical organization of the clathrin – actin machinery To dissect the respective roles of Dab2 , CHC , CLC , Myosin VI , and Hip1R during infection , we observed the effects of sin - gle protein depletion on the other members of the machinery . We also used cytochalasin D to impair actin polymerization before infection . The knockdown of Dab2 had a clear effect on the recruitment of all members of the machinery including actin ( Fig . 6 a ) . The depletion of CHC prevented binding of the CLC subunit and recruitment of Hip1R , and , as previously described ( Veiga et al . , 2007 ) , blocked recruitment of actin . It also partially affected the recruitment of Myosin VI and Dab2 ( Fig . 6 b ) , possibly affecting the latter by reducing coated pit stability . CLC depletion completely prevented recruitment of Hip1R and actin , while apparently having a partial effect on Figure 5 . Dab2 , Myosin VI , and Hip1R are required during bacterial infections . ( a – c ) Jeg3 cells and HeLa cells were transfected with two siRNA sequences ( si1 and si2 ) targeted to Dab2 ( a ) , Myosin VI ( b ) , or Hip1R ( c ) . L . monocytogenes was then used to infect Jeg3 and HeLa cells to follow the InlA or InlB internalization pathway , respectively , by a gentamicin survival assay . HeLa cells were infected with EPEC to follow actin - based pedestals formation by immunofluorescence where  200 pedestals were counted for each experiment . Values are means ± SD of three independent experiments ( error bars ) . Asterisks represent P - values ( * * , P ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * * , P ≤ 0 . 001 ; Student’s t test ) . JCB • VOLUME 195 • NUMBER 3 • 2011 532 as a prelude for actin cytoskeleton reorganization during bacterial adhesion and internalization . We also describe key components of the molecular machinery that orchestrates actin dynamics at clath - rin coats , reinforcing the increasingly recognized link between clathrin and actin in mammalian cells ( Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ; Veiga et al . , 2007 ; Cureton et al . , 2009 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . Discussion Using three infection models , we provide here the first func - tional demonstration of a physiological role for the signaling - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC . This posttranslational modification is needed for clathrin accumulation at the membrane Figure 7 . CHC phosphorylation is required to assemble the clathrin - actin machinery . ( a – c ) Jeg3 cells were transfected with a control siRNA or with a CHC - targeted siRNA , alone or in combination with the overexpression of wt CHC - GFP or the Y1477 , 1487F mutant of CHC - GFP ( non - p - CHC ) . Cells were then incubated with L . innocua ( InlA ) , L . innocua ( InlB ) , or EPEC , then fixed and processed by immunofluorescence . The frequency of recruitment of the different component of the clathrin – actin machinery at the bacterial adhesion sites was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy and normalized to that of control cells . Values are means ± SD of three independent experiments ( error bars ) where  100 bacteria were counted for each condition . Figure 6 . Ordered recruitment of the clathrin - actin machinery established by siRNA treatment . ( a – f ) Jeg3 and HeLa cells were transfected with siRNA targeted to either Dab2 ( a ) , CHC ( b ) , CLC ( c ) , Myosin VI ( d ) , or Hip1R ( e ) ; or incubated with cytochalasin D for 30 min ( f ) . Cells were incubated with L . innocua ( InlA ) , L . innocua ( InlB ) , or EPEC , then fixed and processed by immunofluorescence . The frequency of recruitment of the different component of the clathrin / actin machinery at the bacterial adhesion sites was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy and normalized to that of control cells . Values are means ( ± SD ) of three independent experiments where  100 bacteria were counted for each condition . Red horizontal lines mark the control level of protein recruitment . Error bars indicate mean ± SD . 533 Clathrin in actin recruitment during bacterial infection • Bonazzi et al . has been reported during epithelial morphogenesis ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , AP - 2 was never observed during L . mono­ cytogenes entry , and its knockdown does not affect bacterial internalization ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ) . However , a role of Dab2 independent of AP - 2 has been described ( Maurer and Cooper , 2006 ) . Furthermore , the NPXY consensus sequence recognized by Dab2 is not present in E - cadherin or Met , the host receptors for L . monocytogenes , which suggests that Dab2 must be associated with additional components that remain to be identified . CLC is a Hip protein interactor and a regulator of clathrin assembly ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ; Wilbur et al . , 2010 ) . Here we show that the interaction between CLC and Hip1R plays a key role in recruiting and organizing actin at clathrin coats . In our infection models , the knockdown of either CLC or Hip1R impedes the recruitment of actin at the bacterial adhesion sites , resulting in impaired bacte - rial internalization . Importantly , CLC depletion prevents Hip1R recruitment , which locates CLC upstream of Hip1R and dem - onstrates its essential role in the recruitment of Hip1R , hence actin , at clathrin coats . Infection triggers the tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC Clathrin - mediated internalization of cell surface receptors that signal through Src family kinases is accompanied by the tyro - sine phosphorylation of CHC . Here we provide evidence for an essential role of this posttranslational modification during bacterial infections . By developing new tools for the study of CHC phosphorylation , we were able to show that the initial step of bacteria – host interactions triggers the phosphorylation of CHC , which occurs at tyrosines 1477 and 1487 . In line with our previous observations ( Sousa et al . , 2007 ; Bonazzi et al . , 2008 ) , during InlA - mediated infections , CHC phosphoryla - tion is mediated by Src family kinases . Indeed , the pretreat - ment of cells with the Src family kinase inhibitor PP1 before purified InlA incubation resulted in decreased phosphorylation of CHC . Our previous studies led to the hypothesis that the tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC might favor the accumula - tion of clathrin - coated pits so that they could be available for coordinated receptor uptake upon dephosphorylation and syn - chronized budding at the end of receptor signaling ( Stoddart et al . , 2002 ; Crotzer et al . , 2004 ) . In the case of bacterial inter - action , the phosphorylated coated pits apparently serve as plat - forms for actin organization . However , completion of vesicle invagination may eventually serve an endocytic purpose later during infection , where clathrin - mediated endocytosis could play a role in vacuole maturation . Such an additional and more conventional role for clathrin at a later stage of infection would explain our earlier findings that dynamin and Hrs are also key proteins needed for successful infection ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ) . By analogy with the bacterial – host interactions we have observed , we speculate that phosphorylation - stabilized or “fro - zen” clathrin coated pits at the edge of immune cell signal - ing domains might also play a role in actin nucleation at the immunological synapse , whose organization is both clathrin and actin dependent ( Calabia - Linares et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , phos - phorylation of CHC may have a dual role of stabilizing clathrin as an actin - nucleating platform and providing a pool of coated pits that can be coordinately activated for endocytosis upon subsequent dephosphorylation . How tyrosine phosphorylation of CHC contributes to coated pit stability is not yet established . Because of its location on the proximal leg region , this modifi - cation could potentially block further addition of triskelia and freeze lattice growth through direct inhibition of regional inter - action or recruitment of a blocking protein . Defining components of clathrin – actin interaction during infection The surprising observation that clathrin assembles into coated pits of conventional size at bacteria – host interfaces suggested that clathrin may serve a role during infection other than that of an endocytic protein . Here we demonstrate the sequential re - cruitment of Dab2 , CHC , CLC , Hip1R , and Myosin VI to sites of host – pathogens interaction to orchestrate the recruitment of actin at sites of bacterial adhesion / internalization . Dab2 has been identified as the clathrin adaptor for the internalization of UPEC , where it functions in association with AP - 2 ( Eto et al . , 2008 ) , and a role for Dab2 in E - cadherin endocytosis Figure 8 . Proposed model for the clathrin - actin machinery triggered by bacterial infection . Bacteria activate host receptor downstream signaling , which results in the recruitment of the clathrin adaptor Dab2 and of the CHC – CLC complex . Clathrin coats are then stabilized by the tyrosine phos - phorylation of CHC ( P ) , followed by the sequential recruitment of Hip1R and actin . Myosin VI is also recruited in the case of invading bacteria , probably providing the pulling force for bacterial internalization , whereas it is excluded from EPEC - induced actin pedestals . CHC remains phosphory - lated at the bacterial adhesion or internalization sites where clathrin and actin are colocalized . JCB • VOLUME 195 • NUMBER 3 • 2011 534 with the immunizing peptide . The affinity - purified antibody was used di - rectly for immunofluorescence . This affinity purified antibody was tested for peptide specificity by ELISA . The antibody at 1 : 1 , 000 dilution was incu - bated with purified peptides with two sites phosphorylated , one site phos - phorylated , or nonphosphorylated in solution at the specified concentrations , then tested for binding to the double phospho - peptide using a secondary antibody coupled to horseradish peroxidase . For analysis by immunoblotting , the affinity - purified anti - pCHC antibody was further depleted by expo - sure to nonphosphorylated recombinant hub fragments immobilized on membrane as follows . 10 sets of 15 µg of purified hub were run on an SDS - PAGE gel and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane . Hub bands were cut out of the membrane and blocked with 5 % BSA in PBS for 2 h . 100 µl of 9 µg / ml anti - pCHC was put onto the hub - loaded membrane for 1 h and pipetted every 10 min . After 1 h , the anti - pCHC was moved onto another - hub loaded membrane , and the process repeated . In total , the anti - pCHC was exposed to hub - loaded membranes 10 times . The depleted anti - pCHC was then tested by immunoblotting for binding to recombinant purified Hub protein ( Liu et al . , 1995 ) with or without exposure to purified Src kinase ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Plasmids and siRNA sequences siRNA targeting the CHC sequence 1 , 5  - GGGAAUUCUUCGUACUC - CATT - 3  ; and 2 , 5  - GAUUAUCAAUUACCGUACATT - 3  . The CLC sequence 1 , 5  - AAAGACAGTTATGCAGCTATT - 3  ; and 2 , 5  - AAGGAACCAGCGC - CAGAGTGA - 3  . Control siRNA sequences were obtained from Invitrogen . siRNA targeting the Hip1R sequence 1 , 5  - CUCCGACAUGCUGUACUU - CTT - 3  ; and 2 , 5  - ACCGGAGAATCTCATTGAGATCTT - 3  . The CHC sequ - ence used for rescue analysis was 5  - GCAAUGAGCUGUUUGAAGA - 3  . Control siRNA sequences were obtained from QIAGEN . siRNA targeting the Myosin VI sequence 1 , 5  - GCUGGCAGUUCAUAGGAAUTT - 3  ; and 2 , 5  - AUUCCUAUGAACUGCCAGCTT - 3  . Control siRNA sequences were obtained from Eurogentec . siRNA targeting the Dab2 sequence 1 , 5  - GCAAAGAUAUCCUGUUAGUTT - 3  ; and 2 , 5  - GAACCAGCCUUCAC - CCUUUTT - 3  . Control siRNA sequences were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific . For CHC rescue analysis , human CHC cDNA was made to be resistant to the CHC siRNA sequences used and inserted into a pcDNA3 . 1 / Zeocin vector ( Invitrogen ) using the HindIII and NotI digestion sites . The siRNA - resistant human CHC cDNA was further mutated by site - directed mutagenesis using Quikchange II XL ( Agilent Technologies ) so that tyrosines 1477 and 1487 were mutated to code for phenylalanines . The resulting cDNA was then cloned into a pcDNA3 . 1 / Zeocin vector using the HindIII and NotI digestion sites . Transient transfections For siRNA transfection , 2 × 10 5 cells / ml were mixed with siRNA and Lipo - fectamine RNAiMAX ( Invitrogen ) before plating according to manufacturer’s instructions for reverse transfections . Cells were probed for siRNA efficacy 72 h after transfection by Western blotting . For CHC rescue experiments , 48 h after siRNA transfection , cells were transfected with the indicated clath - rin constructs using Gene Juice according to manufacturer’s instructions . Fluorescence microscopy Cells grown on glass coverslips were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 20 min , rinsed in PBS , and incubated for 20 min in blocking solution ( 0 . 5 % BSA and 50 mM NH 4 Cl in PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) supple - mented with 0 . 05 % saponin . Cells were then incubated for 30 min at room temperature with the appropriate primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution , washed five times in PBS , and incubated for 30 min at room temperature with Alexa Fluor – coupled secondary antibodies ( Invitrogen ) . Where needed , Alexa Fluor – coupled phalloidin was added to the second - ary antibodies to label the cell cytoskeleton . Cells were washed five times in PBS and mounted on microscope slides using Fluoromount mounting medium ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) . Preparations were analyzed using an epifluorescence microscope ( Axiovert 135 ; Carl Zeiss ) connected to a charge - coupled device camera ( CoolSnap HQ ; Photometrics ) and oper - ated by Metamorph software ( Molecular Devices ) . Images were acquired using a 63× oil - immersion objective lens . Image analysis was performed using ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) . Transmission electron microscopy Cells were grown on glass - bottomed Petri dishes and infected with either L . innocua ( InlA ) or L . innocua ( InlB ) at an MOI of 50 . Cells were fixed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M Hepes buffer , pH 7 . 2 , overnight at 4°C , washed in 0 . 1 M Hepes buffer , postfixed for 1 h in 1 % osmium + 1 . 5 % K3 [ Fe ( CN ) 6 ] in 0 . 1M cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , and washed in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer . Cells were then incubated for 1 h with 1 % tannic acid Knockdown of the motor protein Myosin VI does not reduce the recruitment of all proteins of the clathrin – actin machinery at bacterial adhesion sites but prevents bacterial inter - nalization . This identifies Myosin VI as the last component of such machinery that provides the pulling force for bacterial internalization , followed by the disassembly of clathrin coats . The absence of Myosin VI at pedestals likely reflects the fact that these are not internalization structures . Myosin VI recruitment at EPEC pedestals may be prevented by a bacterial type III effector , secreted upon adhesion to host cells . In summary , by ectopic expression of a nonphosphorylat - able mutant of CHC , we showed herein that the phosphoryla - tion of CHC triggered by infection is the initiating event for the accumulation of clathrin coats at bacterial adhesion sites . These coats , via CLC – Hip1R interactions , in turn coordinate actin re - cruitment at bacterial – host adhesion sites ( Fig . 8 ) , leading either to internalization in conjunction with recruited Myosin VI or to pedestal formation . Thus , using bacterial infection models , we provide evidence that the clathrin – actin interaction mediated by CLC and Hip1R goes beyond its function in conventional coated vesicle endocytosis ( Newpher and Lemmon , 2006 ; Boulant et al . , 2011 ; Collins et al . , 2011 ) . We show here that , via the CLC – Hip1R interaction , the clathrin lattice can serve as a functional actin - organizing platform for uptake of structures that exceed the size limits of clathrin - coated vesicles and sup - ports additional actin - based activities such as pedestal forma - tion , unrelated to endocytosis . We further demonstrate that this novel function for clathrin in actin organization is dependent on CHC phosphorylation , thereby defining the functional conse - quence of CHC modification by Src family kinases , which are stimulated when signaling receptors are engaged during infec - tion and initiation of endocytosis . Materials and methods Bacterial strains and cell lines L . monocytogenes EGD ( BUG 600 ) was grown in brain – heart infusion . L . innocua transformed with pRB474 harboring the inlA gene ( BUG 1489 ) was grown in brain – heart infusion with 7 µg / ml chloramphenicol . L . innocua transformed with pP1 - B3 harboring the inlB gene ( BUG 1531 ) was grown in brain – heart infusion with 5 µg / ml erythromycin . EPEC strain JPN15 ( BUG 2361 ) was grown in Luria - Bertani broth . Jeg3 cells ( human epithelial placental cells ATCC n° : HTB - 36 ) and HeLa cells ( human cervix epithelial cells ATTC n° : CCL - 2 ) were grown in MEM medium containing Glutamax , nonessential amino acids , sodium pyruvate , and 10 % FBS . Antibodies and reagents PY20 anti - phosphotyrosine monoclonal antibody and anti - Hip1R poly - clonal antibody were obtained from Millipore . Anti - Dab2 polyclonal anti - body and anti - Myosin VI polyclonal antibody were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Anti - actin monoclonal antibody was obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . Anti - CLC polyclonal antibody was produced as de - scribed previously ( Acton et al . , 1993 ) , monoclonal antibodies against CHC ( X22 for immunofluorescence and TD . 1 for blotting were produced in our laboratory ; Brodsky , 1985 ; Näthke et al . , 1992 ) , anti - InlA polyclonal antibody R302 , anti - InlA monoclonal antibody L7 . 7 , anti - InlB B4 - 6 mono - clonal antibody , and anti – L . innocua polyclonal antibody R11 were pro - duced in our laboratory . The 4G10 anti - phospho - tyrosine monoclonal antibody was obtained from the Bishop laboratory at University of Califor - nia , San Francisco . Cytochalasin D was obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . To obtain the anti - pCHC antibody , rabbits were immunized with a phospho - peptide comprising CHC residues from 1473 – 1491 , with phosphorylated tyrosines 1477 and 1487 . The antibody was affinity purified by depletion with nonphosphorylated peptide 1473 – 1491 , followed by positive purification 535 Clathrin in actin recruitment during bacterial infection • Bonazzi et al . supernatants were discarded . Beads were then washed in lysis buffer and resuspended in Laemmli loading buffer . Samples were then loaded on an 8 % poly - acrylamide gel and blotted for protein analysis . Mass spectrometry Src kinase was incubated with recombinant CHC ( Hub ) followed by diges - tion with trypsin and collection of peptide masses by matrix - assisted laser de - sorption / ionization ( MALDI ) time of flight ( TOF ) . Peptides masses in the mass spectrum were manually matched to expected peptide masses , and identifi - cation of phospho - peptides was determined by the presence of two peptides with an 80 - D mass difference . The peptide sequence and the presence of phospho - tyrosine were confirmed by MALDI TOF / TOF analysis . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows bacterial infection and incubation with bacterial surface proteins involved in L . monocytogenes internalization phosphorylate CHC . When cells are incubated with the L . monocytogenes surface protein InlA , CHC phosphorylation is dependent on Src family kinases . Fig . S2 shows that EGF treatment of cells promotes the accumulation of phosphorylated CHC at the plasma membrane . Fig . S3 shows that bacterial infection does not affect the clathrin - mediated internalization of transferrin . Fig . S4 shows the efficiency and specificity of the siRNA interference treatments used in this study . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201105152 / DC1 . This work was supported by Institut Pasteur , Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale , Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique , European Research Council ( advanced grant 233348 ) to P . Cossart , and grant GM038093 from the National Institutes of Health and grant 15IB - 0035 from the California Breast Cancer Research Program to F . M . Brodsky . M . Bonazzi is supported by the Pasteur Roux Fellowship . P . Cossart is an international research scholar of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . Submitted : 26 May 2011 Accepted : 3 October 2011 References Acton , S . L . , D . H . Wong , P . Parham , F . M . Brodsky , and A . P . Jackson . 1993 . Alteration of clathrin light chain expression by transfection and gene dis - ruption . Mol . Biol . Cell . 4 : 647 – 660 . Bonazzi , M . , E . Veiga , J . Pizarro - Cerdá , and P . Cossart . 2008 . Successive post - translational modifications of E - cadherin are required for InlA - mediated internalization of Listeria monocytogenes . Cell . Microbiol . 10 : 2208 – 2222 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2008 . 01200 . x Boulant , S . , C . Kural , J . - C . Zeeh , F . Ubelmann , and T . Kirchhausen . 2011 . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 1124 – 1131 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2307 Brodsky , F . M . 1985 . Clathrin structure characterized with monoclonal antibod - ies . I . Analysis of multiple antigenic sites . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2047 – 2054 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 101 . 6 . 2047 Brodsky , F . M . , C . Y . Chen , C . Knuehl , M . C . Towler , and D . E . Wakeham . 2001 . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 : 517 – 568 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 17 . 1 . 517 Buss , F . , S . D . Arden , M . Lindsay , J . P . Luzio , and J . Kendrick - Jones . 2001a . Myosin VI isoform localized to clathrin - coated vesicles with a role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J . 20 : 3676 – 3684 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / 20 . 14 . 3676 Buss , F . , J . P . Luzio , and J . Kendrick - Jones . 2001b . Myosin VI , a new force in clathrin mediated endocytosis . FEBS Lett . 508 : 295 – 299 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0014 - 5793 ( 01 ) 03065 - 4 Calabia - Linares , C . , J . Robles - Valero , H . de la Fuente , M . Perez - Martinez , N . Martín - Cofreces , M . Alfonso - Pérez , C . Gutierrez - Vázquez , M . Mittelbrunn , S . Ibiza , F . R . Urbano - Olmos , et al . 2011 . Endosomal clath - rin drives actin accumulation at the immunological synapse . J . Cell Sci . 124 : 820 – 830 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 078832 Carreno , S . , A . E . Engqvist - Goldstein , C . X . Zhang , K . L . McDonald , and D . G . Drubin . 2004 . Actin dynamics coupled to clathrin - coated vesicle forma - tion at the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 165 : 781 – 788 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200403120 Chan , Y . G . Y . , M . M . Cardwell , T . M . Hermanas , T . Uchiyama , and J . J . Martinez . 2009 . Rickettsial outer - membrane protein B ( rOmpB ) mediates bacte - rial invasion through Ku70 in an actin , c - Cbl , clathrin and caveolin 2 - dependent manner . Cell . Microbiol . 11 : 629 – 644 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2008 . 01279 . x in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer and an additional 30 min with 1 % osmium in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer . Cells were then dehydrated through a graded ethanol series and incubated overnight in a mixture of 50 % pure ethanol and 50 % EPON resin . Cells were then incubated in pure EPON and the resin was polymerized for 72 h at 65°C . For immunolabeling on thawed cryosections , cells were grown onto 100 - mm Petri dishes and incubated with wt L . monocytogenes at an MOI of 50 for 20 min , then samples were fixed with a mixture of 2 % paraformaldehyde and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M Sorensen’s phosphate buffer . After quenching of free aldehyde groups , cells were scraped and pellets were embedded in 12 % gelatin ( TAAB ) . After hardening on ice , blocks of 1 mm 3 were cut and infiltrated overnight at 4°C with 2 . 1 M sucrose in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer . Blocks were mounted on pins and frozen by plunging in liquid nitrogen . 60 - nm sections were cut using a cryo - microtome ( UC6 / FC6 ; Leica ) and picked up using a 1 : 1 mixture of 2 % methylcellulose and 2 . 1 M sucrose . Sections were labeled at room temperature with the rabbit anti - CLC followed by protein A gold ( Cell Microscopy Center ) and observed with a transmission electron microscope ( 1010 ; Jeol ) operated at 80 kV , equipped with a keenview camera ( Olympus Soft imaging ) . Infection - based assays For the gentamicin survival assays , L . monocytogenes were grown at 37°C to an OD 600 of 0 . 8 – 1 . 0 . Before infection , bacteria were washed twice in PBS , diluted in DME , and incubated with either Jeg3 or HeLa cells ( E - cadherin – expressing Jeg3 cells are mainly infected by the InlA pathway , and HeLa cells , which do not express E - cadherin , are mainly infected by the InlB pathway ) at an MOI of 50 . After 1 h of incubation at 37°C , cells were washed with complete culture medium and incubated for 2 h at 37°C in complete culture medium containing 10 µg / ml gentamicin . Cells were washed and lysed in 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 . The number of viable bacteria was assessed by titering on agar plates . For CHC rescue experiments , bacterial internalization was analyzed by double labeling bacteria before and after permeabilization ( Veiga and Cossart , 2005 ) , and the particle analysis plug - in of Image J was used to quantify internalized bacteria in CHC - GFP – expressing cells . For other assays , Jeg3 or HeLa cells were washed in serum - free culture medium and incubated with L . innocua ( InlA ) or L . innocua ( InlB ) , respectively , at an MOI of 50 . Cells were centrifuged for 2 min at 1 , 000 rpm and incubated at 37°C for the indicated times . Alternatively , HeLa cells were infected with EPEC at 37°C for the indicated times . At each time point , cells were fixed and processed for immunofluores - cence . Protein recruitment and EPEC - induced actin pedestals formation were quantified by fluorescence microscopy where 100 – 200 events were observed for each condition . To hierarchically organize the components of the actin – clathrin machinery , values were then normalized versus the frequency of recruitment of a given protein in control conditions , and the fluctuations of such value when other members of the machinery are knocked down were plotted . Transferrin uptake assay Jeg3 cells were briefly washed in DME without serum and incubated in the same medium supplemented with 25 µg / ml Cy3 - labeled transferrin and 20 mM Hepes for 30 min on ice . One sample was fixed immediately after that to measure the amount of surface - bound transferrin . A second sample was washed in PBS and subjected to a 4 - min acid wash ( 500 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 % acetic acid ) to verify that all transferrin was extracellular . All remain - ing samples were incubated with either L . innocua ( InlA ) , L . innocua ( InlB ) , or EPEC as described above for 1 h at 37°C . Cells were then washed in PBS , subjected to the acid wash , and fixed and labeled with DAPI and with the anti – L . innocua antibody R11 where applicable . Cell - bound and / or intracellular transferrin was measured by fluorescence microscopy using ImageJ . Immunoprecipitations Immunoprecipitations were performed as described previously ( Bonazzi et al . , 2008 ) . In brief , cells were treated as indicated , rinsed in pre - chilled PBS at 4°C , and incubated in 500 ml of lysis buffer ( 1 % NP - 40 , 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 10 % glycerol , 20 mM NaF , 5 mM Na 3 VO 4 , and complete protease inhibitors cocktail ; Roche ) . Cells were then scraped and collected in 1 . 5 ml Eppendorf tubes and further incubated in the lysis buffer for 15 min at 4°C on a spinning wheel . Lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 4°C at maximum speed and the supernatants were incubated for 1 h at 4°C with protein A – Sepharose beads to eliminate unspecific binding of proteins to beads . Lysates were then centrifuged to eliminate beads and incubated overnight at 4°C on a spinning wheel with the anti - CHC antibody . Protein A beads were added to samples and incubated at 4°C for 3 h . Samples were then centrifuged for 2 min at 4°C at maximum speed , and the JCB • VOLUME 195 • NUMBER 3 • 2011 536 host cells is mediated by a clathrin - dependent mechanism . Cell . Microbiol . 11 : 1179 – 1189 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2009 . 01319 . x Morris , S . M . , S . D . Arden , R . C . Roberts , J . Kendrick - Jones , J . A . Cooper , J . P . Luzio , and F . Buss . 2002 . Myosin VI binds to and localises with Dab2 , potentially linking receptor - mediated endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . Traffic . 3 : 331 – 341 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1034 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2002 . 30503 . x Näthke , I . S . , J . Heuser , A . Lupas , J . Stock , C . W . Turck , and F . M . Brodsky . 1992 . Folding and trimerization of clathrin subunits at the triskelion hub . Cell . 68 : 899 – 910 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 92 ) 90033 - 9 Newpher , T . M . , and S . K . Lemmon . 2006 . Clathrin is important for normal actin dynamics and progression of Sla2p - containing patches during en - docytosis in yeast . Traffic . 7 : 574 – 588 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2006 . 00410 . x Pizarro - Cerdá , J . , B . Payrastre , Y . J . Wang , E . Veiga , H . L . Yin , and P . Cossart . 2007 . Type II phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinases promote Listeria monocyto­ genes entry into target cells . Cell . Microbiol . 9 : 2381 – 2390 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2007 . 00967 . x Pizarro - Cerdá , J . , M . Bonazzi , and P . Cossart . 2010 . Clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis : what works for small , also works for big . Bioessays . 32 : 496 – 504 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bies . 200900172 Popoff , V . , G . A . Mardones , S . K . Bai , V . R . Chambon , D . L . Tenza , P . V . Burgos , A . Shi , P . Benaroch , S . Urbé , C . Lamaze , et al . 2009 . Analysis of articu - lation between clathrin and retromer in retrograde sorting on early endo - somes . Traffic . 10 : 1868 – 1880 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2009 . 00993 . x Raiborg , C . , and H . Stenmark . 2009 . The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sort - ing of ubiquitylated membrane proteins . Nature . 458 : 445 – 452 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature07961 Saffarian , S . , E . Cocucci , and T . Kirchhausen . 2009 . Distinct dynamics of endo - cytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000191 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000191 Sousa , S . , D . Cabanes , L . Bougnères , M . Lecuit , P . Sansonetti , G . Tran - Van - Nhieu , and P . Cossart . 2007 . Src , cortactin and Arp2 / 3 complex are required for E - cadherin - mediated internalization of Listeria into cells . Cell . Microbiol . 9 : 2629 – 2643 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2007 . 00984 . x Stoddart , A . , M . L . Dykstra , B . K . Brown , W . Song , S . K . Pierce , and F . M . Brodsky . 2002 . Lipid rafts unite signaling cascades with clathrin to regulate BCR internalization . Immunity . 17 : 451 – 462 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 02 ) 00416 - 8 Veiga , E . , and P . Cossart . 2005 . Listeria hijacks the clathrin - dependent endocytic machinery to invade mammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 894 – 900 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1292 Veiga , E . , J . A . Guttman , M . Bonazzi , E . Boucrot , A . Toledo - Arana , A . E . Lin , J . Enninga , J . Pizarro - Cerdá , B . B . Finlay , T . Kirchhausen , and P . Cossart . 2007 . Invasive and adherent bacterial pathogens co - opt host clathrin for infection . Cell Host Microbe . 2 : 340 – 351 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2007 . 10 . 001 Wilbur , J . D . , C . Y . Chen , V . Manalo , P . K . Hwang , R . J . Fletterick , and F . M . Brodsky . 2008 . Actin binding by Hip1 ( huntingtin - interacting pro - tein 1 ) and Hip1R ( Hip1 - related protein ) is regulated by clathrin light chain . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 32870 – 32879 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M802863200 Wilbur , J . D . , P . K . Hwang , J . A . Ybe , M . Lane , B . D . Sellers , M . P . Jacobson , R . J . Fletterick , and F . M . Brodsky . 2010 . Conformation switching of clathrin light chain regulates clathrin lattice assembly . Dev . Cell . 18 : 854 – 861 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2010 . 04 . 007 Wilde , A . , E . C . Beattie , L . Lem , D . A . Riethof , S . H . Liu , W . C . Mobley , P . Soriano , and F . M . Brodsky . 1999 . EGF receptor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphorylation of clathrin , influencing clathrin redistri - bution and EGF uptake . Cell . 96 : 677 – 687 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80578 - 4 Wong , A . R . C . , J . S . Pearson , M . D . Bright , D . Munera , K . S . Robinson , S . F . Lee , G . Frankel , and E . L . Hartland . 2011 . Enteropathogenic and enterohaemor - rhagic Escherichia coli : even more subversive elements . Mol . Microbiol . 80 : 1420 – 1438 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 2011 . 07661 . x Yang , D . H . , K . Q . Cai , I . H . Roland , E . R . Smith , and X . X . Xu . 2007 . Disabled - 2 is an epithelial surface positioning gene . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 13114 – 13122 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M611356200 Yarar , D . , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and S . L . Schmid . 2005 . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 964 – 975 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 09 - 0774 Chen , C . Y . , and F . M . Brodsky . 2005 . Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clath - rin light chains and thereby influence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 6109 – 6117 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M408454200 Collins , A . , A . Warrington , K . A . Taylor , and T . Svitkina . 2011 . Structural organi - zation of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 : 1167 – 1175 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 05 . 048 Crotzer , V . L . , A . S . Mabardy , A . Weiss , and F . M . Brodsky . 2004 . T cell recep - tor engagement leads to phosphorylation of clathrin heavy chain dur - ing receptor internalization . J . Exp . Med . 199 : 981 – 991 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20031105 Cureton , D . K . , R . H . Massol , S . Saffarian , T . L . Kirchhausen , and S . P . J . Whelan . 2009 . Vesicular stomatitis virus enters cells through vesicles incompletely coated with clathrin that depend upon actin for internalization . PLoS Pathog . 5 : e1000394 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000394 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , R . A . Warren , M . M . Kessels , J . H . Keen , J . Heuser , and D . G . Drubin . 2001 . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin as - sembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 154 : 1209 – 1223 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200106089 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . , C . X . Zhang , S . Carreno , C . Barroso , J . E . Heuser , and D . G . Drubin . 2004 . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly ma - chinery . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 1666 – 1679 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 09 - 0639 Eto , D . S . , H . B . Gordon , B . K . Dhakal , T . A . Jones , and M . A . Mulvey . 2008 . Clathrin , AP - 2 , and the NPXY - binding subset of alternate endocytic adaptors facilitate FimH - mediated bacterial invasion of host cells . Cell . Microbiol . 10 : 2553 – 2567 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2008 . 01229 . x Ferguson , S . M . , A . Raimondi , S . Paradise , H . Shen , K . Mesaki , A . Ferguson , O . Destaing , G . Ko , J . Takasaki , O . Cremona , et al . 2009 . Coordinated ac - tions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell . 17 : 811 – 822 . ( published erratum appears in Dev . Cell . 2010 . 18 : 332 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 11 . 005 Hyman , T . , M . Shmuel , and Y . Altschuler . 2006 . Actin is required for endocyto - sis at the apical surface of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells where ARF6 and clathrin regulate the actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 427 – 437 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 - 05 - 0420 Inoue , A . , O . Sato , K . Homma , and M . Ikebe . 2002 . DOC - 2 / DAB2 is the binding partner of myosin VI . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 292 : 300 – 307 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2002 . 6636 Jonquières , R . , H . Bierne , F . Fiedler , P . Gounon , and P . Cossart . 1999 . Interaction between the protein InlB of Listeria monocytogenes and lipoteichoic acid : a novel mechanism of protein association at the surface of gram - positive bacteria . Mol . Microbiol . 34 : 902 – 914 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 1999 . 01652 . x Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 404 – 414 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm1940 Le Clainche , C . , B . S . Pauly , C . X . Zhang , A . E . Y . Engqvist - Goldstein , K . Cunningham , and D . G . Drubin . 2007 . A Hip1R - cortactin complex nega - tively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J . 26 : 1199 – 1210 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601576 Legendre - Guillemin , V . , M . Metzler , J . F . Lemaire , J . Philie , L . Gan , M . R . Hayden , and P . S . McPherson . 2005 . Huntingtin interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) regulates clathrin assembly through direct binding to the regula - tory region of the clathrin light chain . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 6101 – 6108 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M408430200 Liu , S . H . , M . L . Wong , C . S . Craik , and F . M . Brodsky . 1995 . Regulation of clath - rin assembly and trimerization defined using recombinant triskelion hubs . Cell . 83 : 257 – 267 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 95 ) 90167 - 1 Maurer , M . E . , and J . A . Cooper . 2006 . The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL re - ceptors into coated pits independently of AP - 2 and ARH . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 4235 – 4246 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03217 Mengaud , J . , H . Ohayon , P . Gounon , R . - M . Mege , and P . Cossart . 1996 . E - cadherin is the receptor for internalin , a surface protein required for entry of L . monocy­ togenes into epithelial cells . Cell . 84 : 923 – 932 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81070 - 3 Merrifield , C . J . , M . E . Feldman , L . Wan , and W . Almers . 2002 . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 691 – 698 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb837 Mettlen , M . , D . Loerke , D . Yarar , G . Danuser , and S . L . Schmid . 2010 . Cargo - and adaptor - specific mechanisms regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 188 : 919 – 933 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200908078 Moreno - Ruiz , E . , M . Galán - Díez , W . Zhu , E . Fernández - Ruiz , C . d’Enfert , S . G . Filler , P . Cossart , and E . Veiga . 2009 . Candida albicans internalization by