Learning by Doing Something Else : Variation , Relatedness , and the Learning Curve Melissa A . Schilling • Patricia Vidal • Robert E . Ployhart • Alexandre Marangoni Management and Organizational Behavior , New York University , 40 West 4th Street , New York , New York 10012 School of Management , Boston University , 595 Commonwealth Avenue , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 Department of Psychology , MSN 3F5 , George Mason University , Fairfax , Virginia 22030 School of Management , Boston University , 595 Commonwealth Avenue , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 mschilli @ stern . nyu . edu • patvidal @ bu . edu • rployhar @ gmu . edu • amarangoni @ yahoo . com M any organizational learning studies have an implicit assumption that the learning rate is maximized through specialization : the more an individual or organization focuses on a particular task , the faster it will improve . However , through contrasting the various learning process theories described in the research on organizational , group , and individual learning , we develop a set of competing hypotheses that suggest some degree of variation might improve the learning rate . Furthermore , such comparison yields competing arguments about how related or unrelated such task variation should be to improve the learning rate . This research uses an experimental study to answer the following research questions : Is the learning rate maximized through specialization ? Or does variation , related or unrelated , enhance the learning process ? We ﬁnd that the learning rate under conditions of related variation is signiﬁcantly greater than under conditions of specialization or unrelated varia - tion , indicating the possibility of synergy between related learning efforts consistent with an implicit learning or insight effect . We ﬁnd no signiﬁcant differences in the rates of learning under the conditions of specialization and unrelated variation . These results yield important implications for how work should be organized , and for future research into the learning process . ( Learning Curve ; Group Learning ; Organizational Learning ; Insight ; Transfer of Learning ; Absorp - tive Capacity ; Specialization ; Variation ; Implicit Learning ) Although management scholars and economists have vigorously scrutinized organizational learning curves since the 1930s ( e . g . , Wright 1936 ) , and the ﬁeld of organizational learning is attracting an increasing amount of attention , there are still many fundamental questions for which we do not have answers . Two of those questions are the focus of this study : ( 1 ) Is orga - nizational learning maximized through specialization , or does some amount of variation improve the learn - ing rate ? ( 2 ) If some degree of task variation enhances the learning rate , must those tasks be related ? Specialization is the degree to which an individual , group , or organization performs a narrow range of activities . Within the ﬁrm , specialization refers to the extent that individuals or groups are assigned to a narrow or wide range of tasks , and is often referred to as the division of labor . At the organization level , specialization can refer to the range of the ﬁrm’s product line , geographic scope , functional activities , etc . Specialization is considered a primary structural dimension of organization design ( Daft 1995 , Pugh et al . 1968 ) . Despite the importance of specialization 0025 - 1909 / 03 / 4901 / 0039 $ 5 . 00 1526 - 5501 electronic ISSN Management Science © 2003 INFORMS Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 pp . 39 – 56 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else as an organizational dimension , its impact on group or organizational learning curves has received scant theoretical or empirical attention . One possible reason for this lack of attention may be due to methodolog - ical challenges . Organizational learning curve stud - ies most commonly utilize data from ﬁeld sites to test their hypotheses . Typically , cost per unit or labor hours are regressed on cumulative output over time to obtain a learning rate , with an emphasis on speci - fying the functional form or comparing rates for dif - ferent industries . 1 However , it is difﬁcult to use a ﬁeld site to examine the impact of specialization or task variation on the learning curve , because such a study requires identifying a set of production facilities that utilizes different amounts of task variation , yet is basi - cally identical in every other way to avoid confound - ing the results with other sources of variance . A second possible reason for this lack of attention may be an implicit assumption that there is no ques - tion to be resolved . The productivity beneﬁts of spe - cialization have been exhorted since Adam Smith’s ( 1776 ) treatment of the subject , indicating that an indi - vidual’s learning should be fastest when he or she is narrowly specialized . Even the standard formula - tions of the learning curve wherein learning is mod - eled as a function of the cumulative experience with a particular task ( rather than a range of tasks ) seems to presuppose that the learning rate is maximized through dedication to a single activity . Such a conclu - sion , however , may be premature . Exciting new psy - chology research on learning at the individual level has yielded both theory and evidence suggesting that task variation can increase individual learning - curve rates . For example , an individual who applies his or her efforts to different , but related , problem domains may be able to more rapidly develop a deeper cog - nitive understanding ( or “schema” ) of both , that may enhance the learning rate ( Graydon and Grifﬁn 1996 , Loewenstein et al . 1999 , Schmidt 1975 ) . Further , by combining the ideas of negative transfer ( e . g . , Ellis 1965 ) and distributed practice ( e . g . , Mumford et al . 1994 ) , it is even possible to derive a hypothesis that the learning rate will be maximized when learners 1 For an excellent review of early learning curve work , see Yelle ( 1979 ) . engage in multiple activities that appear unrelated in any obvious way . If group and organizational learn - ing curves rely on some of the same processes driv - ing individual learning curves ( Argote 1999 , Larson and Christensen 1993 ) , there may be reason to suspect that some degree of task variation may also improve group and organizational learning rates . A few studies have begun to brush against these questions . For example , Fisher and Ittner ( 1999 ) exam - ine the impact of product variety on productivity and costs at an automobile plant , and conclude that prod - uct variety increases overhead hours , rework , inven - tory , and the excess labor capacity required to buffer against variability . However , this study was not a learning - curve study and draws no conclusions about the impact of product variety on organizational learn - ing . Darr et al . ( 1995 ) also indirectly broach this topic in their study of productivity in pizza franchises . They include a variable for the product mix at each store in their models , which can be interpreted as a measure of related task variation . They found no sig - niﬁcant results for this variable in any of their models , although it is important to note that the impact of product variety was not a focus of their study , and the data in the article do not indicate whether there was signiﬁcant variance in the product mix across stores . In sum , although specialization and task variety are of obvious relevance to organizational productivity , we found no explicit theoretical arguments about ( nor empirical evidence of ) the impact of specialization and task variety on the organizational learning - curve rate in the existing literature . To address these research questions while sur - mounting the methodological challenges , we used an experimental design wherein groups of individuals solved a series of strategic problems within an arti - ﬁcial organizational setting . By using small groups that learn through collective action and interaction , we hoped to more closely approximate organizational rather than individual learning . Because groups are the “building blocks” of larger organizations ( Argote 1999 , p . 99 ) and because the learning within groups is shaped by the same social processes that inﬂuence learning at the organization level ( e . g . , communica - tion , coordination , conﬂict ) , group learning provides 40 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else us with a smaller scale analog to organizational learn - ing ( Argote 1999 ) . The ﬁrst section of this paper reviews the exist - ing research on learning curves at the organizational , group , and individual levels , and then discusses the relationships between levels—including why theories of individual learning should inform our theories of group and organizational learning . The next section draws on theory and evidence at multiple levels to build a competing set of hypotheses about the impact of specialization , related variation , and unrelated vari - ation on the learning rate . In the second and third sections , we describe the methods of our study and the results obtained . The fourth and ﬁfth sections dis - cuss the meaning of our results , their limitations , and their implications for future research . Organizational , Group , and Individual Learning Curves The learning curve is an aggregate model that may be used to represent both individual learning and group or organizational learning ( Anzai and Simon 1979 , Argote 1999 , Yelle 1979 ) . It has been widely applied at the individual level by psychologists ( e . g . , Anzai and Simon 1979 , Ellis 1965 , Harlow 1949 , Thorndike 1898 ) , and at the organizational level by economists and management scholars ( e . g . , Argote 1993 , 1999 , Baloff 1971 , Dutton and Thomas 1984 , Hatch and Mowery 1998 , Levy 1965 , Mukherjee et al . 1998 , Yelle 1979 ) . It has been less often applied at the group level , although research is beginning to emerge in this area ( e . g . , Argote et al . 1995 ) . Organizational Learning Curves As articulated by Levitt and March ( 1988 , p . 320 ) orga - nizations learn “by encoding inferences from history into routines that guide behavior , ” and one of the purest examples of organizational learning is mani - fested in the effects of cumulative production on cost and productivity—otherwise known as “learning by doing” ( Arrow 1962 ) . Organizations experience pro - ductivity improvements as a “consequence of their growing stock of knowledge” ( Dutton and Thomas 1984 , p . 235 ) , and the application of this knowledge to increase the effectiveness and efﬁciency of produc - tion technologies ( Amit 1986 , Hall and Howel 1985 ) . Organizational learning scholars typically model the learning curve as a function of cumulative output : performance increases or cost decreases , with the number of units of production , usually at a decreas - ing rate . This pattern has been found to be consistent with production data on a wide range of products and services ( Argote 1993 , Baloff 1971 , Hatch and Mowery 1998 , Yelle 1979 ) , and for a variety of dependent vari - ables , including total costs per unit ( Darr et al . 1995 ) , accidents per unit ( Greenberg 1971 ) , and waste per unit ( Mukherjee et al . 1998 ) . One signiﬁcant ﬁnding is that although learning curves are found in a wide range of organizational processes , there are substantial differences in the rates at which organizations learn ( Argote 1999 ) . Under - standably , both managers and scholars are interested in understanding why one ﬁrm reaps great improve - ment in a process whereas another exhibits almost no learning . Many studies have examined various rea - sons for this variability in learning rates , including looking at how the ﬁrm’s learning rate is inﬂuenced by process - improvement projects , intentional innova - tion , or contact with customers and suppliers ( Dutton and Thomas 1984 , Levy 1965 , Mukherjee et al . 1998 ) . Our study contributes directly to this area of inquiry by examining how specialization , variation , and the relatedness of variation in the learning task inﬂuence the learning rate . Group Learning Curves Although there is a considerable body of research on learning and productivity in groups ( see Betten - hausen 1991 , Williams and O’Reilly , 1998 for reviews ) , few group studies explicitly consider the nature of the task as a variable ( e . g . , Argote et al . 1995 , Lord and Rowzee 1979 ) , and even fewer utilize a learning - curve framework . There is , however , evidence that group learning demonstrates a learning - curve pat - tern similar to that found in studies of individual and organizational learning ( e . g . , Argote et al . 1995 , Guetzkow and Simon 1955 , Leavitt 1951 , Shure et al . 1962 ) . For example , Argote et al . ( 1995 ) use a learning - curve framework to examine the impact of turnover and task complexity on group performance during Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 41 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else six experimental periods . They found that group per - formance conformed to learning - curve patterns that have been demonstrated at the organizational lev - els , and that performance was negatively affected by group turnover and task complexity . Compared to the literature on organizational and individual learning curves , the research on group learning curves is lim - ited , making this an area ripe for exploration . Individual Learning Curves Psychologists discovered learning curves in their study of individual learning processes in both humans and other species , and demonstrated the per - sistence of the learning curve across many different types of tasks ( e . g . , Harlow 1949 , Thorndike 1898 ) . Ellis ( 1965 ) explains the individual learning curve as a type of learning transfer : If one deconstructs learn - ing curves into the individual units of output , one can deﬁne the overall performance at any unit as some amount of performance that is derived from learn - ing in the previous units that is transferred to the current unit , plus some incremental increase in per - formance due to new learning . The learning that is transferred can be further deconstructed into knowl - edge content transfer ( knowledge gained about the previous unit transfers to the current unit ) and learn - ing process transfer ( “learning to learn” ) . The latter process indicates that individuals become better at learning over time because they transfer their previ - ous learning about how to assimilate or process particu - lar kinds of information to the new problem set . For example , they may learn general approaches to prob - lem solving or “modes of attack” ( Ellis 1965 , p . 33 ) . Relationships Across Levels Our study was motivated by a desire to understand organizational learning curves and , thus , in the tra - dition of the research on organizational learning , we have drawn from the organizational learning litera - ture and we have employed a study design and data analysis methods that are consistent with the research on organizational learning curves . However , we also draw from the research on group learning because ( 1 ) organizations are deﬁned as “a group of persons organized for a particular purpose” ( Webster’s dictio - nary ) , ( 2 ) organizations are typically a hierarchically - nested system of other smaller groups ( Simon 1962 ) , ( 3 ) much of the learning that takes place in the orga - nization does so at the small group level ( Argote 1999 , Brown and Duguid 1991 ) , and ( 4 ) our data is collected at the small group level . We further draw from the research on individual learning , because organization and group learning is , to some degree , a function of individual learning . For example , Crossan et al . ( 1999 ) eloquently relate all three levels by arguing that all intuition , insight , and innovative ideas occur at the individual level ( Simon 1991 ) , but that these ideas are then shared and interpreted within the group , wherein common mean - ing is developed ( Argyris and Schon 1996 , Daft and Weick 1984 , Huber 1991 ) . This shared understanding may subsequently become institutionalized in orga - nizational routines or artifacts ( Hedberg 1981 , Shri - vastava 1983 ) . It is also argued that the development of organizational routines that embody experiential learning is a highly parallel process to that employed by individuals when developing procedural knowl - edge ( Anderson 1983 , Argote 1993 ) , and thus might be shaped by similar forces . The relationship between individual and group learning has received more attention than the rela - tionship between organizational learning and either of the other two levels . For example , there is a con - siderable body of research that postulates that groups may form interactive information systems that ( 1 ) uti - lize the memory and learning of individual mem - bers ( e . g . , see the work on transactive memory , More - land 1999 , Rulke and Rau 2000 , Wegner 1987 ) , ( 2 ) fos - ter the development of a shared mental model that is more than ( or at least different from ) the sum of the properties of its individual members ( Klimoski and Mohammed 1994 , Mathieu et al . 2000 , Sande - lands and Stablein 1987 ) , and might be able to out - perform individuals on cognitive tasks ( e . g . , Collins and Guetzkow 1964 , Hinsz 1990 , Lorge and Solomon 1959 , Shaw 1932 ) . Although Argote ( 1993 ) describes a considerable amount of research suggesting that individual experi - ence does not contribute to group performance ( e . g . , Katz 1982 , Laughlin and Sweeney 1977 , Tuckman and Lorge 1962 ) , she also points out that this ﬁnding is likely to depend on the degree to which the task requires extensive coordination , whether the group 42 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else or organization is highly structured ( through stan - dardization , formalization , and centralization ) , and the skill level of the individual ( s ) . She concludes that group and organizational learning curves have an individual learning component , a system compo - nent ( i . e . , the ways in which work is organized and coordinated , and the organization’s technology ) , and an environmental component ( i . e . , learning that is obtained from suppliers , from competitors , etc . ) . Larson and Christensen ( 1993 ) also address this issue in their cogent description of how groups use social cognition to solve problems . They deﬁne social cognition as “those social processes (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) that relate to the acquisition , storage , transmission , manipulation , and use of information for the purpose of creating a group - level intellective product” ( 1993 , p . 6 ) . They point out that some stages of problem solving ( e . g . , manipulating and using information ) may rely pri - marily on cognitive processes that take place within individuals . Other stages of problem solving ( e . g . , storing information ) may rely on processes that are group level , but operate in a way that is highly anal - ogous to processes that occur at the individual level . For instance , it has been argued that information in the individual memory is organized as nodes corre - sponding to particular concepts , connected in a net - work , with the number and directness of connec - tions affecting the likelihood ( and effectiveness ) of retrieval . Similarly , at the group level , information may be distributed across individuals , and those indi - viduals may be thought of as nodes that collectively form a network . Retrieval of information from this network also relies on the pattern of connections or communication between the individuals . Thus , theo - ries of individual cognition should inform theories of group cognition both because ( 1 ) some processes of group cognition may actually take place at the indi - vidual level , and ( 2 ) some processes of group cogni - tion may behave analogously to individual cognition . Specialization , Variation , and Relatedness Although examination of the various bodies of research on learning indicates a number of implicit and explicit references to how the organizational learning rate might be affected by task specializa - tion , related variation , or unrelated variation ( e . g . , Darr et al . 1995 , Fisher and Ittner 1999 ) , there is lit - tle empirical evidence or consensus about whether specialization or some degree of variation maximizes the organizational learning rate . In the sections that follow , we draw from multiple bodies of research to develop competing hypotheses about the impact of task specialization , related variation , and unrelated variation on the organizational learning rate . Specialization There is research at both the organizational and individual levels that supports the proposition that specialization will enhance the learning rate . For example , Smith’s ( 1776 ) early arguments about the beneﬁts of division of labor suggest that specialization enables performance gains at both the individual and organizational levels . Both the learning curves used by psychologists to capture individual learning and those used by management scholars to measure orga - nizational learning have also reinforced the inference that learning is maximized through specialization by modeling performance as a function of the cumula - tive output at a particular activity . In a condition of pure specialization , individuals or organizations can focus all of their time and energy toward one task . Specialization allows them to complete the most rep - etitions of a particular kind of problem within a ﬁnite time period , and to gain an in - depth understanding of the problem domain . An individual or organiza - tion switching between multiple kinds of tasks , even if they were related , would be taking time away from learning the core task , and might become distracted from learning concepts that apply only to the core task . The learning transfer explanation for learning curves put forth by Ellis ( 1965 ) also suggests sup - port for specialization beneﬁts : If ( 1 ) overall perfor - mance improves with the number of units , because for each unit performance is equivalent to learning that is transferred from the previous unit , plus an incremental increase in learning for the current unit , and ( 2 ) if the amount of learning that transfers from unit to unit is positively related to the similarity of the units , then ( 3 ) in absence of any explanation for a difference in incremental learning for the current unit , Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 43 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else the learning rate should be positively related to the degree of similarity of the units . At the individual level , some psychologists have noted that an individual is unlikely to make a sig - niﬁcant contribution to an area until they have at least a decade of intense study in a particular domain of knowledge ( Hayes 1989 ) . Simon and Chase ( 1973 ) quantiﬁed this expertise by studying chess grand masters and other experts , concluding that individu - als need approximately 50 , 000 “chunks” of informa - tion related to a narrowly deﬁned problem domain prior to making a fruitful discovery . At the organizational level , Von Hippel ( 1998 ) has argued that a ﬁrm that solves more of the same kinds of problems should get better at it , leading to the con - clusion that groups or organizations that are more specialized should have steeper learning curves . Fur - thermore , some of the early empirical studies on orga - nizational learning curves suggest that specialization yields efﬁciency gains , though also often noting the risk of loss of ﬂexibility ( e . g . , Abernathy and Wayne 1974 ) . We begin , then , with the following hypothesis . Hypothesis 1 . The learning rate will be greatest under conditions of pure specialization . Variation Both the individual and organization learning liter - atures can yield arguments for the beneﬁcial role of variation in the learning process , but it is predom - inantly research at the individual level that enables arguments to be separately drawn for related versus unrelated variation . First , we examine research sup - porting variation in general , and then turn to the arguments in favor of related and unrelated variation in turn . Although the efﬁciency advantages of specializa - tion are commonly acknowledged , more recent work on organizational learning has begun to examine the role of product or process variety ( e . g . , Fisher and Ittner 1999 ) . Although Fisher and Ittner conclude that variation negatively affected productivity , many authors have argued that in the long run , variation is critical for the ﬁrm to develop new capabilities , increase its absorptive capacity , and maintain long - term productivity . For instance , as Leonard - Barton ( 1992 ) has pointed out , ﬁrms that do not develop new competencies risk becoming trapped in “core rigidi - ties . ” Levinthal and March ( 1993 ) have argued that ﬁrms have a tendency to overinvest in the exploita - tion of the organization’s existing competencies to the detriment of exploring new problem domains . Moreover , several authors have noted , that in con - trast to the image one may have of highly specialized research divisions producing important innovations , invention is more often the result of borrowing among disparate ﬁelds than through intensive focus on a sin - gle ﬁeld ( e . g . , March and Simon 1958 , Usher 1929 ) . The absorptive capacity construct mentioned above ( a direct application of Ellis’ ( 1965 ) learning - curve arguments to the organizational level ) can be inter - preted to suggest that varied prior learning might enhance the future learning rate—or at least , not negatively impact it . As articulated by Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 p . 128 ) , “ (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) the ability to evaluate and utilize outside knowledge is largely a function of the level of prior - related knowledge . At the most elemental level , this prior knowledge includes basic skills or even a shared language but may also include knowledge of the most recent scientiﬁc or technologi - cal developments in a given ﬁeld . Thus , prior knowl - edge confers an ability to recognize the value of new information , assimilate it , and apply it to commer - cial ends . ” Like Ellis’ ( 1965 ) explanation of learning curves , the absorptive capacity construct has both content and process components . The argument that the more information we have , the more likely some of it will apply to the new problem , is the transfer of knowledge content from one problem to another . The other part of the absorptive capacity argument—that individuals ( and organizations ) learn about the learn - ing process itself , is what Ellis calls “learning to learn” ( Ellis 1965 , p . 32 ) . The process of learning to learn implies that absorptive capacity may be improved even if the knowledge base possessed is not directly related to the knowledge base being acquired . Learn - ing skills may be transferred across ﬁelds of knowl - edge that are organized or described in similar ways , even if the content of the knowledge is substantively different . In essence , this research extends the notion of “learning by doing” to “learning by doing some - thing else . ” Although an organization working on dif - ferent but related tasks may ﬁnd that not all of the 44 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else knowledge content transfers from one unit to the next , the learning process knowledge may readily transfer . Research on individual learning has also sup - ported the role of variation . Although Simon and Chase’s ( 1973 ) ﬁndings suggest beneﬁts of special - ization , Simon ( 1985 ) later argued that possessing a diverse knowledge base may elicit greater learn - ing or problem - solving skills . Some researchers have explained this process by arguing that when a per - son gains experience and knowledge in an area , he or she creates new cognitive nodes of knowledge , and strengthens the connections between those nodes . The more knowledge nodes that are developed , and the more links developed between them , the larger and more dense the scaffolding within which to build new knowledge structures . This knowledge network may enable faster assimilation of new information because of increased speed and efﬁciency through these net - work links ( Leonard and Sensiper 1998 , Martindale 1995 ) . The study of cognitive insight also yields simi - lar arguments . Some researchers have posited that insight is the direct result of the transfer of knowledge among different types of learning activities ( Mayer 1996 ) . Individuals appear to spontaneously develop a new understanding of a problem because they trans - fer knowledge from one domain to another : what was well understood in one problem domain , suddenly provides an analogous solution to a new problem domain . 2 Such transfer of knowledge may even occur across domains that appear to have little in common ; in fact , Simonton ( 1999 ) notes that the most fruitful of insights are likely to be between those areas that had previously seemed unrelated . Related Variation . Psychology studies of individ - ual learning have demonstrated that related task vari - ation ( varying the content or context of the task ) may enhance the learning process through facili - tating the development of more abstract principles ( or “schema” ) related to a general class of tasks ( Graydon and Grifﬁn 1996 , Paas and Van Merren - boer 1994 , Schmidt 1975 ) . Such schemas promote the 2 There are various competing views of the mechanisms underlying insight . For a comprehensive survey , see Sternberg and Davidson ( 1995 ) . rapid acquisition of related skills or knowledge sets . For instance , Loewenstein et al . ( 1999 ) demonstrate that students who compare two different but simi - larly structured decision scenarios were more likely to derive an abstraction based on their commonalities ( “analogical encoding” ) . The abstraction then enabled those students to transfer knowledge gained from those previous examples to a new decision scenario more effectively than students who received only a single initial scenario . In a related vein of research , it has been shown that varying the context of a task may also enhance the development of implicit learning ( Wulf and Schmidt 1997 ) . Implicit learning is a passive form of learn - ing whereby the learner picks up “critical covaria - tions in the environment” ( Reber 1989 , p . 233 ) without even being aware of it . It is an unconscious process that yields abstract knowledge that may be complex and difﬁcult to articulate . If a concept is presented in varied contexts , it gives the learner more possi - ble associations for the concept , thereby improving understanding and recall ( Maskarinec and Thompson 1976 ) . Tyre and Von Hippel ( 1997 ) note a similar phe - nomenon within organizations when they ﬁnd that engineers often need to explore a problem in multi - ple settings ( e . g . , plant and lab ) before they are able to understand and resolve the problem . “Schema” and implicit learning are both ways in which learn - ing is transferred between related problem domains through the development of a deeper cognitive struc - ture that applies to both , which brings us to our sec - ond hypothesis . Hypothesis 2 . The learning rate will be greatest under conditions of related variation . Unrelated Variation . Although , perhaps , less intu - itively obvious , there is nonetheless sound evidence upon which to base an argument that the learn - ing rate may be improved through unrelated vari - ation . One of the major areas of research on indi - vidual learning processes is the subject of “massed” versus “distributed practice . ” Under massed prac - tice conditions , the learner repeats a task without interruption for the entire learning period . Under distributed practice conditions , trials of performing the task are interspersed with break periods during Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 45 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else which the learner rests or engages in some other task . There is abundant research indicating that dis - tributed practice results in improved learning rates over massed practice , presumably because it gives the learner time to do the deep , elaborative process - ing necessary for the development of the knowledge structures and general principles underlying a task ( Mumford et al . 1994 ) . Several research studies found distributed practice resulted in better performance on cognitive tasks , including multiplication problems ( Cornelius and Modigliani 1985 ) , French vocabulary ( Bloom and Shuell 1981 ) , and statistical operations ( Mumford et al . 1994 , Smith and Rothkopf 1984 ) . Because unrelated variation offers the learner time away from the core task , it may offer a form of dis - tributed practice , and thereby improve the learning rate . By contrast , if learners alternate between two related tasks , they may engage in constant cognitive processing of the knowledge structures common to both tasks , and thus not have the “rest period” accom - modated by distributed practice . To the degree that group and organizational learning is a function of individual learning , these arguments may also be true for groups and organizations , bringing us to our third competing hypothesis . Hypothesis 3 . The learning rate will be greatest under conditions of unrelated variation . Method To test the preceding hypotheses , 90 subjects ( primar - ily college students ) were solicited to participate in an experimental design utilizing an artiﬁcial organi - zational setting . The 90 subjects were divided into 30 teams of 3 subjects each . Because the learning within groups is shaped by the same social processes that inﬂuence learning at the organization level , group learning provides us with a smaller scale analog to organizational learning , and enables us to imple - ment an experimental design that would otherwise be unfeasible . Laboratory studies can allow knowledge or performance to be more directly measured , and can enable better control over other potential sources of variance in the group , task , or learning environ - ment ( Argote 1993 ) . Our design allows us to com - pare multiple learning curves in a controlled setting , whereby the primary sources of systematic variation across conditions are our experimental manipulations . The Problem - Solving Task The ﬁrst challenge of constructing the experimen - tal design was to identify problem - solving tasks that would enable ( 1 ) repetition without one ideal solu - tion , ( 2 ) extended learning over time , ( 3 ) controlling for difﬁculty , and ( 4 ) accurate performance appraisal . After consideration of many alternatives , we decided to have the groups play games against a computer . We evaluated more than 300 game possibilities and narrowed the list down by consulting several game review sources , including ( 1 ) A History of Traditional Games ( Masters 1999 ) , ( 2 ) A History of Card Games ( Parlett 1990 ) , ( 3 ) The Oxford History of Board Games ( Parlett 1999 ) , and ( 4 ) an extensive index of card games by type , developed by McLeod ( 1998 ) . We ﬁnally chose the game of Go for our core game . 3 We chose the alternate games of Reversi ( related game ) and Cribbage ( unrelated game ) . Go . Go is an ancient strategic board game that is widely played in Asia . In addition to meeting our above criteria , the game of Go also provided the fol - lowing additional beneﬁts : ( 1 ) it was unfamiliar to most of the subjects who responded to the solicitation ( more information on screening is provided below ) ; ( 2 ) it is a strategic game that is simple to learn , yet difﬁcult to master ; ( 3 ) a game can be completed in 10 minutes or less ( using a 13 × 13 board grid ) ; and ( d ) it is one of the oldest board games in existence , thus demonstrating its robustness , and its ability to capture and hold the attention of participants for an extended period of time ( Parlett 1999 ) . 4 Reversi . We chose Reversi as the related alternate game because it met the above criteria , and is con - sidered to be highly related to Go in appearance , 3 In each condition , the learning curves are estimated for the game of Go only ( not alternate games ) to ensure comparability . 4 According to legend , Go ( also known as Wei - Qi ) was invented by Emperor Yao of China ( 2357 – 2256 BC ) for the purpose of develop - ing the mind of his son , Tan Chu . The game was commonly used by military leaders of China , Korea , and Japan for the development of strategic skills , and by Buddhist monks as a route to enlight - enment ( Parlett 1999 ) . It continues to be one of the most highly revered of Asian board games . 46 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else objectives , and ancestry ( Parlett 1999 ) . Both games are played on an unchequered grid with stones . Both games emphasize spatial strategy , and the objective of both games is to control territory . Furthermore , both games employ only placement of stones rather than movement , award points based on the amount of ter - ritory controlled , and permit capturing of an oppo - nent’s pieces by surrounding those pieces . Cribbage . A computer version of Cribbage was cho - sen as the unrelated alternate game , because while it met the above criteria , it is vastly different from Go or Reversi . Cribbage is a card game , that is played in multiple hands , with the cumulative adding of points . Sophisticated Cribbage players can be strate - gic in playing or withholding cards to maximize their point scores while minimizing those of their oppo - nents . Unlike Go and Reversi , which rely predomi - nantly on spatial skills , Cribbage relies more on math skills , with a particular emphasis on probabilities . We used a version of Cribbage that played to 61 points ( rather than the traditional 121 ) to ensure that games could be played in 10 minutes or less . Solicitation and Screening The participants were solicited with ﬂyers that spec - iﬁed that subjects would perform basic problem - solving tasks . The ﬂyers did not indicate that the experiment would entail playing games ( to avoid cre - ating a response bias ) . The ﬂyers also offered a $ 100 payment to subjects upon completion of the experi - ment period , with a stipulation that no partial partic - ipation would be compensated , and that no subject would be permitted to participate in more than one period . To ensure that the teams all began at the beginning of the learning curve , respondents to the ﬂyer were screened to avoid inclusion of any participant with experience playing the games used in the experiment . The respondents were asked a series of questions , including those asking for demographic information ( e . g . , age , gender , occupation ) , and about a variety of activities in which they engage ( e . g . , reading the newspaper , tennis , golf , etc . ) . Although participants were only screened based on their experience with the games used in the study ( no participant was included if they had played Go , Reversi , or Cribbage within the last 5 years , or more than 5 times in their life ) , a wide variety of questions were asked to avoid signaling the respondents about the particular activities of interest . Conditions Respondents were randomly assigned to teams and experimental condition ( 3 subjects per team , 10 teams per condition ) . In each condition , the teams repeat - edly played the games for 5 hours a day for 2 consec - utive days . In the specialization condition , the teams played only Go . In the conditions involving varia - tion , the teams played alternating blocks of 4 games of Go ( the core game ) , and 4 games of their alter - nate game ( either Reversi or Cribbage ) . The games were sequenced in blocks in the variation conditions , because research has indicated that if tasks are varied too quickly , it may become confusing to the learners , which would prevent both learning in the core task and transfer of learning from the alternate task ( Gray - don and Grifﬁn 1996 ) . Other than the variation in tasks , all teams were subjected to identical experimental conditions . Prior to commencing play of the games , all individuals were asked to complete an entrance survey ( which collected basic demographic information , personal - ity assessment information , and prior game experi - ence ) , and were given instruction sheets for playing the games . Teams were told that the experiment was a learning study , and that their objective was to work together to get as good at the game ( s ) as possible . Teams were also instructed that each game was to be a group endeavor ( i . e . , delegation of game playing among the team members was not allowed ) , however , they were also instructed not to speak to any mem - bers of any other team , to prevent information leaks between teams . Teams were permitted to play at their own speed . The teams were given detailed score sheets to track the time at which they began and ended each game , their score on each game played , and the computer’s score . The score sheets were coded with the team’s identiﬁcation code , and the name of the games they played listed in the appropriate order . The teams that played alternating blocks of different games recorded Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 47 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else time and score data for both games—there was noth - ing to indicate to the teams that one game was more important than the other . Three monitors observed the teams in each condition ( i . e . , 3 monitors for 10 teams ) at all times to ensure that teams adhered to the rules of the experiment and to note any unusual activity . After completion of the 10 hours , the individuals were asked to complete an exit survey about how the team interacted during the experiment . Dependent Variable The dependent variable in all 3 conditions is the score for the games of Go only to ensure compa - rability . These scores range from 0 – 149 , with many instances of 0 scores , and no instance of a perfect ( 169 ) score . It is important to note that in production studies , it is unusual for ﬁrms to experience signiﬁ - cant decreases ( lapses in their performance ) in their production , therefore , their learning curves tend to demonstrate fairly consistent improvement . However , in robust computer versions of the game of Go , the computer is a skilled player , and even teams that have acquired good Go - playing skills ( and demonstrate increasing average scores ) will occasionally earn poor scores . Low scores are particularly likely to occur when teams experiment with new strategies . Thus , there is more variability in the learning curves for the game of Go than one would expect in production learning curves . Overview of Analyses The standard form of the learning curve is formulated as y = ax − b (cid:6) where y is the number of direct labor hours required to produce the x th unit , a is the number of labor hours required to produce the ﬁrst unit , x is the cumula - tive number of units produced , and b is the learning rate . By rewriting the formula in logarithmic form , we obtain the following formula , enabling the learning coefﬁcient to be obtained through linear regression : log y = log a − b log x(cid:1) Our speciﬁcation uses this standard formulation but with one exception ; rather than modeling the out - come as a decrease in labor hours , we model the out - come as an increase in scores , resulting in a negatively accelerated increasing curve . Our learning curve form is as follows : y = ax b or log y = log a + b log x(cid:1) In learning rate studies , the dependent measure is typically regressed on the number of learning tri - als . In this study , this translates into regressing the game score on the number of games played . Though total play time was carefully controlled in our study , there is variability in the number of games played because teams were allowed to play at their own speed . Some teams played quickly , in a trial - and - error fashion , whereas others played more deliberately , dis - cussing each move in advance . There was also vari - ability in speed of play over time for individual teams ( i . e . , a team might play quickly for awhile , and then take a more measured approach ) . To standardize the number of observations across teams and permit comparison across the multiple learning curves , we employ an analytical approach similar to that used by Darr et al . ( 1995 ) . They exam - ined learning curves of individual pizza stores and the effect of belonging to a particular franchise by gathering weekly data on the pizzas made and aver - age cost per unit . By aggregating the number of piz - zas per week for each store , franchise , and across all franchises , they were able to analyze the degree to which learning occurred with experience at the store , franchise , and interfranchise level despite variation in the number of pizzas produced . In a similar fashion , we aggregated our data to the hour level , and regressed the average score a team achieved on Go games in a given hour t on the cumu - lative number of Go games played by the end of the previous hour ( i . e . , cumulative number of Go games played from the beginning of the ﬁrst hour to the end of the t − 1 hour ) . 5 This aggregation allows us to con - trol for both time and the number of games played by any particular team over time , while also yield - ing an equal number of observations ( 10 ) for each team , for a sample size of 300 . As mentioned above , there was variability in the speed and deliberateness of play both across teams and over time . To control 5 An alternative speciﬁcation that includes all of the games played is discussed in the Results section . 48 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else for effects due to speed of play and exploratory trial - and - error strategies , we included the number of Go games played in the hour t , and the standard devi - ation of the scores earned on Go games in the hour t as control variables . We included dummy variables (cid:8) 0 (cid:6) 1 (cid:9) for each condition ( specialization , related vari - ation , and unrelated variation ) , and interaction terms between the cumulative number of Go games and the condition , to test whether the condition signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the learning rate . The interaction terms effectively separate the learning curves into those for specialization , related variation , and unrelated varia - tion ( for another example of this approach , see Lapre et al . 2000 ) . We also included dummy variables for each team to control for team - level effects . We used the following symbols : s it = average score earned by team i in hour t on Go games . Q it − 1 = cumulative number of Go games played by team i from the beginning of the ﬁrst hour through the end of hour t − 1 . G it = number of Go games played by team i in hour t . SD it = standard deviation of scores earned on Go games by team i in hour t . S = dummy variable for the specialization condi - tion . R = dummy variable for the related variation con - dition . U = dummy variable for the unrelated variation condition . V i = dummy variables for each team . Our most basic model estimated was Ln s it = b 0 + b 1 G it + b 2 SD it + b 3 Ln Q it − 1 + b i V i + e(cid:1) ( 1 ) If b 3 is statistically signiﬁcant and positive in the ﬁrst model , then overall , the teams signiﬁcantly improved their performance as they played games , indicating a learning - curve effect . To control for the impact of different play strategies ( e . g . , fast versus slow , deliberate versus exploratory ) or differences in the amount of time spent on the alternate games , the model includes a control variable ( b 1 G it ) for the num - ber of Go games played in the hour , and a control variable ( b 2 SD it ) for the variability of scores earned on Go games in the hour . In the second model , we estimated the following function : Ln s it = b 0 + b 1 G it + b 2 SD it + b 3 Ln Q it − 1 + b 4 S + b 5 R + b i V i + e(cid:1) ( 2 ) If b 3 (cid:6)b 4 , and b 5 in the second model are signiﬁcant ( and b 3 is positive ) , then the teams demonstrate an overall learning - curve effect , and the condition sig - niﬁcantly inﬂuences the average scores achieved . In our ﬁnal model , the cumulative production variable is divided into the 3 conditions by multiplying it by the condition dummies , allowing different learning rates to be estimated for teams in each condition : Ln s it = b 0 + b 1 G it + b 2 SD it + b 3 S + b 4 R + b 5 S Ln Q it − 1 + b 6 R Ln Q it − 1 + b 7 U Ln Q it − 1 + b i V i + e(cid:1) ( 3 ) In this model , if the constant , b 3 and b 4 are signif - icant , then the conditions signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the curve intercepts ( teams’ initial performance at the start of play ) . If b 5 (cid:6)b 6 (cid:6) and b 7 are signiﬁcant , and sig - niﬁcantly different from one another , then the con - ditions signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the learning rate and one of the three competing hypotheses should be supported . Results After 10 hours , the teams had played an average of 86 games each of Go . Although teams could have attempted to delegate play to an individual member , the monitors noted that the team mem - bers vigorously interacted during the entire exper - imental period . Although some individuals became more involved with the game than others , 6 team performance appeared to be almost always a collec - tive effort . Within the teams , members actively dis - cussed potential moves , evaluating what appeared to be successful or unsuccessful and formulating strate - gies . Although the individual holding the computer 6 Responses to the exit survey indicated that 62 of the subjects felt that all team members were equally involved with the game most or all of the time , whereas 28 subjects felt that some members were more involved than others most of the time . Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 49 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else Table 1 Regression Results for Learning Models 95 % Conﬁdence interval for B Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Variables B B B Lower bound Upper bound Constant 2 (cid:1) 98 ∗∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 18 ∗∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 11 ∗∗∗ (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 32 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 55 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 54 (cid:3) Number of Go games played in hour t − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 00 (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 01 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 01 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 01 (cid:3) Standard deviation of scores in hour t 0 (cid:1) 01 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 01 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 01 ∗∗∗ (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 00 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 00 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 00 (cid:3) Cumulative Go games at time t − 1 0 (cid:1) 25 ∗∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 25 ∗∗∗ † (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 03 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 03 (cid:3) Specialization dummy − 0 (cid:1) 35 − 0 (cid:1) 32 (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 77 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 74 (cid:3) Related variation dummy − 0 (cid:1) 25 − 0 (cid:1) 36 (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 77 (cid:3) (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 75 (cid:3) Specialization X cumulative games 0 (cid:1) 14 ∗∗∗ 0 . 06 0 . 23 (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 05 (cid:3) Related variation X cumulative games 0 (cid:1) 40 ∗∗∗ 0 . 31 0 . 50 (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 05 (cid:3) Unrelated variation X cumulative games 0 (cid:1) 21 ∗∗∗ 0 . 13 0 . 29 (cid:2) 0 (cid:1) 04 (cid:3) R 2 0 (cid:1) 40 0 (cid:1) 40 0 (cid:1) 44 Adjusted R 2 0 (cid:1) 32 0 (cid:1) 32 0 (cid:1) 36 F 5 (cid:1) 21 ∗∗∗ 4 (cid:1) 88 ∗∗∗ 5 (cid:1) 45 ∗∗∗ (cid:9)R 2 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 04 F of the (cid:9)R 2 0 (cid:1) 11 9 (cid:1) 68 ∗∗∗ N = 296 ( 4 of the 300 team hours had unusable data ) . ∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 05 ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 01 ∗∗∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 005 , standard errors are shown in parentheses . Team dummy variables are included in all models , although coefﬁcients are not reported here due to space constraints . † In Model 3 , the cumulative games variable is divided into three separate variables for each of the conditions ; the original cumulative games variable must then be omitted to avoid overspeciﬁcation ( the three interaction terms add linearly to the single cumulative games variable ) . mouse would execute the move , most move deci - sions were decided through group interaction . Many teams demonstrated a pattern whereby control of the mouse was rotated from individual to individual . Furthermore , the individual controlling the mouse was frequently not the most active proponent of the next move ( that is , control over the mouse did not appear to indicate decision authority over game moves ) . For most teams , the emotional involvement with the game appeared to escalate over time . Discus - sion among team members sometimes became quite heated , with individuals occasionally voicing anger or frustration . Particularly high scores often resulted in an eruption of cheers . For each team , the average scores for each hour , and cumulative number of Go games played by the end of the previous hour were tallied . We used a natural log transformation of the average scores and cumulative games , which is consistent with a standard learning - curve power function . Ordinary least squares regres - sion was used to estimate the models ( see Table 1 ) . We tested for ﬁrst - order autocorrelation in the residuals , and found no signiﬁcant autocorrelation . Scatterplots of the residuals were also examined , and they did not indicate autocorrelation or heteroscedasticity . Model 1 shows a signiﬁcant and positive coefﬁ - cient for the cumulative games variable ( 0 (cid:1) 25 (cid:6)p < 0 (cid:1) 005 ) , indicating that overall , the performance of the teams demonstrates a signiﬁcant learning - curve effect ( graphically depicted in Figure 1 ) . The control vari - able for the games played per hour is insigniﬁcant , but the control variable for the standard deviation of 50 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else Figure 1 Relation Between Average Score t and Cumulative Number of Games Played t − 1 , Raw and Natural Log Transformed AverageScore t Cumulative Games Played 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 5 4 3 2 1 0 200 150 100 50 0 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Ln Average Score t Ln Cumulative Games Played t – 1 t – 1 scores earned in the hour is positive and signiﬁcant ( 0 (cid:1) 01 (cid:6)p < 0 (cid:1) 01 ) . 7 In Model 2 , the dummy variables for the conditions are added . Again , the results indicate a signiﬁcant learning - curve effect overall ( 0 (cid:1) 25 (cid:6)p < 0 (cid:1) 005 ) . The con - trol variable for number of games per hour is again insigniﬁcant , and the control variable for standard deviation of scores is again positive and signiﬁcant ( 0 (cid:1) 01 (cid:6)p < 0 (cid:1) 01 ) . Neither of the condition dummy vari - ables is signiﬁcant . In Model 3 , interaction terms of condition X cumu - lative number of games have been entered , essen - tially splitting the data into 3 samples : ( 1 ) the learning rate over cumulative number of Go games for teams in the specialization condition , ( 2 ) the related varia - tion condition and ( 3 ) the unrelated variation condi - tion . The inclusion of these interaction terms results in a signiﬁcant increase in the R - squared ( p < 0 (cid:1) 005 ) , indicating that the inclusion of the interaction terms signiﬁcantly improves the model . Furthermore , all 3 interaction terms are signiﬁcant ( p < 0 (cid:1) 005 ) and posi - tive ( 0 . 14 for specialization , 0 . 40 for related variation , and 0 . 21 for unrelated variation ) , indicating signif - icant learning curves in all 3 conditions . However , the learning rate for the related variation condition is much larger than those for the specialization condi - tion and unrelated variation condition . The 95 % con - ﬁdence interval for the learning rate for the related 7 The coefﬁcients for the team dummy variables are not of particular interest , so are not reported here . None of the coefﬁcients for the team dummy variables were signiﬁcant . variation condition does not overlap with those for the other conditions , indicating that the learning rate for teams in the related variation condition was sig - niﬁcantly greater ( p < 0 (cid:1) 05 ) than the learning rates for teams in the other conditions . This ﬁnding supports Hypothesis 2 and provides evidence against Hypothe - ses 1 and 3 , and against the null hypothesis that condition has no signiﬁcant impact on learning rate . The conﬁdence intervals do not indicate a signiﬁcant difference between the learning rates for the special - ization and unrelated variation conditions . An alter - native speciﬁcation wherein every game ( Go games and alternate games ) was included in the cumula - tive games and games - per - hour variables yielded the same results . The coefﬁcients obtained for the learn - ing rates were lower for all 3 conditions , but their relative sizes were unchanged ( specialization = 0 (cid:1) 003 , p < 0 (cid:1) 05 ; related variation = 0 (cid:1) 01 (cid:6)p < 0 (cid:1) 01 ; unrelated variation = 0 (cid:1) 003 (cid:6)p < 0 (cid:1) 05 ) . 8 Adding the interaction terms also parses the impact of condition into two effects : ( 1 ) the impact on the intercept ( captured by the condition dummies and 8 An anonymous reviewer pointed out the possibility that teams in the specialization condition might have had decreases in perfor - mance toward the end of the experimental period due to boredom . To explore this possibility , we examined scatterplots of the spe - cialization data , and ran models that included quadratic terms for each of the conditions . Neither scatterplots nor the models with quadratic terms indicated that teams in the specialization condition had more negatively accelerated learning curves than teams in the other conditions . Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 51 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else constant ) and , ( 2 ) on the learning rate . The coefﬁcients for the dummies for specialization and related vari - ation capture the impact of those conditions on the intercept ( the dummy variable for unrelated varia - tion must be omitted to avoid overspeciﬁcation ) , and neither one was signiﬁcant . When the model was run using dummy variables for related and unrelated variation ( omitting the specialization dummy ) , again neither coefﬁcient was signiﬁcant . Thus , the results indicate that the condition had no signiﬁcant impact on initial performance . The control variable for num - ber of games played per hour was also not signiﬁcant , and the control variable for the standard deviation of scores for each hour had a signiﬁcant and posi - tive coefﬁcient ( 0 (cid:1) 01 (cid:6)p < 0 (cid:1) 005 ) , suggesting that while speed of play may have had no signiﬁcant impact on average score , willingness to take an exploratory approach ( resulting in variability of scores ) might be associated with higher overall performance . Discussion The ﬁndings indicate that groups working under con - ditions of related variation—that is , working on dif - ferent but similar types of problems over time— learned at a signiﬁcantly faster rate , on average , than did teams that either worked under conditions of specialization or unrelated variation . Furthermore , teams that worked under conditions of specialization learned at a rate that was not signiﬁcantly different from that of the teams that alternated between unre - lated types of problem - solving tasks . Finally , though not hypothesized , the results suggest that teams with greater variability in their scores per hour performed slightly better overall . These results have interesting implications both for theory and practice . First , the results are consistent with arguments suggesting that task variability enhances learning . Variation has been proposed to enhance individual learning through the development of a deeper cog - nitive structure ( common to the research on schema , analogical encoding , and implicit learning ) or through stimulating insightful synthesis between different problem domains . Task variability might prompt the learners to consider more possible associations for concepts underlying the tasks , and because the tasks are related , the learners develop a more abstract and complex knowledge structure that pertains to both types of tasks . In essence , the variation stimulates the learners to develop a deeper understanding of the tasks than they would if they had performed only one type of task over time . Furthermore , when learners think about two different types of problems that are similar in some fundamental ways , they may be able to apply a solution or logic developed in one prob - lem domain to the other problem domain , rapidly increasing their understanding of the second problem domain , resulting in the “Aha” ! experience character - istic of insightful problem solving ( Gick and Lockart 1996 ) . In sum , consistent with recent ﬁndings on indi - vidual learning , we ﬁnd that group learning rates were highest under conditions of related task varia - tion , suggesting that groups can also reap synergies from working on different but related problems . By contrast , there was not a signiﬁcant differ - ence between the learning rates under conditions of specialization and unrelated variation . This result is somewhat surprising and intriguing . Even if we believe in learning synergies between related learning efforts , we might still expect that specialization would outperform unrelated variation by not distracting the learner from the core task . There are at least two pos - sible explanations here . The ﬁrst is basically a null hypothesis : with the exclusion of related variation , the condition under which individuals or groups learn makes little difference in their learning rate . Learners are neither advantaged by specializing on a particu - lar task nor by having variety in the context unless it is closely related . This argument posits related varia - tion as a special condition under which the learning rate will be inﬂuenced , whereas in general condition is unimportant . However , a more likely ( and inter - esting ) interpretation of the results may be that there are learning advantages of specialization , but that there are also learning advantages achieved through distributed practice , and that in our study , the differ - ence between these effects is inseparable . While learn - ers may achieve focus beneﬁts from specializing in a particular task , they may be simultaneously forfeiting the deeper cognitive processing beneﬁts of rest from a particular task . This interpretation would also pro - vide additional explanation for the positive impact 52 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else of related variation : Because the tasks are similar but varied , the learner reaps some focus advantages and some degree of distributed practice advantage . 9 The teams in the unrelated variation condition , by con - trast , reap only the advantages of distributed prac - tice and forfeit any synergy effects between the tasks . Future research should attempt to tease out these different effects , perhaps eventually reaching a point where we can predict the relative strength of the various effects and what problem - speciﬁc , learner - speciﬁc , or context - speciﬁc factors would mediate the impact of the various effects . The results have interesting implications for the way that work is assigned within organizations . The results imply that when managers assign tasks to teams , they should consider the potential synergy effects of working on different but related prob - lems . Rather than assigning teams to work on the same project ( or a series of nearly identical projects ) over time , managers might wish to introduce some degree of related variation into the teams’ efforts , so that they can beneﬁt by the potential for developing schema , implicit learning , and / or insight . Teams that are overly specialized will improve , but might be less likely to generate insightful solutions . This implication is strengthened by considering the potential value of performance improvement in the alternate activity . In our study , we estimated the learning curves for the core task only , how - ever , it was straightforward to observe that teams also made signiﬁcant improvement in their alter - nate games ( although we have no data to compare this improvement to what it might have been had they played only the alternate games ) . Because orga - nizations typically pursue many projects simultane - ously , the performance on alternate tasks would be relevant for them , thus increasing the advantage of related variation over specialization , and possibly giv - ing unrelated variation some advantage over special - ization as well . 9 Note that a distributed practice effect alone is insufﬁcient to explain the results . If distributed practice were the primary fac - tor inﬂuencing rate of learning , then we would have expected to see both related and unrelated variation outperform specialization , and we would not have expected related variation to outperform unrelated variation . Limitations and Future Research The current study utilizes a well - deﬁned strategic problem - solving task with immediate and accurate performance feedback . Much of the early work done on implicit learning and schemas utilized motor skill learning tasks , thus it is encouraging to ﬁnd simi - lar results in a strategic problem - solving domain . The nature of the task may , however , impose some gen - eralizability constraints . For example , many strate - gic problem - solving tasks that organizations face are not well deﬁned ; rather , they are open ended and “fuzzy” ( Schwenk 1984 ) . The generalizability of our results to such a domain may be limited . Future research should attempt to replicate these results uti - lizing different learning domains , including , perhaps , learning curves that relate to technological knowl - edge , production processes , market knowledge , or the social knowledge underlying effective management of human resources . Furthermore , although we examined group - level learning to approximate organizational learning , we must exercise caution in generalizing the ﬁndings to other levels . Our groups were small , new , and had no prior training or predetermined hierarchy . Previous research has indicated that a team’s training and expe - rience can affect its development of transactive mem - ory ( Moreland 1999 , Wegner 1987 ) and its degree of structure ( Argote 1993 , Devadas 1990 ) , both of which can inﬂuence the degree to which the group is depen - dent on individual knowledge and cognition . Future research should attempt to replicate these ﬁndings at various levels of analysis to determine whether there are systematic differences in the ways that task varia - tion impacts learning at the organization , group , and individual levels . Although the current work is a ﬁrst step in exam - ining whether task variety impacts group learning rates , future studies could integrate the body of work on group process dynamics with this research , and attempt to examine the way in which task variety inﬂuences the complex group dynamics that shape the resulting learning outcomes . For instance , inter - esting questions might include : ( 1 ) Does task vari - ety stimulate different types of group communica - tion , coordination , or conﬂict than task specialization ? ( 2 ) Do group processes mediate whether groups are Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 53 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else able to beneﬁt from related variation ? ( 3 ) Does team composition affect its response to task variety ? Furthermore , although the study was not designed to explore the differential impact of explorative versus exploitative strategies ( Levinthal and March 1993 ) , the unexpected ﬁnding that variability in scores was associated with higher average scores suggests inter - esting avenues for future research . For instance , do groups beneﬁt by employing more exploratory learn - ing strategies , and do such beneﬁts depend on ( 1 ) the nature of the task , ( 2 ) the nature of the team , and / or ( 3 ) the stage of the learning curve ? Clearly , there is exciting work to be done in this area . The current study is limited in that it relies on only a few levels of variation and relatedness . Both variation and relatedness are multidimensional and continuous constructs . The research by Ellis ( 1965 ) and others points out that relatedness is a mat - ter of both degree and kind . For example , previ - ous knowledge might be related in its content or structure , the language with which it is conveyed , the process by which it is attained , or any number of other dimensions . In our study , the related tasks shared similarities in physical appearance , objectives , and implementation . There is also evidence that the tasks are related by origin—that is , Reversi is likely a descendant of Go . Subjectively , therefore , the tasks appear to be highly related on many dimensions . Our results thus do not enable us to determine which dimensions of relatedness enhanced learning . Because previous research has indicated that certain kinds of relatedness may actually impair learning by result - ing in negative transfer ( whereby stimulus similar - ity prompts the learner to apply a response that is actually inappropriate ) , the distinction between dif - ferent dimensions of relatedness is an important one ( Ellis 1965 ) . Future research requires that we develop much more rigorous and multidimensional measures of relatedness and variation . Failure to do so may yield unanticipated—and undesirable—results . Ulti - mately , we would like to be able to answer the ques - tions : How related must problems and solutions be to elicit positive transfer of learning ? and Under what level of variation will the learning rate be maxi - mized ? We have made a step toward answering these questions , however , much more work remains to be done . Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge the help and support of Tom Cloherty , Mahesh Rajan , Michael Lapre , Linda Argote , Tammy Madsen , Kevin Steensma , Cassandra Vasco , and several anony - mous reviewers . Support for this research was provided by the Systems Research Center at Boston University . References Abernathy , W . J . , K . Wayne . 1974 . Limits of the learning curve . Har - vard Bus . Rev . 52 ( 5 ) 109 – 119 . Amit , R . 1986 . Cost leadership strategy and experience curves . Strategic Management J . 7 281 – 292 . Anderson , J . R . 1983 . The Architecture of Cognition . Harvard Univer - sity Press , Cambridge , MA . Anzai Y . , H . Simon . 1979 . The theory of learning by doing . Psych . Rev . 86 ( 2 ) 124 – 140 . Argote , L . 1993 . Group and organizational learning curves : Indi - vidual , system and environmental components . British J . Soc . Psych . 32 31 – 52 . . 1999 . Organizational Learning : Creating , Retaining and Transfer - ring Knowledge . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston . , C . Insko , N . Yovetich , A . Romero . 1995 . Group learning curves : The effects of turnover and task complexity on group performance . J . Appl . Soc . Psych . 25 512 – 529 . Argyris , C . , D . Schon . 1996 . Organizational Learning II : Theory , Method , and Practice . Addison Wesley , Reading , MA . Arrow , K . J . 1962 . The economic implications of learning by doing . Rev . Econom . Stud . 29 166 – 170 . Baloff , N . 1971 . Extensions of the learning curve—some empirical results . Oper . Res . Quart . 22 ( 4 ) 329 – 340 . Bettenhausen , K . 1991 . Five years of groups research : What we have learned and what needs to be addressed . J . Management 17 345 – 381 . Bloom , K . C . , T . J . Shuell . 1981 . Effects of massed and distributed practice on the learning and retention of second - language vocabulary . J . Ed . Res . 74 245 – 248 . Brown , J . , P . Duguid . 1991 . Organizational learning and communi - ties of practice : Towards a uniﬁed view of working , learning and innovation . Organ . Sci . 2 40 – 57 . Cohen , W . M . , D . A . Levinthal . 1990 . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 128 – 152 . Collins , B . E . , H . Guetzkow . 1964 . A Social Psychology of Group Pro - cesses for Decision Making . John Wiley and Sons , New York . Cornelius , R . , V . Modigliani . 1985 . The effect of expanded versus massed practice on the retention of multiplication facts and spelling lists . J . Practical Res . Appl . 4 1 – 18 . Crossan , M . , H . Lane , R . White . 1999 . An organizational learn - ing framework : From intuition to institution . Acad . Management Rev . 24 522 – 537 . 54 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else Daft , R . 1995 . Organization Theory and Design . West Publishing , Min - neapolis , MN . , K . Weick . 1984 . Toward a model of organizations as interpre - tation systems . Acad . Management Rev . 66 70 – 74 . Darr , E . D . , L . Argote , D . Epple . 1995 . The acquisition , transfer and depreciation of knowledge in service organizations : Productiv - ity in franchises . Management Sci . 41 1750 – 1762 . Devadas , R . 1990 . Organizational learning curves : The effect of turnover and work group structure . Unpublished doctoral dis - sertation , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA . Dutton , J . , A . Thomas , 1984 . Treating progress functions as a man - agerial opportunity . Acad . Management Rev . 9 235 – 247 . Ellis , H . 1965 . The Transfer of Learning . Macmillan Company , New York . Fisher , M . L . , C . D . Ittner . 1999 . The impact of product variety on automobile assembly operations : Empirical evidence and sim - ulation analysis . Management Sci . 45 771 – 786 . Gick , M . L . , R . S . Lockart . 1996 . Cognitive and affective components of insight . R . J . Sternberg , J . E . Davidson , eds . The Nature of Insight . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Graydon , J . , M . Grifﬁn . 1996 . Speciﬁcity and variability of practice with young children . Perceptual and Motor Skills 83 83 – 88 . Greenberg , L . 1971 . Why the mine injury picture is out of focus . Mining Engrg . 23 51 – 53 . Guetzkow , H . , H . Simon . 1955 . The impact of certain communica - tion nets upon organization and performance in task - oriented groups . Management Sci . 1 233 – 250 . Hall , G . , S . Howel . 1985 . The experience curve from the economist’s perspective . Strategic Management J . 6 197 – 212 . Harlow , H . E . 1949 . The formation of learning sets . Psych . Rev 56 51 – 65 . Hatch , N . W . , D . C . Mowery . 1998 . Process innovation and learn - ing by doing in semiconductor manufacturing . Management Sci . 44 ( 11 ) 1461 – 1477 . Hayes , J . R . 1989 . The Complete Problem Solver , 2nd ed . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Hedberg , B . 1981 . How organizations learn and unlearn . P . C . Nystrom , W . H . Starbuck , eds . Handbook of Organizational Design . Oxford University Press , New York , 3 – 27 . Hinsz , V . B . 1990 . Cognitive and consensus processes in group recognition memory performance . J . Personality Social Psych . 59 705 – 718 . Huber , G . 1991 . Organizational learning : The contributing processes and the literatures . Organ . Sci . 2 88 – 115 . Katz , R . 1982 . The effects of group longevity on communication and performance . Admin . Sci . Quart . 27 81 – 104 . Klimoski , R . , S . Mohammed . 1994 . Team mental model : Construct or metaphor ? J . Management 20 403 – 437 . Lapre , M . , A . Mukherjee , L . Van Wassenhove . 2000 . Behind the learning curve : Linking learning activities to waste reduction . Management Sci . 46 597 – 611 . Larson , J . R . , C . Christensen . 1993 . Groups as problem - solving units : Toward a new meaning of social cognition . British Psych . Soc . 32 5 – 30 . Laughlin , P . , J . Sweeney . 1977 . Individual - to - group and group - to - individual transfer in problem solving . J . Experiment . Psych . : Human Learn . Memory 3 246 – 254 . Leavitt , H . 1951 . Some effects of certain communication patterns on group performance . J . Abnormal Soc . Psych . 46 38 – 50 . Leonard - Barton , D . 1992 . Core capabilities and core rigidities : A paradox in managing new product development . Strategic Management J . 13 111 – 125 . Leonard , D . , S . Sensiper . 1998 . The role of tacit knowledge in group innovation . California Management Rev . 40 ( 3 ) 112 – 132 . Levinthal , D . A . , J . G . March . 1993 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Strategic Management J . 14 95 – 112 . Levitt , B . , J . March . 1988 . Organizational learning . Ann . Rev . Soc . 14 319 – 340 . Levy , F . 1965 . Adaptation in the production process . Management Sci . 11 ( 6 ) B136 – B154 . Loewenstein , J . , L . Thompson , D . Gentner . 1999 . Analogical encod - ing facilitates knowledge transfer in negotiation . Psych . Bull . Rev . 6 586 – 597 . Lord , R . G . , M . Rowzee . 1979 . Task interdependence , temporal phase , and cognitive heterogeneity as determinants of lead - ership behavior and behavior - performance relations . Organ . Behavior Human Performance 23 182 – 200 . Lorge , I . , H . Solomon . 1959 . Individual performance and group per - formance in problem solving related to group size and previ - ous exposure to the problem . J . Psych . 48 107 – 114 . March , J . , H . Simon . 1958 . Organizations . John Wiley and Sons , New York . Martindale , C . 1995 . Creativity and connectionism . S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , R . A . Finke , eds . The Creative Cognition Approach MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 249 – 268 . Maskarinec , A . S . , C . P . Thompson . 1976 . The within - list distributed practice effect : Tests of the varied context and varied encoding hypothesis . Memory and Cognition 4 741 – 746 . Masters , J . 1999 . A history of traditional games . (cid:6) http : / / web . ukonline . co . uk / james . masters / traditionalGames / traditional gameshome . htm (cid:7) . Mathieu , J . , T . Heffner , G . Goodwin , E . Salas , J . Cannon - Bowers . 2000 . The inﬂuence of shared mental models on team process and performance . J . Appl . Psych . 85 273 – 283 Mayer , R . E . 1996 . The search for insight : Grappling with Gestalt psychology’s unanswered questions . R . J . Sternberg , J . E . Davidson , eds . The Nature of Insight . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . McLeod , J . 1998 . Index of card games by type . (cid:6) http : / / www . pagat . com / index . html (cid:7) . Moreland , R . 1999 . Transactive memory : Learning who knows what in work groups and organizations . L . L . Thompson , J . M . Levine , D . Messick , eds . Shared Cognition in Organizations . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ , 3 – 31 . Mukherjee , A . , M . Lapre , L . Wassenhove . 1998 . Knowledge driven quality improvement . Management Sci . 44 S35 – S49 Mumford , M . D . , D . P . Costanza , W . A . Baughman , K . V . Threlfall , E . A . Fleishman . 1994 . Inﬂuence of abilities on performance Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003 55 SCHILLING , VIDAL , PLOYHART , AND MARANGONI Learning by Doing Something Else during practice : Effects of massed and distributed practice . J . Ed . Psych . 86 134 – 144 . Paas , F . , J . Van Merrenboer . 1994 . Variability of worked examples and transfer of geometrical problem solving skills : A cognitive - load approach . J . Ed . Psych . 86 122 – 133 . Parlett , D . 1990 . A History of Card Games . Oxford University Press , New York . . 1999 . The Oxford History of Board Games . Oxford University Press , New York . Pugh , D . , D . Hickson , R . Hinings , C . Turner . 1968 . Dimensions of organization structure . Admin . Sci . Quart . 13 65 – 91 . Reber , A . 1989 . Implicit learning and tacit knowledge . J . Experiment . Psych . 118 219 – 235 . Rulke , D . , D . Rau . 2000 . Investigating the encoding process of trans - active memory development in group training . Group Organ . Management 25 373 – 396 . Sandelands , L . , R . Stablein . 1987 . The concept of organization mind . Res . Soc . Organ . 5 135 – 161 . Schmidt , R . A . 1975 . A schema theory of discrete motor skill learn - ing . Psych . Rev . 82 225 – 260 . Schwenk , C . 1984 . Cognitive simpliﬁcation processes in strategic decision - making . Strategic Management J . 5 111 – 128 Shaw , M . E . 1932 . Comparison of individuals and small groups in the rational solution of complex problems . Amer . J . Psych . 41 491 – 504 . Shrivastava , P . 1983 . A typology of organizational learning systems . J . Management Stud . 20 ( 1 ) 7 – 28 . Simon , H . 1962 . The architecture of complexity . Proc . Amer . Philos . Soc . 106 467 – 482 . . 1985 . What we know about the creative process . R . L . Kuhn , ed . , Frontiers in Creative and Innovative Management . Ballinger , Cambridge , MA , 3 – 20 . . 1991 . Bounded rationality and organizational learning . Organ . Sci . 2 125 – 134 . , Chase , W . G . 1973 . Skill in chess . Amer . Scientist 61 394 – 403 . Simonton , D . 1999 . Creativity as blind variation and selective reten - tion : Is the creative process Darwinian ? Psych . Inquiry 10 ( 4 ) 309 – 328 . Smith , A . 1776 . The Wealth of Nations . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Smith , S . M . , E . Z . Rothkopf . 1984 . Contextual enrichment and dis - tribution of practice in the classroom . Cognition and Instruction 1 341 – 358 . Sternberg , R . J . , J . E . Davidson . ed . 1995 . Nature of Insight . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Shure , G . , M . Rogers , I . Larsen . 1962 . Tassone , J . Group planning and task effectiveness . Sociometry 25 263 – 282 . Thorndike , E . L . 1898 . Animal intelligence : An experimental study of the associative processes in animals . Psych . Rev . : Ser . Mono - graph Supplements 2 1 – 109 . Tuckman , J . , I . Lorge . 1962 . Individual ability as a determinant of group superiority . Human Relations 15 45 – 51 . Tyre , M . J . , E . Von Hippel . 1997 . The situated nature of adaptive learning in organ . Organization Sci . 8 71 – 84 . Usher , A . 1929 . A History of Mechanical Inventions . Dover Publica - tions , New York . Von Hippel , E . 1998 . Economics of product development by users : The impact of “sticky” local information . Management Sci . 44 629 – 645 . Wegner , D . M . 1987 . Transactive memory : A contemporary analysis of the group mind . B . Mullen , G . R . Goethals , eds . Theories Group Behavior . Springer - Verlag , New York . Williams , K . , C . A . O’Reilly . 1998 . Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research . Res . Organ . Behavior 20 77 – 140 . Wright , T . P . 1936 . Factors affecting the cost of airplanes . J . Aeronau - tical Sci . 3 ( 4 ) 122 – 128 . Wulf , G . , R . A . Schmidt . 1997 . Variability of practice and implicit motor learning . J . Experiment . Psych . : Learn . Memory , and Cog - nition 23 987 – 1006 . Yelle , L . 1979 . The learning curve : Historical review and compre - hensive survey . Decision Sci . 10 302 – 328 . Accepted by Linda Argote ; received January 26 , 2000 . This paper was with the authors 7 months for 3 revisions . 56 Management Science / Vol . 49 , No . 1 , January 2003