Microbial sphingomyelinase induces RhoA - mediated reorganization of the apical brush border membrane and is protective against invasion The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Saslowsky , David E . , Jay R . Thiagarajah , Beth A . McCormick , Jean C . Lee , and Wayne I . Lencer . 2016 . “Microbial sphingomyelinase induces RhoA - mediated reorganization of the apical brush border membrane and is protective against invasion . ” Molecular Biology of the Cell 27 ( 7 ) : 1120 - 1130 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 05 - 0293 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 05 - 0293 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 05 - 0293 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 27662131 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA 1120 | D . E . Saslowsky , J . R . Thiagarajah , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | ARTICLE Microbial sphingomyelinase induces RhoA - mediated reorganization of the apical brush border membrane and is protective against invasion ABSTRACT The apical brush border membrane ( BBM ) of intestinal epithelial cells forms a highly structured and dynamic environmental interface that serves to regulate cellular physi - ology and block invasion by intestinal microbes and their products . How the BBM dynami - cally responds to pathogenic and commensal bacterial signals can define intestinal homeosta - sis and immune function . We previously found that in model intestinal epithelium , the conversion of apical membrane sphingomyelin to ceramide by exogenous bacterial sphingo - myelinase ( SMase ) protected against the endocytosis and toxicity of cholera toxin . Here we elucidate a mechanism of action by showing that SMase induces a dramatic , reversible , RhoA - dependent alteration of the apical cortical F - actin network . Accumulation of apical mem - brane ceramide is necessary and sufficient to induce the actin phenotype , and this coincides with altered membrane structure and augmented innate immune function as evidenced by resistance to invasion by Salmonella . INTRODUCTION Sphingolipids are major components of eukaryotic cell membranes that play critical roles in membrane organization and function . Sphingomyelin ( SM ) , by far the most abundant sphingolipid in mam - malian cells , is particularly enriched in the brush border membrane ( BBM ) of intestinal epithelial cells ( Simons and van Meer , 1988 ) . It is concentrated in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane ( PM ) and coalesces with cholesterol and other membrane components to form small , highly dynamic nanodomains often termed lipid rafts ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . SM - enriched lipid nanodomains have been implicated in the regulation of diverse membrane processes , including the initiation of signal transduction , cytoskeletal – mem - brane attachment , endocytosis , and vesicular trafficking ( Lingwood and Simons , 2010 ) , although the molecular basis for these functions is not fully understood . Membrane nanodomains ( lipid rafts ) are linked both structurally and functionally to the actin cytoskeleton ( Villalba et al . , 2001 ; Pelk - mans et al . , 2002 ; Gowrishankar et al . , 2015 ) , which contributes to the formation and maintenance of several key structures defining the apical pole of polarized enterocytes . This is the membrane sur - face that interfaces with the gut lumenal environment , and the actin cytoskeleton regulates in particular the apical microvilli and the peri - junctional actin ring , which affect transcellular and paracellular intes - tinal permeability , respectively ( Bretscher , 1991 ) . To do this , the cor - tical F - actin underlying the BBM interacts dynamically with membrane anchor proteins . These assemblies are regulated in turn by membrane lipids and diverse protein effectors . At other sites , the Monitoring Editor Robert G . Parton University of Queensland Received : May 18 , 2015 Revised : Jan 27 , 2016 Accepted : Feb 1 , 2016 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 05 - 0293 ) on February 10 , 2016 . † These authors contributed equally . * Address correspondence to : David Saslowsky ( david . saslowsky @ nih . gov ) . © 2016 Saslowsky , Thiagarajah , et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publi - cation it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : BBM , brush border membrane ; CT , cholera toxin ; CTB , chol - era toxin B - subunit ; ERM , ezrin / radixin / moesin ; SM , sphingomyelin ; SMase , sphingomyelinase ; TcdA , Clostridium difficile toxin A ; TER , transepithelial resis - tance ; TJ , tight junction . David E . Saslowsky a , b , c , † , * , Jay R . Thiagarajah a , b , c , † , Beth A . McCormick b , d , Jean C . Lee c , e , and Wayne I . Lencer a , b , c a Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition and b Harvard Digestive Diseases Center , Boston Children’s Hospital , Boston , MA 02115 ; c Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 ; d Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA 01655 ; e Division of Infectious Diseases , Department of Medicine , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Boston , MA 02115 Volume 27 April 1 , 2016 SMase reorganizes the enterocyte BBM | 1121 with SMase ( 0 . 75 U / ml ) displayed a dense clustering of F - actin cen - tralized in the plane of the apical membrane that extended 2 – 5 μm into the cell interior ( Figure 1 , A , right , and B , arrowheads , and Supplemental Movie S1 ) . Greater than 60 % of cells were affected , and SMase from other bacterial and human sources fully repro - duced this alteration ( unpublished data ) . Boiling SMase before monolayer application abolished the phenotype , consistent with cortical actin cytoskeleton is involved in many processes , including macropinocytosis , endocytosis , and cell migration . Many intestinal microbes and microbial products coopt the actin cytoskeleton for internalization into host cells , including Salmonella , Listeria , entero - hemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( EHEC ) , Shiga toxin , and cholera toxin ( CT ; Knutton et al . , 1989 ; Tilney and Portnoy , 1989 ; Finlay et al . , 1991 ; Badizadegan et al . , 2004 ; Romer et al . , 2010 ) . Sphingomyelinases ( SMases ) are enzymes that cleave the phos - phorylcholine head group from SM , leaving the ceramide compo - nent intact in the cell membrane ( Gulbins et al . , 2004 ) . This alters membrane structure and function and can result in coalescence of ceramide - rich nanodomains ( Grassme et al . , 2003 ) . Membrane ce - ramide can also serve as a second messenger in signaling pathways affecting cellular differentiation , proliferation , apoptosis , cytokine production , and ion transport ( Hannun , 1994 ; Gulbins et al . , 1997 ; Lepple - Wienhues et al . , 1999 ; Chik et al . , 2001 ; Ito et al . , 2004 ; Chapman et al . , 2005 ; Saslowsky et al . , 2009 ) , thereby placing SMases as potential regulators of these pathways . Both commensal and pathogenic microbes that colonize the gastrointestinal tract can synthesize and secrete SMase ( Helicobacter pylori , Staphylococcus aureus [ also called β - hemolysin ; Clarke et al . , 2006 ] , Lactobacillus brevis [ Angulo et al . , 2011 ] , Streptococcus thermophilus [ Angulo et al . , 2011 ] , Clostridium perfringens [ Si et al . , 2004 ] , Bacillus cereus [ Gilbert and Kramer , 1984 ] , Listeria species [ Gonzalez - Zorn et al . , 1999 ; Vazquez - Boland et al . , 2001 ] , and Saccharomyces cerevisiae [ Ella et al . , 1997 ] ) . Others may be added to the list , as SMase expres - sion by gut microbes has not been systematically analyzed . Because bacteria do not make SM , the physiological function ( s ) of bacterial SMase may be to modulate mucosal cell SM / ceramide levels , but how this would affect host enterocyte function and mucosal defense is not known . Our interest in how the conversion of SM to ceramide via SMase might affect the apical membrane of polarized enterocytes emerged from our studies on CT . CT enters intestinal cells from the apical surface by binding its sphingolipid receptor ganglioside GM1 . Like SM , GM1 has an affinity for lipid raft nanodomains , and these two sphingolipids coassemble and function together in such specialized membrane structures . We found earlier that in intestinal epithelial monolayers , the conversion of apical membrane SM to ceramide by exogenously applied bacterial SMase decreased endocytosis and toxicity of CT ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) . The effect was fully re - versible , specific to toxin entry via the apical membrane , and was recapitulated by addition of exogenous long - chain ceramides . In this article , we explore mechanisms that might explain these effects . Because cortical actin is linked to and affects the structure , function , and endocytosis of SM - containing lipid microdomains , including those bearing CT - GM1 complexes ( Villalba et al . , 2001 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ; Badizadegan et al . , 2004 ) , we began by testing for ef - fects of SMase on the apical actin cytoskeleton . RESULTS Conversion of apical SM to ceramide induces reorganization of the apical cortical actin cytoskeleton in polarized intestinal epithelia We found that apically applied SMase from S . aureus induces a strik - ing reorganization of F - actin localized to the apical region of polar - ized human T84 intestinal monolayers ( Figure 1 ) . Untreated control T84 monolayers not treated with SMase and fixed and stained with fluorophore - labeled phalloidin displayed an apical mesh - like net - work of F - actin with intact perijunctional actin rings , as visualized in en face optical confocal sections acquired at the plane of tight junc - tions ( TJs ; Figure 1A , left ) . In contrast , monolayers treated apically FIGURE 1 : Apical conversion of SM to ceramide by SMase induces cortical F - actin reorganization in polarized intestinal epithelial monolayers . ( A ) T84 monolayers were incubated with or without bacterial SMase ( 1 U / ml ) apically for 1 h , fixed , and F - actin stained with labeled phalloidin ( imaged en face to monolayer ) . Bottom , digital magnifications showing single cells . ( B ) Images of T84 monolayers rendered from confocal Z - dimension stacks and displayed perpendicular to the plane of the monolayer ( middle images are 20° rotations of top images ) . F - actin was detected as in A , and the TJ marker ZO - 1 was detected by immunostaining . Arrow indicates cortical F - actin network underlying apical PM , and arrowhead indicates F - actin phenotype ( also depicted in a rotatable movie format in Supplemental Movie S1 ) . Bottom , single XY - planes showing basolateral stress fibers . ( C ) T84 monolayers incubated apically with SMase for the indicated times were fixed and imaged as in A . Arrowheads indicate cortical F - actin bundle structures . ( D ) Caco - 2 monolayers incubated with or without SMase were fixed and imaged as in A . ( E ) Polarized T84 monolayers incubated apically for 1 h with buffer or 1 U / ml SMase were washed and incubated a further 3 h in buffer only ( SMase washout ) or ( F ) for 1 h in buffer containing 30 μM mixed long - chain SM species ( SMase + SM ) . Bars , 10 μm ( A – F ) , 1 μm ( A , bottom ) , 5 μm ( D , bottom ) . 1122 | D . E . Saslowsky , J . R . Thiagarajah , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell pable of invading cells ( Bajaj et al . , 1995 ; Hueck et al . , 1995 ; Figure 3 , right column ) . The magnitude of the block in Salmonella invasion was similar to that observed for inhibition of CT toxicity ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) . Because only a fraction ( ∼ 60 % ) of SMase - treated cells display the F - actin phenotype , we consider it likely that such cells are highly or even completely resistant to invasion . The SMase - induced F - actin phenotype could be caused by the generation and accumulation of membrane ceramide , loss of SM , perturbation of cholesterol homeostasis , or release and downstream action of the phosphorylcholine SM head group . The last - named possibility was rejected because monolayers incubated apically with a range of phosphorylcholine concentrations showed no change in apical F - actin morphology ( unpublished data ) . Similarly , depletion of cholesterol from the apical PM by extraction with methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) did not obviously change corticular F - actin structure ( Supplemental Figure S1 , D and E ) , suggesting that altera - tions in membrane cholesterol content , on their own , cannot explain the effect being dependent on enzymatic activity ( unpublished data ) . SMase induced detectable changes in F - actin structure as early as 15 min after apical treatment , with the maximal effect occur - ring by 60 min ( Figure 1C ) . SM depletion from the apical PM after SMase treatment was confirmed using a SM - binding probe ( Supple - mental Figure S1A ; Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) . Monolayers of hu - man Caco - 2 intestinal cells treated apically with SMase also dis - played altered F - actin morphology ( Figure 1D ) , suggesting that the results can be generalized to other in vitro models of human intesti - nal epithelia . Of interest , SMase treatment had no detectable effect on cortical F - actin morphology in nonpolarized T84 or Caco - 2 cells grown on glass coverslips ( Supplemental Figure S1B and unpub - lished data ) , implicating a specific effect of SMase on the special - ized actin assemblies forming the apical brush border of polarized epithelia . The F - actin phenotype was completely reversible ( Figure 1E ) , and apical repletion by addition of SM after SMase treatment de - creased the recovery time to achieve normal F - actin morphology ( Figure 1F ) . Remarkably , the perijunctional actin ring remained intact in all cells ( Figure 1A , apical ) , and basolateral actin stress fibers were not detectably changed structurally ( Figure 1B , bottom ) or function - ally ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) . Pretreatment with the actin - stabi - lizing drug jasplakinolide abrogated the SMase - induced F - actin phenotype , suggesting that F - actin bundles are formed via de novo polymerization events and not by remodeling of existing structures ( Supplemental Figure S1C ) . Apical SMase treatment had no obvious effect on the morphology of the TJ - associated protein ZO - 1 ( Figure 1B ) or transepithelial resistance ( TER ; Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) , suggesting that TJs also remained intact . In addition , cAMP - and Ca 2 + - dependent Cl − secretion was not affected by apical SMase , showing that ion channel function at the apical PM remained gener - ally intact and that ceramide formation was not compromising api - cal PM integrity ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ; Saslowsky et al . , 2009 ) . To demonstrate that the SMase - induced phenotype can be elic - ited via host – microbe interactions , we performed coculture experi - ments with human T84 monolayers and S . aureus bacteria that syn - thesize and secrete a SMase enzyme ( Hlb / β - hemolysin ) . T84 monolayers incubated apically for 75 min with wild - type , SMase - secreting S . aureus ( multiplicity of infection [ MOI ] = 20 ; strain 8325 - 4 ) displayed a similar F - actin phenotype as when exposed to puri - fied SMase alone ( Figure 2 , top left ) . Coculture of monolayers with an isogenic S . aureus strain harboring a viral - inactivating insertion in the β - hemolysin gene ( MOI = 20 ; strain DU5719 ; Patel et al . , 1987 ) resulted in a completely normal actin cytoskeleton ( Figure 2 , bottom left ) , consistent with the F - actin phenotype being induced by SMase enzymatic activity . As with the purified enzyme , apical exposure of monolayers to S . aureus had no effect on basolateral stress fibers ( Figure 2 , right ) or TER ( unpublished data ) . Our previous studies revealed a defect in CT uptake in intestinal epithelial cells treated apically with SMase , with ceramide genera - tion being the decisive factor ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) . The ac - tin cytoskeleton has been implicated in CT uptake into endocytic pathway ( s ) leading to intoxication , suggesting that SMase - induced alterations in apical F - actin might explain the protective effect against CT . To test this idea , we used a pathogenic microbe that requires actin for invasion : Salmonella typhimurium . Apical preincu - bation of T84 monolayers with SMase resulted in ∼ 50 % less invasion through the apical membrane by wild - type S . typhimurium com - pared with controls ( Figure 3 , left and middle columns ) . Assay back - ground was determined using the S . typhimurium isogenic mutant VV341 , which features a deletion of the hilA locus , rendering it inca - FIGURE 2 : SMase secretion by live bacteria induces cortical F - actin reorganization . T84 monolayers were incubated apically with wild - type S . aureus or a mutant devoid of SMase activity ( MOI = 20 ) for 1 h , fixed , and F - actin imaged as in Figure 1 . Bar , 10 μm . FIGURE 3 : Apical SMase treatment attenuates S . typhimurium invasion . Polarized T84 monolayers were treated apically with 1 U / ml SMase for 1 h apically before apical S . typhimurium incubation . After gentamicin treatment at 4°C for 1 h and extensive washing , only intracellular bacteria are viable . VV341 harbors a mutation rendering it incompetent to invade cells . n = 3 for each condition . Volume 27 April 1 , 2016 SMase reorganizes the enterocyte BBM | 1123 trate in dense foci of the apical membrane ( Figure 4B , top right ) , spatially consistent with the condensed F - actin structures induced by SMase ( Figure 4B , bottom ) . We also found that addition of exog - enous long - chain but not short - chain ( C6 ) ceramides partially reca - pitulated the cortical actin phenotype ( Figure 4C ) . Thus it is the generation of long - chain ceramide in the apical membrane that ex - plains the F - actin phenotype , consistent with our previous findings with respect to CT toxicity ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) . Although the de novo apical membrane ceramide generated by the SMase C reaction might flip to the inner PM leaflet and undergo conversion to C1P and other metabolites , this cannot explain our results , as pretreatment of monolayers with the ceramide kinase inhibitor NVP - 231 failed to block the F - actin phenotype ( unpublished data ) . In ad - dition , we found no evidence for ceramide ( via SMase treatment or exogenously added long - chain species ) inducing apoptosis in T84 monolayer as assayed by annexin V staining of the outer PM leaflet ( unpublished data ) . The results are consistent with the formation of large , ceramide - rich apical membrane domains . The striking change in cortical F - actin structure prompted us to examine whether other subcellular features of the BBM or intracel - lular organelles might be affected by conversion of apical SM to ceramide . Transmission electron microscopy showed microvillar ef - facement in the central region of cells overlying the region of F - ac - tin rearrangement in T84 monolayers ( Figure 5A ) . By confocal mi - croscopy , we found that microtubules extended deeper into the cell interior and essentially encased the SMase - induced F - actin bundles without obviously penetrating those structures ( Figure 5B ) . Immu - nolocalization of the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) – resident protein calnexin showed an obvious relocalization of calnexin away from the central , subapical region of each cell in monolayers treated api - cally with SMase as compared with buffer controls ( Figure 5C ) . This is the approximate area of the F - actin bundles , which , we infer , physically excluded the ER from these sites . We did not observe any changes in the intracellular distribution or morphology of the Golgi or recycling endosomes , as visualized by GM130 or Rab11 immu - nostaining ( Figure 5 , D and E , respectively ) , nuclei , or the early or late endosomal compartments ( gauged by EEA1 and LAMP1 im - munostaining , respectively ; unpublished data ) , consistent with their more basal and perinuclear localizations within polarized epithelial cells . GM1 , cholesterol , and phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate are depleted from the PM overlying SMase - induced F - actin structures Our tracer studies suggest that the ceramide produced during SMase exposure self - assembles into large , micrometer - sized do - mains . Such ceramide rich domains are known to exclude certain lipid raft components , including SM and cholesterol ( Megha and London , 2004 ; Taniguchi et al . , 2006 ; Sot et al . , 2008 ) . To test whether this occurs in our model system , we used fluorescently la - beled cholera toxin B - subunit ( CTB ) , which binds the lipid raft marker ganglioside GM1 with high specificity and affinity . In buffer - treated monolayers , fluorophore - labeled CTB was distributed across the full apical surface of individual cells , and F - actin displayed a uniform , mesh - like network underlying the apical PM ( Figure 6A , top ) . In SMase - treated monolayers , however , CTB localized GM1 to regions of the apical membrane almost exclusively outside of the regions overlying the centralized , F - actin bundles ( Figure 6A , bot - tom , outlined in red ) . The segregation of CT - GM1 complexes from the dense F - actin core in SMase - treated cells was also observed in monolayers labeled with native CTB and assessed by immunofluo - rescence using antibodies against CTB ( unpublished data ) . Thus the SMase - induced phenotype . To determine whether the loss of SM or accumulation of ceramide was the decisive factor , we incu - bated monolayers with SMase D from Corynebacterium pseudotu - berculosis . This enzyme cleaves SM at a different position , one phosphate group higher , leaving ceramide - 1 - phosphate ( C1P ) in the outer PM leaflet instead of ceramide ( Subbaiah et al . , 2003 ) . Apical SMase D treatment depleted the apical membrane of SM ( Supplemental Figure S1F ) but failed to elicit the same phenotype as S . aureus SMase ( also known as SMase C ; Figure 4A ) , although it did cause a loss of perijunctional actin staining and a more - diffuse - appearing cortical actin network ( Figure 1F , right ) . SMase D treat - ment also abolished TER ( unpublished data ) , unlike what we ob - serve with SMase C from S . aureus . This shows that SM loss from the apical PM cannot explain our results . To test whether the PM region overlying the SMase - induced F - actin structures was enriched in ceramide , we incorporated the fluo - rescent ceramide tracer C11 TopFluor ceramide into the apical membranes of SMase - treated or untreated T84 cells . The results show that in live cells , C11 TopFluor ceramide is distributed across the apical surface of control ( untreated ) monolayers , with small areas of enrichment evident in the focal plane of the apical PM of indi - vidual cells ( Figure 4B , top left ) . In contrast , SMase pretreatment of T84 monolayers caused the fluorescent ceramide tracer to concen - FIGURE 4 : Apical ceramide is necessary and sufficient to induce changes in cortical F - actin structure . ( A ) T84 monolayers treated apically with 1 U / ml indicated SMase were fixed and imaged as in Figure 1 . ( B ) As in A , except that the fluorescent ceramide C11 TopFluor ceramide was incubated for 15 min after SMase C / buffer treatment and imaged in live cells by confocal microscopy . ( C ) T84 monolayers were incubated for 2 h apically with either short - chain ( C6 ) or mixed long - chain ceramides complexed with α - cyclodextran , fixed , and imaged as in A . Bars , 10 μm . 1124 | D . E . Saslowsky , J . R . Thiagarajah , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell conversion of SM to ceramide causes a redistribution of F - actin to the central region of the apical membrane , and this coincides with the redistribution of the CTB - GM1 complex away from the PM re - gion overlying the F - actin bundles to peripheral regions of the api - cal PM outer leaflet . To quantify the redistribution , we calculated the Pearson’s cor - relation coefficient ( ρ ) for colocalization of CTB and cortical F - ac - tin . Image analysis of 90 individual cells from untreated monolay - ers showed that the fluorescence signals representing CTB and F - actin possess virtually no correlation ( ρ = 0 . 012 ± 0 . 075 SD ; FIGURE 5 : Effects of SMase on polarized T84 subcellular structure . ( A ) Transmission electron microscope micrographs of T84 monolayers incubated apically with or without SMase for 50 min . Ultrathin sections are perpendicular to the monolayer support . Scale bar , 1 μm . Box insets are 2 × digital zooms of apical PM region . ( B ) Three - dimensional reconstructions from XY - stacks of monolayers stained with phalloidin and immunostained for ZO - 1 and β - tubulin . Arrow denotes lack of microtubules in the internal region of the SMase - induced F - actin bundle structure . ( C ) Monolayers treated with or without SMase were methanol fixed and immunostained for the ER marker calnexin ( a fixation method not compatible with phalloidin staining ) . Enclosed areas represent single - cell outlines , and arrows denote regions of decreased calnexin immunostaining in SMase - treated monolayers . ( D ) Monolayers treated with or without SMase were fixed and FIGURE 6 : CTB , cholesterol , and PIP2 are depleted from the central PM region overlying SMase - induced F - actin structures . ( A ) T84 monolayers were incubated apically with or without SMase at 37°C , incubated with 10 nM fluorophore - labeled CTB at 4°C , fixed , stained for F - actin , and imaged by confocal microscopy at the plane of the apical PM . The hand - drawn white lines approximate individual cells exclusive of the perijunctional F - actin ring , and the red lines approximate the SMase - induced F - actin bundle structures . ( B ) Correlation analysis of CTB and F - actin fluorescence signal in T84 monolayers treated with or without SMase ( p < 0 . 001 ) . ( C ) As in A , except that cholesterol was stained with filipin or ( D ) PIP2 was immunostained using anti - PIP2 immunoglobulin M . Arrowheads in C and D denote PM domains overlying the F - actin bundle structures . Scale bars , 10 μm . immunostained for the Golgi marker GM130 or ( E ) Rab11 to mark recycling endosomes ( arrows denote region of altered F - actin structure for the latter ) . Scale bars , 1 μm ( A ) , 10 μm ( B – E ) . Volume 27 April 1 , 2016 SMase reorganizes the enterocyte BBM | 1125 should block the induction of F - actin bundle structures if RhoA acti - vation is required . Preliminary studies showed that TcdA concentra - tions > 0 . 5 nM could not be used because , on their own , they in - duced aberrant , cell - wide alterations in F - actin morphology and loss of TJ function ( Supplemental Figure S3 ; Riegler et al . , 1997 ; Feltis et al . , 2000 ) . Submaximal doses of TcdA toxin , however , did not in - duce obvious , deleterious alterations in F - actin structure , although we presume that some fraction of total RhoA was still affected at such lower doses of TcdA . As shown in Figure 8 , monolayers incu - bated with low - dose , 0 . 2 nM TcdA displayed only minor structural changes in cortical F - actin structure ( compare Figure 8 , B and C ) , and they were refractory to SMase - induced cortical F - actin reorgani - zation ( Figure 8 , compare D and F with E and G ) . The effect was quantified by scoring individual cells within the monolayer as having either a normal or SMase - phenotypic apical cortical F - actin structure ( as defined in Figure 1 ) . In buffer - treated monolayers , > 90 % of the cells displayed a normal F - actin morphology regardless of pretreat - ment with either buffer or 0 . 2 nM TcdA ( Figure 8H , first two bars ) . In Figure 6B ) , meaning that the two species have a random distribu - tion of fluorescence intensities with respect to each other across the plane of the apical PM . In contrast , the analysis of the same number of cells from SMase - treated monolayers showed a nega - tive correlation for the fluorescence intensities between CTB and F - actin ( ρ = − 0 . 328 ± 0 . 098 SD ) . In other words , in SMase - treated monolayers , regions of the PM with higher intensities of fluores - cence from CTB tend to have significantly ( p < 0 . 001 ) less fluores - cence from F - actin ( Figure 6B ) . A similar redistribution of choles - terol and phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) away from cortical F - actin was observed in the apical PM of SMase - treated cells , as assessed by the location of the sterol - binding molecule filipin and PIP2 immunolocalization ( Figure 6 , C and D , respec - tively ) . Thus , converting SM to ceramide caused canonical lipid raft – associated lipids resident in both inner and outer leaflets of the apical PM to redistribute away from the region overlying corti - cal F - actin bundle structures . The ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) family of actin - regulating pro - teins plays an important role in cortical F - actin and brush border membrane dynamics in polarized epithelia ( Bretscher , 1999 ; Saotome et al . , 2004 ) . Because the ERM proteins are coregulated by membrane PIP2 ( Bretscher et al . , 2002 ) , we tested whether they also might be involved in the SMase - induced phenotype by localizing them in relation to the SMase - induced actin bundles . Immunolocal - ization studies in untreated T84 monolayers showed that ezrin and ezrin - binding protein 50 ( EBP50 ) distributed with cortical F - actin across the apical PM , but they were excluded from TJ regions ( Figure 7 , A and B , top ) . In SMase - treated monolayers , however , the location of both ERM proteins was altered . Each colocalized with the F - actin bundles induced by SMase ( Figure 7 , A and B , bottom ) . In contrast to the ERM proteins , immunofluorescence of Myosin 1a showed no change in the lateral distribution of Myo1a across the apical PM , indicating that only certain cortical F - actin and microvillar effectors are affected by SMase treatment ( Figure 7C ) . RhoA activation by SMase action The Rho - family GTPases Rac , Rho , and Cdc42 can act as F - actin ef - fectors , are upstream mediators of ERM protein function ( Bretscher et al . , 2002 ) , and can be regulated by PIP2 ( Hilpela et al . , 2004 ) . A previous study showed that pharmacological inhibition of Rho - asso - ciated coiled - coil protein kinase ( ROCK ) , a downstream Rho effector , resulted in a cortical F - actin phenotype in T84 monolayers similar to SMase treatment ( Walsh et al . , 2001 ) , although this does not exactly phenocopy SMase - induced actin changes , as the small molecule Y27632 used in that study also compromises the perijunctional actin ring ( Supplemental Figure S2 ) . Thus , to test whether activation of Rho family GTPases was involved , we affinity isolated the active ( GTP - bound ) forms of RhoA , Cdc42 , and Rac1 in SMase - treated and control T84 monolayers . Whereas the activation state of Cdc42 and Rac1 was not affected ( unpublished data ) , apically applied SMase induced a transient 3 . 4 - fold increase in RhoA activation ( ± 0 . 3 - fold ) , which preceded the structural changes in F - actin ( Figure 8A , com - pare lanes 3 and 4 ) . This initial burst of RhoA activity rapidly dimin - ished to below control levels ( Figure 8A , lane 5 ; 0 . 9 - fold compared with lane 3 ) . To test whether RhoA activation was required for the SMase - in - duced phenotype , we first attempted to genetically deplete RhoA , but this resulted in T84 cells incapable of forming functional mono - layers and precluded an experiment ( unpublished data , supported by Nusrat et al . , 1995 ) . Therefore we instead used the RhoA - inacti - vating toxin from Clostridium difficile ( TcdA ; Just et al . , 1995 ) . Pre - treatment of T84 monolayers with TcdA before SMase incubation FIGURE 7 : Ezrin and EBP50 coalesce with SMase - induced cortical F - actin structures . T84 monolayers incubated apically with or without SMase were fixed and immunostained for ezrin ( A ) , EBP50 ( B ) , or myosin 1a ( C ) , and F - actin was stained with labeled phalloidin in all cases . Arrows denote colocalization of ezrin and EBP50 with SMase - induced F - actin bundle structures . Scale bars , 5 μm ( A , B ) , 10 μm ( C ) . 1126 | D . E . Saslowsky , J . R . Thiagarajah , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell SMase - treated monolayers , TcdA pre - treatment rescued the normal actin - phenotype by approximately threefold ( Figure 8H , last two bars ) . These results suggest that RhoA activation is required for in - duction of the observed F - actin bundles and implicate microbial SMase - induced ceramide microdomains as regulators of RhoA sig - naling at the apical BBM of the human intestine . DISCUSSION The results of this study show that enzymatic conversion of SM to ceramide in the apical membrane of polarized intestinal cells causes large - scale domain formation and restructuring of the apical , corti - cal F - actin network underlying the PM . It appears that after libera - tion from SM , ceramide forms its own macrodomain , which excludes cholesterol and CT – GM1 complexes , ablates microvilli , and some - how nucleates the dramatic F - actin rearrangement . The bulk of ce - ramide overlying the SMase - induced F - actin bundles are likely long - chain ceramides . This ceramide - induced actin phenotype can be induced by a microbial species common to the gut microflora and is dependent on RhoA activation . The combined effects of membrane lipid domain alterations and F - actin restructuring result in resistance to invasion by the gut pathogen Salmonella and cholera toxin and perhaps by other microbes and microbial products that coopt the apical actin cytoskeleton to enter host cells . Reorganization of the apical cortical actin cytoskeleton A striking finding from this study is the effect of SMase action on apical , corticular F - actin structure and how CT – GM1 complexes and cholesterol on the outer leaflet of the apical PM segregate away from the overlying PM region . The SMase / ceramide - induced reor - ganization of the apical F - actin cytoskeleton is distinct from other reports of F - actin reorganization in polarized cells ( Hecht et al . , 1988 ; Madara et al . , 1988 ; Ivanov et al . , 2004 ) . Only the F - actin un - derlying the apical PM is affected , and there are no effects on TJs , as assessed functionally by TER and morphologically by immunos - taining for ZO - 1 . SMase does not affect perijunctional actin rings or basolateral stress fibers , and neither protein kinase C ( PKC ) nor phospholipase C , enzymes involved in F - actin remodeling , mediate the SMase - induced reorganization in apical F - actin . Such selective disruption of cortical F - actin without impairment of TJ structure / function is a unique finding and may be an important way that lumi - nal gut microbes affect the BBM to limit uptake and lysosomal deg - radation . Because the PM regions overlying the condensed F - actin structure exclude the CTB - subunit bound to GM1 in polarized intes - tinal epithelial cells , we propose that our previous findings ( that SMase inhibits toxicity and CT - GM1 endocytosis ) are explained by alterations in corticular F - actin structure and function . The ability of SMase to induce the observed phenotypes at the apical PM is likely to be specific for SM species containing long acyl chains because only exogenous long - chain ceramides recapitulate the SMase - induced alterations in F - actin bundle formation . These findings correlate well with our previous studies showing that api - cally loaded long - but not short - chain ceramides inhibit cholera in - toxication from the apical PM ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) . Note that the C1P generated by SMase D action cannot flip between bi - layers as readily as ceramide , and this may be important for how ceramide acts to deform the membrane . Although ceramide can be converted into the potent signaling molecule S1P ( Merrill et al . , 1997 ) , this does not explain our results , as exogenous S1P addition had no effect on F - actin structure or CT toxicity , and we never ob - served activation of extracellular signal – regulated kinase signaling as would be expected if S1P was generated at significant levels FIGURE 8 : RhoA activation is required for the cortical F - actin phenotype induced by apical SMase treatment . ( A ) GTP - bound Rho ( active form ) was affinity isolated from T84 monolayer protein lysates and analyzed for RhoA by immunoblot ( top ) . Bottom , RhoA immunoblot of input protein lysates to demonstrate RhoA equivalence among sample extracts . A 20 - ng amount of purified histidine - tagged RhoA was loaded as standard ( lane 1 ) . Experimental samples ( lanes 3 – 5 ) were treated with buffer only ( 60 min ) or 1 U / ml SMase for the indicated times . Positive controls ( lane 2 ) were produced by incubating lysates from parallel samples with an excess of GTP γ S to preload RhoA , locking it in an “active” state . Molecular weight standards are indicated at the left . ( B – G ) T84 monolayers were preincubated with buffer or TcdA for 1 h before the addition of buffer or 0 . 5 U / ml SMase for an additional 1 h . F - actin and ZO - 1 were imaged as in Figure 1B , but en face to monolayer . Arrowheads indicate SMase - induced F - actin bundles , and arrows denote attenuated bundle formation in TcdA - pretreated monolayers . ( F , G ) Digital zooms of the boxed areas in D and E , respectively . Scale bars , 10 μm . ( H ) Quantitation of results depicted in Figure 6 , B – G . Based on F - actin morphology , cells populating fields of view in confocal optical sections from three independent experiments were scored for displaying the F - actin phenotype ( bundling and concentration in the central region underlying the apical PM ) . Total number of cells analyzed / condition is indicated above the bars . Data are representative of at least three independent experiments . Volume 27 April 1 , 2016 SMase reorganizes the enterocyte BBM | 1127 mensal microbes colonizing the gut , some produce SMase , as do certain microbial pathogens ( Gonzalez - Zorn et al . , 1999 ; Angulo et al . , 2011 ) . This , we predict , will alter the brush border of intestinal cells in ways described here , although perhaps without the dramatic progression to microvillar loss and large - scale cortical F - actin rear - rangement seen in vitro . Still , such transient SMase - induced disrup - tion of lipid rafts by formation of ceramide microdomains and Rho - dependent alterations in actin structure and function are predicted to have physiological consequences . This is perhaps best evidenced by the resistance we observe against cholera toxin ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) and Salmonella invasion ( this study ) . It is also possible that in some instances , disruption of lipid nanodomains by deple - tion of SM on its own , separate from the induced F - actin rearrange - ments , may account for resistance to infection against some mi - crobes and viruses . Recent studies , for example , show that by binding to the glycosphingolipid GB3 , P . aeruginosa can induce the early stages of cell invasion by “zippering” lipid rafts around the organism as it induces inwardly directed membrane curvature ( Eier - hoff et al . , 2014 ) . The invaginations depend on lipid raft structure but not on actin dynamics . In the case of Pseudomonas aeruginosa , actin dynamics is still required for microbial invasion and pathogen - esis , but this may not be true for other microbes or viruses . Overall , our results implicate the microbial SMases as one way in which gut microbes might modulate the epithelial barrier so as to affect innate host defense and enhance or disrupt intestinal homeostasis . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents Long - chain porcine brain ceramides or sphingomyelins and synthetic C6 ceramide were from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL ) , bacterial SMase ( S . aureus ) was from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) , goat anti - calnexin was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Dallas , TX ) , anti – phos - pho - ezrin was from Cell Signaling Technology ( Danvers , MA ) , anti - PI ( 3 , 4 ) P2 was from Eschelon Biosciences ( Salt Lake City , UT ) , anti - GM130 was from Abcam ( Cambridge , MA ) , CTB – Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate , phalloidin – Alexa Fluor 568 , and mouse anti - ZO1 were from Thermo Fisher Scientific ( Waltham , MA ) , anti - CTB was used as previously described ( Saslowsky et al . , 2013 ) , and C11 TopFluor ce - ramide was from Avanti Polar Lipids . Hanks’ balanced salt solution ( HBSS ) , pH 7 . 4 , was used for all manipulations with live cells . Recom - binant lysenin fused to red fluorescent protein was a kind gift from Toshihide Kobayashi ( RIKEN , Japan ) . This fusion protein contains a truncated form of lysenin that cannot oligomerize but still binds SM specifically ( Kiyokawa et al . , 2005 ) . Other kind reagent gifts were as follows : C . difficile TcdA was from Borden Lacy ( Vanderbilt University ) ; SMase D from C . pseudotuberculosis was from Yvonne Lange ( Rush University Medical Center ) and Yusuf Hannun ( Stony Brook University ) ; anti - EBP50 and anti - ezrin were from Anthony Bretscher ( Cornell University ) ; anti - Myo1a was from Mark Mooseker ( Yale University ) ; and rabbit anti - Rab11 was from Jim Goldenring ( Vanderbilt University ) . All other chemicals and reagents were from Sigma - Aldrich . Cell culture Polarized monolayers of human T84 cells were cultured on 0 . 33 - ( for imaging ) or 5 - cm 2 ( for biochemistry ) polyester Transwell inserts ( Corning , Acton , MA ) as previously described ( Lencer et al . , 1995 ) . S . aureus growth conditions Bacterial cultures were grown overnight with aeration at 37°C in tryptic soy broth . The bacteria were pelleted , washed once in 0 . 01 M phosphate and 0 . 15 M NaCl , pH 7 . 2 , and resuspended in the same buffer . ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ; Saslowsky et al . , 2009 ; unpublished data ) . In T84 cells , cholesterol depletion does not microscopically change apical cortical F - actin structure , although CT endocytosis and toxicity are inhibited by cholesterol depletion using cyclodex - trins ( Wolf et al . , 2002 ) . Because ceramide has a strong tendency to self - assemble into large microdomains and exclude cholesterol ( Grassme et al . , 2003 ; Gulbins et al . , 2004 ) , it is possible that ceramide acts indirectly to affect CT function by perturbing PM cho - lesterol dynamics . This possibility is supported by our finding that cholesterol is depleted in the central PM domain overlying the ce - ramide - induced F - actin bundles . Our results showing a redistribution of the ERM proteins ezrin and EBP50 to the F - actin bundles imply that apical conversion of SM to ceramide disrupts the normal tethering of cortical F - actin to the apical PM without compromising the ability of F - actin to interact with these effector proteins . We presume that this is due to nascent ce - ramide domains forming in the outer apical PM leaflet and disrupt - ing the normal ERM – PM associations . The mechanism underlying this redistribution , however , is unexplained . In nonpolarized MCF - 7 cells ( Zeidan et al . , 2008 ) , exogenous SMase induces dephosphory - lation of ezrin via the action of PKC δ , but this does not explain our results , as inhibition of PKC δ by calphostin C failed to block SMase - induced F - actin and ezrin reorganization ( unpublished data ) . SMase - induced alterations in apical membrane microdomains How the conversion of SM to ceramide in the outer leaflet of the PM actuates the reorganization of F - actin microfilaments is not known . One possibility is that the enzymatic action of SMase displaces a corti - cal actin anchor protein ( s ) or lipid ( such as PIP2 ) from membrane nanodomains , thus compromising the ability of F - actin to fully and uniformly distribute across the inner leaflet of the apical cell PM . We suspect that PIP2 is a key player in the apical SMase phenotype be - cause it normally partitions into the inner - leaflet , sphingomyelin - con - taining lipid raft nanodomains ( Liu et al . , 1998 ; Pike and Miller , 1998 ) but becomes excluded from the central , presumably ceramide - rich domain induced by SMase treatment ( Figure 6D ) . PIP2 regulates actin dynamics by binding and modulating the activity of actin effectors , including N - WASP ( Ho et al . , 2004 ) , small GTPases such as Rac , Rho , and Cdc42 ( Hilpela et al . , 2004 ) , and members of the ERM family ( Bretscher et al . , 2002 ) . Our findings that apical SMase transiently ac - tivates RhoA and concomitantly causes redistribution of ezrin , PIP2 , and EBP50 raises the possibility that disruption of apical microdo - mains may mediate the process . One possibility would be that ce - ramides produced by SMase disrupt the PIP2 - containing inner leaflet microdomains either by flipping to the inner leaflet and coalescing or through transbilayer effects via long , saturated acyl - chain interactions ( Devaux and Morris , 2004 ; Gri et al . , 2004 ) . These ideas are supported by a study by Abe et al . ( 2012 ) , who found that during cytokinesis ( in HeLa cells ) , SM and PIP2 are concentrated in the outer and inner leaflets , respectively , of the membrane bilayer comprising the cleav - age furrow . After exogenous SMase treatment , they no longer de - tected PIP2 concentration at this site , RhoA accumulated to a lesser extent , and cytokinesis was impaired . Of interest , cholesterol was also enriched at the cleavage furrow , a feature not affected by SMase ac - tion , analogous to what we find in the present studies . Whether any of the phosphatidylinositides or ERM proteins plays a direct role in alteration of brush border structure remains to be determined . In vivo relevance The activities of the exogenous SMases on apical brush border membranes might have clinical relevance . Of the 100 trillion com - 1128 | D . E . Saslowsky , J . R . Thiagarajah , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell subtle changes in F - actin after SMase treatment but were not counted as positive for the phenotype ( some cell examples of this are evident in Figure 1C , no arrows ) . The Y - axis in Figure 6B is the Pearson’s correlation coefficient , where + 1 indicates perfect positive correlation of CTB and F - actin signal distribution , 0 indicates no correlation ( random distribution ) , and − 1 indicates perfect negative correlation ( mutually exclusive distribution ) . Electron microscopy T84 monolayers grown on 0 . 33 - cm 2 Transwell inserts were fixed , embedded , processed , and imaged as previously described ( Madara et al . , 1987 ; Nusrat et al . , 1992 ) using a JEOL 1200EX elec - tron microscope ( Peabody , MA ) . S . typhimurium invasion assay Polarized T84 monolayers ( 0 . 33 - cm 2 inserts ) were treated apically with 1 U / ml SMase for 1 h at 37°C and washed three times , and then S . typhimurium ( wild - type strain SL1344 or the isogenic mutant VV341 ) was added to the apical chamber for 1 h at 37°C . After wash - ing , gentamicin was added as previously described ( Criss et al . , 2001 ) . After gentamicin treatment at 4°C for 1 h and extensive wash - ing , only intracellular bacteria remain viable . Lipid incorporation into cell membranes Lipids or solvent ( 100 % ethanol ) were titrated into buffer containing 0 . 034 % defatted bovine serum albumin to a final concentration of 30 μM as previously described ( Pagano et al . , 1991 ) . For incorpora - tion of C6 and mixed long - chain ceramides into apical membranes , these species were titrated to a final concentration of 10 μM into 8 mM α - cyclodextrin in HBSS at 50°C to form a water - soluble com - plex and were applied apically to monolayers for 2 h . For cholesterol depletion , monolayers were incubated in 3 mM M β CD apically for 50 min . To quantify cholesterol depletion after the 50 min incuba - tion , a fraction of the apical Transwell chamber contents was col - lected and assayed using an Amplex Red cholesterol assay kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) per manufacturer’s protocol . Briefly , pure 3 mM M β CD in HBSS was used as a blank in the assay , and experi - mental samples were directly compared with cholesterol standard curves ( both with and without the inclusion of M β CD , which did not influence the assay results ) . RhoA activation assay and immunoblot analysis T84 monolayers grown on 5 - cm 2 inserts were assayed for RhoA activation using a commercially available assay kit ( Cytoskeleton , Denver , CO ) . Lysates from two inserts were pooled for each sam - ple , and 800 μg of crude lysate was used to produce the positive control . SDS – PAGE ( 10 – 20 % Tris - HCl gradient gels ) and standard immunoblotting methodologies were as previously described ( Saslowsky and Lencer , 2008 ) , using manufacturer - supplied anti - RhoA antibody . Band intensity was quantified by densitometric anal - ysis using ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) . The relative intensities of the active RhoA bands were normal - ized to image background as well as total RhoA control bands . Confocal microscopy Lysenin fused to red fluorescent protein ( 2 mg / ml ) was applied api - cally for either 60 min at 4°C or 5 min at 37°C to untreated and SMase C – or D – treated ( 1 U / ml , 50 min , 37°C ) T84 monolayers . Monolayers were then washed , fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) for 20 min , and mounted on slides using ProLong Gold Anti - fade reagent ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . For immunolocalization studies , polarized T84 monolayers were treated and fixed as de - scribed and permeabilized using 0 . 2 % saponin for 30 min at room temperature . Cells were washed , blocked in 10 % nonimmune goat serum , and immunostained using the indicated primary antibody and then incubated with Alexa Fluor – conjugated secondary anti - bodies ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) with or without the inclusion of Alexa Fluor – conjugated phalloidin to detect F - actin . For C11 Top - Fluor ceramide studies , polarized T84 monolayers ( 0 . 33 - cm 2 inserts ) were treated apically for 1 h with SMase ( 1 U / ml ) or HBSS , washed , and then incubated with 2 . 5 μM C11 TopFluor ceramide for 15 min . Inserts were mounted in a microperfusion chamber and imaged as indicated later . Parallel inserts were fixed ( 4 % PFA ) and stained with Alexa Fluor 568 – labeled phalloidin . All samples were imaged by confocal microscopy on a Zeiss in - verted Axiovert 200M microscope ( Zeiss , Peabody , MA ) coupled to a PerkinElmer - Cetus CSU - X1 spinning - disk confocal unit ( Boston , MA ) , using a Zeiss 63 × ( 1 . 4 numerical aperture ) oil immersion objec - tive lens and a QuantEM 512SC electron - multiplying charge - cou - pled device camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . SlideBook software ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations , Denver , CO ) was used for image capture and processing . For rendering XZ - planes , stacks of XY - images were acquired at 0 . 3 - μm intervals . Colocalization analysis Regions similar to the ones delineated with white lines in Figure 6A were analyzed for pixel correlation of the two channels for 90 cells each in images of SMase - treated and untreated ( buffer ) monolayers . This measurement was taken from optical sections that included both leaflets of the apical PM but excluded the apical perijunctional actin ring , which is not affected by SMase treatment . By definition , only cells that responded to SMase by aggregation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton were analyzed for the SMase set ( representing ∼ 60 % of cell population ) . That ∼ 60 % of cells display the F - actin phe - notype after SMase treatment is likely due , in large part , to T84 cells being a morphologically and functionally heterogeneous cell line . Strikingly , ∼ 10 – 20 % of cells in typical monolayers have much larger than average ( ∼ 4 – 10 × ) apical diameter and lack any evidence of api - cal cortical F - actin ( presumably no apical microvilli ) , and we have always considered these cells to be undifferentiated . As for visual scoring of the alteration in F - actin structure , only cells showing clear F - actin changes were counted ( e . g . , cells denoted by arrows in Figure 1C ) . Thus the remaining 20 – 30 % of cells may have shown ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Marian Neutra for discussions and critical reading of the manuscript , Wendy Kam , Lydia Kaoutzani , and Meredith O’Hear for help with tissue culture , Jessica Wagner with image analysis , and Dan Chinnapen and Elisha Fielding for assistance with recombinant protein expression and purification . This work was supported by Na - tional Institutes of Health Grants R01 DK048106 to W . I . L . , DK056754 and DK033506 to B . A . M . , and K01 DK073480 and RO3 DK084090 to D . E . S . , Pediatric Scientist Development Program K12 - HD000850 to J . R . T . , P30 DK034854 to the Harvard Digestive Diseases Center , and a Boston Children’s Hospital Career Development Award to D . E . S . REFERENCES Abe M , Makino A , Hullin - Matsuda F , Kamijo K , Ohno - Iwashita Y , Hanada K , Mizuno H , Miyawaki A , Kobayashi T ( 2012 ) . A role for sphingomyelin - rich lipid domains in the accumulation of phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate to the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis . Mol Cell Biol 32 , 1396 – 1407 . Volume 27 April 1 , 2016 SMase reorganizes the enterocyte BBM | 1129 Hueck CJ , Hantman MJ , Bajaj V , Johnston C , Lee CA , Miller SI ( 1995 ) . Salmonella typhimurium secreted invasion determinants are homolo - gous to Shigella Ipa proteins . Mol Microbiol 18 , 479 – 490 . Ito Y , Sato S , Ohashi T , Nakayama S , Shimokata K , Kume H ( 2004 ) . Reduc - tion of airway anion secretion via CFTR in sphingomyelin pathway . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 324 , 901 – 908 . Ivanov AI , McCall IC , Parkos CA , Nusrat A ( 2004 ) . Role for actin filament turnover and a myosin II motor in cytoskeleton - driven disassembly of the epithelial apical junctional complex . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 2639 – 2651 . Just I , Selzer J , von Eichel - Streiber C , Aktories K ( 1995 ) . The low molecular mass GTP - binding protein Rho is affected by toxin A from Clostridium difficile . J Clin Invest 95 , 1026 – 1031 . Kiyokawa E , Baba T , Otsuka N , Makino A , Ohno S , Kobayashi T ( 2005 ) . Spatial and functional heterogeneity of sphingolipid - rich membrane domains . J Biol Chem 280 , 24072 – 24084 . Knutton S , Baldwin T , Williams PH , McNeish AS ( 1989 ) . Actin accumulation at sites of bacterial adhesion to tissue culture cells : basis of a new di - agnostic test for enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli . Infect Immun 57 , 1290 – 1298 . Lencer WI , Moe S , Rufo PA , Madara JL ( 1995 ) . Transcytosis of cholera toxin subunits across model human intestinal epithelia . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 , 10094 – 10098 . Lepple - Wienhues A , Belka C , Laun T , Jekle A , Walter B , Wieland U , Welz M , Heil L , Kun J , Busch G , et al . ( 1999 ) . Stimulation of CD95 ( Fas ) blocks T lymphocyte calcium channels through sphingomyelinase and sphingo - lipids . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 , 13795 – 13800 . Lingwood D , Simons K ( 2010 ) . Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizing prin - ciple . Science 327 , 46 – 50 . Liu Y , Casey L , Pike LJ ( 1998 ) . Compartmentalization of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in low - density membrane domains in the absence of caveolin . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 245 , 684 – 690 . Madara JL , Stafford J , Barenberg D , Carlson S ( 1988 ) . Functional coupling of tight junctions and microfilaments in T84 monolayers . Am J Physiol 254 , G416 – G423 . Madara JL , Stafford J , Dharmsathaphorn K , Carlson S ( 1987 ) . Structural analysis of a human intestinal epithelial cell line . Gastroenterology 92 , 1133 – 1145 . Megha , London E ( 2004 ) . Ceramide selectively displaces cholesterol from ordered lipid domains ( rafts ) : implications for lipid raft structure and function . J Biol Chem 279 , 9997 – 10004 . Merrill AH Jr , Schmelz EM , Dillehay DL , Spiegel S , Shayman JA , Schroeder JJ , Riley RT , Voss KA , Wang E ( 1997 ) . Sphingolipids—the enigmatic lipid class : biochemistry , physiology , and pathophysiology . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 142 , 208 – 225 . Nusrat A , Delp C , Madara JL ( 1992 ) . Intestinal epithelial restitution . Charac - terization of a cell culture model and mapping of cytoskeletal elements in migrating cells . J Clin Invest 89 , 1501 – 1511 . Nusrat A , Giry M , Turner JR , Colgan SP , Parkos CA , Carnes D , Lemichez E , Boquet P , Madara JL ( 1995 ) . Rho protein regulates tight junctions and perijunctional actin organization in polarized epithelia . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 , 10629 – 10633 . Pagano RE , Martin OC , Kang HC , Haugland RP ( 1991 ) . A novel fluorescent ceramide analogue for studying membrane traffic in animal cells : ac - cumulation at the Golgi apparatus results in altered spectral properties of the sphingolipid precursor . J Cell Biol 113 , 1267 – 1279 . Patel AH , Nowlan P , Weavers ED , Foster T ( 1987 ) . Virulence of protein A - deficient and alpha - toxin - deficient mutants of Staphylococcus aureus isolated by allele replacement . Infect Immun 55 , 3103 – 3110 . Pelkmans L , Puntener D , Helenius A ( 2002 ) . Local actin polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Sci - ence 292 , 535 – 539 . Pike LJ , Miller JM ( 1998 ) . Cholesterol depletion delocalizes phosphati - dylinositol bisphosphate and inhibits hormone - stimulated phosphati - dylinositol turnover . J Biol Chem 273 , 22298 – 22304 . Riegler M , Sedivy R , Sogukoglu T , Castagliuolo I , Pothoulakis C , Cosentini E , Bischof G , Hamilton G , Teleky B , Feil W , et al . ( 1997 ) . Epidermal growth factor attenuates Clostridium difficile toxin A - and B - induced damage of human colonic mucosa . Am J Physiol 273 , G1014 – G1022 . Romer W , Pontani LL , Sorre B , Rentero C , Berland L , Chambon V , Lamaze C , Bassereau P , Sykes C , Gaus K , Johannes L ( 2010 ) . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocy - tosis . Cell 140 , 540 – 553 . Saotome I , Curto M , McClatchey AI ( 2004 ) . Ezrin is essential for epithelial organization and villus morphogenesis in the developing intestine . Dev Cell 6 , 855 – 864 . Angulo S , Morales A , Danese S , Llacuna L , Masamunt MC , Pultz N , Cifone MG , De Simone C , Delgado S , Vila J , et al . ( 2011 ) . Probiotic sonicates selectively induce mucosal immune cells apoptosis through ceramide generation via neutral sphingomyelinase . PLoS One 6 , e16953 . Badizadegan K , Wheeler HE , Fujinaga Y , Lencer WI ( 2004 ) . Trafficking of cholera toxin - ganglioside GM1 complex into Golgi and induction of toxicity depend on actin cytoskeleton . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 287 , C1453 – C1462 . Bajaj V , Hwang C , Lee CA ( 1995 ) . hilA is a novel ompR / toxR family member that activates the expression of Salmonella typhimurium invasion genes . Mol Microbiol 18 , 715 – 727 . Bretscher A ( 1991 ) . Microfilament structure and function in the cortical cytoskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Biol 7 , 337 – 374 . Bretscher A ( 1999 ) . Regulation of cortical structure by the ezrin - radixin - moesin protein family . Curr Opin Cell Biol 11 , 109 – 116 . Bretscher A , Edwards K , Fehon RG ( 2002 ) . ERM proteins and merlin : inte - grators at the cell cortex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 , 586 – 599 . Chapman H , Ramstrom C , Korhonen L , Laine M , Wann KT , Lindholm D , Pasternack M , Tornquist K ( 2005 ) . Downregulation of the HERG ( KCNH2 ) K ( + ) channel by ceramide : evidence for ubiquitin - mediated lysosomal degradation . J Cell Sci 118 , 5325 – 5334 . Chik CL , Li B , Karpinski E , Ho AK ( 2001 ) . Ceramide inhibits the outward potassium current in rat pinealocytes . J Neurochem 79 , 339 – 348 . Clarke CJ , Snook CF , Tani M , Matmati N , Marchesini N , Hannun YA ( 2006 ) . The extended family of neutral sphingomyelinases . Biochemistry 45 , 11247 – 11256 . Criss AK , Ahlgren DM , Jou TS , McCormick BA , Casanova JE ( 2001 ) . The GTPase Rac1 selectively regulates Salmonella invasion at the apical plasma membrane of polarized epithelial cells . J Cell Sci 114 , 1331 – 1341 . Devaux PF , Morris R ( 2004 ) . Transmembrane asymmetry and lateral domains in biological membranes . Traffic 5 , 241 – 246 . Eierhoff T , Bastian B , Thuenauer R , Madl J , Audfray A , Aigal S , Juillot S , Rydell GE , Muller S , de Bentzmann S , et al . ( 2014 ) . A lipid zipper trig - gers bacterial invasion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 12895 – 12900 . Ella KM , Qi C , Dolan JW , Thompson RP , Meier KE ( 1997 ) . Characteriza - tion of a sphingomyelinase activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Arch Biochem Biophys 340 , 101 – 110 . Feltis BA , Wiesner SM , Kim AS , Erlandsen SL , Lyerly DL , Wilkins TD , Wells CL ( 2000 ) . Clostridium difficile toxins A and B can alter epithelial perme - ability and promote bacterial paracellular migration through HT - 29 enterocytes . Shock 14 , 629 – 634 . Finlay BB , Ruschkowski S , Dedhar S ( 1991 ) . Cytoskeletal rearrangements ac - companying salmonella entry into epithelial cells . J Cell Sci 99 , 283 – 296 . Gilbert RJ , Kramer JM ( 1984 ) . Bacillus cereus enterotoxins : present status . Biochem Soc Trans 12 , 198 – 200 . Gonzalez - Zorn B , Dominguez - Bernal G , Suarez M , Ripio MT , Vega Y , Novella S , Vazquez - Boland JA ( 1999 ) . The smcL gene of Listeria ivanovii encodes a sphingomyelinase C that mediates bacterial escape from the phagocytic vacuole . Mol Microbiol 33 , 510 – 523 . Gowrishankar K , Ghosh S , Saha SCR , Mayor S , Rao M ( 2015 ) . Active re - modeling of cortical actin regulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface molecules . Cell 149 , 1353 – 1367 . Grassme H , Jendrossek V , Riehle A , von Kurthy G , Berger J , Schwarz H , Weller M , Kolesnick R , Gulbins E ( 2003 ) . Host defense against Pseudo - monas aeruginosa requires ceramide - rich membrane rafts . Nat Med 9 , 322 – 330 . Gri G , Molon B , Manes S , Pozzan T , Viola A ( 2004 ) . The inner side of T cell lipid rafts . Immunol Lett 94 , 247 – 252 . Gulbins E , Dreschers S , Wilker B , Grassme H ( 2004 ) . Ceramide , membrane rafts and infections . J Mol Med 82 , 357 – 363 . Gulbins E , Szabo I , Baltzer K , Lang F ( 1997 ) . Ceramide - induced inhibition of T lymphocyte voltage - gated potassium channel is mediated by tyrosine kinases . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 , 7661 – 7666 . Hannun YA ( 1994 ) . The sphingomyelin cycle and the second messenger function of ceramide . J Biol Chem 269 , 3125 – 3128 . Hecht G , Pothoulakis C , LaMont JT , Madara JL ( 1988 ) . Clostridium difficile toxin A perturbs cytoskeletal structure and tight junction permeability of cultured human intestinal epithelial monolayers . J Clin Invest 82 , 1516 – 1524 . Hilpela P , Vartiainen MK , Lappalainen P ( 2004 ) . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 282 , 117 – 163 . Ho HY , Rohatgi R , Lebensohn AM , Le M , Li J , Gygi SP , Kirschner MW ( 2004 ) . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 , 203 – 216 . 1130 | D . E . Saslowsky , J . R . Thiagarajah , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Taniguchi Y , Ohba T , Miyata H , Ohki K ( 2006 ) . Rapid phase change of lipid microdomains in giant vesicles induced by conversion of sphingomyelin to ceramide . Biochim Biophys Acta 1758 , 145 – 153 . Tilney LG , Portnoy DA ( 1989 ) . Actin filaments and the growth , movement , and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite , Listeria monocyto - genes . J Cell Biol 109 , 1597 – 1608 . Vazquez - Boland JA , Kuhn M , Berche P , Chakraborty T , Dominguez - Bernal G , Goebel W , Gonzalez - Zorn B , Wehland J , Kreft J ( 2001 ) . Listeria pathogenesis and molecular virulence determinants . Clin Microbiol Rev 14 , 584 – 640 . Villalba M , Bi K , Rodriguez F , Tanaka Y , Schoenberger S , Altman A ( 2001 ) . Vav1 / Rac - dependent actin cytoskeleton reorganization is required for lipid raft clustering in T cells . J Cell Biol 155 , 331 – 338 . Walsh SV , Hopkins AM , Chen J , Narumiya S , Parkos CA , Nusrat A ( 2001 ) . Rho kinase regulates tight junction function and is necessary for tight junction assembly in polarized intestinal epithelia . Gastroenterology 121 , 566 – 579 . Wolf AA , Fujinaga Y , Lencer WI ( 2002 ) . Uncoupling of the cholera toxin - G ( M1 ) ganglioside receptor complex from endocytosis , retrograde Golgi trafficking , and downstream signal transduction by depletion of membrane cholesterol . J Biol Chem 277 , 16249 – 16256 . Zeidan YH , Jenkins RW , Hannun YA ( 2008 ) . Remodeling of cellular cytoskel - eton by the acid sphingomyelinase / ceramide pathway . J Cell Biol 181 , 335 – 350 . Saslowsky DE , Lencer WI ( 2008 ) . Conversion of apical plasma membrane sphingomyelin to ceramide attenuates the intoxication of host cells by cholera toxin . Cell Microbiol 10 , 67 – 80 . Saslowsky DE , Tanaka N , Reddy KP , Lencer WI ( 2009 ) . Ceramide activates JNK to inhibit a cAMP - gated K + conductance and Cl – secretion in intes - tinal epithelia . FASEB J 23 , 259 – 270 . Saslowsky DE , te Welscher YM , Chinnapen DJ , Wagner JS , Wan J , Kern E , Lencer WI ( 2013 ) . Ganglioside GM1 - mediated transcytosis of cholera toxin bypasses the retrograde pathway and depends on the structure of the ceramide domain . J Biol Chem 288 , 25804 – 25809 . Si JM , Yu YC , Fan YJ , Chen SJ ( 2004 ) . Intestinal microecology and quality of life in irritable bowel syndrome patients . World J Gastroenterol 10 , 1802 – 1805 . Simons K , Ikonen E ( 1997 ) . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 . Simons K , van Meer G ( 1988 ) . Lipid sorting in epithelial cells . Biochemistry 27 , 6197 – 6202 . Sot J , Ibarguren M , Busto JV , Montes LR , Goni FM , Alonso A ( 2008 ) . Choles - terol displacement by ceramide in sphingomyelin - containing liquid - ordered domains , and generation of gel regions in giant lipidic vesicles . FEBS Lett 582 , 3230 – 3236 . Subbaiah PV , Billington SJ , Jost BH , Songer JG , Lange Y ( 2003 ) . Sphingo - myelinase D , a novel probe for cellular sphingomyelin : effects on choles - terol homeostasis in human skin fibroblasts . J Lipid Res 44 , 1574 – 1580 .