112 K . Mohri et al . ZOOLOGICAL SCIENCE 36 : 112 – 119 ( 2019 ) © 2019 Zoological Society of Japan * Corresponding author . E - mail : sato @ faculty . chiba - u . jp † Present address : Department of Bioinformatics , College of Life Sciences , Ritsumeikan University , Kusatsu 525 - 8577 , Japan doi : 10 . 2108 / zs180151 INTRODUCTION The ADF / cofilins are a family of small actin - binding pro - teins . They bind to actin molecules at a stoichiometry of 1 to 1 and enhance turnover of actin monomeric units within actin filaments by regulating the rate constants of depolymerization and polymerization at the filament ends ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) and severing the filaments ( Nishida et al . , 1984 ; Hayden et al . , 1993 ) . Every eukaryotic cell has at least one member of ADF / cofilin family , and these proteins perform an essential role for the structure and function of actin organization in the cells ( for review , see Bamburg , 1999 ; Ono , 2003 ) . Involvement of cofilin in the regulation of actin assembly in developing skeletal mus - cle was first demonstrated in chicken ( Abe et al . , 1989 ) . In mammals , there are three ADF / cofilin family proteins , ADF ( destrin ) ( Moriyama et al . , 1990 ) , nonmuscle - type cofilin Chimeric Mice with Deletion of Cfl2 that Encodes Muscle - Type Cofilin ( MCF or Cofilin - 2 ) Results in Defects of Striated Muscles , Both Skeletal and Cardiac Muscles Kurato Mohri 1† , Fumie Suzuki - Toyota 2 , Takashi Obinata 1 , and Naruki Sato 1 , 3 * 1 Department of Biology , Graduate School of Science and Technology , Chiba University , Yayoi - cho , Inage - ku , Chiba 263 - 8522 , Japan 2 Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology , Graduate School of Medicine , Chiba University , Chiba 280 - 8670 , Japan 3 Department of Biology , Graduate School of Science , Chiba University , Yayoi - cho , Inage - ku , Chiba 263 - 8522 , Japan Cofilin , a member of the ADF / cofilin family , is an actin - binding protein which is widely distributed among eukaryotic organisms and involved in actin filament dynamics in a variety of cell types . In mammalian striated muscles , muscle - type cofilin ( MCF or cofilin - 2 ) is predominantly expressed . Previous investigations have shown that MCF plays an essential role in the regulation of assembly of contractile apparatus in skeletal muscle , but its role in cardiac muscle has remained unclear . In the present study , in order to further clarify the role of MCF in organization of myofibrillar structure in vivo , we generated chimeric mice with a combination of MCF - deficient cells that were generated by Cfl2 - knockout ( Cfl2 - / - ) and wild type cells containing MCF , and examined the effect of MCF defi - ciency on striated muscles , especially on the fine structures of contractile apparatus in cardiac muscle . We found that mice chimeric for MCF deficient cells exhibited structural defects in their skeletal muscles as previously reported . Histological analysis showed that MCF deficiency leads to degradation of myofibers and promotion of muscle regeneration . Electron microscopic observa - tion of cardiac muscle of the chimeric mice showed coexistence of the cells with normal sarco - meres and those with disorganized myofibrils in a chimeric pattern . In these cofilin - deficient cells , myofilaments were scattered in the cytoplasm and myofibrillar structures were severely disrupted . These results provide strong evidence for that MCF plays a critical role in the formation and the maintenance of myofibril structure not only in skeletal muscle but also in cardiac muscle . Key words : cofilin , myofibril assembly , cardiac muscle , chimeric mice , Cfl2 , cofilin - 2 ( NMCF or cofilin - 1 ) and muscle - type cofilin ( MCF or cofilin - 2 ) , which are encoded by Dstn , Cfl1 and Cfl2 gene in mice , respectively ( Ono et al . , 1994 ; Gillett et al . , 1996 ) . NMCF and ADF are expressed in a variety of tissues , while MCF is a predominant form in striated muscles ( Ono et al . , 1994 ) and its expression is coupled with muscle cell differentiation ( Mohri et al . , 2000 ) . MCF shows higher affinity to F - actin than NMCF and ADF ( Nakashima et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , it has been reported that MCF binds to ATP - actin with higher affinity ( Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ; Kremneva et al . , 2014 ) and severs F - actin more efficiently than NMCF ( Chin et al . , 2016 ) . In chicken , there is only one cofilin isoform that is highly homolo - gous with mammalian MCF ( Abe et al . , 1990 ; Ono et al . , 1994 ) . The existence of MCF suggests its specialized roles in the assembly or regulation of myofibril actin filaments in mam - malian striated muscles . The requirement of cofilin for myofibril organization has been demonstrated in several instances ; 1 ) Null mutation of muscle - cofilin isoform gene ( unc - 60B ) of nematode , C . elegans , and loss of its function caused severe disorganiza - tion of sarcomeric actin filaments in body wall muscle during 113 Cofilin deficient striated muscles embryonic development ( Ono et al . , 1999 ) . 2 ) Formation of unusual actin filament bundles and increase of stress fibers in C2C12 myogenic cells have been observed , when cofilin was inactivated by over - expression of LIM kinase , which tar - gets a Ser residue of cofilin ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Amano et al . , 2001 ) and in addition , increase of phosphorylated MCF in cardiomyocytes led to generation of actin filament bundles ( Subramanian et al . , 2015 ) . 3 ) Mutation in MCF gene , CFL2 , caused nemaline myopathy , which is characterized by the presence of nemaline bodies , cytoplasmic rods containing actin and Z - band proteins ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ) . 4 ) Depletion of cofilin from cardiac myocytes by RNA interference caused disorganization of sarcomeric actin filaments ( Skwarek - Maruszewska et al . , 2009 ) . 5 ) Depletion of chicken cofilin , a homologue of mammalian MCF , with anti - sense morpholino oligonucleotides in chicken skeletal myogenic cells in culture at the early phase of myofibrillogenesis caused abnormal actin aggregates in myotubes and impaired actin organization into cross - striated myofibril structures ( Miyauchi - Nomura et al . , 2012 ) . 6 ) In MCF - deficient mice ( Cfl2 − / − ) that were generated by Cfl2 gene knockout ( KO ) , intact sarcomeric structures were formed in skeletal muscle by the newborn stage , but severe disruption of sar - comeres in skeletal muscle occurred during postnatal devel - opment , indicating that MCF is essential for maintenance of skeletal muscle , although not critical for muscle develop - ment ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ; Gurniak et al . , 2014 ) . In the Cfl2 KO mice , remarkable failures in heart have not been observed at neonatal stages . The effect of MCF deficiency on contractile apparatus of mature heart muscle could not been examined in these cofilin KO mice , because they died within several weeks after birth . Therefore , it remained to be clarified how MCF is needed for heart muscle . In this study , in order to further clarify the role of MCF in organization of myofibrillar structure in vivo , we generated chimeric mice with a combination of MCF deficient cells and wild type cells containing MCF , and examined the effect of MCF deficiency on striated muscles , especially on the fine structures of contractile apparatus using cardiac muscle as a model system . In such chimeric mice , the cells with MCF , MCF ( + ) cells , and the cells without MCF , MCF ( − ) cells , co - exist in the heart tissue , since cardiac muscle cells are mono - nucleated . The presence of MCF ( + ) cells may allows the chimeric mice to survive and the heart to function to some extent at least . In such living mice , the effect of MCF - deficiency on contractile apparatus of heart could be examined clearly . In contrast , in the case of skeletal muscles of the chimeric mice , MCF exists at a variety of amount in the muscle cells ; multi - nucleated cells that are formed as a result of fusion of MCF ( + ) cells and MCF ( − ) cells at a variety of ratio . Therefore , the effect of MCF - deficiency on contrac - tile apparatus might not be clearly examined with the skele - tal muscles of chimeric mice . On the other hand , in the case of MCF - deficient ( Cfl2 - KO ) mice , the mice get serious dam - age during postnatal development and die in a month or so after birth ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) . Therefore , it is rather diffi - cult to examine the effect of MCF - deficiency in the mature MCF - KO mice . In contrast , examination of cardiac muscle tissue of the chimeric mice that are composed of the MCF ( + ) cells and the MCF ( − ) cells provides us advantage to clarify how contractile apparatus are altered in MCF - null striated muscle cells in adult mice . In this study , we found that sarco - meric structures of contractile apparatus , myofibril , were severely damaged in MCF - deficient heart cells of adult mice , although they were once formed during embryonic through neonatal development ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) . It is suggested that MCF is indispensable for maintenance and / or dynamic reorganization of contractile apparatus of heart cells in adult mature mice . MATERIAL AND METHODS Cell culture The mouse E14 embryonic stem cell line was used to generate MCF deficient ES cells . The ES cells were propagated in high glu - cose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium supplemented with 15 % fetal calf serum , 2 mM L - glutamine , 1 : 100 diluted GIBCO non - essential amino acid solution , sodium - pyruvate , 0 . 1 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol , and purified recombinant leukemia inhibitory factor at 1 , 000 units / ml . The cells were maintained in the undifferentiated state by culturing on confluent feeder layers of mitomycin C treated primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts or an STO feeder cell line . Targeted disruption of two MCF gene ( Cfl2 ) alleles in ES cells by homologous recombination A genome DNA clone containing Cfl2 was isolated from a 129SV genomic DNA library . The targeting vector that is shown in Fig . 1 was introduced by electroporation into the ES cells . The cells were selected by resistance to G418 in the presence of 0 . 35 mg / ml of G418 and 2 mM gancyclovir for 10 – 13 days for obtaining the cells where a homologous recombination was achieved . Targeted cell lines with a heterozygous knockout of the Cfl2 were further selected at 10 mg / ml G418 for 15 – 21 days and finally we obtained five clones which had no wild - type alleles of MCF gene . Targeted disruption of the MCF locus was confirmed by PCR and Southern blotting . Generation of chimeric mice MCF ( + / − ) or MCF ( – / – ) ES cells were trypsinized , and injected into the blastocoel cavity of blastocysts of B6C3F1 mice at the day 3 . 5 postcoitum . Injected blastocysts were transferred to the uterus of pseudopregnant ICR females 2 . 5 days after mating with sterile stud males . Southern blotting Genomic DNA of ES cells was prepared using a DNA isolation kit ( Gentra Systems USA ) according to the instructions and 20 μ g of DNA was digested by Spe I and Not I , electrophoresed on 0 . 6 % aga - rose gel , and then transferred to nitrocellulose filters . Hybridization was performed by the procedure of Thomas ( 1980 ) , with probes labeled with 32 P by the method of Feinberg and Vogelstein ( 1983 ) . The filters were finally washed in 2xSSC ( 1xSSC : 150 mM NaCl , 25 mM trisodium citrate ) at 55 ° C . β - galactosidase ( β - gal ) staining and histological sections Chimeric mice tissues were fixed for 2 h at 4 ° C in 1 % parafor - maldehyde , 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 02 % Nonidet P - 40 in phos - phate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , followed by washing and then stained in the solution containing 0 . 1 M sodium phosphate ( pH 7 . 2 ) , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 02 % Nonidet P - 40 , 0 . 01 % sodium deoxycholic acid , 1 mg / ml of X - gal ( 5 - bromo - 4 - chlolo - 3 - indolyl β - D - galactopyranoside ) , 5 mM K 3 Fe ( CN ) 6 and 5 mM K 4 Fe ( CN ) 6 at 37 ° C overnight . For paraffin sections , the stained specimens were post - fixed in 4 % paraformal - dehyde in PBS and embedded in paraffin wax after dehydration with an ethanol / xylene series . Sections at 8 μ m thickness were pre - pared , and counter - stained with haematoxilin - eosin ( HE ) . Transmission electron microscopy Ventricular muscle tissues from the 8 - weeks old chimeric mice 114 K . Mohri et al . were processed for β - gal staining by the same way as described above . Small tissue blocks were isolated from the positively stained areas , and were rinsed with 0 . 05 M cacodylate buffer at pH 7 . 4 . Then , they were fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer for 2 h , and post - fixed with OsO 4 . Thereafter , the samples were dehydrated thorough a graded ethanol series and then embedded in Epon 812 . Semi - thin sections were cut on an ultramicrotome ( Ultracut FC 4E ; Reichert - Jung , Vienna , Austria ) , stained with tolu - idine blue , and observed with a light microscope ( BX50 Olympus , Tokyo ) . Ultrathin sections were cut on the same ultramicrotome and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate . Observation was per - formed with a transmission electron microscope ( 1200EX ; JEOL , Tokyo ) . It is known that the products ( insoluble 5 , 5 ′ - dibromo - 4 , 4 ′ - dichloro - indigo ) raised through β - gal staining reaction are detectable in the sections by electron microscopy , as in our proce - dure ( Bonnerot et al . , 1987 ; St John et al . , 2007 ) . RESULTS Targeted disruption of the Cfl2 encoding MCF in ES cells To achieve target disruption of the Cfl2 ( MCF gene ) in ES cells , a positive negative selection strategy was applied as described ( Mansour et al . , 1988 ) . The scheme of the tar - geting event is shown in Fig . 1A . PGK - neo cassette that was included in targeting vector served to select transformed cells in the presence of G418 . To exclude randomly inte - grated cells , HSV - tk cassette was linked at the 3’ end of the genome DNA fragment . Randomly inte - grated cells , which have HSV - tk gene , were killed in the presence of ganciclo - vir . Embryonic stem cells ( E14 ) were transfected and G418 - and ganciclovir - resistant clones were isolated and screened for gene targeting events by PCR . Homologous recombination of iso - lated clones was confirmed by Southern blot analysis as shown in Fig . 1B . Genomic DNA of isolated clones were digested by Spe I and Not I , and hybrid - ized with the probe A ( indicated in Fig . 1A , top ) . In the case of the wild type cells , this probe hybridized to the 9k bp fragment , while in the case of the tar - geted cells , two fragments were detected : namely , the predicted 12k bp fragment derived from mutated allele and the 9k bp fragment derived from wild type allele as shown in Fig . 1A . Three hundred fifty colonies of G418 - and ganciclovir - resistant cells were exam - ined and two independent clones had undergone a single homologous recom - bination event . To prepare the cells homozygous deficient in Cfl2 , independent ES cell lines containing single targeted MCF allele were further selected in the medium containing high concentration of G418 ( 10 mg / ml ) . Southern blot analysis verified that 5 clones had undergone gene conversion and resulted in disrup - tion of both alleles . In these homozygous clones , the 9k bp fragments that are generated by Spe I and Not I digestion of the wild type MCF allele had been lost and only 12k bp fragments derived from the mutated allele were detected ( Fig . 1B ) . To confirm that the recombination was achieved , Eco RI digests of genomic DNA of the heterozygous and homozygous targeted clones were analyzed by southern hybridization with probe B indicated in Fig . 1A , top . In the heterozygous clone , the 8k bp fragment specific for the probe B was detected , whereas any specific fragments were not detected in the homozygotes ( Fig . 1C ) . Since this probe hybridizes to the sequence encoding exon 4 of the Cfl2 , it was confirmed that the transcribed region of Cfl2 had been lost in the homo - zygous clones . Generation of chimeric mice The two clones , named 331o and 54w , of MCF ( − / − ) ES cells that were derived from independent heterozygous lines 331 and 54 respectively were used for generation of chime - ric mice composed of MCF - null , MCF ( − / − ) , cells and nor - mal MCF ( + / + ) cells . The chimeras thus generated were termed MCF ( − / − ) chimera in the following . The chimeras termed MCF ( + / − ) chimera were produced by using one of the two heterozygous MCF ( + / − ) ES clones in place of the MCF ( − / − ) cells and used as control chimeras . The chime - rism of postnatal animals was evaluated by the coat color . Fig . 1 . Targeted disruption of MCF gene ( Cfl2 ) by homologous recombination in ES cells . ( A ) Schematic representation of the Cfl2 locus ( Upper ) , the targeting vector ( Middle ) and the mutant allele ( Bottom ) produced by homologous recombination . The exons of Cfl2 are presented by white ( coding sequence ) and gray boxes ( 5’ and 3’ UTR ) . Location of the Lac Z - PGK - neo cassette and HSV - tk cassette in the targeting vector are also indicated . The entire coding sequence of MCF was replaced with lacZ - PGK - neo cassette , and β - gal gene ( lacZ ) was placed under the control of the endogenous MCF promoter . ( B ) Genomic DNA of wild type ES cell strain E14 ( + / + ) , heterozygous ( + / − ) and homozygous ( − / − ) clones for the MCF knockout allele were digested by Spe I and Not I , and hybridized with the probe A that is shown in ( A ) top . The results with wild type ES cells , 2 different hetero - zygous ( + / − ) clones ( named 331 and 54 , respectively ) , and 5 different homozygous ( − / − ) clones ( named 331o , 54g , 54m , 54s and 54w , respectively ) are demonstrated . Hybridiza - tion detected the bands corresponding to 9k bp for wild type allele and 12k bp for the tar - geted allele . In the homozygous clones , the 9k bp band had been lost and only the 12k bp band was detected . ( C ) Eco RI - digested genomic DNAs of hetero - and homozygous clones were hybridized with the probe B that is shown in ( A ) top . In the heterozygous clone , the 8k bp fragment specific for the probe B was detected , whereas any specific fragments were not detected in the homozygotes . 115 Cofilin deficient striated muscles The chimerism of MCF ( − / − ) chimeras was varied among the chimeras generated . Since the chimeras with high con - tribution of MCF ( − / − ) cells could be born and survive , it is likely that embryonic development was less affected by the MCF deficiency . Some of the MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mice were smaller in size , and four out of 19 MCF ( − / − ) chimeras showed some defects in the outer appearance , such as stooping backs with dragging the legs and waddling gaits ( Fig . 2A ) . In contrast , none of the MCF ( + / − ) chimeras showed these abnormalities . Morphological defects observed in MCF deficient stri - ated muscle tissues To detect the distribution of the ES - derived cells in chi - meric mice , β - gal staining was performed on the chimeric mouse tissues . Since Lac Z transgene was expressed under the control of the endogenous MCF promoter , β - gal was pro - duced in the MCF ( + / − ) and MCF ( − / − ) cells instead of the MCF in striated muscle tissues . In any developmental stages examined , there was no obvious difference in the β - gal staining patterns between MCF ( + / − ) and MCF ( − / − ) chime - ras . β - gal staining - positive ( or blue - colored ) regions were frequently observed in various regions of the striated mus - cles of chimeric mice . Examples of β - gal stained leg muscle and heart of adult mice are shown in Fig . 2B , 2C and 2D . As seen in Fig . 2B , hind limb taken from some of chimeric mice looked normal ( left ) or showing abnormalities , namely some - what imbalanced distribution of muscle and a little deformed joint ( right ) . Chimerism of MCF ( − / − ) cells in muscle of abnormal mice looked higher than that of normal mice . The muscles containing blue - colored regions were sectioned and examined by standard histological methods using HE staining . As shown in Fig . 3B and 3C , the muscles in the blue - colored areas where MCF - deficient cells were enriched showed structural alterations , although the extent of altera - tion varied . In the case of thigh muscle we observed , the tissue sections of the blue - colored regions showed the fea - tures just like those of dystrophic muscles , namely variation in fiber size , fiber degradation ( Fig . 3C , arrow ) and increased number of mono - nucleic cells . In consequence , connective tissue cells in the endomysium appeared to be increased to fill the space . However , in the β - gal staining - negative regions where the host normal cells were concentrated and the regions where only a small number of MCF - deficient cells were included , the muscle defects were scarcely observed . In the case of the β - gal positive thoracic muscles of MCF ( + / − ) chimera , the muscle fibers of uniform size were regularly distributed and fiber degradation was not observed at the any developmental stages ( Fig . 3A ) . The morphologi - cal alterations in the blue - colored regions of muscles were observed not only in the thigh muscles but also in the breast , abdomen , back , arm , shoulder and calf muscles . Twelve out of 19 adult MCF ( − / − ) chimeras analyzed showed β - gal - positive skeletal muscles , and in these chimeras , 9 animals showed skeletal muscle abnormalities . The structural altera - tion of muscle fibers in the blue - colored muscles was not observed at the embryonic and neonatal stages ( Fig . 4A and 4B ) but became detectable for the first time at 2 - weeks post - natal stage ( Fig . 4C ) . On the other hand , in the β - gal positive muscles of MCF ( + / − ) chimera , structural defects were scarcely observed at the any developmental stages as shown in Fig . 3A . As described above , some adult MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mice exhibited the behavioral disorders . In these chimeras , blue - colored MCF ( − / − ) cells were detected more frequently in the leg muscles ( Fig . 2B ) , suggesting that the structural disorganization of skeletal muscle led to this behavioral disorder and the magnitude of these defects depends on extent of contribution of the MCF ( − / − ) cells in the skeletal muscles . The sections of the ventricular muscle of 2 - week and 4 - week postnatal MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mice are shown in Fig . 5 . In the both developmental stages , obvious difference was Fig . 2 . Outer appearance of chimeric mice generated by a combi - nation of MCF ( − / − ) cells and wild type cells . ( A ) Majorities of chimera looked normal ( above ) but some of them showed abnor - malities such as smaller in size and bending back ( below ) . Bar , 1 cm . ( B ) , ( C ) , and ( D ) β - gal staining of leg muscle ( B , C ) and heart ( D ) of adult chimeric mice . Locations of the cells derived from MCF ( − / − ) cells were detected by blue - color using β - gal staining . Panel ( C ) shows a magnified image of leg shown in panel B , left . Bar , 2 mm . Fig . 3 . Morphology of the skeletal muscles in adult MCF ( + / − ) or MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mice . Sections were treated with a combination of HE staining and β - gal staining . Muscle cells in the blue - colored region that were derived from MCF ( + / − ) or MCF ( − / − ) cells are demonstrated . In these regions , MCF is deficient or decreased in amount . ( A ) Cross - section of MCF ( + / − ) chimera thoracic muscle . ( B ) and ( C ) Transverse sections of MCF ( − / − ) chimera thigh muscle at lower magnification ( B ) and higher magnification ( C ) . Muscles of MCF ( − / − ) chimera show a high variation in fiber size , increasing number of mono - nucleic cells and fiber degradation ( arrow in C ) . Bars , 100 μ m . 116 K . Mohri et al . scarcely observed between the region without blue color and the region with blue color where MCF ( − / − ) cells were concentrated , as far as examined by histological methods under an optical microscope . The morphology of β - gal stained cardiac muscle in the MCF ( − / − ) chimeras was indistinguishable from that of MCF ( + / − ) chimeras ( data not shown ) . Twelve MCF ( − / − ) chimeras examined had MCF deficient cardiac muscle cells in their heart , but all of them showed similar results . Electron microscopic observations of cardiac muscle cells in MCF ( – / – ) chimeric mice Disruption of sarcomeric myofibril structure in the skel - etal muscle of cofilin ( cofilin - 2 , or MCF ) KO mice has been demonstrated ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) . We were able to con - firm the disruption of myofibril structure in MCF - deficient muscle of our MCF ( – / – ) chimeric mice . On the other hand , the previous report described that any remarkable defect in myofibrils was not observed in the heart cells of cofilin - 2 KO mice within a month after birth . Therefore , in this study , we examined the heart of the 8 - weeks old adult MCF ( − / − ) chi - meric mice by electron microscopy and found the coexis - tence of the cells having myofibrils with normal sarcomere structures and those having disorganized myofibrils ; they were observed in a chimeric pattern in the MCF ( − / − ) chime - ric mice ( Fig . 6 ) . As indicated by arrows in Fig . 6 , needle - like deposits were observed in the cells with disorganized myofi - brils ; the deposits are regarded as the electron - dense product ( 5 , 5 ′ - dibromo - 4 , 4 ′ - dichloro - indigo ) that was gener - ated as the result of β - gal staining reaction as previously described ( Bonnerot et al . , 1987 ; St John et al . , 2007 ) . The cells marked MCF ( – / – ) with these deposits were regarded as derived from MCF - deficient ES cells . In such MCF - deficient cells , complete myofibrils were absent , and sarcomeric structures were disrupted by different extent or occasionally totally lost . It is to be pointed out that well - organized myofibrils are present in wild - type cells marked MCF ( + / + ) without the needle - like structures and that these cells are located just adjacent to MCF - deficient Fig . 5 . Histological observations of cardiac muscles in MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mice by a combination of HE staining and β - gal staining . Sections of the ventricle of heart of 2 - week - old ( A ) and 4 - week - old ( B ) MCF ( − / − ) chimera mice are demonstrated . No evident differ - ence was observed between the region without blue - color and the region with blue - color staining by β - gal where MCF ( − / − ) cells are concentrated . Bar , 50 μ m . Fig . 4 . Histological observations of skeletal muscles in infant MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mice by a combination of HE staining and β - gal staining . ( A ) and ( B ) : Sections of neonatal MCF ( − / − ) chimera thigh muscle ; muscle cells with ( A ) or without ( B ) dark blue - color positive staining by β - gal are demonstrated . No remarkable differences were observed between MCF ( − / − ) cells with blue color and wild type cells without blue color at the neonatal age . ( C ) Thoracic mus - cle of postnatal 2 - week - old MCF ( − / − ) chimera . Variation in fiber size and the presence of degenerating fibers are observed in the blue - colored region . Arrows in ( C ) indicate fiber degradation . Bar , 100 μ m . Fig . 6 . Electron micrograph of cardiac muscle in 8 - weeks old MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mouse . Coexistence of the ventricular cells derived from MCF ( − / − ) cells and wild type cells is demonstrated . The cell marked MCF ( − / − ) is a cardiac muscle cell derived from MCF ( − / − ) cell , whereas the cells marked MCF ( + / + ) are derived from wild type cells . Arrows indicate needle - like structures , 5 , 5 ′ - dibromo - 4 , 4 ′ - dichloro - indigo , that were generated by β - gal staining ; they are observed in the MCF ( − / − ) cardiac cells . The cytoplasm of MCF ( − / − ) cell is filled with numerous fibrils . Interca - lated disk between MCF ( − / − ) and MCF ( + / + ) cells can be seen at the left side . Bar , 1 μ m . 117 Cofilin deficient striated muscles cells . Therefore , it is obvious that disruption of myofibrils was caused specifically in MCF - deficient cells in mouse heart muscle . Examples of disruption of myofibrillar struc - ture by MCF deficiency are further shown in Fig . 7 . In this case , incomplete myofibrils and numerous myofilaments are present in the cytoplasm of MCF - deficient cell . Deformed myofibrils and myofilaments tend to orientate along the cell axis . The images of incomplete myofibrils observed at a higher magnification are shown in Fig . 7B ; here , a large amount of actin - like thin filaments ( Fig . 7B , single arrow - head ) as well as myosin - like thicker filaments ( Fig . 7B , dou - ble arrowhead ) were observed without being organized in a striated pattern . It is assumed that actin assembly might occur without being controlled in the cytoplasm in the absence of MCF . Dense bodies that might be aggregates of the constituents of Z - bands ( Z in Fig . 7 ) are scattered at ran - dom in the severely disorganized myofilaments . Such struc - tures might be related to nemaline bodies that were observed in nemaline myopathy caused by mutation of CFL2 , human MCF gene ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ) . DISCUSSION In this study , we examined the effect of MCF - deficiency on the organization of striated muscle cells and myofibril architecture in striated muscles by using MCF ( − / − ) chime - ric mice . Previously , the effect of MCF - deficiency in mice was examined by using MCF ( cofilin - 2 ) KO mice ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) ; these mice with constitutive excision of MCF were born alive similarly as wild - type mice with MCF but were led to death within eight days after birth . Therefore , it was impos - sible to examine the phenotype of adult muscle tissue with MCF deficiency by using the MCF KO mice . In the case of the chimeric mice we examined , tissues were constituted by a combination of MCF ( − / − ) cells and MCF ( + / + ) cells . Existence of the normal wild - type cells together with MCF - deficient cells allowed the mice to survive from the neonatal ages through adulthood . There - fore , we could examine how MCF defi - ciency affects on muscle contractile apparatus in adult mice . Another advan - tage in using the chimeric mice we made was that we could specify the cells that were derived from MCF ( − / − ) ES cells using β - gal staining as a marker , namely blue color staining of MCF ( − / − ) cells in the case of histology at optical microscopy or needle - like precipitates ( electron - dense 5 , 5 ′ - dibromo - 4 , 4 ′ - dichloro - indigo ) in the cytoplasm of particular cells in the case of electron microscopy as previously described ( Bonnerot et al . , 1987 ; St John et al . , 2007 ) . The multi - nucleated skeletal muscle cells of these chimeric mice were formed by fusion of MCF ( − / − ) - derived cells and MCF ( + / + ) wild - type cells at a variety of ratio . Therefore , the content of MCF in skeletal muscle cells of the chime - ric mice must be varied ; the level of MCF depended on how many MCF ( − / − ) cells contributed to form individual multi - nucleated muscle cells . While in the case of cardiac muscle , MCF ( − / − ) muscle cells must have existed together with MCF ( + / + ) wild - type cells in the tissue in a chimeric manner . The skeletal muscle in the areas where MCF - deficient cells were enriched showed remarkable structural alterations just like dystrophic muscles , namely variation in fiber size , increased number of mono - nucleic cells , and fiber degrada - tion . Such morphology of MCF - deficient muscle we observed appears similar to the features of the muscle tissue in MCF ( Cfl2 ) - KO mice ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) . The morphological alterations in the blue - colored region of muscles were observed in a variety of areas of the body . Nevertheless , the phenotype of the individual skeletal muscle cells could not be uniform because of the difference of the content of MCF . In the β - gal staining - negative regions where the host normal cells were concentrated or in the regions where MCF ( + / − ) cells were present , the defects in muscle fibers were scarcely observed . When cardiac muscle of the chimeric mice was exam - ined by histological methods under an optical microscope , remarkable structural damage as shown in skeletal muscle was not clearly observed at the regions where MCF - deficient cells were enriched . This may suggest that cell death and cell regeneration might not occur in heart even in the chime - ric mice and / or morphological changes of heart cells could not be clearly visualized under an optical microscope , since heart cells are mono - nucleated cells . Presence of NMCF ( cofilin - 1 ) in heart cells might partly compensate the lack of MCF , even though the amount of NMCF in adult heart is small ( Mohri et al . , 2000 ) . Fig . 7 . Electron micrographs of MCF - deficient ventricular muscle cell in the 8 - weeks old MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mouse . ( A ) Incomplete myofibrils in the various disorganization stages are present in the cytoplasm where needle - like structures are detectable . ( B ) Magnified image of the cytoplasm marked by square in ( A ) . Myosin - like filaments ( marked by double arrowheads ) and actin - like filaments ( marked by a single arrowhead ) are scattered without been organized in the sarcomeric structure . White arrows indicate precipitates of 5 , 5 ′ - dibromo - 4 , 4 ′ - dichloro - indigo . Z , Z band in ( A ) and ( B ) . Bars , 1 μ m in ( A ) and 400 nm in ( B ) , respectively . 118 K . Mohri et al . When we observed the cardiomyocytes in the heart of the chimeric mouse under an electron microscope , we could find the cells with disorganized myofibrils . In the cells where myofibrils were severely disrupted , needle - like deposits , the products of β - gal staining reaction , were clearly detected . EM observations of MCF ( − / − ) heart cells revealed accumu - lation of a lot of actin filaments in cytoplasm . They were packed in the cytoplasm and often oriented parallel to the cell axis without being organized in striated structures ; sometimes , they were bundled in aggregates . Our previous observations of the effects of cofilin deficiency on myofibril organization in skeletal muscle cells agree with the present results ; namely , cofilin depletion in cultured myotubes by anti - sense methodology caused abnormal actin aggregates in the cytoplasm and impaired actin organization into cross - striated myofibril structures ( Miyauchi - Nomura et al . , 2012 ) . On the other hand , we have demonstrated that when amount of cofilin in cultured muscle cells was increased by either cDNA transfection or injection of purified protein , actin fila - ments in myofibrils were disorganized and abnormal aggre - gates of actin were generated in the cytoplasm ( Nagaoka et al . , 1995 ) . Therefore , for ordered assembly of actin into sar - comeric structures , appropriate amount of cofilin seems to be indispensable . According to a previous report ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) , severe damages in myofibril structures of skeletal muscle was observed in MCF - KO mice , but no gross abnormalities in heart muscle were identified by the ages up to and includ - ing the end stage . It is assumed that considerable amounts of NMCF ( cofilin - 1 ) exist in developing heart of mice and it may make deep contribution for myofibril organization in developing cardiac muscle cells . Once myofibrils are formed in cardiomyocytes , they might be stably maintained for cer - tain periods even under the conditions where MCF is absent and NMCF is decreasing in amount . As a matter of fact , in our previous observation , actin localization in striated myofi - brils in well - developed myotubes in culture was hardly affected , regardless of suppression of cofilin expression by antisense probes ( Miyauchi - Nomura et al . , 2012 ) . We assume that myofibril structures that were formed in cardiac muscle with the aid of NMCF during embryonic through neo - natal stages are gradually degraded during postnatal devel - opment both in MCF - KO mice as well as in MCF - deficient heart cells in the chimeric mice . In the case of the chimeric mice we used , presence of wild - type cardiomyocytes with MCF enables heart beating sufficiently . The mechanical stress derived from such contractile movement caused by cardiac muscle cells might stimulate inadequate reorganiza - tion of myofibrils in MCF - deficient cardiac muscle cells . According to Subramanian et al . ( 2015 ) , in the heart cells of the mouse model with decreased cofilin - 2 ( MCF ) expres - sion caused by a cardiac - specific cofilin - 2 heterozygous knockout ( haploinsufficiency ) , myofibril structures were altered ; namely , abnormal actin pattern such as lack of proper orientation of the filaments and poorly organized sar - comeres were revealed by immunohistochemistry and elec - tron microscopy . In addition , it was observed that the I and M bands were frequently absent in sarcomeres , which were often hyper contracted , and the Z lines were interrupted . The results of our present study are mostly consistent with these views , but in the case of the MCF - deficient heart cells of our MCF ( − / − ) chimeric mice , disruption of myofibrils appeared more severe , because MCF was totally lost in the MCF ( − / − ) heart cells . The deficiency of MCF ( cofilin - 2 ) could be etiol - ogy of cardiomyopathy as suggested ( Subramanian et al . , 2015 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Dr . Kazunori Hanaoka for helpful guidance , many suggestions and discussions through the work , especially in targeted disruption of Cfl2 and preparing MCF - deficient chimeric mice . COMPETING INTERESTS The authors have no competing interests to declare . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS KM conceived and performed the almost all experiments and prepared figures . FS - T performed the electron microscopy . TO and NS conceived and designed study , and prepared the figures and wrote the manuscript . REFERENCES Abe H , Ohshima S , Obinata T ( 1989 ) A cofilin - like protein is involved in the regulation of actin assembly in developing skeletal mus - cle . J Biochem 106 : 696 – 702 Abe H , Endo T , Yamamoto K , Obinata T ( 1990 ) Sequence of cDNAs encoding actin depolymerizing factor and cofilin of embryonic chicken skeletal muscle : two functionally distinct two actin reg - ulatory proteins exhibit high structural homology . Biochemistry 29 : 7420 – 7425 Agrawal PB , Greenleaf RS , Tomczak KK , Lehtokari VL , Wallgren - Pettersson C , Wallefeld W , et al . ( 2007 ) Nemaline myopathy with minicores caused by mutation of the CFL2 gene encoding the skeletal muscle actin - binding protein , cofilin - 2 . Am J Hum Gent 80 : 162 – 167 Agrawal PB , Joshi M , Savic T , Chen Z , Beggs AH ( 2012 ) Normal myofibrillar development followed by progressive sarcomeric disruption with actin accumulations in a mouse Cfl2 knockout demonstrates requirement of cofilin - 2 for muscle maintenance . Hum Mol Genet 21 : 2341 – 2356 Amano T , Tanabe K , Eto T , Narumiya S , Mizuno K ( 2001 ) LIM - kinase 2 induces formation of stress fibers , focal adhesions and mem - brane blebs , dependent on its activation by Rho - associated kinase - catalysed phosphorylation at threonine - 505 . Biochem J 354 : 149 – 159 Arber S , Barbayannis FA , Hanser H , Schneider C , Stanyon CA , Bernard O , et al . ( 1998 ) Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 : 805 – 809 Bamburg JR ( 1999 ) Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 15 : 185 – 230 Bonnerot C , Rocancourt D , Briand P , Grimber G , Nicolas J - F ( 1987 ) A β - galactosidase hybrid protein targeted to nuclei as a marker for developmental studies . Proc Natl Acad . Sci USA 84 : 6795 – 6799 Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , et al . ( 1997 ) Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 Chin SM , Jansen S , Goode BL ( 2016 ) TIRF microscopy analysis of human Cof1 , Cof2 , and ADF effects on actin filament severing and turnover . J Mol Biol 428 : 1604 – 1616 Feinberg AP , Vogelstein B ( 1983 ) A technique for radiolabeling DNA restriction endonuclease fragments to high specific activity . Anal Biochem 132 : 6 – 13 Gillett GT , Fox MF , Rowe PS , Casimir CM , Povey S ( 1996 ) Mapping 119 Cofilin deficient striated muscles of human non - muscle type cofilin ( CFL1 ) to chromosome 11q13 and muscle - type cofilin ( CFL2 ) to chromosome 14 . Ann Hum Genet 60 ( Pt 3 ) : 201 – 211 Gurniak CB , Chevessier F , Jokwitz M , Jönsson F , Perlas E , Richter H , et al . ( 2014 ) Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knock - out mouse model points to an essential role of cofilin2 in sarco - meric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur J Cell Biol . 93 : 252 – 266 Hayden SM , Miller PS , Brauweiler A , Bamburg JR ( 1993 ) Analysis of the interaction of actin depolymerizing factor with G - and F - actin . Biochemistry 32 : 9994 – 10004 Kremneva E , Makkonen MH , Skwarek - Maruszewska A , Gateva G , Michelot A , Dominguez R , et al . ( 2014 ) Cofilin - 2 controls actin filament length in muscle sarcomeres . Dev Cell 31 : 215 – 226 Mansour , SL , Thomas , KR , Capecchi MR ( 1988 ) Disruption of the proto - oncogene int - 2 in mouse embryo - derived stem cells : a general strategy for targeting mutations to non - selectable genes . Nature 336 : 348 – 352 Miyauchi - Nomura S , Obinata T , Sato N ( 2012 ) Cofilin is required for organization of sarcomeric actin filaments in chicken skeletal muscle cells . Cytoskeleton , 69 : 290 – 302 Mohri K , Takano - Ohmuro H , Nakashima H , Hayakawa K , Endo T , Hanaoka K , et al . ( 2000 ) Expression of cofilin isoforms during development of mouse striated muscles . J Muscle Res Cell Motil 21 : 49 – 57 Moriyama K , Nishida E , Yonezawa N , Sakai H , Matsumoto S , Iida K , et al . ( 1990 ) Destrin , a mammalian actin - depolymerizing protein , is closely related to cofilin . Cloning and expression of porcine brain destrin cDNA . J Biol Chem 265 : 5768 – 5773 Nagaoka R , Kusano K , Abe H , Obinata T ( 1995 ) Effects of cofilin on actin filamentous structures in cultured muscle cells . Intracel - lular regulation of cofilin action . J Cell Sci 108 : 581 – 593 Nakashima K , Sato N , Nakagaki T , Abe H , Ono S , Obinata T ( 2005 ) Two mouse cofilin isoforms , muscle - type ( MCF ) and non - muscle type ( NMCF ) , interact with F - actin by different effi - ciencies . J Biochem 138 : 519 – 526 Nishida E , Maekawa S , Sakai H ( 1984 ) Cofilin , a protein in porcine brain that binds to actin filaments and inhibits their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry 23 : 5307 – 5313 Ono S ( 2003 ) Regulation of actin filament dynamics by actin depo - lymerizing factor / cofilin and actin - interacting protein 1 : new blades for twisted filaments . Biochemistry 42 : 13363 – 13370 Ono S , Minami N , Abe H , Obinata T ( 1994 ) Characterization of a novel cofilin isoform that is predominantly expressed in mam - malian skeletal muscle . J Biol Chem 269 : 15280 – 15286 Ono S , Baillie DL , Benian GM ( 1999 ) UNC - 60B , an ADF / cofilin fam - ily protein , is required for proper assembly of actin into myofi - brils in Caenorhabditis elegans body wall muscle . J Cell Biol 145 : 491 – 502 Skwarek - Maruszewska A , Hotulainen P , Mattila PK , Lappalainen P ( 2009 ) Contractility - dependent actin dynamics in cardiomyo - cytes sarcomere . J Cell Sci 122 : 2119 – 2126 St John PL , Abrahamson DR ( 2007 ) LacZ transgenic mice and immunoelectron microscopy : an ultrastructural method for dual localization of β - galactosidase and horseradish peroxidase . J Histochem Cytochem . 55 : 1207 – 1211 Subramanian K , Gianni D , Balla C , Assenza GE , Joshi M , Semigran MJ , et al . ( 2015 ) Cofilin - 2 phosphorylation and sequestration in myocardial aggregates : novel pathogenetic mechanisms for idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy . J Am Coll Cardiol . 65 : 1199 – 1214 Thomas PS ( 1980 ) Hybridization of denatured RNA and small DNA fragments transferred to nitrocellulose . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77 : 5201 – 5205 Vartiainen MK , Mustonen T , Mattila PK , Ojala PJ , Thesleff I , Partanen J , et al . ( 2002 ) The three mouse actin - depolymeriz - ing factor / cofilins evolved to fulfill cell - type – specific require - ments for actin dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 183 – 194 ( Received September 20 , 2018 / Accepted November 23 , 2018 )