ORIGINAL ARTICLE User eXperience Laddering with preschoolers : unveiling attributes and beneﬁts of cuddly toy interfaces Vero Vanden Abeele • Bieke Zaman • Dirk De Grooff Received : 22 October 2009 / Accepted : 27 January 2010 (cid:2) Springer - Verlag London Limited 2011 Abstract In this paper , we suggest Laddering as a promising empirical method to evaluate the impact of tangibility on young children’s user experiences . In the ﬁrst part of this paper , we explain what Laddering is . We explicate the conceptual foundations of Laddering , discuss the typical Laddering interviewing technique and focus on the Laddering data treatment . Then , we argue why Laddering might be especially valuable in a context of UX evaluations of tangible and embedded interfaces with children . In the second part of this paper , we present a case study , comparing three cuddly toy interfaces , and we demonstrate how Laddering can be used with preschoolers to explain preferences between these tangible interfaces . The case study conﬁrms that Laddering can contribute to verifying the assumed beneﬁts of tangibility . Laddering revealed how speciﬁc cuddly toy attributes as opposed to non - cuddly toy attributes led to speciﬁc beneﬁts for the young participants . However , contrary to research ﬁndings from developmental literature , only children aged 5 years and older proved to be capable of performing as full Laddering respondents . Keywords User eXperience (cid:2) Research methods (cid:2) Laddering (cid:2) Preschoolers (cid:2) Children (cid:2) Tangible interaction (cid:2) Cuddly toy interface (cid:2) Evaluation 1 Introduction Embodied interaction , tangible manipulation and physical mediation of digital data are the recent focus of many HCI researchers , carried out under the label of ‘Tangible Embedded Interaction’ ( TEI ) . Donald Norman [ 1 ] addres - ses this trend as physicality or ‘the return to physical devices , where we control things by physical body move - ment , by turning , moving and manipulating appropriate mechanical devices’ . TEI is considered as more natural and to be preferred over a cognition - driven approach , associ - ated with personal computing paradigms [ 2 – 4 ] . Tangibles are linked to a more affective interaction [ 5 , 6 ] . TEI is also found to stimulate social interaction and sharing [ 4 , 7 ] . Concerning interaction design for children , TEI is consid - ered to enhance play and stimulate learning [ 8 – 10 ] . Not surprisingly , in the last years , many creative TEI projects have been carried out to augment children’s play experi - ence and learning . As the ﬁeld expands and addresses new challenges , it is important to be clear about the main motivations and assumptions regarding the beneﬁts of tangible interaction and to seek empirical evidence for these . Unfortunately , many research articles on TEI projects that report on the ‘positive effects’ of tangibility go no further than describ - ing participants’ mostly enthusiastic experiences with tangibles . Moreover , it appears that often little attention is V . Vanden Abeele ( & ) e - Media Lab , GROUP T , Leuven Engineering College / CUO ( Association KULeuven ) , Vesaliusstraat 13 , 3000 Leuven , Belgium e - mail : Vero . Vanden . Abeele @ groept . be B . Zaman (cid:2) D . De Grooff Centre for User Experience Research ( CUO ) , Katholieke Universiteit Leuven , Parkstraat 45 Bus 3605 , 3000 Leuven , Belgium e - mail : Bieke . Zaman @ soc . kuleuven . be D . De Grooff e - mail : Dirk . DeGrooff @ soc . kuleuven . be B . Zaman (cid:2) D . De Grooff Future Health Department , IBBT - K . U . Leuven , Kasteelpark Arenberg 10 bus 2446 , 3001 Leuven , Belgium 123 Pers Ubiquit Comput DOI 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 011 - 0408 - y paid to the user evaluation method . Consequently , it becomes hard to make solid claims about the results’ reliability or validity with respect to the ‘tangibility’ . Although these user studies provide interesting , explor - atory and inspiring qualitative information , the evaluation results are often equivocal ; hypotheses or research ques - tions of researchers are not properly addressed . In order to suggest design improvements regarding the user experi - ence , one should be careful in drawing conclusions from children’s enthusiastic play behaviours and reactions . Researchers should always critically question whether the test children’s enthusiasm is really caused by a positive user experience or by something else . What is often lacking in TEI research papers is a thorough description of the user research method , how it has been tailored to a young audience , and a reﬂection upon the results with a special attention to the limitations of the study [ 11 , 12 ] . Only by doing so , we can investigate the true impact of tangi - bility on children’s user experience and developmental processes . In sum , in order to support the development of the TEI research ﬁeld , it is necessary that empirical studies ade - quately afﬁrm the design improvements and technological innovations . User research on TEI , certainly in combina - tion with children , lacks empirical validation on whether it is really the ‘tangible’ or ‘embedded’ interaction that is causing the positive effects . To make reliable claims about the effects of tangible or embedded interaction , adapted research designs and methods are needed . In this paper , we suggest such an adapted research design , namely Ladder - ing , as a promising empirical method to evaluate the impact of tangibility on young children’s user experiences . In the ﬁrst part of this paper , we explain what Laddering is . We explicate the conceptual foundations of Laddering , discuss the typical Laddering interviewing technique and focus on the Laddering data treatment . Then , we argue why Laddering might be especially valuable in a context of UX evaluations of tangible and embedded interfaces with children . In the second part of this paper , we present a case study and demonstrate how Laddering can be used to explain preferences between cuddly toy prototypes with preschool - aged children . 2 What is Laddering ? 2 . 1 The conceptual foundation of Laddering : means - end theory Laddering originates in consumer research and relies heavily on means - end theory as proposed by Gutman [ 13 ] . Means - end theory states that people choose a product because it contains attributes ( the means ) that are instru - mental to achieving the desired consequences and fulﬁlling values ( the ends ) . In other words , users’ product choices and consumer behaviour are dependent on how they per - ceive certain product attributes as most likely to deliver certain desired consequences , which are seen as beneﬁcial towards their individual values 1 . The common generic means - end chain , therefore , consists of attributes ( A ) , consequences ( C ) and values ( V ) . Attributes - [ consequences - [ values With consequences , one points to either positive consequences that a consumer seeks from a product or negative consequences that a consumer avoids by using a product . Clearly , a consumer desires to derive beneﬁts from product use . Therefore , the term ‘beneﬁts’ is often used as a synonym for ‘consequences’ . Although in consumer research , a three - step ( A - C - V ) model is often sufﬁcient [ 15 ] , the model has been further reﬁned by [ 16 ] as a six - level model ( see Fig . 1 ) , with the following steps : concrete attributes ( CA ) - [ abstract attributes ( AA ) - [ functional consequences ( FC ) - [ psy - cho - social consequences ( PSC ) - [ instrumental values ( IV ) - [ terminal values ( TV ) . Concrete attributes are those graspable , directly per - ceivable aspects of a product , such as a colour , a certain material or size . Abstract attributes are those intangible features of a product , not directly perceivable characteris - tics , such as the styling or the level of convenience . Contrary to attributes that remain invariant and are not dependent on the judgment of the individual product user , consequences are directly tied towards the use and the judgment of the individual . Consequences unfold in the interaction between the user and the product . Conse - quences provide a blend of the product and the individual ( see Fig . 1 ) . Functional consequences are situated at the usage level , as exempliﬁed by the statement ‘because that ( product attribute ) makes me go faster’ . Psycho - social consequences exceed the usage level and list the conse - quences for social , psychological or psycho - social level , e . g . ‘because that ( product attribute ) makes me feel better about myself’ or ‘because my friend thinks it ( product attribute ) is cool’ . Finally , at the value level , individuals no longer mention the product , but talk about the values , morals and norms they uphold , e . g . ‘because I think it is important to take care of others’ or ‘because it is important to safe the planet’ 1 In fact , Means - End Theory closely parallels Expectancy - Value theories , as put forward by Fishbein and Ajzen , and is built upon by communication media scholars via Uses & Gratiﬁcations paradigm . Readers that would like to read more about the similarities between these models , especially with relation to ‘likeability for preschoolers’ are referred to [ 14 ] . Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 which are both extrinsic or instrumental values . These values still allow serving a purpose . Terminal values are values such as ‘happiness’ and ‘peace - of - mind’ , which are intrinsically oriented . The means - end approach foresees in a variety of methods to observe and question users about their choices for certain product attributes and desired outcomes [ 17 ] . One particular method for interviewing and the resulting data analysis is Laddering [ 18 ] . Laddering gained popu - larity within consumer research as a powerful approach , allowing for segmentation of the customer audience , advertising and marketing purposes [ 19 ] . Laddering proved to be superior to other elicitation methods as it increased the explanatory power with regard to choice option attractiveness [ 20 ] , i . e . Laddering is the best method for understanding why people chose one product over another . In the following paragraphs , we will explain the inter - viewing technique , the qualitative as well as the quantita - tive data treatment that constitute the Laddering method . 2 . 2 Laddering as an interviewing technique Laddering is most commonly known as a speciﬁc one - on - one depth interviewing technique . The Laddering interview consists of two phases . The ﬁrst phase is the ‘Attribute Elicitation phase’ . During that phase , the interviewee is prompted to identify salient attributes of a certain product or product class as explanatory for his / her preference among several products or product classes . Different techniques are possible for attribute elicitation , such as triadic sorting , free sorting , ranking , direct / free elicitation , etc . For an excellent overview of different possible tech - niques , we refer to [ 18 , 21 , 22 ] . Perhaps , the best known technique for attribute elicitation is triadic sorting , based upon the Repertory Grid Technique [ 23 ] , also used within Human Computer Interaction by [ 24 – 27 ] . The Repertory Grid technique results in a list of attributes , ranked or sorted by the interviewee . After this initial attribute elicitation phase , the actual ‘Laddering’ takes place . During this phase , the interviewer will try to reveal the interviewee’s product attribute - related ladder by asking : ‘Why is this attribute important to you ? ’ In other words , the interviewee is asked to motivate his attribute selection by explaining the related , anticipated and favoured consequences . The interviewer , however , does not rest at the consequences level and keeps prompting ‘Why ? ’ . This way the interviewer aims for an expression of how these consequences serve personal values . This probing typiﬁes a Laddering interview , during which the question ‘Why is that important to you ? ’ is repeated as many times as needed to reveal all possible elements of the ladders . By probing into the reasons why , the interviewee will ‘climb up the ladder’ . The goal of Laddering – as with all means - end approaches – is to identify and understand the linkages across the range of attributes , consequences and values , rather than deriving an inventory of the attributes , consequences or values . Through this insight into the relationships between attri - butes and values , researchers can understand the meaning that ( product ) attributes hold for users . The real interest therefore lies in the association networks : the meaningful couplings between attributes , consequences and values . 2 . 3 Laddering as data treatment Although many researchers only refer to Laddering as a special interviewing technique , one might easily forget that full Laddering entails both an interviewing technique and a speciﬁc procedure for data analysis [ 15 ] . The Laddering data analysis involves a qualitative and a quantitative phase . In the qualitative phase , the Laddering interviews are transcribed and elements ( i . e . attributes , consequences and values ) are coded . This phase relies on skills that are stan - dard in qualitative research and content analysis . Reliable coding ( i . e . interpreting , categorizing and labelling the data while bearing in mind the A - C - V conceptualization ) is necessary to deﬁne those core elements that emerge from the interviews . Categories of elements need to be broad enough to get replications , e . g . these categories must be mentioned by more than one respondent . Yet , these cate - gories should not be so broad that all meaning is lost . Additionally , Laddering allows for crossing over from qualitative data gathering to quantitative data treatment . Once that the core elements are deﬁned and labelled , the individual ladders can be re - inspected and decomposed based upon these codes . All individual ladders are entered into what is called a Summary Score Matrix ( SSM ) , sum - marizing the data of all the interviewees . At this point , Laddering becomes a quantitative research effort . From the SSM , an Implication Matrix ( IM ) is constructed , which lists the amount of direct and indirect links between two elements in the ladders . A direct link occurs when two elements follow one another directly , and an indirect link refers to two elements that are positioned in the same ladder but that are not positioned adjacently . The sum of direct and indirect links between the elements expresses the strength of the link between these elements . Fig . 1 A six - level model for means - end chains Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 In order to deﬁne dominant linkages , the researcher has to decide what can be considered a dominant link . The decision is made quantitatively and based upon cut - off levels . Links that fall beneath the cut - off levels are ignored because they are too marginally related ; those that reach that predeﬁned level are kept . From the quantitative Lad - dering data analysis , dominant perceptual orientations emerge that do no longer represent individual ladders but means - end chains ( MECs ) at the aggregate level . Such dominant relationships are mapped out in a Hierarchical Value Map ( HVM ) , see Fig . 4 as an example . This map gives a visual overview of which attributes link to which consequences and values based on the number of direct and indirect links in the Implication Matrix . This HVM is the ultimate goal of a Laddering study as it provides an over - view of dominant perceptions , providing insight into the motives for using a certain product . 3 Why Laddering for user experience evaluations of tangible and embedded interfaces with young children ? As was argued in the introduction of this paper , we should deliberately question and critically reﬂect upon the reasons why and the way in which we select our methods . In this paragraph , we will therefore explain our motivation to use Laddering for User eXperience ( UX ) evaluations of TEI applications with very young children . Three topics form the thread throughout our motivation of Laddering : user experience , TEI and young children . 3 . 1 Laddering in a UX evaluative context In the past years , the HCI research domain has been characterized by a number of studies , workshops and SIGs [ 28 – 34 ] that aimed to contribute to the dearth of frame - works , theories and methods to facilitate approaches to design products that allow for pleasurable , enjoyable and entertaining interaction . One particularly relevant frame - work is that of worth - centred design , proposed by Cockton . The author and others [ 35 – 38 ] advocate that designing user experiences is connecting a product’s means to the user’s ends . As a result , these authors conceive the aesthetics of user experience as unfolding in the interaction between the product’s means on the one hand and the ultimate ends of the individual on the other . Laddering is one possible research method that can reveal these means - end chains to grasp the aesthetics of User eXperiences . Moreover , Laddering is a method that corresponds well to ISO’s conceptualization of User eXperience . ISO deﬁned User eXperience as ‘ a person’s perceptions and responses resulting from the use or anticipated use of a product , system or service ’ [ 39 ] . Approaching UX from ISO’s perspective , we consider experiences as individually constructed and thus explicitly address the subjective nat - ure of technological experiences , hereby also following one of the UX pioneers Hassenzahl [ 28 ] . From a methodolog - ical point of view , Laddering equally aims at analysing people’s experiences by relying upon individual self - reports . We will focus on one type of responses that are the judgmental responses that are affect - driven evaluative responses to ( an interaction with ) a stimulus [ 40 ] . We should hereby acknowledge that each affective response is further modiﬁed by classiﬁcation and comparison pro - cesses in which ‘ people construct the apparent product character based on the particular combination of ‘product features and their personal standards and expectations ’ and that a ‘ personal standard most likely consists of other objects the product can be compared to ’ [ 28 ] . More par - ticularly , when judging products , people typically create bipolar ( e . g . easy versus difﬁcult ) constructs when com - paring the product features against the features of the product alternatives [ 41 , 42 ] . This judgmental comparison process then results in ‘an expression of opinion about the dominance ( importance , preference or likelihood ) of one element over another’ . Again , Laddering , which is from origin not a HCI but a consumer research method , corre - sponds surprisingly well to our conceptualization of User eXperience . As we will explain later , Laddering interviews typically start by letting the respondent ( 1 ) judge and ( 2 ) explain ( 3 ) signiﬁcant differences between products or product classes ( 4 ) in terms of preferences . 3 . 2 Laddering in a TEI evaluative context The second motivation for Laddering refers to the meth - odological issues that surface when researching TEIs for children . In general , we can discern different methodo - logical issues regarding research on children’s likes and dislikes according to the research phase within the design process . In the early design phases , researchers are inclined to rely on creative methods to inform the design [ 43 ] such as cooperative inquiry [ 44 ] , drawings or low - tech proto - typing [ 45 ] . In the middle and late design phases , user - based evaluative methods are prominent such as the Problem Identiﬁcation Pictures Cards method ( PIPC ) [ 46 ] , ( spontaneous ) thinking - aloud [ 47 ] , constructive interaction [ 48 ] , peer - tutoring [ 49 , 50 ] or the Fun Toolkit ( Smiley - ometer , Funometer , Again - Again meter [ 51 , 52 ] ) . As opposed to the methods of the early design phases that are mainly formative ( shaping or inspiring the design ) , the middle and late design methods are summative ( evaluating or testing the design ) . Whereas in the beginning of a design process , the main research aims are dealing with ﬁnding innovative and age - appropriate design ideas for future Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 products , the purposes in the last stages are rather of the type of benchmarking and evaluation : deciding on product preferences , making comparisons between designs , assessing whether user requirements have been achieved and detecting usability problems or a few key attributes to improve towards an optimal user experience ( see also [ 53 ] ) . In the case of TEI research , formative methods would focus on how the tangible interaction could be conceptu - alized and designed whereas evaluative methods would verify whether the tangible interaction really serves the beneﬁts it was designed for . Summative methods can for instance be used to compare one product with a tangible interface versus the same product but with a more tradi - tional interface ( see for instance [ 54 ] ) . In this paper , we will add Laddering to the list of evaluative methods that can be used in the middle and late design phases when typically some test materials are available , be it sketches , models , scenarios , mock - ups or prototypes [ 45 , 53 ] . Laddering will help to benchmark various TEI or non - TEI prototypes against each other . However , in the case of benchmarking and evaluating tangible interfaces , it is not sufﬁcient to reveal which alternative scores best . Laddering not only aims at revealing which prototype was preferred , but it also allows for understanding into the reasons why . Consequently , Laddering points to those concrete product attributes that are related to ( or may be improved in order to serve ) positive values . For TEI research , Laddering thus answers the question of to what extent the tangible or embedded attributes deliver intended consequences and value to the overall user experience and why . 3 . 3 Laddering in a context of evaluations with children Finally , we should question whether Laddering is an appropriate research method for young children . In this paper , we deal with the preoperational age group of pre - schoolers as labelled by Jean Piaget , encompassing chil - dren from 2 to 7 years old . These children cannot yet read or write and do not yet have started infant school . Never - theless , according to the literature , children from the pre - operational stage already show cognitive and behavioural capabilities needed to be adequate respondents in a Lad - dering interview . 3 . 3 . 1 Language One of the most prominent capabilities that children from the preoperational stage acquire is language [ 55 ] . Pre - schoolers’ language has reached a sufﬁcient level for the adequate use of words to describe actions or to represent objects [ 56 , 57 ] . The same goes for their pragmatics , or ‘children’s practical ability to use language to communi - cate with others in a variety of social contexts’ [ 56 ] and preschoolers’ ability to deal with the complexities of open - ended questions [ 58 ] . As for the ability to talk about experiences in general and media or technology experi - ences in particular , preschoolers have acquired the skills to think and talk beyond the here and now . Yet , in general , young children’s cognitive abilities are maximized in situ - ations where children are given tasks that are simpliﬁed and relevant to their everyday lives [ 56 ] . In the case of Laddering , we should therefore ensure that the technolo - gies evaluated are meaningful objects used in a familiar context - of - use . 3 . 3 . 2 Awareness of psychological causes Apart from their language and pragmatics , young chil - dren’s awareness of mental states and their understanding of psychological causes are other relevant cognitive capa - bilities for Laddering interviews in which the interviewer probes for the underlying reasons of positive or negative user experiences . When children begin to reach the age of three , their ability to speak about mental states grows [ 59 , 60 ] as well as their ability to think of events and behaviours in terms of causal relations [ 61 ] . Miller and Aloise [ 62 ] came to the same conclusions for two - to ﬁve - year - olds who proved to be able to appropriately and spontaneously use words referring to their internal state while acknowl - edging the psychological causes of behaviour and events . The mental states children mentioned , seemed to involve past , present or future and refer to ‘cold’ aspects of mind such as thought , memory , attention and perception or ‘hot’ aspects such as emotions , motivation and personality [ 62 ] . Miller and Aloise concluded that these young children’s expressions of mental states were ‘not limited to their own states or the immediate , concrete situation’ . More partic - ularly , young children can talk about mental states that they are not actually experiencing or mental states of others [ 57 , 63 ] . Based on these theoretical insights , we may assume that Laddering should be possible with respondents aged 2 – 7 years old . Nevertheless , this assumption is taken with care and will be critically evaluated in our case study as the preoperational age group already provides a vast age span . Although theoretically these children share many similar capabilities , there is more variation in the preoperational stage than variation that may spring from Piaget’s stage theory [ 64 ] . In other words , although we often refer to the ‘typical’ achieved intellectual and language developmental capabilities of the preoperational children , one may not forget the individual and cultural differences . Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 4 Evaluating the UX of cuddly toy interfaces with preschoolers : a case study In the following part of this paper , the process of Laddering is discussed via a speciﬁc case of the UX evaluation of three cuddly toy interfaces . By this case study , we aim for investigating the feasibility and usefulness of Laddering when performed with young children in order to evaluate tangible interaction . If Laddering proves to be feasible with this young target group , we should get an insight into overall product preferences and understand how product - related characteristics can be improved to enhance the user experience by meeting children’s needs or values . More speciﬁcally , in this case study , Laddering was performed in order to reveal children’s preferred prototype , as this would be the prototype the developers were to design further . Furthermore , in order to inform the design of the preferred prototype , Laddering also had to provide a better under - standing of which TEI movements and mappings would be preferred by the children and which other non - tangible attributes would be mentioned by the preschoolers as important criteria for deriving beneﬁts . 4 . 1 Positioning the TOEWIE case : a cuddly toy interface TOEWIE is an ongoing research project to design a ‘cud - dly toy interface’ for preschoolers to navigate and interact in a 3D game environment . Our cuddly toy interface bears resemblance to the sympathetic interface developed by Johnson et al . [ 65 ] or the SenToy developed by Paiva et al . [ 66 ] . Similar to these research projects , physical manipu - lations with a plush toy or puppet are mapped unto the movements and actions of an in - game character in a 3D world . Nevertheless , these studies seem to limit their focus to usability issues ( rather than also studying UX - related issues ) , or they relied upon methods that are only appro - priate for older children . With our case study , we aim at relying upon a preschooler - friendly methodological approach that allows for studying both usability and User eXperience - related issues . Our ﬁrst aspiration was to make our cuddly toy interface more useable and more likeable as compared to standard modes of navigating and interacting in a 3D world . We hereby explicitly chose for a comparable research design in order to verify the assumed added value of the cuddle toy interface . In [ 54 , 67 ] , we conducted an experimental study of the likeability and usability of TOEWIE versus a key - board interface . Contrary to our hypotheses , the results of this study indicated that the cuddly toy interface was nei - ther more likeable nor more usable than the keyboard interface . Especially , the necessary physical hopping movement appeared as less liked by preschoolers . How - ever , the preference for the keyboard could also have been explained from a psychosocial perspective ; preschoolers wanted to interact with computers as their older siblings did . The results of this ﬁrst study raised concerns with regard to which attributes of the cuddle toy interface pro - totypes were holding which beneﬁts for preschoolers , and to what extent the tangible interaction was efﬁcacious . In order to address these research questions , the team designed three different cuddly toy prototypes that each incorporated a different cuddly toy interface with a dif - ferent mode of physical manipulation , with an associated game character and game world . The three different pro - totypes are a penguin with a snow landscape , a bird within a jungle environment and a kangaroo within the woods ( see Fig . 2 ) . In every game , treasures are to be collected , respectively , ﬁsh , apples or leaves . In order to make the penguin walk , the child needs to wiggle the penguin ( tilt from left to right ) . In order to make the bird ﬂy , the child needs to move the wings up and down . In order to make the kangaroo jump , the child needs to make a hopping move - ment . Furthermore , when the child uses the prototype in a different , non - functional way ( e . g . when making a bizarre movement ) , the penguin topples , the bird makes a tumble and the kangaroo makes a split . This has no further func - tion as it does not help in collecting the treasures . We explicitly chose for a comparable research design in which the penguin , bird and kangaroo cuddly toy interac - tions can be compared to each other . This allowed for investigating the added value of TEI attributes ( i . e . the Fig . 2 An overview of the three different cuddly interfaces and the game worlds Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 physical manipulations and the cuddly toy itself ) and whether the tangible interaction versus other in - game attributes really accounted for the overall user experience . 4 . 2 Research aims To summarize , with this case study , we aim to address the following research questions : RQ1 Is Laddering feasible with young child respondents aged 2 – 7 years old ? RQ2 Does Laddering reveal overall preferences between prototypes ? RQ3 Does Laddering help to explain product preferences in terms of TEI - related attributes ? As for the ﬁrst question , literature suggests that Lad - dering is possible with young child users , aged 2 – 7 years old . Therefore , we will investigate whether our young child participants would be able to produce ladders . Addition - ally , we will inspect whether age mediates the number of meaningful ladders and the number of elements within one ladder . As for the second research question , we will verify whether Laddering can start with a ranking exercise in which children are asked to reveal their preferred choice . Finally , with the third research question , we will analyse whether Laddering can help us reveal the exact beneﬁts of tangible and non - tangible attributes of the three prototypes with respect to the user experience of preschoolers . More particularly , we will question whether Laddering can help us answering the following questions . Which cuddly toy interface would preschoolers prefer and which means - end chains would be decisive in their choice ? Which attributes would fulﬁl which consequences and lead to which values ? We especially aim to investigate to what extent the ‘tan - gible’ attributes will be decisive in children’s preferences . 4 . 3 Method 4 . 3 . 1 Participants and location All interviews took place at an elementary school , where during holidays day camps are organized for kids of the community . The testing took place on three consecutive days . Forty - six preschoolers that were visiting the day camps participated in the Laddering study ( M age = 57 , 54 months , SD = 13 , 54 months ) . The youngest partici - pant was 33 months old ( almost 3 years old ) ; the oldest was 86 months old ( 7 years old ) . One facilitator was present to guide the child and conduct the interview . In the same room were also one data logger and one wizard ( who mastered the technology and steered the interaction behind the scenes , 2 see [ 68 , 69 ] for examples ) ; they did not intervene during the interview . 4 . 3 . 2 Procedure In order to provide the child with a meaningful context for the product experience evaluation , the child was invited to play with either one of the three cuddly toy interfaces at the beginning of the test . Immediately after playing a game , the child was invited to play that same game a second time , in order to assure that the child fully understood the game . The order in which each child played twice with either the kangaroo , bird or penguin games was counterbalanced to avoid order effects . After playing with the three different prototypes , the child was invited to sit in front of screenshots of the three different game prototypes as well as the cuddle toy inter - faces ( see Fig . 3 ) . Again , this was done to stimulate chil - dren’s memory by providing a visible memory aid . The Laddering interview started by eliciting children’s preferred choice . The ‘ranking’ questions were inspired by the This - or - That method [ 67 , 70 ] that entails ﬁve questions that are tailored to preschooler language and cognitive capabilities to infer which prototype was preferred most . Each question began with ‘ Show me which game … ’ and was then competed with ‘ … was most fun ? ’ ‘ … you would like to receive as a gift ? ’ , ‘ … you found a little bit stupid ? ’ , ‘ … you would like to play again ? ’ and ‘ … you would like to take home ’ . At the end , a control question was added to this list and prompted the child once more to identify his or her preferred choice [ 70 ] upon the sentence : ‘ I’m sorry , I have forgotten , can you show me once more which game you found most fun ? ’ . Upon the identiﬁcation of the preferred prototype , the facilitator started the Laddering interview by probing ‘ Why ? ’ . Contrary to the typical Laddering approach as it is performed with adults , we kept the Laddering interviews short . If a child remained silent , repeated itself , or indicated in any other way that it was impossible for him / her to answer , we ﬁnished the interview . On average , the inter - view lasted 2 or 3 min . 4 . 3 . 3 Qualitative data analysis All interviews were recorded and transcribed . In the next step , the transcriptions of the interviews were analysed by both authors independently to establish the core elements ( attributes , consequences and values ) from the interviews . These two lists of core elements were compared to each 2 None of the children realized that a human Wizard steered their interaction , a pilot study revealed that even adults did not detect this . Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 other and reﬁned into one set of core elements that both researchers agreed upon ( see Table 1 ) . In total , we discern 12 concrete attributes , two abstract attributes , ﬁve functional consequences and four psycho - social consequences . Prototypes 1 - 2 - 3 refer to the answer on the ranking questions and indicate the prototype that was preferred most . Attributes 4 - 5 - 6 refer to the physical manipulation , often demonstrated by the child rather than described ( e . g . the child demonstrated the physical manipulation ) . Attri - butes 7 - 8 - 9 refer to the navigation mode in the game , but do not refer to the physical manipulation ( e . g . ‘I preferred the bird , because it could ﬂy’ ) . Attributes 10 - 11 - 12 refer to the non - functional aesthetics in the game , the tumble , the topple and the split . Attributes 13 - 14 - 15 refer to aspects of the digital game environment . Attribute 16 refers to spe - ciﬁc parts of the cuddly toy . Attributes 17 - 18 are more abstract attributes that children mentioned in their expla - nation of prototype preference . Further , ﬁve functional consequences were derived , namely ‘experiencing extraordinary things’ , ( e . g . ‘I can sit in a tree’ ) , being faster / easier ( e . g . ‘That was faster’ ) , novel / different ( e . g . ‘I don’t have that at home’ ) , similarity / recognition ( e . g . ‘It is like the bird of my neighbour’ ) and beautiful / nice to watch ( e . g . ‘I like to look at it’ ) . Finally , we were also able to detect dominant psycho - social consequences from the interviews . Children pointed towards immersion ( e . g . ‘then I feel like a bird’ ) , humour ( e . g . ‘it makes me laugh’ ) , social interaction ( e . g . ‘I can tell it to my mommy’ ) and mastery ( e . g . ‘then I can do it better’ ) . None of the ladders attained the value level . However , due to the nature of the ranking question that formed the basis of the Laddering interview ( ‘ Which did you ﬁnd most fun ? ’ ) , we argue that conceptually every ladder links to the terminal value of ‘fun’ . Next , the interviews were re - analysed and coded by both authors independently on the basis of this new list of core elements . On the basis of this second resulting data set , interreliability between coders was assessed . Cohen’s Kappa was found to be at 0 . 77 ( p \ . 0 . 001 ) , demonstrating an acceptable level of agreement between coders . Table 2 shows a typifying example of a transcribed Laddering interview that was administered with a boy aged 57 months ( almost 5 years ) . 4 . 3 . 4 Quantitative data analysis To arrive at the dominant means - end chains , we ﬁrst coded each ladder on the basis of the above list of core elements . Fig . 3 An overview of the interview setting , with the three different conditions positioned in front of the child Table 1 A list of the core elements Prototypes 1 Bird 2 Penguin 3 Kangaroo Concrete Attributes 4 Phys . Flapping 5 Phys . Wiggling 6 Phys . Hopping 7 Flying 8 Walking 9 Jumping 10 Aest . Tumble 11 Aest . Topple 12 Aest . Split 13 Apples 14 Fish 15 Graphical details 16 Cuddly toy parts Abstract attributes 17 Soft / cute / cuddly 18 Healthy / tasty Functional consequences 19 Experiencing extraordinary things 20 Being easier / faster 21 Novel / different 22 Similar / recognition 23 Beautiful / cool / nice to watch Pyscho - social consequences 24 Immersion / fantasy 25 Funny / humour / laughing 26 Social interaction 27 Mastery Terminal Value ( Conceptual ) 28 Fun Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 These ladders were entered into Ladderux [ 71 ] , 3 an online tool that aids the quantitative analysis of Laddering . The coding of the ladders was summarized in a score matrix . This score matrix lists up all ladders for all individual respondents . In total , the score matrix consisted out of 79 ladders for 46 preschoolers . Second , from this score matrix , the implication matrix was drawn . The implication matrix charts the links between all elements , both direct and indirect . Contrary to the score matrix that presents data at individual level , the implication matrix represents data at the aggregate level . The Laddering resulted in a total number of 223 elements , yielding 256 links ( 144 direct links and 113 indirect links ) . To determine an appropriate cut - off level ( thus link strength between conditions concrete attributes , abstract attributes , functional consequences and psycho - social consequences ) , we based ourselves on the heuristics provided by [ 15 , 72 ] , suggesting a cut - off level that leads to the most informative and interpretable solution , yet retains the most information . Mostly , this cut - off level lies between 3 and 5 and retains roughly two - thirds of all links . Consequently , we chose a cut - off level of three for all elements , retaining 162 links of the 256 links , corre - sponding to two - thirds of all links . As the ﬁnal step in the quantitative data analysis , we drew a Hierarchical Value Map ( HVM ) , as can be seen in Fig . 4 . The HVM visually summarizes the dominant links and hereby reveals how the attributes of the dif - ferent prototypes provide meaningful consequences for our preschoolers . The thicker the lines between two elements in the means - end chain , the higher the link strength . 5 Results RQ1 Is Laddering a feasible method with young children aged 2 – 7 years old ? Our ﬁrst research question dealt with the feasibility of Laddering with preschoolers , aged 2 – 7 years old . We wondered whether our young participants would be able to produce ladders and questioned how age would mediate the number of meaningful ladders and the number of elements within one ladder . The results of our case study show that in total , 79 ladders and 223 elements were derived from 46 pre - schoolers . This is an average of 1 . 72 ladders per pre - schooler . However , contrary to the developmental literature ﬁndings , nine children could not successfully participate in the Laddering interview and failed to produce a ladder that went beyond the choice of the preferred prototype . The mean age of these nine preschoolers was 43 . 67 months ( SD = 9 . 92 ) – about three and a half year – as compared to the mean age of the preschoolers producing ladders , M = 60 . 89 months ( SD = 12 . 17 ) – 5 - year . Fur - ther inspection revealed a strong correlation between age and the numbers of ladders that were produced by the preschoolers , r . 607 ( p \ 0 . 01 ) , and a strong correlation between age and number of elements , r . 469 ( p \ 0 . 01 ) . Furthermore , as was expected from literature , our results conﬁrm that children are not likely to talk about values . In our case study , none of children’s ladders attained the value level . RQ2 Can Laddering reveal overall preferences between several prototypes ? A crucial condition for Laddering is the attribute elici - tation phase during which the respondent is mentioning those attributes that explain product preferences . There - fore , the child respondents should be able to express overall product preferences ﬁrst . Our results show that all Table 2 Example of an excerpt of a Laddering interview with a boy , almost 5 years old Laddering questions and answers ‘ I’m sorry , I have forgotten , can you show me once more which game you found most fun ? ’ [ child points towards the bird game ] ( prototype preference Bird ) What did you like about that game ? That it can ﬂy ( Attribute Flying ) Why do you like ﬂying ? Because ﬂying , it is actually , it is very … Nice because … actually an airplane can also do a somersault The bird ﬂies , what do you like about ﬂying ? Because it can do a somersault ( Attribute Tumble ) What did you like more about it ? Because it’s like I’m ﬂying ( Consequence Immersion ) 3 http : / / www . ladderux . org . Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 preschoolers , even the youngest ones , were able to indicate a preferred choice and therefore produced a ladder that started from the preferred prototype and linked to the theoretical value of ‘fun’ . However , preferences were often expressed in a non - verbal way , by a child pointing to his or her preferred game . Upon inspection of the answer to the ﬁrst question ‘Which did you ﬁnd most fun ? ’ , we noticed that the pen - guin is preferred by 21 children , the bird by 19 children and the kangaroo by 6 children . Although none of the three games signiﬁcantly stood out in terms of ﬁrst preference at the group level , the bird and the penguin game were competing for the ﬁrst choice ; the kangaroo game was mentioned the least by the children . When we split the data according to gender , we see that among girls ( N total = 19 ) , the penguin is preferred most ( N = 13 or almost 70 % ) , next the kangaroo ( N = 5 ) and last the bird ( N = 1 ) . Among boys ( N total = 27 ) , the bird is preferred most ( N = 14 or 52 % ) , next the penguin ( N = 8 ) and least the kangaroo ( N = 5 ) . Thus , although we did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant statistical difference in UX preference at the group level , there is a clear trend that girls prefer the penguin and boys prefer the bird . RQ3 To what extent does Laddering help to explain product preferences in terms of TEI - related attributes ? With this third research question , we analysed whether Laddering can help us reveal the exact beneﬁts of tangible and non - tangible attributes of the three prototypes with respect to the user experience of preschoolers . More par - ticularly , we questioned whether Laddering would help us reveal what would be decisive in children’s preference , which attributes would fulﬁl which consequences and lead to which values and the extent to which the ‘tangible’ attributes would be decisive in children’s preferences . In order to answer our questions , we should ﬁrst scru - tinize the results of our qualitative analysis . From the list of core elements drawn from our Laddering transcripts ( see Table 1 ) , we see that from the set of 12 concrete attributes , only three referred speciﬁcally to the physical manipulation of the cuddly toy ( 4 - 5 - 6 ) and only one to the cuddly toy itself ( 16 ) . Therefore , only four out of the twelve attributes could be linked directly to the cuddle toy interaction . In order to further interpret the weight that these con - crete characteristics have , we should consider the dominant ladders as they were depicted in the HVM of Fig . 4 From this Hierarchical Value Map , the ﬁrst thing to note is that the bird is the only cuddle toy interface that links to the psycho - social consequence of immersion via the dom - inant means - end chain ( MEC ) ‘Bird’—‘phys . ﬂapping’— ‘ﬂying’—‘aes . tumble’—‘experiencing extraordinary things’—‘immersion / fantasy’ . Our results hereby suggest that children that preferred the bird seemed to value the psycho - social consequence of ‘immersion’ . For our pre - schoolers , the cuddle toy interaction of the bird was thus appreciated since it allowed for more immersion and fan - tasy , something which would be harder to realize without the cuddle toy interface . From the MEC , we understand that the physical ﬂapping contributes to the attainment of the psycho - social value of immersion . From our ranking exer - cise , we also understand that this MEC has gendered components as mainly boys preferred the bird prototype . Both the bird and the penguin linked to the psycho - social consequence of ‘mastery’ ‘via the MEC ‘Bird’—‘phys . ﬂapping’—‘ﬂying’—‘being easier / faster’— ‘mast ery’ and the MEC ‘Penguin’—‘being easier / faster’—‘mastery’ . These results show that both the bird and penguin interface allowed the child to play the game well and gave a sense of mastery . Yet , for the bird , this was related to the physical ﬂapping of the wings , whereas with the penguin prototype , this was not hinging upon physical interaction . The kan - garoo was not linked to this consequence . The HVM also shows that the kangaroo and the penguin offered the psycho - social consequence of funniness / humour / laughing via the MEC ‘kangaroo’—‘aest . split’— ‘funny / humour / laugh’ and the MEC ‘penguin’—‘aest . top - ple’—‘funny / humour / laughing’ . Interestingly , the aesthetic tumble of the bird did not contribute to humour but rather to immersion . The kangaroo only attained one psycho - social consequence whereas the other two prototypes attained two psycho - social consequences ; this might explain the lack of popularity for the kangaroo . From the inspection of the dominant MECs , we con - clude that for the penguin and the kangaroo prototypes , preference is not based on physical manipulation but rather upon in - game attributes , leading to fun and mastery . For the bird prototype , the physical manipulation ( ‘ﬂapping the wings’ ) contributes to a sense of mastery and to immersion in the game . In sum , as for our three research questions , we can conclude that Laddering is possible with children aged 5 years and older ( RQ1 ) . All children , also the youngest ones , proved able to express their prototype preference ( RQ2 ) . In order to inform the evaluation and design process of the TOEWIE case , the Laddering data provided us with insights into the reasons for preferences , allowing us to understand the impact of the tangibility on the overall User eXperience ( RQ3 ) . From the qualitative analysis , it shows that tangibility is not the sole reason for preferring one of the three proto - types . Many other attributes are taken into consideration by the child , such as the graphical environment of the game and the non - functional aesthetics . Furthermore , from the HVM , we infer that cuddly toy and non - cuddly toy attri - butes work together , e . g . both the aesthetic tumble as well as the ﬂapping with the wings contributed to immersion in Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 case of the bird . Furthermore , not all physical movements are equal with regard to liking . Hopping and wiggling the cuddly toy did not contribute to ‘immersion’ nor to ‘being easier / faster’ whereas ﬂapping with the wings did . Finally , we noted a strong gendered inﬂuence , which is , however , beyond the scope of this research paper . 6 Guidelines for Laddering for TEI evaluations with young children In the following paragraphs , we will reﬂect upon how Laddering was feasible and useful in our case study to evaluate products with young children . We will discuss the adaptations we made to the ‘traditional’ way of Laddering to make it more child - friendly or realistic in a user - centred design context . We end with critical remarks that highlight the issues for further work . 6 . 1 Provide alternatives This ﬁrst preliminary case study of Laddering with young children showed the potential of the method . Laddering is indeed based on the premise of ﬁnding reasons for product ( class ) differences , e . g . in terms of preferences . By pro - viding alternatives , children can compare products or product classes and more easily discuss their opinions and experiences . 6 . 2 Accept attributes consequences ladders Our case study results show that Laddering can be possible with children aged 5 years and older . We hereby make an important remark that we did not strive to probe until values . First of all , children are more likely to explain their preference in terms of external causes , related to the characteristics of the object entity ( e . g . ‘This is a chal - lenging game with difﬁcult obstacles’ ) than internal rea - sons , related to the characteristics of the person who made the choice ( e . g . ‘I like to overcome challenging situations’ ) [ 62 ] . This implicates that in a Laddering interview , chil - dren will be more likely to express attributes or product - related consequences than values . Second , discussing ( abstract ) values also demand a cognitive reasoning that young children do not yet fully master . Last but not least , as we were evaluating prototypes , we also acknowledge the possible lack of values that are based upon real - life expe - riences [ 73 ] . HCI projects often deal with new prototypes , artefacts , systems or services . In this case , Laddering is used to gather requirements on attributes of a product that is not yet adopted at a wide scale into society . Conse - quently , the means - end chains ( MECs ) that are revealed in these ( HCI ) contexts differ from MECs that consumer researchers ﬁnd with respect to established products . In such an HCI product design and evaluation context , the Laddering method should foresee that for certain conse - quences and values , people rely on hypotheses instead of Fig . 4 The hierarchical value map for the three cuddly toy interfaces Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 actual user experiences within a real - life context . There - fore , values listed by users might not be reliable or simply non - existent . 6 . 3 Avoid hard Laddering Hard Laddering [ 17 ] , involving putting hard pressure on the respondent to reveal consequences and values , and not stop the interview until all levels of the means - end chain are addressed . This is not without risks when the links between attributes , consequences and values might be weak because of the possible absent or restricted usage situations . The user might fabricate associations that are not the result of introspection but rather to please the interviewer . Therefore , we argue that in the case of Lad - dering with preschoolers and / or prototype evaluations , hard Laddering is likely to decrease the validity of the results of Laddering , rather than augmenting them . We suggest that more weight should be given to the salient elements , rather than exhausting participants to paint a complete picture . Reaching the level of functional or psycho - social conse - quences already provides the UX evaluator with informa - tion about meaningful associations between the individual and the product attributes [ 73 ] . We state that it might not always be possible nor necessary to distinguish between psycho - social consequences , instrumental values or termi - nal values as all three indicate how attributes relate to the beneﬁts for the individual . Finally , whereas we advise not to stress on attaining the value level within Laddering , we suggest to stress more on reﬁning the attribute level . More particularly , it is important to distinguish at the attribute level between concrete and abstract attributes [ 73 ] . Design improvements towards meaningful value or UX can only be realized if information is known about concrete attri - butes ; abstract values are not sufﬁcient . 6 . 4 Introduce a play experience as an icebreaker and memory aid Another modiﬁcation to the ‘traditional’ way of Laddering to make the technique more child - friendly and feasible for user - centred design deals with the introductory play experience . Product use should be associated with the ‘real’ context in which it is used . ‘ Laddering works best when respondents are providing associations while thinking of a realistic occasion in which they would use the product . ‘‘ [ … ] Attention to the context of consumer behaviour provides a more meaningful context for Laddering to proceed . People do not use or consume products in gen - eral ; they do so in particular contexts [ 74 ] ’ . For proto - types , it is not always possible to perform the Laddering interview in a meaningful or existing context . Neverthe - less , at least the prototype experience should be recent and become . A preceding experience with a prototype can serve as a meaningful context to the Laddering interview . This ensures that the product experience is fresh in memory and helps the child to overcome possible cognitive limitations . An introductory product experience may also serve as an icebreaker and provide a common topic between researcher and child to refer to . Moreover , creating a meaningful context for the Laddering interview goes further than the exploratory play experience alone . It also refers to the object of experiences that stays in front of the child during the Laddering interview [ 75 ] . Again , the presence of the object of experience may stimulate children’s memory . If children ﬁnd it hard to express their opinions in words , then they should deﬁnitely be encouraged to show what they are willing to say . 6 . 5 Keep a Laddering interview short Reynolds and Gutman recommend that each Laddering study contains about 20 respondents to arrive at over 125 ladders and at least 500 elements , assuming that an average respondent produces ﬁve ladders , and that an average ladder consists of ﬁve elements . It is evident that when child respondents are involved , the interview cannot last as long and that the number of ladders and elements that Reynolds et al . propose cannot be reached . Therefore , we propose that Laddering interviews in a UX evaluative context with children should remain short and not last longer than 5 – 10 min [ 73 ] . This suggestion cannot only be motivated from a child - respondent perspective but also with a user - centred design argument . Although our timing represents only a fraction of the time necessary for tradi - tional Laddering , for UX researchers , however , Laddering might be only one phase of a complete design process . Consequently , full Laddering as employed within con - sumer research might not always be that realistic . Espe - cially , user - centred design , with its focus on iterative user testing with prototypes , requires an adapted , less time - consuming Laddering alternative . 7 Discussion From a theoretical perspective , it seemed that Laddering would be possible with children as young as 2 years old . However , in our case study , we found that the youngest children were less likely to produce ladders and more likely to generate less elements within a ladder . If one aims for ﬁve elements per preschooler , linear regression analysis predicts an age of 59 , 57 months or 5 years ( r . 469 , b o = - 1 . 314 , b 1 = . 106 , p \ 0 . 01 ) . Consequently , we suggest that Laddering is only feasible with ‘older preschoolers’ , preferably 5 years or older . Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 According to these ﬁgures , with a set of 45 preschoolers and ﬁve elements , the research study provides 225 ele - ments , which is close to the 223 elements we found . According to Reynold and Olson , a traditional Laddering study should aim for approximately 500 elements [ 22 ] . This number includes value elements as well , something we cannot expect our preschoolers to express . We are nevertheless convinced that Laddering should not aim for the number of elements put forward in consumer research . We deal with prototypes and do not aim for a complete listing of all consequences and values but rather the most salient ones . However , how many elements a Laddering study should aim for to claim reliable and valid results deserves further investigation and thus outlines the future efforts needed to achieve progress in this area . 8 Conclusion With the emergence of new tangible interfaces , the HCI community is fully aware of the need for theories and methods for UX research and evaluation . This is especially true when one aims at revealing and understanding the beneﬁts of tangibility . In this paper , we introduced Lad - dering into the ﬁeld of HCI in order to perform UX eval - uations with preschoolers . This paper questioned the value and feasibility of Laddering for UX evaluations of tangible interfaces with preschoolers both from a theoretical as well as a practical perspective . By our case study , we showed how Laddering is instructive in understanding preferences and more particularly how it reveals the way speciﬁc cuddly toy interface aspects and non - cuddly toy interface attributes can lead to speciﬁc beneﬁts . In other words , Laddering hereby helps to critically question the assumed beneﬁts of tangibility . As for the feasibility of Laddering , the method proves to be feasible with the older children , preferably aged 5 years and older . We work towards more Laddering projects and welcome other researchers to redo a similar case study to conﬁrm our ﬁndings , hereby also critically reﬂecting about the assumptions we made . We would advise that in future work , more attention is paid to children’s background and gender ( e . g . previous experi - ence , favourite cuddle toys , … ) or the interview context and the way they may impact the results . We also suggest that future studies focus on the relation between adult and child , questioning the way in which the researcher’s character - istics may inﬂuence the results , e . g . via the child’s extroversion . Acknowledgments We like to thank all preschoolers who partici - pated in the Laddering study . Furthermore , we like to thank the animators of the summer day camp Kattestroof and the community of Bertem , JITSOC for granting us the permission to conduct this research on their playgrounds . We like to thank master students Leonard Van Domselaer ( for creating the penguin ) and especially Michiel Van Minnebrugge ( for his wizardly patience ) . We also like to thank the under or above the radar work of the TOEWIE team , namely technical artists Jelle Husson and Jeroen Wauters for kaka - toewie and kangaroo , Maarten Vanoverveldt and Luc Geurts for the future signal processing and Frederik Windey for the aid in the game development … and ﬁnally Stef Desmet for his meticulous reading . References 1 . Norman D ( 2007 ) The next UI breakthrough , part 2 : physicality . Interactions 14 : 46 – 47 2 . Fitzmaurice GW , Ishii H , Buxton WAS ( 1995 ) Bricks laying the foundations for graspable user interfaces . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM Press / Addison - Wesley Publishing Co , Denver , Colorado , USA , pp 442 – 449 3 . Ullmer B , Ishii H ( 2001 ) Emerging frameworks for tangible user interfaces . In : Caroll BW ( ed ) Human - computer interaction in the new millennium . Addison - Wesley , MA , pp 579 – 601 4 . Dourish P ( 2001 ) Where the action is : the foundations of embodied interaction . MIT Press , Cambridge 5 . Djajadiningrat T , Wensveen S , Frens J , Overbeeke K ( 2004 ) Tangible products : redressing the balance between appearance and action . Pers Ubiquitous Comput 8 : 294 – 309 6 . Wensveen SAG , Djajadiningrat JP , Overbeeke CJ ( 2004 ) Inter - action frogger : a design framework to couple action and function through feedback and feedforward . Presented at the , Cambridge , MA , USA 7 . Hornecker E , Buur J ( 2006 ) Getting a grip on tangible interaction : a framework on physical space and social interaction . Proceed - ings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , Montre´al , Que´bec , Canada , pp 437 – 446 8 . Antle AN ( 2007 ) The CTI framework : informing the design of tangible systems for children . Proceedings of the 1st international conference on tangible and embedded interaction . ACM , Baton Rouge , Louisiana , pp 195 – 202 9 . Price S , Rogers Y , Scaife M , Stanton D , Neale H ( 2003 ) Using ‘tangibles’ to promote novel forms of playful learning . Interact Comput 15 : 169 – 185 10 . Marshall P , Price S , Rogers Y ( 2003 ) Conceptualising tangibles to support learning . Presented at the , Preston , England 11 . Xie L , Antle AN , Motamedi N ( 2008 ) Are tangibles more fun ? : comparing children’s enjoyment and engagement using physical , graphical and tangible user interfaces . Presented at the , Bonn , Germany 12 . Marshall P ( 2007 ) Do tangible interfaces enhance learning ? Proceedings of the 1st international conference on tangible and embedded interaction . ACM , Baton Rouge , Louisiana , pp 163 – 170 13 . Gutman J ( 1982 ) A means - end chain model based on consumer categorization processes . J Mark 46 : 60 – 72 14 . Vanden Abeele V , Zaman B ( 2008 ) The extended likeability framework : a theoretical framework for and a practical case of designing likeable media applications for preschoolers . Advances in human - computer interaction . p 11 15 . Reynolds T , Gutman J ( 2001 ) Laddering theory , method , analy - sis , and interpretation . In : Reynolds T , Olsen J ( eds ) Under - standing consumer decision making : the means - end approach to marketing and advertising strategy . Lawrence Erlbaum , Mahwah , NJ , London , pp 25 – 52 16 . Olson JC , Reynolds TJ ( 1983 ) Understanding consumers’ cognitive structures : implications for advertizing strategy . Advertising and consumer psychology . Lexington Books , Lexington , pp 77 – 90 Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 17 . Grunert KG , Beckmann SC , Sorensen E ( 1996 ) Means - end chains and laddering : an inventory of problems and an agenda for research . understanding consumer decision - making : the means - end approach to marketing and advertising strategy . Lawrence Earlbaum , Mahwah , pp 63 – 90 18 . Reynolds T , Gutman J ( 1988 ) Laddering theory , method , analy - sis , and interpretation 19 . Bech - Larsen T ( 2000 ) Model - based development and testing of advertising messages aˆ € . A comparative study of two campaign proposals based on the Meccas model and a conventional approach . University of Aarhus , Aarhus School of Business , The MAPP Centre 20 . Grunert KG , Bech - Larsen T ( 2005 ) Explaining choice option attractiveness by beliefs elicited by the laddering method . J Econ Psychol 26 : 223 – 241 21 . Bech - Larsen T , Nielsen NA ( 1999 ) A comparison of ﬁve elici - tation techniques for elicitation of attributes of low involvement products . J Econ Psychol 20 : 315 – 341 22 . Reynolds TJ , Dethloff C , Westberg SJ ( 2001 ) Advancements in laddering . In : Reynolds TJ , Olson JC ( eds ) Understanding con - sumer decision - making : the means - end approach to marketing and advertising strategy . Lawrence Elbaum Associates , New Jersey , pp 91 – 118 23 . Kelly GA ( 1963 ) A theory of personality : the psychology of personal constructs . W . W . Norton & Co , NY 24 . Hassenzahl M , Trautmann T ( 2001 ) Analysis of web sites with the repertory grid technique . CHI ‘01 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , Washington , pp 167 – 168 25 . Karapanos E , Martens J ( 2008 ) The quantitative side of the repertory grid technique : some concerns . Proceedings of the workshop now let’s do it in practice : user experience evaluation methods in product development . Florence , Italy 26 . Hawley M ( 2007 ) The repertory grid : eliciting user experience comparisons in the customer’s voice : UXmatters . http : / / www . zotero : / / attachment / 613 / 27 . Fallman D ( 2004 ) Integrating user experience into the design process with the repertory grid technique : some preliminary notes . Presented at the 28 . Hassenzahl M ( 2004 ) The thing and I : understanding the rela - tionship between user and product . In : Blythe M , Overbeeke K , Monk A , Wright P ( eds ) Funology : from usability to enjoyment . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Norwell , pp 31 – 41 29 . Obrist M , Roto V , Va¨a¨na¨nen - Vainio - Mattila K ( 2009 ) User experience evaluation : do you know which method to use ? Proceedings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , Boston , pp 2763 – 2766 30 . Roto V , Va¨a¨na¨nen - Vainio - Mattila K , Law E , Vermeeren A ( 2009 ) User experience evaluation methods in product develop - ment ( UXEM’09 ) . Human - computer interaction—INTERACT 2009 . pp 981 – 982 31 . Va¨a¨na¨nen - Vainio - Mattila K , Roto V , Hassenzahl M ( 2008 ) Now let’s do it in practice : user experience evaluation methods in product development . CHI ‘08 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , Florence , Italy , pp 3961 – 3964 32 . Law E , Roto V , Hassenzahl M , Vermeeren A , Kort J ( 2009 ) Understanding , scoping and deﬁning user experience : a survey approach . Proceedings of the 27th international conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM Press , Boston , pp 719 – 728 33 . Roto V , Vaananen - Vainio - Mattila , Law E , Vermeeren A ( 2009 ) User experience evaluation methods in product development ( UXEM’09 ) Lecture Notes In Computer Science , vol 5727 . ACM Press , NY , pp 981 – 982 34 . Law E , Roto V , Vermeeren AP , Kort J , Hassenzahl M ( 2008 ) Towards a shared deﬁnition of user experience . CHI ‘08 extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems . ACM , Flor - ence , Italy , pp 2395 – 2398 35 . Hassenzahl M ( 2004 ) The thing and I : understanding the rela - tionship between user and product . Funology , from usability to enjoyment . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht , pp 31 – 42 36 . Cockton G ( 2008 ) Designing worth—connecting preferred means to desired ends . Interactions 15 : 54 – 57 37 . Cockton G ( 2004 ) Value - centred HCI . Proceedings of the third Nordic conference on human - computer interaction . ACM , Tam - pere , Finland , pp 149 – 160 38 . Cockton G ( 2004 ) From quality in use to value in the world . CHI ‘04 extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems . ACM , Vienna , Austria , pp 1287 – 1290 39 . International organization for standardization : ISO 9241 - 210 : 2010—Ergonomics of human - system interaction—Part 210 : human - centred design for interactive systems , http : / / www . iso . org / iso / catalogue _ detail . htm ? csnumber = 52075 40 . Hassenzahl M ( 2008 ) Aesthetics in interactive products : corre - lates and consequences of beauty . In : Schifferstein H , Hekkert P ( eds ) Product experience . Elsevier , New York , pp 287 – 302 41 . Kelly G ( 1955 ) The psychology of personal constructs . Norton , New York 42 . Fishbein M , Ajzen I ( 1975 ) Belief , attitude , intention , and behavior : an introduction to theory and research . Addison - Wes - ley , MA 43 . Sluis - Thiescheffer W , Bekker T , Eggen B ( 2007 ) Comparing early design methods for children . Proceedings of the 6th inter - national conference on Interaction design and children . ACM , Aalborg , Denmark , pp 17 – 24 44 . Druin A ( 1999 ) Cooperative inquiry : developing new technolo - gies for children with children . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : the CHI is the limit . ACM , Pittsburgh , pp 592 – 599 45 . Sluis - Theischeffer W , Bekker T , Eggen B ( 2009 ) Adding user creativity to the UX toolbox : Exploring the use of Creative UX methods . Presented at the 13th CHI Netherlands , The Netherlands 46 . Barendregt W ( 2006 ) Evaluating fun and usability in computer games with children . Technische Universiteit Eindhoven 47 . Ericsson KA , Simon HA ( 1993 ) Protocol analysis : verbal reports as data . The MIT Press , Cambridge 48 . Als BS , Jensen JJ , Skov MB ( 2005 ) Comparison of think - aloud and constructive interaction in usability testing with children . Proceeding of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children—IDC ‘05 . Boulder , Colorado , pp 9 – 16 49 . Ho¨ysniemi J , Ha¨ma¨la¨inen P , Turkki L ( 2003 ) Using peer tutoring in evaluating the usability of a physically interactive computer game with children . Interact Comput 15 : 203 – 225 50 . Kesteren IEHV , Bekker MM , Vermeeren APOS , Lloyd PA ( 2003 ) Assessing usability evaluation methods on their effec - tiveness to elicit verbal comments from children subjects . Pro - ceedings of the 2003 conference on Interaction design and children . ACM , Preston , pp 41 – 49 51 . Read JC , Markopoulos P ( 2008 ) Lifelong interactions . Under - standing children’s interactions . Interactions 15 : 26 52 . Read JC ( 2008 ) Validating the fun toolkit : an instrument for measuring children’s opinions of technology . Cogn Tech Work 10 : 119 – 128 53 . ISO 9241 - 210 : 2010—Ergonomics of human - system interaction— Part 210 : human - centred design for interactive systems , http : / / www . iso . org / iso / catalogue _ detail . htm ? csnumber = 52075 54 . Vanden Abeele V , Zaman B , Vanden Abeele M ( 2008 ) The un - likeability of a cuddly toy interface : an experimental study of preschoolers’ likeability and usability of a 3D game played with a Pers Ubiquit Comput 123 cuddly toy versus a keyboard . In : Markopoulos et al . ( eds ) Fun and games 2008 , LNCS 5294 . Springer , Berlin , pp 118 – 131 55 . Lemish D ( 2007 ) Preschoolers , media impact on developmental needs of . In : Arnett JJ ( ed ) Encyclopaedia of children , adoles - cents , and the media . Sage , Thousand Oaks , pp 407 – 410 56 . Rice F ( 1998 ) Human development : a life - span approach . Pre - ntice Hall , Upper Saddle River 57 . Bukatko D ( 2001 ) Child development : a thematic approach . Houghton Mifﬂin , Boston 58 . Irwin LG ( 2005 ) Interviewing young children : explicating our practices and dilemmas . Qual Health Res 15 : 821 – 831 59 . Bretherton I , Beeghly M ( 1982 ) Talking about internal states : the acquisition of an explicit theory of mind . Dev Psychol 18 : 906 – 921 60 . Dunn J , Bretherton I , Munn P ( 1987 ) Conversations about feeling states between mothers and their young children . Dev Psychol 23 : 132 – 139 61 . Hickling A , Wellman H ( 2001 ) The emergence of children’s causal explanations and theories : evidence from everyday con - versation . Dev Psychol 37 : 668 – 683 62 . Miller P , Aloise P ( 1989 ) Young children’s understanding of the psychological causes of behavior : a review . Child Dev 60 : 257 – 285 63 . Berk L ( 1999 ) Development through the lifespan , 3rd edn . Allyn & Bacon , Boston 64 . Bidell T , Fisher K ( 1992 ) Beyond the stage debate : action , structure , and variability in Piagetian theory and research . In : Sternberg R , Berg C ( eds ) Intellectual development . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp 100 – 140 65 . Johnson MP , Wilson A , Blumberg B , Kline C , Bobick A ( 1999 ) Sympathetic interfaces : using a plush toy to direct synthetic characters . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : the CHI is the limit . ACM , Pittsburgh , pp 152 – 158 66 . Paiva A , Andersson G , Ho¨o¨k K , Moura˜o D , Costa M , Martinho C ( 2002 ) SenToy in FantasyA : designing an affective sympa - thetic interface to a computer game . Pers Ubiquitous Comput 6 : 378 – 389 67 . Zaman B , Vanden Abeele V ( 2007 ) How to measure the like - ability of tangible interaction with preschoolers . Proceedings of CHI . NL . Infotec Nederland BV Woerden . Eindhoven , The Netherlands , pp 57 – 59 68 . Andersson G , Ho¨o¨k K , Moura˜o D , Paiva A , Costa M ( 2002 ) Using a Wizard of Oz study to inform the design of SenToy . Proceedings of the 4th conference on designing interactive sys - tems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques . ACM , London , England , pp 349 – 355 69 . Ho¨ysniemi J , Ha¨ma¨la¨inen P , Turkki L ( 2004 ) Wizard of Oz prototyping of computer vision based action games for children . Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Interaction design and children : building a community . ACM , Maryland , pp 27 – 34 70 . Zaman B ( 2009 ) Introducing a pairwise comparison scale for UX evaluations with preschoolers . Human - computer interaction— INTERACT 2009 . pp 634 – 637 71 . LadderUX on line and freely available software tool for UX laddering , www . ladderux . org 72 . Pieters R , Baumgartner H , Allen D ( 1995 ) A means - end chain approach to consumer goal structures . Int J Res Mark 12 : 227 – 244 73 . Vanden Abeele V , Zaman B ( 2009 ) Laddering the user experi - ence ! User experience methods , interact 2009 . Uppsala , Sweden 74 . Reynolds TJ , Olson JC ( 2001 ) Understanding consumer decision making 75 . Zaman B ( 2007 ) Introducing contextual laddering to evaluate the likeability of games with children . Cogn Tech Work 10 : 107 – 117 Pers Ubiquit Comput 123