The Pennsylvania State University The Graduate School Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology CYTOSKELETAL REGULATION OF GERMLINE ARCHITECTURE IN C . ELEGANS A Dissertation in Biochemistry , Microbiology and Molecular Biology by Kang Zhou © 2012 Kang Zhou Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy May 2012 ii The dissertation of Kang Zhou was reviewed and approved * by the following : Wendy Hanna - Rose Associate Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Co - Chair of Committee , Dissertation Co - Advisor Melissa Rolls Assistant Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Co - Chair of Committee , Dissertation Co - Advisor Joseph Reese Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Robert Paulson Associate Professor of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences Aimin Liu Assistant Professor of Biology Craig Cameron Associate Department Head for Research and Graduate Education * Signatures are on file in the Graduate School iii ABSTRACT The cytoskeleton is key to cell shape and function . Though organized in diverse arrays , the fundamental cytoskeletal elements and their regulatory toolbox are conserved . How different types of cell use the same set of basic cytoskeletal tools to build distinctive architectures has been extensively studied , but little has been done to investigate their regulation in complicated systems like tissues or organs . The germline of Caenorhabditis elegans offers a simple model to investigate cytoskletal organization and its regulation in a muticellular system . The majority portion of the C . elegans germline is a syncytium in which the germ cell nuclei are orderly arranged in an evenly - spaced pattern . Using this system I first investigated the mechanism of nuclear positioning in the germline . In the C . elegans embryo , the centrosome , which is attached to the nucleus via ZYG - 12 , organizes the microtubule network and promotes nuclear migration . Surprisingly , in the gonad ZYG - 12 is dispensable for centrosome attachment . Using temperature sensitive mutants , I discovered ZYG - 12 – mediated recruitment of dynein to the nuclear envelope is required to maintain microtubule organization , membrane architecture , and nuclear positioning within the syncytial gonad . I also found that γ - tubulin localizes to the plasma membrane in addition to the centrosome , and regrowth initiates at both sites . I propose that gonad architecture , including membrane and nuclear positioning , is determined by microtubule nucleation at the plasma membrane combined with tension on the microtubules produced by dynein anchored at the nucleus by ZYG - 12 . I further investigated the role of cytokinetic machinery in maintaining germline architecture . The germline syncytium is the result of incomplete cytokinesis at the distal mitotic zone . In the germline the cleavage plane organizer centralspindlin complex and the adapter protein anillin are sequentially assembled to the intercellular bridge in a microtubule independent manner . Other cytokinetic factors , including RhoA , F - actin and myosin , are all enriched on the membrane . I showed F - actin is necessary for maintaining the germline morphology but myosin is not required . Given that both actomyosin ring components , F - actin and myosin , are loaded in the germline , an inhibitory mechanism may exist to prevent the contraction of the intercellular bridge . Through this work I demonstrated C . elegans germline is a valuable model to study cytoskeletal iv regulations . The organization of microtubules in the germline and its underlying mechanism is unique . It not only keeps the germ cell nuclei in place , but also has a critical role in maintaining the overall gremline architecture . I also showed distinct assembly pathway of the cytokinetic factors in the germline and their functions in the maintenance of germline morphology . Meanwhile , through this study I have identified interesting perspectives of the cytoskeletal regulations in the germine . v TABLE OF CONTENTS LIST OF FIGURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii ABBREVIATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . x ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi Chapter 1 INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 FOREWORD………………………………………………………………… . . … . … . . . 1 CYTOSKELETONS AND THEIR REGULATIONS…………………… . ……… . . . . . . 2 Cytoskeleton is key to cell morphology and function……………………… . . … . . 2 Microtubules………………………………………………… . …… . ………… . . . . 2 Microtubule nucleation……………………………………………… . … . …… . . . . 3 Microtubule based motor proteins…………………………………… . …… . … . . . 5 Regulation of Microtubule dynamics by motor proteins……………… . …… . . …5 Actin filaments……………………………………………………… . ………… . 6 Nucleation and functions of actin filaments………………………… . … . …… . . . . 6 Rho family GTPase……………………………………………………… . . …… . 8 Crosstalk between microtubule and actin filaments ……… . . . …………… . . …… . 8 Transducing cytoskeletal forces into the nucleus ……… . . . …………… . . …… . . . 10 USING C . ELEGANS GERMLINE TO INVESTIGATE CYTOSKELETAL REGULATION…………………………………………………………… . . … . 12 C . elegans as a model system………………………………… . …………… . . . . . 12 Development of C . elegans germline……………………… . …………… . ……12 C . elegans germline architecture……………………………………… . … . … . . . 14 C . elegans gonad as a test tube……………………… . ………………… . … . . . . . . 15 Chapter 2 PULLS FROM THE NUCLEUS : ZYG - 12 - DYNEIN INTERACTION ORGANIZES MICROTUBULES IN THE GERMLINE………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ……17 FOREWORD………………………………………………………… . . . … . … . …… . 17 ABSTRACT……………………………………………………… . . … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . …17 INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………… . … . 18 Microtubule rearrangement is a common theme in differential cells……… . …18 KASH and SUN domain proteins are essential to nuclear positioning ……… . 18 ZYG - 12 is a KASH domain protein mediating centrosome - nucleus attachment……………………………………………………………… . . . 19 RESULTS……………………………………………………………………… . . . …20 Mutation of zyg - 12 results in nuclear position and oogenesis defects in the C . elegans gonad……………………………………………… . … . 20 Germ cell membranes are also disrupted in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant gonads… . . 23 ZYG - 12 – dynein and ZYG - 12 – SUN - 1 interactions are important for normal gonad architecture………………………………………… . …… . 24 vi The cytoplasmic microtubule network is disrupted in the syncytial gonad of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) ………………………………………………………… 27 Maintenance of microtubule organization within the gonad is centrosome independent……………………………………………… . . 30 γ - Tubulin localization suggests plasma membrane nucleation of microtubules in the distal gonad…………………… . …………………31 Ultrastructural analysis of gonad subcellular architecture…………………… . . 31 DISCUSSION……………………………………………………………………… . 36 Distinct molecular interactions by ZYG - 12 are required for gonad and embryonic functions………………………………………… . ………36 Model for architecture of the distal gonad…………………… . ……………… . 37 METHODS………………………………………………………………………… . 40 Maintenance and culture of C . elegans……………………………………… . . . . … . . 40 Immunofluorescence and microscopy……………………………………… . . . . 40 Yeast two - hybrid assay………………………………………………… . . . . . . . …41 Microtubule depolymerization and regrowth………………………………… . . 41 Ultrastructural analysis…………………………………………………… . . … . 42 Chapter 3 THE ROLE OF CYTOKINETIC MACHINERY IN MAINTAINING GERMLINE ARCHITECTURE……… . . …………………… . … . 43 ABSTRACT……………………………………………………………………… . . . 43 INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… . . … . . . 44 C . elegans germline syncyntium is the result of incomplete cytokinesis…… . . . 44 Centraspindlin complex has role in maintaining germline architecture……… . 44 RESULTS………………………………………………………………………… . . . 46 Spatial control of C . elegans germ cell progression ………………………… . . 46 Centralspnidlin components ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 are required for C . elegance germline gonad development…………………………… . 47 ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 specifically localize to the membrane of the intercellular bridge………………………………………………… . . . . 49 CYK - 4 activity is required for ZEN - 4 localization……………………… . . . … . 50 Microtubules are not essential for locating centralspindlin to the membrane…51 Anillin is involved in targeting centralspindlin to the membrane…………… . . 52 F - actin is required for maintaining germline architecture but not for targeting anillin and centralspindlin to the membrane……………… . . 53 Actomyosin ring component NMY - 2 is not required for maintaining germline architecture …………………………………………………… . 54 RHO - 1 ( RhoA ) localization is not affected in the germline of cyk - 4 mutant………… . . ………………………………………………… . 55 Centralspinlin might regulate germline microtubules organization…………… . 57 DISCUSSION…………………………………………………………………… . . . . 58 Sequential assembly of anillin and centrapsindlin complex to the membrane of the germline intercellular bridge………………………… . . 58 The role of F - actin and Myosin in maintaining germline architecture …… . …59 vii Mechanistic differences between the cytokinetic furrow and the germline intercellular bridge…………………………………………… . . . . . 60 METHODS………………………………………………………………… . ……… . 61 Maintenance and culture of C . elegans………………………………… . ……… . . …61 RNAi experiment……………………………………………………… . ………61 Gonad culture and drug treatment ……………………………………… . . … . …61 Immunofluorescence and microscopy…………………………………… . … . . . . 62 Chapter 4 PERSPECTIVES……… . …………………………… . ……………………… . 63 Distinct cytoskeletal regulation in the germline…………………………… . … . . … . . 64 The generation of non - centrosomal microtubule arrays……………… . . ………… . . . 65 The function of the centrosome in the germline………………………………… . …66 The termination of abscission in the germline…………………………… . . . ……… . 67 Using RNAi screening to investigate cytalskeltal regulation in the germline …… . . . 68 REFERENCES……………………………………………………………………… . … . 71 viii LIST OF FIGURES Figure 1 - 1 : Microtubule skeleton . ………………………………………………… . . … . …4 Figure 1 - 2 : Actin skeleton……………………………………………………………… . . . . 7 Figure 1 - 3 : Crosstalk between microtubule and F - actin during cytokinesis………… . . . …9 Figure1 - 4 : KASH / SUN pair spans nuclear envelope to transduce cytoskeletal forces into the nucleus………………………………………………… . 11 Figure 1 - 5 : The development of hermaphrodite gonad …………………………………13 Figure 1 - 6 : The germline architecture . …………………………………………… . . . … . . 14 Figure 2 - 1 : zyg - 12 ( ct350ts ) disrupts the regular arrangement of germline nuclei …… . . 21 Figure 2 - 2 : zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) germline nuclei relocalize rapidly to the central rachis in response to a temperature shift . …………………………………… . . …… . 22 Figure 2 - 3 : The membranes of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads are rearranged at the restrictive temperature . ……………………………………………………… . …… . 24 Figure 2 - 4 : The zyg - 12 ( or577 ) mutant , which does not affect the ZYG - 12 – dynein interaction , has normal germline nuclear positioning . ………………………… . … . 25 Figure 2 - 5 : zyg - 12 ( or577 ) has normal germline nuclear positioning when raised at the nonpermissive temperature from the L1 stage . ………………………………26 Figure 2 - 6 : sun - 1 RNAi disrupts gonad nuclear arrangement . …………………… . . . … . 26 Figure 2 - 7 : Microtubules in the gonad of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) rearrange after shift to the non - permissive temperature . ……………………………………………27 Figure 2 - 8 : Microtubule architecture accounts for nuclear positioning in both wild - type and ct350 mutants . ………………………………………………… . 28 Figure 2 - 9 : 3D projections of confocal z series show the nuclear position and microtubule structure of animals……………………………………………… . . 29 Figure 2 - 10 : There are different mechanisms controlling centrosome attachment in the embryo and the germline . ……………………………………… . . 30 Figure 2 - 11 : Microtubule nucleator γ - tubulin localizes to germ cell membrane . ……… . 31 ix Figure 2 - 12 : zyg - 12 ( ct350 ts ) mutant doesn’t affect γ - tubulin localization ……… . ……32 Figure 2 - 13 : Plasma membrane as the nucleation site of microtubules in the distal gonad ………………………………………………… . . …………… . . … . . . 33 Figure 2 - 14 : TEM reveals microtubule organization in the germline . ………………… . . 35 Figure 2 - 15 : A model for MTOC - independent nuclear anchoring in the germline…… . . 37 Figure 3 - 1 : Spatial arrangement of germ cells at the oocyte commitment region . …… . . . 46 Figure 3 - 2 : Centralspindlin components ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 play role in germline development . ……………………………………………………… . … . . …47 Figure 3 - 3 : Maintaining germline morphology requires postmitotical functions of centralspindlin . ………………………………………………… . … . …48 Figure 3 - 4 : Centralspindlin specifically localizes to the membrane of the intercellular bridge……………………………………………………………… . … . 49 Figure 3 - 5 : CYK - 4 is required for localizing ZEN - 4 to the membrane…………… . . . . …50 Figure 3 - 6 : Microtubule is not required for targeting centralspindlin to the membrane . …………………………………………………………………… . . . . 51 Figure 3 - 7 : Anillin is involved in recruiting centralspindlin to the membrane…… . . . … . . 52 Figure 3 - 8 : F - actin is required for maintaining germline architecture but not for targeting anillin and CYK - 4 to the membrane . ……………………… . . ……… . 54 Figure 3 - 9 : Actomyosin ring component NMY - 2 is not necessary for maintaining germline architecture……………………………………… . ………… . 55 Figure 3 - 10 : RHO - 1 : : GFP localization is not altered in the germline of cyk - 4 ( or749 ) mutant……………………………………………………………… . 56 Figure 3 - 11 : Centralspindlin might regulate microtubule organization in the germline………………………………………………… . . . …… . 57 Figure 3 - 12 : Mechanistic difference between germline intercellular bridge and cytkinetic furrow . ………………………………………………………………53 x ABBREVIATIONS ani : anillin cyk : cytokinesis - defective him : high incidence of males nmy : nonmuscle myosin unc : uncoordinated zen : z ygotic hypodermal en closure - defective zyg : zyg ote ( embryo ) - defective DMSO : Dimethyl sulfoxide GAP : GTPase activating protein GEF : guanine nucleotide exchange factors LatA : Latrunculin A MTOC : microtubule - organizing cente xi ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to acknowledge my advisors , Wendy Hanna - Rose and Melissa Rolls . It ' s Wendy who came out and supported me when I was facing a career - ending crisis five years ago . She saves the project I am presenting in this thesis , also helps me to find the other advisor of mine , Melissa . Both Wendy and Melissa are the best mentor a graduate student could ever have . They are always energetic , with a true passion for science . They foster an environment in the lab that everyone likes to discuss science and help others . During past five years , they taught me how to design experiment , organize data , present my work , and more importantly , the way of critical thinking . They not only let me enjoy the freedom of research , but also are always there to give me suggestions and supports . Whenever I had questions I could stop by their office to talk with them . I will always remember how ideas were inspired by these conversions . They have me well prepared for the next step in my career . Here I’d like to say : “Thank you , Wendy and Melissa , for turning a devastating situation into a fun journey of discovery” I ' d thank all members of both Hanna - Rose ' s and Rolls ' labs , as well as my past colleagues in Malone ' s lab . IL Minn taught me how to handle worms at the beginning ; Yi Chen shared her data and strains with me . Michelle Stone , Floyd J . Mattie and Michelle Nyguen have helped with confocal microscope and immunostaining . Hongliu Sun , Li Huang and all other members in Hanna - Rose lab have helped me through the transition . Finally , I would thank Stephanie Lange for her helps and proofreading this thesis . I would also like to thank all the members of my committee , Dr . Joseph Reese , Dr . Robert Paulson and Dr . Aimin Liu for their suggestions on my projects . Some nematode strains used in this work were provided by the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center , which is funded by the National Institutes of Health National Center for Research Resources . Finally I ' d like to say thanks to my family , my parents and my wife , for their selfless supports during these years . 1 Chapter 1 INTRODUCTION FOREWORD Part of the content in Chapter 1 is adapted from : Zhou K . , Rolls M . M . , Hall D . H . , Malone C . J . and Hanna - Rose W . ( 2009 ) A ZYG - 12 - dynein interaction at the nuclear envelope defines cytoskeletal architecture in the C . elegans gonad . Journal of Cell Biology . 186 ( 2 ) : 229 - 41 . And Zhou K . , Hanna - Rose W . ( 2010 ) Movers and shakers or anchored : Caenorhabditis elegans nuclei achieve it with KASH / SUN . Developmental Dynamics . 239 ( 5 ) : 1352 - 64 . 2 CYTOSKELETON AND its REGULATIONS The cytoskeleton is key to cell morphology and function Multicellular organisms are composed of tissues and organs with various architectures that are key to their functions . Tissue architecture , in turn , is largely determined by constituent cell architecture , including global cell shape as well as subcellular positioning of the nucleus and other organelles . The cytoskeleton is responsible for generating and maintaining morphology and organelle organization in cells with a variety of shapes and functions ( Li et al . 2008 ) . The ctoskeleton is intracellular filament regulated by various factors , including nucleators , motors , severing proteins ( Bamburg 1999 ; Quarmby 2000 ; McGough et al . 2003 ; Roll - Mecak at al . 2009 ) , crosslinkers ( Tseng et al . 2005 ; Peterman et al . 2009 ) , polymerases and depolymerase ( Howard et al . 2007 ; Brouhard et al . 2008 ) . Although diverse , these regulators constitute a conserved basic tool set which work together with a common set of cytoskeletal elements . We have gained great understanding of how cytoskeleton is regulated . On one hand , dramatic differences of cytoskeletal organization and dynamics have been well documented among cells with distinct architectures . For example , microtubules in most proliferative cells appear in radial , centrosome - associated pattern , but in differentited epithelial cell the majority of microtubules are non - centrosomal arrays with minus end anchored at the apical surface and plus end extended to the basal domain ( Fig 1 - 1 C ) ( Musch 2004 ; Bartolini et al . 2006 ) . On the other hand , similar cytoskeletal arrangement is often found in different cell types to support distinct functions . For instance , actin bundle is common in many cells : it constitutes stress fiber , fills the projected microvilli of intestinal epithilial cells , assembles into actomyosin contractile ring in dividing cells . The cytoskeletal regulation in individiual cell has been the focus of past research . However , we do not yet understand how diverse cells use the common set of cytoskeletal elements and similar basic tools to manipulate these elements to generate distinct architectures , especially in tissues composed of multiple cell types . There are three types of cytoskeleton : microfilaments ( actin filaments , often referred as F - actin ) , microtubules and intermediate filaments . Since this work will mainly focus on microtubules and F - actin , I will introduce these two types of cytoskeleton below . Microtubules Microtubules are polymers consisting of GTP bound α - and β - tubulin dimers . They are tubular 3 structures made up of laterally associated profilaments ( Fig . 1 - 1 A ) . α and β tubulin first form a dimer , then the dimer polymerizes to form profilaments ( Fujiwara et al . 1975 ) . The profilament has polarity because it always has α - tubulin exposed at one end and β - tubulin exposed at the other end . Since its profilaments are associated in parallel , microtubules also have this same polarity . The α - tubulin exposing tip is designated the minus ( - ) end while the β - tubulin exposing tip is designated the plus ( + ) end ( Fig . 1 - 3 A ) . The minus end of microtubule is usually capped and stable . The α / β tubuilin dimers are typically added to the plus end of an existing microtubule . An important feature of microtubule is its dynamic instability at the plus end , where it can rapidly switch between polymerization and depolymerization . The switching is regulated by cellular signals . This is important because a variety of microtubule fuctions depend on this dynamic instability ( Mitchison et al . 1984 ) . Microtubules have various important functions . Of these , the formation of spindle during cell division is the best known ( Schuyler et al . 2001 ; Wittmann et al . 2001 ) . Microtubules are also vital for maintaining cell polarity ( Black et al . 1989 ) and transporting cargoes such as proteins , vesicles , lysosomes and mitocondria within the cell ( Mitchison 1986 ; Brown et al . 1996 ) . The microtubule is also the core component of some specialized organelles and structures including cilia , flagella and centriole ( Carvalho - Santos et al . 2011 ; Ishikawa et al . 2011 ; Nigg et al . Stearns 2011 ) . Microtubule nucleation Microtubules can be de novo nucleated in additon to directly polymerizing at an existing plus end . γ - tubulin is the core molecule for microtubule nucleation . γ - tubulin can associate with several other proteins to form a complex , termed the γ - tubulin ring complex ( γ - TuRC ; Zheng , et al . 1995 ; Moritz et al . 2001 ) . This is a circular structure on which the polymerization of α / β tubuilin dimer is initiated . In animal cells , γ - tubulin usually localizes to a small organelle known as centrosome . Due to the microtubule nucleating activity of γ - tubulin , the centrosome is typically associated with radial microtubule filaments . This phenomenon is particularly prominent during the cell divsion . Thus the centrosome is often referred to as the microtubule organizing center ( MTOC ) ( Rieder et al . 2001 ; Doxsey et al . 2005 ) . However , the centrosome is not absolutely required for microtubule nucleation ( Roll - Mecak et al . 2006 ; Luders et al . Stearns 2007 ) . For example , higher plants do not have centrosome but still can nucleate microtubule to form functional spindles during cell division ( Zhang et al . 2011 ) . In the 4 female animal germ cell , the centrosome is often eliminated , thus the meiotic spindle lacks a centrosome . This is a typical mechanism to avoid multipolar spindles in the fertilized zygote ( Kim et al . 2006 ) . Even in animal cells , the centrosome is not the sole MTOC . For example , γ - tubulin has been found on Golgi to nucleate microtubules ( Kodani et al . 2009 ; Rivero et al . 2009 ) . Figure 1 - 1 : Microtubule skeleton . ( A ) Microtubule has polarity . α / β tubuilin dimers are typically add to the profilament ( indicated by arrow ) at the plus end . ( B ) Microtubule based motors dynein and kinesin . Dynein motor is minus end directed . Most kinesins move toward plus end . ( C ) In an epithelial cell the majority of microtubules have their minus end anchored at the apical surface and plus end extended to the basal domain . 5 Microtubule based motor proteins One important function of microtubule is intracellular transportation . The polarized microtubules provide an excellent “highway” for directional transport of cargoes . Transportation is carried out by microtubule based motor proteins ( Vale 2003 ; Caviston et al . 2006 ) . There are two types of microtubule associated motors : dynein and kinesin ( Fig . 1 - 1 B ) . Dynein is a polypeptide complex that binds to microtubule through the motor domain within the heavy chains . The ATPase activity of the heavy chain allows it to hydrolyzes ATP to provide energy for walking along the microtubule filaments . The movement of dynein is minus end directed , meaning towards the microtubule minus end ( Gibbons 1988 ; Porter et al . 1989 ) . Besides cytoplasmic localized dynein , there is also axonemal dynein whose activity is essential for cilia or flagella movement . The second type of microtubule associated motor is kinesin . Kinesins comprise a large family of proteins consisting of about 40 kinesins in humans , classified into 14 subfamilies ( Hirokawa et al . 2009 ) . Like dynein , kinesin also hydrolyzes ATP to power movement along a microtubule ( Vale , et al . 1985 ) . The movement of most kinesins is plus end directed with the exception of kinesin 14 moving towards microtubule minus end ( Fink et al . 2009 ; Cross 2010 ) . Both kinesin and dynein rely on their light chain to associate with cargoes . Kinesin typically binds cargo through receptors or scaffolding proteins while dynein sometimes requires a class of proteins known as dynactin to mediate the cargo binding ( Gill et al . 1991 ; Hollenbeck 2001 ; Verhey et al . 2001 ; Hirokawa et al . 2009 ) . Nonetheless , the light chain of dynein and kinesin can also sometimes directly bind to cargoes ( Tai et al . 1999 ; Wozniak et al . 2006 ) Regulation of Microtubule dynamics by motor proteins In addition to their function of transporting cargoes to a specific location within the cells , there is an ever - growing body of evidence suggesting both dynein and kinesin motors have pivotal role in regulating microtubule dynamics ( Bringmann et al . 2004 ; Malikov et al . 2004 ; Daire et al . 2009 ; Drummond 2011 ; Wu et al . 2011 ) . For instance , in the C . elegans one cell stage embryo , dynein is anchored at the cell cortex and binds to microtubules via its heavy chain . The minus - end - directed movement of dynein can generate pulling forces on the microtubule . In the early stage of mitosis the pulling by dynein can rotate the centrosomes and position them along the longitudinal axis of the cell . Thus , dynein is essential for setting up a proper spindle orientation during mitosis ( Gonczy et al . 1999 ; Nguyen - Ngoc et al . 2007 ) . Members of kinesin - 13 subfamily present another elegant example of how motor proteins regulate microtubule dynamics ( Moores et al . 2006 ) . Two members of kinesin - 13 subfamily , Klp10A and Klp59C , can recognize 6 microtubule minus and plus ends , respectively and promote depolymerization of microtubule . Depolymerization at the minus end leads to microtubule subunit flux toward the spindle pole ( poleward movement ) , while depolymerization at the plus end , where microtubule captures the kinetochore , will chew up the microtubule track ( known as “Pac - Man” model ) . Both poleward and Pac - Man movements contribute to driving chromatids toward spindle pole during anaphase in mitosis ( Rogers et al . 2004 ) . Actin filaments Nucleation and functions of actin filaments Filamentous actin , or F - actin , is another component of the cytoskeleton . It is a polymer of globular actin ( G - actin ) . Monomeric actin is ATP - bond and the ATP will be hydrolyzed when G - actin is incorporated into the actin filament ( Carlier 1990 ; Carlier 1991 ) . Like a microtubule , F - actin also has polarity . This is because an actin molecule forms a cleft - like structure to hold ATP , and G - actin monomers are added onto the filaments in such a way that all ADP - holding clefts point to the same direction , designated minus end ( Fig . 1 - 2 A ) . There are two types of factors stimulating actin nucleation in the cell . One of them is the arp2 / 3 complex , a seven - subunit protein complex that is responsible for generating branched actin networks . Arp2 / 3 binds to the side of an existing actin filament from where it nucleates new filament with a 70° angle on the mother filament ( Mullins et al . 1998 ; Blanchoin et al . 2000 ; Goley et al . 2006 ) . Another type of factor is formin , which nucleates non - branched actin filaments ( Fig . 1 - 2 B ; Bindschadler et al . 2004 ) . The actin skeleton is essential for a broad range of cellular functions . Actin filaments can bundle together to support cell shape ( Pollard and Cooper 2009 ) , participate in cell to cell and cell to extracellular matrix interactions ( Ayollo , Zhitnyak et al . 2009 ; Yonemura 2011 ) , or act as tension sensor ( Manor and Kachar 2008 ) . In muscle cells , myosin slides against actin bundles to generate muscle contraction ( Shriver 1986 ) . During cytokinesis , actin bundles and myosin assemble into actomyosin contractile ring to pinch the mother cell into two daughter cells ( Satterwhite 1992 ) . F - actin is also involved in intracellular trafficking . Actin filaments formed by polymerization not only provide mechanical forces for the movement of cargoes ( Taunton et al . 2000 ; Theriot 7 2000 ) , but also constitute track for directional transportation mediated by non - conventional myosin ( Apodaca 2001 ; Buss et al . 2002 ) . Another important function of actin filament is to support cell motility . Upon the stimulation of migrating cues , a series of signals can trigger rapid actin polymerization , pushing the membrane of the cell front forward . A dense meshwork of actin filaments is typically found in the cell leading edge during cell migration ( Pantaloni et al . 2001 ; Le Clainche et al . 2008 ) . Figure 1 - 2 : Actin skeleton . ( A ) The ATP is hydrolized whe a ATP bound G - actin is incoprated into the actin filaments . All ADP - holding clefts of actin subuits point to the same direction , thus creats the polarity . ( B ) the nucleation of actin filament . ARP2 / 3 complex binds to the side of an existing flilament to nuclate branched F - actin while formin nucleates non - branched F - actin . ( C ) Rho family GTPase is a molecular switch . GDP bound Rho GTPase is inactive . GEF can substitute its GDP with a GTP to convert it to active , GTP bound form . GAP can activate the GTPase activity to hydrolize GTP and convert an active Rho to its inactive , GDP bound form . Rho GTPase regulates cytoskeltons , especially the actin skeleton , through variuos effectors . 8 Rho family GTPase Like microtubules , F - actin undergoes cycles of dynamic polymerization and depolymerization that are key to most of its functions . The actin dynamics are regulated by various cellular signaling molecules , among which the Rho GTPases are most notable . Rho GTPases are a family of small G proteins ( guanine nucleotide - binding proteins ) . As implied by the name , Rho GTPases contain a GTP binding domain . GTP - bound Rho GTPase is the active form , and can switch to inactive GDP - bound form . Two classes of proteins , guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEF ) and GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) , regulate the activity of Rho GTPase . A GEF protein can substitute the GDP of an inactive Rho GTPase with a GTP to convert it into the active form . The GAPs can activate the intrinsic GTPase activity of the G protein , leading to GTP hydrolysis and converting itself into the inactive form ( Moon et al . 2003 ; Rossman et al . 2005 ) . The Rho GTPase family functions as a molecular switches and are the key signaling molecules in regulating actin cytoskeleton by transducing upstream signaling to a broad range of effectors , including WASP , ROCK1 , SRA1 , etc . Many of these effectors are regulators of actin skeleton ( Fig1 - 2 C ; Bishop et al . 2000 ; Bustelo et al . 2007 ) . Three members of Rho family , Rac1 , Cdc42 , and Rho , have been extensively studied . Each of these G proteins has a distinct role , but they also function in coordination with each other to regulate actin dynamics . For example , active Rac1 can bind to WASP family proteins , such as N - WASP and WAVE , who subsequently activate the arp2 / 3 complex to nucleate branched actin filaments normally found in the lamellipodia of a migrating cell . Active RhoA can lead to the activation of formin whose activity is to nucleate non - branched actin filament . RhoA activity is critical for maintaining stress fibers . It is also the key signaling molecule for assembling actomysin contractile ring during cytokinesis . Cdc42 activity contributes to the formation of filopodia , spike - like membrane protrusions ( Hall 1998 ; Ridley 2006 ) . Crosstalk between microtubule and actin filaments Both actin filaments and microtubule are important cytoskeletal elements . In fact , they have well defined but overlapping functions . Accumulating evidences suggest F - actin and microtubule often regulate each other in many cellular processes ( Etienne - Manneville 2004 ; Rosales - Nieves et al . 2006 ) . Cytokinesis is such an event during which crosstalk between microtubule and F - actin is critical for an accurate cell division . During the cytokinesis , microtubules form the spindle apparatus to carry out chromosome segregation while actin filaments assemble into actomyosin contractile ring with myosin to drive the cleavage . In many animal cells , a 9 specialized spindle structure , termed central spindle , is necessary for effective cleavage . The central spindle is formed by microtubules nucleated from both spindle poles . We have gained great understanding of how the central spindle forms during the past decade ( Glotzer 2009 ) . A microtubule based motor protein , ZEN - 4 ( or MKLP1 , mitotic kinesine like protein in mammals ) , interacts with the Rho family GAP protein CYK - 4 to form a heterotetrameric complex , called centralspindlin ( Pavicic - Kaltenbrunner et al . 2007 ) . This complex functions as a crosslinker that bundles antiparallel mcirotubules nucleated from both poles . The centralspindlin complex plays a key role in organizing the cleavage furrow formation . It is found CYK - 4 can target Rho GEF protein ECT - 2 to the cleavage plane , which subsequently activates RhoA to promote actomyosin ring assembly ( Yüce et al . 2005 ; Su et al . 2011 ) . Moreover , the GAP activity of CYK - 4 may also locally inactivate RhoA to limit the spreading of active RhoA zone at cell cortex ( Miller et al . 2009 ) . Therefore , the actin based cell cleavage machinery , the actomyosin contractile ring , is regulated by the microtubule based structure cenralspindle ( Figure 1 - 3 ) . On the other hand , actin filaments also play role in spindle assembly and positioning . In cultured mammalian and Drosophila cells , cortical actin network was found important to separating and rotating centrosomes to set up the spindle orientation ( Rosenblatt et al . 2004 ; Cao et al . 2010 ) . In summary , cytoknesis probably is the most dramatic cellular event during which the both actin and microtubule skeletons function concertedly to ensure its accuracy . Figure 1 - 3 : Crosstalk between microtubule and F - actin during cytokinesis . A Kinesin - 6 family member , ZEN - 4 , forms a complex with Rho family GAP CYK - 4 to bundles antiparallel microtubules of the centrospindle . The complex organizes other cytokinetic factors , including Rho family GEF ECT - 2 , RhoA and anillin , to the cleavage furrow . The GEF activity of ECT - 2 and GAP activity of CYK - 4 , have regulatory roles on RhoA activity , which is critical for actomyosin ring assembly . 10 Transducing cytoskeletal forces into the nucleus In text books , the nucleus of eukaryotic cells is often depicted at the cell center . In fact , it usually occupies a particular position within the cell , such as the neuromuscular junction in skeletal muscle ( Lei et al . 2009 ) ; or undergoes dramatic migration during development , such as the process of hypoderm formation in C . elegans ( Sulston et al . 1983 ) . In migrating cells , nucleus usually moves together with the cell body , typically with the centrosome leading the way ( Luxton et al . 2011 ) . Cytoskeleton has been found actively interact with the nucleus in these processes . This interaction is mediated by a conserved protein complex , the SUN / KASH pair , that spans the nuclear envelope ( Starr 2011 ) . The name of SUN domain is coined from the yeast protein Sad1 and C . elegans protein UNC - 84 ( Malone et al . 1999 ) . SUN protein localizes to the inner nuclear membrane , extending its C - terminal SUN domain into the perinuclear lumen . KASH domain protein is the binding partner of SUN domain protein on the outer nuclear envelop . It has a transmembrane domain at the C - terminus that is followed by a short stretch of amino acid residues , termed KASH domain ( the name comes from Klarsicht , ANC - 1 and Syne Homology , see Starr et a . l 2002 ) . KASH domain protein is recruited to the outer nuclear envelope through the interaction between its KASH domain and SUN proteins ( Minn et al . 2009 ) . The N - terminus of KASH proteins can interact with cytoskeleton trough either direct binding or other cytoskeletal associated factors . For example , C . elegans ANC - 1 and its mammalian homology Syne1 directly can bind to F - actin to anchor nuclei in the syncytial hypoderm and skeletal muscle respectively ( Figure 1 - 4 A ; Starr 2002 ; Lei et al . 2009 ) , while UNC - 83 associates with microtubule through kinesin - 1 to mediate nuclear migration during early stage of hypoderm development ( Figure1 - 4 B ; Meyerzon et al . 2009 ) . Another type of cytoskeleton - nucleus interaction involves centrosome ( Figure 1 - 4 C ) . In the early embryo of C . elegans , centrosomes always attach to the nucelus . This attachment is mediated by KASH domain protein ZYG - 12 ( Malone et al . 2003 ) . Among three ZYG - 12 isoforms , both isoform B and C localize to the outer nuclear envelop via their transmembrane domain and KASH domain . Isoform A dosen ' t has transmembrane domain and KASH domain , and localizes to the centrosome . It is proposed ZYG - 12 forms homodimer between centrosome and nucleus to tether these two organelles together . A temperature sensitive allele of zyg - 12 , ct350 , abolishes the homodimerization activity of ZYG - 12 at non - permissive temperature , resulting in detachment of centrosome from the nucelus and embryo death ( Malone et al . 2003 ) . In addition to centrosome - nucleus interaction , ZYG - 12 and its binding partner SUN - 1 can also transduce cytoskeletal force into the nucleus to move the choromsome . In C . elegans germline , pulling forces generated by 11 dynein is transmitted into the meiotic nucleus through ZYG - 12 / SUN - 1 pair ( Figure 1 - 4 D ) . This cytoskeletal force is critical for chromosome movement and correct homologous pairing during meiosis ( Sato et al . 2009 ) . Figure1 - 4 : KASH / SUN pair spans nuclear envelope to transduce cytoskeletal forces into the nucleus . ( A ) C . elegans SUN domain protein UNC - 84 recruits KSAH protein ANC - 1 to the outer nuclear membrane . N terminus of ANC - 1 binds to actin filament and anchors the nucleus at its position in the syncytial hypoderm . ( B ) During the early embryogenesis , nuclei of adjacent hypoderm precursors occupy opposite end . These nuclei will migrate to the other end of the cell . The nuclear migration is mediated by KASH protein UNC - 83 , who binds to Kinesin , and UNC - 84 on the nuclear envelope . ( C ) In the early embryo of C . elegans , centrosomes ( shown green in the diagrams of wild type and zyg - 12 ct350 mutant ) attach to the nucleus . The attachment is mediated by KASH protein ZYG - 12 . SUN domain protein SUN - 1 recruits ZYG - 12 to the outer nuclear membrane . The interaction between ZYG - 12 and dynein helps bring centrosome close to the nucleus . KASH less ZYG - 12 isoform ZYG - 12 A localizes to the centrosome , forming homodimer with ZYG - 12 on the nuclear envelope and tethering the centrosome and nucleus together . ( D ) In the germline of C . elegans , ZYG - 12 recruits dynein to the nuclear envelope . The pulling force of dynein on the microtubue is transduced into the nucleus , playing a critical role on the meiotic chromosome pairing . 12 USING C . ELEGANS GERMLINE TO INVESTIGATE CYTOSKELETAL REGULATION C . elegans as a model system Caenorhabditis elegans is a free - living , soil - dwelling nematode that possesses many desirable features for the laboratory setting . It has small size ( adult animal is about 1mm in length ) , large broods ( 300 plus progenies ) and is easy to maintain ( fed on bacteria ) . These attributes make large scale genetic screens to identify genes and mutations a feasible task ( Brenner 1974 ) . The life span of C . elegans is short . Under normal culture conditions , it reaches adulthood from oocyte fertilization in four days , so that the function of a gene can be quickly identified through mutant screen . C . elegans has two sexes , male and hermaphrodite . Hermaphrodites can produce progeny through self - fertilization or crossing with males , making it easy to be genetically manipulated . The body of C . elegans is transparent , so the behavior of every cell can be visualized in the light microscope . The complete cell lineage has been mapped this way , and remarkably , it is invariant ( Sulston et al . 1977 ; Sulston , Schierenberg et al . 1983 ) . The genome size of C . elegans is relatively small and has been completely sequenced . Its genome bears significant homology to that of humans ( C . elegans sequence consortium 1998 ) . Taken together , since it was first introduced by Sydney Brenner in 1970 ' s ( Wood 1988 ) , C . elegans has been established as a powerful model system to study a broad range of biological topics from fate determination of a single cell to behavioral study as a whole organism ( Wood 1988 ) . The germline of C . elegans A large portion of the body of both male and hermaphrodite worms is occupied by the gonad . The males have a single lobed gonad and the hermaphrodites have a U - shaped gonad consisting of two lobed arms ( Schedl 1997 ) . Since the work of this thesis is based on the hermaphrodite germline , I will introduce the development and morphology of the hermaphrodite germline below . Development of C . elegans germline Asymmetrical cell divison is the major characteristic of the early embryogenesis of C . elegans through which the maternal deposited materials critical for germline specification are segregated to the P blastomeres ( Fig . 1 - 5 A ; Kawasaki et al . 1998 ; Korf et al . 1998 ) . After several cell divisions , the germline founder cell , P4 , gives rise to the primordial germ cells Z2 13 and Z3 . Two somatic gonad precursor cells , Z1 and Z4 , who are descendants of the MS blastomere , reside adjacent to the Z1 and Z2 cells respectively ( Fig . 1 - 5 B ) . These four cells start to proliferate during the L1 stage . The Z1 and Z4 cells produce a ) two distal tip cells ( DTCs ) that lead two gonad arms extend away from the center , b ) nine blast cells that will generate all other adult somatic gonad tissues , and c ) one anchor cell important for initiation of adult egg - laying apparatus . Z2 and Z3 cells , promoted by signals from surrounding somatic gonad tissues , in particular the DTCs and the gonad sheath , will proliferate dramatically and exclusively produce the germline cells . The gonad continuously increases in size and cell number , extends away from the center , and finally makes a turn to form a U - shaped pattern ( Fig . 1 - 5 C ; Hirsh et al . 1976 ; Hubbard et al . 2005 ) . Figure 1 - 5 : The development of hermaphrodite gonad . ( A ) Schematic diagram of the germlien specification . Fertilization of oocyte produces diploid zygote . At four - cell stage , germline specific materials are segregated to the posterior P2 cell ( yellow ) through asymmetrical cell division . Two additional cell divisions produce the germline funder cell P4 . The division of P4 generates primordial germ cells Z2 and Z3 . The somatic gonad precursors Z1 and Z4 are descedants of MS blastomere ( B ) In L1 larva , somatic gonad precursor cells Z1 and Z4 flank primordial germ cells Z2 and Z3 . The germline of adult hermaphrodite consists two U - shaped gonad arms ( yellow ) 14 C . elegans germline architecture The C . elegans gonad consists of an orderly arrangement of nuclei within a large syncytium that is surrounded by somatic gonad sheath cells . The global architecture of the gonad , as well as the cell cycle state of the nuclei , changes as nuclei progress from the distal gonad tips to the proximal region ( Fig . 1 - 6 A ) . A distal tip cell caps each gonad arm and acts to maintain a mass of mitotic nuclei . As new cell divisions push nuclei proximally and away from the distal tip cells , nuclei initiate a meiotic program in the transition zone . Each meiotic nucleus is maintained at the periphery of the gonad in a partially enclosed membrane compartment with a cytoplasmic bridge that connects to a central cytoplasmic pool , called the rachis ( Fig . 1 - 6 C and D ; Hirsh et al . , 1976 ; Hall et al . , 1999 ) . Nuclei progress through the pachytene region into the loop of the gonad where changes in cell shape , including acquisition of extra cytoplasm , and full cellularization lead to production of large oocytes ( Fig . 1 - 6 A ) . A transverse view of the distal gonad arm reveals ~ 12 germline nuclei abutting the gonad sheath and surrounding the rachis ( Fig . 1 - 6 B ) . Figure 1 - 6 : The germline architecture . ( A ) Schemitic lateral view of one gonad arm of the hermaphrodite . A distal tip cell leads the arm . Within the gonad , at the distal most region is the mitotic zone , which is followed by the transition zone where germ cell starts meiosis . Meiotic germ cells are arrested at the pachytene stage in the distal arm . When a germ cell progresses to oocyte commitment region ( typically at the loop ) , its size expands dramatically to oocype the whole space of the tubular gonad . In the proximal gonad is a sigle file of oocytes . ( B ) The transverse view of the distal gonad . ( C ) SYN - 4 : : GFP ( green ) marks germ cell membrane . Each germline nucleus ( DAPI stain , blue ) is enclosed by incomplete membrane . ( D ) 3 - D projection shows all germ cells locate at the peripheral gonad . 15 The regularly arrayed pattern of germline nuclei within the gonad seems important for proper oogenesis and reproduction . Firstly , it enables the temporal control of germ cell progression . The region close to the DTC is maintained as a proliferative niche while the region away from DTC is set for meiosis ( Lambie et al . 1991 ; Crittenden et al . 1994 ; Henderson et al . 1994 ) . Secondly , germ cells may act as nurse cells because large amount of mitochondria have been found in the germ cell . The syncytial nature of the germline might facilitate the local transportation between the germ cell and the central cytoplasmic pool ( Gumienny et al . 1999 ) . Thirdly , at the proximal gonad the germ cells expand drastically . The hollow rachis is an ideal pathway for cytoplamic streaming and the open bridge of the germ cell is favorable for receiving the cytoplasma ( Wolke et al . 2007 ) . Finally , when a germ cell expands to occupy the whole space of the gonad tube , it not only ends the syncytium but also ensures only one oocyte can form at a time . C . elegans gonad as a test tube Because it provides an ideal system to address a variety of biological questions , the gonad of C . elegans has been referred as a biological “test tube” ( Hubbard et al . 2000 ) . The germline progression and cell cycle control have been well documented ( Kimble et al . 2005 ) . In addition , since gonadogenesis is a profound process involving concerted interactions among the germline , the somatic gonad , and their surrounding soma , the role of cell - cell interactions in the developing gonad presents an interesting model ( Sharma - Kishore et al . 1999 ) . For example , the Z1 cell descendant anchor cell is important for the development of uterus and vulva as well as building the connection between these two tubular organs ( Hill et al . 1992 ; Hanna - Rose et al . 1999 ; Estes et al . 2009 ) . A large amount of work has shed light into cell fate specification ( Greenwald et al . 1983 ; Sternberg 1988 ; Green et al . 2008 ) and the coordination of different signaling pathways , such as LIN - 12 / Notch and Let - 23 / EGF signaling , during the development of a common set of organs ( Yoo et al . 2004 ; Myers et al . 2007 ) . Besides , the anchor cell needs to invade into the basement membrane to induce vulva formation . This cellular behavior alone offers an excellent model to study the cancer cell invasion ( Sherwood et al . 2003 ; Sherwood et al . 2005 ) . Additionally , although transgenes are usually repressed in the germline , genetic tools have been developed to express fluorophore - tagged proteins in the C . elegans germline ( Frokjaer - Jensen et al . 2008 ) . The transparent body makes it easy to monitor cellular activity , such as meiotic chromosome dynamics , within the germline . The germline of C . elegans provides a complex , multicellular system with unique architecture 16 that is simple enough to use both genetic and cell biology tools to study the basic regulatory mechanisms of cytoskeleton . Previous studies have shown that the cytoskeleton is important for maintaining the germline architecture and carrying out its function . For example , mutations on fli - 1 , a gene that encodes an actin severing protein , result in clusters of germ cells extending into the rachis ( Lu et al . 2008 ) . However , how the cytoskeletal elements within the germline are organized and their role in regulating germline architecture and function has not yet been systematically investigated . The goal of this work is to use the Caenorhabditis elegans hermaphrodite gonad as a model to investigate cytoskeletal organization in a complex muticellular system , and to probe the molecular mechanisms that establish and maintain this unique architecture . 17 Chapter 2 PULLS FROM THE NUCLEUS : ZYG - 12 - DYNEIN INTERACTION ORGANIZES MICROTUBULES IN THE GERMLINE FOREWORD The content of Chapter 2 has been published in the Journal of Cell Biology . Zhou K . , Rolls M . M . , Hall D . H . , Malone C . J . and Hanna - Rose W . ( 2009 ) A ZYG - 12 - dynein interaction at the nuclear envelope defines cytoskeletal architecture in the C . elegans gonad . Journal of Cell Biology . 186 ( 2 ) : 229 - 41 . The ultrastructural analysis of the gonad was done by Dr . David H . Hall at Albert Einstein College of Medicine . ABSTRACT Changes in cellular microtubule organization often accompany developmental progression . In the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo , the centrosome , which is attached to the nucleus via ZYG - 12 , organizes the microtubule network . I investigate ZYG - 12 function and microtubule organization before embryo formation in the gonad . Surprisingly , normal ZYG - 12 function is not required for centrosome attachment in the germline . However , ZYG - 12 – mediated recruitment of dynein to the nuclear envelope is required to maintain microtubule organization , membrane architecture , and nuclear positioning within the syncytial gonad . I examined γ - tubulin localization and microtubule regrowth after depolymerization to identify sites of nucleation in germ cells . γ - tubulin localizes to the plasma membrane in addition to the centrosome , and regrowth initiates at both sites . I propose that gonad architecture , including membrane and nuclear positioning , is determined by microtubule nucleation at the plasma membrane combined with tension on the microtubules by dynein anchored at the nucleus by ZYG - 12 . 18 INTRODUCTION Microtubule rearrangement is a common theme in differentiated cells Although all cytoskeletal components make significant contributions to the establishment and maintenance of architectural organization , dramatic changes in microtubule organization upon differentiation and the extensive diversity in microtubule organization among cell types speaks to their key role in cell architecture . The concept of a microtubule - organizing center ( MTOC ) , a site of γ - tubulin localization that nucleates microtubule formation , is used to explain the origins of various microtubule arrangements . In dividing cells , the nucleus - attached centrosome nucleates a characteristic array with the plus ends of the microtubules extending radially toward the cell periphery . However , differentiated cells have various alternative organizations in which microtubules are nucleated at noncentrosomal sites via mechanisms that are less well understood . For example , during differentiation of myoblasts , the microtubule cytoskeleton is remodeled from a centrosome - nucleated radial structure to a series of parallel arrays along the long axis of the myotube that are likely nucleated at nuclei with plus ends extending to the poles ( Tassin et al . , 1985 ; Bugnard et al . , 2005 ) . Polarized epithelia provide a second dramatic example of an alternative microtubule cytoskeleton ; epithelial cells contain linear arrays of microtubules oriented with minus ends at the apex and plus ends extending to the basal side ( Fig . 1 - 3 , C ; Bre et al . , 1990 ; Meads et al . , 1995 ) . In epidermal development , epidermal cells progress from a stage with a centrosomal array to a stage with a parallel array as microtubule - anchoring proteins are relocalized from the centrosome to the cell junctions near the apical membrane ( Lechler et al . , 2007 ; Meng et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , dramatic alterations in microtubule organization often accompany differentiation . To comprehend the events that underlie cell differentiation and development of tissue architecture , it is important to understand how diverse microtubule arrays are organized . KASH and SUN domain proteins are essential to nuclear positioning In C . elegans gonad , germline nuclei are evenly spaced at the periphery throughout the distal gonad arm . Nuclear position in C . elegans , including that of germline nuclei , is subject to active control by the cytoskeleton and by extracellular matrix proteins ( Hedgecock et al . , 1982 ; Vogel et al . , 2001 ; Thompson et al . , 2002 ; Lu et al . , 2008 ) . However , the mechanisms that maintain the evenly distributed peripheral pattern of germline nuclei are mysterious . Nuclear 19 positioning in other C . elegans tissues and in other systems often depends on a conserved pair of protein families called Sad1 / unc - 84 ( SUN ) and Klarsicht / Anc - 1 / Syne - 1 homology ( KASH ) domain proteins ( for review see Starr , 2007 ) . Current models posit that conserved SUN domain proteins bind chromatin or the nuclear lamina in the nucleus and span the inner nuclear membrane to bind to a conserved KASH domain protein partner in the inter membrane space . The KASH domain proteins span the outer nuclear membrane and interact with cytoskeletal elements in the cytoplasm . Thus , a SUN – KASH pair can facilitate interaction of the nucleus with a cytoskeletal system , including the microtubules ( Starr et al . , 2002 ; Fischer et al . , 2004 ; Yu et al . , 2006 ; Zhang et al . , 2007 ) . ZYG - 12 is a KASH domain protein mediating centrosome - nucleus attachment In the C . elegans embryo , centrosome – nucleus attachment is maintained via the SUN – KASH pair , SUN - 1 and ZYG - 12 ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . Two of three alternative ZYG - 12 isoforms have a transmembrane - containing KASH domain and are localized to the nuclear envelope by SUN - 1 , but the third ZYG - 12 isoform lacks the KASH domain and localizes to the centrosome ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . Interaction of these nuclear and centrosomal isoforms is proposed to mediate centrosome – nucleus attachment , and nuclear migration clearly depends on the connection between the nucleus and the centrosome MTOC . Dynein also plays a role in embryonic pronuclear migration ; depletion of C . elegans dynein subunits DLI - 1 or DHC - 1 causes a penetrant pronuclear congression defect ( Gonczy et al . , 1999 ; Yoder et al . , 2001 ) . These data are consistent with a model in which dynein provides the force for movement of the centrosome , whereas ZYG - 12 provides centrosome – nucleus attachment , permitting nuclear movement . ZYG - 12 also interacts directly with DLI - 1 , the light intermediate chain of dynein , and recruits DLI - 1 to the nuclear envelope in the early embryo and the gonad ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) , suggesting that ZYG - 12 functions as a molecular anchor on the nuclear envelope for cytoplasmic dynein . However , the role of dynein at the nuclear envelope in embryos is not clear ; a zyg - 12 allele ( or577 ) that abrogates ZYG - 12 homodimerization but retains the dynein interaction has migration and centrosome detachment defects as severe as those of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) , which disrupts the dynein interaction ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) , suggesting that the key function for ZYG - 12 in the embryo is centrosome – nucleus attachment . Both SUN - 1 and ZYG - 12 are expressed in the germline , but neither the role of these proteins nor the role of the microtubules in germline architecture , nuclear positioning , or centrosome attachment has been investigated in the gonad . Therefore , I started the investigation of germline 20 cytoarchitecture with ZYG - 12 . I reveal that , in the gonad , ZYG - 12 is dispensable for centrosome attachment . However , ZYG - 12 recruitment of dynein to the germ cell nuclear envelope is critical for nuclear positioning . Because both ZYG - 12 function and nuclear positioning in the gonad are independent of the centrosome , I examined alternative sites of microtubule nucleation . Based on the localization of γ - tubulin and microtubule regrowth initiation at the cytoplasmic membrane after depolymerization , I propose that gonad architecture , including germline nuclear positioning , is determined by microtubule nucleation at the plasma membrane in combination with tension on these microtubules provided by dynein that is anchored to the nuclear membrane by ZYG - 12 . RESULTS Mutation of zyg - 12 results in nuclear position and oogenesis defects in the C . elegans gonad In the embryo , nuclear positioning requires ZYG - 12 at the nuclear membrane . ZYG - 12 is also localized to the nuclear envelope of germline nuclei in the syncytial C . elegans gonad ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . To determine whether ZYG - 12 has essential function in the gonad , I examined zyg - 12 mutant gonads for defects . To avoid the early embryonic lethality associated with disruption of ZYG - 12 function , I used a temperature - sensitive allele of zyg - 12 . I shifted postembryonic , first larval stage ( L1 ) zyg - 12 ( ct350 ts ) animals to the restrictive temperature ( 25°C ) and examined the gonad of the adults . Intriguingly , I observed disruption of the regular arrangement of nuclei within the syncytial gonad of all mutant animals . Although germline nuclei are arranged in a regular array at the periphery of the gonad in wild type ( Fig . 1 - 2 A and B , Fig . 2 - 1 A ) , germline nuclei appear randomly distributed within the gonad of the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutants ( Fig . 2 - 1 B ) . Furthermore , large oocytes with multiple nuclei form in the proximal gonad arm of the mutants ( Fig . 2 - 1 D ) in contrast to the single nucleus in each wild - type oocyte ( Fig . 2 - 1 C ) . 21 Figure 2 - 1 : zyg - 12 ( ct350ts ) disrupts the regular arrangement of germline nuclei . ( A and B ) DAPI - stained germline nuclei are regularly arrayed in the distal gonad arm of adult wild - type animals ( A ) but disarrayed in zyg - 12 ( ct350ts ) gonads ( B ) . ( C and D ) Immunofluorescent images with ZYG - 12 in green , α - tubulin in red , and nuclei ( DAPI ) in blue . Oocytes contain a single nucleus in the proximal gonad of wild - type animals ( C ) but have multiple nuclei in zyg - 12 ( ct350ts ) gonads ( D ) . All animals were shifted to 25°C during L1 . I used immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy to further characterize nuclear mispositioning . I extruded gonads from zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) or wild - type animals at the restrictive temperature and performed immunofluorescence with antibodies against ZYG - 12 to visualize nuclear envelopes and against α - tubulin to visualize cytoplasm . In wild type , germline nuclei are evenly arranged directly under the surface of gonad ( Fig . 2 - 2 A ) , and no nuclei occupy the central rachis ( Fig . 2 - 2 B ) . In contrast , in the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant , the nuclei are disarrayed at the surface ( Fig . 2 - 2 D ) , and large numbers of nuclei have collapsed into the central rachis ( Fig . 2 - 2 E ) . I also observed abnormal clusters of small nuclei that do not appear to have undergone oogenesis in the proximal gonad ( Fig . 2 - 2F ) . 22 Figure 2 - 2 : zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) germline nuclei relocalize rapidly to the central rachis in response to a temperature shift . ( A – F ) Confocal images of gonads from egg - laying adults incubated at 25°C for 6 h . Gonads are labeled with ZYG - 12 ( green ) to mark the nuclear envelope and α - tubulin ( red ) . Wild - type ( WT ) gonads maintain the regular position of the nuclei at the periphery ( A ) and have no nuclei in the rachis ( B ) . ( C ) Furthermore , the proximal gonads of wild - type animals have evenly spaced oocytes with one nucleus each . ( D and E ) In contrast , the nuclei at the periphery of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads are disorganized ( D ) , and many nuclei occupy the central rachis ( E ) . ( F ) The proximal gonad of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) animals has abnormal clusters of small nuclei that resemble the distal nuclei . ( G – L ) DAPI - stained proximal ( G – I ) and distal ( J – L ) gonads of egg - laying adult zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) animals incubated at 25°C for short intervals , as indicated . The nuclei are rapidly displaced in response to exposure to the restrictive temperature . 23 Because zyg - 12 is required for centrosome – nucleus attachment in the embryo , it is required for embryonic mitotic divisions ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . To rule out a mitotic defect in the rapidly proliferating germline as the underlying cause of the disruption in nuclear arrangement , we examined gonads at shorter intervals after the shift to the restrictive temperature . I transferred zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) egg - laying hermaphrodites that had been maintained at 15°C to the restrictive temperature ( 25°C ) for 1 , 4 , or 8 h and examined the postmitotic region of their gonads . Germline nuclei retained their position after 1 h at 25°C ( Fig . 2 - 2 G ) . However , within 4 h , germline nuclei were displaced in the distal ( Fig . 2 - 2 H ) and the proximal ( Fig . 2 - 2 K ) gonad . 8 h after the temperature shift , the gonad was heavily disrupted ( Fig . 2 - 2 I and L ) . The majority of the distal nuclei are unlikely to have undergone mitosis during the time course of the experiment . Moreover , the nuclei in the pachytene zone of the proximal gonad are postmitotic before the temperature shift and yet become mispositioned . Wild - type germline nuclei maintained their well - aligned position when cultured at the restrictive temperature starting in L1 ( Fig . 2 - 1 C ) or after 6 h at the restrictive temperature ( Fig . 2 - 2 , A - C ) . The rapid nuclear repositioning throughout the gonad after 4 h at the restrictive temperature suggests that the phenotype is independent of any mitotic defect . Germ cell membranes are also disrupted in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant gonads To further characterize the disrupted gonad phenotype caused by zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) , I further examined cell membranes . I used a germ cell membrane – localized syntaxin - GFP fusion , GFP : : SYN - 4 ( Jantsch - Plunger et al . , 1999 ) , to visualize the membranes that partially surround each germ cell nucleus in the syncytial gonad . In parallel with the disruption of nuclear position , the membranes are rearranged in the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutants . In wild type , the membranes that partially surround each germ cell nucleus are well organized in a honeycomb - like structure ( Fig . 2 - 3 , A ) . However , within 6 hours at the restrictive temperature , zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) membranes are disorganized ( Fig . 2 - 3 , B and C ) and , in the proximal gonad , sometimes incorporate > 1 nucleus ( Fig . 2 - 3 , E and F ) . I conclude that zyg - 12 is involved in a mechanism that helps to maintain the well - aligned , evenly spaced peripheral position of the germline nuclei and the regularly arrayed surrounding membranes within the gonad syncytium . 24 Figure 2 - 3 : The membranes of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads are rearranged at the restrictive temperature . ( A – D ) GFP : : SYN - 4 permits visualization of membranes in a wild - type distal ( A ) and proximal ( D ) gonad . This patterned array of germ cell membranes is disorganized in the distal ( B and E ) and proximal ( C and F ) arm of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads . ZYG - 12 – dynein and ZYG - 12 – SUN - 1 interactions are important for normal gonad architecture To understand how disruption of ZYG - 12 could alter both nuclear position and membrane architecture , I tested alleles of zyg - 12 that affect distinct protein – protein interactions ( Fig . 2 - 4 , J ) . ZYG - 12 interacts with itself and with dynein light intermediate chain DLI - 1 in yeast two - hybrid assays ( Fig . 2 - 4 K ; Malone et al . , 2003 ) . The zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) allele mutation ( Q44P ) lies in the N - terminal region ( Fig . 2 - 4 , J ) and renders both the ZYG - 12 – ZYG - 12 and ZYG - 12 – DLI - 1 interactions sensitive to high temperature in a yeast two - hybrid assay ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , the mutation ( Q367P ) present in another zyg - 12 ts allele , or577 , lies in the coiled - coil domain of ZYG - 12 ( Fig . 2 - 4 J ) and abrogates the ZYG - 12 – ZYG - 12 interaction without affecting the ability of ZYG - 12 to bind DLI - 1 in a yeast two - hybrid assay ( Fig . 2 - 4 , K ; Malone et al . , 2003 ) . Although zyg - 12 ( or577ts ) embryos exhibit detached centrosomes and pronuclear migration defects similar to those of zyg - 12 ( ct350ts ) embryos ( see Fig . 2 - 10 B and C ) , I surprisingly found that zyg - 12 ( or577ts ) mutants do not display the gonad defect of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) . The gonads of zyg - 12 ( or577 ) hermaphrodites shifted to 25°C for 6 h are indistinguishable from wild - type animals ( Fig . 2 - 4 A - C ) . zyg - 12 ( or577 ) hermaphrodites shifted to the restrictive temperature during L1 also have evenly spaced germline nuclei and oocytes 25 with single nuclei as adults ( Fig . 2 - 5 A and B ) . Using an antibody to the heavy chain of cytoplasmic dynein , DHC - 1 , I confirmed that DHC - 1 was recruited to the nuclear membrane of all germline nuclei in wild - type ( Fig . 2 - 4 D ) but not zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant gonads at 25°C ( Fig . 2 - 4 E , Malone et al . , 2003 ) . zyg - 12 ( or577 ) animals had normal DHC - 1 localization at the nuclear membrane ( Fig . 2 - 4 F ) . Figure 2 - 4 : The zyg - 12 ( or577 ) mutant , which does not affect the ZYG - 12 – dynein interaction , has normal germline nuclear positioning . ( A – C ) Confocal fluorescent images of zyg - 12 ( or577 ) incubated at 25°C for 6 h . Gonads are labeled with ZYG - 12 ( green ) to mark the nuclear envelope and α - tubulin ( red ) . ( A and B ) The nuclei at the periphery of the gonad maintain their regular positioning ( A ) , and no nuclei are in the central rachis ( B ) . ( C ) Furthermore , the proximal gonad has evenly spaced oocytes with one nucleus each , which is similar to wild - type animals ( Fig . 2 C ) . The or577 allele has no detectable effect on ZYG - 12 – DLI - 1 interactions in this assay . ( D – F ) Immunofluorescent images obtained with DHC - 1 antibody stained gonads . ( D ) We confirmed that DHC - 1 is recruited to the nuclear envelope of all nuclei in the wild - type ( WT ) germline . ( E ) In contrast , robust DHC - 1 signal was never observed in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant germlines ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) and < 10 % of the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) nuclei display a weak DLI - 1 signal . ( F ) DHC - 1 is retained at the nuclear envelope of all nuclei in zyg - 12 ( or577 ) animals at 25°C . ( G – I ) RNAi of dynein heavy chain ( dhc - 1 ) disrupts gonad nuclear arrangement . ( G ) DAPI - stained distal gonad shows disorganized nuclei . ( H and I ) Immunofluorescent images of proximal gonads stained with ZYG - 12 ( green ) to mark nuclei , α - tubulin ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) show multiple nuclei ( arrowhead ) in single oocytes . ( J ) ct350 and or577 affect different domains of ZYG - 12 ( Malone et al . 2003 ) ( K ) We confirmed the ZYG - 12 interaction with dynein light intermediate chain DLI - 1 using a yeast two - hybrid assay as well as the lack of interaction caused by the ct350 allele ( Malone et al . 2003 ) . BD , DNA - binding domain vector ; AD , activation domain vector . 26 The lack of a gonad phenotype in zyg - 12 ( or577 ) , which binds to and recruits dynein to the nuclear envelope , compared with the severe nuclear positioning and membrane morphology defects of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) , which fails to bind dynein or recruit it to the nuclear envelope , suggests that a ZYG - 12 interaction with dynein is important for maintenance of gonad architecture . To further investigate the role of dynein , I used RNAi to deplete DHC - 1 . dhc - 1 ( RNAi ) causes a larval arrest phenotype ( unpublished data ) . However , adult animals that escape larval arrest have a gonad phenotype similar to that of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) animals . In the distal gonad of dhc - 1 ( RNAi ) hermaphrodites , germline nuclei were displaced from the periphery of the gonad ( Fig . 2 - 4 G ) as previously noted ( Wolke et al . , 2007 ) . Phenotypes in the proximal gonad in dhc - 1 ( RNAi ) were somewhat variable . However , there were many oocytes with multiple nuclei ( Fig . 2 - 4 H ) , and the arrangement of the oocytes during their formation is abnormal ( Fig . 2 - 4 I ) . Figure 2 - 5 : zyg - 12 ( or577 ) has normal germline nuclear positioning when raised at the nonpermissive temperature from the L1 stage . ( A ) The nuclei ( DAPI ) are regularly arrayed in the distal gonad of an adult zyg - 12 ( or577 ) animal . ( B ) The proximal gonad of zyg - 12 ( or577 ) animals have evenly spaced oocytes with one nucleus each . In the zygote and the gonad , the localization of ZYG - 12 to the outer nuclear membrane is dependent on the inner nuclear envelope protein SUN - 1 ( Malone et al . , 2003 ; Penkner et al . , 2007 ) . As expected , depletion of sun - 1 via RNAi also causes disorganization of the nuclei in the distal gonad and clumping of multiple nuclei in the proximal gonad ( Fig . 2 - 6 A - C ) . I conclude that in addition to ZYG - 12 , both known binding partners of ZYG - 12 , SUN - 1 and DLI - 1 , are required for maintenance of gonad architecture . Figure 2 - 6 : sun - 1 RNAi disrupts gonad nuclear arrangement . ( A ) DAPI - stained distal gonads show disorganized nuclei . ( B and C ) Proximal nuclei are disorganized and abnormally small , likely reflecting a defect in meiotic progression . ( inset ) A higher magnification view of the region near the arrowhead , showing nuclei with additional DNA fragments during diakinesis . 27 Figure 2 - 7 : Microtubules in the gonad of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) rearrange after shift to the non - permissive temperature . ( A ) Immunofluorescent image stained for α - tubulin shows the microtubule structure of a wild - type ( WT ) gonad . Microtubules appear in a punctate pattern surrounding the nucleus in this single frame of a confocal z series . In Fig . 2 - 9 A ′ , the 3D projection of the same z series reveals a meshwork - like structure of microtubules surrounding the nucleus . ( B ) When raised at the permissive temperature , zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) has the same microtubule structure as wild type . ( C ) 1 h after the shift to the restrictive temperature , microtubule structure remains intact . ( D ) After 2 h at restrictive temperature , microtubule arrangement is partially disrupted and is accompanied by the disruption of nuclear position . ( E ) We observed dramatic microtubule rearrangement as early as 3 h at the restrictive temperature . ( F ) After 8 h at the restrictive temperature , clusters of multiple nuclei were wrapped in a reorganized microtubule network . All panels are a single frame of a confocal z - series . The cytoplasmic microtubule network is disrupted in the syncytial gonad of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) Given the drastic rearrangement of gonad morphology in the dynein - binding – defective zyg - 12 mutant or upon RNAi of dhc - 1 , I hypothesized that microtubule organization might be perturbed . 28 To visualize microtubule structure with high resolution , I stained glutaraldehyde - fixed gonads with an anti – α - tubulin antibody and acquired an immunofluorescent confocal z series at 0 . 1 - µ m intervals along the z - axis . In a single frame , the α - tubulin appears in a punctate pattern throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig . 2 - 7 A ) . A 3D projection of the z series reveals a meshwork arrangement of microtubule filaments criss - crossed throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig . 2 - 8 A and Fig . 2 - 9 A ) . The zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant displays the same microtubule arrangement as wild type when maintained at 15°C ( Fig . 2 - 7 B and Fig . 2 - 9 B ′ ) . To examine microtubule reorganization upon disruption of zyg - 12 function , I shifted ct350 adults to 25°C and fixed the gonad at different time points . 1 hour after the temperature shift , the microtubules show no obvious differences compared with wild type ( Fig . 2 - 7 C and Fig . 2 - 9 C ′ ) , and nuclei maintained their peripheral positions ( Fig . 2 - 9 C ) . 2 hour after the temperature shift , microtubule structure is altered ; longer filaments can be seen in a single frame ( Fig . 2 - 7 D ) compared with the short filaments seen in wild type . Coincident with this microtubule rearrangement , the well - aligned nuclear position is partially disrupted ( Fig . 2 - 9 D ) . 3 hour after the temperature shift , dramatic rearrangement of microtubules is accompanied by disruption of nuclear position ( Fig . 2 - 7 E ; and Fig . 2 - 9 E and E ′ ) . By 8 hour , gonad architecture is completely rearranged ( Fig . 2 - 8 B and C ; and Fig . 2 - 7 F ) . There are longer microtubule filaments that are no longer associated with nuclei ( Fig . 2 - 8 B ; and Fig . 2 - 7 F ) . Aberrant microtubule arrays encapsulate large clusters of nuclei , whereas other nuclei are excluded from these structures ( Fig . 2 - 8 C ; and Fig . 2 - 9 , F and F ′ ) . Figure 2 - 8 : Microtubule architecture accounts for nuclear positioning in both wild - type and ct350 mutants . ( A ) Distal gonad of wild - type ( WT ) animal . 3D projection of a z series of confocal immunofluorescent images stained with α - tubulin reveals a meshwork - like structure of microtubules surrounding the nuclei . Microtubules in the gonad of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutants are severely disorganized after 8 h at the restrictive temperature . ( B ) In a view of the distal gonad region , longer microtubule filaments crisscross through a cytoplasm devoid of nuclei . ( C ) In a view of the whole gonad arm , large microtubule networks encapsulate multiple nuclei . The arrowhead indicates multiple nuclei surrounded by the same microtubule network , and the arrow indicates nuclei not surrounded by microtubules . 29 Figure 2 - 9 : 3D projections of confocal z series show the nuclear position and microtubule structure of animals . ( A – F ′ ) A , B , C , D , E , and F are stained with SUN - 1 antibody to indicate the nuclear position . A ′ , B ′ , C ′ , D ′ , E ′ , and F ′ show corresponding animals stained with α - tubulin antibody . Wild type ( WT ; A and A ′ ) and zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) ( B – F ′ ) after the indicated times at the restrictive temperature . 3D projections correspond to those in Fig . 2 - 7 . 30 Figure 2 - 10 : There are different mechanisms controlling centrosome attachment in the embryo and the germline . ( A – C ) ZYG - 12 is required for centrosomal attachment in the embryo . Immunofluorescent images of embryos incubated at the restrictive temperature for 6 h labeled with ZYG - 12 ( green ) to mark the nuclear envelope and α - tubulin ( red ) to mark the centrosome . ( A ) The centrosomes are attached to the nuclei in a two - cell stage embryo . ( B and C ) Centrosomes ( arrowheads ) are detached from the nuclei in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) and zyg - 12 ( or577 ) embryos . ( D – F ) ZYG - 12 is dispensable for centrosome attachment in the gonad , and loss of nuclear anchoring is independent of centrosome attachment . Immunofluorescent images of gonads incubated at the restrictive temperature for 6 h labeled with antibodies to SAS - 4 ( green ) to mark centrosomes , ZYG - 12 ( red ) to mark nuclei , and α - tubulin ( blue ) . Centrosomes remain closely apposed to the nuclear envelope of wild - type ( WT ) nuclei ( D ) , zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) nuclei that have been displaced ( E ) , and zyg - 12 ( or577 ) nuclei ( F ) . Note that in wild - type and both mutants , the SAS - 4 signal is visible at all nuclei but does not appear in images only because of the focal plane of the confocal image . Although nuclear position was disrupted , centrosomes still remain on the nuclear envelope of the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutants ( E , arrowhead ) . Maintenance of microtubule organization within the gonad is centrosome independent The best - characterized MTOC is the centrosome , and ZYG - 12 is required for the juxtaposition of the centrosome and the nucleus in the embryo . Thus , one simple hypothesis to explain disruption of microtubules in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads is that mispositioning of the centrosomal MTOC underlies the microtubule disorganization . Therefore , I determined whether zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) at the nonpermissive temperature resulted in loss of the centrosome from its perinuclear position in the gonad . I examined attachment of the centrosome to the nucleus at the restrictive temperature in wild - type and zyg - 12 ( or577 ) gonads , in which germline nuclei are always properly positioned , and in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads , in which the germline nuclei are mispositioned . I confirmed that both zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) and zyg - 12 ( or577 ) result in detached centrosomes in embryos ( Fig . 2 - 10 , A - C ) , but , strikingly , the centrosome remains attached to the 31 germline nuclei regardless of zyg - 12 genotype or nuclear positioning phenotype ( Fig . 2 - 10 , D – F ) . In wild - type and zyg - 12 ( or577 ) gonads , centrosomes are always juxtaposed to the regularly arrayed nuclei in the peripheral plane ( Fig . 2 - 10 , D and F ) . Similarly , the centrosomes remain attached to all displaced nuclei in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads , as most strikingly illustrated by the maintenance of attachment to nuclei that have collapsed into the central rachis ( Fig 2 - 10 E ) . We conclude that the mechanism for centrosome attachment differs between the embryo and the germline and does not require ZYG - 12 in the gonad . Furthermore , nuclear and microtubule rearrangement upon shift to the restrictive temperature is not associated with loss of centrosomal – nuclear attachment . Misplaced mutant nuclei maintain their centrosome attachments ( Fig . 2 - 10 E ) , and misplaced nuclei with attached centrosomes are sometimes completely outside any microtubule network ( Fig . 2 - 8 C ) . Thus , the centrosome is not sufficient to organize the global microtubule architecture in the postmitotic gonad , and the mechanism for maintaining nuclear positioning and microtubule organization within the gonad is likely centrosome independent . γ - Tubulin localization suggests plasma membrane nucleation of microtubules in the distal gonad As the centrosome is not the key to the loss of microtubule organization in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutants , I hypothesized that another major MTOC is present in the gonad . To identify potential sites of microtubule nucleation , I visualized γ - tubulin , the core component of the canonical microtubule nucleation pathway . I first visualized γ - tubulin using live animals expressing γ - tubulin : : GFP ( Dammermann et al . , 2004 ) . Although the γ - tubulin : : GFP signal is weak , it demonstrates that the bulk of the γ - tubulin in the distal region of the gonad syncytium localizes to the germ cell membranes and to the centrosome ( Fig . 2 - 11 A ) . In the proximal gonad , I see γ - tubulin on the nuclear and plasma membranes of oocytes with some signal emanating from structures in the cytoplasm as well ( Fig . 2 - 11 B ) . Figure 2 - 11 : Microtubule nucleator γ - tubulin localizes to germ cell membrane . ( A ) Scanning confocal microscopy of the gonad of a live animal expressing γ - tubulin : : GFP . GFP signal is detected on cell membrane and centrosome ( white arrow ) . ( B ) GFP antibody stain of the proximal gonad of animal expressing γ - tubulin : : GFP . Accumulation of GFP signal on nuclear envelope can be seen , but the centrosomal GFP signal shown in distal gonad is not detected in the oocyte . 32 As a more sensitive method to confirm the expression pattern , I used immunofluorescence with a polyclonal GFP antibody in combination with a nuclear pore complex antibody to mark the nuclear membrane . As observed in live animals , γ - tubulin : : GFP localizes to both the germ cell membranes and to the nucleus - associated centrosome in the distal gonad ( Fig . 2 - 12 , A – C ) . In the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant at the restrictive temperature , γ - tubulin : : GFP still localizes to the cell membranes and the centrosomes ( Fig . 2 - 12 , D – F ) . Based on the localization of γ - tubulin and the phenotype of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) , I hypothesized that the plasma membrane may be a major site of microtubule nucleation in the distal gonad . Figure 2 - 12 : zyg - 12 ( ct350 ts ) mutant doesn’t affect γ - tubulin localization . ( A – E ) γ - Tubulin localizes to germ cell membrane in both wild - type ( WT ) and zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) gonads . ( A ) In the distal gonad of wild - type animals , γ - tubulin localizes to germ cell membranes and centrosomes ( white arrows ) . ( B ) The nuclear pore complex marks the nuclei . ( D – F ) In zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) , neither the membrane nor the centrosomal localization ( D , white arrows ) of γ - tubulin : : GFP is altered . ( F ) However , nuclear position has been disrupted . To investigate this hypothesis , I used nocodazole to depolymerize microtubules and then removed the drug to observe regrowth in gonads in which the plasma and nuclear membranes were marked with GFP . Filamentous microtubules are found in the space between the nuclear envelope and plasma membrane , with some overlap at each membrane , before treatment with the drug ( Fig . 2 - 13 , A ) . Microtubules were effectively depolymerized after 1 hour of nocodazole treatment ( Fig . 2 - 13 , B ) . Consistent with the idea that the microtubule network is critical for 33 maintaining germline nuclear position and germ cell membrane organization , both are disrupted upon microtubule depolymerization ( Fig . 2 - 13 , B ) . Very few microtubule puncta appear 20 min after nocodazole removal ( Fig . 2 - 13 , C ) . Within 30 min of nocodazole removal , staining for microtubules reveals numerous puncta ( Fig . 2 - 13 , D ) that are associated with the plasma membrane ( Fig . 2 - 13 , E and F ) . No microtubules are observed along the circumference of the nuclear membrane at these early time points ( Fig . 2 - 13 D ) , with the exception of those at the centrosome ( Fig . 2 - 13 H ) . However , microtubules do localize along the circumference of the nuclear membrane by 1 hour after nocodazole removal ( Fig . 2 - 13 , G ) . This temporal pattern of microtubule regrowth suggests that the plasma membrane is an important microtubule nucleation site . Microtubule nucleation at the centrosome is also observed in disorganized gonads of the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutants ( Fig . 2 - 13 , I ) , again suggesting that the centrosome has the capacity to nucleate some microtubules but is insufficient to organize the global germline microtubule array . I propose that the majority of microtubules in the gonad are nucleated at the plasma membrane and that dynein localized to the nuclear envelope by ZYG - 12 subsequently captures these microtubules to organize the microtubule array and to position nuclei at the gonad periphery . Figure 2 - 13 : Plasma membrane as the nucleation site of microtubules in the distal gonad . ( A – I ) Microtubules regrow from the plasma membrane ( marked by GFP : : SYN - 4 ) after the removal of depolymerizing drug from cultured gonads . ( A ) Filamentous microtubules occupy the cytoplasm and partially colocalize with the plasma membrane in a cultured gonad not subjected to nocodazole . ( B ) 1 h of nocodazole treatment effectively depolymerizes microtubules in the gonad . ( C ) 20 min after nocodazole removal , only a few punctate microtubules appear on plasma membrane . ( D - F ) 30 min after the removal of nocodazole , microtubules regrow at the plasma membrane . Punctate microtubule signals ( stained with α - tubulin antibody ; D , white arrows ) align with GFP : : SYN - 4 – marked plasma membrane ( E and F ) . ( G ) 1 h after the removal of nocodazole , membrane - associated microtubules grow into filaments ( white arrows ) . ( H - I ) 30 min after nocodazole removal , microtubule puncta ( H , red ) associate with γ - tubulin : : GFP – marked membrane and centrosomes ( arrowheads ) . ( I ) ct350 expressing γ - tubulin : : GFP . Microtubules regrow from centrosome ( arrowhead ) at restrictive temperature . 34 Ultrastructural analysis of gonad subcellular architecture To better understand the microtubule organization within the germ cell , the collaborator of our lab ( David Hall at Albert Einstein College of Medicine ) used ultrastructural analysis to examine gonad architecture and microtubule organization to gain a deeper understanding of how microtubules relate to other organelles and major features of the gonad . Electron micrographs of the proximal gonad reveal several interesting features . First , there is a striking uniformity in cytoplasmic contents in the partially cellularized germ cells and the rachis , consisting primarily of an abundance of free ribosomes , some mitochondria , and rather little ER or yolk ( Fig . 2 - 14 ) . Second , organelles such as mitochondria cross the cytoplasmic bridge from germ cell to rachis , illustrating the need for holding the larger nucleus in place and restricting its proximity to the rachis bridge ( Fig . 2 - 14 ) . Third , nuclei are maintained in close proximity to the outer membrane of the germ cell ( Fig . 2 - 14 A ) . Fourth , microtubule organization in the germ cells is nonuniform . There are relatively few microtubules , and they are not found in parallel arrays . They criss cross ( Fig . 2 - 14 C ) and approach both the plasma membrane and the nucleus , specifically contacting the nucleus at areas of electron density ( Fig . 2 - 14 B ) in proximity to the nuclear pores ( not depicted ) . Microtubules also contact the rachis along its structural support feature , “the rachis coat” ( Vogel and Hedgecock , 2001 ; Hall and Altun , 2008 ) . The coat is an electron - dense structure ( Fig . 2 - 14 , A , D , and E ) that covers the outer surface of the rachis , with slight thickening near each germ cell opening . The coat is comprised principally of hemicentin , which is required to prevent early germ cell membranes from encapsulating multiple nuclei ( Vogel and Hedgecock , 2001 ) . Mitochondria ( and other potential cargoes ) are often observed to lie very near to microtubules by transmission EM ( TEM ; Fig . 2 - 14 E ) . Finally , bundles of microtubules cross the cytoplasmic bridge between the germ cell and the rachis ( Fig . 2 - 14 D ) . 35 Figure 2 - 14 : TEM reveals microtubule organization in the germline . ( A ) Low power view of the distal arm of the gonad seen in lengthwise view . Rows of germ cells ( GC ) lie on either side of the rachis , connected by cytoplasmic bridges to the rachis . A somatic sheath cell partially covers the germline at this level . The cytoplasm of the germ cells contains a large central nucleus and scattered mitochondria . The rachis is also filled with mitochondria and contains yolk granules ( Y ) and some ER . Some organelles span the bridges between the germ cell and rachis . The outside surface of the rachis membrane has an electron - dense rachis coat between closely spaced arrowheads . ( B – E ) Higher power views of germ cells oriented so that the germ cell lies to the top of each panel with the rachis beneath it , running left to right as in A . Note that free ribosomes fill most of the cytoplasm in all distal germline cells and in the rachis . ( B ) A microtubule appears to attach to an electron - dense projection ( asterisks ) on the cytoplasmic face of a germ cell nucleus ( nuc ) . These projections appear to extend from the nuclear pore . ( C ) Two microtubules pass one another at almost orthogonal angles near the top of a germ cell . ( D ) A bundle of microtubules passes across the cytoplasmic bridge between the rachis and a germ cell , running close to several mitochondria . ( E ) Microtubules can be seen running lengthwise along the long axis of the rachis close to several mitochondria . Black arrowheads indicate microtubules , and white arrowheads mark rachis openings for each germ cell . Bars : ( A ) 5 µ m ; ( C ) 0 . 5 µ m . 36 DISCUSSION Distinct molecular interactions by ZYG - 12 are required for gonad and embryonic functions Recruitment of ZYG - 12 to the nuclear envelope is critical to embryonic development ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . In this study , I show that ZYG - 12 at the nuclear envelope is crucial for maintenance of the global architecture of the gonad as well . Interestingly , the key binding partners for ZYG - 12 in the embryo appear to be distinct from those in the gonad . In the embryo , a homodimeric interaction between ZYG - 12 proteins localized separately to the nuclear envelope and the centrosome is presumed to mediate the necessary attachment between the nucleus and the centrosome ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . In the gonad , ZYG - 12 has no role in nucleus – centrosome attachment . ZYG - 12 is not localized to the centrosome in the gonad ( Penkner et al . , 2007 ) , and nucleus – centrosome attachment is maintained in the gonad in both zyg - 12 ( ts ) alleles examined . Furthermore , ZYG - 12 – ZYG - 12 interactions are dispensable in the gonad , as indicated by the normal gonad phenotype of the ZYG - 12 homodimerization - defective mutant zyg - 12 ( or577 ) . This is further illustrated by comparing the gross phenotype of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) , which is sterile , indicating a germline defect , and zyg - 12 ( or577 ) , which is embryonic lethal but not sterile , suggesting normal gonad and germline function . Thus , I have revealed a ZYG - 12 – independent mechanism for centrosome attachment in the postmitotic gonad . The protein emerin appears to function in nucleus – centrosome attachment in human fibroblasts ( Salpingidou et al . , 2007 ) . It will be interesting to determine whether C . elegans emerin shares this function in the gonad or whether other as yet unidentified proteins attach germline nuclei and perhaps nuclei in other tissues to centrosomes . In the germline and embryos , ZYG - 12 appears to function as a molecular anchor for recruiting dynein to the outer nuclear membrane . Although the function of the dynein at the nuclear envelope in embryos may play a minor role in centrosome attachment ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) , I have shown that recruitment of dynein to the nuclear membrane by ZYG - 12 is critical for maintenance of gonad architecture ; loss of ZYG - 12 – DLI - 1 interactions likely underlies the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant phenotype . Although I cannot rule out the possibility that an interaction between ZYG - 12 and another unknown protein is simultaneously disrupted by the ct350 allele , the data are consistent with a central role for dynein . Disruption of dynein expression mimics the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) phenotype , and the lack of dynein recruitment to the nuclear envelope is 37 correlated with the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) phenotype . ZYG - 12 has also been implicated in meiotic chromosome pairing ( Penkner et al . , 2007 ) , and it remains to be determined which molecular interactions of ZYG - 12 are key to this function . Model for architecture of the distal gonad I propose that cellular architecture in the distal gonad is dictated by microtubules nucleated at the plasma membrane by γ - tubulin and captured at the nuclear envelope by dynein , whose motor activity , directed toward microtubule minus ends , creates tension between the nucleus and plasma membrane ( Fig . 2 - 15 ) . This tension could explain the major structural features of the distal gonad , including the peripheral position of the nuclei in the gonad , with a central rachis devoid of nuclei , and the architecture of the plasma membrane that appears to be pulled around each nucleus ( Hall et al . , 1999 ) . The predicted resulting haphazard arrangement of microtubules in the cytoplasm is supported by the ultrastructural analysis . Figure 2 - 15 : A model for MTOC - independent nuclear anchoring in the germline . ( A ) A model for germline nuclear anchoring in the gonad . ZYG - 12 recruits dynein to the outer nuclear envelope . Dynein promotes nuclear anchoring via direct interactions with the microtubule filaments nucleated from membrane - localized γ - tubulin . The centrosome is not involved in nuclear positioning of germline nuclei . ( B ) The centrosome is the key to nuclear positioning in the embryo . ZYG - 12 homodimerization is essential to maintain the nucleus – centrosome interaction in the embryo , permitting control of nuclear positioning . 38 If the only considerations in the distal gonad were positioning nuclei near the edge and bringing plasma membrane extensions between nuclei , other arrangements of microtubules might work equally well . For example , microtubules could be nucleated at or near the nucleus and be pulled on by interactions with the cell cortex . This general arrangement is used frequently ( Siegrist et al . , 2007 ) . However , the distal gonad is not simply a storage shed for future oocyte nuclei ; it is hypothesized to function as a nurse compartment that provides material to the oocyte ( Wolke et al . , 2007 ) . Oocytes , which are transcriptionally quiescent , are packed with material for early embryogenesis via actin - based cytoplasmic streaming from the rachis ( Wolke et al . , 2007 ) . The transcriptionally active germline nuclei distal to the developing oocytes are thought to synthesize the rachis cytoplasm ( Starck et al . , 1977 ; Gibert et al . , 1984 ; Wolke et al . , 2007 ) . The high free ribosome density observed in electron micrographs is consistent with a role for these cells in synthesizing material for loading into the oocyte during cytoplasmic streaming . Thus , most trafficking from the peripheral nuclei should be directed into the central rachis of the gonad , and this transport is likely to be microtubule based . Microtubule nucleation at the plasma membrane and tension along the side of microtubules by dynein at the nuclear envelope allows the tips of microtubules to extend past the nuclei into the rachis ( Fig . 2 - 14 D and Fig . 2 - 15 ) , whereas other microtubule arrangements that could account for peripheral localization of nuclei as mentioned previously , would not . Interestingly , microtubules appear to make closest contact with the nucleus at sites containing electron - dense projections that lie in proximity to the nuclear pore ( Fig . 2 - 14 D ) . This may provide a link for trafficking from the nucleus to the rachis . Microtubule extension from the peripheral germ cells into the rachis has been described previously ( Wolke et al . , 2007 ) , but the organizing factors were not known . Interactions between microtubules and the rachis coat are also likely to contribute to the integrity of the membrane in the area of the bridge to the rachis . The rachis coat appears to reinforce the tubular shape of the rachis and probably the cytoplasmic bridges between the germ cells and the rachis , as the coat covers the rachis surface with slight thickening at each opening but never extends over the surface of the germ cells ( Hall et al . , 1999 ) . Interactions between this coat and local microtubules could maintain each rachis opening between a germ cell and the syncytium as the maturing germ cell migrates proximally along the rachis . Several other biologically important features of the gonad are likely to be facilitated by anchoring nuclei at its outside edge . Unanchored nuclei could float through cytoplasmic bridges to the rachis , as observed for mitochondria ( Fig . 2 - 14 ) . This might block the bridge or disrupt cytoplasmic streaming in the rachis . It could also result in multiple nuclei streaming into the 39 oocyte as seen in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) ( Fig . 2 - 2 F ) . Other mutants are known to cause similar defects in the distal gonad , such as nuclei in the central rachis ( Thompson et al . , 2002 ) , chains of membrane - covered germline cells with extended cytoplasmic bridges connecting them to a malformed rachis ( Lu et al . , 2008 ) , or germline cells containing multiple nuclei per membranous compartment but connected normally to the rachis ( Vogel et al . , 2001 ) . The gonads of these mutants appear superficially similar to that of zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) . However , molecular analyses suggest that these phenotypes are caused by different mechanisms such as a mitotic defect or malformed membranes . Aspects of the phenotype observed after loss of dynein from the nuclear envelope in zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) are also consistent with a plasma membrane – nucleus tension model for architecture of the distal gonad . After loss of dynein from the nuclear envelope in the zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) mutant , the distal gonad is rearranged such that the microtubule network encapsulates groups of nuclei while excluding others . The excluded nuclei with no surrounding microtubules clearly illustrate the lack of microtubule - organizing activity by the nuclei and their attached centrosomes . The nuclei that are encapsulated by the microtubule network no longer pull membrane around themselves and are not pulled to the periphery because tension between nuclei and the membrane is lost . Although the proposed model for microtubule arrangement seems to make sense for the biology of the C . elegans gonad , it appears to conflict with what is known about microtubule arrays in other cell types . Typically , microtubule minus ends are thought to be near the center of the cell and plus ends at the periphery ( Siegrist et al . , 2007 ) . However , the canonical rearrangement is reversed in oocyte development in other animals . For example , in the middle of Drosophila melanogaster oocyte development , microtubules are rearranged so that minus ends emanate from the cortex ( Steinhauer et al . , 2006 ) , although in this case , the principles that underlie the arrangement of microtubules have not been elucidated ( Steinhauer et al . , 2006 ) . Further afield , minus ends are also known to be far from the cell center in mammalian ( Baas et al . , 1988 ) and Drosophila ( Stone et al . , 2008 ) neurons . In all of these examples , the positioning of the nucleation sites is not well understood . This system will provide an opportunity to identify , using a simple genetic organism , how these sites are regulated and to test whether this regulation is the key to setting up different types of architecture in different regions of a single organ . 40 METHODS Maintenance and culture of C . elegans Wild - type N2 animals were maintained at 20 or 15°C . The temperature - sensitive mutants zyg - 12 ( ct350 ) and zyg - 12 ( or577 ) ( provided by J . White , University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI ) were maintained at 15°C before temperature shifts . ct350 animals expressing GFP : : syn - 4 or γ - tubulin : : GFP were obtained by crossing lin - 31 ( n301 ) ct350 ; him - 5 ( e1490 ) with strains syn - 4 ( ok372 ) ; xuIs88 ( gfp : : syn - 4 ) ( provided by J . Nance , New York University , New York , NY ) and unc - 119 ( ed3 ) ; ddIs6 [ tbg - 1 : : GFP + unc - 119 ( + ) ] , respectively , then cloning green F2 animals with a multivulva phenotype . The F3 generation was shifted to the restrictive temperature to confirm the sterility phenotype of ct350 . Temperature shifts were conducted on standard culture plates ( Brenner , 1974 ) . For sun - 1 and dhc - 1 RNAi , I transferred L1 stage animals to RNAi feeding plates with bacteria ( strain HT115 ) expressing double - stranded RNA and assayed animals as adults ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . sun - 1 and dhc - 1 RNAi was performed by feeding animals bacteria that express double - stranded RNA as previously described ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . Immunofluorescence and microscopy Animals were cut to release the gonad on polylysine - coated slides and fixed gonads using methanol at − 20°C . Primary ZYG - 12 ( raised in rat ; Malone et al . , 2003 ) , SUN - 1 ( rabbit ) , SAS - 4 ( rabbit ) , DHC - 1 ( rabbit ; provided by S . Strome , University of California , Santa Cruz , Santa Cruz , CA ; Schmidt et al . , 2005 ) , GFP ( rabbit ) , and α - tubulin ( T9026 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) antibodies were diluted 1 : 200 in PBSBT buffer ( PBS containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 and 3 % BSA ) and incubated with sample overnight at 4°C . 1 : 400 dilution of mAb 414 ( Covance ) was used to stain nuclear pore complex ( Rolls et al . , 1999 ) . Corresponding Alexa Fluor 488 – and 568 – conjugated secondary antibodies ( Invitrogen ) or Cy5 AffiniPure goat anti – mouse IgG ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) were diluted in PBSBT buffer to a final concentration of 20 µ g / ml and incubated with samples at room temperature for 1 h followed by incubation with 10 µ g / ml DAPI ( Sigma - Alrich ) for 5 min . Because the zyg - 12 alleles are temperature sensitive , the gonads of mutants were fixed with paraformaldehyde at 25°C . These conditions had no effect on staining patterns or observed phenotypes . To visualize microtubules structure with high resolution , extracted gonads were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBST buffer containing 2 % Triton - X 100 at room temperature for 15 min . After three washes 41 with PBST buffer , the sample was quenched with 150 mM glycine in PBST for 10 min as described previously ( Yu et al . , 2008 ) . When examining the position of germline nuclei , I took images at the pachytene region of distal gonad ( just before nuclei enter the loop region ) and oocytes in proximal gonad ( postloop region ) . Images were acquired using a confocal microscope ( LSM 510 ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) with a Plan NeoFluar 63 × 1 . 4 NA oil lens ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) operated by LSM 510 software ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) or using a microscope ( Eclipse 90i ; Nikon ) equipped with a Plan Apochromat total internal reflection fluorescence 60 × 1 . 45 NA oil lens ( Nikon ) and a camera ( CoolSnap HQ ; Photometrics ) operated by SimplePCI software ( Compix , Inc ) . I captured frames every 0 . 1 µ m to create the z - axis series and used LSM 510 software to produce 3D projection images . Image levels were adjusted using Photoshop ( CS ; Adobe ) without altering the γ value and were assembled by Canvas 9 ( Deneba ) . Yeast two - hybrid assay The yeast two - hybrid assay was performed with ZYG - 12 as bait using the Matchmaker 3 system ( Clontech Laboratories , Inc . ) as described previously ( Malone et al . , 2003 ) . Full - length dli - 1 was PCR amplified from cDNA yk102f4 using primers 5 ′ - GACCATATGCCACCAACTGCGCAAC - 3 ′ and 5 ′ - GTC CTGCAGTTA TGCATCACTG TCC CG - 3 ′ cloned into NdeI and PstI sites of vector pGAKT7 and shifted to the pGADT7 vector . Plasmids were introduced into the yeast AH109 strain , and selection was performed on synthetic defined / − Leu / − Trp plates . Cotransformants were inoculated into liquid YPD medium and grown to OD600 0 . 8 . 1 ml culture was centrifuged and washed once with 1 ml of water and resuspended in 1 ml of water . 10 µ l of a 1 : 100 dilution in water was inoculated on a synthetic defined / − Leu / − Trp / − His / − Ade plate and incubated at 25°C . Microtubule depolymerization and regrowth Gonads from strain syn - 4 ( ok372 ) ; xuIs88 ( gfp : : syn - 4 ) were cultured for drug treatments as described previously ( Wolke et al . , 2007 ) . Animals were placed in embryonic culture medium ( ECM ; 84 % Leibovitz L - 15 medium [ Invitrogen ] , 9 . 3 % FBS [ Hyclone ] , 4 . 7 % sucrose , 0 . 01 % levamisole , and 2 mM EGTA ) on a coverslip and cut at the pharynx . Extruded gonads were transferred to a 1 . 5 - ml centrifuge tube containing ECM and 10 µ g / ml nocodazole . After 1 h , gonads were washed twice with 1 ml ECM then resuspended in ECM and incubated for 0 , 20 , 30 , or 60 min . All gonads were fixed and stained with α - tubulin antibody as described in section immunofluorescence and microscopy . 42 Ultrastructural analysis Intact young adult nematodes were fixed and embedded for electron microscopy by conventional methods ( Hall , 1995 ) . A two - step fixation was used : animals were first fixed in buffered aldehydes followed by postfixation with osmium tetroxide and en bloc staining with uranyl acetate . Serial thin sections were examined with an electron microscope ( CM10 ; Phillips ) . The distal gonad was observed in lengthwise sections to better display the relationship between the developing germline , the rachis , and the overlying somatic gonad . 43 Chapter 3 THE ROLE OF CYTOKINETIC MACHINERY IN MAINTAINING GERMLINE ARCHITECTURE ABSTRACT The centralspindlin complex is key to central spindle formation during cytokinesis ( Mishima et al . , 2002 ; Glotzer 2009 ) . It also recruits other regulatory molecules , including ECT - 2 and anillin , to the cleavage plane ( D ' Avino et al . , 2008 ; Su et al . , 2011 ) . During cytokinesis , the two subunits of centralspindlin , ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 , are mutually dependent for localization to the mitotic midzone ( Hutterer et al . , 2009 ) . Microtubules are also required to transport clusters of the complex to the midzone . In the C . elegans germline , the complex specifically localizes to the membrane of the intercellular bridge between germ cells and the rachis . I discovered that in the germline , in contrast to dividing cells , the centraspindlin complex is sequentially assembled , with anillin targeting CYK - 4 and then CYK - 4 recruiting ZEN - 4 to the intercellular bridge . Centralspindlin functions post - mitotically to maintain germline architecture . Temperature sensitive mutations of both zen - 4 and cyk - 4 disrupt germline morphology . I also showed that , although other cytokinetic factors , including the actomyosin ring components F - actin and NMY - 2 , are loaded at the intercellular bridge , it dosen’t trigger the contraction of actomyosin ring to complete the abscission . 44 INTRODUCTION C . elegans germline syncyntium is the result of incomplete cytokinesis In previous chapters , I have described the architecture of the syncytial germline of C . elegans . Syncytia are a common phenomenon widely found in multicellular organisms including fungi ( Salles - Passador et al . , 1991 ) , plants ( Plachno et al . , 2010 ) , and animals . Under physiological conditions , for instance , during the course of development , a syncytium can be formed through cell fusion or incomplete cytokinesis . In C . elegans , the formation of the hypoderm represents the former ( Sulston et al . , 1983 ) , while the syncytial germline might be an example of the incomplete cytokinesis pathway . During a normal cell division , the actomyosin contractile ring drives membrane abscission to cleave the intracellular bridge connecting two daughter cells ( Hales et al . , 1999 ; Barr et al . , 2007 ) . In the germline , the abscission terminates and the intracellular bridge becomes a stable structure ( Weber et al . , 1987 ; Robinson et al . , 1994 ) . In fact , the germline intracellular bridge not only resembles the mitotic cleavage furrow structurally , but also shares a common set of macromolecules with the furrow ( Hime et al . , 1996 ) . For example , the scaffold protein anillin is found in both the cleavage furrow and the germline cytoplasmic bridge ( Maddox et al . , 2005 ; D ' Avino 2009 ) . Through its multiprotein binding domains , anillin provides a platform for the assembly of the cytokinetic machinery by interacting with a variety of cytokinetic factors , such as actin , Rho family GTPases and septin ( Piekny et al . , 2008 ) . One of three anillins in C . elegans , anillin 2 , is specifically expressed in the germline and is essential for germline integrity ( Maddox et al . , 2005 ) . Other cytokinetic factors , including RhoA ( RHO - 1 ) and myosin , are also enriched on the germ cell membrane around the cytoplasmic channel . The extracellular matrix protein hemicentin was recently shown to promote cleavage furrow maturation of mouse embryo , and it is also important for maintaining germline integrity in C . elegans ( Xu et al . , 2011 ) . Centraspindlin complex has role in maintaining germline architecture Centraspindlin is a protein complex comprised of CYK - 4 ( MgcRacGAP in mammals ) and ZEN - 4 ( or mitotic kinesin like protein 1 , MKLP1 ) that plays a key role in regulating the formation of the central spindle during cytokinesis ( Adams et al . , 1998 ; Powers et al . , 1998 ; Raich et al . , 1998 ; Jantsch - Plunger et al . , 2000 ; Mishima et al . , 2002 ) . CYK - 4 is a Rho family GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) . During cytokinesis , a dimer of CYK - 4 forms a tetrameric 45 complex with a dimer of the kinesin - 6 family protein ZEN - 4 to bundle the antiparallel microtubules that constitute the central spindle ( Pavicic - Kaltenbrunner et al . , 2007 ) . The complex localizes to the center of the microtubule bundles through the plus - end - directed motor domain of ZEN - 4 . Besides central spindle formation , the complex also promotes cleavage furrow formation through several mechanisms . Rho family GTPase RhoA ( RHO - 1 ) is the primary signaling molecule in the pathway of actomyosin contractile ring assembly ( Piekny et al . , 2005 ) . Although it is a Rho family GAP , CYK - 4 can interact with the Rho family guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) ECT - 2 to activate RHO - 1 , which subsequently promotes the polymerization of non - branched F - actin through its effector , formin ( Yuce et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , it is also proposed the GAP activity of MgcRacGAP ( CYK - 4 ) locally inactivates RhoA to limit the spread of the RhoA activity zone during cytokinesis ( Miller et al . , 2009 ) . Rho family GTPase Rac is another possible target of CYK - 4 . A recent study suggested that the GAP activity of CYK - 4 inactivates Rac to inhibit the growth of branched F - actin , which antagonizes actomyosin contractile ring assembly ( Canman et al . , 2008 ) . Finally , the localization of the scaffold protein anillin , which binds to F - actin , RhoA and myosin , is subjected to the regulation of CYK - 4 ortholog RacGAP50C in dividing Drosophila S2 cell . ( D ' Avino et al . , 2006 ) . CYK - 4 is expressed in the C . elegans germline , and cyk - 4 mutant animals exhibit morphological defects in the proximal gonad ( Jantsch - Plunger , Gonczy et al . 2000 ) . In a screen to identify factors regulating C . elegans germline morphology , I found both ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 . These genes have an important function in maintaining germline architecture in addition to their role in cytokinesis . In cytokinesis , the formation of the centralspindlin complex and its presence at the center of central spindle are mutually dependent on both subunits as well as microtubules . In contrast , I show that a microtubule - independent , sequential assembly pathway of CYK - 4 and ZEN - 4 appears to exist on the membrane of germline intercellular bridge . I also demonstrated a mechanistic difference between the function of the centralspindlin and its associated protein machinery at the cytoplasmic bridge relative to the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis , although the two complexes resemble one another in both structural features and molecular components . 46 RESULTS Spatial control of C . elegans germ cell progress ion The gonadal architecture of C . elegans has been well described ( Hirsh et al . , 1976 ; Hall , Winfrey et al . , 1999 ; Zhou et al . , 2009 ) . The majority of the germline is a large syncytium but complete cellularization occurs at the proximal gonad , as individual germ cells acquire a large amount of cytoplasm and expand in size . This is a coordinated progression because there are always multiple germ cells moving together proximally , but only one at a time can fully cellularlized to occupy the whole tubular space in the proximal gonad . In the germline , programmed cell death is pivotal to eliminating excessive germ cells ( Gumienny et al . , 1999 ) . The shape and spatial arrangement of germ cells begin to change when they progress to the loop region just prior to cellularization . To better understand this process , I used confocal microscopy to visualize extruded gonads of adult hermaphrodite whose germ cell membranes were marked with membrane - localized syntaxin GFP : : SYN - 4 . The size of each germ cell increases as it moves closer to the loop . Coupled with the expanding cell size , the number of germ cells decreases ( Fig . 3 - 1 A ) . In two single frames representing the top and bottom view of the germline respectively ( Fig . 3 - 1 B and C ) , I see that one row of nuclei in each frame extends out of a group of germ cells , resulting in two germ cells juxtaposed in the gonad tube at the loop region . Finally , these two rows of germ cells merge to form a single row of oocytes . One interesting observation is that in one frame ( Fig . 3 - 1 B ) , the leading front of the grouped germ cell appears to lag behind the group in the other frame ( indicated by arrows in Fig . 3 - 1 B and C ) . Figure 3 - 1 : Spatial arrangement of germ cells at the oocyte commitment region . ( A ) The oocyte commitment region ( loop ) of an extruded gonad . SYN - 4 : : GFP marks the germ cell membrane and DAPI marks the nuclei . The number of germ cells decreases and the size of germ cell increases when germ cells progressed proximally . ( B ) Top frame and ( C ) bottom frame of a confocal Z - series . Arrow in each frame point out a raw of nuclei extends out of the group of germ cells . Note the leading front of the germ cell group in frame B lags behind the leading front in frame C . 47 Centralspindlin components ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 are required for C . elegance germline gonad development In an RNAi screen to identify factors organizing germline architecture , I found ZEN - 4 , a kinesin - 6 familyprotein ( Raich et al . , 1998 ) , regulates gonad development . I extruded the gonad of adult , γ - tubulin : : GFP expressing animals that were grown on zen - 4 RNAi plates from the first larval stage ( L1 ) and visualized the microtubules by staining the gonad with α - tubulin antibody . Phenotypes I observed include a ) although the honeycomb - like arrangement of germ cell membranes appears as in wild type , some germ cells contain more than one centrosome ( Fig . 3 - 2 A , arrow ) ; b ) a giant DNA mass accumulates in the proximal gonad ( Fig . 3 - 2 , B ) ; c ) oogenesis was disrupted . Instead of the typical orderly , single - file line of oocytes in the proximal region , each of which occupies the entire gonad diameter , zen - 4 ( RNAi ) oocytes maybe smaller and appear side - by - side ( Fig . 3 - 2 C and D , different frames of the same confocal Z - series , shows oocytes occupy the same proximal - distal position ) . Multiple centrsosomes in one germ cell reflects cytokinesis failure and gaint DNA mass could be the result of disrupting spermatogenesis . For those gonads with multiple oocytes founded at the same proximal osition , the germ - cell - to - oocyte transition could be specifically disrupted . ZEN - 4 is known to interact with a RhoGAP , CYK - 4 , to form the protein complex centralspindlin that is essential for the formation of the central spindle during anaphase of cytokinesis ( Mishima , et al . , 2002 ; Zhu et al . , 2005 ; Hizlan et al . , 2006 ) . I examined the extruded gonad of hermaphrodite animals fed with cyk - 4 RNAi and found the same defects as observed in the zen - 4 RNAi experiment . I concluded that ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 function together in regulating germline organization ( Fig . 3 - 2 , E , F and G ) . Figure 3 - 2 : Centralspindlin components ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 play role in germline development . ( A - D ) Extruded gonads of zen - 4 RNAi treated animals . Arrow in ( A ) point out two γ - tubulin : : GFP foci in one germ cell ; DAPI staining ( blue in B ) indicates the accumulation of DNA mass in the proximal gonad ; Frame C and D are from the same confocal Z - series demonstrating different oocytes occupy overlapping position in the proximal gonad . ( E - G ) Extruded gonads of cyk - 4 RNAi treated animals display same defects seen in zen - 4 RNAi treated animals , including multiple γ - tubulin : : GFP foci in one germ cell ( arrow in E ) ; accumulation of DNA mass ( F ) and disruption of oogenesis ( G ) . 48 Figure 3 - 3 : Maintaining germline morphology requires postmitotical functions of centralspindlin . ( A ) The distal region of the gonad from a zen - 4 ts animal that has been maintained at non - permissive temperature for 12 hours . Fluorescent labeling of F - actin ( green ) and nuclei ( DAPI , blue ) indicates the disruption of syncytium . ( B ) Loop region of the gonad from a zen - 4 ts animal . The arrow indicates the membrane between several germ cells collapses while the arrowhead points a group of rounded cells . ( C ) Distal gonad arm of a cyk - 4 ts animal maintained at non - permissive temperature for 12 hours . F - actin ( red ) and nuclei ( blue ) staining demonstrates the majority portion of the gonad has normal morphology . However , the arrowhead indicates area with collapsed rachis . ( D and E ) Short period ( 2 hours ) incubation of a cyk - 4 ts animal at non - permissive temperature cause oogenesis defect . Arrows in E point oocytes that contain more than one nuclei , as compared with one - nucleus oocytes in wild type animal ( D ) . Because centralspindlin is necessary for cytokinesis , one interpretation of the RNAi experiments is that the observed phenotypes in the proximal gonad are the result of cytokinetic failure during mitosis in the distal gonad early in germline progression . I tested this idea by transferring adult hermaphrodites with temperature sensitive mutations to a non - permissive temperature for either 2 or 12 hours and visualized the germline architecture by staining extruded gonads with fluorophore - conjugated phalloidin . After 12 hours of incubation at 25ºC , the arrangement of newly formed germ cells at the distal - most part of the germline of zen - 4 ( or153 ts ) animals was disrupted ( Fig . 3 - 3 , A ) . Although the gonad still looked syncytial , there was no distinct rachis observed in the mutant , which is different from the well - defined rachis in the wild - type gonad . This defect is likely due to cytokinetic failure . Between the distal and proximal portions of the gonad , where germ cells are arrested at pachytene stage of meiosis I , the germ cell nuclei still appear to occupy the periphery gonad , but the plasma membrane between some cells disappears ( Fig . 3 - 3 , B arrow ) . Staining of F - actin revealed that the separation between germ cells and rachis in some areas was gone ( cyk - 4 or749 ts ) ( Fig . 3 - 3 , C arrowhead ) . At the loop region , I observed a cluster of rounded germ cells ( Fig 3B arrowhead ) . Following a short ( 2 hour ) incubation at the non - permissive temperature , the distal gonad the germline architecture 49 was intact ( I did not see the collapse of plasma membrane and cluster of germ cell nuclei ) . However , at a low frequency ( 3 out of 20 gonads ) , some mutant animals have oocytes in the proximal gonad contained more than one nucleus ( Fig . 3 - 3 , E arrow , compared with the wild type in Fig . 3 - 3 , D ) . Multiple repeats of temerature shifting assays confirmed this observation . An adult hermaphrodite typically generates one oocyte about every 20 minutes ; therefore this defect was produced immediately upon the temperature shift , indicating the ts mutant I used in this assay is a fast - acting allele . Based on the above data , I concluded that both ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 have an important role in C . elegans germline development , and a post - mitotic function of the centralspindlin complex is required for maintaining germline architecture . ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 specifically localize to the membrane of the intercellular bridge To further elucidate the post - mitotic function of centralspindlin in germline development , I took advantage of green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) expressing strains to examine the localization of ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 in the gonad . I extruded gonads and stained the F - actin with fluorophore - labeled phalloidin . As shown in Fig . 3 - 4 A , F - actin outlines the germ cell membrane . I observed GFP : : ZEN - 4 on the germ cell membrane . In contrast to F - actin , which marks the whole membrane of germ cell , GFP : : ZEN - 4 only localizes to the membrane of the cytoplasmic bridge between germ cells and the rachis ( Fig . 3 - 4 , B and C ) . GFP : : ZEN - 4 signal was also found on nuclei that have progressed close to the loop region , and the signal remains on the oocyte nuclei Figure 3 - 4 : Centralspindlin specifically localizes to the membrane of the intercellular bridge . ( A ) F - actin ( red ) outlines the germ cell membrane . ( B ) ZEN - 4 : : GFP ( green ) specifically localize to the boundary between germ cell and rachis . ( C ) Co - localization between F - actin and ZEN - 4 : : GFP at the intercellular bridge . ( D ) ZEN - 4 : : GFP also appears on the nuclei entering the loop region and oocyte nucleus . ( E ) ZEN - 4 : : GFP is seen on the membrane around the cytoplasmic bridge . ( F ) The gonad of CY - 4 : : GFP expressing animal shows the same localization of CYK - 4 . 50 in the proximal gonad ( Fig . 3 - 4 , D ) . A frame of the confocal Z - series in Fig . 3 - 4 E shows strong accumulation of the GFP : : ZEN - 4 on the membrane around the cytoplasmic bridge . CYK - 4 : : GFP has the same localization pattern as GFP : : ZEN - 4 ( Fig . 3 - 4 E and F ) . This observation is consistent with the previously reported expression pattern of CYK - 4 ( Jantsch - Plunger et al . , 2000 ) . CYK - 4 activity is required for ZEN - 4 localization ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 are known to be essential to mid - zone assembly during embryonic mitosis . ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 are proposed to form a complex which bundles oppositely oriented microtubules . Previous studies suggest that both ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 are required for the mid - zone localization of the centralspindlin complex . In addition , microtubules appear to be important for the enrichment of centralspindlin at the midbody because clusters of centrospindlin are transported on microtubules , probably via the kinesin motor domain of ZEN - 4 ( Hutterer , Glotzer et al . 2009 ) . Based on these data , I speculated that in the germline , ZEN - 4 would recruit CYK - 4 to the cytoplamic bridge through a similar kinesin - based mechanism . To test this idea , I generated zen - 4 ts mutants expressing CYK - 4 : : GFP ( strain zen - 4 ( or153 ts ) ; cyk - 4 : : gfp ) and Figure 3 - 5 : CYK - 4 is required for localizing ZEN - 4 to the membrane . ( A - B ) Images of live animals demonstrate the expression of correct GFP - tagged proteins in strains zen - 4 ts ; cyk - 4 : : gfp ( A ) and cyk - 4 ts ; zen - 4 : : gfp ( B ) . ( C - D ) Extruded gonads from animals shifted to non - permissive temperature . F - actin ( red ) in ( C ) and ( D ) outlines the gremline architecture of extruded gonads . Incubation at non - permissive temperature caused ZEN - 4 : : GFP disappear from both membrane and nuclei with cyk - 4 ts background ( D ) but has no effect on CYK - 4 : : GFP of the zen - 4 ts background ( C ) . 51 vice versa , cyk - 4 ts mutants expressing GFP : : ZEN - 4 ( strain cyk - 4 ( or749 ts ) ; gfp : : zen - 4 ) . Live images showed the expected GFP expression in these two strains ( Fig . 3 - 5 A and B ) . Surprisingly , in a temperature shift assay , I found CYK - 4 : : GFP signal still remained on the membrane of the cytoplamic bridge and the germ cell nuclei in the zen - 4 ts background ( Fig . 3 - 5 , C ) , but GFP : : ZEN - 4 signal disappeared from both the membrane and germ cell nuclei in the cyk - 4 ts background ( Fig . 3 - 5 D ) . This observation is opposite of what we expected , suggesting that the activity of CYK - 4 plays an essential role in targeting the centralspindlin complex to its location in the germline , while ZEN - 4 is the downstream functional output . Microtubules are not essential for locating centralspindlin to the membrane I next tested the role of microtubules in this targeting process . I depolymerized germline microtubules by soaking extruded gonads in nocodazole - containing culture medium . Both GFP : : ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 : : GFP localization in gonads treated with nocodazole ( Fig . 3 - 6 , A and B ) are not altered compared with gonads soaked in a medium containing DMSO ( Fig . 3 - 6 , A and B ) . This result is consistent with the above data , in that CYK - 4 , but not ZEN - 4 , is responsible for localizing the centralspindlin complex in the germline . Thus , we conclude that targeting centra1spindlin complex to its location in the germline , especially to the membrane of intercellular bridge , depends neither on kinesin motor activity of ZEN - 4 nor on the microtubules . Rather , CYK - 4 appears to be responsible for recruiting ZEN - 4 to its location . Figure 3 - 6 : Microtubule is not required for targeting centralspindlin to the membrane . Extruded gonads from either GFP : : ZEN - 4 ( A and C ) or CYK - 4 : : GFP ( B and D ) expressing animals are treated with micortubule depolymerizing agent nocodazole or DMSO in controlled experiment . Nocodazole effectively remove microtubule filaments ( C and D ) as compared with DMSO ( A and D ) but localization of both GFP : : ZEN - 4 and GFP : : ZEN - 4 is not affected . 52 Anillin is involved in targeting centralspindlin to the membrane The germ cell cytoplasmic bridge localization of centralspindlin is unique . To date , only a few proteins have been found to localize to the same place in the C . elegans germline ( Vogel et al . , 2001 ) . One of these proteins is anillin ( Fig . 3 - 7 , A ; Maddox et al . , 2005 ) . Anillin is a scaffold protein known to interact with CYK - 4 / MgcRacGAP . Among the three C . elegans anillins , ANI - 2 has a specific function in germline development . I stained extruded gonads of cyk - 4 ( or749 ts ) animals that were maintained at 25ºC with ANI - 2 antibody , but didn ' t detect any loss of ANI - 2 signal in the germline ( data not shown ) . On the other hand , I fed strains expressing GFP : : ZEN - 4 or CYK - 4 : : GFP with ani - 2 RNAi expressing bacteria . After 4 or 5 days on the RNAi plates , I extruded the gonads and visualized GFP signal . I found that the germline architecture is still intact at day 4 , however , both CYK - 4 : : GFP and GFP : : ZEN - 4 signals at the membrane of cytoplasmic bridge were signficantly dimmer than the control . The GFP signal on the nuclei was unchanged ( Fig . 3 - 7 , C ) . At day 5 , the germline architecture was disrupted , indicated by the disruption of germ cell nuclei position , and membrane - associated GFP signal vanished ( Fig . 3 - 7 , D ) . From these data , I can place ANI - 2 upstream of CYK - 4 and ZEN - 4 in the targeting mechanism within the germline . Figure 3 - 7 : Anillin is involved in recruiting centralspindlin to the membrane . Immunostaining of ANI - 2 ( green in A ) shows anillin localizes to the membrane between germ cell and the rachis . CYK : : GFP expressing animals are treated with either controlled ( B ) or ani - 2 RNAi ( C and D ) . The diminishing CYK - 4 : : GFP signal was detected on day 4 with ani - 2 RNAi treatment ( C ) . On day 5 , the CYK - 4 : : GFP disappeared from the membrane but remained on the nuclei ( D ) 53 Another protein with the same membrane localization in the germline is HIM - 4 ( hemicentin ) , a secreted extracellular protein with a role in maintaining germ cell membrane stability ( Vogel et al . , 2001 ; Xu et al . , 2011 ) . I created a cyk - 4 ( or749 ts ) ; him - 4 : : gfp strain and performed a temperature shift assay . The HIM - 4 : : GFP localization on the membrane did not change after prolonged incubation ( > 20 hours ) at 25ºC . An RNAi feeding experiment demonstrated that him - 4 RNAi did not affect CYK - 4 : : GFP localization either ( data not shown ) . I conclude that hemicentin is not involved in the mechanism for targeting centralspindlin in the germline , neither is localization of hemicentin downstream of centralspindlin . F - actin is required for maintaining germline architecture but not for targeting anillin and centralspindlin to the membrane Anillin is a scaffold protein that binds to actin through its N - terminus ( D ' Avino 2009 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . During cytokinesis it was thought to link RhoA with the actomysoin contractile ring components actin and myosin through its multiple protein - binding domain . In the germline , there is strong co - localization between F - actin and anillin . Thus the recruitment of centralspindlin to the membrane might be through the interaction between anillin and actin . I investigated this idea by depolymerizing F - actin in cultured gonads with Latrunculin A ( LatA ) . After 1hour incubation in the embryonic culture medium containing 2 µ M LatA , the germ cell architecture is disrupted and the membrane collapsed to the gonad periphery ( Fig . 3 - 8 A and B show SYN - 4 : : GFP labeled gonads treated with DMSO and LatA , respectively ) . In the LatA treated gonads of CYK - 4 : : GFP expressing animals , I found CYK - 4 : : GFP remained on the collapsed membranes that lacked F - actin signal ( Fig . 3 - 8 , C and D ) . I stained LatA treated gonads with anillin and observed co - localization between CYK - 4 : : GFP and anillin at the membrane ( Fig . 3 - 8 , E and F ) . From above results I conclude that although F - actin is required for maintaining germline architecture , it is not responsible for targeting anillin and centralspindlin to the membrane . Anillin might associate with the membrane through its intrinsic PH domain , or via other membrane - bound cues . However , these data do not exclude the possibility that F - actin might have a role in restricting anillin and centralspindlin complex to the cytoplasmic bridge location , or , on the other hand , , anillin and its associated partners can interact with F - actin under physiological conditions . 54 Figure 3 - 8 : F - actin is required for maintaining germline architecture but not for targeting anillin and CYK - 4 to the membrane . ( A and B ) SYN - 4 : : GFP marks the germ cell membrane . Depolymerizing F - actin by latrunculin A cause germ cell membrane collapse and shrink to gonad periphery ( B ) . ( C and D ) F - actin is not required to target CYK - 4 to membrane . CYK - 4 : : GFP ( green ) colocalizes with F - actin ( red in C ) . Latrunculin A treatment removes F - actin signal in the gonad but the CYK - 4 : : GFP remains on membrane that does not associate with F - actin ( D ) . ( E and F ) Anillin and CYK - 4 co - localize on the membrane of Latrunculin A treated gonad . Staining anillin with ANI - 2 antibody shows CYK - 4 : : GFP co - localizes with anillin in both DMSO ( E ) and latrunculin A ( F ) treated gonad . Actomyosin ring component NMY - 2 is not required for maintaining germline architecture The structure of the C . elegans germline intercellular bridge resembles an incomplete cleavage furrow during cell division . It would be interesting to test if a mechanism similar to cytokinetic control exists in maintaining germline architecture . I first examined the localization of C . elegans non - muscle myosin NMY - 2 , one of the key actomyosin ring components ( Piekny et al . , 2002 ; Cuenca et al . , 2003 ) , by examining the gonad of a NMY - 2 : : GFP expressing strain . Similar to ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 , NMY - 2 exhibits strong enrichment at the membrane surrounding the cytoplasmic bridge ( Fig . 3 - 9 , A ) . In addition , NMY - 2 is also expressed in the germ cell cytoplasm . At the loop region where the germ cells undergo oocyte commitment , NMY - 2 : : GFP displays clear germ cell membrane localization . I then investigated the function of NMY - 2 by transferring adult animals containing the temperature sensitive allele nmy - 2 ( ne3409 ) to the non - 55 permissive temperature . Interestingly , the ts strain had normal germline architecture and continuously produced unhatched embryos ( Fig . 3 - 9 , B ) . I also made a cyk - 4 ( or749 ts ) ; nmy - 2 : : gfp strain and carried out a temperature shift assay . Although the germline structure was disrupted , the NMY - 2 : : GFP expressing pattern was not altered ( data not shown ) . Figure 3 - 9 : Actomyosin ring component NMY - 2 is not necessary for maintaining germline architecture . ( A ) NMY - 2 : : GFP localizes to the membrane of intercellular bridge and germ cell plasma . ( B ) F - actin ( green ) and nuclear ( blue ) labeling indicates the germline architecture of the nmy - 2 ts animals does not altered when grown at non - permissive temperature . RHO - 1 ( RhoA ) localization is not affected in the germline of cyk - 4 mutant The Rho family GTPase RHO - 1 ( RhoA ) plays vital role in regulating actomyosin ring assembly ( Glotzer 2005 ; Yoshida et al . , 2009 ) . It has been reported that CYK - 4 , together with RhoGEF ECT - 2 , regulates the localization and activity of RHO - 1 during cytokinesis ( Yuce , et al . , 2005 ; Nishimura et al . , 2006 ; Simon et al . , 2008 ; Su et al . , 2011 ; Loria et al . , 2012 ) . In the germline , RHO - 1 localizes to the germ cell membrane and concentrates at the intercellular bridge area ( Figure 3 - 10 A ) . I performed temperature shift assays with a cyk - 4 ( or749 ts ) ; rho - 1 : : gfp strain . In contrast to CYK - 4 activity individing cells , the cyk - 4 mutant did not affect RHO - 56 1 : : GFP localization in the gonad ( Figure 3 - 10 B ) . Together with the NMY - 2 data , I speculate that the mechanism of maintaining germline architecture , especially the cytoplasmic bridge , might differ from the one that regulates actomyosin ring assembly despite the similarity of proteins expressed in both places . ECT - 2 is a major RhoA regulator during cytokinesis ( Kimura et al . , 2000 ) . Although I did not see ECT - 2 expression in the germline with a transgenic strain bearing an ect - 2 : : gfp transgene expressed from the pie - 1 promoter , I did observe that the ect - 2 ts allele has germline defects similar to that of a cyk - 4 ts mutant ( Figure 3 - 10 C ) . However , ect - 2 RNAi treated animals have a germline phenotype much more severe than cyk - 4 RNAi treated animals ( not shown ) . Moreover , ECT - 2 has been shown necessary for hemicentin to localize to the boundary between germ cell and rachis ( Xu et al . , 2011 ) , while CYK - 4 does not , indicating ECT - 2 may have a broader role in regulating germline development than CYK - 4 and centralspindlin . Figure 3 - 10 : RHO - 1 : : GFP localization is not altered in the germline of cyk - 4 ( or749 ) mutant . ( A ) RHO - 1 : : GFP localizes to the grem cell membrane . ( B ) The gremline architecture of cyk - 4 ( or749 ) was disrupted , but RHO - 1 : : GFP still localizes to the germ cell membrane , including the cytoplasmic bridge . ( C ) At non - permissive temperature , ect - 2 ts mutant produces germline phenotype similar to that of cyk - 4 ts mutant : membrane between germ cells collapses ( white arrow ) ; a group of gem cells appears at the oocyte position ( white arrow head ) . 57 Centralspinlin might regulate germline microtubules organization Another question is whether the centralspindlin complex regulates microtubules through the ZEN - 4 kinesin motor domain . I stained extruded gonad with the α - tubulin antibody . Microtubule organization was well defined in the germ cell but poorly defined in the rachis . It appears that a barrier resistant to Triton X 100 permeabilization is present at the germ cell / rachis boundary . I occasionally achieved good antibody penetration into the rachis allowing observation of microtubules in the rachis . In gonads of wild type animals , I observed robust microtubule bundles passing through the cytoplasmic bridge ( Figure 3 - 11 A ) , but in cyk - 4 mutants , few germ cells have such microtubule bundles through the bridge ( Figure 3 - 11 B ) . I speculate that centralspindlin might regulate microtubule organization in the germline . However , since the number of samples from which I collected the data is limited , this is still an open question remaining to be clarified . Figure 3 - 11 : Centralspindlin might regulate microtubule organization in the germline . F - actin ( green ) outlines the germ cell cortex . Microtubule is marked by α - tubulin staining ( red ) ( A ) Robust microtubule bundles are found passing through the cytoplasmic bridge ( white arrow ) . ( B ) The cyk - 4 ( or749 ) mutant has fewer microtubule bundles through the cytoplasmic bridge . 58 DISCUSSION Sequential assembly of anillin and centrapsindlin complex to the membrane of the germline intercellular bridge Centralspindlin is a protein complex consisting of kinesin - 6 family member ZEN - 4 and Rho family GAP CYK - 4 . The function of centralpindlin in cytokinesis has been widely investigated in various model systems ( Zavortink et al . , 2005 ; Zhu et al . , 2005 ; D ' Avino et al . , 2006 ; Zhao et al . , 2006 ; Verbrugghe et al . , 2007 ) . During cytokinesis , the centralspindlin complex bundles antiparallel microtubules from the opposite spindle poles to form the central spindle . The complex also acts as a molecular anchor for other cytokinetic factors , such as the Rho family GEF ECT2 , through which it regulates RhoA localization and activity at the cell cortex during cleavage furrow formation ( Fig . 3 - 12 , A ) . Rac is another possible target of CKY - 4 GAP activity ( Canman et al . , 2008 ) . In the dividing cells , both subunits of centralspindlin are required for localizing the complex to the midzone , since the depletion of either subunit led to the other component remaining in the cytosol ( Yuce et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , microtubules appear to be important for enriching centra1spindlin to the midzone through ZEN - 4 / kinesin - based transportation . Whether the function of this complex is limited in cytokinesis is not clear . One report suggested it functions postmitotically to polarize C . elegans foregut epithelium ( Portereiko et al . , 2004 ) . cyk - 4 mutant is known to cause germline morphology defects at the proximal gonad , but little has been done to elucidate its mechanism ( Jantsch - Plunger et al . , 2000 ) . In the germline , both ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 localize to the membrane of cytoplasmic bridge . In this study , I demonstrated that the postmitotic function of centraspindlin plays important role in maintaining C . elegans germline architecture . Moreover , I established a sequential assembly pathway in which CYK - 4 recruits ZEN - 4 to the membrane of germline cytoplasmic bridge . The targeting mechanism in the germline also differs from that of cytokinesis in that neither microtubules nor kinesin motor activity of ZEN - 4 are required . I also placed anillin upstream to the CYK - 4 ( Fig . 3 - 12 , B ) . This is also different from dividing Drosophila S2 cells in which CYK - 4 ortholog RacGAP50C was shown to be necessary for anillin accumulation at the cleavage furrow ( D ' Avino et al . , 2008 ) . 59 Figure 3 - 12 : Mechanistic difference between germline intercellular bridge and cytkinetic furrow . ( A ) Centraspindlin complex acts as a midzone organizer that modulates other cytokinetic factors at the cleavage furrow . ( B ) In the germline the centraspindlin complex is sequentially assembled to the membrane at the intercellular bridge . Anillin is upstream of this assembly pathway . It remains to be investigated whether a regulatory mechanism exists to inhibit the contraction of actomyosin ring in the germline . The role of F - actin and Myosin in maintaining germline architecture A meshwork of F - actin has been found at the Drosophila germline intercelluar bridge ( termed the ring canal ) ( Warn et al . , 1985 ; Tilney et al . , 1996 ; Robinson et al . , 1997 ) . In C . elegans , germline F - actin is also enriched on the membrane of cytoplasmic bridge . Anillin is a scaffold protein that binds to F - actin ( D ' Avino 2009 ; Piekny et al . , 2010 ) . In cytokinesis , it modulates Rho A , F - actin , and myosin at the cleavage furrow ( Piekny et al . , 2008 ) . Through the actin depolymerization assay , I showed that F - actin is not responsible for targeting anillin and centralspindlin to the membrane . However , F - actin does play an essential role in maintaining the germline architecture because depolymerizing F - actin causes the germline architecture , including the cytoplasmic bridge , to collapse . F - actin could reinforce the germline morphology to provide a platform for assembling anillin and centraspidlin . Moreover , the result of actin depolymerization does not exclude the possibility that the cytoplasmic bridge localization of anillin and centralspindlin complex is restricted by F - actin . On the other hand , since F - actin , Rho A , and myosin are enriched on the membrane of cytoplasmic bridge , anillin and centralspindlin might have a regulatory role on F - actin through RhoA ( RHO - 1 ) . Non - muscle myosin NMY - 2 is another actomyosin contractile ring component . In the C . 60 elegans germline , NMY - 2 is expressed in the germ cells , with strong accumulation on the membrane of the intercellular bridge . Consistent to its reported loss - of - function phenotype , the temperature sensitive mutant of nmy - 2 produces dead embryos at the non - permissive temperature , which is has a completely normal germline architecture , indicating myosin is not necessary for maintaining germline morphology . Mechanistic differences between the cytokinetic furrow and the germline intercellular bridge During cell division , the centra1spindlin complex modulates other signaling molecules , including Rho GEF ECT - 2 and RhoA , at the cleavage plane to promote actomyosin ring assembly . Both components of the actomyosin contractile ring , F - actin and myosin NMY - 2 , and its major regulatory signaling molecule , RhoA , are enriched at the germline intercellular bridge . On one hand , I demonstrated myosin is not necessary for maintaining the germline architecture , including the cytoplasmic bridge . On the other hand , it is intriguing that although these key factors of cytokinetic machinery are loaded properly , it doesn ' t trigger the contraction of the actomyosin ring . In fact , when the germ cell progresses to the loop region , the intercellular bridge enlarges to facilitate the acquisition of cytoplasm . A speculation is there might be a regulatory mechanism in the germline to inhibit myosin activity and prevent actomyosin ring contraction ( Fig . 3 - 10 , B ) . In the dividing cell , active myosin that induces contraction typically forms dynamic patches . In this study , I showed mutation of cyk - 4 doesn ' t affect either RHO - 1 : : GFP or NMY - 2 : : GFP localization . However , I was not able to determine their activities in real time because the GFP signal in the gonad was often obscured by the body of the animal . Developing a tool that can quantitatively analyze the dynamics of RhoA and NMY - 2 in the gonad will be helpful to understand their role in maintaining germline architecture . 61 METHODS Maintenance and culture of C . elegans All strains were grown on standard culture plates as described in chapter 2 . The temperature - sensitive mutants nmy - 2 ( ne3409 ) ( Liu , Maduzia et al . 2010 ) , zen - 4 ( or153 ) ( Severson et al . , 2000 ; Obtained from Caenorhabditis Genetics Center ) , cyk - 4 ( or749 ) ( Canman et al . , 2008 ; Provided by J . C . Canman , Columbia University Medical Center , New York , NY ) and corresponding wild type animals were maintained at 15°C prior to performing temperature shifting assays all animals . Strains cyk - 4 ( or749 ) ; gfp : : zen - 4 and zen - 4 ( or153 ) ; cyk - 4 : : gfp were made by crossing each temperature - sensitive allele with corresponding GFP expressing strains ( strain OD63 of gfp : : zen - 4 and WH279 of cyk - 4 : : gfp ) . Since both strains are obligate heterozygotes that throw heterozygous animals expressing GFP and non - GFP uncoordinated homozygous animals , only non - UNC worms were selected for strain maintenance and microscopic analysis . RNAi experiment ani - 2 RNAi was made by PCR amplification of ani - 2 genomic sequence flanking exon 8 and exon 9 from worm lysis . Primers used for PCR reaction are 5’gttgctagc AGAAATGCATCCAA GTGTTCACATGGG 3’and 5’cgtGGTACCGAGATGGATAGCAATATTCGAAATCAC3’ . Amplified fragment was inserted into RNAi expression vector L4440 between cloning sites Nhe I and Kpn I . The resulted plasmid was transformed into bacteria strain HT115 . All other RNAi expressing bacteria were from C . elegans genome wide RNAi library ( Kamath et al . , 2003 ; Obtained from Source BioScience LifeSciences , Nottingham , UK ) . The RNAi experiment was performed by placing few egg - laying adult animals to RNAi feeding plates and assaying adult animals of the next generation . Gonad culture and drug treatment I extruded adult hermaphrodite gonads and cultured them for drug treatments as described in chapter 2 . Extruded gonads were transferred to a 35mm tissue culture dish containing ECM and 10 µ g / ml nocodazole or 2 µ M latrunculin A . After gently rocking on a platform for 1 hour , gonads were immediately fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde and then washed twice with PBST buffer ( PBS containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ) before being proceeded to immunofluorescence assay . 62 Immunofluorescence and microscopy Fixed gonads were extensively washed with PBST buffer and then permeabilized with 3 % Triton X - 100 in PBS buffer for 30 minutes . Primary ani - 2 ( rabbit IgG , provided by K . Oegema , UCSD ) and α - tubulin ( T9026 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) antibodies were diluted 1 : 200 in PBSBT buffer ( PBS containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 and 3 % BSA ) and incubated with samples at 4 ° C overnight . Corresponding Alexa Fluor 488 – and 568 – conjugated secondary antibodies ( Invitrogen ) were diluted in PBSBT buffer to a final concentration of 20 µ g / ml and incubated with samples at room temperature for 1 h followed by incubation with 10 µ g / ml DAPI ( Sigma - Alrich ) for 5 min . Alexa Fluor 488 – and 568 – conjugated pholoidin ( 1 : 500 dilution in PBST , Cytoskeleton , MD ) were used to stain filamentous actin . Images were acquired using an Olympus Fluoview 1000 confocal microscope equipped with PalnApo 60x 1 . 42 NA oil lens . Images were captured with FV10 - ASW software . To view GFP expression in live animals , adult hermaphrodite were paralyzed in M9 buffer ( 3g KH 2 PO 4 , 6 g Na 2 HPO 4 , 5 g NaCl , 1 ml 1 M MgSO 4 , H 2 O to 1 liter ) ( Stiernagle , T . 2006 ) containing Tricaine / Tetramisole ( 2 . 5 µ l of 0 . 2 % tricaine and 0 . 02 % tetramisole ) . Animals were mounted on slide with agar pad as described . 63 Chapter 4 PERSPECTIVES 64 The regulation of cytoskeleton in different cell types has been widely studied ( Li et al . , 2008 ) . In particular , cytoskeleton usually have unique cell type specific organization , such as the polarized non - centrosomal microtubule arrays in the mature epithelial cell . Little is known about how cytoskeletal elements are regulated to build complex morphology like tissues and organs . With its unique syncytial architecture , the C . elegans germline offers a simple model to study the cytoskeletal regulation within a complex , multicellular system . My work demonstrates that the C . elegans germline is a valuable model to study how the common set of cytoskeletal elements is manipulated by the basic cytoskeletal tools . I do discover unique mechanisms existing in the germline to organize cytoskeleton and maintain the overall germline morphology . Meanwhile , this study also raises interesting perspectives for further investigation . Distinct cytoskeletal regulation in the germline My work shows that the cytoskeleton , including microtubules and actin filaments , are specially organized in the germline and are critical for maintaining germline architecture . I described the 3 - dimensional microtubule organization in the C . elegans germline for the first time . Unlike most cultured cells , whose microtubule network appears in radial pattern associated with the centrosome , in the C . elegans germ cell , the majority of microtubules are organized in a criss - crossed pattern . I further found γ - tubulin localizes to the germ cell membrane . Through microtubule regrowth experiments , I demonstrated that membrane - associated γ - tubulin does nucleate microtubules . I concluded that non - centrosomal arrays are the dominant form of microtubules in the germ cell . In mammalian epithelial cell , non - centrosomal arrays are also the dominant form of microtubules . The C . elegans germline and mammalian epithelial cells are similar in that γ - tubulin and microtubule minus end are anchored at cell cortex in both cell types . However , in mammalian epithelial cells , microtubules have their minus - ends anchored at the apical surface while plus ends extend to the basal domain ( Bartolini et al 2006 ) . In the C . elegans germ cell , it is the dynein that is anchored at the nuclear membrane and pulls microtubules to organize non - centrosomal microtubule arrays around the nucleus . From this work I also discovered a new mechanism for nuclear positioning . Although usually depicted at the center of a cell in the text book , the nucleus typically occupies a specific location within the real cell , and often varies its position during development through active migration . Nuclear positioning depends on a conserved protein complex , the KASH and SUN pair , to span across the nuclear envelope and transduce cytoskeletal forces to the nucleus ( Wilhelmsen et al . , 65 2006 ; Starr 2011 ) . ZYG - 12 is a KASH domain protein localizes to the outer nuclear membrane through its interaction with the inner nuclear membrane localized SUN domain protein SUN - 1 . Previous studies suggested that in the embryo , the attachment of centrosomes to the nucleus is mediated by ZYG - 12 - ZYG - 12 interaction and is essential for proper pronuclear migration ( Malone , Misner et al . 2003 ) . My work demonstrates that in the germline , it is the ZYG - 12 - dynein interaction that plays an essential role in maintaining nuclear position , while the centrosome is dispensable . The C . elegans germline is largely a syncytium generated by incomplete mitosis at the distal region . In normal mitotic cells , the intercellular bridge connecting two daughter cells is cleaved , while in the germline , the abscission terminates with the cell to cell bridge being converted to a stable cytoplasmic bridge between the germ cell and the central cytoplasmic pool . It is not surprising that the cytoplasmic bridge resembles the cleavage furrow in both structure and molecular composition . Cytokinetic machinery components , including the adapter protein anillin , the midzone organizer centralspindlin , the signaling molecule RhoA , and the actomysoin ring components F - actin and myosin are all found on the membrane of the cytoplasmic bridge . Among them , anillin and the two subunits of centralspindlin , ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 , specifically localize to the bridge . However , I have found distinct differences between normal cytokinesis and the germline cytoplasmic bridge , in that the centralspindlin complex components are sequentially assembled in the germline , with anillin targeting CYK - 4 and CYK - 4 recruiting ZEN - 4 . This is different from the normal cell division , in which ZEN - 4 and CYK - 4 are interdependent for their midzone localization . Microtubules , which transport the centralspindlin complex to the midzone during cytokinesis , are not required for either ZEN - 4 or CYK - 4 to localize to the germline membrane . I also found that the centralspindlin complex functions postmitotically in maintaining germline architecture . When adult temperature - sensitive mutant animals of either zen - 4 or cyk - 4 are incubated at the non - permissive temperature , the germ cell membrane and the intercellular bridge collapse . The generation of non - centrosomal microtubule arrays How non - centrosomal microtubule arrays are generated in the germline is an interesting question . Non - centrosomal microtubules are typical of polarized , differentiated cells , such as the mature epithelium and myotubes ( Musch 2004 ; Bartolini et al . , 2006 ) . In the mammalian epithelium , microtubules are initially generated by the centrosome and then released , possibly through the microtubule severing mechanism . The microtubule minus end is subsequently 66 anchored at the apical surface through minus - end - associated proteins such as ninine ( Lechler et al . , 2007 ) . Whether the C . elegans germ cell is a typical polarized cell is not yet clear . First , some proteins , like anillin , ZEN - 4 , and CYK - 4 , do specifically localize to the membrane at one end of the germ cell . But there are no reports of other stereotypic polarity markers of polarized cells having the same distinct localization . Using a transgenic strain , I did not observe the presence of ajm - 1 : : gfp , a marker typically found on the apical junction of polarized epithelial cells , in the germline . Second , γ - tubulin can bind to the minus end of existing microtubules , acting as a cap to prevent dissociation of tubulin dimmers ( Wiese et al . , 2000 ) . I have showed the evidence of de novo nucleation of microtubule by the membrane - associated γ - tubulin . However , it is not clear whether part of non - centrosomal arrays is contributed by microtubules that are released from the centrosome and then capped by γ - tubulin . Nonetheless , the anchorage of γ - tubulin on the membrane is key to organizing the non - centrosomal arrays . It is also important to identify factors responsible for localizing γ - tubulin to the membrane . Ninein is an ideal candidate because it has been shown to anchor γ - tubulin and microtubules on the membrane in mammalian cells . However , through a BLAST search , I didn ' t find any apparent ninine homologue in the C . elegans genome . It is important to screen other candidates that have microtubule minus end anchoring activity . A recent study reported in Drosophila a Zona pellucida ( ZP ) domain containing protein localizes γ - tubulin to cell cortex ( Brodu et al . , 2010 ) . There are about 40 ZP domain proteins in C . elegans with a few of them being characterized to function in cuticle alae formation ( Sapio et al . , 2005 ) . Further efforts are needed to investigate if ZP domain proteins have a role in targeting γ - tubulin to the membrane of C . elegans germ cells . The function of the centrosome in the germline I have shown non - centrosomal microtubule arrays in the germ cell and the centrosome is not responsible for keeping germ cell nuclei at their position . Interestingly , ZYG - 12 localizes to the centrosome in the embryo but not to the centrosome in germ cells . However , other centrosome - associated proteins , especially γ - tubulin , are found on the germ cell centrosome . These observations raise the question of the centrosome function in the hermaphrodite germline . At the distal - most region , the centrosome could still be the MTOC because it is associated with mitotic spindle . But we do not know if the centrosome is indispensable at the meiotic pachytene stage . Through the microtubule regrowth assay , I demonstrated that the germ cell centrosome could nucleate microtubules . Whether this nucleation activity has functional implications , for example 67 generating microtubules to be severed and released , is not clear . To test this idea , specifically compromising centrosomal activity at the pachytene stage and a thorough analysis of the function of microtubule severing proteins are necessary approaches . Another interesting aspect is that in male animals , the centrosome usually translocates to the germ cell cortex where most centrosomal components are converted into the sperm flagella , but in the female animals , the germ cell centrosome is often eliminated during oogenesis . In C . elegans hermaphrodites , the germ cell starts to lose centrosomal materials during the oocyte commitment process , typically at the loop region . This process is believed to be controlled by cell cycle signals because suppression of CDK inhibitor cki - 2 can disrupt the elimination of centrosome in oocytes ( Kim et al . , 2006 ) . An interesting correlation is that this is also the time when the centralspindlin complex appears on the germ cell nucleus . It remains to be investigated whether the recruitment of centralspindlin to the nucleus and the elimination of centrosome are on the same linear pathway or only a coincidence . The termination of abscission in the germline The formation of the intercellular bridge in the C . elegans germline is the result of incomplete cytokinesis at the distal mitotic region . My work shows that the centralspindlin complex is sequentially recruited to the membrane of the intercellular bridge by anillin . Interestingly , when the microtubules of the central spindle disappear during the telophase of a normal cytokinesis , the centralspindlin complex , which localizes to the middle of central spindle during anaphase , appears in a membrane - associated , ring - like structure . A possible interpretation is that during anaphase centralspindlin modulates anillin localization at the cleavage furrow through the interaction between CYK - 4 and anillin , but in telophase , after microtubules break down , anillin plays essential role in anchoring the centralspindlin on the membrane of the cleavage furrow . Then the contraction of the actomyosin ring drives the abscission to completion . . In the germline , the abscission terminates and the transient molecular compositions of the cleavage furrow , including the centralspindlin complex , RhoA , F - actin , and myosin , are converted into stable constituents of the intercellular bridge . The signal that causes the termination of abscission is a mystery . Interestingly , all major components of the cytokinetic machinery still present at the intercellular bridge but they do not trigger the contraction of the actomyosin ring . A logical speculation is that an inhibitory mechanism might be imposed on the cytokinetc machinery in the germline . Inhibition of RhoA activity is one possible way to achieve negative regulation of the actomyosin contraction . Another possibility is direct inhibition of myosin . Investigations of the 68 activity of RhoA and myosin are important to dissecting the underlying mechanisms . Using RNAi screening to investigate cytalskeltal regulation in the germline Since its discovery , RNAi has been developed into a powerful genetic tool to dissecting gene function . RNAi based screening was widely in various systems ( Kuttenkeuler et al . , 2004 ; Cullen et al . , 2005 ; Root et al . , 2006 ) . C . elegans is a model particularly suitable for RNAi screening . To knock down gene expression , animals can be soaked in solution containing double strand RNA . Alternatively , plasmid expressing interfering RNA can be transformed into bacteria and plated on culture dish to feed the animals . Both methods can be used for large - scale screening . In order to test if feeding RNAi can be effectively used to screen genes involved in cytoskeletal regulation in the germline , I did a small scale screening , focusing on microtubue associated factors , including centrosomal components ( such as sas - 4 , sas - 6 and spd - 2 ) , microtubule binding partners ( such as nud - 2 , lin - 5 , lis - 1 ) and kinases ( zyg - 1 , zyg - 9 , air - 1 ) . After RNAi feeding , I extruded the gonad and stained it with α - tubulin to visualize microtubules . The result indicates RNAi is a useful method to screen cytoskeltal regulators in the germline . In fact , the post - mitotic function of zen - 4 described in charpter 3 was identified through this screen because RNAi of most other screened genes results in severely disrupted gonad architecture ( Figure 4 - 1 C - E ) , indicating mitotic failure at early germline developmental stage , while zen - 4 RNAi only has mild morphological defect but shows disruption at the germ - cell - to - oocyte transition region . Another gene in this screen whose RNAi produces interesting germline phenotype is air - 1 . air - 1 encodes the C . elegans Aurora A kinase ( Schumacher et al . , 1998 ) . The function of Aurora A includes regulating mitotic spindle formation , centrosome separation , chromosome segregation and oocyte maturation ( Crane , et al . , 2003 ) . α - tubulin staining reveals dramatic microtubules accumulation at germ cell cortex ( Figure 4 - 1 B ) . Instead of appearing in punctate in the control RNAi experiments ( Figure 4 - 1 A ) , bundles of long microtubule filaments are found at the gem cell membrane of the air - 1 RNAi treated animals . In mammalian system , aurora A has been shown to interact with BRCA1 , TACC1 , TPX2 etc . Among them , TACC1 and TPX1 are microtubule associated ( Kufer et al . , 2002 ; Conte et al . , 2003 ; ) . In addition , Aurora A also plays role in recruiting γ - tubulin during spindle formation ( Hannak et al . , 2001 ) . Further investigation will help us to understand the function of Aurora A kinase in the germline . 69 Figure 4 - 1 : RNAi screening of genes involved in regulating germline microtubules . α - tubulin was immunolabeled to visualize microtubule structure ( red ) . ( A ) microtubule appears in punctate pattern around the nucleus in the control RNAi treated animals . ( B ) air - 1 RNAi results in accumulation microtubule filaments at the cortex of the germ cell . ( C - E ) RNAi of most other screened genes , such as spd - 2 ( C ) , gpr - 2 ( D ) and tbg - 1 ( E ) , generates severely disorganized germline . 70 The screening I did suggest RNAi is an effective way to identify genes involved in cytoskeletal regulation in the germline . However , this protocol required extruding the gonad and performing immunofluorescencent staining , which is time consuming . In order to extend the RNAi screening to a larger scale , we need to develop a more efficient monitoring method . In the germline , GFP - tubulin marked microtubule has intensive background , thus is not an ideal choice . GFP - labeled microtubule associated proteins ( MAPs ) , such as enscosin , have been successfully used in other model systems ( Lechler et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore , to develop a screening system suitable for live imaging , it is worth to engineer GFP labeled MAPs that have good resolution in the germline . To screen genes play role in actin dynamics in the germline , GFP - moesin is a good candidate that has been used in C . elegans early embryogenesis ( Velarde et al . , 2007 ) . 71 REFERENCES Adams , R . R . , Tavares , A . A . ( 1998 ) . Pavarotti encodes a kinesin - like protein required to organize the central spindle and contractile ring for cytokinesis . Genes Dev . 12 ( 10 ) : 1483 - 94 . Apodaca , G . ( 2001 ) . Endocytic traffic in polarized epithelial cells : role of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton . Traffic 2 ( 3 ) : 149 - 59 . Ayollo , D . V . , . Zhitnyak , I . Y . ( 2009 ) . Rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton and E - cadherin - based adherens junctions caused by neoplasic transformation change cell - cell interactions . PLoS One 4 ( 11 ) : e8027 . Baas P . W . , Deitch J . S . , Black M . M . , Banker G . A . ( 1988 ) . Polarity orientation of microtubules in hippocampal neurons : uniformity in the axon and nonuniformity in the dendrite . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85 : 8335 – 8339 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 15 : 185 - 230 . Barr , F . A . , Gruneberg U . ( 2007 ) . Cytokinesis : placing and making the final cut . Cell 131 ( 5 ) : 847 - 60 . Bartolini , F . , Gundersen G . G . ( 2006 ) . Generation of noncentrosomal microtubule arrays . J Cell Sci 119 ( Pt 20 ) : 4155 - 63 . Bindschadler , M . , McGrath J . L . ( 2004 ) . Formin ' new ideas about actin filament generation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 ( 41 ) : 14685 - 6 . Bishop , A . L . , Hall , A . ( 2000 ) . Rho GTPases and their effector proteins . Biochem J 348 Pt 2 : 241 - 55 . Black , M . M . , Baas , P . W . ( 1989 ) . The basis of polarity in neurons . Trends Neurosci 12 ( 6 ) : 211 - 4 . Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . ( 2000 ) . Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 ( 6781 ) : 1007 - 11 . Bre M . H . , Pepperkok R . , Hill A . M . , Levilliers N . , Ansorge W . , Stelzer E . H . , Karsenti E . ( 199 . Regulation of microtubule dynamics and nucleation during polarization in MDCK II cells . J Cell Biol 111 : 3013 – 3021 Brenner S . ( 1974 ) . The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 77 : 71 – 94 . Bringmann , H . , Skiniotis , G . ( 2004 ) . A kinesin - like motor inhibits microtubule dynamic instability . Science 303 ( 5663 ) : 1519 - 22 . 72 Brodu , V . , Baffet , A . D . ( 2010 ) . A developmentally regulated two - step process generates a noncentrosomal microtubule network in Drosophila tracheal cells . Dev Cell 18 ( 5 ) : 790 - 801 . Brouhard , G . J . , Stear , J . H . ( 2008 ) . XMAP215 is a processive microtubule polymerase . Cell 132 ( 1 ) : 79 - 88 . Brown , D . , Stow , J . L . ( 1996 ) . Protein trafficking and polarity in kidney epithelium : from cell biology to physiology . Physiol Rev 76 ( 1 ) : 245 - 97 . Bugnard E . , Zaal K . J . , Ralston E . ( 2005 ) . Reorganization of microtubule nucleation during muscle differentiation . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 60 : 1 – 13 . Buss , F . , Luzio , J . P . ( 2002 ) . Myosin VI , an actin motor for membrane traffic and cell migration . Traffic 3 ( 12 ) : 851 - 8 . Bustelo , X . R . , Sauzeau , V . ( 2007 ) . GTP - binding proteins of the Rho / Rac family : regulation , effectors and functions in vivo . Bioessays 29 ( 4 ) : 356 - 70 . Canman , J . C . , Lewellyn , L . ( 2008 ) . Inhibition of Rac by the GAP activity of centralspindlin is essential for cytokinesis . Science 322 ( 5907 ) : 1543 - 6 . Cao , J . , Crest , J . , Fasulo , B . , Sullivan W . ( 2010 ) Cortical actin dynamics facilitate early - stage centrosome separation . Curr Biol . 20 ( 8 ) : 770 - 6 . Carlier , M . F . ( 1990 ) . Actin polymerization and ATP hydrolysis . Adv Biophys 26 : 51 - 73 . Carlier , M . F . ( 1991 ) . Actin : protein structure and filament dynamics . J Biol Chem 266 ( 1 ) : 1 - 4 . Carvalho - Santos , Z . , Azimzadeh , J . ( 2011 ) . Evolution : Tracing the origins of centrioles , cilia , and flagella . J Cell Biol 194 ( 2 ) : 165 - 75 . Caviston , J . P . , Holzbaur , E . L . ( 2006 ) . Microtubule motors at the intersection of trafficking and transport . Trends Cell Biol 16 ( 10 ) : 530 - 7 . Consortium , T . C . e . S . ( 1998 ) . Genome sequence of the nematode C . elegans : a platform for investigating biology . Science 282 ( 5396 ) : 2012 - 8 . Conte , N . , Delaval , B . , Ginestier , C . , Ferrand , A . , Isnardon , D . , Larroque , C . , Prigent , C . , Séraphin , B . , Jacquemier , J . , Birnbaum , D . ( 2003 ) TACC1 - chTOG - Aurora A protein complex in breast cancer . Oncogene 22 ( 50 ) : 8102 - 16 . Crane , R . , Gadea , B . , Littlepage , L . , Wu , H . , Ruderman , J . V . ( 2004 ) Aurora A , Meiosis and Mitosis . Biol Cell 96 ( 3 ) : 215 - 29 Crittenden , S . L . , Troemel , E . R . ( 1994 ) . GLP - 1 is localized to the mitotic region of the C . elegans germ line . Development 120 ( 10 ) : 2901 - 11 . Cross , R . A . ( 2010 ) . Kinesin - 14 : the roots of reversal . " BMC Biol 8 : 107 . 73 Cuenca , A . A . , Schetter , A . ( 2003 ) . Polarization of the C . elegans zygote proceeds via distinct establishment and maintenance phases . Development 130 ( 7 ) : 1255 - 65 . Cullen , L . M . , Arndt , G . M . ( 2005 ) Genome - wide screening for gene function using RNAi in mammalian cells . Immunol . Cell Biol . 83 ( 3 ) : 217 - 23 . Daire , V . , Giustiniani , J . ( 2009 ) . Kinesin - 1 regulates microtubule dynamics via a c - Jun N - terminal kinase - dependent mechanism . J Biol Chem 284 ( 46 ) : 31992 - 2001 . Dammermann A . , Muller - Reichert T . , Pelletier L . , Habermann B . , Desai A . , Oegema K . ( 2004 ) . Centriole assembly requires both centriolar and pericentriolar material proteins . Dev Cell 7 : 815 – 829 . D ' Avino , P . P . ( 2009 ) . How to scaffold the contractile ring for a safe cytokinesis - lessons from Anillin - related proteins . J Cell Sci . 122 ( Pt 8 ) : 1071 - 9 . D ' Avino , P . P . , Savoian , M . S . ( 2006 ) . RacGAP50C is sufficient to signal cleavage furrow sufficient for furrow formation and ingression and astral microtubules provide a route for its delivery to the cleavage site . J Cell Sci . 119 ( Pt 21 ) : 4402 - 8 . D ' Avino , P . P . , Takeda , T . ( 2008 ) . Interaction between Anillin and RacGAP50C connects the actomyosin contractile ring with spindle microtubules at the cell division site . J Cell Sci 121 ( Pt 8 ) : 1151 - 8 . Desai , A . , Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Microtubule polymerization dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 13 : 83 - 117 . Doxsey , S . , McCollum , D . ( 2005 ) . Centrosomes in cellular regulation . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 21 : 411 - 34 . Drummond , D . R . ( 2011 ) . Regulation of microtubule dynamics by kinesins . Semin Cell Dev Biol 22 ( 9 ) : 927 - 34 . Estes , K . A . , Hanna - Rose W . ( 2009 ) . The anchor cell initiates dorsal lumen formation during C . elegans vulval tubulogenesis . Dev Biol 328 ( 2 ) : 297 - 304 . Etienne - Manneville , S . ( 2004 ) Actin and microtubules in cell motility : which one is in control ? Traffic 5 ( 7 ) : 470 - 7 Fink , G . , Hajdo , L . ( 2009 ) . The mitotic kinesin - 14 Ncd drives directional microtubule - microtubule sliding . Nat Cell Biol 11 ( 6 ) : 717 - 23 . Fischer J . A . , Acosta S . , Kenny A . , Cater C . , Robinson C . , Hook J . ( 2004 ) . Drosophila klarsicht has distinct subcellular localization domains for nuclear envelope and microtubule localization in the eye . Genetics 168 : 1385 – 1393 . Frokjaer - Jensen , C . , Davis , M . W . ( 2008 ) . Single - copy insertion of transgenes in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nat Genet 40 ( 11 ) : 1375 - 83 . 74 Fujiwara , K . , . Tilney , L . G . ( 1975 ) . Substructural analysis of the microtubule and its polymorphic forms . Ann N Y Acad Sci 253 : 27 - 50 . Gibert M . A . , Starck J . , Beguet B . ( 1984 ) . Role of the gonad cytoplasmic core during oogenesis of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Biol Cell 50 : 77 – 85 . Gibbons , I . R . ( 1988 ) . Dynein ATPases as microtubule motors . J Biol Chem 263 ( 31 ) : 15837 - 40 . Gill , S . R . , Schroer , T . A . ( 1991 ) . Dynactin , a conserved , ubiquitously expressed component of an activator of vesicle motility mediated by cytoplasmic dynein . J Cell Biol 115 ( 6 ) : 1639 - 50 . Glotzer , M . ( 2005 ) . The molecular requirements for cytokinesis . Science 307 ( 5716 ) : 1735 - 9 . Glotzer , M . ( 2009 ) . The 3Ms of central spindle assembly : microtubules , motors and MAPs . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 ( 1 ) : 9 - 20 . Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . ( 2006 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 ( 10 ) : 713 - 26 . Gonczy P . , Pichler S . , Kirkham M . , Hyman A . A . ( 1999 ) . Cytoplasmic dynein is required for distinct aspects of MTOC positioning , including centrosome separation , in the one cell stage Caenorhabditis elegans embryo . J Cell Biol 147 : 135 – 150 . Green , J . L . , Inoue , T . ( 2008 ) . Opposing Wnt pathways orient cell polarity during organogenesis . Cell 134 ( 4 ) : 646 - 56 . Greenwald , I . S . , Sternberg , P . W . ( 1983 ) . The lin - 12 locus specifies cell fates in Caenorhabditis elegans . Cell 34 ( 2 ) : 435 - 44 . Gumienny , T . L . , Lambie , E . ( 1999 ) . Genetic control of programmed cell death in the Caenorhabditis elegans hermaphrodite germline . Development 126 ( 5 ) : 1011 - 22 . Hales , K . G . , Bi , E . ( 1999 ) . Cytokinesis : an emerging unified theory for eukaryotes ? Curr Opin Cell Biol 1 1 ( 6 ) : 717 - 25 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 ( 5350 ) : 509 - 14 . Hall D . H . ( 1995 ) . Electron microscopy and three - dimensional image reconstruction . Methods Cell Biol 48 : 395 – 436 . Hall D . H . , Altun Z . F . ( 2008 ) . C . elegans Atlas . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY : 348 pp Hall D . H . , Winfrey V . P . , Blaeuer G . , Hoffman L . H . , Furuta T . , Rose K . L . , Hobert O . , Greenstein D . ( 1999 ) . Ultrastructural features of the adult hermaphrodite gonad of Caenorhabditis elegans : relations between the germ line and soma . Dev Biol 212 : 101 – 123 . Hannak , E . , Kirkham , M . , Hyman , A . A . , Oegema , K . ( 2001 ) Aurora - A kinase is required for centrosome maturation in Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Cell Biol . 155 ( 7 ) : 1109 – 16 . 75 Hanna - Rose , W . , Han , M . ( 1999 ) . COG - 2 , a sox domain protein necessary for establishing a functional vulval - uterine connection in Caenorhabditis elegans . Development 126 ( 1 ) : 169 - 79 . Hedgecock E . M . , Thomson J . N . ( 1982 ) . A gene required for nuclear and mitochondrial attachment in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Cell 30 : 321 – 330 . Henderson , S . T . , Gao , D . ( 1994 ) . lag - 2 may encode a signaling ligand for the GLP - 1 and LIN - 12 receptors of C . elegans . Development 120 ( 10 ) : 2913 - 24 . Hill , R . J . , Sternberg , P . W . ( 1992 ) . The gene lin - 3 encodes an inductive signal for vulval development in C . elegans . Nature 358 ( 6386 ) : 470 - 6 . Hime , G . R . , Brill , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Assembly of ring canals in the male germ line from structural components of the contractile ring . J Cell Sci . 109 ( Pt 12 ) : 2779 - 88 . Hirokawa , N . , Noda , Y . ( 2009 ) . Kinesin superfamily motor proteins and intracellular transport . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 ( 10 ) : 682 - 96 . Hirsh D . , Oppenheim D . , Klass M . ( 1976 ) . Development of the reproductive system of Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev Biol 49 : 200 – 219 . Hizlan , D . , Mishima , M . ( 2006 ) . Structural analysis of the ZEN - 4 / CeMKLP1 motor domain and its interaction with microtubules . J Struct Biol 153 ( 1 ) : 73 - 84 . Hollenbeck , P . J . ( 2001 ) . Kinesin delivers : identifying receptors for motor proteins . J Cell Biol 152 ( 5 ) : F25 - 8 . Howard , J . , Hyman , A . A . ( 2007 ) . Microtubule polymerases and depolymerases . Curr Opin Cell Biol 19 ( 1 ) : 31 - 5 . Hubbard , E . J . , Greenstein , D . ( 2000 ) . The Caenorhabditis elegans gonad : a test tube for cell and developmental biology . Dev Dyn 218 ( 1 ) : 2 - 22 . Hubbard , E . J . , Greenstein , D . ( 2005 ) . Introduction to the germ line . WormBook : 1 - 4 . Hutterer , A . , Glotzer , M . ( 2009 ) . Clustering of centralspindlin is essential for its accumulation to the central spindle and the midbody . Curr Biol 19 ( 23 ) : 2043 - 9 . Ishikawa , H . , Marshall , W . F . ( 2011 ) . Ciliogenesis : building the cell ' s antenna . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 ( 4 ) : 222 - 34 . Jantsch - Plunger V . , Glotzer M . ( 1999 ) . Depletion of syntaxins in the early Caenorhabditis elegans embryo reveals a role for membrane fusion events in cytokinesis . Curr Biol 9 : 738 – 745 . Kawasaki , I . , Shim , Y . H . ( 1998 ) . PGL - 1 , a predicted RNA - binding component of germ granules , is essential for fertility in C . elegans . Cell 94 ( 5 ) : 635 - 45 . 76 Kim , D . Y . , Roy , R . ( 2006 ) . Cell cycle regulators control centrosome elimination during oogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . J Cell Biol 174 ( 6 ) : 751 - 7 . Kimble , J . , Crittenden , S . L . ( 2005 ) . Germline proliferation and its control . WormBook : 1 - 14 . Kimura , K . , Tsuji , T . ( 2000 ) . Accumulation of GTP - bound RhoA during cytokinesis and a critical role of ECT2 in this accumulation . J Biol Chem . 275 ( 23 ) : 17233 - 6 . Kodani , A . , Sutterlin , C . ( 2009 ) . A new function for an old organelle : microtubule nucleation at the Golgi apparatus . EMBO J 28 ( 8 ) : 995 - 6 . Korf , I . , Fan , Y . ( 1998 ) . The Polycomb group in Caenorhabditis elegans and maternal control of germline development . Development 125 ( 13 ) : 2469 - 78 . Kufer , T . A . , Silljé , H . H . , Körner , R . , Gruss , O . J . , Meraldi , P . , Nigg , E . A . ( 2002 ) Human TPX2 is required for targeting Aurora - A kinase to the spindle . J Cell Biol . 158 ( 4 ) : 617 - 23 . Kuttenkeuler , D . , Boutros , M . ( 2004 ) Genome - wide RNAi as a route to gene function in Drosophila . Brief . Funct . Genomic Proteomic 3 ( 2 ) : 168 - 76 . Lambie , E . J . , Kimble , J . ( 1991 ) . Two homologous regulatory genes , lin - 12 and glp - 1 , have overlapping functions . Development 112 ( 1 ) : 231 - 40 . Lechler T . , Fuchs E . ( 2007 ) . Desmoplakin : an unexpected regulator of microtubule organization in the epidermis . J Cell Biol 176 : 147 – 154 . Le Clainche , C . , Carlier , M . F . ( 2008 ) . Regulation of actin assembly associated with protrusion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol Rev . 88 ( 2 ) : 489 - 513 . Lei , K . , Zhang , X . , Ding , X . , Guo , X . , Chen , M . , Zhu , B . , Xu , T . , Zhuang , Y . , Xu , R . , Han , M . ( 2009 ) SUN1 and SUN2 play critical but partially redundant roles in anchoring nuclei in skeletal muscle cells in mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 ( 25 ) : 10207 - 12 . Li R . , Gundersen G . G . ( 2008 ) . Beyond polymer polarity : how the cytoskeleton builds a polarized cell . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 860 – 873 Liu , J . , Maduzia , L . L . ( 2010 ) . NMY - 2 maintains cellular asymmetry and cell boundaries , and promotes a SRC - dependent asymmetric cell division . Dev Biol . 339 ( 2 ) : 366 - 73 . Loria , A . , Longhini , K . M . ( 2012 ) . The RhoGAP Domain of CYK - 4 Has an Essential Role in RhoA Activation . Curr Biol . 22 ( 3 ) : 213 - 9 . Lu J . , Dentler W . L . , Lundquist E . A . ( 2008 ) . FLI - 1 Flightless - 1 and LET - 60 Ras control germ line morphogenesis in C . elegans . BMC Dev Bio 8 : 54 Luders , J . , Stearns , T . ( 2007 ) . Microtubule - organizing centres : a re - evaluation . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 ( 2 ) : 161 - 7 . 77 Luxton , G . W . , Gundersen , G . G . ( 2011 ) Orientation and function of the nuclear - centrosomal axis during cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 23 ( 5 ) : 579 - 88 . Maddox , A . S . , Habermann , B . ( 2005 ) . Distinct roles for two C . elegans anillins in the gonad and early embryo . " Development 132 ( 12 ) : 2837 - 48 . Malikov , V . , Kashina , A . ( 2004 ) . Cytoplasmic dynein nucleates microtubules to organize them into radial arrays in vivo . Mol Biol Cell 15 ( 6 ) : 2742 - 9 . Malone C . J . , Misner L . , Le Bot N . , Tsai M . C . , Campbell J . M . , Ahringer J . , White J . G . ( 2003 ) . The C . elegans hook protein , ZYG - 12 , mediates the essential attachment between the centrosome and nucleus . Cell 115 : 825 – 836 . Manor , U . , Kachar , B . ( 2008 ) . Dynamic length regulation of sensory stereocilia . Semin Cell Dev Biol 19 ( 6 ) : 502 - 10 . Meads T . , Schroer T . A . ( 1995 ) . Polarity and nucleation of microtubules in polarized epithelial cells . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 32 : 273 – 288 . Meng W . , Mushika Y . , Ichii T . , Takeichi M . ( 2008 ) . Anchorage of microtubule minus ends to adherens junctions regulates epithelial cell - cell contacts . Cell 135 : 948 – 959 . McGough , A . M . , Staiger , C . J . ( 2003 ) . The gelsolin family of actin regulatory proteins : modular structures , versatile functions . FEBS Lett 552 ( 2 - 3 ) : 75 - 81 . Miller A . L . , Bement W . M . ( 2009 ) Regulation of cytokinesis by Rho GTPase flux . Nat Cell Biol . 11 ( 1 ) : 71 - 7 . Minn , I . L . , Rolls , M . M . , Hanna - Rose , W . , Malone , C . J . ( 2009 ) SUN - 1 and ZYG - 12 , mediators of centrosome - nucleus attachment , are a functional SUN / KASH pair in Caenorhabditis elegans . Mol Biol Cell . 20 ( 21 ) : 4586 - 95 . Mishima , M . , Kaitna , S . ( 2002 ) . Central spindle assembly and cytokinesis require a kinesin - like protein / RhoGAP complex with microtubule bundling activity . Dev Cell 2 ( 1 ) : 41 - 54 . Mitchison , T . , Kirschner , M . ( 1984 ) . Dynamic instability of microtubule growth . Nature 312 ( 5991 ) : 237 - 42 . Mitchison , T . J . ( 1986 ) . The role of microtubule polarity in the movement of kinesin and kinetochores . J Cell Sci Suppl 5 : 121 - 8 . Moon , S . Y . , Zheng , Y . ( 2003 ) . Rho GTPase - activating proteins in cell regulation . Trends Cell Biol 13 ( 1 ) : 13 - 22 . Moores , C . A . , Milligan , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Lucky 13 - microtubule depolymerisation by kinesin - 13 motors . J Cell Sci 119 ( Pt 19 ) : 3905 - 13 . 78 Mooseker , M . S . , Tilney , L . G . ( 1975 ) . Organization of an actin filament - membrane complex . Filament polarity and membrane attachment in the microvilli of intestinal epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 67 ( 3 ) : 725 - 43 . Moritz , M . , Agard , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Gamma - tubulin complexes and microtubule nucleation . Curr Opin Struct Biol 11 ( 2 ) : 174 - 81 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 ( 11 ) : 6181 - 6 . Musch , A . ( 2004 ) . Microtubule organization and function in epithelial cells . Traffic 5 ( 1 ) : 1 - 9 . Myers , T . R . , Greenwald , I . ( 2007 ) . Wnt signal from multiple tissues and lin - 3 / EGF signal from the gonad maintain vulval precursor cell competence in Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 ( 51 ) : 20368 - 73 . Meyerzon , M . , Fridolfsson , H . N . , Ly , N . , McNally , F . J . , Starr , D . A . ( 2009 ) UNC - 83 is a nuclear - specific cargo adaptor for kinesin - 1 - mediated nuclear migration . Development 136 ( 16 ) : 2725 - 33 . Nguyen - Ngoc T . , Afshar K . , Gonczy P . ( 2007 ) . Coupling of cortical dynein and G alpha proteins mediates spindle positioning in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nat Cell Biol . 9 : 1294 – 1302 . Nigg , E . A . , Stearns , T . ( 2011 ) . The centrosome cycle : Centriole biogenesis , duplication and inherent asymmetries . Nat Cell Biol 13 ( 10 ) : 1154 - 60 . Nishimura , Y . , Yonemura , S . ( 2006 ) . Centralspindlin regulates ECT2 and RhoA accumulation at the equatorial cortex during cytokinesis . J Cell Sci 119 ( Pt 1 ) : 104 - 14 . Pantaloni , D . , C . Le Clainche , et al . ( 2001 ) . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 ( 5521 ) : 1502 - 6 . Pavicic - Kaltenbrunner , V . , Mishima , M . ( 2007 ) . Cooperative assembly of CYK - 4 / MgcRacGAP and ZEN - 4 / MKLP1 to form the centralspindlin complex . Mol Biol Cell 18 ( 12 ) : 4992 - 5003 . Penkner A . , Tang L . , Novatchkova M . , Ladurner M . , Fridkin A . , Gruenbaum Y . , Schweizer D . , Loidl J . , Jantsch V . ( 2007 ) . The nuclear envelope protein Matefin / SUN - 1 is required for homologous pairing in C . elegans meiosis . Dev Cell 12 : 873 – 885 . Peterman , E . J . , Scholey , J . M . ( 2009 ) . Mitotic microtubule crosslinkers : insights from mechanistic studies . Curr Biol 19 ( 23 ) : R1089 - 94 . Piekny , A . , Werner , M . ( 2005 ) . Cytokinesis : welcome to the Rho zone . Trends Cell Biol 15 ( 12 ) : 651 - 8 . Piekny , A . J . , Glotzer , M . ( 2008 ) . Anillin is a scaffold protein that links RhoA , actin , and myosin during cytokinesis . Curr Biol 18 ( 1 ) : 30 - 6 . Piekny , A . J . , Maddox , A . S . ( 2010 ) . The myriad roles of Anillin during cytokinesis . Semin Cell Dev Biol 21 ( 9 ) : 881 - 91 . 79 Piekny , A . J . , Mains , P . E . ( 2002 ) . Rho - binding kinase ( LET - 502 ) and myosin phosphatase ( MEL - 11 ) regulate cytokinesis in the early Caenorhabditis elegans embryo . J Cell Sci 115 ( Pt 11 ) : 2271 - 82 . Portereiko , M . F . , Saam , J . ( 2004 ) . ZEN - 4 / MKLP1 is required to polarize the foregut epithelium . Curr Biol 14 ( 11 ) : 932 - 41 . Pollard , T . D . , Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 ( 5957 ) : 1208 - 12 . Porter , M . E . , Johnson , K . A . ( 1989 ) . Dynein structure and function . Annu Rev Cell Biol 5 : 119 - 51 . Powers , J . , Bossinger , O . ( 1998 ) . A nematode kinesin required for cleavage furrow advancement . Curr Biol 8 ( 20 ) : 1133 - 6 . Quarmby , L . ( 2000 ) . Cellular Samurai : katanin and the severing of microtubules . J Cell Sci 113 ( Pt 16 ) : 2821 - 7 . Raich , W . B . , Moran , A . N . ( 1998 ) . Cytokinesis and midzone microtubule organization in Caenorhabditis elegans require the kinesin - like protein ZEN - 4 . Mol Biol Cell 9 ( 8 ) : 2037 - 49 . Ridley , A . J . ( 2006 ) . Rho GTPases and actin dynamics in membrane protrusions and vesicle trafficking . Trends Cell Biol 16 ( 10 ) : 522 - 9 . Rieder , C . L . , Faruki , S . ( 2001 ) . The centrosome in vertebrates : more than a microtubule - organizing center . Trends Cell Biol 11 ( 10 ) : 413 - 9 . Rivero , S . , Cardenas , J . ( 2009 ) . Microtubule nucleation at the cis - side of the Golgi apparatus requires AKAP450 and GM130 . EMBO J 28 ( 8 ) : 1016 - 28 . Robinson , D . N . , Cooley , L . ( 1997 ) . Drosophila kelch is an oligomeric ring canal actin organizer . J Cell Biol 138 ( 4 ) : 799 - 810 . Rogers , G . C . , Rogers , S . L . ( 2004 ) . Two mitotic kinesins cooperate to drive sister chromatid separation during anaphase . Nature 427 ( 6972 ) : 364 - 70 . Roll - Mecak , A . , McNally , F . J . ( 2009 ) . Microtubule - severing enzymes . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 ( 1 ) : 96 - 103 . Roll - Mecak , A . , Vale , R . D . ( 2006 ) . Making more microtubules by severing : a common theme of noncentrosomal microtubule arrays ? J Cell Biol 175 ( 6 ) : 849 - 51 . Rolls M . M . , Stein P . A . , Taylor S . S . , Ha E . , McKeon F . , Rapoport T . A . ( 1999 ) . A visual screen of a GFP - fusion library identifies a new type of nuclear envelope membrane protein . J Cell Biol 146 : 29 – 44 . 80 Root , D . E . , Hacohen , N . , Hahn , W . C . , Lander , E . S . , Sabatini , D . M . ( 2006 ) Genome - scale loss - of - function screening with a lentiviral RNAi library . Nat Methods . 3 ( 9 ) : 715 - 9 . Rosales - Nieves , A . E . , Johndrow , J . E . , Keller , L . C . , Magie , C . R . , Pinto - Santini , D . M . , Parkhurst , S . M . ( 2006 ) Coordination of microtubule and microfilament dynamics by Drosophila Rho1 , Spire and Cappuccino . Nat Cell Biol . 8 ( 4 ) : 367 - 76 . Rosenblatt , J . , Cramer , L . P . , Baum , B . , andMcGee , K . M . ( 2004 ) . Myosin II - dependent cortical movement is required for centrosome separation and positioning during mitotic spindle assembly . Cell 117 , 361 – 372 . Rossman , K . L . , Der , C . J . ( 2005 ) . GEF means go : turning on RHO GTPases with guanine nucleotide - exchange factors . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6 ( 2 ) : 167 - 80 . Sapio , M . R . , Hilliard , M . A . ( 2005 ) . The Zona Pellucida domain containing proteins , CUT - 1 , CUT - 3 and CUT - 5 , play essential roles in the development of the larval alae in Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev Biol . 282 ( 1 ) : 231 - 45 . Salpingidou G . , Smertenko A . , Hausmanowa - Petrucewicz I . , Hussey P . J . , Hutchison C . J . ( 2007 ) . A novel role for the nuclear membrane protein emerin in association of the centrosome to the outer nuclear membrane . J Cell Biol 178 : 897 – 904 . Sato , A . , Isaac , B . , Phillips , C . M . , Rillo , R . , Carlton , P . M . , Wynne , D . J . , Kasad , R . A . , Dernburg , A . F . ( 2009 ) Cytoskeletal forces span the nuclear envelope to coordinate meiotic chromosome pairing and synapsis . Cell 139 ( 5 ) : 907 - 19 . Satterwhite , L . L . , Pollard , T . D . ( 1992 ) . Cytokinesis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 4 ( 1 ) : 43 - 52 . Schedl , T . ( 1997 ) . Developmental Genetics of the Germ Line . In C . elegans II . 2nd edition . Riddle DL , Blumenthal T , Meyer BJ , et al . , editors . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , NY Salles - Passador , I . , Moisand , A . ( 1991 ) . Physarum plasmodia do contain cytoplasmic microtubules ! J Cell Sci . 100 ( Pt 3 ) : 509 - 20 . Schmidt D . J . , Rose D . J . , Saxton W . M . , Strome S . ( 2005 ) . Functional analysis of cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain in Caenorhabditis elegans with fast - acting temperature - sensitive mutations . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 1200 – 1212 . Schumacher , J . M . , Ashcroft , N . , Donovan , P . J . , Golden , A . ( 1998 ) A highly conserved centrosomal kinase , AIR - 1 , is required for accurate cell cycle progression and segregation of developmental factors in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos . Development 125 ( 22 ) : 4391 - 402 . Schuyler , S . C . , Pellman , D . ( 2001 ) . Search , capture and signal : games microtubules and centrosomes play . J Cell Sci 114 ( Pt 2 ) : 247 - 55 . Severson , A . F . , Hamill , D . R . ( 2000 ) . The aurora - related kinase AIR - 2 recruits ZEN - 4 / CeMKLP1 to the mitotic spindle at metaphase and is required for cytokinesis . Curr Biol . 10 ( 19 ) : 1162 - 71 . 81 Sharma - Kishore , R . , White , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Formation of the vulva in Caenorhabditis elegans : a paradigm for organogenesis . Development 126 ( 4 ) : 691 - 9 . Sherwood , D . R . , Butler , J . A . ( 2005 ) . FOS - 1 promotes basement - membrane removal during anchor - cell invasion in C . elegans . Cell 121 ( 6 ) : 951 - 62 . Sherwood , D . R . , Sternberg , P . W . ( 2003 ) . Anchor cell invasion into the vulval epithelium in C . elegans . Dev Cell 5 ( 1 ) : 21 - 31 . Shriver , J . W . ( 1986 ) . The structure of myosin and its role in energy transduction in muscle . Biochem Cell Biol 64 ( 4 ) : 265 - 76 . Siegrist S . E . , Doe C . Q . ( 2007 ) . Microtubule - induced cortical cell polarity . Genes Dev . 21 : 483 – 496 . Simon , G . C . , Schonteich , E . ( 2008 ) . Sequential Cyk - 4 binding to ECT2 and FIP3 regulates cleavage furrow ingression and abscission during cytokinesis . EMBO J . 27 ( 13 ) : 1791 - 803 . Starck J . ( 1977 ) . Radioautographic study of RNA synthesis in Caenorhabditis elegans ( Bergerac Variety ) oogenesis . Biol Cell 30 : 181 – 182 . Starr D . A . ( 2007 ) . Communication between the cytoskeleton and the nuclear envelope to position the nucleus . Mol Biosyst 3 : 583 – 589 . Starr , D . A . , Han , M . ( 2002 ) . Role of ANC - 1 in tethering nuclei to the actin cytoskeleton . Science 298 : 406 – 409 . Starr , D . A . ( 2011 ) . KASH and SUN proteins . Curr Biol 21 ( 11 ) : R414 - 5 . Steinhauer J . , Kalderon , D . ( 2006 ) . Microtubule polarity and axis formation in the Drosophila oocyte . Dev Dyn 235 : 1455 – 1468 . Sternberg , P . W . ( 1988 ) . Lateral inhibition during vulval induction in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 335 ( 6190 ) : 551 - 4 . Stone M . C . , Roegiers F . , Rolls M . M . ( 2008 ) . Microtubules have opposite orientation in axons and dendrites of Drosophila neurons . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 4122 – 4129 . Su , K . C . , Takaki , T . ( 2011 ) . Targeting of the RhoGEF Ect2 to the equatorial membrane controls cleavage furrow formation during cytokinesis . Dev Cell 21 ( 6 ) : 1104 - 15 . Sulston , J . E . , Horvitz , H . R . ( 1977 ) . Post - embryonic cell lineages of the nematode , Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev Biol 56 ( 1 ) : 110 - 56 . Sulston , J . E . , Schierenberg , E . ( 1983 ) . The embryonic cell lineage of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev Biol 100 ( 1 ) : 64 - 119 . 82 Tai , A . W . , Chuang , J . Z . ( 1999 ) . Rhodopsin ' s carboxy - terminal cytoplasmic tail acts as a membrane receptor for cytoplasmic dynein by binding to the dynein light chain Tctex - 1 . Cell 97 ( 7 ) : 877 - 87 . Tassin A . M . , Maro B . , Bornens M . ( 1985 ) . Fate of microtubule - organizing centers during myogenesis in vitro . J Cell Biol 100 : 35 – 46 . Taunton , J . , Rowning , B . A . ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J Cell Biol . 148 ( 3 ) : 519 - 30 . Theriot , J . A . ( 2000 ) . The polymerization motor . Traffic 1 ( 1 ) : 19 - 28 . Thompson H . M . , Skop A . R . , Euteneuer U . , Meyer B . J . , McNiven M . A . ( 2002 ) . The large GTPase dynamin associates with the spindle midzone and is required for cytokinesis . Curr Biol . 12 : 2111 – 2117 . Tilney , L . G . , Tilney , M . S . ( 1996 ) . Formation of actin filament bundles in the ring canals of developing Drosophila follicles . J Cell Biol . 133 ( 1 ) : 61 - 74 . Tseng , Y . , Kole , T . P . ( 2005 ) . How actin crosslinking and bundling proteins cooperate to generate an enhanced cell mechanical response . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 334 ( 1 ) : 183 - 92 . Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . The molecular motor toolbox for intracellular transport . Cell 112 ( 4 ) : 467 - 80 . Vale , R . D . , Reese , T . S . ( 1985 ) . Identification of a novel force - generating protein , kinesin , involved in microtubule - based motility . Cell 42 ( 1 ) : 39 - 50 . Verhey , K . J . , Meyer , D . ( 2001 ) . Cargo of kinesin identified as JIP scaffolding proteins and associated signaling molecules . J Cell Biol 152 ( 5 ) : 959 - 70 . Vogel B . E . , Hedgecock E . M . ( 2001 ) . Hemicentin , a conserved extracellular member of the immunoglobulin superfamily , organizes epithelial and other cell attachments into oriented line - shaped junctions . Development 128 : 883 – 894 . Warn , R . M . , Gutzeit , H . O . ( 1985 ) . F - actin rings are associated with the ring canals of the Drosophila egg chamber . Exp Cell Res . 157 ( 2 ) : 355 - 63 . Wiese , C . , Zheng , Y . ( 2000 ) . A new function for the gamma - tubulin ring complex as a microtubule minus - end cap . Nat Cell Biol . 2 ( 6 ) : 358 - 64 . Wilhelmsen , K . , Ketema , M . ( 2006 ) . KASH - domain proteins in nuclear migration , anchorage and other processes . J Cell Sci . 119 ( Pt 24 ) : 5021 - 9 . Wittmann , T . , Hyman , A . ( 2001 ) . The spindle : a dynamic assembly of microtubules and motors . Nat Cell Biol 3 ( 1 ) : E28 - 34 . Weber , J . E . , Russell , L . D . ( 1987 ) . A study of intercellular bridges during spermatogenesis in the rat . Am J Anat . 180 ( 1 ) : 1 - 24 . 83 Wolke U . , Jezuit E . A . , Priess J . R . ( 2007 ) . Actin - dependent cytoplasmic streaming in C . elegans oogenesis . Development 134 : 2227 – 2236 . Wood , W . B . ( 1988 ) . The Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . Cold Spring Harbor , N . Y . , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press . Wozniak , M . J . , Allan , V . J . ( 2006 ) . Cargo selection by specific kinesin light chain 1 isoforms . EMBO J . 25 ( 23 ) : 5457 - 68 . Wu , J . , Misra , G . ( 2011 ) . Effects of dynein on microtubule mechanics and centrosome positioning . Mol Biol Cell 22 ( 24 ) : 4834 - 41 . Xu , X . , Vogel , B . E . ( 2011 ) . A secreted protein promotes cleavage furrow maturation during cytokinesis . Curr Biol . 21 ( 2 ) : 114 - 9 . Yoder J . H . , Han M . ( 2001 ) . Cytoplasmic dynein light intermediate chain is required for discrete aspects of mitosis in Caenorhabditis elegans . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 2921 – 2933 . . Yonemura , S . ( 2011 ) . Cadherin - actin interactions at adherens junctions . Curr Opin Cell Biol 23 ( 5 ) : 515 - 22 . Yoo , A . S . , Bais , C . ( 2004 ) . Crosstalk between the EGFR and LIN - 12 / Notch pathways in C . elegans vulval development . Science 303 ( 5658 ) : 663 - 6 . Yoshida , S . , Bartolini , S . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms for concentrating Rho1 during cytokinesis . Genes Dev . 23 ( 7 ) : 810 - 23 . Yuce , O . , Piekny , A . ( 2005 ) . An ECT2 - centralspindlin complex regulates the localization and function of RhoA . J Cell Biol 170 ( 4 ) : 571 - 82 . Yu J . , Starr D . A . , ( 2006 ) . The KASH domain protein MSP - 300 plays an essential role in nuclear anchoring during Drosophila oogenesis . Dev Biol 289 : 336 – 345 . Yu W . , Qiang L . , Solowska J . M . , Karabay A . , Korulu S . , Baas P . W . ( 2008 ) . The microtubule - severing proteins spastin and katanin participate differently in the formation of axonal branches . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 1485 – 1498 . Zhang , H . , Dawe , R . K . ( 2011 ) . Mechanisms of plant spindle formation . Chromosome Res 19 ( 3 ) : 335 - 44 . Zavortink , M . , Contreras , N . ( 2005 ) . Tum / RacGAP50C provides a critical link between anaphase microtubules and the assembly of the contractile ring in Drosophila melanogaster . J Cell Sci . 118 ( Pt 22 ) : 5381 - 92 . Zhang , L . , Maddox , A . S . ( 2010 ) . Anillin . Curr Biol 20 ( 4 ) : R135 - 6 . Zhang X . , Xu R . , Zhu B . , Yang X . , Ding X . , Duan S . , Xu T . , Zhuang Y . , Han M . ( 2007 ) . Syne - 1 and Syne - 2 play crucial roles in myonuclear anchorage and motor neuron innervation . Development 134 : 901 – 908 . 84 Zhao , W . M . , Seki , A . ( 2006 ) . Cep55 , a microtubule - bundling protein , associates with centralspindlin to control the midbody integrity and cell abscission during cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 17 ( 9 ) : 3881 - 96 . Zheng , Y . , Wong , M . L . ( 1995 ) . Nucleation of microtubule assembly by a gamma - tubulin - containing ring complex . Nature 378 ( 6557 ) : 578 - 83 . Zhou , K . , Rolls , M . M . , Hall , D . H . , Malone , C . J . , Hanna - Rose W . ( 2009 ) . A ZYG - 12 - dynein interaction at the nuclear envelope defines cytoskeletal architecture in the C . elegans gonad . J Cell Biol . 186 ( 2 ) : 229 - 41 . Zhu , C . , Bossy - Wetzel , E . ( 2005 ) . Recruitment of MKLP1 to the spindle midzone / midbody by INCENP is essential for midbody formation and completion of cytokinesis in human cells . Biochem J . 389 ( Pt 2 ) : 373 - 81 . VITA Kang Zhou EDUCATION Ph . D . in Biochemistry Microbiology and Molecular Biology MS in Plant Biology , 1998 , Jiangsu Institute of Botany , Chinese Academy of Sciences BA in Agronomy , 1995 , Shandong Agricultural University PUBLICATION Kang Zhou , Wendy Hanna - Rose . ( 2010 ) Movers and shakers or anchored : Caenorhabitis elegans nuclei achieve it with KASH / SUN . Developmental Dynamics 239 , 1352 - 1364 . Kang Zhou , Melissa M . Rolls , David H . Hall , Christian J . Malone , and Wendy Hanna - Rose . ( 2009 ) A ZYG - 12 – dynein interaction at the nuclear envelope defines cytoskeletal architecture in the C . elegans gonad . Journal of Cell Biology , 186 , 229 - 241 . Jianwei Zhu , Dan Yu , Xian - Chun Zeng , Kang Zhou , and Xi Zhan . ( 2007 ) Receptor - mediated endocytosis involves tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin . Journal of Biological Chemistry 282 , 16086 - 16094 . Ying Wang , Kang Zhou , Xianchun Zeng , Jinxiu Lin , and Xi Zhan . ( 2007 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation of missing in metastasis protein is implicated in platelet - derived growth factor - mediated cell shape changes . Journal of Biological Chemistry 282 , 7624 - 7631 . Ying Wang , Jiali Liu , Elizabeth Smith , Kang Zhou , Jie Liao , Guang - Yu Yang , Ming Tan , and Xi Zhan . ( 2007 ) Downregulation of missing in metastasis gene ( MIM ) is associated with the progression of bladder transitional carcinomas . Cancer investigation . 25 , 79 – 86 . Jianwei Zhu , Kang Zhou , Jian - Jiang Hao , Jiali Liu , Nicole Smith and Xi Zhan . ( 2005 ) Regulation of cortactin / dynamin interaction by actin polymerization during the fission of clathrin - coated pits . Journal of Cell Science . 118 , 807 - 817 . Jinxiu Lin , Jiali Liu , Ying Wang , Jianwei Zhu , Kang Zhou , Nicole Smith and Xi Zhan . ( 2005 ) Differential regulation of cortactin and N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization by missing in metastasis ( MIM ) protein . Oncogene 24 , 2059 – 2066 . Jian - Jiang Hao , Jianwei Zhu , Kang Zhou , Nicole Smith and Xi Zhan . ( 2005 ) The coiled - coil domain is required for HS1 to bind to F - actin and activate Arp2 / 3 complex . Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 , 37988 - 37994 . PUBLISHED ABSTRACTS Zhou , K . , MM . Rolls , DH . Hall , CJ . Malone , and W , Hanna - Rose . ( 2009 ) A ZYG - 12 – dynein interaction at the nuclear envelope defines microtubule architecture and germline nuclear position in the C . elegans gonad . Talk at the 17 th international C . elegans Meeting . June 24 - 28 , 2009 . Los Angeles , CA Zhou , K . , H . Sun , and W . Hanna - Rose ( 2008 ) . “HIM - 8 and ZIM zinc - finger proteins globally affect transcription factor activity . ” Developmental Biology 319 : 566 . Presented as a poster at Society for Developmental Biology 67 th Annual Meeting . July 26 - 30 , 2008 . Philadelphia , PA . TEACHING EXPERIENCES Teaching assistant of Microbiology 107 in spring semester 2007 and fall semester 2007