Loss of E - Cadherin Promotes Metastasis via Multiple Downstream Transcriptional Pathways Tamer T . Onder , 1 , 2 Piyush B . Gupta , 2 , 3 Sendurai A . Mani , 1 Jing Yang , 4 Eric S . Lander , 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 and Robert A . Weinberg 1 , 2 1 Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research ; 2 Department of Biology , Massachusetts Institute of Technology ; and 3 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard , Cambridge , Massachusetts ; 4 Department of Pharmacology and Pediatrics , University of California , San Diego , School of Medicine , La Jolla , California ; and 5 Department of Systems Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts Abstract Loss of the epithelial adhesion molecule E - cadherin is thought to enable metastasis by disrupting intercellular contacts—an early step in metastatic dissemination . To further investigate the molecular basis of this notion , we use two methods to inhibit E - cadherin function that distinguish between E - cadherin’s cell - cell adhesion and intracellular signaling functions . Whereas the disruption of cell - cell contacts alone does not enable metastasis , the loss of E - cadherin protein does , through induction of an epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition , invasiveness , and anoikis resistance . We find the E - cadherin binding partner B - catenin to be necessary , but not sufficient , for induction of these phenotypes . In addition , gene expression analysis shows that E - cadherin loss results in the induction of multiple transcription factors , at least one of which , Twist , is necessary for E - cadherin loss – induced metastasis . These findings indicate that E - cadherin loss in tumors contributes to metastatic dissemination by inducing wide - ranging transcriptional and functional changes . [ Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 ( 10 ) : 3645 – 54 ] Introduction On progression to high - grade neoplasia , cancer cells acquire qualities that enable them to invade neighboring tissues and , ultimately , to metastasize . The steps involved in metastatic dissemination include loss of cell - cell adhesion , increased motility and invasiveness , entry into and survival in the circulation , dispersion to distant anatomic sites , extravasation , and coloniza - tion of some of those sites ( 1 ) . Whereas significant progress has been made in identifying molecular alterations responsible for primary tumor growth , the signaling pathways that regulate metastatic progression are less clear . One protein prominently associated with tumor invasiveness , metastatic dissemination , and poor patient prognosis is the epithelial cell adhesion molecule E - cadherin ( 2 – 4 ) . The significance of E - cadherin for metastasis has been shown in a variety of in vitro and in vivo models ( 5 – 8 ) . E - Cadherin is a single - span transmem - brane glycoprotein that establishes homophilic interactions with adjacent E - cadherin molecules expressed by neighboring cells , thereby forming the core of the epithelial adherens junction ( 9 , 10 ) . In its cytoplasmic domain , E - cadherin associates with a number of proteins , including three catenins ( a , h , and p120 ) , which link E - cadherin to the actin cytoskeleton . In light of its well - established function in maintaining adherens junctions , E - cadherin loss ostensibly promotes metastasis by enabling the first step of the metastatic cascade : the disaggregation of cancer cells from one another . However , it has been unclear whether E - cadherin loss also supports the successful completion of additional steps of the invasion - metastasis cascade . Previous work has revealed that several structural proteins associated with adherens junctions can also mediate intracellular signaling functions ( 11 – 14 ) . Accordingly , E - cadherin loss may result in the activation of specific downstream signal transduction pathways that , in turn , confer traits on cancer cells facilitating completion of the later steps of metastasis . In human tumors , loss or reduction of E - cadherin expression can be caused by somatic mutations , chromosomal deletions , proteo - lytic cleavage , and silencing of the CDH1 promoter ( 15 – 18 ) . Such silencing can occur either by DNA hypermethylation or through the action of transcription factors such as Slug , Snail , and Twist ( 19 – 22 ) . These transcription factors were initially identified because of their role in mesoderm development , where they trigger epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions ( EMT ) that involve , among other changes , the repression of E - cadherin expression ( 23 ) . It has also become increasingly evident that these transcription factors play important roles in tumor progression ( 24 ) . Given the known correlation between loss of E - cadherin expression and the up - regulation of these transcription factors , we were interested in learning whether the loss of E - cadherin is just one manifestation of the multicomponent EMT program that is activated in tumors or whether , alternatively , E - cadherin itself acts as a pleiotropic regulator of cell phenotype , enabling it to function as a master regulator of cell behavior . In the present work , we examine whether loss of cell - cell contacts is the sole contribution to metastasis provided by E - cadherin loss . We find , instead , that multiple transcriptional pathways are activated on E - cadherin loss , at least two of which contribute to the later steps of metastatic dissemination . Thus , our findings reveal a complex transcriptional network that is controlled by the E - cadherin molecule . Materials and Methods Cell culture . Immortalized human breast epithelial cells ( HMLE ) , generated through the introduction of the SV40 large T antigen , and hTERT were maintained as described ( 25 ) . To generate tumorigenic and green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) – expressing derivates , we infected HMLE cells with pBabe H - ras and PRRL - GFP vectors ( 25 ) . To measure cell growth rates , 2 , 500 cells were seeded onto 96 - well plates in triplicate . Cell viability was measured using CellTiter - Glo ( Promega ) according to the Note : Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online ( http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / ) . Requests for reprints : Robert A . Weinberg , Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research , 9 Cambridge Center , Cambridge , MA 02142 . Phone : 617 - 258 - 5159 ; Fax : 617 - 258 - 5213 ; E - mail : Weinberg @ wi . mit . edu . I 2008 American Association for Cancer Research . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 2938 www . aacrjournals . org 3645 Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 Research Article Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from manufacturer’s instructions . Treatment with the glycogen synthase kinase ( GSK ) inhibitor BIO ( Calbiochem ) was done for 6 h at 1 A mol / L concentration . Plasmids . Sequences targeting the E - cadherin and h - catenin shRNAs were taken from the website of the RNAi consortium at the Broad institute and cloned into the PLKO - puro and PLKO - hygro vectors 6 ( 26 ) . E - Cadherin and h - catenin targeting sequences are GCAGAAATTATTGGGCTCTTT and GCTTGGAATGAGACTGCTGAT , respectively . Control shRNAs were either targeted against GFP or a nonfunctional E - cadherin shRNA . Twist shRNA expression vector was previously described ( 22 ) . Wild - type and dominant - negative mutant E - cadherin cDNAs ( gifts of Dr . Gerhard Christofori , Department of Clinical Biological Sciences , University of Basel , Basel , Switzerland ) were expressed from the pWZL - blasticidin vector . pBp - D N90 h - catenin vector was used as described ( 27 ) . Viral production and infection of target cells . Viral production and infection of target cells were previously described ( 26 ) . Infected cells were selected with 2 A g / mL puromycin , 200 A g / mL hygromycin , and 10 A g / mL blasticidin . Antibodies , immunoblotting , immunofluorescence , and histology . Antibodies used were E - cadherin , a - catenin , h - catenin , g - catenin , N - cadherin ( BD Transduction ) , phospho - h - catenin , phospho - GSK3 h , GSK3 h ( Cell Signaling ) , vimentin V9 ( NeoMarkers ) , actin , tubulin ( Abcam ) , H - Ras ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , fibronectin ( Sigma ) , and cytokeratin 8 ( Troma - 1 , Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , University of Iowa ) . Twist monoclonal antibody was used as previously described ( 22 ) . For immunohistochemical staining , anti – large T antigen ( Santa Cruz Biotech - nology ) and anti – E - cadherin ( Cell Signaling ) antibodies were used as described ( 25 ) . Anoikis assays . Cells ( 75 , 000 ) were seeded onto six - well ultra - low attachment plates . After 24 or 48 h , cells were harvested and incubated at 37 j C with 0 . 25 % trypsin for 5 min to prevent cell aggregation . Viable cells were counted using trypan blue . For fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) analysis , we used the ApoAlert Annexin V - FITC Apoptosis Kit ( Takara - Bio ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and used a FACSCalibur flow cytometer ( Becton Dickinson ) . Motility and invasion assays . Cells ( 5 (cid:1) 10 5 ) were resuspended in a 1 : 1 mixture of DME : F12 and placed into uncoated or Matrigel - coated Transwell inserts containing 8 - A m filters ( BD Falcon ) in triplicate . The bottom wells contained DME : F12 media with growth factors , insulin ( 10 A g / mL ) , epidermal growth factor ( 10 ng / mL ) , and hydrocortisone ( 1 A g / mL ) . After 12 or 16 h , the cells on the upper surface of the filters were removed with a cotton swab . The filters were fixed and stained with a Diff - Quick staining kit ( Dade Behring ) and photographed . The migrated cells were then counted . In vivo tumorigenesis and metastasis assays . Nonobese diabetic , severe combined immunodeficient ( NOD - SCID ) mice ( propagated on site ) and nude mice ( NCR nude ; Taconic ) were used in these studies , and all protocols were approved by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee on Animal Care . Nude mice received 400 rad of g - radiation using a dual 137 Cs source 1 day before tumor cell injection . Mice were anesthetized with either avertin or isoflurane . For orthotopic injections , 1 million cells in 20 A L of Matrigel ( Becton Dickinson ) , diluted 1 : 2 in DME , were injected into each of two mammary glands per female NOD - SCID mouse . For s . c . injections , 1 (cid:1) 10 6 cells in 100 A L of Matrigel diluted 1 : 2 in DME were injected at each of two sites per nude mouse . Tumor diameters were measured biweekly using precision calipers . Primary tumor – bearing animals were sacrificed when the tumors reached a diameter of 2 cm . For tail vein injections , 5 (cid:1) 10 5 cells in 200 - A L PBS were injected per NOD - SCID mouse and the mice were sacrificed 8 wk postinjections . Visualization and quantification of GFP - labeled lung metastases . On necropsy , lungs of injected mice were removed and examined under a Leica MZ 12 fluorescence dissection microscope . Images of lung lobes were captured at identical settings . The amount of metastatic burden was quantified using ImageJ 7 and expressed as a percentage of the total lung area captured ( 28 ) . Microarray hybridization , data collection , and analysis . Total RNA was extracted from three independent culture plates for each cell type with an RNeasy Mini kit ( Qiagen ) . Synthesis of cRNA and hybridization / scanning of microarrays were done with Affymetrix GeneChip products as described in the GeneChip manual . Normalization of the raw gene expression data , quality control checks , and subsequent analyses were done using the open - source R - project statistical software 8 ( 29 ) in conjunction with Bioconductor packages . Raw data files ( . CEL ) were converted into probe set values by RMA normalization . Hierarchical clustering with complete linkage was done on the probe set data using the Euclidean metric . The probes used for hierarchical clustering and heatmap generation were identified on the basis of their consistent up - regulation and down - regulation across a set of isogenic lines that were induced into EMT using a variety of inducers : Twist , TGF - h , Snail , or Goosecoid overexpression ( to be described in detail elsewhere ) . 9 The identified probes constitute an EMT expression signature whose targets are > 3 - fold up - regulated or down - regulated in each of the cell lines induced into EMT relative to vector control cells that were not induced into EMT . 9 The microarray data have been deposited in National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE9691 . SYBR green real - time reverse transcription - PCR . Reverse transcrip - tion - PCR ( RT - PCR ) analysis of twist was carried out as described ( 22 ) . Results Characterization of in vitro phenotypes resulting from expression of E - cadherin shRNA and dominant - negative E - cadherin . To resolve the role of E - cadherin in cell - cell adhesion from its intracellular signaling functions , we used two distinct methods of inhibiting E - cadherin function : ( a ) shRNA - mediated knockdown of E - cadherin , which resulted in > 90 % reduction of E - cadherin protein levels ( shEcad ) , and ( b ) expression of a truncated form of E - cadherin ( DN - Ecad ) lacking the ectodomain of the wild - type protein ( Fig . 1 A and B ) . This truncation product , which retains the cytoplasmic domain , has previously been shown to act in a dominant - negative manner by binding and titrating cytoplasmic proteins associated with the adherens junctions , thereby abstracting them from wild - type E - cadherin molecules ( 30 ) . We expressed both constructs either in immortalized but untransformed human mammary epithelial cells ( HMLE ) or in ras - transformed derivatives ( HMLER ) . Both types of cells express - ing control shRNA ( shCntrl ) grew in monolayer culture as epithelial clusters with a typical cobblestone morphology , whereas knock - down of E - cadherin and expression of the dominant - negative protein both resulted in loss of cell - cell contacts and cell scattering ( Fig . 1 A ) . This was observed with both the HMLE and HMLER cells ( Supplementary Fig . S1 A ) . Whereas the cell populations expressing shEcad and DN - Ecad both lost cell - cell adhesion , the individual cells expressing shEcad displayed , in addition , an elongated , fibroblastic morphology ( Fig . 1 A ) . To confirm that this phenotype was a specific consequence of E - cadherin ablation , we reexpressed E - cadherin in HMLE - shEcad cells . Indeed , expression of an shRNA - resistant murine E - cadherin gene reversed the observed phenotypes , causing shEcad cells to revert to an epithelial morphology and to regenerate a cobblestone growth pattern in monolayer culture ( Supplementary Fig . S2 ) . 6 http : / / www . broad . mit . edu / genome _ bio / trc / 7 http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / 8 http : / / www . r - project . org / 9 Manuscript in preparation . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 3646 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from The acquisition of a fibroblastic morphology by the cells expressing shEcad suggested that these cells had undergone an EMT . To determine whether , in addition to the observed morphologic changes , the molecular alterations associated with an EMT occurred on loss of E - cadherin , we assessed the status of EMT markers in control , shEcad , and DN - Ecad HMLER cells . On shRNA - mediated loss of E - cadherin , expression of mesenchymal proteins such as N - cadherin and vimentin was markedly up - regulated ( Fig . 1 B and C ) . In contrast , none of the mesenchymal proteins was up - regulated in HMLER - DN - Ecad cells ( Fig . 1 B ) . Whereas the expression of adherens junction - associated catenins was maintained in the absence of E - cadherin , epithelial cytoker - atins were down - regulated ( Fig . 1 B ) . These observations indicate that complete loss of E - cadherin protein results in an EMT , whereas inhibition of E - cadherin – mediated cell - cell adhesion causes cell scattering without the additional changes in differen - tiation state associated with passage through the EMT program . Primary tumor formation and metastatic competence of E - cadherin – inhibited cancer cells . To determine whether E - cadherin perturbation affects primary tumor growth , we injected control HMLER cells and the two E - cadherin – inhibited derivative lines s . c . into nude mice . Whereas all three cell lines generated primary tumors with comparable latencies , tumor growth rates differed slightly among shCntrl , DN - Ecad , and shEcad HMLER cells , with the latter growing most rapidly ( Fig . 2 A ) . We confirmed that E - cadherin suppression and expression of the dominant - negative construct were maintained during the course of tumor growth ( Supplementary Fig . S3 ) . Immunohistochemical staining of tumors with anti – E - cadherin antibodies also supported this conclusion ( Supplementary Fig . S3 ) . We next determined whether metastatic dissemination to the lungs occurred when these various transformed cells were implanted in an orthotopic tissue site—the mammary fat pad . To facilitate detection of microscopic and macroscopic metastases , we engineered the introduced HMLER cells to express the GFP . We controlled for differences in primary tumor growth rates by sacrificing animals when their tumor burden reached a preestab - lished threshold . Accordingly , the mean primary tumor weights at the end of the experiment were comparable across the shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cohorts ( Fig . 2 B ) . Figure 1 . Characterization of in vitro phenotypes resulting from expression of E - cadherin shRNA and dominant - negative E - cadherin . A , schematic representation of the generation of HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cell lines , as well as their respective morphologies . B . expression levels of the endogenous and dominant - negative mutant E - cadherin ( arrowhead ) , h - catenin , g - catenin , a - catenin , cytokeratin - 8 ( CK - 8 ) , and mesenchymal proteins N - cadherin and vimentin in HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cells examined by immunoblotting . h - Actin is used as a loading control . C , immunofluorescence staining of E - cadherin ( green ) , vimentin ( red ) , and N - cadherin ( green ) in the HMLER cells expressing either shCntrl or shEcad . The blue signal represents the nuclear DNA staining by 4 ¶ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole . Metastasis Promotion by E - Cadherin Loss www . aacrjournals . org 3647 Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from In consonance with previous findings ( 25 ) , control HMLER cells did not form any macroscopic nodules in the lungs , and only a few GFP - positive cells could be detected as micrometastases in the lungs of animals bearing these tumors ( Fig . 2 D ) . In contrast , animals bearing HMLER - shEcad tumors harbored numerous microscopic and macroscopic metastases in their lungs ( Fig . 2 D ) . In fact , the lung metastatic burden in animals bearing HMLER - shEcad tumors covered a substantial portion of the total lung surface ( Fig . 2 C and D ) . Whereas we did find small numbers of cells in the lungs of mice bearing HMLER - DN - Ecad tumors , macro - scopic nodules were never observed . These results indicate that the two modes of E - cadherin inhibition yield cancer cells with qualitatively different metastatic powers . Because the HMLER - DN - Ecad cells were incapable of forming macroscopic metastases from primary tumors growing at ortho - topic sites , we also subjected these cells to a less stringent test of metastatic competence—the ‘‘experimental metastasis’’ model , which involves tail vein injection of tumor cells . Using this assay , HMLER - shCntrl cells rarely formed macroscopic nodules in the lungs after an 8 - week incubation period ( 2 nodules in 1 of 5 mice ; Fig . 2 C and D ) . In contrast , HMLER - shEcad cells established numerous lung macrometastases , some of which invaded the rib cage . However , DN - Ecad cells did not form either microscopic or macroscopic lung nodules in any of the mice , thereby echoing the previous results ( Fig . 2 D ) . Taken together , these observations suggest that whereas the loss of cell - cell contacts does not suffice to impart metastatic competence to cancer cells , the concomitant liberation of adherens junction proteins and other associated proteins from the cytoplasmic tail of E - cadherin indeed suffices to do so . Hence , in Figure 2 . Loss of E - cadherin is sufficient for metastasis whereas cellular disaggregation is not . A , growth patterns of primary s . c . tumors formed by the HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cells . Points , mean of eight primary tumors ; bars , SD . B , final primary tumor weights of HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad tumors grown s . c . Columns , mean of eight primary tumors ; bars , SD . C , quantification of total lung metastasis burden in mice bearing either orthotopic primary tumors of HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cells or 8 wk after tail - vein injection of these lines . Columns , mean of five mice analyzed per group ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 001 . D , representative fluorescence images of mouse lung lobes bearing either orthotopic primary tumors of HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cells or 8 wk after tail - vein injection of these lines . GFP signal denotes the presence of tumor cells ( left ) . Arrows , occasional tumor cells detected in the lungs of control and DN - Ecad tumor – bearing animals . Representative immunohistochemical staining of sections with anti – large T antibody from the same set of lungs . Brown nuclear staining denotes the tumor cells . N , lung tissue ; M , metastatic nodule ( right ) . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 3648 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from addition to promoting dissemination from primary tumor sites via the disruption of cell - cell contacts , E - cadherin loss facilitates the successful completion of one or more subsequent rate - limiting steps of the invasion - metastasis cascade . Functional differences in cell motility , invasion , and anoikis resistance . To determine the functional changes in cell behavior that occurred following E - cadherin loss , we used several in vitro assays to characterize the control and E - cadherin – perturbed HMLER cells . More specifically , we used Boyden chamber assays to gauge the migratory and invasive abilities of these various cells . Whereas control cells were minimally motile and invasive , E - cadherin loss resulted in a significant increase in both motility and invasiveness ( Fig . 3 A and B ) . However , DN - Ecad cells , whereas more motile than controls ( albeit less so than shEcad cells ) , failed to invade through Matrigel - coated membranes . Disseminating tumor cells that enter into the bloodstream lose their attachment to the extracellular matrix , resulting in induction of the form of apoptosis termed anoikis ( 1 ) . Moreover , expression of antiapoptotic molecules that confer resistance to anoikis has been shown to promote metastasis ( 31 , 32 ) . We therefore set out to evaluate the anoikis sensitivity of DN - Ecad , shEcad , and control HMLER cells . When placed into suspension cultures , the viability of both control and DN - Ecad cells declined dramatically over a 2 - day period ( Fig . 3 C ) ; in contrast , shEcad cultures exhibited only a minor decrease in cell number during the same time period ( Fig . 3 C ) . To confirm that loss of viability was indeed a consequence of increased apoptosis , we stained cells from these cultures with Annexin V . Whereas the control and DN - Ecad suspension cultures exhibited a significant fraction of cells undergoing apoptosis , minimal Annexin V positivity was observed in the shEcad cultures ( Fig . 3 D ) . Taken together , these results indicate that EMT induction upon E - cadherin loss promotes cancer cell invasiveness and enables survival in the absence of substrate attachment . Importantly , the acquisition of these traits was not a direct consequence of the disruption of cell - cell adhesion per se , suggesting that activation of specific signaling pathways following E - cadherin loss is important for the observed phenotypes . The role of B - catenin in EMT and metastasis induced by E - cadherin loss . A critical intracellular protein associated with the E - cadherin cytoplasmic tail is h - catenin , which has previously been implicated in the induction of EMTs in various contexts ( 33 – 38 ) . We therefore examined whether E - cadherin loss influenced h - catenin status and whether such change in h - catenin contrib - uted , in turn , to the subsequent induction of EMT . Whereas in control cells h - catenin localization was predominantly associated with cell - cell junctions , shEcad cells exhibited a diffuse cytoplasmic and nuclear localization pattern ( Fig . 4 A ) . Examination of the phosphorylation status of h - catenin in shEcad cells indicated that Figure 3 . Loss of E - cadherin leads to increased invasiveness and resistance to anoikis . A , HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cells were induced to move or invade through uncoated or Matrigel - coated transwell membranes . After 12 h ( uncoated ) or 16 h ( Matrigel - coated ) , the migrated cells were fixed , stained , and photographed . Representative photographs of Transwell membranes showing stained migrated cells from either motility or invasion experiments . B , quantification of motility and invasion experiments ( A ) done by counting the number of migrated cells . Columns , mean of triplicate assays ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 01 , compared with shCntrl . C , HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cells were put in suspension and cultured on ultra - low attachment plates in triplicate . After the indicated times , viable cells were counted with trypan blue . Columns , mean number of remaining viable cells expressed as a percentage of the initial seeding ; bars , SD . D , representative FACS histograms indicating the percentage of apoptotic HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and DN - Ecad cells in suspension as determined by binding of FITC - conjugated Annexin V . The FACS analyses were done 24 h after suspension culture . Right , columns , mean number of Annexin V – positive cells expressed as a percentage of total cells ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 001 . Metastasis Promotion by E - Cadherin Loss www . aacrjournals . org 3649 Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from it was largely unphosphorylated , and therefore present in an active state ( Fig . 4 A ; ref . 13 ) . In contrast , a significant amount of h - catenin protein in control cells was phosphorylated and thus targeted for ubiquitylation and degradation ( Fig . 4 A ) . We next determined whether the observed h - catenin phosphor - ylation was correlated with the state of GSK - 3 h , the kinase that is primarily responsible for phosphorylating it , thereby labeling it for subsequent ubiquitylation . Indeed , we found that GSK - 3 h was largely in a phosphorylated , and therefore inactive , state in HMLER - shEcad cells , in contrast to its unphosphorylated state in control cells ( Fig . 4 A ; ref . 39 ) . Hence , loss of E - cadherin in HMLER cells was sufficient to liberate h - catenin from its site of sequestration adjacent to the plasma membrane and to permit its survival in an unphosphorylated , stabilized state . To determine whether h - catenin was functionally active follow - ing E - cadherin loss , we inhibited h - catenin expression in HMLER - shEcad cells using a lentiviral shRNA vector ( shEcad + shBcat ; Fig . 4 B ) . Down - regulation of h - catenin resulted in a slightly reduced growth rate in vitro ( Supplementary Fig . S4 ) . Importantly , h - catenin knockdown in shEcad cells significantly diminished expression of the mesenchymal proteins N - cadherin , vimentin , and fibronectin ( Fig . 4 B ) . In contrast , the down - regulation of epithelial cytokeratins in shEcad cells still occurred in the absence of h - catenin ( Fig . 4 B ) . We next assessed whether h - catenin affected cell biological phenotypes associated with metastasis . h - Catenin inhibition in shEcad cells decreased cancer cell invasiveness ( Fig . 4 C ) . In addition , knockdown of h - catenin sensitized shEcad cells to apoptosis specifically when the cells were placed in a suspension culture Figure 4 . h - Catenin is activated on E - cadherin loss and is necessary for E - cadherin – induced EMT . A , immunofluorescence staining for h - catenin ( green ) in shCntrl and shEcad cells showing differential localization . Right , nuclear 4 ¶ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ; blue ) staining of the same cells . White arrows , nuclear h - catenin staining observed in the shEcad cells . Immunoblots showing phospho - h - catenin , total h - catenin , phospho - GSK3 h , and total GSK levels in either untreated shCntrl and shEcad cells or in the same set of cells treated with DMSO or GSK inhibitor BIO ( 1 A mol / L ) for 6 h . B , expression levels of E - cadherin , h - catenin , E - cadherin , N - cadherin , and vimentin in HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and double knockdown cells ( shEcad + sh h cat ) cells examined by immunoblotting . h - Actin is used as a loading control . C , left , HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and shEcad + sh h cat cells were induced to invade through Matrigel - coated transwell membranes . After 16 h , the invaded cells were fixed , stained , photographed , and counted . Columns , mean of triplicate assays , shown relative to shCntrl cell invasion ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 01 , compared with shEcad . Right , the percentage of apoptotic HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and shEcad + sh h cat cells in suspension was determined by binding of FITC - conjugated Annexin V . The FACS analyses were done 24 h after suspension culture . Columns , mean number of Annexin V – positive cells expressed as a percentage of total cells ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 01 , compared with shEcad . D , representative fluorescence images of mouse lung lobes 8 wk after tail - vein injection of shEcad or shEcad + sh h cat cells . GFP signal denotes the presence of tumor cells ( left ) . Quantification of total lung metastasis burden in the same sets of mice . Right , columns , mean of seven mice analyzed ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 001 . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 3650 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from ( Fig . 4 C ) . To assess the contribution , if any , of h - catenin to the metastatic behavior of shEcad cells , we introduced control shEcad and double knockdown ( shEcad + sh h cat ) cells via the tail vein directly into the circulation . We observed that HMLER + shEcad + sh h cat cells were significantly impaired in their ability to form lung metastases compared with HMLER + shEcad cells ( Fig . 4 D ) . Because h - catenin was necessary for various aspects of the EMT occurring following E - cadherin loss , we examined whether h - catenin activation would , on its own , suffice to induce EMT . Overexpression of a constitutively active h - catenin protein did not induce the expression of any mesenchymal markers examined ( Supplementary Fig . S5 ) . Taken together , these data indicate that whereas h - catenin was required for changes in the expression of certain biochemical markers associated with the EMTas well as for acquisition of traits facilitating metastasis , it does not suffice on its own to induce these phenotypes . Gene expression profiling identifies global changes resulting from E - cadherin loss . To obtain an unbiased view of the molecular changes resulting from the liberation of intracellular adherens junction proteins from the cytoplasmic domain of E - cadherin , we compared the gene expression profiles of shEcad , DN - Ecad , and control cells . To avoid the influence of specific oncogenic lesions , we used the immortalized , nontransformed mammary epithelial ( HMLE ) cells for this analysis . Furthermore , we reasoned that a comparison between shEcad - and DN - Ecad – expressing cells would make it possible to identify those changes in gene expression that were not consequences of the loss of cell - cell adhesion . In addition , we incorporated into this analysis the expression profile of cells in which both E - cadherin and h - catenin were inhibited ; this would allow us to evaluate the contribution of h - catenin to the gene expression changes observed following inhibition of E - cadherin . The global expression profiles revealed that shEcad cells exhibited significantly greater overall differential gene expression relative to control cells than did DN - Ecad cells ( Fig . 5 A and B ; see Supplementary Tables S1 and S2 for complete lists ) . Nonetheless , there was an overlap between the genes that were differentially expressed in both shEcad and DN - Ecad cells relative to control cells ( 18 induced and 59 repressed ; Supplementary Table S3 ) . This indicated that the loss of cell - cell contacts , on its own , suffices to alter expression of this subset of cellular genes . Among the genes significantly induced in shEcad cells relative to controls were a number of mesenchymal markers known to be associated with passage through an EMT , including N - cadherin , vimentin , fibronectin , and seven distinct collagens . In addition to these induced mesenchymal markers , 11 distinct cytokeratin genes were down - regulated in shEcad cells ( Supplementary Table S1 ) relative to controls . Whereas none of the above - mentioned mesenchymal genes was induced in cells expressing DN - Ecad , we did observe down - regulation of 4 of the 11 cytokeratin genes in DN - Ecad – expressing cells . We further analyzed these changes by testing for their association with the biological processes arrayed in the Gene Ontology ( GO ) database ( 40 ) . Genes most significantly down - regulated in shEcad and DN - Ecad cells were , in both cases , strongly associated with cell differentiation ( Fig . 5 C ) . Whereas the genes induced in shEcad cells were strongly associated with matrix Figure 5 . Gene expression profiling identifies molecular changes induced on E - cadherin loss . A , hierarchical clustering of shEcad , DN - Ecad , shEcad + shBcat , and shCntrl cells . Distances between samples were computed using the Euclidean metric applied to a 225 - probe subset corresponding to genes highly induced or repressed on EMT ( 71 genes induced , 84 genes repressed ) . B , differentially expressed genes in shEcad and DN - Ecad cells relative to control shGFP cells . The numbers of genes either induced or repressed that surpass the indicated threshold of differential expression ( 1 . 5 (cid:1) , 2 (cid:1) , 2 . 5 (cid:1) , 3 (cid:1) log 2 fold - change ) are depicted . C , GO analysis of differentially induced or repressed genes in shEcad and DN - Ecad cells with respect to enrichment of genes with assignments to specific biological processes . Fold enrichment and the number of genes in a particular biological process are shown . No significant enrichment of genes for any biological process was observed in DN - Ecad – induced genes ( * ) . D , induction of multiple transcription factors in shEcad cells . Each dot represents the value for an individual replicate expression value ( colors correspond to samples ) for the gene listed on the x - axis . The dotted line indicates the 1 . 5 log 2 fold - change threshold . Metastasis Promotion by E - Cadherin Loss www . aacrjournals . org 3651 Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from adhesion and skeletal development , the genes induced in DN - Ecad cells were not significantly associated with any specific biological processes listed in the GO database ( Fig . 5 C ) . This indicated that down - regulation of certain epithelial genes results directly from the dissolution of cell - cell contacts , and that the induction of mesenchymal characteristics required , in addition , the loss of the cytoplasmic domain of E - cadherin . To directly assess the extent to which of these various cell lines had entered into a mesenchymal state , we performed hierarchical clustering on the expression data using a global metric computed on the basis of a 225 - gene set capable of discriminating between mammary epithelial cells that have or have not been induced to undergo EMT by a variety of means , including the expression of the Snail and Twist transcription factors . 10 This analysis revealed that the expression profiles of the control and DN - Ecad cell lines were essentially indistinguishable with respect to these EMT - associated genes and were both indicative of cells that have not undergone an EMT ( Fig . 5 A ) . In contrast , the expression profile of shEcad cells indicated that they had , in fact , passed through an EMT ( Fig . 5 A ) . These findings reinforced our earlier conclusion that shEcad cells , but not DN - Ecad cells , have indeed adopted a mesenchymal cell state . Expression of multiple transcription factors is induced on E - cadherin loss but not cell - cell disaggregation . To evaluate the contribution of h - catenin to the gene expression changes observed on E - cadherin loss , we compared the expression profile of the doubly altered cells ( HMLE shEcad + sh h cat ) with the profile of shEcad cells . We observed that f 14 % of the genes ( 84 of 617 genes ; Supplementary Table S4 ) that were differentially expressed in shEcad cells relative to control cells were dependent on h - catenin for their regulation . The h - catenin dependence of a number of representative genes induced or repressed by E - cadherin loss is depicted in Supplementary Fig . S6 . Because 84 % of the gene expression changes that occurred on E - cadherin loss were not dependent on h - catenin function , it was likely that other transcriptional regulators were mediating the transcriptional changes following E - cadherin loss . In fact , there were 19 transcription factors that were up - regulated > 3 - fold in shEcad cells relative to control cells ( Fig . 5 D ) . Of these factors , only two were up - regulated in DN - Ecad cells , indicating that induction of the remaining 17 required the loss of the cytoplasmic tail of E - cadherin . In light of the observation that h - catenin is incapable on its own of inducing EMT , these findings further implicated one or more of these 19 factors as potential contributors to the EMT observed following E - cadherin loss . Up - regulation of Twist on loss of E - cadherin and its functional role . The presence of the transcription factors twist and TCF8 ( ZEB - 1 ) among the set of genes highly up - regulated on E - cadherin loss was surprising ( Fig . 5 D ) . Twist had previously been shown to be essential for the metastasis of mouse mammary tumor cells and to be expressed in a high proportion of human lobular breast cancers in correlation with E - cadherin down - regulation ( 22 ) . Twist is functionally related to a set of transcription factors , including Snail , Slug , SIP1 , and ZEB - 1 , which are known to repress E - cadherin expression and are sufficient in various cellular contexts to induce EMTs . Based on extensive previous work , these factors are thought to act upstream of E - cadherin , and several are known to directly repress transcription of the CDH1 gene itself ( 20 , 41 – 44 ) . The identification of Twist and ZEB - 1 in our gene expression data suggested the opposite possibility—that the expression of EMT - inducing transcription factors may , under certain circum - stances , be controlled by the levels of E - cadherin . We pursued this hypothesis by examining the functional consequences of Twist induction following E - cadherin loss . Analyses of twist mRNA levels by real - time RT - PCR validated the expression array data , indicating that twist was specifically up - regulated in HMLER - shEcad but not in control or DN - Ecad cells ( Fig . 6 A ) . To determine whether Twist expression played a functionally important role in the EMT induced upon E - cadherin loss , we superinfected shEcad cells with a lentiviral shRNA vector targeting Twist . Introduction of this shRNA vector resulted in an f 5 - fold decrease in Twist levels , reducing it below the basal levels present in the parental HMLER line ( Fig . 6 B ) . Whereas Twist inhibition led to a f 50 % reduction of N - cadherin levels , the expression of vimentin remained largely unaffected ( Fig . 6 B ) . To further evaluate the functional consequences of Twist up - regulation to metastasis - associated traits , we characterized the contribution of Twist to the induction of invasion and anoikis resistance following E - cadherin loss . Twist inhibition resulted in a significant reduction in the invasive behavior of shEcad cells ( Fig . 6 C ) . In addition , sensitivity to induction of anoikis was partially restored upon Twist inhibition ( Fig . 6 C ) . These findings indicated that Twist is an important mediator of signaling in response to E - cadherin loss and operates upstream of certain cellular functions that contribute to metastatic competence . The observed effects on motility , invasiveness , and anoikis resistance following Twist knockdown were similar to those observed on h - catenin knockdown . Because the induction of Twist was not h - catenin dependent , we concluded that these two factors may be acting in parallel to program the cellular changes observed following E - cadherin loss . To determine if Twist was also mediating the acquisition of metastatic powers following E - cadherin down - regulation , we evaluated the metastatic ability of Twist - inhibited cells using the experimental metastasis assay . Whereas control shEcad cells were able to efficiently colonize the lung , as before , cells doubly inhibited for E - cadherin and Twist exhibited a marked decrease in the ability to do so ( Fig . 6 D ) . Collectively , these results indicate that Twist is a crucial downstream effector of cellular functions in response to E - cadherin loss and is necessary for the metastasis of E - cadherin – deficient cells . Discussion In this study , we show that the loss of E - cadherin has wide - ranging transcriptional and functional consequences for human breast epithelial cells . In fact , E - cadherin loss is sufficient to confer metastatic ability on breast cancer cells that are otherwise essentially nonmetastatic . Moreover , by using a dominant - negative E - cadherin mutant , we show that the acquisition of metastatic ability by cancer cells following E - cadherin loss is not attributable solely to the disruption of intercellular adhesion contacts . Instead , it is the additional loss of E - cadherin protein that provokes an EMT , attended by increased cellular motility , invasiveness , and resistance to apoptosis . The mechanisms by which E - cadherin is inactivated in human tumors can be placed into two general categories : ( a ) those that 10 Manuscript in preparation . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 3652 www . aacrjournals . org Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from result in the production of a nonfunctional protein and ( b ) those that lead to the complete absence of E - cadherin . The present results suggest that point mutations in the extracellular domain that preserve the cytoplasmic tail of E - cadherin ( 18 ) are not likely to result in an EMT or to afford functional traits that allow completion of the later steps of metastasis . In contrast , complete elimination of E - cadherin expression ( occurring in human tumors via truncation mutation or locus repression / loss ) results in the activation of the malignancy - associated traits listed above . Stated differently , loss of E - cadherin , in combination with certain additional oncogenic lesions , results in the acquisition of multiple functional traits that contribute to the completion of several rate - limiting steps in the invasion - metastasis cascade . A recent study has shown that combined loss of p53 and E - cadherin in the mouse mammary gland results in metastatic tumors that , in contrast to our findings , do not exhibit a ‘‘classic’’ EMT phenotype ( 5 ) . However , in concordance with our results , cells from such tumors were highly resistant to anoikis . This suggests that differences between the mouse and human mammary glands , the cell types targeted , and the ( epi ) genetic constitutions of such cells may play an important role in determining the phenotypic response to E - cadherin loss . In our human mammary epithelial cell system , the retention of the cytoplasmic tail of E - cadherin prevented EMT induction ; therefore , we initially focused our efforts on proteins known to bind this cytoplasmic domain , specifically h - catenin . In addition to the release of h - catenin from cell adherens junctions , loss of E - cadherin led to inactivation of GSK3 h through phosphorylation . In the future , it will be interesting to explore the signaling pathways that are induced by loss of E - cadherin to inactivate GSK3 h , thus further stabilizing the released h - catenin . Although we found h - catenin to be necessary for several aspects of E - cadherin loss – induced EMT , it was not sufficient to cause these phenotypes . Therefore , we concluded that additional signals beyond those conveyed by h - catenin must be important in transducing the downstream effects of E - cadherin loss . Others have reported that the adherens junction – associated proteins a - catenin and p120 catenin may also modulate intracellular signaling pathways ( 11 , 12 ) ; however , we have been unable to find evidence for the activation of signaling pathways by either of these two proteins following E - cadherin loss ( data not shown ) . We therefore undertook to identify the spectrum of transcrip - tional changes resulting from E - cadherin loss . Expression profiling revealed that 19 transcription factors were highly induced following E - cadherin loss , all of which did not ostensibly require h - catenin for their induction . Interestingly , Twist and ZEB - 1 , both previously known to cause E - cadherin repression , were among the transcrip - tion factors up - regulated following E - cadherin loss ( 22 , 44 ) . This means that in some cells , transient E - cadherin loss may result in the induction of its own repressors , yielding a feed - forward signaling loop whereby the EMT - induced mesenchymal state , once established , is stabilized and perhaps maintained . Thus , E - cadherin can act as a central modulator of the cell biological phenotypes and the molecular factors that govern metastatic dissemination of carcinomas . Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed . Acknowledgments Received 8 / 1 / 2007 ; revised 1 / 4 / 2008 ; accepted 3 / 17 / 2008 . Grant support : NIH grant R01 - CA078461 and the Breast Cancer Research Foundation . T . T . Onder is the recipient of a U . S . Army Predoctoral Breast Cancer Fellowship ( W81XWH - 05 - 1 - 0268 ) . R . A . Weinberg is an American Cancer Society Research Professor and a Daniel K . Ludwig Cancer Research Professor . Figure 6 . Twist is up - regulated on loss of E - cadherin and plays a functionally important role in E - cadherin loss – induced EMT and metastasis . A , the relative levels of twist mRNA measured by real - time RT - PCR in HMLER - shEcad and DN - Ecad cells compared with shCntrl cells . Columns , mean from triplicate PCRs ; bars , SE . B , expression levels of twist , vimentin , and N - cadherin in HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and double knockdown cells ( shEcad + shTwist ) . h - Actin is used as a loading control . C , right , HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and shEcad + shTwist cells were induced to invade through Matrigel - coated transwell membranes . After 16 h , the invaded cells were fixed , stained , photographed , and counted . Columns , mean of triplicate assays , shown relative to shCntrl cell invasion ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 01 , compared with shEcad . Left , the percentage of apoptotic HMLER - shCntrl , shEcad , and shEcad + shTwist cells in suspension were determined by binding of FITC - conjugated Annexin V . The FACS analyses were done 24 h after suspension culture . Columns , mean number of Annexin V – positive cells expressed as a percentage of total cells ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 01 , compared with shEcad . D , representative fluorescence images of mouse lung lobes 8 wk after tail - vein injection of shEcad or shEcad + shTwist cells . GFP signal denotes the presence of tumor cells ( left ) . Right , quantification of total lung metastasis burden in the same sets of mice . Columns , mean of five mice analyzed ; bars , SD . * , P < 0 . 01 . Metastasis Promotion by E - Cadherin Loss www . aacrjournals . org 3653 Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . We thank Priyamvada Rai , Tugba Bagci , Richard O . Hynes , David M . Sabatini , and members of R . A . Weinberg’s laboratory for helpful comments and discussions ; Drs . Gerhard Christofori and Kimberly Hartwell for reagents ; Ahmet Acar and Ferenc Reinhart for technical help ; Casey Gates and the gene expression platform at the Broad Institute for data collection and helpful advice ; and the Ludwig Center for Molecular Oncology at MIT and the W . M . Keck Foundation Biological imaging facility at the Whitehead Institute . Cancer Research Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : ( 10 ) . May 15 , 2008 3654 www . aacrjournals . org References 1 . Gupta GP , Massague J . Cancer metastasis : building a framework . Cell 2006 ; 127 : 679 – 95 . 2 . Oka H , Shiozaki H , Kobayashi K , et al . Expression of E - cadherin cell adhesion molecules in human breast cancer tissues and its relationship to metastasis . Cancer Res 1993 ; 53 : 1696 – 701 . 3 . Schipper JH , Frixen UH , Behrens J , Unger A , Jahnke K , Birchmeier W . E - Cadherin expression in squamous cell carcinomas of head and neck : inverse correlation with tumor dedifferentiation and lymph node metastasis . Cancer Res 1991 ; 51 : 6328 – 37 . 4 . Umbas R , Isaacs WB , Bringuier PP , et al . Decreased E - cadherin expression is associated with poor prog - nosis in patients with prostate cancer . Cancer Res 1994 ; 54 : 3929 – 33 . 5 . Derksen PW , Liu X , Saridin F , et al . Somatic inactivation of E - cadherin and p53 in mice leads to metastatic lobular mammary carcinoma through induc - tion of anoikis resistance and angiogenesis . Cancer Cell 2006 ; 10 : 437 – 49 . 6 . Perl AK , Wilgenbus P , Dahl U , Semb H , Christofori G . A causal role for E - cadherin in the transition from adenoma to carcinoma . Nature 1998 ; 392 : 190 – 3 . 7 . Frixen UH , Behrens J , Sachs M , et al . E - Cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion prevents invasiveness of human carcinoma cells . J Cell Biol 1991 ; 113 : 173 – 85 . 8 . Vleminckx K , Vakaet L , Jr . , Mareel M , Fiers W , van Roy F . Genetic manipulation of E - cadherin expression by epithelial tumor cells reveals an invasion suppressor role . Cell 1991 ; 66 : 107 – 19 . 9 . Nagafuchi A , Shirayoshi Y , Okazaki K , Yasuda K , Takeichi M . Transformation of cell adhesion properties by exogenously introduced E - cadherin cDNA . Nature 1987 ; 329 : 341 – 3 . 10 . Gumbiner BM . Regulation of cadherin - mediated adhesion in morphogenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 6 : 622 – 34 . 11 . Wildenberg GA , Dohn MR , Carnahan RH , et al . p120 - catenin and p190RhoGAP regulate cell - cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism between Rac and Rho . Cell 2006 ; 127 : 1027 – 39 . 12 . Vasioukhin V , Bauer C , Degenstein L , Wise B , Fuchs E . Hyperproliferation and defects in epithelial polarity on conditional ablation of a - catenin in skin . Cell 2001 ; 104 : 605 – 17 . 13 . Nelson WJ , Nusse R . Convergence of Wnt , h - catenin , and cadherin pathways . Science 2004 ; 303 : 1483 – 7 . 14 . Perez - Moreno M , Fuchs E . Catenins : keeping cells from getting their signals crossed . Dev Cell 2006 ; 11 : 601 – 12 . 15 . Hirohashi S . Inactivation of the E - cadherin - mediated cell adhesion system in human cancers . Am J Pathol 1998 ; 153 : 333 – 9 . 16 . Strathdee G . Epigenetic versus genetic alterations in the inactivation of E - cadherin . Semin Cancer Biol 2002 ; 12 : 373 – 9 . 17 . Maretzky T , Reiss K , Ludwig A , et al . ADAM10 mediates E - cadherin shedding and regulates epithelial cell - cell adhesion , migration , and h - catenin transloca - tion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 ; 102 : 9182 – 7 . 18 . Berx G , Becker KF , Hofler H , van Roy F . Mutations of the human E - cadherin ( CDH1 ) gene . Hum Mutat 1998 ; 12 : 226 – 37 . 19 . Yoshiura K , Kanai Y , Ochiai A , Shimoyama Y , Sugimura T , Hirohashi S . Silencing of the E - cadherin invasion - suppressor gene by CpG methylation in human carcinomas . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995 ; 92 : 7416 – 9 . 20 . Bolos V , Peinado H , Perez - Moreno MA , Fraga MF , Esteller M , Cano A . The transcription factor Slug represses E - cadherin expression and induces epithelial to mesenchymal transitions : a comparison with Snail and E47 repressors . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 499 – 511 . 21 . Batlle E , Sancho E , Franci C , et al . The transcription factor snail is a repressor of E - cadherin gene expression in epithelial tumour cells . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 84 – 9 . 22 . Yang J , Mani SA , Donaher JL , et al . Twist , a master regulator of morphogenesis , plays an essential role in tumor metastasis . Cell 2004 ; 117 : 927 – 39 . 23 . Thiery JP , Sleeman JP . Complex networks orchestrate epithelial - mesenchymal transitions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 ; 7 : 131 – 42 . 24 . Huber MA , Kraut N , Beug H . Molecular requirements for epithelial - mesenchymal transition during tumor progression . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2005 ; 17 : 548 – 58 . 25 . Elenbaas B , Spirio L , Koerner F , et al . Human breast cancer cells generated by oncogenic transformation of primary mammary epithelial cells . Genes Dev 2001 ; 15 : 50 – 65 . 26 . Stewart SA , Dykxhoorn DM , Palliser D , et al . Lentivirus - delivered stable gene silencing by RNAi in primary cells . RNA 2003 ; 9 : 493 – 501 . 27 . Hartwell KA , Muir B , Reinhardt F , Carpenter AE , Sgroi DC , Weinberg RA . The Spemann organizer gene , Goosecoid , promotes tumor metastasis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 ; 103 : 18969 – 74 . 28 . Rasband WS . ImageJ . Bethesda ( MD ) : U . S . National Institutes of Health ; 1997 – 2006 . 29 . Team RDC . R : a language and environment for statistical computing . Vienna ( Austria ) : R Foundation for Statistical Computing ; 2007 . 30 . Dahl U , Sjodin A , Semb H . Cadherins regulate aggregation of pancreatic h - cells in vivo . Development 1996 ; 122 : 2895 – 902 . 31 . Martin SS , Ridgeway AG , Pinkas J , et al . A cytoskeleton - based functional genetic screen identifies Bcl - xL as an enhancer of metastasis , but not primary tumor growth . Oncogene 2004 ; 23 : 4641 – 5 . 32 . Douma S , Van Laar T , Zevenhoven J , Meuwissen R , Van Garderen E , Peeper DS . Suppression of anoikis and induction of metastasis by the neurotrophic receptor TrkB . Nature 2004 ; 430 : 1034 – 9 . 33 . Kim K , Lu Z , Hay ED . Direct evidence for a role of h - catenin / LEF - 1 signaling pathway in induction of EMT . Cell Biol Int 2002 ; 26 : 463 – 76 . 34 . Yang L , Lin C , Liu ZR . P68 RNA helicase mediates PDGF - induced epithelial mesenchymal transition by displacing Axin from h - catenin . Cell 2006 ; 127 : 139 – 55 . 35 . Eger A , Stockinger A , Park J , et al . h - Catenin and TGF h signalling cooperate to maintain a mesenchymal phenotype after FosER - induced epithelial to mesenchy - mal transition . Oncogene 2004 ; 23 : 2672 – 80 . 36 . Morali OG , Delmas V , Moore R , Jeanney C , Thiery JP , Larue L . IGF - II induces rapid h - catenin relocation to the nucleus during epithelium to mesenchyme transition . Oncogene 2001 ; 20 : 4942 – 50 . 37 . Liebner S , Cattelino A , Gallini R , et al . h - Catenin is required for endothelial - mesenchymal transformation during heart cushion development in the mouse . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 166 : 359 – 67 . 38 . Conacci - Sorrell M , Simcha I , Ben - Yedidia T , Blechman J , Savagner P , Ben - Ze’ev A . Autoregulation of E - cadherin expression by cadherin - cadherin interactions : the roles of h - catenin signaling , Slug , and MAPK . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 163 : 847 – 57 . 39 . Cross DA , Alessi DR , Cohen P , Andjelkovich M , Hemmings BA . Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase - 3 by insulin mediated by protein kinase B . Nature 1995 ; 378 : 785 – 9 . 40 . Dennis G , Jr . , Sherman BT , Hosack DA , et al . DAVID : database for annotation , visualization , and integrated discovery . Genome Biol 2003 ; 4 : P3 . 41 . Grooteclaes ML , Frisch SM . Evidence for a function of CtBP in epithelial gene regulation and anoikis . Oncogene 2000 ; 19 : 3823 – 8 . 42 . Cano A , Perez - Moreno MA , Rodrigo I , et al . The trans - cription factor snail controls epithelial - mesenchymal transitions by repressing E - cadherin expression . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 76 – 83 . 43 . Comijn J , Berx G , Vermassen P , et al . The two - handed E box binding zinc finger protein SIP1 down - regulates E - cadherin and induces invasion . Mol Cell 2001 ; 7 : 1267 – 78 . 44 . Eger A , Aigner K , Sonderegger S , et al . D EF1 is a transcriptional repressor of E - cadherin and regulates epithelial plasticity in breast cancer cells . Oncogene 2005 ; 24 : 2375 – 85 . Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from 2008 ; 68 : 3645 - 3654 . Cancer Res Tamer T . Onder , Piyush B . Gupta , Sendurai A . Mani , et al . Downstream Transcriptional Pathways Loss of E - Cadherin Promotes Metastasis via Multiple Updated version http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 68 / 10 / 3645 Access the most recent version of this article at : Material Supplementary http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / suppl / 2008 / 05 / 12 / 68 . 10 . 3645 . DC1 Access the most recent supplemental material at : Cited articles http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 68 / 10 / 3645 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 42 articles , 14 of which you can access for free at : Citing articles / content / 68 / 10 / 3645 . full . html # related - urls This article has been cited by 100 HighWire - hosted articles . Access the articles at : E - mail alerts related to this article or journal . Sign up to receive free email - alerts SubscriptionsReprints and . pubs @ aacr . org Department at To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal , contact the AACR Publications Permissions . permissions @ aacr . org Department at To request permission to re - use all or part of this article , contact the AACR Publications Research . on April 13 , 2017 . © 2008 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from