© 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 2 | APRIL 2000 | www . nature . com / ncb 191 Dynamics and segregation of cell – matrix adhesions in cultured fibroblasts Eli Zamir * , Menachem Katz * , Yehudit Posen * , Noam Erez * , Kenneth M . Yamada† , Ben - Zion Katz‡ , Shin Lin § , Diane C . Lin § , Alexander Bershadsky * , Zvi Kam * and Benjamin Geiger * ¶ * Department of Molecular Cell Biology , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel †Craniofacial Development Biology and Regeneration Branch , NIDCR , NIH , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 - 4370 , USA ‡The Hematology Institute , Tel - Aviv Medical Center , Tel - Aviv 64239 , Israel § Department of Developmental and Cell Biology , University of California at Irvine , Irvine , California 92697 - 7450 , USA ¶e - mail : Benny . Geiger @ weizmann . ac . il Here we use time - lapse microscopy to analyse cell – matrix adhesions in cells expressing one of two different cytoskeletal proteins , paxillin or tensin , tagged with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) . Use of GFP – paxillin to analyse focal contacts and GFP – tensin to study fibrillar adhesions reveals that both types of major adhesion are highly dynamic . Small focal contacts often translocate , by extending centripetally and contracting peripherally , at a mean rate of 19 micrometres per hour . Fibrillar adhesions arise from the medial ends of stationary focal contacts , contain aaaa 5 bbbb 1 integrin and tensin but not other focal - contact components , and associate with fibronectin fibrils . Fibrillar adhesions translocate centripetally at a mean rate of 18 micrometres per hour in an actomyosin - dependent manner . We propose a dynamic model for the regulation of cell – matrix adhesions and for transitions between focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions , with the ability of the matrix to deform functioning as a mechanical switch . ell adhesion plays a critical part in embryonic development and in regulating tissue architecture , tissue function , and sig - nalling across cell membranes 1 – 5 . Adhesion complexes show extraordinary structural and molecular diversity 3 , 6 , 7 . For example , sites of cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) can be medi - ated by a variety of matrix molecules and integrin proteins 8 , 9 . Integrins act as transmembrane linkers between ECM molecules and cytoplasmic proteins that anchor the actin cytoskeleton to the membrane . We have shown previously that ECM adhesions formed by cul - tured fibroblasts can be classified by molecular and structural crite - ria into two major types , characterized by distinct complements of integrins and cytoskeletal anchor molecules 10 , 11 . Classical ‘focal con - tacts’ are located mainly at the cell periphery and contain relatively high levels of vinculin , paxillin and proteins with phosphorylated tyrosine residues , as well as integrin a v b 3 . In contrast , ‘fibrillar adhesions’ are characteristically elongated or beaded structures , are located more centrally in cells , are enriched in tensin and a 5 b 1 integrin , and are associated with fibronectin fibrils 10 , 11 . The forma - tion of fibrillar adhesions is affected by the rigidity or deformability of the ECM . Thus , covalent immobilization of substrate - associated fibronectin ( an ECM component ) blocks the formation of fibrillar adhesions and instead induces formation of large focal contacts containing both a 5 b 1 and a v b 3 integrin , as well as relatively high lev - els of tensin , vinculin , paxillin and phosphotyrosine residues 11 . We propose that the formation of fibrillar adhesions depends on ECM reorganization and a corresponding segregation of associated cellu - lar components from focal contacts . Here we searched for dynamic processes that might be responsi - ble for molecular diversification of cell – matrix adhesions . We used quantitative immunofluorescence and time - lapse fluorescence microscopy to follow the reorganization of tensin and paxillin in cells transfected with GFP chimaeras of these proteins . We describe extensive modulations of focal - contact structure and localization , and show directly that fibrillar adhesions are assembled at the medial margins of classical focal contacts and transported in an actomyosin - dependent manner towards the cell centre . These unexpectedly dynamic changes in the morphology , molecular com - ponents and locations of cell – matrix adhesions contrast with the idea of classical focal contacts as stable cell attachments , and pro - vide multiple mechanisms for cell interactions with the ECM . Results The molecular composition of early cell – matrix adhesions . To study the dynamic segregation of components of matrix adhe - sions , we followed the changing molecular composition of adhe - C Figure 1 Relative distributions of aaaa 5 and aaaa v integrins in HFFs at different times after plating on fibronectin - coated coverslips . HFFs were fixed and double - labelled for a 5 and a v integrins . The columns , from left to right , show a 5 labelling with Cy3 ( in red ) , a v labelling with FITC ( in green ) , and the quantitative , comparative , FRIC images ( a 5 / a v ) , at the indicated time points . At early time points note the co - localization of a v and a 5 integrins but the quantitative predominance ( lower a 5 / a v ratio ) of a v , compared with the clear segregation of a v and a 5 integrins in focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions after 16 h of incubation . The spectrum scale indicates the value of the ratio , as described in Methods . a 5 a 5 a v a v / 10 min 30 min 60 min 16 h 20 m m Cy3 / FITC 0 . 1 ‡ 1 ‡ 10 © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles 192 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 2 | APRIL 2000 | www . nature . com / ncb sion sites after plating human foreskin fibroblasts ( HFFs ) on fibronectin . Matrix adhesions immunolabelled for both a 5 and a v integrins formed rapidly after plating on fibronectin and increased in number and size ( Fig . 1 ) . For the first hour after plating , the two integrins remained largely co - localized , although the relative labelling intensities for a 5 and a v , reflected by the fluorescence ratio imaging between two different compo - nents ( FRIC ) values , changed as a function of time after plating . Thus , the relative levels of integrin a v in adhesion sites ( com - pared with levels of a 5 ) increased between 10 and 30 min ; by 60 min , the distributions of integrins a 5 and a v had partially segre - gated and segregation was complete after several hours . By 16 h , these integrins had segregated into classical focal contacts , which were enriched in a v integrin , and fibrillar adhesions , containing a 5 integrin ( for example , compare the a 5 / a v FRIC values in Fig . 1 ) . Various other components of ECM adhesions segregated over time into two distinct structures ( Fig . 2 ; see also refs 10 , 11 ) . Focal contacts contained relatively high levels of a v integrin , vin - culin , paxillin and phosphotyrosine , and relatively low levels of tensin , whereas fibrillar adhesions were enriched in a 5 integrin , fibronectin and tensin . In addition , ‘mosaic adhesions’ with sub - domains exhibiting the molecular properties of both adhesions were apparent . These sites were polar , being enriched with fibril - lar - adhesion components at their medial aspects and focal - con - tact components in their peripheral regions . Dynamic reorganization of paxillin - containing focal contacts . To study the dynamic properties of focal contacts , we transfected HFFs with complementary DNAs encoding GFP – paxillin , and examined the organization of focal contacts by time - lapse fluores - cence microscopy . We chose paxillin because it is particularly enriched in classical focal contacts , and is almost undetectable by immunofluorescence microscopy in fibrillar adhesions . Indeed , when expressed in HFFs , the GFP – paxillin fusion protein was associated only with focal contacts ( Fig . 3 ) . We used only trace levels of GFP – paxillin relative to levels of the endogenous protein , and the intensities and patterns of paxillin immunolabelling in transfected cells were indistinguishable from those of untrans - fected neighbouring cells . Analysis of time - lapse movies of GFP – paxillin ( see Supplementary Information , movie 1 ) and temporal fluorescence ratio imaging ( FRIT ) analysis ( Fig . 3 ) revealed sev - eral specific types of change . First , the assembly and growth of focal contacts involves the formation of new adhesions , generally at the cell periphery ( red patches produced by FRIT indicate de novo adhesions ; Fig . 3A , B , a ) . The growth of focal contacts is characterized either by their polar extension , always towards the cell centre ( Fig . 3A , B , c ) , or by a uniform increase in total focal - contact area . Second , focal contacts , particularly small contacts ( with areas of < 3 m m 2 ) and peripheral focal contacts , translocate frequently in HFFs . Translocation is highly directional , proceed - ing centripetally from the cell periphery towards the centre , and is always aligned along the long axis of the focal contacts ( Fig . 3A , B , d ) . This translocation occurs at 19 – 11 m m h – 1 and is not a smooth , continuous process , but rather consists of a phase of centripetal extension followed by apparent ‘contraction’ of the trailing end of the focal contacts , reminiscent of inchworm movement ( Fig . 3 ) . This result is in agreement with previous observations 12 – 15 . Third , the fading of focal contacts , that is , a uniform decrease in GFP – paxillin intensity ( Fig . 3A , B , b ; blue ) , is a common process , con - Figure 2 Distributions of different components of focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions . HFFs were fixed 16 h after plating , double - labelled for different pairs of plaque components using Cy3 - and FITC - coupled antibodies , and subjected to FRIC analysis . The component names are coloured red if the antibody used to detect them was tagged with Cy3 , and green if the antibody used for detection was tagged with FITC . Notice the segregation of focal - contact components ( a v integrin , paxillin , vinculin and phosphotyrosine ) and fibrillar - adhesion components ( a 5 integrin , tensin and fibronectin ) into the respective adhesions , or into distinct zones in ‘mosaic adhesions’ . FN , fibronectin ; Pax , paxillin ; PY , phosphotyrosine ; Ten , tensin ; Vin , vinculin . Cy3 PY T e n P a x PY V i n F N Cy3 / FITC FITC Cy3 Cy3 / FITC FITC a 5 a 5 a 5 a v a 5 F N T en a 5 a 5 10 m m Cy3 / FITC 0 . 1 ‡ 1 ‡ 10 PY © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 2 | APRIL 2000 | www . nature . com / ncb 193 sistent with the results of interference - reflection - microscopy studies 16 , 17 . The generation and translocation of fibrillar adhesions . To com - pare the dynamic properties of fibrillar adhesions and focal con - tacts , we transfected HFFs with cDNA encoding a GFP – tensin fusion protein . In agreement with the results of immunolocaliza - tion studies ( Fig . 2 ; see also refs 10 , 11 ) , GFP - tagged tensin was mainly associated with fibrillar adhesions ; weak labelling of classical focal contacts was also seen ( Fig . 4 ) . Time - lapse microscopy of GFP – tensin revealed short , tensin - containing fibrils emerging from the medial ends of classical focal contacts and then translocating towards the cell centre ( see Supple - mentary Information , movie 2 ) . The short tensin - rich structures often merged with each other to form characteristic elongated fibrillar adhesions . These newly formed structures contained little or no paxillin , vinculin , focal - adhesion kinase ( FAK ) ( ref . 10 and data not shown ) or phosphotyrosine ( Figs 4 , Fig . 5b ) and were ini - tially often not associated with interference - reflection - dark struc - tures ( Fig . 5c ) . FRIT images ( Fig . 4 ) of GFP – tensin revealed two general pat - terns of reorganization . In one pattern , tensin - containing focal contacts moved slowly , primarily along cell margins ( yellow struc - tures in FRIT analysis , Fig . 4 ) . In the second pattern , highly dynamic tensin - rich fibrillar adhesions were seen in more central locations ( Fig . 4 ) ; note the predominance of red structures ( which represent the presence of GFP – tensin in new locations ) and blue colouring ( which represents GFP – tensin - labelled structures that Figure 3 Temporal changes in the pattern of GFP – paxillin labelling in transfected HFFs , as determined by FRIT . A , Cells were analysed by time - lapse recording at 1 - min intervals , starting 24 h after transfection with GFP – paxillin . The dynamic behaviour of GFP – paxillin is shown here by the FRIT patterns obtained from images taken at 5 - min intervals ( see Supplementary Information , movie 1 ) . For example , the top left panel compares the image taken at 5 min with that taken at time 0 . B , To exemplify different specific types of dynamic behaviour , four regions of the FRIT images ( marked a – d ) were magnified threefold from the earlier and later time windows shown in A . The magnified images are shown in B ( upper row , earlier time points ; lower row , later time points ) . The locations of the sampled regions in A are indicated by the brackets labelled a – d for the earlier time points and a ¢ – d ¢ for the later timepoints . The arrows point toward the cell centre . A B a a b c d c b d a ' c ' b ' d ' 20 m m 0 . 1 ‡ 1 ‡ 10 5 ' / 0 10 ' / 5 ' 15 ' / 10 ' 20 ' / 15 ' 35 ' / 30 ' 25 ' / 20 ' 30 ' / 25 ' GFP / GFP t + D t t Figure 4 Temporal ( FRIT ) analysis of GFP – tensin - transfected HFFs and FRIC analysis of phosphotyrosine residues and tensin . Cells were analysed by time - lapse fluorescence recording starting 24 h after transfection with GFP – tensin . The dynamic behaviour of GFP – tensin is demonstrated by FRIT analysis of pairs of images taken at 10 - min intervals . ( See Supplementary Information , movie 2 . ) At the end of the live recording ( 50 min ) , the cells were fixed and immunolabelled for phosphotyrosine ( PY ) . The FRIC image in the lower right panel shows the variability in the phosphotyrosine / tensin ratio between and within adhesion sites . Ten , tensin . FRIT ( 10 ' / 0 ) FRIT ( 20 ' / 10 ' ) FRIT ( 30 ' / 20 ' ) FRIT ( 40 ' / 30 ' ) FRIT ( 50 ' / 40 ' ) FRIC ( PY / Ten ) 50 ' 10 m m Cy3 / GFP 0 . 1 ‡ 1 ‡ 10 0 . 1 ‡ 1 ‡ 10 GFP / GFP t + D t t Figure 5 High - magnification demonstration of the dynamics of tensin - containing structures and their phosphotyrosine content . To highlight the dynamics of fibrillar adhesions , red arrows are located at fixed points ( usually pointing to focal contacts ) and blue arrows follow the movement of the fibrillar adhesions . a , A small region of the cell shown in Fig . 4 was magnified , and the localization of GFP – tensin at 10 - min intervals is shown . b , The localization of GFP – tensin ( Ten ; in green ) and immunolabelled - phosphotyrosine ( PY ; in red ) in the same cell , fixed at 50 min . The blue arrows at 50 min in a and in the PY and Ten + PY images in b indicate the absence of phosphotyrosine from tensin - containing structures that emerged from focal contacts . c , Further examples , from other cells , of the emergence of tensin fibrils from focal contacts . In the bottom row , pairs of GFP – tensin ( left - hand panel of each set of two panels ) and interference - reflection - microscopy ( right - hand panel of each set of two ) images indicate that tensin fibrils emerging from focal contacts are often not associated with interference - reflection - dark structures . a c b 5 m m 0 Ten PY Ten + PY 10 ' 20 ' 0 10 ' 22 ' 0 10 ' 18 ' 0 4 ' 10 ' 30 ' 40 ' 50 ' © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles 194 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 2 | APRIL 2000 | www . nature . com / ncb had disappeared ) in this region . As shown in Fig . 5a , GFP – tensin fibrils also translocated laterally ( small red arrows at time points 0 , 10 min and 20 min , or at time points 40 min and 50 min ) . Staining of GFP – tensin - transfected cells for phosphotyrosine revealed nearly mutually exclusive tensin and phosphotyrosine patterns ( Fig . 4 , bottom right ; Fig . 5b ) . More examples of tensin fibrils emerging from focal contacts are shown in Fig . 5c and in Supplementary Information , movies 3 and 4 ( before drug addition ; see below ) . The actin cytoskeleton and fibrillar adhesion dynamics . To test the hypothesis that the formation and movement of fibrillar adhe - sions are actomyosin - driven processes , we perturbed the actin cytoskeleton using a variety of drugs . Latrunculin - A ( 2 m M ) , which destroys actin microfilaments by sequestering actin monomers , caused a rapid arrest in the formation and translocation of fibrillar adhesions . The results of the FRIT analysis shown in Fig . 6a reveal the immobilization of GFP – tensin after treatment with latrunculin - A , as demonstrated by the predominance of temporally overlapping structures ( coloured yellow in the FRIT image ; see also Supplemen - tary Information , movie 3 ) . Moreover , inhibition of serine and threonine phosphorylation by 150 m M H - 7 ( Fig . 6b ) or 100 m M ML - 7 ( Fig . 6c ) ( both block activity of the myosin - light - chain kinase ) resulted in destruction of actin bundles and focal contacts . This treatment also rapidly inhibited the translocation of tensin - con - taining fibrillar adhesions , but had only minor effects on their structure ( Fig . 6b , c ; see also Supplementary Information , movies 4 , 5 ) . All three types of drug did not disrupt existing fibrillar adhe - sions . The observed effects were fully reversible after washing out latrunculin - A , H - 7 or ML - 7 . We also tested for an involvement of Rho kinase in tensin translocation , as Rho - driven activation of Rho kinase stimulates actomyosin contractility 18 , 19 . Treatment of GFP – tensin - trans - fected cells with the Rho - kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 ( ref . 20 ) , even at 100 – 300 m M , had only a limited inhibitory effect on the stability or translocation of fibrillar adhesions ( Fig . 6d ) . However , tensin was rapidly lost from the centre of focal contacts as a result of such treatment , and focal contacts were subsequently destroyed com - pletely ( see also Supplementary Information , movie 6 ) . Discussion Here we searched for dynamic changes in cell – ECM adhesions in cultured human fibroblasts . We focused on the main classes of matrix adhesion — focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions — using dynamic microscopic analyses of GFP - tagged paxillin or tensin . Both classes of adhesion are associated with integrins and actin , but their subcellular localization and detailed molecular composition are markedly different : focal contacts contain relatively high levels of a v b 3 integrin , paxillin and vinculin , and only modest levels of a 5 b 1 and tensin ; are usually located at the ends of actin stress fibres ; and are highly tyrosine phosphorylated . In contrast , fibrillar adhe - sions contain only a 5 b 1 integrin and are characteristically enriched only in tensin , lacking the other plaque components studied and tyrosine phosphorylation . In addition , fibrillar adhesions are asso - ciated with fibronectin fibrils close to the cell centre , whereas focal Figure 6 Effects of cytoskeletal drugs on the mobility of tensin - containing structures . HFFs were transfected with cDNA encoding GFP – tensin and analysed by time - lapse fluorescence recording before and during treatment with a , latrunculin - A ( lat - A ) , b , H - 7 , c , ML - 7 , or d , the Rho - kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 . Temporal changes were analysed by FRIT from images taken at 10 - min intervals before and during the drug treatments . Note the dynamic nature of fibrillar adhesions before treatment ( indicated by the abundance of red or blue structures ; stationary focal contacts appear yellow ) . a – c , Latrunculin - A , H - 7 and ML - 7 block the movement of these adhesions , as indicated by the abundance of yellow patterns . d , Y - 27632 has only a limited effect , at this time point , on the structure and translocation of fibrillar adhesions , but had a dramatic effect on the stability of focal contacts . See also Supplementary Information , movies 3 – 6 . Untreated Drug Untreated Drug H - 7 La t - A Y - 27632 M L - 7 5 m m GFP / GFP 0 . 1 ‡ 1 ‡ 10 t + D t t a b c d Figure 7 Model for the involvement of actomyosin - driven forces in the formation and segregation of fibrillar adhesions and focal contacts . a , Before segregation of focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions , the adhesion site contains a v b 3 integrin bound mainly to the ECM protein vitronectin , together with a 5 b 1 integrin bound mainly to fibronectin . Both integrins are associated through different plaque proteins with actin filaments ( F - actin ) , and are subject to actomyosin - driven contraction forces . b , As vitronectin provides a rigid substrate , a v b 3 integrin does not move as a result of these contractile forces , and high tension develops , resulting in the recruitment of proteins typical of focal contacts , such as paxillin and vinculin , and in an increase in levels of phosphorylated tyrosine residues . In contrast , a 5 b 1 , which is bound to the moveable fibronectin matrix , is moved by actomyosin pulling . Because tension is low , tension - dependent recruitment of paxillin , vinculin and phosphotyrosine residues does not occur . The association of fibrillar - adhesion components , such as tensin , is tension - independent ; such components remain associated and translocate with a 5 b 1 integrin and the associated fibronectin . Myosin - II - driven contractility a High tension Low translocation High translocation Low tension b Fibronectin Vitronectin a 5 b 1 a v b 3 Tensin Paxillin and other focal - contact proteins Myosin II F - actin © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 2 | APRIL 2000 | www . nature . com / ncb 195 contacts often bind fibronectin - free ECM sites at the cell periphery 10 , 21 . These two types of matrix adhesion appear to differ not only in their shape and molecular composition , but also in their functions 11 , 22 , 23 ( R . Pankov , personal communication ) . Focal con - tacts are characteristically found about 10 – 20 nm from the ECM substrate and mediate tight cell – substrate adhesion . In contrast , fibrillar adhesions ( also termed ECM contacts ) are found £ 100 nm from the substrate , and a 5 b 1 integrin mediates binding to fibronec - tin fibrils , adhesion , slowing of cell migration and assembly of a fibronectin matrix . Because only the focal contacts are highly tyro - sine phosphorylated and contain FAK 10 , they are probably also the major site of integrin signalling . Thus , it is important to understand how these two distinct forms of cell – matrix adhesion are generated . Our results show that fibrillar adhesions assemble at one pole of focal contacts and are actively transported from these sites . This conclusion is based on direct visualization of tensin - rich fibrils emerging centripetally from focal contacts and then translocating towards the cell centre . This dynamic process depends on the pres - ence of an intact microfilament system and active myosin II , as actin disruption or inhibitors of myosin - light - chain kinase block both the formation of fibrillar adhesions and their translocation . The initial stage of fibrillar - adhesion formation occurs at the mar - gin of focal contacts orientated towards the cell centre . This finding explains our previous static immunofluorescence results which showed that , in addition to focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions , there exist ‘mosaic adhesions’ characterized by a polar segregation of subdomains enriched either in tensin , a 5 integrin and fibronectin or in vinculin , paxillin , phosphotyrosine residues and a v integrin ( Fig . 2 ; see also ref . 10 ) . These mosaic adhesions appear to represent early stages of fibrillar - adhesion formation , before the fibrillar adhesions segregate completely from focal contacts . On the basis of our present results and previous data , we pro - pose the following model for the assembly and segregation of focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions ( Fig . 7 ) . First , upon interaction with the ECM , integrins ( a 5 b 1 , a v b 3 and potentially other integrins ) bind to the matrix , cluster , and interact across the membrane with spe - cific plaque proteins and actin filaments 24 , 25 ( Fig . 7a ) . These struc - tures may be analogous to the ‘focal complexes’ induced by Rac 26 , 27 . Second , actomyosin - driven forces act on these new complexes . As focal - contact - associated actin filaments are orientated with their barbed ( more slowly growing ) ends towards the membrane 28 , ten - sion is applied primarily from the membrane towards the cell cen - tre . Third , the outcome of these forces depends on the physical properties of the associated matrix . Thus , interaction with a deformable or pliable matrix such as substrate - adsorbed fibronec - tin results in translocation of the ECM component together with specific integrins and tensin ( Fig . 7b ) . This process appears to be responsible for fibronectin fibrillogenesis ( R . Pankov , personal communication ) . In contrast , interactions with a rigid , non - deformable matrix ( such as glass - associated vitronectin ) lead to immobilization of adhesion complexes , high tension at the cytoskeleton – membrane interface , and assembly of focal contacts 13 , 14 , 29 , 30 ( Fig . 7b ) . It is likely that local , tension - driven activa - tion of tyrosine phosphorylation produces new docking sites for a variety of anchor and signalling molecules that become associated with the developing focal contacts . When fibronectin translocation is prevented by covalently immobilizing it to the substrate , large focal contacts form without fibrillar adhesions , and the compo - nents of focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions remain intermixed 11 . We propose that transformation or generation of fibrillar adhesions at focal contacts is governed by a mechanical switch , namely matrix deformability or pliability . This mechanical regulator would pro - vide cells with the capacity to respond to environmental cues , such as a rigid substrate , by switching to an adhesion mode that provides firm anchorage . Fourth , although large , paxillin - rich focal contacts are generally stationary , small focal contacts can translocate , in agreement with the results of previous studies that were based on tandem scanning confocal microscopy 14 , fluorescence microscopy of microinjected talin , vinculin or a - actinin 12 , 13 , or the expression of GFP – b 1 - integrin fusion proteins 15 . The movement of these small focal contacts involves polar extension at one end of the focal contact followed by contraction of the other end in an inchworm - like process . This movement of non - immobilized small focal contacts also appears to depend on contractile actomyosin . A specific cell type may emphasize only one adhesion mecha - nism . For example , fibronectin fibrils and fibrillar adhesions are the most common structures for NIL8 cells 31 , whereas chicken lens and other cells show focal contacts at sites from which fibronectin is actively removed 21 . In cells that can switch on the formation of fibrillar adhesions from focal contacts , the initial presence of a 5 b 1 integrin in focal contacts immediately after plating of cells on fibronectin and the replacement of a 5 b 1 by a v b 3 can be explained by the ligand specificity of these integrins , with a v b 3 binding to vit - ronectin and a 5 b 1 binding to fibronectin , after the fibronectin is cleared away into fibrils from under focal contacts 21 , 32 , 33 . In summary , the unexpected dynamics and diverse range of changes in the morphology , molecular constituents and locations of cell – matrix adhesions identified here provide cells with a rich , varying palette of adhesion structures beyond the classical station - ary focal contacts . This diversity and flexibility is consistent with the multitude of parts known to be played by cell – ECM adhesions . The apparent function of matrix deformability as a mechanical switch that regulates the transition from focal contacts to fibrillar adhe - sions may be only one of many mechanisms for integrating these important processes . h Methods GFP fusion proteins . Full - length human paxillin cDNA ( provided by K . Nakata , S . Miyamoto and K . Matsumoto ) or full - length chicken tensin cDNA 34 were ligated into the GFP expression vector pGZ21 as described 35 . Cells and immunofluorescence labelling . Primary HFFs were cultured , treated and labelled for immunofluorescence in serum - containing medium as described 10 , 11 . Drugs included H - 7 or ML - 7 ( Sigma ) , latrunculin - A ( provided by I . Spector ) , and Y - 27632 ( Yoshitomi Pharmaceuticals Industries , Saitama , Japan ) . Electroporation . Subconfluent HFFs were suspended in electroporation buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , 137 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 0 . 7 mM Na 2 HPO 4 and 6 mM dextrose , pH 7 . 05 ) and either GFP – paxillin or GFP – tensin vector ( 30 m g ) , and electroporated using a GENE PULSER II ( Bio - Rad ) 36 . Following electroporation , cells were collected by centrifugation , resuspended with DMEM , and plated ( see below ) . Digital microscopy and time - lapse recording . The methods for image acquisition have been described previously 10 . For dynamic microscopic analyses , glass coverslips were glued with hot wax to the bottom of 35 - mm tissue - culture plates , and then coated with 25 m g ml – 1 fibronectin . HFFs were transfected with GFP – paxillin or GFP – tensin cDNA , plated on the tissue - culture plates , and examined microscopically . For time - lapse recording , cells were maintained in DMEM with 10 % fetal calf serum buffered with 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 0 at 37 (cid:176) C . Images were acquired every 1 or 2 min using a filter set for GFP . Image processing . Fluorescence ratio imaging between two different components ( FRIC ) using double - labelled cells was done as described 10 . In short , Cy3 and fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) or GFP images were subjected to high - pass filtration to remove background labelling and to avoid the generation of ‘noisy’ images resulting from the presence of low - intensity pixels in the numerator or denominator . Ratio values were calculated pixel by pixel and displayed using a spectrum scale 10 . The same principle was applied for temporal fluorescence ratio imaging ( FRIT ) to compare images of GFP fluorescence acquired at two different time points . In FRIT , the numerator and the denominator correspond to the later and earlier images , respectively . Thus , a red colour indicates a new structure and a blue colour indicates a structure that has disappeared . RECEIVED 21 OCTOBER 1999 ; REVISED 18 JANUARY 2000 ; ACCEPTED 1 FEBRUARY 2000 ; PUBLISHED 22 FEBRUARY 2000 . 1 . Howe , A . , Aplin , A . E . , Alahari , S . K . & Juliano , R . L . Integrin signaling and cell growth control . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 220 – 231 ( 1998 ) . 2 . Gumbiner , B . M . Cell adhesion : the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis . Cell 84 , 345 – 357 ( 1996 ) . 3 . Yamada , K . M . & Geiger , B . Molecular interactions in cell adhesion complexes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 76 – 85 ( 1997 ) . 4 . Clark , E . A . & Brugge , J . S . Integrins and signal transduction pathways : the road taken . Science 268 , © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd articles 196 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 2 | APRIL 2000 | www . nature . com / ncb 233 – 239 ( 1995 ) . 5 . Schoenwaelder , S . M . & Burridge , K . Bidirectional signaling between the cytoskeleton and integrins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 274 – 286 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Jockusch , B . M . et al . The molecular architecture of focal adhesions . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 11 , 379 – 416 ( 1995 ) . 7 . Geiger , B . , Yehuda - Levenberg , S . & Bershadsky , A . D . Molecular interactions in the submembrane plaque of cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesions . Acta Anat . 154 , 46 – 62 ( 1995 ) . 8 . Schwartz , M . A . , Schaller , M . D . & Ginsberg , M . H . Integrins : emerging paradigms of signal transduction . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 11 , 549 – 599 ( 1995 ) . 9 . Hynes , R . O . Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 , 11 – 25 ( 1992 ) . 10 . Zamir , E . et al . Molecular diversity of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1655 – 1669 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Katz , B . Z . et al . Physical state of the extraxellular matrix regulates the structure and molecular composition of cell - matrix adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell ( in the press ) . 12 . Kreis , T . E . , Avnur , Z . , Schlessinger , J . & Geiger , B . in Molecular Biology of the Cytoskeleton ( eds Borisy , G . , Cleveland , D . & Murphy , D . ) 45 – 57 ( Cold Spring Harb . Symp . , Cold Spring Harbor , 1985 ) . 13 . Hock , R . S . , Sanger , J . M . & Sanger , J . W . Talin dynamics in living microinjected nonmuscle cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 14 , 271 – 287 ( 1989 ) . 14 . Davies , P . F . , Robotewskyj , A . & Griem , M . L . Endothelial cell adhesion in real time . Measurements in vitro by tandem scanning confocal image analysis . J . Clin . Invest . 91 , 2640 – 2652 ( 1993 ) . 15 . Smilenov , L . B . , Mikhailov , A . , Pelham , R . J . , Marcantonio , E . E . & Gundersen , G . G . Focal adhesion motility revealed in stationary fibroblasts . Science 286 , 1172 – 1174 ( 1999 ) . 16 . Izzard , C . S . & Lochner , L . R . Formation of cell - to - substrate contacts during fibroblast motility : an interference - reflexion study . J . Cell Sci . 42 , 81 – 116 ( 1980 ) . 17 . Izzard , C . S . & Lochner , L . R . Cell - to - substrate contacts in living fibroblasts : an interference reflexion study with an evaluation of the technique . J . Cell Sci . 21 , 129 – 159 ( 1976 ) . 18 . Kimura , K . et al . Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 , 245 – 248 ( 1996 ) . 19 . Amano , M . et al . Phosphorylation and activation of myosin by Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 20246 – 20249 ( 1996 ) . 20 . Uehata , M . et al . Calcium sensitization of smooth muscle mediated by a Rho - associated protein kinase in hypertension . Nature 389 , 990 – 994 ( 1997 ) . 21 . Avnur , Z . & Geiger , B . The removal of extracellular fibronectin from areas of cell - substrate contact . Cell 25 , 121 – 132 ( 1981 ) . 22 . Chen , W . T . & Singer , S . J . Immunoelectron microscopic studies of the sites of cell - substratum and cell - cell contacts in cultured fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 95 , 205 – 222 ( 1982 ) . 23 . Akiyama , S . K . , Yamada , S . S . , Chen , W . T . & Yamada , K . M . Analysis of fibronectin receptor function with monoclonal antibodies : roles in cell adhesion , migration , matrix assembly , and cytoskeletal organization . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 863 – 875 ( 1989 ) . 24 . Miyamoto , S . et al . Integrin function : molecular hierarchies of cytoskeletal and signaling molecules . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 791 – 805 ( 1995 ) . 25 . Plopper , G . & Ingber , D . E . Rapid induction and isolation of focal adhesion complexes . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 193 , 571 – 578 ( 1993 ) . 26 . Nobes , C . D . & Hall , A . Rho , rac , and cdc 42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 ( 1995 ) . 27 . Rottner , K . , Hall , A . & Small , J . V . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr . Biol . 9 , 640 – 648 ( 1999 ) . 28 . Begg , D . A . , Rodewald , R . & Rebhun , L . I . The visualization of actin filament polarity in thin sections . Evidence for the uniform polarity of membrane - associated filaments . J . Cell Biol . 79 , 846 – 852 ( 1978 ) . 29 . Bershadsky , A . , Chausovsky , A . , Becker , E . , Lyubimova , A . & Geiger , B . Involvement of microtubules in the control of adhesion - dependent signal transduction . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1279 – 1289 ( 1996 ) . 30 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . & Burridge , K . Rho - stimulated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1403 – 1415 ( 1996 ) . 31 . Hynes , R . O . & Destree , A . T . Relationships between fibronectin ( LETS protein ) and actin . Cell 15 , 875 – 886 ( 1978 ) . 32 . Fath , K . R . , Edgell , C . J . & Burridge , K . The distribution of distinct integrins in focal contacts is determined by the substratum composition . J . Cell Sci . 92 , 67 – 75 ( 1989 ) . 33 . Singer , II et al . Cell surface distribution of fibronectin and vitronectin receptors depends on substrate composition and extracellular matrix accumulation . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 2171 – 2182 ( 1988 ) . 34 . Chuang , J . Z . , Lin , D . C . & Lin , S . Molecular cloning , expression , and mapping of the high affinity actin - capping domain of chicken cardiac tensin . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 1095 – 1109 ( 1995 ) . 35 . Kioka , N . et al . Vinexin : a novel vinculin - binding protein with multiple SH3 domains enhances actin cytoskeletal organization . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 59 – 69 ( 1999 ) . 36 . LaFlamme , S . E . , Thomas , L . A . , Yamada , S . S . & Yamada , K . M . Single subunit chimeric integrins as mimics and inhibitors of endogenous integrin functions in receptor localization , cell spreading and migration , and matrix assembly . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 1287 – 1298 ( 1994 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This study was supported by the Israel Science Foundation , the Yad Abraham Center for Cancer Diagnosis and Therapy , and the Minerva Foundation . B . G . holds the Erwin Neter Chair in Cell and Tumor Biology . Z . K . holds the Israel Pollak Chair of Biophysics . We thank D . Rivelin and G . Tzur for advice regarding time - lapse recording and digital microscopy . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B . G . Supplementary information is available on Nature Cell Biology ’s World - Wide Web site ( www . nature . com / ncb ) . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd supplementary information Supplementary Information is available for this article . The movies that correspond to the captions below can be found by selecting " suppl info " on the Nature Cell Biology Web page . Movie Legends Movie 1 Time - lapse recording of an HFF cell expressing GFP – pax - illin . Images were recorded at 1 - min intervals starting 24 h after transfection . Time is indicated by the time bar . GFP – paxillin is localized in focal contacts , and their dynamic behaviour , namely assembly and growth , translocation and fading , can be appreciated . These changes are highlighted by FRIT analysis in Fig . 3 of the paper . Bar indicates 10 m m . Movie 2 Time - lapse recording of an HFF cell ( and twofold - mag - nified inserts of the same and two other cells ) expressing GFP – tensin . Images were recorded at 2 - min intervals starting 24 h after transfection . Time is indicated by the time bar . GFP – tensin is localized in both focal contacts and fibrillar adhesions , and thus reveals the dynamic relationships between the two . Tensin - con - taining fibrils emerge from the medial ends of focal contacts and then translocate toward the cell centre . This dynamic behaviour is highlighted in Fig . 5 and by FRIT analysis in Fig . 4 of the paper . Scale bar represents 10 m m . Movie 3 Time - lapse recording of an HFF cell expressing GFP – tensin , before , during and after incubation with 2 m M latrunculin - A . Images were recorded at 2 - min intervals starting 24 h after transfection . Time is indicated by the time bar , and the timing of drug addition and removal is marked by arrows . Scale bar repre - sents 10 m m . Movie 4 Time - lapse recording of an HFF cell expressing GFP – tensin , before , during and after incubation with 150 m M H - 7 . Images were recorded at 2 - min intervals starting 24 h after transfec - tion . Time is indicated by the time bar , and the timing of drug addi - tion and removal is marked by arrows . Scale bar represents 10 m m . Movie 5 Time - lapse recording of an HFF cell expressing GFP – tensin , before , during and after incubation with 100 m M ML - 7 . Images were recorded at 2 - min intervals starting 24 h after transfec - tion . Time is indicated by the time bar , and the timing of drug addi - tion and removal is marked by arrows . Scale bar represents 10 m m . Movie 6 Time - lapse recording of two HFF cells expressing GFP – tensin , before , during and after incubation with 100 m M ( left cell ) or 300 m M ( right cell ) Y - 27632 . Images were recorded at 2 - min intervals starting 24 h after transfection . Time is indicated by the time bar , and the timing of drug addition and removal is marked by arrows . Scale bar represents 10 m m .