T cell morphodynamics reveal periodic shape oscillations in 3D migration April 2022 Henry Cavanagh 1 , Daryan Kempe 2 , Jessica K . Mazalo 2 , Mat´e Biro 2 , Robert G . Endres 1 * * Corresponding author : r . endres @ imperial . ac . uk 1 Imperial College London , Centre for Integrative Systems Biology and Bioinformatics , London , UK , SW7 2BU ; 2 EMBL Australia , Single Molecule Science node , School of Medical Sciences , The University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia . a r X i v : 2 2 04 . 03692v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 7 A p r 2022 Abstract T cells use sophisticated shape dynamics ( morphodynamics ) to migrate towards and neutralise in - fected and cancerous cells . However , there is limited quantitative understanding of the migration process in 3D extracellular matrices ( ECMs ) and across timescales . Here , we leveraged recent advances in lattice light - sheet microscopy to quantitatively explore the 3D morphodynamics of migrating T cells at high spatiotemporal resolution . We ﬁrst developed a new shape descriptor based on spherical harmonics , incorporating key polarisation information of the uropod . We found that the shape space of T cells is low - dimensional . At the behavioural level , run - and - stop migration modes emerge at ∼ 150 s , and we mapped the morphodynamic composition of each mode using multiscale wavelet analysis , ﬁnding ‘stereo - typed’ motifs . Focusing on the run mode , we found morphodynamics oscillating periodically ( every ∼ 100 s ) that can be broken down into a biphasic process : front - widening with retraction of the uropod , fol - lowed by a rearward surface motion and forward extension , where intercalation with the ECM in both of these steps likely facilitates forward motion . Further application of these methods may enable the comparison of T cell migration across diﬀerent conditions ( e . g . diﬀerentiation , activation , tissues , and drug treatments ) , and improve the precision of immunotherapeutic development . 1 Introduction Shape changes ( morphodynamics ) are one of the principal mechanisms through which individual cells interact with their environment [ 1 , 2 ] . These dynamics arise from the interplay between a multitude of molecules and complex signalling pathways that often organise with emergent simplicity to carry out critical cellular functions , including division and migration . T cells , specialised cells of the adaptive immune system , are highly dependent on global morphodynamics to squeeze through gaps in the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , in contrast to the ECM - degrading strategies other cells use ( e . g . tumour cells ) . Despite plasticity for adjusting the mode of migration to environmental conditions , the migration of T cells is often characterised as amoeboid : fast ( up to 25 µ m min - 1 [ 3 ] ) , with low adhesion and polarised morphologies arising due to the segregation of diﬀerent cytoskeletal networks to speciﬁc subcellular compartments [ 4 ] . In this mode of locomotion , dynamic F - actin forms pseudopods at the leading edge and an actomyosin - rich uropod at the rear generates contractile forces [ 5 ] ( see Fig . 1a for a schematic ) . However , this canonical migration mechanism is not ﬁxed and T cells adapt their motility to their immediate environment . T cells are thought to toggle between exploration and exploitation states , balancing surface receptor cues for interacting with antigen - presenting or target cells ( ‘stop’ ) with chemokine - driven or purely exploratory searches ( ‘run’ ) [ 6 ] . The speciﬁc morphodynamics and force - generating mechanisms behind these states are not well understood , in part due to their large variety and adaptability in diﬀerent environments [ 7 ] . Proposed methods for propulsion include leading edge extension and intercalation with the ECM ( using either low - adhesion integrin connections or surface texture for friction ) , followed by contraction of the uropod for small pore sizes [ 7 , 8 ] . In addition to creating friction for moving forward , the rearward ﬂow of actin waves from the leading edge may connect with the ECM like a paddle [ 9 , 10 ] . However , the extent to which these methods are used in complex 3D ECM environments , and their precise organisation , are far from well - characterised . Accurate characterisation is important as dysregulation of T cell migration processes can be highly deleterious . T cells diﬀerentiate into diﬀerent eﬀector states . For instance , antigen - speciﬁc CD4 + ‘helper’ T cells amplify the immune response , while CD8 + ‘cytotoxic’ T cells seek out and neutralise infected or cancerous cells [ 11 ] . Inadequate migration leaves infected and cancerous cells free to proliferate , while over - stimulation can cause inﬂammation - based diseases like asthma and arthritis [ 12 ] . While there are exciting immunotherapeutic avenues manipulating the migration process , these have so far disappointed [ 13 ] . With quantitative representations of T cell morphodynamics , their statistics can be interpreted with high - precision and compared across conditions for potentially improved immunotherapeutic development , and mechanistic models can be developed [ 14 – 16 ] . One of the main challenges for analysing morphodynamics is that cells do not have obvious landmarks ( e . g . legs , eyes , wings of animals ) , and so the important degrees of freedom must be inferred from the data itself . Where there is important landmark - like information ( e . g . polarisation that can manifest as subtle morphological features ) , this is typically diﬀuse rather than precisely - locatable , which further complicates quantiﬁcation . Current methods therefore do not explicitly include this information . 2D cell morphologies are often quantiﬁed using Fourier descriptors . This method decomposes the cell outline coordinates as functions 1 of rotation around the centroid in terms of Fourier coeﬃcients , which then represent the morphology . This approach has revealed that amoeboid migrating cells in 2D , including epithelial keratocytes and Dictyostelium amoebae [ 14 , 15 ] , explore only a small subspace of the shapes that might be thought possible from qualitative inspection ( i . e . low - dimensionality of morphology ) . Furthermore , the morphodynamics within this space are composed primarily of frequently - used , or ‘stereotyped’ , motifs ( i . e . low - dimensionality of morphodynamics ) . Imaging of 3D cell dynamics at suﬃciently high spatio - temporal resolution has only recently become available through lattice - light sheet microscopy [ 17 ] . Whether T cells navigating complex 3D ECM envi - ronments similarly have low - dimensional morphology and morphodynamics remains to be understood . Such questions in 3D necessitate automated analysis even more than in 2D , both because such datasets are in - herently harder to visualise and interpret , and because 3D environments typically induce a richer variety of morphodynamics [ 18 ] . Spherical harmonic descriptors ( SPHARM ) , a 3D analogue of Fourier descriptors , are a promising method for quantifying 3D cell shape and connecting with motion [ 19 ] . However , the repre - sentations are typically too uninterpretable for exploring morphodynamics with high precision , and use so far is primarily limited to classiﬁcation or the detection of established shape changes [ 20 , 21 ] . It therefore remains an open question how best to quantify 3D cell shapes without clear landmarks and interpret high spatiotemporal dynamics . Here , we sought to combine lattice light - sheet microscopy [ 17 ] with quantitative image analysis to explore the 3D morphodynamics of cytotoxic T cells migrating in the absence of chemoattractant cues through 3D collagen matrices [ 22 ] . We ﬁrst created a new compact shape descriptor , based on SPHARM , but better connected to key polarisation information than current approaches . We found that T cells explore a low - dimensional morphological space , and that run - and - stop migration emerges at long timescales . We explored the morphodynamic compositions of these two modes using multiscale wavelet analysis , previously used to explore the structure of fruit ﬂy behaviour [ 23 , 24 ] , uncovering a global set of largely discrete stereotyped motifs . Focusing ultimately on the run mode , due to its key role in active translocation and polarised morphologies that are well - suited for analysis with our descriptor , we found that periodically oscillating morphodynamics ( every ∼ 100 s ) sustain forward motion . These can be understood as a biphasic process integrating previously hypothesised propulsion mechanisms [ 9 , 10 ] , namely : front - widening and retraction of the uropod ( rear moves forward ) , and rearward surface motion with forward extension ( front moves forward ) . 2 Results 2 . 1 T Cell Shape is Low - Dimensional We imaged primary mouse eﬀector CD8 + cytotoxic T cells in 3D collagen matrices without chemical cues , with a lattice light - sheet microscope ( LLSM ) [ 17 ] at spatial resolution of 0 . 145 , 0 . 145 , 0 . 4 µ m and temporal resolution of ∼ 2 - 5 s ( see Methods for details on the imaging and pre - processing and Supplementary Fig . 1 for a representative snapshot and 3D trajectories ) . Spherical harmonics ( Fig . 1b ) can be used to quantify 3D cell shapes , as shown in Fig . 1c [ 20 , 21 , 25 , 26 ] . The spherical harmonic functions , Y ml ( θ , φ ) , form a basis over the sphere , where l is the function degree ( related to frequency ) and m is the order ( rotations at each degree ) . The full approach is detailed in Methods and summarised here . The Cartesian coordinates describing the cell surface are each mapped to a sphere , so as polar coordinates { θ , φ } move over the sphere surfaces , the cell surface is traced out in object space . Analogous to a Fourier decomposition , the functions describing the cell surface can be decomposed into a set of spherical harmonic coeﬃcients , c ml , i with i ∈ { x , y , z } . The l = 0 coeﬃcients describe the centroid location , the l = 1 coeﬃcients describe the ellipsoid part of the shapes , and so on , with increasing levels of detail . Truncation of the representation at a certain l max therefore leads to a representation of a smoothed version of the original morphology , where higher - frequency features are ﬁltered out ( Fig . 1d ) . Translation invariance is achieved by omitting the l = 0 coeﬃcient , scale invariance is achieved by dividing all coeﬃcients by V − 13 where V is the volume [ 27 ] , and rotational invariance is achieved by transforming to a new representation , { D l } l > 0 , with D l = X i ∈ ( x , y , z ) l X m = 0 c ml , i c m ∗ l , i , ( 1 ) 2 Pseudopods Cross - linked actin polymers Nucleus Actomyosin fibres E x t r a - c e ll u l a r m a t r i x ( E C M ) a b Uropod D 1 l max = 1 2 3 15 θ ɸ x ( θ , ɸ ) y ( θ , ɸ ) z ( θ , ɸ ) surface parameterization sphericalharmonic decomposition d shape descriptor incorporate invariances D 2 e 12 9 6 4 x y z uropod centroid frame A D 0 frame A frame B frame B D 0 D 0 D 1 D 2 D 3 D 4 0s 15s 30s 50s . . . f 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 m l Re [ Y lm ( θ , ɸ ) ] 0 . 4 - 0 . 4 c Figure 1 : T cell shape can be quantiﬁed by spherical harmonic descriptors in 3D . ( a ) Schematic of a T cell employing an amoeboid migration strategy to navigate through the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) in 3D . Actin polymerisation at the front results in the formation of pseudopods , and a complex of actomyosin at the rear forms the uropod , important for stability and generating contractile forces . ( b ) Complex spherical harmonic functions , Y ml ( θ , φ ) , ( real parts shown for m ≥ 0 ) form a basis on the surface of a sphere . ( c ) Cartesian coordinates of the cell surface , { x , y , z } , are mapped to the surface of a sphere , as parameterised by polar coordinates { θ , φ } . The three resulting functions { x ( θ , φ ) , y ( θ , φ ) , z ( θ , φ ) } are decomposed in terms of the spherical harmonic functions and transformed to be translation , scale and rotation invariant . This yields the ﬁnal shape representation , D l , based on the harmonics at each energy level , l , with the exclusion of l = 0 giving the translation invariance . ( d ) Truncation of the representation at diﬀerent degrees of l leads to diﬀerent levels of smoothing , with l = 1 describing the ellipsoid part of the shape . ( e ) An additional descriptor , D 0 , for accounting for cell orientation , with the landmark - like smooth uropod at the rear and dynamic protrusions at the leading edge . Without this additional variable , the two cells shown have very similar descriptors . The standard deviation of D 0 across all datasets is 0 . 31 , and the standard deviations of the remaining D l are all lower . ( f ) For cases where the uropod vanishes , the landmark - like rear can still be identiﬁed by its smoothness and stationarity , compared with the dynamic leading edge , as shown in the example . For simplicity , we refer to this region at the rear as the uropod for all frames . 3 analogous to how rotational invariance can be achieved by extracting the power spectrum from Fourier descriptors of 2D cell shapes [ 15 ] . There are two key problems with the descriptor in its current form , and we made two modiﬁcations to remedy these . First , the coeﬃcients are not linearly related to the spatial extent of diﬀerent features . We therefore took the square root of each element , i . e . { D l } → { D 12 l } , which yields a descriptor more representative than the power spectrum [ 28 ] . Without this operation , almost all variance is contained in the ﬁrst ( ellipsoid ) coeﬃcient . Second , we added an element to the shape representation to capture key polarisation information lost in a purely global shape representation . At the cell rear is the uropod , a smooth round appendage that stabilises the cell and generates contractile forces , and at the leading edge emerge dynamic , higher - frequency protrusions . The cells in frames A and B in Fig . 1e have very similar descriptors under a regular spherical harmonic representation , reﬂecting the similarity of their ellipsoid components , but this misses the polarisation conveyed in subtler features . We therefore added an extra descriptor , linearly related to the distance between the uropod and centroid , D 0 ( see Methods for the full expression ) . The standard deviation of D 0 across all datasets is 0 . 31 , and the standard deviations of the remaining D l are all lower , showing that frames A and B in Fig . 1e are approximately two standard deviations apart along the D 0 dimension . While most cells have a well - deﬁned uropod that can be readily identiﬁed ( e . g . frames A and B in Fig . 1e ) , some can exhibit more spherical shapes , as shown in Fig . 1f . However , even for these cells there is still an identiﬁable smooth rear opposite a dynamic leading edge , and temporal information can reveal where the uropod transiently forms . For simplicity , we refer to this region at the rear as the uropod for all frames . The ultimate representation of T cell shape is therefore { D l } l max = 15 l = 0 with D 0 as described above and D l for l > 0 the square root of the expression in Eq . 1 . We used principal component analysis ( PCA ) to identify a set of uncorrelated linear features , or principal components ( PCs ) , from the initial high - dimensional shape representation , { D l } . Despite the lack of obvious constraints from manual inspection , Fig . 2a shows only three PCs are required to capture ∼ 96 % of the variance in the data ( 74 % , 12 % and 9 . 8 % for PCs 1 , 2 and 3 , respectively ) . The rotational invariance means that the PCA coordinates are not invertible to unique shapes . To better isolate what features each PC describes , we therefore split the PCA space into 7 equal - length bins along each axis and plotted the T cell within each bin with the lowest value for the other PCs , shown in Fig . 2b for l max = 3 reconstructions and Supplementary Fig . 2a for full cells ( and Supplementary Fig . 2b shows the PC values of these plotted cells ) . Fig . 2c shows what D l transitions these PCs correspond to , with the minimum , mean and maximum inverted for each PC ( with the other PCs set to zero ) , and Supplementary Fig . 2c shows the vector composition of each PC . An increasing PC 1 represents elongation and front - widening , a decreasing PC 2 represents contraction with front - widening , and an increasing PC3 represents elongation ( forward or sideways ) with the centroid moving towards the uropod . Fig . 2d shows a sample of cells ( with l max = 3 ) at their locations in the PC space . Supplementary Fig . 2d shows that along the main axis of variation ( PC 1 ) , dimensionality is relatively constant , and Supplementary Fig . 2e shows only modest diﬀerences in the spherical harmonic spectra of the low and high PC 1 populations . Uncertainty in the uropod label , a diﬀuse region rather than a precisely - locatable point , can be quantiﬁed and propagated to downstream variables of interest ( Supplementary Fig . 3 and Methods ) . Uropod uncer - tainty was found using the curvature around the labelled point ( Supplementary Fig . 3a - b ) , and then PC uncertainties were calculated by re - computing D 0 using each point on the cell rear within this uncertainty ( Supplementary Fig . 3c ) . The mean percent uncertainty in D 0 is 1 . 5 % , which is lower than the uropod uncertainty since cell rears are typically perpendicular to the axis deﬁned by the centroid and uropod . The percentage uncertainties of the PCs ( relative to their standard deviations ) are 4 . 4 % , 0 . 30 % and 9 . 2 % for PCs 1 - 3 , respectively . 2 . 2 Run - and - stop migration emerges over long timescale To connect morphodynamics with migration strategies , variables describing cell motion are required . There are two landmark - like features of the cell that move through the ECM , the uropod and the centroid , and we calculated velocity vectors for both , invariant to cell scale ( i . e . units of s - 1 ; see Methods ) . To ensure uropod velocities have adequate signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) , where noise arises from uropod labelling uncertainty , we found for each dataset the mean time taken for the uropod to move a signiﬁcant distance , τ sig , and then computed velocities using running means over position with a time window of τ sig ( see Methods and Sup - 4 a PC 3 PC 2 PC 1 d U r o p o d C e n t r o i d Increasing with increasing PC Decreasing with increasing PC D l PC 3 Minimum Maximum Mean PC 2 PC 1 D l D l b D 0 D 1 D 2 PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 PC 4 PC 5 c Explained variance ( % ) Increasing PC 3 Increasing PC 2 Increasing PC 1 Increasing PC 1 Increasing PC 2 Increasing PC 3 Figure 2 : T cell shape is low - dimensional as quantiﬁed with 3 principal components . ( a ) Principal components ( PCs ) 1 , 2 and 3 capture 74 % , 12 % and 9 . 8 % ( total of 96 % ) of the variance in D l , respectively . ( b ) Shape changes associated with each PC ( l max = 3 reconstructions ) , found by splitting the PCA space into 7 equal - length bins along each axis and plotting the T cell within each bin with the lowest value for the other PCs . An increasing PC 1 represents elongation and front - widening , a decreasing PC 2 represents contraction with front - widening , and an increasing PC3 represents elongation ( forward or sideways ) with the centroid moving towards the uropod . ( c ) Correspondence between the principal components ( PCs ) and D l is found by inverting the minimum , mean and maximum of each PC , with the other two PCs set to zero . Red and blue indicate decreasing and increasing descriptors , respectively , as the PCs are increased . D 0 represents the closeness between the uropod and centroid , D 1 the ellipsoidal aspects , and higher descriptors represent higher - frequency shape features . ( d ) Cell reconstructions with l max = 3 at their positions in PCA space . Darkness of colour indicates increasing PC 2 . 5 plementary Fig . 3d for details ) . We then calculated speeds , which are 1D and rotationally - invariant , unlike velocities . The uropod and centroid speeds alone cannot separate distinct behaviours at small timescales , like translation and rotation ( Supplementary Fig . 4a ) , and so we searched for a biologically - meaningful reference frame . We found that long - timescale migration is typically along the axis deﬁned by the uropod and centroid ( the UC axis ) , rather than the ellipsoid major axis ( Supplementary Fig . 4b ) . The speeds of the uropod and centroid along this axis then better diﬀerentiate distinct motifs ( Supplementary Fig . 4c ) and Supplementary Fig . 4d shows these describe largely irreversible motion . The former has lower variance and fewer reversals ( Supplementary Fig . 4d ) , and Fig . 1f and Supplementary video 9 show dynamics that we observed in some datasets , where the cell appears to test routes with multiple extensions and retractions but a relatively static uropod , before committing with the uropod . We therefore selected uropod speed along the UC axis as the variable for cell motion ( Fig . 3a ) , and henceforth refer to it simply as speed . Two migration modes separate out at long timescales , as shown in plots of cumulative speed ( Fig . 3b ) : repeated phases of high speed , making signiﬁcant progress forward , e . g . Cell A ; and lower speeds , yielding little progress , despite signiﬁcant uropod motion in some cases , e . g . Cell B ( Fig . 3c ) . Fig . 3d shows that , while at small times the dynamics can be indistinguishable ( both modes have phases of near - zero speed ) , run - and - stop bimodality emerges at approximately 150 s . This bimodality is consistent with conclusions from lower - resolution experiments , where long - timescale trajectories of single cells have been modelled with L´evy - type random walks ( characteristic of switching between stop and run modes ) [ 29 ] . Interestingly , another study suggested more complex statistics , with cells divided into sub - populations described by distinct random walk models [ 30 ] . PCs 1 and 2 have a stronger correlation with run - and - stop mode than speed , indicating that shape is specialised more for migration mode than instantaneous speed , with cells in the run mode longer and thinner than those in the stop mode ( Supplementary Fig . 5a ) . We next explored the morphodynamics behind these migration modes . 2 . 3 Stereotyped morphodynamics underlie migration modes We analysed longer duration datasets for each of the run and stop modes to investigate how they diﬀer ( Supplementary videos 1 - 4 and 5 - 8 for the run and stop modes , respectively ) . We ﬁrst computed the autocorrelation functions of the shape ( PCs 1 - 3 ) and speed dynamics ( using high SNR timeseries ; see Methods for details ) . The autocorrelation function ( ACF ) is the correlation of a timeseries with a lagged version of itself , as a function of the lag , which can reveal the presence of latent variables preserving information across time . We found an autocorrelation decay time , τ ACF , by ﬁtting an exponential decay model to the peaks of the oscillating ACFs ( Supplementary Fig . 5b ) , and these decay times are indicative of the timescales over which processes are likely guided more by internal cytoskeletal machinery than stochastic external cues . For the stop mode , PC 3 is more autocorrelated than the other variables ( mean τ ACF ∼ 250 s compared with ∼ 150 s of the other variables ; Supplementary Fig . 5b ) . PC 3 dynamics are suggestive of sensing : forward extension with a tentative rearward centroid , and reaching sideways . See Supplementary videos 5 - 9 , with the three included in the PC 3 ACF analysis coloured by PC 3 . For the run mode , the main diﬀerences are a decrease in the PC 3 autocorrelation ( to ∼ 150 s ) and an increase in the speed and PC 2 ( contraction with front - widening ) autocorrelations ( to ∼ 225 s ) . The power spectra in Supplementary Fig . 5c show the run mode has larger oscillations in speed and PC 2 , particularly for 0 . 005 - 0 . 01 Hz . The run mode is therefore associated with faster oscillations in speed and PC 2 that typically remain autocorrelated for longer than those of the stop mode . These ACFs give a global perspective on morphodynamics , and the presence of long timescales suggest that the morphodynamics are , as with the morphologies , low - dimensional . We therefore next zoomed in on the PC timeseries to interpret the organisation of local morphodynamics , or ‘behaviours’ , that underlies this low - dimensionality . The continuous wavelet transform is a method for ﬁnding local morphodynamics ( behaviours ) from a timeseries of morphologies , and has been used to map stereotyped behaviour in fruit ﬂies [ 23 , 24 ] . See Methods for the full pipeline and Supplementary Fig . 6a for a schematic . Wavelets are used to transform the timeseries into a spectrogram with multiscale dynamic information . Dimensionality reduction with t - SNE [ 31 ] can then be performed to map the spectrogram to an interpretable 2D morphodynamic space , where diﬀerent locations represent diﬀerent local morphodynamics ( Fig . 4a ) , and Supplementary Fig . 6b shows the dimensionality reduction is robust across diﬀerent hyperparameters . Stereotyped motifs are those that are frequently performed , and so correspond to peaks in the probability density function ( PDF ) of 6 Cell A a Σspeed Time ( s ) 0 0 . 07 ! ! " # " ( µms - 1 ) Cell A Cell B c Uropod - centroid ( UC ) axis ∆uropod 𝜑 𝑑 # $ % Time d b speed running mean ( s - 1 ) , t win = 100s Time ( s ) Stop Run speed ( s - 1 ) Bimodality emerges speed running mean ( s - 1 ) , t win = 200s Cell A Cell B Uropod Centroid Cell B Figure 3 : Run - and - stop migration emerges over long timescales . ( a ) Speed is deﬁned as the uropod speed along the uropod - centroid ( UC ) axis , k ( ∆uropod / ∆ t ) k cos ϕ , with smoothed uropod and centroid locations , and a further operation for invariance to cell scale ( see Methods ) . ( b ) Cumulative speed plots show some cells have repeated phases of high speed ( e . g . Cell A ) while others have much lower speeds ( e . g . Cell B ) . Lines are coloured by the maximum distance traveled divided by total dataset duration . ( c ) This is despite signiﬁcant uropod motion in some cases . Meshes are shown every ∼ 104 s and 103 s for Cells A and B , respectively . ( d ) Histograms of speed with diﬀerent running mean windows ( t win ) . At small timescales , diﬀerences in speed between cells can be indistinguishable because most exhibit phases of low speed , highlighted for Cells A and B . However , bimodality into two modes ( run - and - stop ) emerges at around 150 s . 7 a uropod centroid Run 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 2 3 4 5 8 9 11 Static shape / minor reaching with centroid towards rear Retract & front - widen ( then extend ) Forward - lengthen with centroid towards front Retract & widen Front - widen then streamline & extend Edge centroid forward Streamline ( minor ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 From To Probability 0 1 d Stop Neither ( e . g . transitions ) c b Figure 4 : Morphodynamics are organised in stereotyped motifs . ( a ) 11 stereotyped motifs are local peaks in a probability density function ( PDF ) over the spectrogram embeddings in morphodynamic space , where diﬀerent locations represent diﬀerent local morphodynamics . These form more of a discrete set than continuum , and some examples of the local PC series are shown ( red , blue and green lines for PCs 1 - 3 , respectively ) . ( b ) Example stereotyped motifs , with frames evenly - spaced across 150 s . ( c ) Utilisation of motifs in the stop and run modes . Red and blue indicate the speed running mean is above 0 . 005 s − 1 ( run mode ) and below 0 . 0025 s − 1 ( stop mode ) , respectively ( selected from the bimodal distribution in Fig . 3d ) , and grey indicates it is in between these values ( e . g . transitions ) . ( d ) Transition probability matrices reveal how cells move around the morphodynamic space , counting transitions only once the cell moves to a diﬀerent motif . 8 spectrogram embeddings in this space . We used wavelets with a maximum width of inﬂuence of 150 s , the approximate timescale of organisation found from the autocorrelation analysis . We found that behaviours are organised into more of a discrete set rather than a continuum ( Fig . 4a ) : ‘islands’ between which cells jump , and we could therefore categorise and interpret these individually . Fig . 4b shows key examples , with frames evenly - spaced over a 150 s interval ( with the remainder and further examples in Supplementary Fig . 7 ) , and Supplementary Fig . 8 shows the PC dynamics of three examples from each motif . Fig . 4c shows how these are utilised diﬀerently in the run and stop modes . Red and blue indicate the speed running mean is above 0 . 005 s − 1 ( run mode ) and below 0 . 0025 s − 1 ( stop mode ) , respectively ( selected from the bimodal distribution in Fig . 3d ) , and grey indicates it is in between these values ( e . g . transitions ) . In the stop mode , stereotyped motifs include static shape or minor reaching with centroid towards rear ( 4 ) ; forward lengthen with centroid towards front ( 5 ) ; and edge centroid forward ( 9 ) ( Fig . 4b ) . In the run mode , stereotyped motifs include front - widen then streamline and extend ( 8 ) ; and retract and front - widen then extend ( 2 ) . A probability matrix for transitions between the stereotyped motifs is shown in Fig . 4d , with rows and columns corresponding to the start and end motifs , respectively . We assigned points to the closest stereotyped motif and counted transitions only once the cell moves to a diﬀerent motif ( i . e . diagonal entries are zero ) . Frequent transitions include from 3 to 7 ( retract to reach to one side ) and from 8 to 1 ( front - widen then streamline and extend to front - widening ) . We next looked in detail at the run mode , of particular interest as this is when cells use global mor - phodynamics for active translocation through the ECM , and because it is in all cases deﬁned by polarised morphologies , for which our descriptor was designed . First , we repeated the wavelet analysis with the longer duration datasets of the run mode , ﬁnding more of a continuum than the global morphodynamic space , but for which stereotyped motifs can still be categorised ( Supplementary Fig . 9a - b , with PC timeseries of three examples from each motif in Supplementary Fig . 10 ) . Supplementary Fig . 9c - d shows the speeds and tran - sition probability matrix . Aside for a turning motif , all fall into two categories : compression , and a rearward surface motion with extension forward ( rearward with respect to the cell frame of reference , and relatively static in the lab frame ) . The precise motifs are then variants on these base behaviours , e . g . whether there is also widening . These underlying morphodynamics , omitting the distracting variations , are most charac - teristic of PC 2 dynamics , and this connection between PC 2 dynamics and migration is certainly consistent with the increased autocorrelation timescales and power of PC 2 relative to the stop mode ( Supplementary Fig . 5b - c ) . To test this theory , we calculated the entropy of each PC’s morphodynamics . We did this by repeating the wavelet analysis for each PC on its own and calculating the Markov chain entropy for transitions on a grid over the resulting morphodynamic space ( see Methods and Supplementary Fig . 9e ) . We used grids since these dynamics formed continuums rather than discrete , categorisable morphodynamic spaces . We found an entropy minimum for PC 2 ( Fig . 5a ) , conﬁrming that PC 2 dynamics are the most stereotyped . Fig . 5b shows how all four cells follow the same circular oscillations of varying radius in the space of PC 2 morphodynamics . Supplementary videos 1 - 4 are labelled as Cells 1 - 4 . Outer and inner rings represent high and low amplitude oscillations , respectively , and there is a region for particularly large decreases in PC 2 ( but not for large increases ) . These results , in conjunction with Supplementary videos 1 - 4 , coloured by PC 2 , suggest the following morphodynamic propulsion mechanism ( sketched in Fig . 5b - c ) : the leading edge widens , likely intercalating with the ECM to contract the uropod ( PC 2 decreases ) ; the leading edge then extends forward , as the previously - widened leading edge regions undergo a rearward ﬂow that may connect with the ECM like a paddle , ultimately streamlining ( PC 2 increases ) . This cycle is repeated every ∼ 100 s , and explains the oscillations in ( uropod ) speed observed in Fig . 3d . Fig . 5d shows an example section of Supplementary video 1 , coloured by PC 2 . These results suggest T cells utilise a highly periodic internal machinery to generate a sustained migration eﬀort , alternating between two previously proposed propulsion mechanisms to move the uropod then leading edge forward [ 7 , 9 , 10 ] . A plausible mechanistic basis for the rearward morphodynamic ﬂow is retrograde cortical actin ﬂow , a process that has been implicated in amoeboid migration in a number of cells , including T cells [ 9 , 10 ] . However , further investigations of internal actin dynamics are needed to explore this connection . 9 Combined PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 Entropy ( bits ) a Cell 3 Cell 4 Cell 1 Cell 2 b PC 2 morphodynamics 75s 75s 20s 50s 80s 110s 0s 25s 50s 75s 100s 125s 150s 175s 200s 225s Rearward surface motion Lab - frame marker c d Contract & front - widen Rearward surface motion Speed 0 Speed ( s - 1 ) 0 . 003 - 0 . 2 PC 2 0 . 28 Pseudopod pushes through Front - widens as rear is retracted Uropod moves Centroid moves PC 2 0 . 2 - 0 . 2 0 . 7 - 0 . 2 Cell 1 Figure 5 : Periodic oscillations in PC 2 underlie the run mode . ( a ) Entropy of the run mode marginal dynamics for each PC ( 5 repeats for each ) shows a minimum for PC 2 , and therefore that these dynamics are the most stereotyped , consistent with the autocorrelation results of Supplementary Fig . 5b . Markov chain entropies were calculated for transitions on grids over morphodynamic spaces for each PC , found by repeating the wavelet analysis with each PC on its own . ( b ) Dynamics in the PC 2 morphodynamic space for the run mode , where diﬀerent locations represent diﬀerent local PC 2 morphodynamics ( and decreasing PC 2 represents contraction and front - widening ) . Tracking the trajectories of the longer duration datasets reveals periodic oscillations of varying amplitude . Local PC2 dynamics in 150 s windows are shown inset at key points in the morphodynamic space , showing outer rings represent higher - amplitude oscillations , with a region for particularly large PC 2 decreases , bottom right . The top left corner represents rearward surface motion and the bottom right corner represents contraction and front - widening . Regions in between represent transitions between these motifs . Maximum uropod speeds correspond to contraction and front - widening . ( c ) These results are suggestive of the following cyclic morphodynamic propulsion mechanism : the leading edge widens , likely intercalating with the ECM and contracting the uropod ; the leading edge then extends forward , as the previously - widened leading edge regions undergo a rearward motion that may connect with the ECM like a paddle . This cycle repeats every ∼ 100 s . ( d ) An example showing these oscillations in Cell 1 , coloured by PC 2 . 10 3 Discussion T cells are a key part of the adaptive immune system , migrating through the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) to neutralise infected and cancerous cells . However , their morphodynamics have not yet been completely quantitatively mapped in 3D . Here , we used lattice light - sheet microscopy ( LLSM ) to acquire datasets of primary mouse cytotoxic T cells migrating through a collagen matrix with high spatiotemporal resolution . Using a novel shape descriptor that incorporates key polarisation information with a uropod label , we found that shape was low - dimensional . Run - and - stop migration emerges at long timescales ( ∼ 150 s ) , and global morphodynamics are stereotyped , forming a discrete set rather than continuum . Stop mode morphodynamics primarily involve oscillations in centroid movement towards the uropod , with extension forwards or sideways ( PC 3 dynamics ) , and these remain autocorrelated for long timescales ( decay time , τ ACF ∼ 250 s ) . The run mode ( i . e . active translocation ) arises from periodic oscillations in PC 2 , with a period of ∼ 100 s and τ ACF ∼ 225 s : the leading edge widens , likely using intercalation with the ECM to contract the uropod ( PC 2 decreases ) ; the leading edge then extends forward , as the previously - widened leading edge regions undergo a rearward motion that may connect with the ECM like a paddle , ultimately streamlining ( PC 2 increases ) . These results indicate periodicity in the cellular machinery help sustain forward motion during active translocation . Uropod tracking proved vital for diﬀerentiating key morphological and morphodynamic states . Uropod uncertainties were then required to ensure analysis was at suﬃcient signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) , because the uropod is a diﬀuse region rather than a precisely - locatable point . In analogy to the role of the Hessian matrix in parameter ﬁtting , we found this could be achieved relatively simply by quantifying uropod uncer - tainty through the curvature of the cell rear , then propagating this to downstream variables of interest . The inclusion of landmark - like but diﬀuse features will likely become more important as methods for tracking intracellular structures at high spatiotemporal resolution continue to improve , meaning spatial regions can be associated with speciﬁc internal organisation and activity [ 32 ] . In a small number of cases ( e . g . Supple - mentary video 7 ) , thin ﬂuid - like protrusions extend out of the uropod , which cause dynamics in D 0 that are unlikely to be important for migration . To reduce these eﬀects , in future work we will explore labelling uropods based on smoothed reconstructions ( with e . g . l max = 15 ) . We found uropod deﬁnition reduced for some cells in a long - lived stop mode ( and therefore had high uncertainties for some PCs , meaning they were omitted from analyses ) . This may be indicative of loss of polarisation , so for these modes alternative shape descriptors may be more appropriate . Internal retrograde actin ﬂow has been a hallmark of cell migration models for decades , since Abercrombie ﬁrst observed centripetal ﬂow of particles on ﬁbroblast surfaces [ 5 , 10 ] . However , Abercrombie also proposed a second propulsion mechanism , where rearward ﬂows of surface deformation might push the cell forward like a paddle . Such morphodynamic ﬂows ( or ‘waves’ ) have recently been observed in 2D migrating Dictyostelium cells [ 33 ] , and in T cells embedded in microﬂuidic channels where they can enable migration without any adhesion [ 9 ] . To our knowledge , however , they have not been characterised in 3D ECM environments . Through inhibition at obstacles and activation on the opposite side , ﬂows may also aid turning as has been described in neutrophils [ 34 ] , and the lateral protrusions likely serve as an anchor in conﬁned geometries [ 35 , 36 ] . Analysis of actomyosin dynamics , as well as tracking of the ECM ﬁbres ( perhaps with a contact map over the cell surfaces ) , would help test the connection between the rearward surface motion and internal actin dynamics , and the speciﬁc nature of how these interact with the ECM for anchoring and propulsion . The analysis would also reveal the extent to which decreasing PC2 ( contraction with front - widening ) is driven by contact with ﬁbres , although the periodic PC 2 dynamics across all run mode cells suggests this may predominantly be internally regulated . Exciting areas for future work include the extension of the analysis to the timescale of hours , where the statistics and morphodynamics of switching between run and stop modes could be interpreted at the single - cell level , and the hierarchical organisation of the stereotyped motifs could be mapped . There are technical challenges , however : individual cells would have to be followed and migration distances would exceed the scales of current LLSM ﬁelds of view . Dataset sizes might also become problematic , given that a 20 min video corresponds to 1 TB of data ( with one colour ) . Furthermore , non - stationary issues such as aging , diﬀerentiation and activation may come into eﬀect [ 37 ] . It would also be interesting to build statistical models of T cell morphodynamics [ 16 ] , which may then enable the development of mechanistic models [ 38 ] , connecting morphodynamics to both extra and intra - cellular processes . 11 Ultimately , we hope quantitative morphodynamic analyses of T cells navigating the complex ECM envi - ronment will aid comparison of migration across diﬀerent conditions ( e . g . tissues , drugs and cell mutants ) . In particular , the prevalence and switching between human - labelled modes of migration such as chimneying , mesenchymal , amoeboid ( blebbing ) , ﬁnger - like , and rear - squeezing could be put on ﬁrm objective grounds [ 38 , 39 ] . These advanced morphodynamic analyses will in turn help the development of mechanistic models , with a view to enhanced understanding of , and more eﬀective , immunotherapeutics . 4 Methods 4 . 1 LLSM imaging and pre - processing 4 . 1 . 1 Lattice light - sheet microscopy ( LLSM ) LLSM experiments were either performed on a custom - built system described in [ 40 ] , or on a Zeiss Lattice Light Sheet 7 microscope ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) . OT1 - Lifeact - GFP T cells [ 41 ] labelled with CellTracker Deep Red dye were excited at 642 nm , OT1 - mT / mG at 561 nm and plain OT1 - Lifeact - GFP T cells at 488 nm . For all experiments performed on the home - built system , Point Spread Functions were measured using 200 nm Tetraspeck beads . The acquired datasets were deskewed and deconvolved using LLSpy , a Python interface for processing of LLSM data . Deconvolution was performed using a Richardson - Lucy algorithm using the PSFs generated for each excitation wavelength . Datasets acquired on the Zeiss system were deskewed using the Zeiss Zen ( blue edition ) software . All data were acquired at 37 ◦ C and 5 % humidiﬁed CO2 . The voxel size was 0 . 1x01x0 . 2 µ m 3 for the home - built system and 0 . 145x0 . 145x0 . 4 µ m 3 for the Zeiss system . The temporal resolution was 2 . 5 s per frame for the OT1 - mT / mG datasets , 5 . 6 s per frame for the OT1 - Lifeact - GFP - CellTracker Deep Red datasets ( both imaged on the home - built system ) and 4 . 17 s per frame for the plain OT1 - Lifeact - GFP datasets imaged on the Zeiss system . We collected 29 datasets with 2 , 850 frames altogether and a mean and standard deviation across datasets of 98 and 78 , respectively . 4 . 1 . 2 Image segmentation Before further processing , membrane Tomato signal was denoised using a deep - learning approach based on Content - Aware Image Reconstruction ( CARE ) [ 42 ] . CellTracker Deep Red and membrane Tomato signal were bleach - corrected using FIJI [ 43 ] . Cell surfaces were segmented using Imaris 8 . 4 . 1 ( Bitplane , Zurich , Switzerland ) . To minimise the occurrence of holes in the surfaces , depending on the signal to noise ratio smoothing factors between 0 . 35 µ m and 0 . 8 µ m were applied . Cell surface triangulations were exported using custom Matlab code and again analysed for surface holes . If required , surface holes were eliminated by custom Matlab code based on closing operations . 4 . 1 . 3 Sample preparation Primary murine OT1 - Lifeact - GFP and OT1 - mT / mG cytotoxic T cells were isolated and cultured as previously described [ 41 ] . All imaging was done with T cells cultured over 6 or 7 days . For imaging on the home - built system , OT1 - Lifeact - GFP T cells were labelled with 100 nM CellTracker Deep Red dye ( ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc , Waltham , USA ) . Keeping all components on ice , collagen matrix solution was prepared by adding 10 µ l of 10x PBS , 1 . 15 µ l 1N NaOH and 39 µ l T cell medium ( TCM ) , consisting of phenol - free RPMI 1640 , 10 % foetal calf serum , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 10 mM HEPES , 100 U / ml penicillin , 100 µ g / ml streptomycin , 2 mM L - glutamine and 50 µ M β 2 - mercaptoethanol ( all from Gibco , ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc , Waltham , USA ) , to 50 µ l liquid - phase rat - tail collagen I ( ∼ 3 mg / ml ; Corning , New York , USA ) . Coverslip and imaging dish glass surfaces were treated with 2 % ( 3 - aminopropyl ) triethoxysilane in ethanol and 6 % glutaraldehyde to facilitate ﬁrm attachment of collagen gels . For imaging on the home - built LLSM , 6 µ l of collagen mix were placed onto surface - treated round 5 mm coverslips ( Warner Instruments , Hamden , USA ) and polymerised at 37 ◦ C for 15 min . After polymerisation , 10 5 T cells in phenol - free TCM were seeded on top of the gel and allowed to inﬁltrate over 3 h before imaging . For imaging on the Zeiss LLS system , 10 5 T cells were added to TCM during collagen matrix mix preparation . 70 µ l of collagen mix were added to well of 35 mm imaging dishes ( Mattek , Ashland , USA ) and polymerised at 37 ◦ C for 30 min . After polymerisation , 1 ml of pre - warmed phenol - free TCM was added to the dish and cells were allowed to recover for 1 h before imaging . 4 . 2 Quantifying 3D cell morphology Cell morphologies were quantiﬁed using SPHARM . First , the cell surface , described with 3 Cartesian coordinates , { x , y , z } , is mapped to the unit sphere , described with polar coordinates { θ , φ } , such that the three Cartesian coordinates are functions of the polar coordinates : { x ( θ , φ ) , y ( θ , φ ) , z ( θ , φ ) } . { x ( θ , φ ) , y ( θ , φ ) , z ( θ , φ ) } are then be 12 decomposed in terms of the spherical harmonics , Y ml ( θ , φ ) , and only m ≥ 0 functions are required [ 44 ] . For x for example , x ( θ , φ ) = ∞ X l = 0 l X m = 0 c ml , x Y ml ( θ , φ ) , ( 2 ) and the ( in general complex ) coeﬃcients , c ml , i with i ∈ { x , y , z } , represent the morphology . We used the SPHARM - PDM software package [ 44 ] to ﬁnd the coeﬃcients for the T cells with l max = 15 and cell meshes converted to voxel grids with a spatial resolution of 0 . 5 µm for computational speed . The additional variable for capturing polarisation information was D 0 . This was the distance between the uropod and centroid multiplied by 32 , with the numerator reﬂecting the fact that the harmonics are summed over 3 spatial coordinates and the denominator accounting for the fact that the coeﬃcients have a spatial extent double their magnitude . The uropod was manually selected ( aiming for its center ) in alternating frames and linearly interpolated . PCA is a dimensionality reduction method that ﬁnds a set of uncorrelated linear features ( the principal components , PCs ) , which are the eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix ( which for D l has dimensions 16 × 16 ) [ 45 ] . Supplementary Fig . 2c shows the vector composition of each PC . As explored through the main text , PC 1 is largely associated with transitions between run and stop mode morphologies , PC 2 is largely associated with morphological transitions in the run mode , and PC 3 is largely associated with morphological transitions in the stop mode . For implementing PCA , we used the Scikit - learn Python package . 4 . 3 Uncertainty quantiﬁcation The uncertainty in the uropod label depends on the curvature of the cell rear , which we quantiﬁed using the mean curvature averaged across the 15 closest mesh vertices to the labelled point ( with a sub - sampled mesh for com - putational speed ) . We then deﬁned the positional uncertainty as the cord length associated with a 20 ◦ rotational perturbation . To convert this to PC uncertainties , we found the set of possible D 0 values using mesh vertices within this uncertainty ( i . e . within one cord length of the uropod label ) , calculated the standard deviation , and converted to PC uncertainties by multiplying by the cosine of the angle between the D 0 and PC vectors in { D l } space . This process was repeated for every 10 frames in each dataset to get a single characteristic uncertainty for each PC ( the mean ) for each dataset . τ sig was calculated as the mean time take for the uropod to move twice the cord length . Some cells have uropods that are near - stationary , and therefore have a τ sig comparable with the full dataset duration . To account for such cases , we used a maximum τ sig of 100 s , in order that these could be plotted for comparison with dynamic cells , but we excluded them from quantitative analysis . 4 . 4 Finding a motion variable for small timescales We calculated uropod and centroid velocities by ﬁnding the displacements between consecutive positions ( smoothed with running means over τ sig for both , for consistency ) and dividing by the time step and cube root of cell volume ( for invariance to cell scale ) . The ellipsoid major axis was calculated as the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue of A T A where A is a matrix of the l = 1 spherical harmonic coeﬃcients [ 25 ] : √ 3 3 √ 2 π ( c − 1 1 − c 11 , i ( c − 1 1 − c 11 ) , √ 2 c 01 ) . For comparing the uropod - centroid ( UC ) and ellipsoid axes , we used running means for uropod and centroid with a time window of 100 s for long - timescale behaviour . We compared cells where the uropod speed was above 0 . 0025 s − 1 , i . e . moving more than a quarter cell length in 100 s , and the distance between the uropod and centroid velocity vectors was within half the uropod speed , i . e . they were aligned . 4 . 5 Timeseries autocorrelation functions and power spectra Autocorrelation functions and power spectra were computed for longer duration datasets for each of the run and stop mode . We removed timeseries with low SNR : PC timeseries where the ratio of the signal standard deviation to the PC uncertainty was below 2 . 5 and speed timeseries where t sig was of a similar scale to the full dataset duration . There was one removal for each of PC 1 , 3 and speed , across diﬀerent cells . We calculated the autocorrelation on de - trended timeseries , in order to only capture statistically signiﬁcant correlations , removing trends with frequencies lower than 0 . 0025 Hz ( corresponding to a period of approximately half the total dataset duration ) with a Butterworth highpass ﬁlter [ 46 ] . We then found a decay time , τ ACF , by ﬁtting an exponential decay model , y = e − x τ ACF , to the peaks of the ACF ( rather than the full ACF , which is more appropriate for non - oscillatory patterns ) . 4 . 6 Continuous wavelet transform The continuous wavelet transform was used to ﬁnd local morphodynamics ( or ‘behaviours’ ) from the PC timeseries . A wavelet that decays to zero either side of a central peak is convolved with the timeseries , which produces a new 13 timeseries where each element now represents local morphodynamics . Repeating this process with dilated versions of the wavelet and stacking the resulting set of timeseries yields a spectrogram with multiscale dynamic information , where high - frequency components are analysed close in time , but lower frequency information bleeds in from afar . This spectrogram is then mapped to an interpretable 2D space using t - SNE [ 31 ] , and a PDF can be computed with kernel density estimation [ 47 ] . t - SNE ( t - distributed stochastic neighbour embedding ) is a non - linear dimensionality reduction method that uses machine learning . Two similarity metrics between datapoints are deﬁned for each of the two representations , the initial ( high - dimensional ) representation and the target ( lower - dimensional ) representation . The diﬀerence between the distributions of these similarities across all data pairs is minimised . For implementing t - SNE , we used the Scikit - learn Python package with default parameters : perplexity ( analogous to the number of neighbours in other algorithms ) of 30 , learning rate of 200 , and 1000 iterations . We identiﬁed stereotyped motifs ( PDF peaks ) using adaptive binarisation , a method that thresholds pixels in an image with a threshold value that depends on the local statistics : the mean over a surrounding square of pixels with an added bias ( we used square dimensions of 7 and a bias of 20 , found with a grid search ) . We used adaptive rather than pure binarisation so that regions with high - density peaks and high PDF between then ( ‘superhighways’ representing common transitions ) could be separated , while lower peaks in absolute terms could also be captured . We used two simple wavelets , the ‘mexican hat’ wavelet and Gaussian 1 st derivative wavelet , with the combination of the two required to capture symmetric and antisymmetric features . For organisms where the morphodynamics of interest are organised in repeating bouts , e . g . high - frequency wing - beating of fruit ﬂies , complex wavelets that enable the removal of phase information can be useful . However , over the timescales analysed here , T cell morphodynamics are slower - changing , and phase information is important . We used six equally - spaced frequencies for each wavelet from double the Nyquist limit up to the ( wavelet - speciﬁc ) frequency with width of inﬂuence corresponding to 150 s , the approximate timescale of organisation found from the autocorrelation analysis . The width of inﬂuence was found by convolving each wavelet with a square pulse to ﬁnd where edge eﬀects begin . When repeating this method for only the four run mode datasets , we used for the adaptive binarisation parameters square dimensions of 15 and a bias of 50 , again found with a grid search . 4 . 7 Comparing marginal morphodynamics of the run mode The marginal morphodynamics form continuums , and so transition matrices over stereotyped PDF peaks cannot be deﬁned . Instead , we deﬁned transition matrices over points on a grid . We then quantiﬁed the entropy for the transition dynamics of each PC ( and compared with that of their combined dynamics ) . The entropy is − P π i p ij log 2 p ij , where π i is the equilibrium distribution and p ij is the probability that the next motif to be visited after i will be j . For plotting the PC 2 dynamics of the four cells , we perturbed the wavelets slightly to further improve the interpretability . This was done by searching locally across options for the maximum wavelet width ( keeping 150 s as an upper bound ) and ﬁnding combinations with reduced entropy . Reduced entropy was associated with reducing the Gaussian wavelet maximum width to 100 s , but with the same Mexican hat wavelets as before . Author Contributions DK , JM and MB acquired and segmented the cell surface segmentation data ; HC and RE performed the downstream morphological and morphodynamic analysis . Data accessibility The cell surface segmentation data that support the ﬁndings of this study have been deposited on Dryad ( DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5061 / dryad . tdz08kq1r ) . The code used is available at https : / / github . com / hcbiophys / tcells _ paper _ code . Funding Statement This work was funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( grant number BB / M011178 / 1 ) to RE and the Australian Research Council ( Discovery Project grant DP180102458 ) to MB . Acknowledgements The authors thank ND Geoghegan , KL Rogers , N Tubau and LW Whitehead ( WEHI , Melbourne , Australia ) for technical assistance with LLS microscopy and image denoising . MB acknowledges Bitplane AG for an Imaris Developer licence , and HC and RE thank Suhail Islam for invaluable computational suppport . Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests . 14 References 1 . Yin , Z . et al . How cells explore shape space : a quantitative statistical perspective of cellular morpho - genesis . Bioessays 36 , 1195 – 1203 ( 2014 ) . 2 . Bodor , D . L . , P¨onisch , W . , Endres , R . G . & Paluch , E . K . Of cell shapes and motion : the physical basis of animal cell migration . Developmental cell 52 , 550 – 562 ( 2020 ) . 3 . Friedl , P . , Noble , P . , Shields , E . & Z¨anker , K . Locomotor phenotypes of unstimulated CD45RAhigh and CD45ROhigh CD4 + and CD8 + lymphocytes in three - dimensional collagen lattices . Immunology 82 , 617 ( 1994 ) . 4 . Weninger , W . , Biro , M . & Jain , R . Leukocyte migration in the interstitial space of non - lymphoid organs . Nature Reviews Immunology 14 , 232 – 246 ( 2014 ) . 5 . Dupr´e , L . , Houmadi , R . , Tang , C . & Rey - Barroso , J . T lymphocyte migration : an action movie starring the actin and associated actors . Frontiers in immunology 6 , 586 ( 2015 ) . 6 . Krummel , M . F . , Bartumeus , F . & G´erard , A . T cell migration , search strategies and mechanisms . Nature Reviews Immunology 16 , 193 – 201 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Fowell , D . J . & Kim , M . The spatio - temporal control of eﬀector T cell migration . Nature Reviews Immunology , 1 – 15 ( 2021 ) . 8 . Soriano , S . F . et al . In vivo analysis of uropod function during physiological T cell traﬃcking . The Journal of Immunology 187 , 2356 – 2364 ( 2011 ) . 9 . Reversat , A . et al . Cellular locomotion using environmental topography . Nature 582 , 582 – 585 ( 2020 ) . 10 . Abercrombie , M . , Heaysman , J . E . & Pegrum , S . M . The locomotion of ﬁbroblasts in culture : III . Movements of particles on the dorsal surface of the leading lamella . Experimental cell research 62 , 389 – 398 ( 1970 ) . 11 . Galeano Ni˜no , J . L . et al . Cytotoxic T cells swarm by homotypic chemokine signalling . Elife 9 , e56554 ( 2020 ) . 12 . Xia , M . & Sui , Z . Recent developments in CCR2 antagonists . Expert opinion on therapeutic patents 19 , 295 – 303 ( 2009 ) . 13 . Raﬁq , S . , Hackett , C . S . & Brentjens , R . J . Engineering strategies to overcome the current roadblocks in CAR T cell therapy . Nature reviews Clinical oncology 17 , 147 – 167 ( 2020 ) . 14 . Keren , K . et al . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Tweedy , L . , Meier , B . , Stephan , J . , Heinrich , D . & Endres , R . G . Distinct cell shapes determine accurate chemotaxis . Scientiﬁc reports 3 , 1 – 7 ( 2013 ) . 16 . Tweedy , L . , Witzel , P . , Heinrich , D . , Insall , R . H . & Endres , R . G . Screening by changes in stereotypical behavior during cell motility . Scientiﬁc reports 9 , 1 – 12 ( 2019 ) . 17 . Chen , B . - C . et al . Lattice light - sheet microscopy : imaging molecules to embryos at high spatiotemporal resolution . Science 346 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Driscoll , M . K . & Danuser , G . Quantifying modes of 3D cell migration . Trends in cell biology 25 , 749 – 759 ( 2015 ) . 19 . Heryanto , Y . D . et al . Integrated analysis of cell shape and movement in moving frame . Biology open 10 , bio058512 ( 2021 ) . 20 . Ducroz , C . , Olivo - Marin , J . - C . & Dufour , A . Characterization of cell shape and deformation in 3D using Spherical Harmonics in 2012 9th IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging ( ISBI ) ( 2012 ) , 848 – 851 . 21 . Medyukhina , A . et al . Dynamic spherical harmonics approach for shape classiﬁcation of migrating cells . Scientiﬁc reports 10 , 1 – 12 ( 2020 ) . 15 22 . Galeano Ni˜no , J . L . , Kwan , R . Y . , Weninger , W . & Biro , M . Antigen - speciﬁc T cells fully conserve antitumour function following cryopreservation . Immunology and cell biology 94 , 411 – 418 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Berman , G . J . , Choi , D . M . , Bialek , W . & Shaevitz , J . W . Mapping the stereotyped behaviour of freely moving fruit ﬂies . Journal of The Royal Society Interface 11 , 20140672 ( 2014 ) . 24 . Berman , G . J . , Bialek , W . & Shaevitz , J . W . Predictability and hierarchy in Drosophila behavior . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 , 11943 – 11948 ( 2016 ) . 25 . Brechb¨uhler , C . , Gerig , G . & K¨ubler , O . Parametrization of closed surfaces for 3 - D shape description . Computer vision and image understanding 61 , 154 – 170 ( 1995 ) . 26 . Kazhdan , M . , Funkhouser , T . & Rusinkiewicz , S . Rotation invariant spherical harmonic representation of 3 d shape descriptors in Symposium on geometry processing 6 ( 2003 ) , 156 – 164 . 27 . Zhao , B . , Wei , D . & Wang , J . Application of spherical harmonics analysis on LBS particles and LBS fragments in EPJ Web of Conferences 140 ( 2017 ) , 05002 . 28 . Shen , L . , Farid , H . & McPeek , M . A . Modeling three - dimensional morphological structures using spher - ical harmonics . Evolution : international journal of organic evolution 63 , 1003 – 1016 ( 2009 ) . 29 . Harris , T . H . et al . Generalized L´evy walks and the role of chemokines in migration of eﬀector CD8 + T cells . Nature 486 , 545 – 548 ( 2012 ) . 30 . Banigan , E . J . , Harris , T . H . , Christian , D . A . , Hunter , C . A . & Liu , A . J . Heterogeneous CD8 + T cell migration in the lymph node in the absence of inﬂammation revealed by quantitative migration analysis . PLoS computational biology 11 , e1004058 ( 2015 ) . 31 . Van der Maaten , L . & Hinton , G . Visualizing data using t - SNE . Journal of machine learning research 9 ( 2008 ) . 32 . McKayed , K . K . & Simpson , J . C . Actin in action : imaging approaches to study cytoskeleton structure and function . Cells 2 , 715 – 731 ( 2013 ) . 33 . Driscoll , M . K . et al . Cell shape dynamics : from waves to migration . PLoS computational biology 8 , e1002392 ( 2012 ) . 34 . Weiner , O . D . , Marganski , W . A . , Wu , L . F . , Altschuler , S . J . & Kirschner , M . W . An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS biology 5 , e221 ( 2007 ) . 35 . Tozluo˘glu , M . et al . Matrix geometry determines optimal cancer cell migration strategy and modulates response to interventions . Nature cell biology 15 , 751 – 762 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Mandeville , J . T . , Lawson , M . A . & Maxﬁeld , F . R . Dynamic imaging of neutrophil migration in three dimensions : mechanical interactions between cells and matrix . Journal of leukocyte biology 61 , 188 – 200 ( 1997 ) . 37 . Metzner , C . et al . Superstatistical analysis and modelling of heterogeneous random walks . Nature Com - munications 6 , 7516 ( 2015 ) . 38 . Zhu , J . & Mogilner , A . Comparison of cell migration mechanical strategies in three - dimensional matri - ces : a computationalstudy . Interface Focus 6 , 20160040 ( 2016 ) . 39 . Yamada , K . M . & Sixt , M . Mechanisms of 3D cell migration . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 20 , 738 – 752 ( 2019 ) . 40 . Geoghegan , N . D . et al . 4D analysis of malaria parasite invasion oﬀers insights into erythrocyte mem - brane remodeling and parasitophorous vacuole formation . Nature Communications 12 , 1 – 16 ( 2021 ) . 41 . Galeano Ni˜no , J . L . et al . The Lifeact - EGFP mouse is a translationally controlled ﬂuorescent reporter of T cell activation . Journal of cell science 133 , jcs238014 ( 2020 ) . 42 . Weigert , M . et al . Content - aware image restoration : pushing the limits of ﬂuorescence microscopy . Nature methods 15 , 1090 – 1097 ( 2018 ) . 43 . Schindelin , J . et al . 714 Saalfeld S , Schmid B , Tinevez JY , White DJ , Hartenstein V , Eliceiri K , Tomancak P , Cardona A . 2012 . 715 Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . 16 44 . Styner , M . et al . Framework for the statistical shape analysis of brain structures using SPHARM - PDM . The insight journal , 242 ( 2006 ) . 45 . Wold , S . , Esbensen , K . & Geladi , P . Principal component analysis . Chemometrics and intelligent labo - ratory systems 2 , 37 – 52 ( 1987 ) . 46 . Butterworth , S . et al . On the theory of ﬁlter ampliﬁers . Wireless Engineer 7 , 536 – 541 ( 1930 ) . 47 . Davis , R . A . , Lii , K . - S . & Politis , D . N . in Selected Works of Murray Rosenblatt 95 – 100 ( Springer , 2011 ) . 17 Supplementary Information for T cell morphodynamics reveal periodic shape oscillations in 3D migration in J . R . Soc . Interface April 2022 Henry Cavanagh 1 , Daryan Kempe 2 , Jessica K . Mazalo 2 , Mat´e Biro 2 , Robert G . Endres 1 * * Corresponding author : r . endres @ imperial . ac . uk 1 Imperial College London , Centre for Integrative Systems Biology and Bioinformatics , London , UK , SW7 2BU ; 2 EMBL Australia , Single Molecule Science node , School of Medical Sciences , The University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia . Contents Supplementary Figures 1 Supplementary Figure 1 : 3D T Cell Migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Supplementary Figure 2 : Full meshes and principal components of the sampled frames . . . . . . . 2 Supplementary Figure 3 : Uropod uncertainty quantiﬁcation and propagation to downstream vari - ables of interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Supplementary Figure 4 : Finding a motion variable for small timescales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 Supplementary Figure 5 : Link between run - and - stop modes and shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 Supplementary Figure 6 : Continuous wavelet transform used to map stereotyped motifs . . . . . . 6 Supplementary Figure 7 : Global morphodynamic space with further examples . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Supplementary Figure 8 : PC dynamics of the stereotyped motifs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Supplementary Figure 9 : Run mode morphodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Supplementary Figure 10 : PC dynamics of the stereotyped motifs in the run mode . . . . . . . . . 10 a r X i v : 2 2 04 . 03692v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 7 A p r 2022 Supplementary Figures Supplementary Figure 1 : 3D T Cell Migration a b x ( µm ) x ( µm ) z ( µ m ) y ( µ m ) x ( µm ) y ( µ m ) z ( µ m ) x ( µm ) y ( µ m ) z ( µ m ) Supplementary Figure 1 : 3D T Cell Migration . ( a ) Representative snapshot of a T cell migrating in a 3D collagen gel . Scale bar : 5 µ m . ( b ) Migration tracks of T cells embedded in a 3D collagen gel . Left : xy view . Right : xz view . Starting point of tracks was translated to origin of coordinate system for visualisation purposes . 1 Supplementary Figure 2 : Full meshes and principal components of the sampled frames PC1 2 3 a b Increasing PC 1 Increasing PC 2 Increasing PC 3 Increasing PC 1 Increasing PC 2 Increasing PC 3 c d PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 D 0 D 1 D 2 D 3 D 4 High PC 1 Low PC 1 PC’ 1 PC’ 2 PC’ 3 PC’ 4 PC’ 5 e D 0 D 1 D 2 D 3 D 4 D 5 D 6 D 7 D 8 D 9 High PC 1 Low PC 1 Supplementary Figure 2 : Full meshes and principal components of the sampled frames . ( a ) Shape changes associated with each PC are shown , found by splitting the PCA space into 7 equal - length bins along each axis and plotting the T cell within each bin with the lowest value for the other PCs ( l max = 3 reconstructions in the main text , full cells here ) . An increasing PC 1 represents elongation and front - widening , a decreasing PC 2 represents contraction with front - widening , and an increasing PC3 represents elongation ( forward or sideways ) , with the centroid moving towards the uropod . ( b ) Normalised PC values of the displayed cells , where black colouring indicates which PC is being sampled . ( c ) Vector composition of each PC , in terms of the spherical harmonic descriptors , D l . ( d ) Dimensionality across the main mode of variation ( PC 1 ) is relatively constant . For data both below the mean along PC 1 ( red ) and above it ( green ) , the explained variance ratios by a new set of PCs , PC 0 , are plotted , and these decay at similar rates . ( e ) Diﬀerence in the spherical harmonic spectra ( expressed through the descriptors , D l ) between the low and high PC 1 ( below and above the PC 1 mean , respectively ) populations . 2 Supplementary Figure 3 : Uropod uncertainty quantiﬁcation and propagation to downstream variables of interest Curvature 0 . 5 - 0 . 5 Δu l cord 20° Uncertainty from curvature Shape descriptor uncertainties Ensure uropod velocities are significant 𝑡 < 𝜏 ! " # 𝑡 > 𝜏 ! " # l cord 𝐮 $ % & ’ 𝐮 $ % Possible D 0 values D 0 PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 𝐮−𝐮′ ≤ l ( ) * + 𝐮 𝐮′ a b c d Low uncertainty High uncertainty Supplementary Figure 3 : Uropod uncertainty quantiﬁcation and propagation to downstream variables of interest . ( a ) Mean curvature across the closest 15 mesh vertices to the uropod label was calculated ( with a sub - sampled mesh for computational speed ) . ( b ) Uropod uncertainty is deﬁned as the cord length associated with a 20 ◦ rotational perturbation . ( c ) PC uncertainties for each video were found by recalculating D 0 with all mesh vertices within this uropod uncertainty , calculating the standard deviation , and multiplying this by the cosine of the angle between the D 0 and PC vectors in { D l } space for every 10 frames in each video , then calculating the mean . ( d ) Uropods were also tracked for connecting morphody - namics to motion . To ensure these are at suﬃcient signal - to - noise ratio , we found for each video the mean time taken for the uropod to move a signiﬁcant distance ( deﬁned as twice the cord length ) , τ sig , and then computed velocities using uropod running means with a time window of τ sig . We used a maximum τ sig of 100s to ensure near - stationary cells were included in visualisations , but these insigniﬁcant velocities were omitted from quantitative analysis . 3 Supplementary Figure 4 : Finding a motion variable for small timescales Uropod - centroid ( UC ) axis Ellipsoid axis Axis – v uropod angle ( degrees ) UC axis Ellipsoid axis F r e qu e n c y var : 2 . 52x10 - 5 var : 2 . 63x10 - 5 F r e qu e n c y All values Negative values Speed uropod , UC Speed centroid , UC a centroid uropod Motif 1 Motif 2 Motif 1 2 Motif 1 2 Speed centroid , UC Uropod - centroid axis 𝜑 ! b 𝜑 " a Speed uropod , UC b c d F r e qu e n c y Time Speed uropod Speed centroid Supplementary Figure 4 : Finding a motion variable for small timescales . ( a ) We tracked two variables that can be used to link morphodynamics with motion : the uropod and the centroid . Their velocities ( dividing by the cube root of volume for scale invariance ) are 3D and not rotationally invariant , and a simple description in terms of the speed of either does not adequately separate distinct motifs , like turning ( motif 1 ) and moving forward ( motif 2 ) . An internal reference frame is needed . ( b ) There are two options : the centroid - uropod ( UC ) axis and ellipsoid axis . A histogram shows that at times when the whole cell moves in unison , this happens more along the UC axis than the ellipsoid axis , with an example cell where the two diﬀer shown . Running means for uropods and centroids with a time window of 100s were used for long - timescale behavior . Motion in unison was taken to be when uropod speed was above 0 . 0025 s − 1 , i . e . moving more than a quarter cell length in 100s , and the distance between the uropod and centroid velocity vectors was within half the uropod speed , i . e . they were aligned . ( c ) Descriptors in terms of the speed of the uropod and centroid along the UC axis ( speed uropod , UC and speed centroid , UC ) can then diﬀerentiate motifs 1 and 2 . ( d ) These describe largely irreversible motion ( now with running means using the time windows from the uncertainty analysis , to include shorter - timescale behavior ) . speed uropod , UC has lower variance and fewer reversals , and Supplementary video 9 and Fig . 1f show examples where speed centroid , UC is much more oscillatory . We therefore selected speed uropod , UC as the cell motion variable , and referred to it simply as speed . 4 Supplementary Figure 5 : Link between run - and - stop modes and shape a speed ( s - 1 ) PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 p values r values c log 10 P ss Frequency ( Hz ) PC 1 PC 2 speed running mean ( s - 1 ) , t win = 150s Frequency ( Hz ) log 10 P ss PC 3 Speed b PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 speed Run Stop 𝜏 ! " # ( s ) 𝜏 ! " # Time lag ACF Run Stop Supplementary Figure 5 : Link between run - and - stop modes and shape . ( a ) The link between cell shape and speed is shown through correlations between the shape PCs , raw speed , and the running mean of speed with a window size of 150s . PCs 1 and 2 have a stronger correlation with long rather than short - timescale speed , indicating that shape is specialised more for migration mode than instantaneous speed , with cells in the run mode longer and thinner than those in the stop mode . p - values and r - values ( Pearson correlation coeﬃcients ) are shown . ( b ) The autocorrelations ( ACFs ) were calculated for four long videos from each of the stop and run modes . Decay timescales , τ ACF , were found using exponential decay models ﬁtted to the peaks of the oscillating ACFs . For cells in the stop mode , PC 3 is the most strongly autocorrelated , followed by PC 2 . For cells in the run mode , the main diﬀerences are a large drop in the autocorrelation of PC 3 , meaning PC 2 becomes the most autocorrelated shape variable , and an increase in the autocorrelation of speed . ( c ) The power spectra of the PC and speed time series . The run mode is also associated with larger oscillations in PC 2 and speed . Only powers above the mean variance of associated with PC uncertainty from the uropod labelling are shown . 5 Supplementary Figure 6 : Continuous wavelet transform used to map stereotyped motifs t - SNE PC 1 Time F r e qu e n c y PC 2 Morphodynamicspace PC 3 Wavelets Spectrogram a b Perplexity : 10 30 40 20 50 Random initialisation : Run 1 Run 2 Run 3 Supplementary Figure 6 : Continuous wavelet transform used to map stereotyped motifs . ( a ) The continuous wavelet transform was used to acquire a spectrogram capturing local multi - scale dynamic infor - mation from the PC time series , with two wavelet types to ensure both symmetric and antisymmetric features are captured ( ‘mexican hat’ and Gaussian 1 st derivative ) . We used 6 frequencies per wavelet , from double the Nyquist limit up to the frequencies associated with widths of inﬂuence of approximately 150s , as found from the autocorrelation analysis to be the timescale of morphodynamic organisation . The spectrogram , which represents morphodynamics at each time point , was embedded in an interpretable 2D morphodynamic space using t - SNE . ( b ) Robustness of the morphodynamic space found with t - SNE . The perplexity parameter is analogous to the number of neighbours in alternative dimensionality reduction methods , and the value used was 30 ( the default for the Scikit - learn Python package ) . Colouring four of the motifs ( top ) shows that the embeddings are similar across the perplexity range suggested in the original t - SNE paper [ 1 ] . Re - running the algorithm with a perplexity of 30 coloured by cell ( bottom ) also shows the embeddings are robust across random initialisations . 6 Supplementary Figure 7 : Global morphodynamic space with further examples . 2 Retract & front - widen ( then extend ) uropod centroid 8 Front - widen then streamline & extend 9 Edge centroid forward 11 Streamline ( minor ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 10 Streamline ( major ) 1 Front - widening 3 Retract & widen 4 Static shape / minor reaching with centroid towards rear 5 Forward - lengthen with centroid towards front 6 Streamline & extend forward 7 Reach to one side Supplementary Figure 7 : Two examples for each stereotyped motif from Fig . 4a . 7 Supplementary Figure 8 : PC dynamics of the stereotyped motifs PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 Motif 1 Motif 2 Motif 3 Motif 4 Motif 5 Motif 6 Motif 7 Motif 8 Motif 9 Motif 10 Motif 11 Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Supplementary Figure 8 : PC dynamics of the stereotyped motifs . Three principal component ( PC ) time series for each of the stereotyped motifs are shown , with a 150s time window , and aligned in the y direction so the middle times coincide . Colours indicate the PC and diﬀerent PC series have diﬀerent line styles . 8 Supplementary Figure 9 : Run mode morphodynamics a Front - widen ( fast ) 1 3 4 5 1 3 4 5 1 3 4 5 2 2 2 T + 150s T + 75s T + 112 . 5s T + 37 . 5s Ts 0 Speed ( s - 1 ) 0 . 03 F r o m To P r o b a b ili t y 1 0 b 1 2 3 4 5 6 6 6 Cell 1 Cell 2 Cell 3 Cell 4 Marginal dynamics Combined PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 Quantify complexity of dynamics using entropy PC 3 PC 2 PC 1 Entropy ( bits ) e 6 Compress Compress & front - widen Retrograde flow & extend streamline Retrograde flow & extend , then redo front - widen Retrograde flow & extend front - widen d c Supplementary Figure 9 : Run mode morphodynamics . ( a ) A morphodynamic space now formed exclu - sively from the four long videos of cells in the run mode shows the morphodynamic composition with higher resolution . ( b ) Examples of the stereotyped motifs , each over a 150s period . ( c ) Colouring by speed shows that motif 3 ( compress and front - widen ) is associated with the highest speeds . ( d ) The transition probability matrix ( sequential stereotyped peaks ) . ( e ) Marginal dynamics of each PC . These form continuums , and so transition matrices were deﬁned over points on a grid . We then quantiﬁed the entropy for the dynamics of each PC ( and compared with that of their combined dynamics ) and found an entropy minimum in PC 2 ( consistent with the autocorrelation results ) . The entropy is − P π i p ij log 2 p ij , where π i is the equilibrium distribution and p ij is the probability that the next motif to be visited after i will be j . 9 Supplementary Figure 10 : PC dynamics of the stereotyped motifs in the run mode PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 Motif 1 Motif 2 Motif 3 Motif 4 Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Motif 5 Motif 6 Supplementary Figure 10 : PC dynamics of the stereotyped motifs in the run mode . Three principal component ( PC ) time series for each of the stereotyped motifs are shown , with a 150s time window , and aligned in the y direction so the middle times coincide . Colours indicate the PC and diﬀerent PC series have diﬀerent line styles . References 1 . Van der Maaten , L . & Hinton , G . Visualizing data using t - SNE . Journal of machine learning research 9 ( 2008 ) . 10