State University of New York College at Buffalo - Buffalo State College Digital Commons at Buffalo State Creative Studies Graduate Student Master ' s Theses International Center for Studies in Creativity 8 - 2005 Cross - Cultural Studies of Implicit Theories of Creativity : A Comparative Analysis Between the United States and the Main Ethnic Groups in Singapore Suzanna J . Ramos Buffalo State College , suzannaramos @ gmail . com Advisor Dr . Gerard J . Puccio Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . buffalostate . edu / creativetheses Part of the Arts and Humanities Commons , Liberal Studies Commons , Psychology Commons , and the Sociology Commons Recommended Citation Ramos , Suzanna J . , " Cross - Cultural Studies of Implicit Theories of Creativity : A Comparative Analysis Between the United States and the Main Ethnic Groups in Singapore " ( 2005 ) . Creative Studies Graduate Student Master ' s Theses . Paper 29 . Cross - Cultural Studies of Implicit Theories of Creativity : A Comparative Analysis Between the United States and the Main Ethnic Groups in Singapore . Copyright 2005 , Suzanna Jeyanthi Ramos . Used with permission of Suzanna Jeyanthi Ramos . Cross - Cultural Studies of Implicit Theories of Creativity : A Comparative Analysis between the United States and the Main Ethnic Groups in Singapore by Suzanna Jeyanthi Ramos An Abstract of a Thesis in Creative Studies Submitted in Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Science August 2005 Buffalo State College State University of New York Department of Creative Studies ii ABSTRACT OF THESIS Cross - Cultural Studies of Implicit Theories of Creativity : A Comparative Analysis between the United States and the Main Ethnic Groups in Singapore This thesis explored the extent of influence of culture on implicit theories of creativity among laypeople from the United States and Singapore , as well as the ethnic groups in Singapore - the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , in regard to adaptive and innovative styles of creativity as well as their own conceptions of creativity . A total of 523 participants were involved in this study . They comprised 139 participants from the United States and 199 participants from Singapore , 84 Chinese , 54 Malays , and 47 Indians . The participants completed the first part of a questionnaire that consisted of a ten - point scale to rate the creativity level for the descriptors of the Adaptor and Innovator derived from Kirton’s explicit theory of creativity called the Adaptor - Innovator Theory . They also completed the second part of the questionnaire where they were asked to give words they believed were associated with creativity . The data were analyzed and compared with each other as national cultures as well as amongst the three ethnic groups in Singapore . The results revealed that the participants had an implicit belief that high creativity was associated with Kirton’s innovative style of creativity . Also , the words they believed were associated with creativity seemed to have an innovator bias . Implications of these findings raise new questions on the extent of influence of culture on laypeople’s perceptions of creativity . Recommendations for future research were also discussed . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ iii Suzanna Jeyanthi Ramos Date _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ iv Buffalo State College State University of New York Department of Creative Studies Cross - Cultural Studies of Implicit Theories of Creativity : A Comparative Analysis between the United States and the Main Ethnic Groups in Singapore A Thesis in Creative Studies by Suzanna Jeyanthi Ramos Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Science August 2005 Dates of Approval : Dr . Gerard Puccio , Thesis Advisor Department Chair & Professor Department of Creative Studies Dr . Richard Podemski Dean of Graduate Studies and Research _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ v THESIS COMMITTEE SIGNATORY Dates of Approval : Dr . Susan Keller - Mathers Assistant Professor of Creative Studies Dr . Gerard Puccio Professor of Creative Studies vi Acknowledgments I would like to thank the following individuals who played a great role in supporting and encouraging me throughout this whole process . To Hector Ramos , you have been a strong pillar of support for me . Your love for lifelong learning has always inspired me . Thank you for always being there when I needed you . I thank the Lord for blessing me with such a treasure . To Dr . Gerard Puccio , my humble gratitude and respect for all the time and effort you have so unselfishly given . You had much faith in me and challenged me to look at things differently . Your advisement and encouragement have truly been instrumental in helping me to achieve greater heights . You have helped me to grow into a “Beyonder” . To Henry Tio , thank you for volunteering to be my research assistant in Singapore . Despite your heavy schedule , you cheerfully obtained data for me and showed keen interest in this research . I am very grateful for all your help and dedication . To Virginia McIntyre , thank you for being my research assistant and helping me to obtain data from the U . S . A . I admire your resilience in continuing to be part of the team despite other personal commitments . To Dr . Steve Gareau , thank you for helping me to gain a better understanding of research methods by sharing your materials and expertise . You were patient and understanding when I had so many queries about research . I am indeed grateful for your friendship . vii To Dr . Robert Alan Black , you have been my mentor where cross - cultural studies are concerned . Our conversations on cultural perspectives derived from your travels all over the world have helped me to gain a better understanding of cross - cultural issues . Thank you for sharing your invaluable insights . To Dr . Andrei Aleinikov , you have been my mentor even before I began this master’s program . Thank you for imparting me your wisdom and knowledge in the area of creativity research and for granting me so many opportunities to continue to learn . Most of all , I want to thank my loving family – Amma , Wilson , Nora , Christina , and Nelson , for always believing in me . You are the bedrock of all my achievements . viii Table of Contents Acknowledgements………………………………………………… . ……… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi List of Tables…………………………………………………………………………… . ix Chapter III : Methods and Procedures…………………………………………… . … . 79 Chapter IV : Presentation and Analysis of Data………………………………… . … . 90 Chapter V : Conclusions , Implications for Further Study , and Recommendations…………………………………………………………………… . 113 References…………………………………………………………………………… . 133 Chapter I : Statement of the Problem………………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Chapter II : Literature Review…………………………………………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 Appendix A : Consent Form and Questionnaire………………………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172 Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories……………………… . . . . 174 Appendix C : Concept Paper……………………………………………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223 ix List of Tables Table 3 . 1 - Demographic Information of Sample A ( The United States ) ………………………………………………………… . …………81 Table 3 . 2 - Demographic Information of Sample B ( Singapore ) ……………………………………………………………… . . . ………… . 82 Table 3 . 3 . 1 - Demographic Information of Sample C ( Singapore Chinese ) ………………………………………………………… . ……… . . 83 Table 3 . 3 . 2 - Demographic Information of Sample C ( Singapore Malays ) …………………………………………………………… . ………84 Table 3 . 3 . 3 - Demographic Information of Sample C ( Singapore Indians ) …………………………………………………………… . ………84 Table 4 . 1 - Descriptive Statistics for Samples A , B , and C……………………… . . 92 Table 4 . 2 - Descriptive Statistics for Sample C ( Chinese , Malays , and Indians ) ……………………………………………… . . . . ……93 Table 4 . 3 - Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity ( Across All Samples ) ………………………………………………………………… . . 95 Table 4 . 4 - Samples’ Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity……………………………………………………………………………… . . 96 Table 4 . 5 - Chinese , Malay , and Indian ( Sample C ) Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity……………………………………… . . 97 x Table 4 . 6 - One - Way Analysis of Variance ( ANOVA ) Across Samples A , B , and C…………… . …………………………………………………… . 97 Table 4 . 7 - Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity ( Samples B and C ) ……………………………………………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 Table 4 . 8 . 3 - Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore – Chinese , Malays , and Indians ) ………………………………………………………………… . 101 Table 4 . 9 - Order Effect of Sample B Combined with Sample C ( Total Singaporean Sample ) …………………………………………… . 102 Table 4 . 10 . 2 - Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore - Malays ) ………………… . 105 Table 4 . 11 - Gender Differences Across the Full Sample Table 4 . 12 - Top Categories Reported From Sample A and Table 4 . 13 - Top Categories Reported From Each Ethnic Group in Sample C ( Singapore ) …………………………………………………………… . 111 Table 4 . 8 . 1 - Order Effect of Sample A ( The United States ) …………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99 Table 4 . 8 . 2 - Order Effect of Sample B ( Singapore ) …………………………… . . . 100 Table 4 . 10 . 1 - Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore - Chinese ) ……………… . . . 104 Table 4 . 10 . 3 - Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore - Indians ) ……… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 ( Sample A , Sample B , and Sample C ) …………………………………………… . . 107 Sample B…………………………………………………………………… . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 Chapter I : Statement of the Problem Introduction The purpose of this research is to compare the extent of influence of culture on implicit theories of creativity among laypeople from the United States and Singapore . Since Singapore consists of three main ethnic groups – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , comparisons among them will also be explored . This chapter begins with a brief background of two concepts in psychological studies ; culture and creativity , which provide the framework of this study . The chapter continues with the rationale of this research and core research questions that guided this study . Key concepts and theories associated with this study are offered in the later sections of this chapter . These are ( 1 ) issues of cross - cultural studies , ( 2 ) definitions and research in the field of creativity , ( 3 ) Kirton’s ( 1976 ) Adaption - Innovation Theory ( KAI ) , an explicit theory involved in this study and ( 4 ) implicit theories , a form of psychometric approach to the study of creativity . Background For the purpose of this study , the following definition of culture is used : Culture is “the set of attitudes , values , beliefs , and behaviors , shared by a group of people , communicated from one generation to the next via language or some 2 other means of communication” ( Matsumoto , 1994 , p . 4 ) . From the definition , it is noted that culture allows us to define who we are and what is meaningful , as well as to manage our physical and social milieu . Our cultures have a tremendous influence on the way we think and feel , the way we view the world , the way we communicate , and the way we behave . At the very heart of the concept of culture is the expectation that people brought up in different cultures will possess different values , beliefs , and motives reflected in numerous behaviors ( Kim , 2001 ) . The inclusion of culture in understanding the complexities of human behavior is no longer a topic of debate in current psychological studies or in any other area of science that deals with human behavior ( Matsumoto , 2001 ) . In fact , culture is now considered to be an important precursor and corollary of human behavior , especially in psychological studies . Over the past few decades , the conclusions and findings derived from many cross - cultural studies have challenged traditional knowledge gained in conventional psychology . These studies are done , not with the intent of reshaping psychology , but rather , to add value to the discipline to make it expansive and all - encompassing ( Adamopoulos & Lonner , 2001 ) . Apart from cross - cultural studies , psychologists have also expressed an interest in the phenomenon of creativity . Psychological research in this topic only expanded after J . P . Guilford , in his 1950 APA presidential address , made a plea to make creativity a focal point of psychological inquiry ( Guilford , 1950 ) . Many 3 psychologists responded to this call and creativity research flourished in the 1960s and early 1970s . The literature on creativity includes several of the core disciplines of psychology , mainly personal attributes , cognitive processes , the acquisition and actualization of creative potential , and the influence of social context on individuals’ creativity ( Simonton , 2000 ) . Rationale for Present Study and Core Research Questions The early research on creativity tended to adopt an individualistic perspective , where creativity was viewed as a process that occurred in the minds of individuals who possessed suitable personal characteristics and experiences ( Barron , 1968 , 1969 ; MacKinnon , 1965 ) . This person - centered perspective was rooted in the fact that the vast majority of the creativity researchers were psychologists and , as a result , adopted an individualistic perspective ( Simonton , 2000 ) . In the 1960s and 1970s , however , more psychologists began to take note that creativity should be understood within a social context ( Harrington , 1990 ) , although the magnitude of influence of cultural factors on the development and expression of creativity was generally underestimated ( Rudowicz , 2003 ) . It was only in the 1980s and 1990s that interest in the role of culture in creativity studies gained momentum , as it has been argued that “creative expression is a universal human phenomenon that is firmly grounded in culture and has its own profound effect on culture itself” ( Rudowicz , 2003 , p . 273 ) . This study will provide further insight on how culture influences the conceptualization 4 of creativity , where creativity is seen to be a mental process that cannot be divorced from the cultural system in which a particular individual functions . The results from this study can help in understanding what individuals in a given cultural group mean when referring to creativity . This in turn can be useful in formulating common cultural views of creativity as their conceptions of creativity are derived from their belief systems within that particular cultural setting . In addition to this , a survey by Raina and Raina in 1974 revealed that only 0 . 58 % of literature in creativity is devoted to cross - cultural studies . During the past decade or so , there has not been a marked increase in the number of cross - cultural studies in the Journal of Creative Behavior , Creativity Research Journal or Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology ( Raina , 1999 ) . This study serves to address this deficit by comparing the extent of influence of culture on implicit theories of creativity among laypeople from the United States and Singapore - two very different national cultures in terms of their social and cultural contexts , so as to provide a deeper understanding of the role of culture in the conception of creativity . Although there have been comparative studies between a Western culture and an Eastern culture ( Li & Shallcross , 1992 ; Soh , 1999 ; Wonder & Blake , 1992 ) , there have not been studies done in regard to ethnic groups within a particular national culture . In this study , Singapore , as a national culture , is multi - racial in nature because it comprises three main ethnic groups – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians . Comparisons among these ethnic groups will provide 5 deeper insight as to whether issues of race and other cultural mores distinct in each ethnic group play a role in how creativity is conceived . Creativity has been studied using a myriad of approaches . They include the pragmatic approach , where the concern is primarily with developing creativity ( De Bono , 1971 ; Osborn , 1953 ) ; the cognitive approach , where mental representations and processes underlying creative thought are understood ( Finke , Ward & Smith , 1992 ; Sternberg & Davidson , 1995 ) , and the psychometric approach , where a battery of tests can be designed to study creativity in individuals ( Torrance , 1974 ) . A fairly recent application of a person - oriented psychometric method is the use of implicit theories . This method has been used in investigations of implicit intelligence theories ( Lynott & Woolfolk , 1994 ; Sternberg , 1985a ) , but there have been very few studies of implicit theories of creativity ( Plucker & Renzulli , 1999 ) . This study utilizes this method of inquiry to investigate if these implicit theories match explicit theories of creativity in the literature . In this case , the explicit theory of Kirton’s ( 1976 ) Adaption and Innovation Inventory ( KAI ) , where he posits that individuals lie within a cognitive style continuum ranging from adaptive to innovative orientation , will be compared to laypeople’s implicit theories of creativity . This study will investigate whether laypeople’s implicit theories of creative style indicate that adaptors and innovators are equally creative and that the style of creativity is orthogonal to level of creativity as posited by Kirton . 6 On a broader perspective , the purpose of this research is to provide a clear understanding of the implicit theories of creativity in various cultures so that the meaning of creativity can be fully appreciated on a global basis . It permits us to question our understanding of creativity , which remains skewed because it is based on studies where the role of culture has been marginalized . Perspectives on creativity can be extended when there is greater sensitivity to how different cultural societies conceive creativity in terms of the creative process and the forms and expressions of creativity . Finally , the International Center for Studies in Creativity in Buffalo State College has been engaged in a program of research that had examined implicit theories of creativity in various cultural settings like the United States ( Puccio & Chimento , 2001 ) , Argentina ( Gonzalez , 2003 ) , Saudi Arabia ( Alkeaid , 2004 ) , and Japan ( Muneyoshi & Kagawa , 2004 ) . This study can add to the repository of research already conducted in these cultures so that it provides an extension to the body of knowledge in this area . The specific research questions that guided this study were as follows : 1 . Using Kirton’s explicit theory of Adaption and Innovation to access laypeople’s implicit views of creativity , to what extent do laypeople from the United States and Singapore have similar views of Kirton’s contention that adaptors and innovators are equally creative ? 7 2 . Using Kirton’s explicit theory of Adaption and Innovation to access laypeople’s implicit views of creativity , to what extent do different ethnic groups within Singapore ( i . e . Chinese , Malays , and Indians ) have similar views of Kirton’s contention that adaptors and innovators are equally creative ? 3 . When asked to define creativity in their own words , to what extent do laypeople from different national cultures in the United States and Singapore hold similar or different conceptions of creativity ? 4 . When asked to define creativity in their own words , to what extent do laypeople from different ethnic groups in Singapore hold similar or different conceptions of creativity ? To ensure a clear understanding of this study , definitions and explanation of the main concepts and theories that underlie this investigation will be provided . They are ( 1 ) Cross - Cultural Psychology ( 2 ) Creativity ( 3 ) Adaption - Innovation Theory and ( 4 ) Implicit Theories . These will be dealt with in the following sections of this chapter . 8 Cross - Cultural Psychology The term ‘culture’ does not have a unilateral definition . It could be defined from a historical perspective where traditions are passed on to future generations or from a behavioral perspective , that is , the learned , shared ways of behaving in life . It could also be defined from a symbolic perspective where arbitrarily assigned meanings are shared by the society . Yet again , it could be defined from a normative perspective , which are , the ideals , values , and rules for living ( Jandt , 2004 ) . Thus , it is acknowledged that culture can be one or a combination of all these perspectives . The common thread underlying these perspectives , is that culture is learned rather than biologically inherited and involves arbitrarily assigned , symbolic meanings . Individuals are not viewed as being manipulated by their cultures but rather , “as cognizers , appraisers , and interpreters of them” ( Segall , Lonner & Berry , 1998 , p . 1104 ) . Culture is not a static construct but created daily through contacts , exchanges , and communication between individuals and their social milieu . In fact , Segall ( 1979 ) asserted that “human behavior is meaningful only when viewed in the sociocultural context in which it occurs” ( p . 3 ) . Although there have been several articles calling for more attention to culture in psychological research ( Betancourt & Lopez , 1993 ; Fowers & Richardson , 1996 ; Greenfield , 1997 ) , psychology in general did not regard “culture” as a factor of influence on the behavior of humankind . One example of this is an inventory of the contents of 9 undergraduate textbooks in psychology done several years ago , which showed that culture in relation to behavior had been nearly always absent ( Lonner , 1990 ) . However , it can be noted that during the past few years , there have been attempts to remedy the situation ( e . g . Sternberg , 1995 ; Wade & Tavris , 1996 ) . One of the first pioneers to explore possible relationships between culture and basic psychological processes was W . H . R . Rivers of Cambridge University , who led a group of psychologists and anthropologists on an expedition in 1901 to gather seminal data in the east coast of India and the South Pacific ( Adamopolous & Lonner , 2001 ) . Although there were few notable exceptions , the first two thirds of the last century were marked with a lack of a coherent program of research to guide such expeditions . In fact , such expeditions were what Adamopolous and Lonner ( 2001 ) termed as “sabbatical opportunism” ( p . 13 ) , where psychologists , mainly from the United States or United Kingdom , would travel to exotic places and test a principle or theory in another culture . A statistically significant difference would usually emerge and this was then reported , often implying that the two populations had different responses in their underlying psychological processes ( Jahoda , 1980 ) . Although these reports were illuminating at that time , there was still a lack of continual effort to develop a plan of methodical and well - organized research . As Jahoda ( 1980 ) pointed out , the result has been largely “a patchwork – often fascinating and sometimes insightful , but not as a cumulative science” ( p . 71 ) . There is either a search for differences across groups , or for similarities , or as is 10 increasingly the case , for both ( Jahoda & Krewer , 1997 ) . However , the overall image of cross - cultural psychology as an isolated and disconnected discipline changed radically when a meeting was organized at the University of Nigeria in Ibadan in 1965 . This meeting attracted about 100 social psychologists and it served as a platform in which various perspectives of social psychology were discussed with respect to their cultural generalizability and theoretical grounding ( Adamaopolous & Lonner , 2001 ) . The main catalyst was the inaugural meeting of the International Association for Cross - Cultural Psychology ( IACCP ) held in Hong Kong in 1972 . It was a meeting of more than 100 psychologists , anthropologists , and psychiatrists , where there was an international and cross - cultural focus . This event is held once every two years and it was only recently , in 1998 , that its first ever international congress took place in the United States ( Segall , Lonner & Berry , 1998 ) . Individuals like Gustav Jahoda , Harry Triandis , and Douglass R . Price Williams are among a small number of scholars instrumental in initiating the ‘modern’ movement in cross - cultural psychology ( Adamopoulos & Lonner , 2001 ) . Basically , “Cross - cultural psychology…comprises the many ways of studying culture as an important context for human psychological development and behavior” ( Segall et . al , 1998 , p . 1102 ) . Furthermore , Triandis ( 1980 ) , in his introduction to Handbook of Cross - Cultural Psychology , underscores the importance of cumulative science , where he stated that “Cross - cultural 11 psychology is concerned with the systematic study of behavior and experience as it occurs in different cultures , is influenced by culture , or results in changes in existing cultures” ( p . 1 ) . The next section provides an overview of creativity research as well as the place of culture in creativity studies . Creativity As stated earlier in this chapter , J . P . Guilford , in his 1950 APA Presidential Address , challenged psychologists to pay more attention to what was considered to be a neglected but fundamental attribute , namely creativity ( Guilford , 1950 ) . Guilford reported that less than two tenths of one percent of the entries found in Psychological Abstracts up to 1950 was devoted to creativity . In contrast , from 1975 to 1994 , there was an increase , where one half of one percent of the articles indexed in Psychological Abstracts concerned creativity ( Sternberg & Lubart , 1996 ) . This highlights the fact that interest in creativity has grown . As to the definitions of creativity , most of the authors in the Handbook of Creativity support the idea that creativity involves the creation of an original and useful product ( Mayer , 1999 ) . For example , Feist ( 1999 ) stated that “Psychologists and philosophers who study the creative process , person , and product are in consensus about what is ‘creative’ : novel and adaptive solutions to problems” ( p . 274 ) . Also , according to Nickerson ( 1999 ) , " Although not everyone considers it possible to articulate clear objective criteria for identifying creative 12 products , novelty is often cited as one of their distinctive characteristics , and some form of utility – usefulness , appropriateness , or social value – as another” ( p . 392 ) . Thus , it can be noted that there seems to be a general agreement on the basic definition of creativity . The underpinning idea is that creativity involves the creation of new and useful products , which include ideas and concrete objects . It also follows then that creative individuals are those who create these new and useful products , and that creative thinking processes occur whenever these products come into being . The diversity of the field of creativity can be illustrated by providing a few examples of research studies . One particular area is the view that creativity is an attribute of individuals ( e . g . Davis , 1989 , Torrance & Khatena , 1970 ) . Others include the unique characteristics of people ( e . g . Hall & MacKinnon , 1969 , Simonton , 1999 ) , analysis of creative production ( e . g . Besemer & Treffinger , 1981 , Treffinger & Poggio , 1972 , Wallach , 1976 ) as well as creativity as a cognitive process ( e . g . Runco & Okuda , 1988 , Ward , Smith & Finke , 1999 ) . Apart from the people , product , and process , another question that arises is whether creativity is a personal or social phenomenon , where creativity is understood with respect to the social context ( Mayer , 1999 ) . The first of these social contexts is the interpersonal environment , for example , the expectation of displaying creativity at work or in school and the intrinsic and extrinsic incentives for performing a task ( Amabile , 1996 ) . Another social context is that creativity 13 takes place within a particular scientific , artistic or intellectual discipline , where creativity occurs as a result of the dynamic interactions between the creator ( the individual in question ) , domain ( a set of rules or range of techniques that define a particular approach to creativity ) and the field ( persons or institutions within the same domain that decide the quality of the creations ) ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1988 ) . Of particular importance to this study is the third social context - the socio - cultural environment , where sociologists and anthropologists have long pointed out that creativity is mostly a socio - cultural phenomenon ( e . g . , Kroeber , 1944 ) . These include political influences ( Simonton , 1984 ) , bilingualism ( Lambert , Tucker & d’ Anglejan , 1973 ) or ethnic marginality ( Nemeth & Kwan , 1987 ) , all of which affect the degree of creativity that is manifested by a corresponding population . These studies highlight the fact that the concept of creativity cannot be isolated from a social , cultural , and historical milieu . Also , because creativity permeates in areas such as motivation , attitudes , emotions , and thinking ( Nisbett , Peng , Choi & Norenzayan , 2001 ) , it would indeed be beneficial to explore how culture influences people’s perceptions of creativity . Furthermore , to study creativity by focusing on the individual alone is “like trying to understand how an apple tree produces fruit by looking only at the tree and ignoring the sun and the soil that supports its life” ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1990 , p . 203 ) . One must consider the holistic nature of the individual as part of an evolving system within a cultural setting . As M . K . Raina ( 1999 ) succinctly noted , “There exists a cultural and national dimension to both the concept and the 14 phenomenon of creativeness that affect creative process and its end result” ( p . 454 ) . Now that cross - cultural psychology and creativity have been briefly explored , the next section will deal with a particular explicit theory of cognitive style , Kirton’s ( 1976 ) Adaption - Innovation Theory , which focuses on the preferred style of individuals for creativity and problem solving . Adaption - Innovation Theory Prior to the mid - 1970s , the psychometric approach to creativity assessment was dominated by a focus on measuring an individual ' s level of creativity . Michael Kirton , a British psychologist , introduced a different approach that focused on an individual ' s style of creativity . He concluded that people have different preferred creativity styles with regard to how they solve problems . It is based on the assumption that all individuals are creative but they differ in their creativity styles . His theory offered a new approach from other theories of creativity , where much of the research focused on the level approach , where the focus was on people’s ability to produce novel and useful ideas , solutions to problems , and challenges and products ( Mudd , 1996 ) . Kirton ( 1976 ) developed the Kirton Adaption - Innovation Inventory ( KAI ) , which measures cognitive style differences along a single continuum . At one end of the continuum is the high Adaptor , who tends to accept the problem and stay within the current paradigms , rules , 15 policies , and structures . They work to improve on them and generate solutions that are conventional , less disruptive , and easier to implement . At the other end of the continuum , is the high Innovator , who tends to abandon the current paradigm and redefines the problem with a new approach . Thus , Adaptors do things better while Innovators do things differently when solving problems ( Kirton , 1999 ) . Despite their various styles , Kirton asserts that we are all creative , albeit in various ways . For this particular study , the KAI theory is utilized to access the implicit theories of creativity from laypeople to investigate if their theories of creativity match the explicit theory of KAI . In other words , the assumption is that if there is indeed a matching between these two types of theories , laypeople will have an innate understanding that they are creative but in different ways within the continuum of an Adaptor or Innovator . The next section provides an explanation of implicit theories and its relationship with implicit theories of creative style from four studies conducted in countries comprising various cultures . Implicit Theories of Creativity Perhaps one of the more recent developments in the social sciences in general is implicit or folk theories of psychological constructs . Unlike explicit theories where they are “opinions and views held by scientists” ( Runco , 1999a , p . 16 27 ) and typically based on “some psychological or scientific construct” ( Runco , 1990 , p . 236 ) , implicit theories are tacit knowledge held by an individual and are often “personal rather than shared” ( Runco , 1999a , p . 27 ) . They are theories or conceptions held in people’s minds and can serve as “mental prototypes that can be used to decide if a product , behavior or person is creative” ( Davis , 2004 , p . 70 ) . Thus , their thoughts and actions are guided by their own personal definitions of creativity and they have their own beliefs about how to foster and judge creativity , which may be similar to the theories developed by experts in the field of creativity . Sternberg ( 1993 ) underscores the reason for the study of implicit theories : “In studying implicit theories , one is trying to find out what the stereotypes are , to find out how people process the information” ( p . 16 ) . For example , in a study by Runco , Johnson , and Bear ( 1993 ) , they found that teachers and parents held similar implicit definitions of creativity that included adjectives such as ( a ) adventurous , ( b ) enthusiastic , ( c ) active , ( d ) artistic , ( e ) curious , and ( f ) imaginative . Runco’s ( 1990 ) research also compared implicit theories of artists and non - artists . He found that both groups agreed that artists were imaginative and expressive and that everyday creativity was characterized by being active . However , artists added ( a ) humorous , ( b ) open - minded , and ( c ) emotional while non - artists endorsed ( a ) intelligent , ( b ) original , and ( c ) draw well . Thus , it can be noted that the core characteristics of creativity reported by non - artists were similar to the implicit theories by the artists themselves . 17 Furthermore , when college students were involved in studies of their implicit theories of creativity , wisdom , and intelligence , it was noted that characteristics of definitions of creativity provided by the college students were quite different from those definitions provided for intelligence and wisdom . For example , creativity was associated with ( a ) aesthetic taste , ( b ) imagination , and ( c ) flexibility , intelligence was associated with ( a ) practical problem - solving ability and ( b ) goal orientation , while wisdom was associated with ( a ) reasoning ability and ( b ) judgment ( Sternberg , 1990 ) . The conclusion was that implicit theories of creativity generally correspond with explicit theories and that implicit theories of creativity are markedly different from implicit theories of other psychological constructs ( Plucker & Renzulli , 1999 ) . However , implicit theories of creativity apparently may be similar but not necessarily identical on a worldwide basis . One of the main considerations is cultural values . In India , Kapur , Subramanyam , and Shah ( 1997 ) reported that Indian scientists described creativity as contributing to something new , with the abilities to synthesize and integrate , both of which distinguished creative scientists from just simply being productive scientists . Also , to them , scientific creativity was governed by rules and logic and seen to have a greater impact on society compared to artistic creativity . When describing personality traits , adjectives like ( a ) curiosity , ( b ) self - motivation , ( c ) risk - taking , and ( d ) open - mindedness were offered . However , they considered themselves less creative than their Western counterparts and attributed this to the “cultural influence of 18 Indian society , in which the obedience , religion , superstition , and social etiquette required for diverse hierarchical relationships are encouraged more than individual development” ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 , p . 275 ) . Furthermore , when an explicit theory of creativity was used to access implicit theories from laypeople of various cultures , they did not seem to correspond . For example , in contrast to Kirton’s assertion that adaptors and innovators are equally creative , Puccio and Chimento ( 2001 ) explored the perceptions of the adaptors and innovators of American laypeople and found that the participants rated the innovator as more creative than the adaptor . The implication is that the laypeople did not differentiate between level and style but that the innovator style was associated with a higher level of creativity than the adaptor style . Another study was conducted in Argentina ( Gonzalez , 2003 ) , where the perceptions of laypeople there indicated a similar conclusion . The preliminary findings seem to indicate a perceptual bias across cultures towards the innovator style of creativity , which is in direct contrast to Kirton’s theoretical position . The Argentineans associated words like ( a ) imagination , ( b ) intelligence , ( c ) ingenious , and ( d ) innovation to creativity . Similarly , investigations conducted in Japan ( Muneyoshi & Kagawa , 2004 ) showed that the innovator was seen as more creative . The preliminary conclusion is that from the Japanese perspective , the characteristics of an innovator are rather similar to Japanese traditional artists . In fact , the words 19 associated with creativity , in order of frequency are ( a ) new , ( b ) create , ( c ) art , and ( d ) intuition . However , when Alkeaid ( 2004 ) conducted his research in Saudi Arabia , the results showed that participants significantly perceived the adaptor as more creative than the innovator . He attributes this to the cultural factors involving family , school , university , and the workplace . In fact , some of the characteristics that Kirton described in regard to the innovator are not appreciated in Saudi Arabian culture , for example , ( a ) seen as abrasive , ( b ) impractical , and ( c ) irreverent of group consensual views . From all these studies , it can be noted that laypeople’s implicit theories of creativity do not seem to correspond with Kirton’s view that adaptors and innovators are equally creative . Furthermore , these studies show that cultural factors play a significant role in the way creativity is viewed . Statement of Significance The focus of this research is to compare the extent of influence of culture on implicit theories of creativity among laypeople from the United States and Singapore . Furthermore , a comparison of the implicit conceptions of creativity amongst the three main ethnic groups within Singapore – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , will also be explored . In the literature , it is noted that interest in implicit theories of creativity only gained momentum in the late 1980s in North America and only then in the 1990s did empirical studies of implicit 20 theories of creativity in other cultural settings were found ( Rudowicz , 2003 ) . Examples of these cultural settings include Britain ( Fryer & Collings , 1991 ) , Finland ( Saarilahti , Cramond , & Sieppi , 1999 ) , Hong Kong and China ( Chan & Chan , 1999 ) , and India ( Singh , 1987 ) . In all these cultural settings , the assumption is that each national culture represents a certain implicit conception of creativity . However , it is argued that neither the cultures in the West nor the East are totally homogenous as there are intra - sociocultural dynamics at work ( Khaleefa , Erdos & Ashria , 1996 ; Rudowicz , 2003 ) . Since there is no research to date that highlights the heterogeneous nature of national cultures , the purpose of this research is to extend the understanding of creativity not only within the particular national cultures of the United States and Singapore but in the sub - cultures that make up the national culture of Singapore . In this case , a comparative analysis of the implicit conception of creativity from the three main ethnic groups can allow for more meaningful interpretation of creativity as it serves to demonstrate the effects of traditions , values , and sociopolitical factors on creative expression within a particular national culture . Another area of significance is the contribution of knowledge in the wider arena of cross - cultural psychology . This form of psychological studies highlights the emergence of important themes in the body of literature , such as the role of contextual influences , applications to issues of social policy , and cognitive development ( Gardiner , 2001 ) . Since culture and creativity are two constructs 21 associated with cross - cultural psychology , the findings and insights gained from this research can add new knowledge to this field as well as to raise questions on the validity of adopting Western concepts and instruments , which are assumed to be of universal value . As noted by Eysenck ( 1995 ) : Psychology is split along a number of fault lines…Such a science needs concepts , theories , and measuring instruments which are as universal as possible ; otherwise our empirical findings will remain incapable of generalization beyond the narrow confines of a particular nation or state . Psychology cannot be American , or Japanese , or African ; it must be universal . We can and must achieve greater unification through seeking greater cross - cultural coherence . ( p . 26 ) Furthermore , in cross - cultural psychology , there has been a significant increase in concern with cultural diversity within a multi - cultural society , where cultural societies within a pluralistic society are deemed as ‘cultures’ within their own right ( Camilleri & Malewska - Peyre , 1997 ) . This is the challenge facing cross - cultural psychology as culture is seen to be a central rather than a peripheral entity in psychological inquiry . In a similar vein , this research highlights this challenge in the field of creativity . Is creativity a culturally - loaded term or a term devoid of cultural connotations ? Do theories of creativity developed from empirical studies in the United States represent the more than 90 % of the rest of the world’s population ? The field of creativity calls for a need for a cross - cultural theory of creativity where a more comprehensive theory of creativity can be developed and formulated . 22 Summary This chapter briefly introduced the importance of taking cultural settings into account when studying people’s psychological constructs as well as the relevance of conducting cross - cultural studies to provide a holistic view of creativity . The rationale for conducting this research as well as the core research questions that guided this study was offered . The chapter also covered salient points on the four main pillars of this study , namely cross - cultural psychology , creativity , Kirton’s Adaption - Innovation Theory and implicit theories , as well as a statement of significance of this particular study . Chapter Two further defines the concepts and relationships between cross - cultural psychology , creativity , cognitive style , and implicit theories . A historical perspective between Western and Eastern ideologies will also be presented to gain a better understanding of cognitive differences between them . Finally , a comparison of cultural dimensions between the United States and Singapore will be explored to highlight the distinctiveness of each national culture . 23 Chapter II : Literature Review Introduction Chapter One briefly introduced two concepts in psychological studies – creativity and culture , which provide the framework for this particular study . The nature of implicit theories and the relevance and benefits of exploring people’s implicit views of creativity were also explored . In addition to this , a brief discussion of Kirton’s Adaption - Innovation Theory was presented as this explicit theory served to access the implicit theories of laypeople in this study . The specific research questions of this study and the statement of significance were also included . The purpose of this chapter is to review the literature associated with key concepts of ( a ) implicit theories , ( b ) cross - cultural psychology , ( c ) creativity , and ( d ) cognitive style and their interrelationships . This chapter also presents an overview of a comparative analysis between the national cultures of Singapore and the United States . To set the stage for further discussion of Easterners and Westerners , it should be noted that the terms ‘East’ or ‘West’ are very broad terms that cannot be defined easily ( Lau , Hui & Ng , 2004 ) . The terms ‘Asian’ or ‘Eastern’ usually refer to East Asian countries like China and other countries influenced by its culture like Japan , Taiwan , and Korea , as most published work on cross - cultural studies involve these groups ( Lau et al . 2004 ) . For the purposes of this literature 24 review , the researcher has included another Asian country that is not East Asian ; and that is India , since there are general similarities in terms of the social and cultural aspects distinct from Western countries . One of these similarities is the tradition that traces its origin from Asian thought like Buddhism , Confucianism , Taoism , and Hinduism ( Word Reference . com Dictionary ) . As for the term “Western’ , although a broad brush term , this usually refers to the United States , Canada , western Europe , Australia , and New Zealand ( Weiner , 2000 ) . One of the main features is that it has a long association with ancient Israel and Greece and , the ideas of Christianity , capitalism , as well as the scientific method , are inherently different from the Eastern cultures ( Weiner , 2000 ) . Implicit Theories Every individual uses implicit theories in daily life . These implicit theories are also termed as lay theories , naïve theories , intuitive theories , common sense theories , background beliefs ( Hong , Levy & Chiu , 2001 ) , or self - theories ( Dweck , 1999 ) . Implicit theories influence people’s inferences , reactions , and judgments towards themselves , other people , and the situations they may face . They may not necessarily be aware of their own implicit theories as well as the impact of these theories on their social understanding . The emergence of the importance of implicit theories stemmed from Kelly’s ( 1955 ) work on the theory of personality . According to Kelly , “a person’s 25 processes are psychologically channelized by the ways in which he anticipates events , and that these ways exist in the form of constructs” ( Kelly , 1955 , p . 120 ) . Thus , a major component of personality involves personal constructs or intuitive assumptions about the self and the social reality that surrounds that individual . In his view , just as hypotheses of any scientific investigation requires implicit assumptions that help to interpret any scientific findings , the assumptions of a naïve model of an individual can shed light on the way information about the self and other people is processed , understood , and applied . Later , Heider’s ( 1958 ) seminal work on laypeople’s theories indicated that naïve perceivers often try to process and understand their social world in a way scientists do . People generally create hypotheses based on their implicit theories and frequently test their efficacy . Although many of these theories may lack the rigor of scientific theories , people tend to rely on them to create “a stable , meaning system and to understand , interpret , and predict their social world in a relatively stable way” ( Hong , Levy & Chiu , 2001 , p . 98 ) . In fact , Kruglanski ( 1990 ) views laypeople as intuitive scientists – because just like scientists , laypeople use implicit theories to understand events and make sense of them by making inferences on their social reality . The role of implicit theories in the identification , organization , and interpretation of information has given rise to the increasing acceptance of its value among both cognitive and social psychologists ( Carey & Smith , 1993 , Dweck , Chiu & Hong , 1995 ) , clinical psychologists ( Beck , 1996 ) and cross - 26 cultural psychologists ( Shweder , 1993 ; Shweder & Levine , 1984 ) . Studies have been conducted on the role of implicit theories and their influence on self - perception ( Ross , 1989 ; Sternberg , 1985a ) , judgments of others ( Dweck , et al . , 1995 ; Levy & Dweck , 1998 ; Wright & Murphy , 1984 ) , predictions to behavior ( Henderson & Dweck , 1990 ) , as well as the study of groups ( Haslam & Fiske , 1992 : Hirschfield , 1998 ) . People have at their disposal tools to interpret , explain , and predict human behavior . They develop beliefs that organize their world and provide meaning to their experiences . In fact , Dweck ( 1999 ) terms these beliefs as “meaning systems” ( p . xi ) . These meaning systems can create diverse psychological worlds that lead them to think , feel , and behave differently in particular ways . Furthermore , implicit theories “need to be discovered rather than invented because they already exist , in some form , in people’s heads” ( Sternberg , 1985b , p . 608 ) . He further explains that when such theories are discovered , they can be valuable in helping to formulate the common views that dominate thinking about a particular psychological construct , be it laypeople of one cultural group or a group of psychologists . According to Kelly ( 1955 ) , in order to understand constructs , there needs to be a way to concretize them . Because people’s theories are mostly implicit , systematic effort and investigation needs to be carried out to surface and identify these theories and to make sense of their relevance to interpreting human actions . A search in the literature on implicit theories revealed that a high 27 proportion of such theories have been studied and utilized in the area of intelligence . In fact , Sternberg ( 1985b ) has indicated that the largest number of studies of implicit theories has been carried out in the area of intelligence . In view of this , in order to understand the various types of implicit theories and the models associated with them , it would be worthwhile to delve into this particular domain . Implicit Theories and Intelligence A literature search through the relevant databases that involve studies in intelligence shows that explicit theories have dominated the literature . For example , there are psychometric theories like Guilford’s ( 1967 , 1982 ) Structure - of - Intellect Model , Spearman’s ( 1927 ) theory of intelligence and Vernon’s ( 1950 ) hierarchical model of intelligence ; cognitive theories such as Sternberg’s ( 1983 ) componential theory of intelligence or developmental theories like Piaget’s ( 1972 ) theory of equilibration . All these represent explicit theories of intelligence . However , there seems to be a decreasing trend in the literature with regard to explicit theories of intelligence as there are vast differences of how psychologists view intelligence since there is a realization that there is a lack of a common accepted definition on which a particular explicit theory can be based on ( Sternberg , 1982 , 1985b ) . In view of this , there has been a growing interest in implicit theories because implicit theories from scientists or laypeople can be 28 useful to help formulate a conceptual framework on which explicit theories can be further developed ( Sternberg , 1985b ) . In general , people have different ideas to ascertain the meaning of intelligence . From the literature , three kinds of implicit theories will be presented in the sub - sections that follow . They are ( a ) the prototype model , ( b ) the exemplar model , and ( c ) the entity and incremental theories . These three models are pertinent to this study as they serve to provide how laypeople in this study perceive the construct of creativity and they can also provide a means of interpreting the data obtained for this study . The Prototype Model The prototype model was initially suggested by Neisser ( 1979 ) , which is built upon an approach supported by Rosch ( 1975 ) in the categorization of colors and physical objects . According to Olssen , Wennerholm , and Lyxzen ( 2004 ) “people form abstract summary representations of categories and form classification decisions based on the similarity of an item to the prototypes” ( p . 936 ) . The idea is that there are no defining components of a construct such as ‘intelligence’ , but there exists typical features . Thus , the more of these typical features that characterize a person , the more intelligent that individual is viewed to be . Neisser ( 1979 ) postulated that intelligence is cognitively stored as a prototype , which consists of a template of attributes representing an ideal intelligent individual . The way we judge others as intelligent tends to match the 29 attributes in whatever prototype of intelligence we hold . There has been much empirical support for this view ( Minda & Smith , 2001 ; Smith & Minda , 2000 ; Sternberg , 1985a , 1988 ; Sternberg , Conway , Ketron & Bernstein , 1981 ) . Since implicit theories are constructions by individuals , the most direct way of getting people to articulate these theories is simply by asking them what they are . For example , Sternberg , Conway , Ketron , and Bernstein ( 1981 ) conducted a study that involved experts and laypeople . Lists of intelligent and unintelligent behaviors were elicited from these individuals and they were asked to rate their defining features in an ideally intelligent person . The results of the experts and laypeople were amazingly similar . In fact , a factor analysis of the results revealed similar basic factors that included ( a ) practical problem - solving ability , ( b ) verbal ability , and ( c ) social competence . Other studies also support the view that laypeople’s conceptions of intelligence are relatively close to the views held by experts ( Fitzgerald & Mellor , 1988 ; Raty & Snellman , 1997 ; Siegler & Richards , 1982 ; Sternberg , 1985b , 1988 ; Yussen & Kane , 1985 ) . Another finding was that subjects not only utilized the three factors of practical problem - solving ability , verbal ability , and social competence , they also appeared to use them to rate their own intelligence as well as to evaluate the intelligence of other people ( Sternberg , 1985a ) . Other studies supporting this have been done by Yussen and Kane ( 1985 ) and Siegler and Richards ( 1982 ) . Thus , there seems to be a consensus that a person is viewed as intelligent to the extent that s / he resembles some implicit prototype of what s / he imagines an 30 intelligent person to be . Also , as Sternberg ( 1985b ) points out , despite the numerous standardized tests , it seems that the largest proportion of people’s evaluations on abilities is informal , observational , and not based on psychometric approaches . In short , people use their implicit theories to make their judgments . The Exemplar Model Apart from the prototype theory , another theory that explains the representation of concepts is the exemplar model ( Paulhus & Landolt , 2000 ; Smith & Zarate , 1992 ) . In this theory , people represent categories by storing exemplars of that category “as separate memory traces rather than as abstracted prototypes , and classify items based on their similarity to these stored exemplars” ( Olssen , Wennerholm & Lyxzen , 2004 , p . 936 ) . Thus , an individual’s cognitive conception of “intelligence” , for example , contains memories or experiences of intelligent individuals with whom the perceiver associates . Just like the prototype model , there has been much empirical research in this area ( Hintzman , 1986 ; Nosofsky , 1986 , 1992 ) . For example , Paulhus and Landolt ( 2000 ) examined the constancy across sixteen years of famous exemplars who were reported by college students . The reasoning was that the popularity of the exemplars cited would reveal something about a culture’s conception of intelligence . Popular exemplars included Albert Einstein , Leonardo Da Vinci and William Shakespeare . It was noted that the top 15 exemplars accounted for 83 % of the reports received by the college students . 31 This suggests that a relatively small group of exemplars played a significant role in the conception of intelligence . Paulhus , Wehr , Harms , and Strasser ( 2002 ) built on this research and conducted further investigations on implicit theories of intelligence . Their studies revealed that individuals like Mother Theresa , Martin Luther King , Mahatma Gandhi , and Jesus Christ epitomize intelligence . This seems to relate with Emmons’ ( 2000 ) study where he noted that the ability to understand spiritual concepts and to apply them to everyday problems is considered to be a form of intelligence . Thus , Paulhus et al . ( 2002 ) point out that laypeople may not share the traditional explicit approaches to intelligence . In fact , there seems to be an overlap in the domains of personality and intelligence as exemplified by studies such as Ackerman and Heggestad ( 1997 ) where extensive meta - analysis personality - intellectual ability correlations are provided . Exemplars need not be individuals held in high esteem . Another study by Smith and Zarate ( 1992 ) highlighted the notion that specific past experiences with the individual in question or other individuals as well as basic abstract knowledge , influence perceptions and social judgments of people and groups . For example , the authors provide an example of Saddam Hussein , who might be judged to be dangerous not only based directly on his attributes and acts , but consciously or unconsciously , may remind the perceiver of Adolf Hitler , whom the perceiver considers dangerous . They also provide evidence that even something as inconsequential as to the fact that Saddam Hussein wears a moustache will 32 tend to increase his dangerousness . Another example in the domain of intelligence is that people can associate an exemplar of intelligence like Einstein with coincidental features like a disheveled appearance . Thus , they inadvertently associate this with intelligence . These findings suggest that people store information and judgments in memory linked to specific exemplars and generalize those attributes to new stimuli based on those stored exemplars . During the last thirty years , numerous researchers have shown preference for exemplar models over prototype models ( e . g . Medin , Altom , Edelson & Freko , 1982 ; Smith & Minda , 2000 ) . However , there have been researchers articulating that the exemplar model may not be accurate ( e . g . Minda & Smith , 2001 ; Smith , Murray & Minda , 1997 ) and contend that the formation of prototypes occurs first in the representation of categories . This controversy in the literature has still not resolved itself . So far , the two implicit theories that have been reviewed are the prototype model , which hinges on the typical features associated with a particular construct , and the exemplar model , where memories or experiences of a particular construct are associated . The third model is the entity and incremental model , where it is proposed that there are basically two worldviews of a particular construct – a static worldview as well as a dynamic world view . This will be dealt with in greater detail in the next sub - section . 33 At this juncture , it should be noted that ‘entity theorists’ and ‘incremental theorists’ refer to the individuals or laypeople involved in the studies cited in the following sub - section , and not the psychologists who carried out the studies . Entity and Incremental Theories Research by Dweck , Chiu , and Hong ( 1995a ) have led to the identification of implicit theories that they believe set the stage for analyzing and interpreting human behavior and actions . This refers specifically to the assumptions that people make about the malleability of personal attributes . The entity theory is the belief that human attributes are fixed and by and large , resistant to change . On the other hand , the incremental theory is the belief that human attributes are malleable and can be developed . There is mounting literature that demonstrates that these two theories give rise to distinct patterns of social perception ( Henderson & Dweck , 1990 ; Levy , Plaks , Hong , Chiu & Dweck , 2001 ; Plaks , Levy , Dweck & Stroessner , 2004 ; Zhao & Dweck , 1994 ) . For example , an entity theory of intelligence is the belief that intelligence is a fixed trait that cannot be changed or developed . On the other hand , an incremental theory of intelligence is the belief that intelligence can be increased and developed through effort and training . The underlying assumption of this theoretical model is that the conception of personal attributes as fixed traits will emphasize on traits to understand human behavior and actions , while the conception of personal attributes as dynamic 34 qualities may lessen the importance on traits ( Dweck , et al . , 1995a ) . The implication is that an entity theorist will tend to understand an individual’s behaviors or outcomes in terms of that person’s fixed traits more than an incremental theorist . Also , an incremental theorist will place more emphasis on other factors apart from an individual’s traits , such as , emotional states , needs , intentions , related situations , and prior behaviors . When connected to cross - cultural studies , for instance , it was noted that U . S . samples reported stronger beliefs in traits than contextual factors , a feature consistent in individualistic cultures than in collectivist cultures ( Markus & Kitayama , 1998 ; Triandis , 1995 ) . On the other hand , collectivist cultures like East Asian cultures place more emphasis on contextual information ( Choi , Nisbett & Norenzayan , 1999 ) . In addition to this , understanding these two theories can help explain why very bright individuals may display a helpless pattern where they tend to denigrate their abilities while less intelligent individuals may display a master - oriented pattern , where they do not focus on their failures , but rather , seek ways to improve themselves . For example , Diener and Dweck ( 1978 , 1980 ) highlight the fact that once students have adopted a particular theory of intelligence , it affects what they value , how they approach and manage intellectual tasks , and how they interpret and respond to the situation . For instance , they gave fifth - and sixth - grade students a series of conceptual problems to solve . All of them managed to solve the first eight problems , but the next four problems proved to be too difficult for children their age . As their problem - solving strategies , along 35 with the thoughts and feelings they expressed , were tracked , the researchers found two very distinct patterns emerge . One group showed the helpless response where they quickly denigrated their abilities and blamed their intelligence for their failures . Even more striking was that despite their earlier unbroken success at being able to solve the first eight problems , they lost perspective on the successes they had achieved earlier . In fact , when asked to remember how many problems they had solved correctly ( there were eight ) and how many problems they had difficulty with ( there were four ) , they remembered only five successes , but remembered six failures . They had actually shrunk their successes and inflated their failures , perhaps because the failures were very meaningful to them . However , the other group ( the mastery - oriented group ) recalled the numbers quite correctly . Also , they did not focus on reasons for the failures . In fact , they did not even consider themselves to be failing and displayed a positive demeanor throughout the task . Other studies have also shown that entity theorists of intelligence tend to react helplessly in the face of setbacks while incremental theorists focus more on behavioral factors like effort or problem - solving strategies ( Dweck , 1975 ; Dweck & Legget , 1988 ; Mueller & Dweck , 1998 ) . In addition to this , Dweck , Chiu , and Hong ( 1995b ) emphasize that although some people do have one generalized theory that span all human attributes , others may have an entity theory of one attribute and an incremental 36 theory of another . For example , an individual may hold an entity theory for intelligence but may assume an incremental approach to moral character – that is , an entity theorist may view someone stealing bread as dishonest but an incremental theorist will view him as stealing because of a desperate situation in the home environment ( Dweck , et al . 1995b ) . In the literature , it is noted that the distinction between fixed and malleable worldviews , although simple , can be applied to people , processes , traits , objects , and attributes ( Dweck , Chiu & Hong , 1995b ) . This distinction can generate some predictions for how individuals should perceive the world where they form impressions , make judgments , and serve as guides to behavior . The next sub - section deals with how the core assumptions of entity and incremental theories create varied frameworks for understanding , judging , and reacting to groups and their members . The information in the next sub - section serves to highlight the extent and impact of implicit theories on people’s worldviews , not only in terms of particular constructs like intelligence , but also in the arena of perception of other individuals or groups . The Role of Entity and Incremental Theories in People and Group Perception Apart from creating meaningful social worlds , implicit theories also guide social judgment and provide the basis for social actions . In view of this , implicit theories are relevant to the understanding of group perception and stereotyping ( Levy , 1999 ; Levy & Stroessner , 1998 ) . For example , an entity theory is about 37 fixed traits and thus , it is associated with the expectation that there will be a high degree of consistency in people’s behavior over time and even across various contexts ( Chiu , Hong & Dweck , 1997 ; Erdley & Dweck , 1993 ) . Thus , the traits become the basic components of analysis in understanding others ( Hong , 1994 ; Levy & Dweck , 1999 ) . On the other hand , in the case of incremental theory , social understanding is not limited to simply diagnosing people’s underlying traits but rather , the psychological and situational factors acting on them ( Chiu , 1994 ; Hong , 1994 ) . The implication is that traits will be seen as very useful in perceiving people and also , they have a high predictive value . Traits can also be reliably inferred from small samples of behavior . A number of studies on people’s perception have been conducted on preadolescents and college students ( Levy , 1998 ; Levy & Dweck , 1998 ) . For example , Erdley and Dweck ( 1993 ) showed fourth - and fifth - grade children a narrated slide show depicting negative behaviors of a new boy at school ( e . g . he made up an impressive story about his past , he took markers from the art table which were not supposed to be removed ; he copied a classmate’s assignment ) . The entity theorists made significantly stronger inferences than the incremental theorists about the boy’s global moral traits where they attached negative labels like “bad” and “mean” . Another study by Chiu , Hong , and Dweck ( 1997 ) involved college students where they were told about one student ( Jack ) who outperformed another student ( Joe ) on one occasion . The college students were then asked to predict 38 who would display a better performance in another completely different situation . It was found that individuals with an entity view believed that Jack would win again but in sharp contrast , individuals with an incremental view thought the other student ( Joe ) would outperform in a new situation . It was interesting to note that just based on one piece of information , the incremental theorists were not willing to make general judgments . Research on social cognition has surfaced essential cognitive process in the formation of stereotypes ( Fiske , 1998 ; Hamilton & Sherman , 1994 ; Levy , Stroessner & Dweck , 1998 ) . There have been similar social judgment processes in the areas of self - and person perception through implicit theories ( Chiu , Hong & Dweck , 1997 ; Erdley & Dweck , 1993 ) . In the light of this , the question remains as to whether entity and incremental theorists differ in their judgments of groups of people . Given that entity theorists strongly associate with traits and invest heavy meaning in them , and that stereotyping is basically attributing a set of fixed traits to individuals or groups ( Hewstone , 1990 ; Pettigrew , 1979 ) based on limited information ( Ford & Stangor , 1992 ; Levy , Stroessner & Dweck , 1998 ) , the prediction is that entity theorists would exhibit a greater belief in social stereotyping than incremental theorists . Research has indicated that people who hold entity theories were more likely than incremental theorists to display signs of social stereotyping as they make more extreme trait judgments ( Levy , 1998 ; Levy , Stroessner & Dweck , 1998 ) . This is particularly true for existing groups like 39 racial , ethnic , and occupational groups as well as groups about which they have just learnt . Although both entity and incremental theorists are equally aware and knowledgeable about social stereotypes , studies reveal that entity theorists agreed more strongly with such stereotypes . For example , Levy and Dweck ( 1998 ) had college students list all the stereotypes they could think of for a number of racial and ethnic groups . They were then asked to go back to their lists and rate how true they thought each of the stereotypes was . First , they simply reported what they thought society’s stereotypes were . Then , they reported to the researchers what theirs were . It was noted that across the traits and ethnic groups , entity theorists gave more credence to societal stereotypes . Thus , there seems to be much support for the role of implicit theories in how people view their social milieu . The question to ask now is : Why do people have different conceptions of their environment ? The next section highlights the role of culture in understanding human behavior across increasing diversity in thought , emotion , motivation , and all aspects of psychology . In view of this , research from cross - cultural psychology will provide greater understanding about knowledge of people and human functioning . Cross - Cultural Psychology Cross - cultural psychology is considered to be a specialized method of inquiry that has raised questions about the nature of the knowledge gained from 40 mainstream psychological research . Cross - cultural psychology deals with “the systematic study of behavior and experience as it occurs in different cultures , is influenced by culture , or results in changes in existing cultures” ( Triandis , 1980 , p . 1 ) . The study of diverse cultures not only “tests the generality of a theory developed in one culture” ( Clark , 1987 , pg . 2 ) , but if carried out systematically , may lead to theories of how cultures can exert their influence on individuals . Furthermore , a great value of cross - cultural studies is that “they enhance our sense of human variation” ( Tronick , 1992 , p . 566 ) . When that description is guided by theory , our understanding of human functioning is greatly enriched . There are a few reasons why cross - cultural psychology is important . Firstly , learning about other cultures is beneficial to the individual for more effective intercultural communication . Secondly , understanding other cultures is considered to be one of the hallmarks of an educated individual ; one who goes beyond his or her own realms of cultural identity ( Cole , 1984 ) . But the most important reason for cross - cultural psychologists is for the field to “extend the range of psychological functioning” ( Adamopoulos & Lonner , 2001 , p . 15 ) . For example , most theories and research in psychology have been developed by European Americans , where there was no consideration placed on the cultural context ( Hall , 1997 ) . In the initial stage of cross - cultural research , the methodologies were borrowed from mainstream psychology , which originated in Western psychology . The acronym WASP ( Western Academic Scientific Psychology ) was used to describe this reality , which included psychology 41 practiced in the United States and Great Britain ( Berry , Poortinga & Pandey , 1997 ) . In fact , the United States is considered “the first world” ( Mogahaddam , 1987 , p . 912 ) of psychology . In such studies , culture has often assumed a secondary role in psychology , either as a moderator or qualifier of theoretical hypotheses that were assumed to be universal in nature ( Gergen , Gulerce , Lock & Misra , 1996 ) . However , there has been an increasing awareness that European American psychological theories and models may not be applicable to individuals from other cultures , and that a consideration of cultural issues will only serve to make psychology more comprehensive , expansive , and relevant ( Gergen et al . , 1996 ; Hall , 1997 ; Marsella , 1999 ; Segall , Lonner & Berry , 1998 ) . In short , Segall ( 1979 ) suggested “human behavior is meaningful only when viewed in the sociocultural context in which it occurs” ( p . 3 ) . van de Vijver ( 2001 ) has outlined the progression of cross - cultural psychology in terms of significant phases in the growth of this field . The first phase was the application of Western psychological research in a variety of cultural contexts , highlighting the cultural differences as an area of investigation . Researchers were merely concerned with the documentation of these differences as well as the testing and formation of theories to explain those differences ( Matsumoto , 2001a ) . For example , the earliest use of cross - cultural comparison can be traced to W . H . R . Rivers , who conducted fieldwork research in India and New Guinea . This comparative method was considered to be the heart of the 42 scientific method as it was argued that without comparison , differences and similarities cannot be observed or inferred ( Berry , 1980 ) . Furthermore , an analysis by Lonner and Adamapolous ( 1997 ) indicate that most cross - cultural theories view culture primarily as an antecedent to behavior . Explanations of cross - cultural differences are often based on very simple reasoning ( van de Vijver , 2001 ) . For example , if Indian and American women exhibit different behavior , it is due to their difference in cultural background . But from a scientific perspective , this particular reasoning is hardly illuminating as the specific factors that account for these differences are not sufficiently explored ( Lonner & Adamapoulos , 1997 ; Poortinga & van de Vijver , 1987 ) . They point out that to understand culture one should be able to go beyond mere description and explain it or even predict it in some form . The second phase is where there is a change of existing theories , methods , and models to elucidate cultural differences by “mediating context variables” ( Matsumoto , 2001a , p . 4 ) . Many cross - cultural studies are at this stage , as they are concerned with picking out the pertinent and explicit psychological variables that explain any cultural differences . Differences in cultures exist because we have focused on and developed different aspects of our particular environments and attached meanings and values to them . For example , the difference between a weed and a vegetable is not simply determined by qualities that are innate in a plant , like whether it is edible , or whether it grows from a seed . It really has to do with how we attach meaning to it 43 ( Shweder , 1991 ) . What is considered to be a weed in one country ( e . g . seaweed in France ) is considered an important vegetable in another ( e . g . Japan ) . Shweder ( 1991 ) also noted that if a cabbage were to grow in a rose garden , it would be treated as a weed and plucked out , since it is not the intention to grow a cabbage patch . Thus , Kim ( 2001 ) points out that the distinction between a plant and a weed includes concepts like edibility , meaningfulness , and purpose . Also , in the second stage , there has been realization that methods and instruments developed with a Western perspective as the frame of reference might not be advantageous in field research involving non - Western subjects ( Adamapoulos & Lonner , 2001 ) . For example , in the field of psychology , research in Asian populations has increased dramatically . The Asians represent 60 % of the world’s population and they have been found to exhibit significant differences from non - Asians , particularly Westerners in terms of cognitive strategies , modes of behavior , and self - enhancement tendencies ( Sue & Chang , 2003 ) . Thus , the issue remains as to whether imported measures of assessment , especially from a Western country , are useful and applicable . van de Vijver and Leung ( 1997 ) have dealt with this issue and have described three different types of validity enhancement in cross - cultural and multilingual studies . One of them involves a literal translation of an instrument where no changes to the instrument are needed to avoid construct or method bias . One example is the Beck Depression Inventory that includes translation of measures of depression and anxiety ( Leong , Okazaki & Tak , 2001 ) . These literal 44 translations constitute the most common method of validity enhancement . A second possible enhancement involves adapting the instrument for use in a different culture where items are made appropriate for a specific cultural context . One example is the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory ( MMPI - 2 ) that has been adapted successfully for international consumption ( Butcher , Cheung & Lim , 2003 ) . The third and final enhancement is where a particular instrument is considered ineffective or unsuitable in a certain cultural context , and therefore , a new instrument is constructed for that particular cultural context . A good example is the Chinese Personality Assessment Inventory ( CPAI ) , which is the measure sensitive to aspects of Chinese culture ( Cheung , Cheung , Wada & Zhang , 2003 ) . It is pointed out that this approach is generally not favored as it creates problems for direct comparisons . Thus , there has been concerted effort to improve the suitability of measures and assessment . The third stage of the evolution of cross - cultural psychology , as envisioned by Matsumoto ( 2001a ) , is the “creation of universal theories of psychological processes” ( p . 4 ) , where these models and theories can be applied to individuals of various cultural backgrounds , even to the point of superseding current mainstream theories and models . In this way , developments in methodology and statistics are truly considered to be tailor - made for cross - cultural research . As van de Vijver ( 2001 ) points out , this may require combined 45 experiences derived from various branches of psychology to develop new frameworks of assessment and measures . Cross - Cultural Psychology and Cognition In the literature , it has been noted that one basic psychological process that has been well - studied and researched in mainstream psychology as well as cross - cultural psychology is cognition . Cognition is defined as “that group of processes by which individuals obtain and utilize knowledge of objects in their environment” ( Mishra , 2001 , p . 119 ) . These include processes like recognition , labeling , categorization , reasoning , and planning ( Mishra , 2001 ) . A widely shared view in cross - cultural psychology is that cognitive processes are universal . However , there has been mounting research to challenge these universalist assumptions about human thought and inference ( Nisbett , 2003 ) . In fact , such studies of cognition and cognitive processes across cultures is especially enlightening because it provides information on how the environment and other socio - cultural factors help to shape and alter the way we perceive , process , think , and act in the world . The following sub - sections provide an overview of some studies of cognitive processes to provide a greater understanding of the role of cultural factors on human groups . 46 Categorization Our perception impacts the way we view the world . Cross - cultural research on the categorization of colors and objects provide invaluable insight on how people from different cultures use varied principles of category formation . Early studies on color codability from Whorf ( 1956 ) indicated that people in different cultural societies did not have a similar array of terms to separate the color spectrum . If the philosophy underlying the perception of color is universal , then the assumption is that there should be an agreement on the main divisions of color despite varied vocabulary contained in diverse languages . For example , Berlin and Kay ( 1969 ) first noted that culturally simpler societies tended to have fewer basic color terms than industrial or large - scale societies that were culturally more complex . There have been studies to suggest that language affects cognition ( Davidoff , Davies & Robeson , 1999 ; Levinson , 1996 ; Martinez & Shatz , 1996 ) . For example , Davidoff et al . ( 1999 ) reported that the number of basic color terms in a particular language affects categorization . However , there are also studies that provide support for a weak linguistic effect on color categorization ( Davies & Corbett , 1997 ; Perez - Pereira , 1991 ) . For example , Davies and Corbett ( 1999 ) studied speakers of English , Russian , and Setswana languages as they all differ in the number of basic color terms as well as how the blue - green region is categorized . The subjects were given 65 colors and asked to sort them into groups . 47 The findings revealed significant similarity among the patterns of choice of all three samples . However , considerable differences were also noted . They found that the Setswana speakers have a single basic term for blue and green and thus , were more likely to group blue colors with green colors than the other speakers of Russian and English . On the other hand , the Russian speakers who have two basic color terms for blue were no more likely than English speakers to group light and dark blue separately . Thus , there is a lack of evidence of linguistic effects on categorization . However , it does suggest that color perception is not universal and that cultural factors are at work . Apart from colors , another way of studying categorization is to discover how people place various objects in groups ( Segall , Dasen , Berry & Poortinga , 1999 ) . A common finding in cross - cultural work is that instead of classifying items into taxonomic categories used by Western nations ( e . g . animals in one group , utensils in another group ) , peoples from other cultures will tend to sort items into functional groups ( a hoe is put with a potato into a group since it is an implement used in digging up potatoes ) ( Mishra , Sinha & Berry , 1996 ; Rogoff & Chavajay , 1995 ) . For example , Nisbett ( 2003 ) and his colleagues conducted an experiment with American and Chinese children , where pictures of objects - a cow , grass , and a hen were shown . The finding was that American children preferred to group objects based on taxonomy ( the hen and the cow were grouped together as they were animals ) , but the Chinese children tended to group the items on the 48 basis of relationships ( the cow and the grass because cows eat grass ) . Thus , cultural groups have been found to vary in the preferred dimensions of classification . Learning and Memory Learning and memory are very crucial cognitive processes that are associated with acquisition and retention of information ( Mishra , 2001 ) . One of the earliest studies of memory skills suggested that memory skills in preliterate societies developed differently from those in literate societies ( Bartlett , 1932 ) . The difference as explained by Bartlett ( 1932 ) was that daily life in non - literate societies placed a high premium on remembering even details that should be put in writing . There is some evidence to show that people from societies with a strong oral tradition also have a strong memory capacity . For example , Ross and Millsom ( 1970 ) compared Ghanaian university students ( oral tradition ) with American university students ( written tradition ) in regard to their abilities to recall themes in the stories read aloud in English . It was found that in general , the Ghanaian students recalled the themes better although English was not their first language . Apart from this , some studies have tested the effect of culture on memory by introducing the element of ‘cultural knowledge’ in the stories ( Reynold , Taylor , Steffensen , Shirley & Anderson , 1982 ) . Reynold et al . ( 1982 ) compared African American and White American students using a story about a certain incident 49 that could be interpreted as either a fight or a ritualistic game . The findings showed that White students interpreted the incident as a fight whilst the African American students viewed it as a game . This highlights the fact that the interpretations are coherent with their own cultural knowledge . Another study by Steffenson and Calker ( 1982 ) involved American and Australian Aboriginal women where they were asked to recall stories about a sick child treated by Western medicine in one story and native medicine in another . The findings showed that the women had better recall of stories that were consistent with their own cultural knowledge . Other studies with similar findings include Harris , Schoen , and Lee ( 1986 ) , in their study of American and Brazilian cultural groups as well as Harris , Schoen , and Henlsey ( 1992 ) , with American and Mexican cultural groups . Now that implicit theories and cross - cultural psychology have been discussed , the next section presents a literature review of the relationship between implicit theories and culture . Implicit Theories and Cross - Cultural Psychology Psychologists proposing implicit theories have not expounded on where these theories originate and have tended to follow Piaget’s ( 1960 ) emphasis on each child’s acquisition of theories as a result of direct experimentation with the world , focusing on logical thinking and its development ( Morris , Menon & Ames , 2001 ) . However , it is noted that even Piaget came to believe in the meaning 50 systems that people adopted which could be even more important in shaping their thinking ( Overton , 1990 ; Piaget , Garcia , Davidson & Easley , 1991 ) . Morris , Menon , and Ames ( 2001 ) point out that implicit theories described by early psychologists like Kelly ( 1955 ) and Heider ( 1958 ) are tied to broadly Western culture and contend that integrating implicit theory of social perception with cultural psychology “is mutually enriching” ( Morris et al , 2001 , p . 170 ) . In addition to this , research has indicated that cultural differences found in studies of self - concepts , self - perceptions , and biases may be the result of cultural differences in implicit theories ( Heine , Lehman , Markus & Kitayama , 1999 ; Kitayama , Markus , Matsumoto & Norasakkunkit , 1997 ; Markus & Kitayama , 1998 ; Triandis , 1995 ) . In studies of North Americans , cultural practices are organized in accordance with a model of self that includes the notions that an individual is an independent entity defined by a set of attributes and qualities and that these attributes are relatively absolute and constant across situations ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ) . This model of self is manifested in situations such as corporations that base promotions on individuals’ achievements or schools emphasizing the nurturing of self - esteem ( Heine , Lehman , Markus & Kitayama , 1999 ; Lewis , 1995 ) . In accordance with this model of the self , North Americans who are brought up in a cultural context composed of such practices are likely to develop “habitual psychological tendencies to identify positive attributes of the 51 self , confirm them in private , and then express them in behavior” ( Heine , Kitayama , Lehman , Takata , Ide , Leung & Matsumoto , 2001a ; p . 510 ) . These psychological tendencies are motivated and sustained in part by an implicit theory whereby the cultural assumption is that the self is a relatively fixed and stable entity . This squares with one type of implicit theory that Dweck and her colleagues have called an entity theory ( e . g . Chiu , Hong & Dweck , 1997 ; Dweck , Hong & Chiu , 1993 ; Hong , Dweck , Lin & Wan , 1999 ) that was discussed in the first section of this chapter . Thus , the self is essentially defined by a set of relatively fixed , unchangeable , and consistent inner attributes where there is a motivation to view the self in the most positive light ( Campbell , Trapnell , Heine , Katz , Lavallee & Lehman , 1996 ) . Receiving a positive evaluation of the self becomes a more central concern than the process of becoming a better self and therefore , people in such cultural contexts not only attend to selected positive aspects of themselves but also , are motivated to work hard on tasks in which they excel ( Bandura , 1999 ) . On the other hand , in many cultural contexts outside North America , especially in East Asia , the model of the self includes the notions of an individual occupying a position within a hierarchical set of social relationships . In addition to this , the self is malleable as it needs to be responsive to role obligations within one’s relationships and thus , adjustments are necessary ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Su , Chiu , Hong , Leung , Peng & Morris , 1999 ) . In this case , the type of implicit theory that they hold is one of incremental theory , where the emphasis is 52 on improving oneself in a variety of achievement contexts . Also , the implicit understanding of the self is context dependent , adjustable , and improvable ( Kanagawa , Cross & Markus , 2001 ) . This view has been largely shaped by Confucian thought , where the emphasis is on the importance of understanding one’s roles within a hierarchy and of fulfilling obligations to others who are associated with those roles ( Heine et al . , 2001 ) . There is an enhanced concern for role perfection and an attitude towards learning that must be accompanied by hard work ( Tweed & Lehman , 2002 ) . In contrast to the North American cultural context , practices in contemporary East Asian cultures include seniority - based systems of promotion ( Kang , 1990 ) as well as child - rearing practices that underscore self - discipline and working well with others ( Hess & Azuma , 1991 ) . This dichotomy between Westerners focusing on the individual and the Easterners focusing on the social situation can be noted from studies in ethnography and philosophy ( Fiske , Kitayama , Markus & Nisbett , 1998 ) . Lay or implicit theory in the West is described as ‘dispositionism’ , where the responsibility for behavior is primarily in the individual , where “They expect their environment to be sensitive to them” ( Chiu , 1972 , p . 236 ) . On the other hand , the lay theory in East Asia focuses on the whole context of behavior called ‘situationism’ or ‘contextualism’ ( Lloyd , 1990 ; Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Triandis , 1995 ) , where they “…are situation - centered” ( Chiu , 1972 , p . 236 ) . 53 For example , Cousins ( 1989 ) asked Japanese and American college students to describe themselves using statements beginning with “I am” . The findings revealed that American participants used general abstract traits like “I am curious” or “I am sincere” more times than the Japanese . The Japanese descriptions of self were more often reflected in their social identities , for example , “I am a student” or “I play mahjong on Fridays” . A study by Rhee , Uleman , Lee , and Roman ( 1996 ) found similar findings for the Koreans . The focus on the individual by Westerners can be attributed to the ancient Greeks with philosophies of Aristotle and Galileo , where the locus of behavior lie in the attributes of the person in terms of attitudes , preferences , and motives ( Choi , Nisbett & Norenzayan , 1999 ) and where the world was viewed as composing of “objects which are understood as individuals or particulars which instantiate or ‘have’ properties” ( Hansen , 1983 , p . 30 ) . Thus , Westerners tend to be analytic , paying attention primarily to the object , categorizing it on the basis of its attributes ( See discussion on ‘Categorization’ in the previous section ) and ascribing rules about category memberships ( Choi , Nisbett & Smith , 1997 ; Lloyd , 1990 ; Nakamura , 1985 ) . As for the Asians , Peng and Nisbett ( 1999 ) describe some assumptions that underpin Eastern dialectical reasoning . One is that the principle of change suggests that reality is a dynamic process . Also , since change and contradiction are constant , nothing in human life or nature is isolated or independent . This 54 shows that Easterners are seen to be more concerned with relationships and harmony ( Nisbett , 2003 ) . Thus , studies have indicated that the holistic cognition characteristic of ancient China has had much influence on East Asia whilst the more analytic cognition of the ancient Greeks has wielded its influence on contemporary Western peoples ( Cromer , 1993 ; Ji , Nisbett & Peng , 2000 ) . The next section focuses on the relationship between implicit theories and creativity . Implicit Theories and Creativity During the last 40 years or so , studies in creativity received immense attention in the United States . This has led to a number of conceptualizations and theories about creativity in terms of person , product , process , and press or the environment ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ; Guilford , 1950 , 1956 ; Simonton , 1984 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1991 , 1995 ; Torrance , 1981 , 1988 ) . Chapter One alluded to the various approaches to the study of creativity . It is pointed out that these approaches to creativity are basically explicit in nature , where psychologists or other experts test their own hypotheses using some form of measurement or assessment . Interest in implicit concepts of creativity gained ground in the United States in the late 1980s ( Runco & Bahleda , 1987 ; Sternberg , 1985b , 1988 ) . Most studies on implicit conceptions of creativity have concentrated on creative 55 individuals ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ; Helsen , 1996 ; Montgomery , Bull & Baloche , 1993 ; Runco & Bahleda , 1986 ; Runco , Johnson & Bear , 1993 ) . For example , Runco and Bahleda ( 1986 ) compared implicit theories of artistic , scientific , and everyday creativity amongst undergraduate students and artists . They were asked to list the characteristics of creativity . The findings suggest that the basic characteristics of creativity perceived by the respondents correspond to similar characteristics found in explicit theories in the literature . Some terms associated with creativity are ( a ) imaginative , ( b ) confident , ( c ) independent , ( d ) intelligent , and ( e ) possessing intrinsic motivation . However , another finding suggests that people also distinguish core characteristics of creativity in different domains . For example , words like ( a ) logical and ( b ) thorough were indicative of scientific creativity but not in artistic or everyday creativity . Also , words like ( a ) expressiveness and ( b ) perceptive were associated with artistic creativity while ( a ) helpfulness and ( b ) active were associated with everyday creativity . Implicit theories which focus on characteristics of a creative person can be categorized into motivational factors , cognitive traits , and personality attributes ( Rudowicz , 2003 ) . For example , motivational qualities like ( a ) inquisitive , ( b ) adventurous , ( c ) self - confident , ( d ) enthusiastic , and ( e ) curious have been identified as part of the implicit conceptions of creativity ( Sternberg , 1985b ; Westby & Dawson , 1995 ) . In a study of cognitive traits , Sternberg ( 1985b ) identified ( a ) ability to make connections , ( b ) ability to grasp abstract ideas , and 56 ( c ) ability to see concepts and theories in a new way as some of the traits identified in his study of implicit theories of intelligence , creativity , and wisdom . As for personality attributes , studies frequently listed ( a ) free spirit , ( b ) non - conformist , ( c ) artistic , ( d ) individualistic , and ( e ) sense of humor as characteristics of a creative individual ( Runco & Bahleda , 1987 ; Runco , Johnson & Bear , 1993 ; Sternberg , 1985b ) . Studies on implicit theories of creativity on a conceptual level have also been carried out ( Runco & Bahleda , 1987 ; Sternberg , 1985b ) . For example , Sternberg ( 1985b ) asked experts in the fields of art , business , and physics as well as laypeople about the characteristics of an ideally intelligent , creative , and wise individual . He discovered that people were able to distinguish the concepts of intelligence , creativity , and wisdom and they use these theories in judging themselves and others . Another interesting finding was that despite some distinct differences , the conception of creativity overlapped with conceptions associated with intelligence and wisdom . Furthermore , it was noted that there was less emphasis on analytical abilities in conceptions of creativity but more on imagination and intuition . From the above studies , it is noted that empirical research on the implicit theories of creativity is mostly within the Western context , particularly in American society . Cumulative evidence obtained from studies of implicit theories of creativity across a wide spectrum of social groups and age groups like teachers and students ( Runco , 1984 ; Runco & Johnson , 1993 ; Westby & 57 Dawson , 1995 ) , parents ( Runco , 1989 ) as well as laypeople ( Hoskens & Deboeck , 1991 , Puccio & Chimento , 2001 ) suggest some main characteristics that are important in the Western conception of creativity . These are “…innovation / imagination , intrinsic motivation , independence , risk taking , a wide range of interests , intelligence , high levels of activity / energy , and a sense of humor” ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 , p . 272 ) . One controversy in the creativity literature concerns whether the concept of creativity has a universal meaning or is perceived differently in various cultures ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ; Plucker & Runco , 1998 ) . For example , some researchers believe that there is a universal understanding of the concept of creativity ( Guilford , 1975 ; Plucker & Runco , 1998 ) while another group suggests that people in different cultures perceive creativity differently ( Lubart & Sternberg 1998 ; Rudowicz & Hui , 1997 ) . Although there seems to be a major breakthrough where theories of creativity have been established based on the latter point of view , some researchers have suggested that there are “multiple roots for people’s conceptions of creativity” with a “different philosophical base” ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 , p . 270 ) . A literature review of implicit theories of creativity in various cultures in the next sub - section will provide evidence that creativity could be viewed differently from the North American perspective . 58 The Place of Culture in Implicit Theories of Creativity Studies on implicit conceptions of creativity in other cultural contexts other than the North American context suggest that despite the numerous similarities , there are also some differences in how creativity is viewed ( Chan & Chan , 1999 ; Dinca , 1999 ; Fryer & Collings , 1991 ; Lim & Plucker , 2001 ; Raina , Kumar & Raina , 1980 ; Rudowicz & Hui , 1997 ; Rudowicz & Yue , 2000 ) . Anecdotal data regarding implicit theories of creativity from non - Asian cultures suggest that the differences across cultures refer to slight variations rather than an essential divergence . For example , Finnish teachers view creativity from both the individual and social perspectives . Their implicit theories include not only attributes like ( a ) finding new solutions , ( b ) hard work , ( c ) using old knowledge in new ways , and ( d ) humor and imagination , but also flexibility in social situations ( Saarilahti , Cramond & Sieppi , 1999 ) . This highlights the fact that a creative individual is able to maintain a balance of self - reliance and identification with a group . As for the Brazilians and Cubans , there seems to be much emphasis on emotional sensitivity like intuition , humor , curiosity , and being a dreamer . These humanistic characteristics outweigh the more cognitive process associated with creativity ( Welchsler & Martinez , 2001 ) . Much of the literature on cross - cultural studies of implicit theories of creativity involves Eastern conceptions of creativity , particularly in Asian cultures . For example , Rudowicz and Hui ( 1997 ) found that , similar to the Western 59 conception of creativity , the Chinese included characteristics like ( a ) innovative ideas , ( b ) imagination , ( c ) intelligence , and ( d ) independence . However , the characteristics of ( a ) humor and ( b ) aesthetic tastes were not present in the list of characteristics . A study by Rudowicz and Yue ( 2000 ) also found that the word ‘artistic’ was absent in the implicit theories of undergraduates in Mainland China , Hong Kong , and Taiwan . Instead , attributes like ( a ) inspirational , ( b ) makes a contribution to the progress of society and , ( c ) is appreciated by others , were included and not present in the American samples . This seems to suggest a pragmatic approach to creativity , where creative acts are considered to serve the greater good of the society . Further , Yue and Rudowicz ( 2002 ) found that Chinese undergraduates nominated politicians as being the most creative individuals , followed by scientists and inventors . In fact , artists and musicians were rarely named . This supports findings that characteristics related to aesthetics or sensitivity is hardly present in Hong Kong Chinese implicit theories of creativity ( Rudowicz & Hui , 1998 ; Rudowicz & Yue , 2000 ) . As Yue and Rudowicz ( 2002 ) point out , “This finding is attributed to a strong utilitarian view of creativity that lies in Chinese young people’s perception of creativity . They are much more concerned with a creator’s social influence or contribution in society than with his or her innovativeness in thinking” ( p . 88 ) . In the case of India , very few studies have directly researched the Indian concept of creativity ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 ) . One study by Kapur , Subramanyam , and Shah ( 1997 ) focused on scientific creativity where Indian 60 scientists believed that scientific creativity required more rules and logic than artistic creativity . In view of this , scientific creativity is seen to have a more profound impact on society as compared to artistic creativity . In addition to this , although they shared a Western view of characteristics of creative individuals , like ( a ) , open - mindedness , ( b ) curiosity and , ( c ) risk - taking , they considered themselves to be less creative than their Western counterparts and attributed this to the socio - cultural norms which required them to place more emphasis on diverse hierarchical relationships that encourage group development rather than individual development . This is in line with studies of Indian culture , where the welfare and integrity of the family always supersedes individual needs and self - identity ( Das & Kemp , 1997 ) . Studies related to Japanese and Korean implicit conceptions of creativity are also very sparse . One study by Muneyoshi and Kagawa ( 2004 ) asked laypeople of their conception of creativity . They were , in order of frequency , ( a ) new , ( b ) create , ( c ) art , and ( d ) intuition . The researchers concluded that the Japanese attach the value of creativity to traditional arts ( personal communication , 2005 ) . As for the Korean conception , they have similar views with the American view of creativity in terms of personality , perseverance , independence , and cognition . However , the Koreans view the creator as a loner and viewed less favorably than the Americans ( Lim & Plucker , 2001 ) . This section discussed implicit theories of creativity in various cultures . Since part of this research is to test whether the explicit theory of creative style 61 by Michael Kirton represents the implicit thinking of laypersons not acquainted with his study , the next section provides an overview of cognitive style and cognitive ability . Cognitive Style Cognitive style is defined as “…consistent , individual differences in the ways people experience , organize , and process information” ( Martinsen & Kaufmann , 1999 , p . 273 ) . Cognitive style applies to thinking , memory , perception , decision - making as well as general problem - solving strategies ( Martinsen & Kaufmann , 1999 ) . Thus , it refers to the way in which information is processed rather than the content itself . Cognitive styles were first assumed to be personality traits or dimensions along which individuals of a population differ ( Guilford , 1980 ) . In fact , interest in cognitive style goes back at least to Jung ( 1923 ) , who proposed a theory of psychological types , which still can be seen today in assessments of styles , for example , the Myers - Briggs Type Inventory ( MBTI ) ( Myers & McCaulley , 1985 ; Myers & Myers , 1980 ) . Research in cognitive styles then became concerned with styles representing an interface between work on cognition and personality ( Messick , 1976 ; Pettigrew , 1958 ) . Cognitive styles represent a bridge between cognition and personality ; two fairly distinct areas of psychological research ( Sternberg & Grigorenko , 1997 ) . In this respect , psychologists saw the need to 62 link personality with cognition ( Costa , & McCrae , 1992 ; Peabody & Goldberg , 1989 ) . In fact , in Guilford’s speech ( 1950 ) to the APA , he called for research on two basic questions . The first was how to find the promise of creativity in the children and the second was how to enhance the development of the creative personality . He pointed out that , “creative abilities determine whether the individual has the power to exhibit creativity to a noteworthy degree” ( p . 444 ) . After this address , researchers focused their efforts on psychometric study that involved attempts to measure facets of creativity associated with creative people . Instruments to measure personality correlates of creative behavior were generally designed by studying highly creative individuals so that common personality traits could be determined ( Plucker & Renzulli , 1999 ) . Studies of the creative person yielded personality traits like ( a ) awareness of their creativity , ( b ) originality , ( c ) independence , ( d ) risk taking , ( e ) high energy , ( f ) curiosity , ( g ) humor , ( h ) attraction to complexity and novelty , and ( i ) open - mindedness ( Davis , 2004 , p . 84 - 91 ) . Other personality traits were ‘tolerance for ambiguity’ ( Dacey , 1999 ; MacKinnon , 1978 ) and ‘aesthetic sensitivity’ ( Frois & Eysenck , 1995 ) . Thus , early creativity research focused on studying how much creativity an individual possessed in order to be able to identify highly creative individuals . This is referred to as the level approach , where the focus was primarily on understanding and predicting people’s ability to produce novel ideas , 63 products , or solutions , as well as the potential or competence to produce them ( Mudd , 1996 ) . Much of the literature on cognitive styles has made an effort in differentiating cognitive styles and abilities ( Goldstein & Blackman , 1978 ; Messick , 1984 ; Riding & Cheema , 1991 ) . While cognitive styles describe how people process information , cognitive abilities “describe how much , or how well , or how accurate we process visual , semantic , or numerical stimuli…” ( Martinsen & Kaufmann , 1999 , p . 274 ) . In the case of cognitive abilities , the goal is to measure the level of a particular capacity . For example , divergent thinking in creativity is seen to represent the potential for creative thinking and problem solving . Abilities that are associated with divergent thinking include fluency , flexibility , elaboration , and originality . Thus , divergent thinking tests are among the commonly used in creativity research ( Runco , 1999b ) . In this case , creative abilities are measured in terms of the level of performance , where scores range from high to low . This implies that one pole of the construct is more valued than the other . In contrast with the unipolar nature of abilities ( Messick , 1976 ) , cognitive styles are bipolar in nature , where both poles of the construct are considered to be value free ( Martinsen & Kaufmann , 1999 ) . Unlike abilities , where a high value connotes high ability , cognitive styles are value neutral in that one end of a style continuum is associated with certain characteristics , while the other end is associated with another , neither of which is considered better than the other . 64 Since style refers to the manner of performance , the scores range from one extreme to another and movement from the center of the continuum simply highlights the stronger preference for that particular style . Although there are differences between cognitive style and cognitive ability or level , the distinction between these two constructs is not so clear - cut . In theory , one cognitive style is not deemed to be better than the other . However , Martinsen and Kaufmann ( 1999 ) point out that “In practice , one pole of most style constructs has tended to be more valued than the other” ( p . 274 ) . Further , Messick ( 1976 ) stated , “There are varying degrees of difference and overlap between particular cognitive styles and abilities in terms of both conception and measurement” ( p . 11 ) . For example , Messick ( 1976 ) pointed out that creative abilities such as fluency and flexibility can be present in the constructs of abilities as well as style . Since fluency and flexibility are inextricably linked with creativity research , Messick ( 1976 ) stated , “In the realm of creativity , there is an intimate intertwining of abilities and cognitive styles and other stylistic dimensions that share some of the features of both , suggesting that distinctions in this area are labile and boundaries permeable” ( p . 11 ) . To blur the boundaries even more , although creativity researchers showed an interest in the relationship between cognitive styles and creativity ( Guilford , 1980 ; Kogan , 1976 ; Messick , 1984 ) , they were still caught in the level paradigm ( Messick , 1976 , 1984 ; Witkin , 1977 ) . 65 In view of this , Kirton ( 1976 ) proposed the Adaption - Innovation theory , which posits that cognitive style develops around underlying personality traits and as such , each person displays a definite preference to approach and solve problems . Kirton ( 1976 ) further argues that his theory explains the manner in which an individual is creative , as opposed to level of ability . In short , the concepts of level and style are unrelated . Kirton’s Adaption - Innovation Theory Michael Kirton introduced the Adaption - Innovation theory of cognitive style in 1976 . His theory contends that regardless of level of ability , skill , or talent , each person has a natural or preferred tendency to solve problems using a certain style . He posits that people can be located along a continuum representing a personality dimension , which ranges from adaptor to innovator , depending upon the way they solve problems and make decisions ( Kirton , 1976 ) . The first basic assumption underlying his theory is that cognitive style relates to an individual’s preferred manner of cognitive strategies of problem - solving and decision - making in bringing about change . The second is that cognitive style is not a capacity , competence or aptitude . The third is that cognitive style is related to personality traits and is considered to be stable over time and across situations . Thus , an individual will consistently approach any problem using his / her preferred manner or style ( Kirton , 2003 ) . He also contends that all people are creative , since “creativity is a subset of problem solving” 66 ( 2003 , p . 8 ) . Kirton ( 2003 ) further emphasized that “This theory is directly concerned only with style : with how people solve problems . Both potential capacity ( intelligence or talent ) and learned levels ( such as management competence ) are completely independent characteristics and assessed by other measures” ( p . 4 ) . As mentioned earlier , everyone is located on a continuum ranging from highly adaptive to highly innovative . In fact , Kirton ( 2003 ) asserted that “the terms ‘more adaptive’ or ‘more innovative’ are more precise than ‘adaptors’ and ‘innovators’ , for the theory describes a normally distributed continuous range and not just two types” ( p . 4 ) . For the purpose of clarity , the terms ‘Adaptor’ and ‘Innovator’ will be used in this section to highlight the main attributes between them . According to Kirton ( 1976 , 1987 , 1994 , 2003 ) , there are a number of characteristics that are indicative of people who have an adaptive orientation to their creativity style . Adaptors like to work within a structure , system or paradigm to bring about incremental improvement or change . They are described as ( a ) reliable , ( b ) dependable , ( c ) precise , ( d ) efficient , ( e ) organized , and ( f ) methodical . They are generally concerned with the norms of the group and prefer to have rules with which they can follow . When solving a problem , the adaptor works at a disciplined pace in a predictable manner . On the other hand , the Innovator ( Kirton , 1976 ) is described as less conforming to rules , social norms , and accepted work patterns . They often do not 67 recognize that there is a structure , system , or paradigm to work within , so they often create solutions which would bring about radical change . They prefer not to have rules which they have to follow and are described as ( a ) energetic , ( b ) individualistic , ( c ) spontaneous , ( d ) unconventional , ( e ) thinking tangentially , and ( f ) abrasive . A more complete list of characteristics associated with these two styles is found in Appendix A . The following section briefly describes the measure used to determine the cognitive styles of the adaptor and innovator . Kirton Adaption / Innovation Inventory ( KAI ) Kirton ( 1976 ) has asserted that adaptors and innovators possess equal levels of creativity but they are manifested in very different ways . To evaluate adaptor and innovator styles , Kirton ( 1976 ; 1987 ) developed an instrument called the Kirton Adaption / Innovation Inventory ( KAI ) to validate his theory . An individual’s overall score may range from 32 , on the extremely adaptive end of the continuum , to 160 on the extremely innovative end . The theoretical mean of the instrument is 96 . Research ( Kirton , 1987 ; Mudd , 1986 ) has indicated that the actual mean of the general population stands close to the theoretical mean at 95 . Kirton ( 1976 ) has also stated that style is non - pejorative . Having one style preference is not better or worse than the other and that all styles are equally able to demonstrate high levels of creativity – where theoretically , there are highly creative adaptors and innovators as well as less creative adaptors and innovators . Both the adaptor and innovator are able to flex to the opposing style , 68 but this requires much energy and stress . Thus , Kirton ( 1989 ) suggests that while people are able to flex to different styles , they will most likely return to their preferred style . Studies have indicated that the style of creativity is theoretically different from level of creativity ( Goldsmith , 1987 ; Kirton , 1978 ; Isaksen & Puccio , 1988 , Torrance & yun Horng , 1980 ) . For example , scores from psychometric measures of creative ability like ‘Word Fluency from the Primary Mental Abilities’ battery ( Kirton , 1978 ) , ‘What Kind of Person Are You’ ( Goldsmith , 1887 ) as well as ‘Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking’ ( Isaksen & Puccio , 1988 ; Torrance & yun Horng , 1980 ) have been compared to the KAI and found to support the view that style of creativity is orthogonal to level of creativity . However , there is some ambiguity in the creativity literature regarding this level - style distinction ( Goldsmith & Matherly , 1987 ; Isaksen & Puccio , 1988 ; Puccio , 1987 ; Torrance & yun Horng , 1980 ) . For example , studies ( Isaksen & Puccio , 1988 ; Puccio , 1987 ) have found a significant positive relationship between creative abilities of fluency , flexibility , and originality on the ’Torrance Tests for Creative Thinking’ ( TTCT ) , a psychometric measure of creative level , and the innovative style of creativity on the KAI . Torrance and yun Horng ( 1980 ) and Goldsmith and Matherly ( 1987 ) could not conclusively support Kirton’s level - style distinction as it was noted that some correlations existed between innovativeness and a few of their level measures . 69 Since this present study aims to make a direct comparison between Kirton’s explicit theory where he posits that adaptors and innovators are equally creative against laypeople’s implicit theories of creativity , the next section will discuss some research findings to show that there is a general perceptual bias towards the innovative style of creativity . It is noted that all the studies utilized Kirton’s Adaption - Innovation theory to access laypeople’s implicit theories of creativity . Implicit Theories of Creative Style Puccio and Chimento ( 2001 ) conducted a study of American laypeople including college students , to explore their perceptions of creative style between adaptors and innovators . The participants involved in the study consisted of two groups . The first group consisted of 113 participants from diverse backgrounds in terms of ages , occupations , and educational levels . The second group consisted of 75 participants from two undergraduate courses in creative studies at Buffalo State College . This was a homogenous group in terms of age and educational background . The respondents were required to read descriptions of two different types of people – the Adaptor and Innovator , and asked to use their personal view of creativity and rate the creativity of each person ( the Adaptor or Innovator ) based on a scale of 1 to 10 . It was noted that they gave higher scores to the innovator . This highlights the fact that the respondents perceived the innovators to be 70 significantly more creative than the adaptors . The finding from this study seems to contradict Kirton’s theoretical position , where he has stated that the adaptors are equally creative as the innovators ( Kirton , 1976 ) , at least with regard to laypeople . Puccio and Chimento ( 2001 ) believe that culture could have played a role in influencing the perception of the innovator style as being more creative since ‘innovation’ is highly valued , marketed , publicized , and sought after . Furthermore , they suggest that , “the popular phrase often used to describe creativity , ‘out - of - the - box - thinking’ , seems to reflect a bias towards the paradigm - breaking style associated with Kirton’s innovator” ( p . 679 ) . Another possibility put forward by the researchers is that explicit studies of creativity may have exacerbated the situation by putting undue emphasis on the innovator style of creativity . In fact , some of the characteristics of a highly creative individual like ( a ) innovation , ( b ) imagination , ( c ) independence , ( d ) risk taking , and ( e ) high levels of activity / energy ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 ) , tend to be more associated with the innovator style . Also , as Talbot ( 1997 ) pointed out : …the majority of interest in the creativity field has been devoted to Creative Innovators ( often in implicit contrast to Uncreative Adaptors ) . It leads to the commonly held belief ( not least by themselves ) that Adaptors are not creative , and that Innovators are always creative ( p . 177 ) . Another study by Gonzalez ( 2003 ) shared similar findings in an Argentinean sample that reinforces the perception that the innovator is more creative than the adaptor . One out of four respondents gave the adaptor a rating 71 of ‘5’ on a scale of 1 to 10 points , while more than one out of four respondents gave an innovator a rating of ‘8’ . Further , there were two respondents who even gave a rating of ‘0’ for the adaptor . One of the observations made by Gonzalez ( 2003 ) is that the “Argentinean laypeople possess a built - in bias regarding creativity level of adaptors and innovators” ( p . 57 ) . She also postulated that the disparity between implicit and explicit theories could have three possible reasons : ( a ) Kirton’s explicit theory is correct and laypeople have misconceptions about his theory , ( b ) the laypeople are correct and therefore , Kirton’s theory is inaccurate and possesses inherent problems , and ( c ) , there are no correct or incorrect conclusions but the results highlight the fact that relatively new theories like Kirton’s may take some time to be accepted by the society at large ( Gonzalez , 2003 ) . In the case of an Asian society like Japan , a study ( Muneyoshi & Kagawa , 2004 ) revealed that the mean scores of 4 . 2 for the adaptor rating and the mean score of 6 . 99 for the innovator rating again showed the perception bias towards the innovator being more creative than the adaptor . In fact , the mean score of 6 . 99 for the innovator was even higher than the mean score of 6 . 5 obtained from the American sample from Puccio and Chimento’s study ( 2001 ) . Muneyoshi and Kagawa ( 2004 ) attribute this to the Japanese view where the people make the link between the traits of an innovator and Japanese traditional artists , especially in the area of creating something novel as opposed to an adaptor who improves 72 on what they already have . They also note that if innovators are viewed to be more creative , then creative scientists or engineers who may be adaptive will not be considered creative . In these examples cited above , it is noted that the innovator was viewed to be more creative than the adaptor . However , findings from Saudi Arabia ( Alkeaid , 2004 ) revealed that the adaptor was considered more creative than the innovator . The researcher attributed this to the close social network within the family where members are expected to follow the rules set by the head of the household , regardless of age or gender . Schools and universities also display similar authority , where students and teachers must keep an appropriate distance of each other because of the different statuses . In fact , descriptions associated with the innovator , such as ( a ) seen as undisciplined , ( b ) irreverent of group consensus , and ( c ) seen as abrasive , are not appreciated in Saudi Arabian culture as they go against the cultural norms of the society ( Alkeaid , 2004 ) . Ironically , when the laypeople were asked to list words that associated with creativity , words like ( a ) innovation , ( b ) discovery , and ( c ) novelty were cited . The researcher pointed out that although the descriptions of an innovator are not tolerated , laypeople in Saudi Arabia “might look at innovation within the existing system and paradigm” ( 2004 , p . 15 ) . In this study , the adaptor is seen as being more creative , thereby emphasizing the level of creativity rather than the manner in which creativity is manifested . 73 The conclusions that can be drawn from all these studies show that laypeople use the level distinction to describe the adaptive or innovative manner of creativity , despite Kirton’s contention that all people are creative , albeit in various ways . Also , it is clear from these studies that culture has played a major role on how laypeople view creativity . This research study based in Singapore , will build upon the results obtained from the American , Argentinean , Japanese , and Saudi Arabian cultures . Furthermore , since Singapore is a pluralistic society made up of three main ethnic groups , results from these groups will also be sought . The next section provides a brief overview of the culture of Singapore and it also includes a comparative study with the United States . Singapore as an Asian Culture Singapore is a nation dominated by immigrant populations and this accounts for its multi - racial demographic composition . The country consists of a total population of 4 . 3 million with 76 . 7 % Chinese , 14 % Malays , 7 . 9 % Indians as well as 1 . 4 % of other ethnic groups ( July , 2004 estimates from the World Factbook , 2004 ) . Singapore was granted internal self - government by the British colonial government in 1959 . In 1963 , it joined the Malaysian Federation as the country was seen to be less economically viable on its own as a newly independent nation . After two years , Singapore separated from the Malaysian Federation and became an independent political entity in 1965 ( Chua , 1998a ) . 74 One’s race in Singapore is officially defined strictly by patriarchal descent . Thus , one’s race evidently determines one’s culture and is “…assumed to be embedded in the language of the race…” ( Chua , 1998b , p . 190 ) . Although English is the main medium of instruction in schools and is considered a working language of the masses , Chinese , Malay , and Tamil are also the country’s official languages . Thus , the country is able to claim for itself a neutral position towards all racial groups ( Chua , 1998b ) . Against this backdrop of multiculturalism , the next sub - section will compare the national cultures of Singapore and the United States based on Hofstede’s ( 1984 , 1991 , 1998 ) analysis of national cultures . Dimensions of National Culture Hofstede ( 1984 ) worked with the responses of IBM employees ( 117 , 000 protocols ) , covering a wide array of occupations and demographic variables in 66 countries . He summed up the responses of the subjects from each country to several value items and conducted a factor analysis of the mean responses to each of the value items based on a sample size of 40 ( the number of countries with enough employees to provide stable means ) . In his study , Hofstede ( 1984 ) highlighted differences in national cultures , where culture is defined as “the collective programming of the mind which distinguishes the members of one human group from another” and this “includes systems of values…” ( p . 21 ) . 75 Hofstede ( 1984 ) identified four main dimensions along which dominant value systems in these countries can be “ordered and which affect human thinking , organizations , and institutions in predictable ways” ( p . 10 ) . These four dimensions are ( a ) Collectivism - Individualism , ( b ) Power Distance , ( c ) Masculinity - Femininity , and ( d ) Uncertainty Avoidance . These dimensions will be useful in comparing the national cultures of Singapore and the United States . Collectivism - Individualism This dimension has received the most attention in the social science literature ( Triandis , 2001 ) . Triandis ( 2001 ) points out that individualism and collectivism are not opposites but instead , are conceived as multidimensional constructs . Basically , individualism is often related to competition , emotional distance from in - groups and hedonism . Conversely , collectivism is often related to high family integrity , high sociability , interdependence , and a small distance from in - groups ( Hofstede , 1984 ; 1991 ) . Although self - reliance is often related to individualistic cultures , later work has indicated that self - reliance is also associated with the collectivist culture , albeit in a different meaning ( Triandis , 2001 ) . For instance , while individualists consider self - reliance as “free to be able to do my own thing” , collectivists think of self - reliance as “not being a burden on my in - group " ( Triandis , 2001 , p . 38 ) . Triandis , et al . ( 1988 ) emphasized the basic difference in the relationship to individuals to in - groups . Collectivists usually have one or two in - groups and 76 are deeply interrelated to them . Individualists , on the other hand , have many in - groups but they are superficial in nature . For example , individualists may work in one company but if they receive a better offer somewhere else , they will not hesitate to join the other company . In this respect , collectivists tend to have more loyalty to one company . The United States has been rated as the highest individualistic country with the Individualism Index ( IDV ) of 91 . Singapore has an IDV of 20 ( Hofstede , 1984 ) . This ties in with the concept of ‘dispositionism’ in the West , where the responsibility for behavior lies primarily with the individual ( Chiu , 1972 ) . In an Asian society like Singapore , the individual is controlled by a need for not losing face and maintaining one’s proper place amongst others . In addition to this , meta - analyses of the studies have indicated that collectivism is related to conformity ( Bond & Smith , 1996 ) . Thus , Singapore can be considered a relatively conformist culture . Power Distance Cross - cultural variations in power distance reflect differences in the prevalence of established hierarchies , the preference for vertical versus horizontal relationships as well as the importance of status ( Hofstede , 1991 ) . The United States registered a Power Distance Index ( ( PDI ) value of 40 while Singapore had 74 . Thus , the people of the United States , a relatively low power distance culture , prefer horizontal or equal relationships and are generally 77 informal in their social interactions . One example is the use of first names as a form of address ( Ward , 2001 ) . In the case of Singapore , a relatively high power distance indicates that the people are more likely to use more formal forms of address or those that reflect status differences . Masculinity - Femininity This scale derived from Hofstede’s study concerns the extent to which values of assertiveness , money , and success prevail in a society as opposed to the values of nurturance , quality of life , and people ( Hofstede , 1998 ) . Masculinity refers to the first set of attributes whilst Femininity refers to the latter part . Singapore has a score of 48 on the Masculinity Index ( MAS ) Values and is ranked 28 th out of 50 countries . On the other hand , the United States has a score of 62 and is ranked 15 th . This indicates that Singapore is a relatively feminist culture where emphasis is placed on harmony and caring while in the United States achievement and material success are emphasized . In addition to this , in a country with a higher score , there is a greater belief in independent decision - making as opposed to group decision - making leading to a stronger achievement motivation and higher job stress ( Best & Williams , 2001 ) . Uncertainty Avoidance This dimension is defined as “the extent to which the members of a culture feel threatened by uncertain or unknown situations ( Hofstede , 1991 , p . 113 ) . 78 Thus , it refers to the willingness to tolerate ambiguity . Cultures with high uncertainty avoidance tend to develop institutions , rituals , and structures to deal with the anxiety created by uncertainty ( Matsumoto , 2001b ) . Singapore has a weak Uncertainty Avoidance Index ( UAI ) value of 8 and is ranked last out of 50 countries and 3 regions . In the case of the United States , the country has a score of 46 and is ranked 43 rd . The implication here is that Singapore has a greater capacity to tolerate ambiguity and deviance of ideas . In short , it can be noted that the United States and Singapore differ significantly in all four dimensions of national cultures . Summary This chapter provided a literature review associated with key concepts of ( a ) implicit theories , ( b ) cross - cultural psychology , ( c ) creativity , and ( d ) cognitive style . An attempt was made to highlight the relationships between these four strands . The chapter concluded with a comparison between the two national cultures under study in this research . The next chapter will present the procedures , methods , and materials utilized in this research to explore implicit theories of creativity from laypeople in Singapore and the United States . 79 Chapter III : Methods and Procedures Introduction The purpose of this chapter is to outline the methods and procedures for this study . First , the chapter begins with a description of the participants . Second , materials used to gather the data are discussed . This included a questionnaire that contained close and open - ended questions . Third , procedures for data collection and analysis are provided . The chapter concludes with a summary as well as a preview of Chapter Four , which presents the results of the data analysis . Participants There were three sets of samples that had to be sought . The first set was Sample A , which consisted of participants from the national culture of the United States . The second set was Sample B , which consisted of participants from the national culture of Singapore . As for the third set of Sample C , it consisted of Singaporean participants from the three main ethnic groups , the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians . 80 Sample A ( The United States ) This sample was already obtained by Dr . Gerard Puccio , Director and Professor of the International Center for Studies in Creativity , Buffalo Sate College , between 2003 and 2004 . It was a sample of convenience , that is , the data was collected from individuals who were readily available and who volunteered to fill out the questionnaires . The sample originally consisted of 113 participants . However , it was noted that there was a high proportion of educators . Thus , the researcher sought the help of a fellow creative studies student , who is American , to obtain more participants from a wider variety of occupations and to assume the role of a research assistant . The population now consisted of 139 laypeople , which represented a cross - section of gender , age , occupation , and educational levels . The participants had no formal training or background in creativity studies , as well as prior knowledge of Kirton’s Adaption Innovation ( KAI ) theory . All the participants were 18 years of age and above . Table 3 . 1 shows a summary of the demographic information of Sample A . 81 Table 3 . 1 : Demographic information of Sample A ( The United States ) Age range Number Males Females Examples of occupations 18 - 25 years 8 4 4 educator , engineer , administrative personnel , pastor , nurse , police officer , counselor , student , retiree , housewife 26 - 39 years 44 12 32 40 - 55 years 65 26 39 56 years & above 22 6 16 Total n = 139 48 91 Sample B ( Singapore ) This sample was already obtained in 2003 by a Singaporean creativity studies student but was not analyzed . The population consisted of 199 laypeople , which also represented a cross - section of gender , age , occupation , and educational levels . Just like Sample A , these 199 laypeople were a sample of convenience . Similarly , the participants had no formal training or background in creativity studies , as well as prior knowledge of Kirton’s Adaption Innovation ( KAI ) theory . All the participants were 18 years of age and above . Table 3 . 2 shows a summary of the demographic information of Sample B . 82 Table 3 . 2 : Demographic information of Sample B ( Singapore ) Age range No . ( % ) Males Females Examples of occupations 18 - 25 years 27 8 19 educator , administrative personnel , sales executive , customer service , architect , manager , auditor , pastor , student , retiree 26 - 39 years 86 18 68 40 - 55 years 79 31 48 56 years & above 7 6 1 Total n = 199 63 136 Sample C ( Singapore - Chinese , Malays , and Indians ) Since this study was designed to also compare implicit theories of creativity from the ethnic groups of Singapore , another sample from Singapore ( Sample C ) was sought , as participants in Sample B did not indicate their ethnicity in the questionnaires . A colleague in Singapore who teaches creativity in a tertiary institution was asked to help obtain participants from Singapore and assume the role of a research assistant . This was also a sample of convenience as the participants were obtained from personal contacts and ethnic self - help groups . Sample C consisted of 84 Chinese participants , 54 Malay participants , and 47 Indian participants , making it a total of 185 participants . All the participants were 18 years of age or older and willingly agreed to participate in the study . 83 The sample obtained was also diverse with respect to occupation and educational levels . They had completed at least secondary school education , while there were others who had diplomas and university degrees . Just like the previous two samples , the participants did not have prior knowledge of KAI and did not have any formal educational background in creativity studies . Tables 3 . 3 . 1 , 3 . 3 . 2 , and 3 . 3 . 3 show a summary of the demographic information of the three ethnic groups of Sample C – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians in Singapore . Table 3 . 3 . 1 : Demographic information of Sample C ( Singapore Chinese ) Age range Number Males Females Examples of occupations 18 - 25 years 33 14 19 educator , administrative personnel , engineer , managing executive , clerk , quantity surveyor , student 26 - 39 years 22 14 8 40 - 55 years 25 8 17 56 years & above 4 3 1 Total n = 84 39 45 84 Table 3 . 3 . 2 : Demographic information of Sample C ( Singapore Malays ) Age range Number Males Females Examples of occupations 18 - 25 years 27 12 15 educator , administrative personnel , graphic designer , translator , secretary , librarian , housewife , student 26 - 39 years 16 5 11 40 - 55 years 11 2 9 56 years & above 0 0 0 Total n = 54 19 35 Table 3 . 3 . 3 : Demographic information of Sample C ( Singapore Indians ) Age range Number Males Females Examples of occupations 18 - 25 years 13 6 7 educator , administrative personnel , stenographer , research assistant , journalist , student 26 - 39 years 24 12 12 40 - 55 years 9 5 4 56 years & above 1 1 0 Total n = 47 24 23 Materials The study utilized a questionnaire that contained a close - ended section and an open - ended section . A sample of the questionnaire can be found in 85 Appendix A . The close - ended section was a replication of the original survey created by Puccio and Chimento ( 2001 ) . This questionnaire was again replicated by Gonzalez ( 2003 ) . In this close - ended section , the participants were given descriptions of two different people . The two descriptions were characteristics of the adaptor and innovator , which were directly taken from Kirton’s work ( 1994 ) . As in the earlier two studies , the two sets of characteristics were labeled as Person A and person B . Approximately half of the questionnaires had characteristics of the innovator and labeled as Person A , while the other half had characteristics of the innovator but labeled as Person B . This arrangement would help to suppress any bias and counter balance the effect of reading first one description and for that reason , rating one person higher than the other . A response scale ranged from 1 to 10 ( one meaning ‘not at all creative’ and ten meaning ‘exceptionally creative’ ) . In addition to the quantitative close - ended question , the questionnaire also included an open - ended question . This question was included in Gonzalez’s study ( 2003 ) to better capture the implicit conception of creativity in the Argentinean sample . The open - ended question was : “When you hear the word creativity , what words come into your mind ? Please list below those words you associate with creativity” . 86 Procedures The researcher worked remotely from the United States with a research assistant based in Singapore . The researcher also had a research assistant in the United States to help her obtain more participants for the American sample ( Sample A ) around the Buffalo ( New York ) area . Since the researcher already had Sample A , she proceeded to prepare them for analysis . The section that follows refers to the data collecting procedures for Samples B and C . The researcher conducted on - line discussions with the two research assistants so that they were familiar with the goals and procedures of the study . Ethical considerations like voluntary participation of the respondents and use of the consent forms were thoroughly discussed and explained . They were given a detailed description of the study on paper so that they would be familiar with the procedures for obtaining participants for the study . Since the method of obtaining participants was through convenience sampling , both research assistants were given specific instructions with regard to the diversity of participants required . These were in terms of age groups and occupational backgrounds . The research assistants used their personal contacts at work , college , and places of worship to obtain the participants . In the case of the research assistant based in Singapore , he approached the self - help agencies for the various ethnic groups so that he could obtain more participants . The researcher also used her personal contacts via electronic mail so that a larger sample could be obtained . 87 Before engaging an individual to participate in the study , the research assistants in both countries explained clearly the conditions of participation in the study . The participants read and signed the consent form and indicated their gender , occupation , and age on the front cover of the questionnaire . Participants from the Singaporean sample also indicated their ethnicity – Chinese , Malay or Indian , as well as their religion . Care was taken to ensure that the Singaporean sample consisted of only Singapore citizens , as the country has a large proportion of permanent residents from various countries . The forms were in English as this is the lingua franca , so translation to the various languages was not necessary . Once they had filled out the consent form , the participants proceeded to complete the questionnaire . They read the descriptions carefully and were asked to use their personal view of creativity to rate the creativity of each person described in the survey . Participants had to rate each person ( adaptor or innovator ) based on the scale of 1 to 10 . After completing this part of the survey , they went on to the open - ended question : “When you hear the word creativity , what words come into your mind ? Please list below those words you associate with creativity” . The participants were given as much time as they needed to complete the full questionnaire . Overall , the survey took less than ten minutes to complete . The survey forms were then collected by the research assistants and returned to the researcher . The original surveys from the Singaporean sample 88 were returned by airmail while the original surveys from the American sample were given personally . Questionnaires that the researcher had sent to her Singaporean contacts via electronic mail were also returned electronically . The photocopies of the questionnaires were kept by the research assistants . Analysis The first analysis of the close - ended questions in the questionnaire used t - tests to compare the participants’ ratings of the Adaptor and Innovator across the three samples . Further , inferential statistics were used to assess the differences between countries , gender , ethnic cultures , and the ordering of the questionnaires in terms of the characteristics of the adaptor written first and the characteristics of the innovator written second and vice versa . The second analysis of the data involved the open - ended question where a qualitative analysis was done . The method of coded data was employed to sort the responses for the open - ended question ( Huberman & Miles , 1994 ) . In this study , all the responses from each sample were compiled and each response was assigned a category . A category was created as long as there was a minimum of two similar responses from each sample . For each category , the frequency of similar responses was noted . A ‘Miscellaneous’ category was set up to include responses that did not fit into any assigned categories . 89 Summary This chapter reviewed the methods and procedures used to conduct this study . Participants , materials , and procedures for data collection and analysis were also discussed . The next chapter will present the results of statistical and qualitative analysis of data gathered in this study . 90 Chapter IV : Presentation and Analysis of Data Introduction The purpose of this chapter is to present the results of the statistical analysis of quantitative and qualitative data gathered for this study . SPSS Version 12 . 0 was used to calculate the statistics presented in this chapter . Descriptive statistics will be presented , whereby the mean ratings of Adaptor and Innovator will be highlighted from Sample A ( the United Sates ) , Sample B ( Singapore ) , and Sample C ( the three ethnic groups in Singapore – the Chinese , Malays , and Indians ) . This will be followed by inferential statistics , where tests of significance were computed . The t test for independent samples was used to determine any significant differences between the mean ratings of Adaptor and Innovator for each sample as well as for each ethnic group . Comparison between differences in how men and women rated the Adaptor and Innovator were also noted . Furthermore , an analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) was used to determine whether there was an overall significant difference among all three samples . As for the qualitative analysis , the most frequent responses connected with creativity from Samples A , B , and C will be presented . In the case of Sample C , responses from each of the three ethnic groups in Singapore will also be presented . 91 Results Quantitative Analysis The first part of the questionnaire consisted of a close - ended question where the participants were given descriptions of two different people . The two descriptions were characteristics of the adaptor and innovator , which were directly taken from Kirton’s ( 1976 ) work . The two sets of characteristics were labeled as Person A and Person B . Participants were asked to rate how creative they believed the persons were on a scale of 1 ( not at all creative ) to 10 ( exceptionally creative ) . Table 4 . 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics obtained for Sample A ( United States ) , Sample B ( Singapore ) , and Sample C ( Chinese , Malay , and Indian groups in Singapore ) . They indicate the minimum and maximum ages of participants from each sample , the minimum and maximum ratings of the adaptor and innovator styles , the mean adaptor and innovator ratings as well as the standard deviations of each sample . 92 Table 4 . 1 Descriptive Statistics for Samples A , B , and C N Min . Max . Mean SD Sample A – United States Age ( years ) Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 139 18 1 . 0 1 . 0 75 10 . 0 10 . 0 43 . 5 4 . 6 7 . 3 11 . 7 2 . 2 1 . 9 Sample B – Singapore Age ( years ) Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 199 18 1 . 0 1 . 0 62 10 . 0 10 . 0 36 . 4 4 . 8 7 . 1 10 . 1 1 . 9 2 . 0 Sample C – Singapore ( including Chinese , Malay , and Indian ethnic groups ) Age ( years ) Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 185 18 1 . 0 1 . 0 60 10 . 0 10 . 0 31 . 7 4 . 9 7 . 3 12 . 2 1 . 9 2 . 0 As can be noted from Table 4 . 1 , the minimum age of the participants from all the three samples was 18 years while the maximum age ranged from 60 to 75 years . The mean ages are 43 . 5 years for the United States sample , 36 . 4 years for the Singaporean sample , and 31 . 7 years for the Singaporean sample with the three ethnic groups . Thus , the sample from the United States consists of laypeople that are comparatively older than the laypeople from the two Singaporean samples . The mean rating for the adaptive style ranged from 4 . 6 to 4 . 9 while the mean rating for the innovative style ranged from 7 . 1 to 7 . 3 . In all the three samples , the innovative style received higher ratings for creativity . It is also pointed out that both the adaptor and innovator styles received ratings across the 93 full continuum ; that is , both the adaptor and innovator styles were rated as 1 ( not at all creative ) and 10 ( exceptionally creative ) . Since Sample C comprised the three ethnic groups in Singapore ( i . e . the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians ) , descriptive statistics for these specific subgroups are shown in Table 4 . 2 . This table also indicates the minimum and maximum ages of participants from each sample , the minimum and maximum ratings of the adaptor and innovator styles , the mean adaptor and innovator ratings as well as the standard deviations from each sample . Table 4 . 2 Descriptive Statistics for Sample C – Chinese , Malays , and Indians N Min . Max . Mean SD Chinese Age ( years ) Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 84 18 1 . 0 2 . 0 60 9 . 0 10 . 0 33 . 4 4 . 9 7 . 5 13 . 7 1 . 7 1 . 6 Malays Age ( years ) Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 54 18 1 . 0 1 . 0 50 10 . 0 10 . 0 27 . 9 5 . 4 7 . 3 9 . 8 1 . 9 2 . 2 Indians Age ( years ) Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 47 18 1 . 0 2 . 0 56 9 . 0 10 . 0 33 . 0 4 . 5 6 . 9 10 . 9 2 . 2 2 . 1 94 In Table 4 . 2 , the minimum age of the participants from all the three ethnic groups was 18 years while the maximum age ranged from 50 to 60 years . The mean ages are 33 . 4 years for the Chinese group , 27 . 9 years for the Malay group , and 33 . 0 years for the Indian group . Thus , it can be noted that the Malay group comprises laypeople that are relatively younger than the other two ethnic groups . The mean rating for the adaptive style ranged from 4 . 5 to 5 . 4 while the mean rating for the innovative style ranged from 6 . 9 to 7 . 5 . Just like Table 4 . 1 , the innovative style received higher ratings for creativity . However , it is also noted that only the Malay group had both the adaptor and innovator styles receive ratings across the full continuum ; that is , both the adaptor and innovator styles were rated as 1 ( not at all creative ) and 10 ( exceptionally creative ) . Next , t tests were used to analyze the significance of differences between mean ratings for adaptors and innovators for Samples A , B , and C combined . Table 4 . 3 shows the t test analysis of the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator for the total number of participants from all the three samples combined . 95 Table 4 . 3 Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity ( across all samples ) Sample N Mean SD t p A , B , and C 523 Adaptor Rating 4 . 85 2 . 03 - 19 . 51 . 00 Innovator Rating 7 . 28 1 . 99 Table 4 . 3 indicates that there is a significant difference between mean ratings for adaptors and innovators of all the participants involved in this study ( n = 523 ) with a p - value less than . 00 . The t test was also used to analyze the significance of difference between mean ratings for adaptors and innovators for each individual sample - Sample A , B , and C . Since Sample B and Sample C comprised Singaporean participants , these two samples were collapsed as one group . The results are noted in Table 4 . 4 . 96 Table 4 . 4 Samples’ Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity Sample Variable M SD t p Sample A – United States ( n = Adaptor Rating 4 . 6 2 . 2 139 ) - 10 . 7 . 00 Innovator Rating 7 . 3 1 . 9 Sample B and Sample C - Adaptor Rating 4 . 9 1 . 9 Singapore ( n = 384 ) - 16 . 3 . 00 Innovator Rating 7 . 2 2 . 0 From Table 4 . 4 , it is noted that that there is a significant difference between mean ratings for adaptors and innovators in both samples , Sample A and Sample B and C combined . When Sample C was broken down into the three ethnic groups – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , a significant difference between the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator was also noted ( p < . 00 ) . Table 4 . 5 shows the breakdown of the analyses . 97 Table 4 . 5 Chinese , Malay , and Indian ( Sample C ) Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity Sample Variable M SD t p Chinese ( n = 84 ) Adaptor Rating 4 . 9 1 . 7 - 10 . 0 . 00 Innovator Rating 7 . 5 1 . 6 Malays ( n = 54 ) Adaptor Rating 5 . 4 1 . 9 - 4 . 6 . 00 Innovator Rating 7 . 3 2 . 2 Indians ( n = 47 ) Adaptor Rating 4 . 5 2 . 2 - 5 . 3 . 00 Innovator Rating 6 . 9 2 . 1 A one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) was used to determine if there was a significant difference among the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator from all the three samples ; Sample A , Sample B , and Sample C . The results are shown in Table 4 . 6 . Table 4 . 6 One - Way Analysis of Variance ( ANOVA ) across Samples A , B , and C Sample Variable F p Sample A , Sample B , and Adaptor Rating 0 . 94 0 . 39 Sample C Innovator Rating 1 . 06 0 . 34 98 Table 4 . 6 shows that there is no significant difference among the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator . Thus , adaptors were perceived in similar ways across all three samples , and the lack of significant difference found for the innovative style also indicates no difference in perception for this creativity style across the three samples . Table 4 . 7 shows the t test analysis of the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator of Sample B ( Singapore ) when compared to Sample C ( Chinese , Malay , and Indian groups in Singapore ) . Table 4 . 7 Implicit Perceptions of Adaptor - Innovator Creativity ( Samples B and C ) N Mean SD t p Sample B – Singapore Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 199 4 . 87 7 . 11 1 . 91 1 . 99 - 0 . 49 - 1 . 23 0 . 62 0 . 21 Sample C – Singapore ( including Chinese , Malay , and Indian ethnic groups ) Adaptor Rating Innovator Rating 185 4 . 97 7 . 36 1 . 97 2 . 00 - 0 . 49 - 1 . 23 0 . 62 0 . 21 In Table 4 . 7 , the innovator style received higher ratings for creativity than the adaptive style . No significant difference was found between the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator when Sample B was compared with Sample C . Much like the non - significant findings for oneway ANOVA for all three samples , 99 when adaptor ratings for the two Singaporean samples are compared there are no significant differences . The same was true for the innovator ratings for both of the Singaporean samples . As mentioned in Chapter Three , there were two versions of the questionnaire . One version had the characteristics of the adaptor listed under Person A ( version 1 ) while the second version had characteristics of the innovator listed as Person A ( version 2 ) . This was done to help suppress any bias and counter balance the effect of reading first one description and for that reason , rating one person higher than the other . A t test was done to see if ordering had any effect on the participants’ perceptions of the adaptor and innovator in Sample A , Sample B , and Sample C . The results from each sample are displayed from Table 4 . 8 . 1 to Table 4 . 8 . 3 . Table 4 . 8 . 1 Order Effect of Sample A ( United Sates ) Rating Mean scores t p A - I order I - A order ( n = 62 ) ( n = 77 ) Adaptor 4 . 17 5 . 05 - 2 . 28 0 . 024 Innovator 7 . 67 7 . 15 1 . 57 0 . 117 100 In Table 4 . 8 . 1 , there were 62 participants who responded using the questionnaire where Person A was the adaptor and Person B was the innovator . This group had a mean rating for the adaptor as 4 . 17 and the innovator as 7 . 67 . The rest of the participants in Sample A ( 77 in total ) responded to the questionnaire where Person A was the innovator and Person B was the adaptor . The mean rating of the adaptor from this group was 5 . 05 , while the mean rating of the innovator was 7 . 15 . There seems to be an ordering effect on the participants’ perceptions of the adaptor in the mean rating as the p - value was significant at 0 . 024 , as the adaptor received a higher rating when this style followed the innovator style . However , there did not appear to be an ordering effect in the mean rating of the innovator as the p - value was 0 . 11 . Table 4 . 8 . 2 shows the results of the order effect for Sample B . Table 4 . 8 . 2 Order Effect of Sample B ( Singapore ) Rating Mean scores t p A - I order I - A order ( n = 128 ) ( n = 71 ) Adaptor 4 . 50 5 . 53 - 3 . 74 0 . 00 Innovator 7 . 67 6 . 11 5 . 57 0 . 00 101 In Table 4 . 8 . 2 , there were 128 participants who responded using the questionnaire where Person A was the adaptor and Person B was the innovator . The mean rating for the adaptor was 4 . 50 and the innovator was 7 . 67 . The rest of the participants in Sample B ( 71 in total ) responded to the questionnaire where Person A was the innovator and Person B was the adaptor . The mean rating of the adaptor from this group was 5 . 53 , while the mean rating of the innovator was 6 . 11 . In this case , the ordering appeared to have an effect on the participants’ perceptions of both the adaptor and innovator as a significant difference was noted , with the p - value at 0 . 00 . Like the previous analysis , the adaptor received a more favorable rating when this style came second . Likewise , the innovator style received a significantly better rating when it followed the adaptor style description . Table 4 . 8 . 3 shows the results of the order effect for Sample C . Table 4 . 8 . 3 Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore – Chinese , Malays , and Indians ) Rating Mean scores t p A - I order I - A order ( n = 90 ) ( n = 95 ) Adaptor 4 . 85 5 . 08 - 0 . 78 0 . 43 Innovator 7 . 45 7 . 28 0 . 57 0 . 56 102 In Table 4 . 8 . 3 , there were 90 participants who responded using the questionnaire where Person A was the adaptor and Person B was the innovator . The mean rating for the adaptor was 4 . 85 and the innovator was 7 . 45 . The rest of the participants in Sample C ( 95 in total ) responded to the questionnaire where Person A was the innovator and Person B was the adaptor . The mean rating of the adaptor from this group was 5 . 08 , while the mean rating of the innovator was 7 . 28 . In this sample , ordering did not appear to have an effect on the participants’ perceptions of the adaptor and innovator as there was no significant difference noted for the adaptor ( p = 0 . 43 ) or the innovator ( p = 0 . 56 ) . When Sample B and C were combined , a t test was carried out to determine if ordering had any effect on the participants’ perceptions of the adaptor and innovator in this Singaporean group . The results are shown in Table 4 . 9 . Table 4 . 9 Order Effect of Sample B Combined with Sample C ( Total Singaporean Sample ) Rating Mean scores t p A - I order I - A order ( n = 218 ) ( n = 166 ) Adaptor 4 . 65 5 . 27 - 3 . 16 0 . 02 Innovator 7 . 58 6 . 78 3 . 94 0 . 00 103 In Table 4 . 9 , there were 218 participants who responded using the questionnaire where Person A was the adaptor and Person B was the innovator . The mean rating for the adaptor was 4 . 65 and the innovator was 7 . 58 . The rest of the participants in this combined sample ( 166 in total ) responded to the questionnaire where Person A was the innovator and Person B was the adaptor . The mean rating of the adaptor from this group was 5 . 27 , while the mean rating of the innovator was 6 . 78 . In this group , the ordering appeared to have an effect on the participants’ perceptions of both the adaptor and innovator as significant differences were noted , with the p - value at 0 . 02 for the adaptor and p - value at 0 . 00 for the innovator . Since Sample C consists of the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , a t test was done to see if ordering had any effect on the participants’ perceptions of the adaptor and innovator . A summary of the results from each ethnic group is found in Table 4 . 10 . 1 for the Chinese , Table 4 . 10 . 2 for the Malays , and Table 4 . 10 . 3 for the Indians . 104 Table 4 . 10 . 1 Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore - Chinese ) Rating Mean scores t p A - I order I - A order ( n = 36 ) ( n = 48 ) Adaptor 5 . 11 4 . 75 0 . 91 0 . 36 Innovator 7 . 41 7 . 72 - 0 . 80 0 . 40 In Table 4 . 10 . 1 , there were 36 participants who responded using the questionnaire where Person A was the adaptor and Person B was the innovator . The mean rating for the adaptor was 5 . 11 and the innovator was 7 . 41 . The other 48 participants responded to the questionnaire where Person A was the innovator and Person B was the adaptor . The mean rating of the adaptor from this group was 4 . 75 , while the mean rating of the innovator was 7 . 72 . In this group , the ordering did not appear to have an effect on the participants’ perceptions of both the adaptor and innovator as there were no significant differences noted , with the p - value at 0 . 36 for the adaptor and p - value at 0 . 40 for the innovator . Table 4 . 10 . 2 shows the results of the order effect for the Malays in Sample C . 105 Table 4 . 10 . 2 Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore - Malays ) Rating Mean scores t p A - I order I - A order ( n = 27 ) ( n = 27 ) Adaptor 5 . 14 5 . 74 - 1 . 10 0 . 27 Innovator 7 . 74 6 . 96 1 . 25 0 . 21 In Table 4 . 10 . 2 , there were 27 participants who responded using the questionnaire where Person A was the adaptor and Person B was the innovator . The mean rating for the adaptor was 5 . 14 and the innovator was 7 . 74 . The other half of this group , also 27 participants , responded to the questionnaire where Person A was the innovator and Person B was the adaptor . The mean rating of the adaptor from this group was 5 . 74 , while the mean rating of the innovator was 6 . 96 . Just like the Chinese group in Table 4 . 10 . 1 , the ordering did not appear to have an effect on the participants’ perceptions of both the adaptor and innovator as there were no significant differences noted , with the p - value at 0 . 27 for the adaptor and p - value at 0 . 21 for the innovator . Table 4 . 10 . 3 shows the results of the order effect for the Indians in Sample C . 106 Table 4 . 10 . 3 Order Effect of Sample C ( Singapore - Indians ) Rating Mean scores t p A - I order I - A order ( n = 27 ) ( n = 20 ) Adaptor 4 . 22 5 . 00 - 1 . 19 0 . 23 Innovator 7 . 22 6 . 65 0 . 88 0 . 38 In Table 4 . 10 . 3 , there were 27 participants who responded using the questionnaire where Person A was the adaptor and Person B was the innovator . The mean rating for the adaptor was 4 . 22 and the innovator was 7 . 22 . The remaining participants ( 20 in total ) responded to the questionnaire where Person A was the innovator and Person B was the adaptor . The mean rating of the adaptor from this group was 5 . 00 , while the mean rating of the innovator was 6 . 65 . Again , the ordering did not appear to have an effect on the participants’ perceptions of both the adaptor and the innovator as there were no significant differences noted , with the p - value at 0 . 23 for the adaptor and p - value at 0 . 38 for the innovator . Thus , it is noted that in all the three ethnic groups , ordering did not have any effect on how the adaptor and innovator were perceived . Next , gender differences were examined using the t test . Table 4 . 11 summarizes the results across the full sample , which consists of Sample A , Sample B , and Sample C . 107 Table 4 . 11 Gender Differences Across the Full Sample ( Sample A , Sample B , and Sample C ) Variable Gender t p Males Females ( n = 193 ) ( n = 330 ) Adaptor 4 . 82 4 . 86 - 0 . 20 0 . 83 Innovator 7 . 47 7 . 16 1 . 74 0 . 08 Table 4 . 11 shows there were a total of 193 males and 330 females in the full sample . The males gave the adaptor a mean rating of 4 . 82 while the females gave a mean rating of 4 . 86 . In the case of the innovator , the males gave a mean rating of 7 . 47 , while the females gave a mean rating of 7 . 16 . In comparing the mean ratings of the males and females , the p - value for the adaptor was non - significant at 0 . 83 , while the p - value for the innovator was also non - significant at 0 . 08 , with males giving a statistically higher rating to the innovator . When gender differences were examined in each of the ethnic group - the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , it was noted that the p - values for the adaptor and innovator were also not significant . 108 Qualitative Analysis The second part of the questionnaire included an open - ended question to better capture the implicit conception of creativity from laypeople in Samples A , B , and C . The open - ended question was : “When you hear the word creativity , what words come into your mind ? Please list below those words you associate with creativity” . All the responses from each sample were compiled and each response was assigned a category . A category was created as long as there was a minimum of two similar responses from each sample . A total of 87 categories including the ‘Miscellaneous’ category , were formed . Table 4 . 12 shows the top categories from Sample A and Sample B , while Table 4 . 13 shows the categories of responses from the three ethnic groups of Sample C – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians . A master list of categories with the corresponding responses is provided in Appendix B . 109 Table 4 . 12 Top Categories Reported From Sample A and Sample B Sample Sample A – United States ( n = 139 ) Total number of responses = 879 Category 1 ) Arts / Artistic 2 ) Think outside the box 3 ) New 4 ) Open 5 ) Intelligent 6 ) Problem solver 8 ) Imagination 10 ) Unusual 11 ) Different 12 ) Innovative 14 ) Flexible 16 ) Unique Frequency 90 50 40 32 30 27 27 27 21 20 20 20 % 10 . 2 5 . 6 4 . 5 3 . 6 3 . 4 3 . 0 3 . 0 3 . 0 2 . 3 2 . 2 2 . 2 2 . 2 Total 404 45 . 9 Sample B – Singapore ( n = 199 ) Total number of responses = 871 1 ) New 2 ) Think outside the box 3 ) Innovative 5 ) Different 6 ) Unusual 7 ) Arts / Artistic 9 ) Ideas 10 ) Problem solver 12 ) Bold 13 ) Imagination 100 60 43 43 41 36 36 22 22 21 11 . 4 6 . 8 4 . 9 4 . 9 4 . 7 4 . 1 4 . 1 2 . 5 2 . 5 2 . 4 Total 424 48 . 6 It can be noted that in Table 4 . 12 , the top categories accounted for 404 responses ( 45 . 2 % ) out of a total of 879 responses . The top category for Sample 110 A is ‘arts / artistic’ , which accounted for 10 . 2 % of all the responses . In Sample B , the top categories accounted for 424 responses ( 48 . 3 % ) out of a total of 871 responses . The top category was ‘new’ , which accounted for 11 . 4 % of all the responses . Both samples have ‘think out of the box’ as the category with the second highest number of responses . It is interesting to note that while the category ‘arts / artistic’ is the top category for the American sample ( Sample A ) with 10 . 2 % of the total responses , this category was placed in the seventh position for the Singaporean sample ( Sample B ) , where it accounted for only 4 . 1 % of the total responses . Another observation is that Sample A had categories like ‘open’ and ‘flexible’ , which were clearly absent in Sample B . On the other hand , Sample B had ‘bold’ and this was not evident in the categories in Sample A . Since Sample C consists of the three ethnic groups – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , a breakdown of categories from each ethnic group is provided in Table 4 . 13 . 111 Table 4 . 13 Top Categories Reported From Each Ethnic Group in Sample C ( Singapore ) Chinese ( n = 84 ) 415 Total Total nu Sample mber of responses = Category 1 ) Think outside the box 2 ) New 3 ) Unusual 4 ) Innovative 5 ) Unique 7 ) Different 8 ) Problem solver 10 ) Bold 11 ) Arts / Artistic 13 ) Interesting 14 ) Abnormal / Weird Frequency 54 53 24 22 17 17 15 15 11 11 9 248 % 13 . 0 12 . 7 5 . 7 5 . 3 4 . 0 4 . 0 3 . 6 3 . 6 2 . 6 2 . 6 2 . 1 59 . 7 Malays ( n = 54 ) 299 Total Indians ( n = 47 ) 259 Total Total nu Total number of responses = mber of responses = 1 ) Arts / Artistic 2 ) Think outside the box 3 ) Unique 4 ) New 5 ) Innovative 7 ) Different 8 ) Abnormal / Weird 9 ) Imagination 11 ) Intelligent 1 ) New 2 ) Think outside the box 3 ) Innovative 4 ) Unique 5 ) Unusual 7 ) Different 8 ) Imagination 9 ) Arts / Artistic 11 ) Problem solver 13 ) Abnormal / Weird 28 18 17 11 10 10 9 8 8 119 23 21 17 15 14 14 10 7 7 7 135 9 . 3 6 . 0 5 . 6 3 . 6 3 . 3 3 . 3 3 . 0 2 . 6 2 . 6 39 . 7 8 . 8 8 . 1 6 . 5 5 . 7 5 . 4 5 . 4 3 . 8 2 . 7 2 . 7 2 . 7 52 . 1 112 In Table 4 . 13 , the top category for the Chinese group is ‘think outside the box’ , which accounted for 13 . 0 % of all the responses . The top category for the Malay group was ‘arts / artistic’ which accounted for 9 . 3 % of all the responses while the top category for the Indian group was ‘new’ , which accounted for 8 . 8 % of all the responses . Also , the Chinese had two categories , ‘bold’ and ‘interesting’ , which were absent from the Malay and Indian samples . It is also noted that in all the three ethnic groups , a new category , ‘abnormal / weird’ is found . This category is absent in Sample A ( United States ) and Sample B ( Singapore ) . Summary This chapter presented the analysis of quantitative and qualitative data collected to assess and access the implicit theories of creativity of laypeople from the United States and Singapore , as well as the Chinese , the Malay , and the Indian groups . Conclusions and recommendations of the findings are discussed in the following chapter . Implications for future research will also be presented . 113 Chapter V : Conclusions , Implications for Further Study , and Recommendations Introduction The purpose of this chapter is to present the major findings of this study in the light of the research questions identified in Chapter One . Next , the implications of conducting this research are discussed . Lastly , recommendations for future research in this area are proposed . Interpretation of the Research Outcomes The purpose of this research was to compare the extent of influence of culture on implicit theories of creativity among laypeople from the United States and Singapore . Since Singapore consists of three main ethnic groups – the Chinese , the Malays and the Indians , comparisons among them were also explored . A quantitative analysis of the data revealed that the innovative style was rated as more creative than the adaptive style in samples from the United States as well as Singapore . Within the Singaporean sample , the three ethnic groups – the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , also rated the innovator as more creative than the adaptor . Also , a qualitative analysis of the data revealed that words associated with creativity seemed to have an innovator bias . In addition to this , the implicit understanding of what constitutes creativity did not seem to correspond totally with the explicit conceptions of creativity found in the 114 literature . Furthermore , each ethnic group , although part of one national culture , Singapore , registered differences in their implicit conceptions of creativity . The following section discusses the analysis and interpretation of findings to the research questions that guided this study and which were initially introduced in Chapter One . 1 ) Using Kirton’s explicit theory of Adaption and Innovation to access laypeople’s implicit views of creativity , to what extent do laypeople from the United States and Singapore have similar views of Kirton’s contention that adaptors and innovators are equally creative ? One clear pattern that emerged from the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator was that the participants in the United States and Singapore indicated an implicit belief that a high level of creativity was more associated with Kirton’s ( 1976 ) innovative style of creativity . There was a consistent higher mean rating to the innovator than the adaptor . If a generalization of these findings can be made , there seems to be a perceptual bias towards the innovator being more creative than the adaptor . This is in direct contention with Kirton’s ( 1976 ) explicit theory where he has stated that the adaptors are equally creative as the innovators , at least with regard to laypeople . Studies by Puccio and Chimento ( 2001 ) , Gonzalez ( 2003 ) , as well as Muneyoshi and Kagawa ( 2004 ) have noted similar findings where the innovator was rated as more creative than the adaptor . Chapter Two had already alluded to 115 the possible reasons as to why the innovator is considered more creative than the adaptor . For example , Puccio and Chimento ( 2001 ) believe that culture could have played a role in influencing the perception of the innovator style as being more creative since ‘innovation’ is highly valued , marketed , publicized , and sought after . Furthermore , they suggested that , “the popular phrase often used to describe creativity , ‘out - of - the - box - thinking’ , seems to reflect a bias towards the paradigm - breaking style associated with Kirton’s innovator” ( p . 679 ) . Another possibility put forward by the researchers is that explicit studies of creativity may have exacerbated the situation by putting undue emphasis on the innovator style of creativity . In fact , some of the characteristics of a highly creative individual like ( a ) innovation , ( b ) imagination , ( c ) independence , ( d ) risk taking , and ( e ) high levels of activity / energy ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 ) , tend to be more associated with the innovator style . Another possible explanation is that in the case of the United States , Western values on creativity are dominated by the American ideology , whereby creativity is viewed as creating new and useful objects and ideas that significantly depart from existing ones ( Weiner , 2000 ) . Also , because of a strong emphasis on freedom of expression , individualism , and democracy as reinforced by a political system that protects freedom and protesting rights , Americans are imbibed in a culture where they are encouraged to go beyond the existing frontiers ( Weiner , 2000 ) . This implies that breaking paradigms and questioning the norms are 116 hallmarks of a creative society , and these in turn seem to reflect the innovator style of creativity . A similar situation is also found in the Singaporean samples . Although Singapore is an Asian country that is considered to be more collectivist in nature ( Hofstede , 1984 ) , the innovator style is deemed more creative , not unlike the participants in the American sample . One possible reason could be the overt importance of creativity for the survival of the country since the 1980s . For example , there have been calls by the government to intensify the drive to foster creative thinking in students by having innovative curriculum and pedagogy as well as emphasizing the importance of creativity in the economy ( Ang & Yeoh , 1990 ; Lim & Gopinathan , 1990 ) . In fact , the knowledge - based economy is considered to be an innovation - led economy where “ideas , creativity , entrepreneurship , technology and knowledge converge and connect…” ( Green Paper on ‘Investing in Singapore’s Cultural Capital’ , 2002 , p . iii ) . These examples underscore the importance of creativity in the survival of the nation , where breakthrough creativity is valued . This type of creativity is closely associated with the innovative style rather than the adaptive style . It is interesting to note that in the questionnaire given out to all the participants involved in this study , the characteristics associated with the adaptor seemed to have more positive connotations compared to the characteristics of the innovator . For example , the adaptor had the following characteristics listed in the questionnaire : ( a ) precise , ( b ) reliable , ( c ) disciplined , ( d ) resolving problems , 117 ( e ) improvement , ( f ) greater efficiency , ( g ) sound , ( h ) dependable , and ( i ) maintain high accuracy . However , there were more negative connotations in the characteristics of the innovator and these are listed as follows : ( a ) undisciplined , ( b ) discover problems , ( c ) manipulates problems , ( d ) irreverent of group’s consensual views , ( e ) abrasive , ( f ) unsound , ( g ) impractical , and ( h ) shocks others . Despite this , the innovator was still seen as more creative than the adaptor . This highlights the fact that the implicit view of creativity by laypeople is stereotypical in nature , “where a widely held creative person schema includes traits such as unconventionality , non - conformity , independent - mindedness , rebelliousness , …” ( Kasof , 1995 , p . 328 ) . 2 ) Using Kirton’s explicit theory of Adaption and Innovation to access laypeople’s implicit views of creativity , to what extent do different ethnic groups within Singapore ( i . e . Chinese , Malays , and Indians ) have similar views of Kirton’s contention that adaptors and innovators are equally creative ? Even within the national culture of Singapore , the three ethnic groups comprising the Chinese , the Malays , and the Indians , registered a similar implicit belief that high creativity is associated with the innovative style of creativity . It can be noted that the largest difference in the mean ratings can be seen in the Chinese group , where the mean rating for the adaptor was 4 . 9 and the mean rating for the innovator was 7 . 5 . There was a difference of a mean rating of 2 . 6 . This was followed by the Indians with a difference of 2 . 4 ( adaptor rating = 4 . 5 , 118 innovator rating = 6 . 9 ) , and then the Malays with the smallest difference of 1 . 9 ( adaptor rating = 5 . 4 , innovator rating = 7 . 3 ) . One possibility could be is that the Malay group is more homogeneous than the other participants in the Chinese and Indian groups . For example , the Chinese group had various dialect groups like the Hokkiens , Teochews , and Hakkas , and different religions like Buddhism , Taoism , Christianity , and ‘free thinker’ ( a euphemism used in Singapore when an individual does not embrace any particular faith ) . In the case of the Indian group , there were Sikhs and Punjabis apart from those of South Indian origin . Also , this group registered various religious backgrounds that included Hinduism , Islam , and Christianity . Compared to these groups , the Malay group was relatively homogeneous as all Malays are by constitutional definition Muslims ( Chua , 1998b ) . Although grossly simplified , this could provide a reason why there was a small difference between the mean rating of the adaptor and innovator in the Malay group . However , a major point to note is that despite these differences , the fact remains that there is a significant difference between the mean ratings of the adaptor and innovator ( p ≤ 0 ) , where the innovator was perceived to be more creative than the adaptor across the three ethnic groups . As mentioned earlier , the three ethnic groups were multi - faceted in terms of ethnicity , race , dialect , and religion . Even in the face of these differences , their implicit view of the innovator as being significantly more creative than the adaptor highlights the fact that the 119 explicit theory that Kirton ( 1976 ) espouses certainly does not match laypeople’s implicit theories . In the minds of laypeople , the notion that all individuals are creative , albeit in different ways , does not exist . Instead , contrary to Kirton’s ( 1976 ) view that level of creativity is orthogonal to style of creativity , laypeople still hold the conception that one style of creativity is considered to be more creative than the other . In this case , the innovative style of creativity is deemed to be more creative than the adaptive style of creativity . This then leads to the assumption that if an individual possesses a more adaptive style of creativity , then that individual is not considered to be highly creative . 3 ) When asked to define creativity in their own words , to what extent do laypeople from different national cultures in the United States and Singapore hold similar or different conceptions of creativity ? Both the American and Singaporean samples yielded 879 and 871 responses respectively . In view of this , direct comparisons can be made . One clear similarity between the samples was that most of the top categories of responses seemed to have an innovator bias in the laypeople’s implicit theory of creativity . For example , words like ( a ) think out of the box , ( b ) new , ( c ) innovative , ( d ) unusual , and ( e ) different were some of the top categories from each national culture . This finding further corroborates the participants’ implicit belief that 120 creativity is more associated with the innovative style of creativity rather than the adaptive style . However , some differences can also be noted . The top category from the American sample was ‘arts / artistic’ which accounted for 10 . 2 % of all the responses while this category accounted for only 4 . 1 % of the Singaporean sample . This indicates that being involved in the arts or being artistic is one of the main hallmarks of creativity in this sample of participants and that artistic creative expression is one of the clear indicators of a creative individual . As Leung , Au , and Leung ( 2004 ) have noted , “In the West , creativity is often viewed as an individual activity , and that may be why creativity is typically associated with artists or scientists” ( p . 121 ) . If generalizable , this confirms the individualistic nature of the American society , with an Individualism Index ( IDV ) of 91 compared to Singapore , with an IDV of 20 ( Hofstede , 1984 ) . Also , the top response from the Singaporean sample was ‘new’ , which accounted for 11 . 4 % of the responses compared to the American sample , with 4 . 5 % . Further , the two other top categories for the Singaporean sample were ‘think out of the box’ and ‘innovative’ . Not only do they indicate an innovator bias , but these responses reflect the country’s desire to incorporate creativity and innovation in all spheres of the economy . In fact , Singapore has received considerable support for creativity education and research from its political leaders ( Tan , 2004 ) , where breakthrough thinking and innovation are 121 emphasized . In this case , socio - political factors could have had an influence on how the laypeople in the Singaporean sample perceive creativity . 4 ) When asked to define creativity in their own words , to what extent do laypeople from different ethnic groups in Singapore hold similar or different conceptions of creativity ? One similarity that can be noted from all the three ethnic groups is that again , most of the categories indicate a perceptual bias towards the innovator style . For example , words like ( a ) think out of the box , ( b ) new , ( c ) innovative , ( d ) unusual , and ( e ) different were some of the top categories from each ethnic group . However , one category that seemed to be absent from the two national cultures of the United States and Singapore was ‘abnormal / weird’ . Words in this category included ( a ) crazy , ( b ) irrational , ( c ) eccentric , and ( d ) wacky . Thus , it seems that creativity is associated with ideas , behaviors or products that are out of the norm or particular paradigm . This again reinforces the idea that creativity is more associated with the innovative style of creativity rather than the adaptive style . Furthermore , it can be noted that the categories ‘new’ and ‘think out of the box’ are within the top two categories for the Chinese ( 25 . 7 % ) and Indian samples ( 16 . 9 % ) . As mentioned earlier , Singapore’s emphasis on breakthrough thinking and innovation as part of raising the intellectual capital of its people could have had an impact on how laypeople perceive creativity . Furthermore , a 122 conversation with Dr . Hui Ming Fai , an education specialist from Hong Kong , indicated that in the Chinese language , the Chinese character , ‘create’ , connotes producing something new or producing something that did not exist before ( personal communication , February 8 , 2005 ) . In fact , in Rudowicz and Hui’s ( 1998 ) study , the Hong Kong Chinese laypeople generally described creativity as ‘something new’ and ‘non - existing before’ , again emphasizing the concept of newness . Together with Singapore’s emphasis on breakthrough thinking and innovation , it could shed some light as to why the categories ‘think outside the box’ and ‘new’ are prominent in the Chinese and Indian perceptions of creativity . However , the Malay sample , although part of the national culture of Singapore , revealed that the categories of ‘new’ and ‘think outside the box’ have a lower percentage ( 9 . 6 % ) than the Chinese and Indian samples . In fact , the top category for the Malay sample is similar to the American sample , where ‘arts / artistic’ is the top category , which accounted for 9 . 3 % of the responses . One common conception is that the Malays are highly artistic and thus , would think of creativity in this respect . However , it can be argued that the Chinese and Indians also have deep roots in their own cultures , traditions , and the arts . As pointed out by Professor Lily Kong , Vice - Provost of the National University of Singapore and one of the leading cultural geography researchers in Singapore , “this might be rather essentialist in approach” ( personal communication , 3 July , 2005 ) . Instead , she provides the following conjecture : 123 …It is true that the Chinese and Indian populations in Singapore are largely migrant populations of the working class , rather than the literati and upper classes with their artistic and cultural traditions . One might therefore argue that these groups ( both the early migrants and their later descendents ) do not share the same cultural " ancestry " of others [ Malays ] in their race in the homelands . ( personal communication , 3 July , 2005 ) . Although this is pure conjecture , the main implication here is that there could be cultural factors at work in regard to the different conceptions of creativity for migrant populations like the Chinese and the Indians , compared to the Malays , who are considered regionally indigenous . Furthermore , it is also interesting to note that studies elsewhere have indicated that ‘aesthetic taste’ and ‘being artistic’ are consistently absent in the Chinese conception of creativity ( Rudowicz & Yue , 2000 ; Sternberg , 1985 ) . Again , this highlights the fact that there are indeed differences in how the ethnic groups perceive creativity even within one national culture of Singapore . Implications This study explored the extent of influence of culture on implicit theories of creativity among laypeople from the United States and Singapore , as well as the Chinese , Malay , and Indian groups in Singapore . This section discusses how this research has implications in regard to two theoretical topics , Kirton’s ( 1976 ) Adaption - Innovation theory and cross - cultural implicit theories of creativity . Results revealed that the research participants’ perceptions in all the samples indicate an implicit belief that high creativity is more clearly associated 124 with Kirton’s innovative style of creativity . The conclusion is that laypeople’s implicit theories of creativity have been contrary to Kirton’s explicit theory of creativity styles . This finding confirms other research studies using Kirton’s explicit theory of Adaption and Innovation to access laypeople’s implicit theories of creativity ( Gonzalez , 2003 ; Muneyoshi & Kagawa , 2004 ; Puccio & Chimento , 2001 ) . These three very distinct cultures – Latin , Anglo - Saxon , and Asian , consistently gave higher scores to the innovator . If these results can be generalized , then this indicates a perceptual bias across various types of cultures towards the innovator style of creativity , which is in direct contention to Kirton’s theoretical position . Gonzalez ( 2003 ) has alluded to three possible reasons as to why there is a disagreement between the explicit and implicit theories of creativity . She postulates that it could be that Kirton is correct and that laypeople may have a misconception , or that the laypeople are correct and it could be possible that Kirton’s theory may not be accurate , or it could be a question of not who is right or wrong but that the results could “simply reflect the process of how new ideas are slowly adopted…” ( p . 57 ) . Although it is not within the scope of this study to ascertain if Kirton was correct or not , the fact remains that there seems to be a chasm between laypeople’s implicit theory of creativity and the explicit theory of creativity outlined in Kirton’s theory of creative styles . There are a few implications for this built - in bias towards the innovative style of creativity . 125 Firstly , in the case of Singapore , the clarion call to students and educators alike has been to have a change in mindset where the task of education is to equip students for a future that cannot be predicted ( Goh , 1997 ) . The assumption is that a defining feature of the future is rapid change . Thus , the innovator style of creativity is considered to be a style to strive for if the nation is to be globally competitive . The innovative style of creativity is considered to be the type of creativity that should be fostered and nurtured in every student so that they will be highly creative and innovative workers who will be at the forefront of ideas and scientific breakthroughs . In fact , the former Prime Minister of Singapore , Mr . Goh Chok Tong , explicitly encourages Singaporeans to learn from the Americans , who are seen as “unsurpassed in their ability to produce highly creative , entrepreneurial individuals” ( Goh , 2004 , ¶ 9 ) . In the light of this , the adaptive style of creativity , where working within a paradigm and improving upon it , is implicitly viewed to stymie the progress of the nation trying to brace itself for a future of intense competition and where technologies and concepts are replaced at an escalating pace . In the United States as well as in Singapore , the adaptive style of creativity is not considered as creative as the innovative style as the assumption is that this style does not produce innovative solutions to problems that are inherent in a knowledge - based economy . Secondly , in the area of business , the same can be noted . The key source of economic growth is the ability of businesses to seek out new ideas , 126 knowledge , practices , and technologies that can steer them one step ahead of others . All these connote the demand for the innovative style of creativity , where tangential thinking and working out of the paradigm are required . Again , the adaptive style of creativity , characterized by long - term efficiency and seeking solutions in tried and tested ways , is viewed as unproductive and perhaps even detrimental to an organization that emphasizes the proverbial ‘thinking out of the box’ mindset . The tried and tested methods are seen as irrelevant to an organization that demands solutions to heuristic problems . Thus , it appears that in the general society , creativity as a concept seems to reflect an innovative style of creativity . If Kirton is indeed correct in his view of creativity where different styles exist , then there should be a more concerted effort on the part of researchers to communicate his explicit theory to the population . Otherwise , individuals who are more comfortable with the adaptive style of creativity are marginalized and seen as less creative than their peers . In the quest for a more innovative style , the adaptive style of creativity is squelched or overlooked and the true potential of individuals with the adaptive style of creativity will not be realized . The belief that everyone is creative but in different ways will not hold true as there is undue emphasis on how creative an individual is as opposed to acknowledging how an individual is creative . The above discussion highlights the implicit belief of laypeople that an innovative style of creativity is considered to be more creative than the adaptive style . However , Alkeaid ( 2004 ) , in his research of Saudi Arabian laypeople , found 127 that the adaptor was rated more creative than the innovator . Again , this is contrary to Kirton’s ( 1976 ) explicit view that adaptors and innovators are equally creative . However , when they were asked about their conceptions of creativity , words like ( a ) innovative , ( b ) distinguished , ( c ) novelty , and ( d ) discovery were most frequently mentioned ( Alkeaid , 2004 ) . These words seemed to be more associated with the characteristics of the innovator rather than the adaptor . Alkeaid ( 2004 ) alludes to the fact that laypeople view innovation from a different lens in that innovation can still occur within an existing paradigm or system . Thus , it can be noted that even the term ‘innovator’ holds different connotations in a society . In some cultures , like the United States , Singapore , Japan , and Argentina , innovative thinking occurs only when existing paradigms are challenged , whereas in Saudi Arabia , innovative thinking can still occur within the existing paradigm . Furthermore , Alkeaid ( 2004 ) points out that characteristics unique to Saudi Arabian culture like ( a ) development , ( b ) distinguished , and ( c ) proficiency , were also frequently mentioned when asked about their conceptions of creativity . Alkeaid ( 2004 ) postulated that these attributes could have come about as a result of a strong Islamic influence which under girds the Saudi Arabian culture . However , when compared to the Malay group in Singapore , which also has Islam as its main religion , they ( the Singaporean Malay group ) viewed the innovator as significantly more creative than the adaptor . Although religion ( in this case Islam ) is the common denominator between these two cultures , yet their implicit views of creativity are significantly different . In this 128 case , Kirton’s ( 1976 ) explicit theory does not take into account the rich cultural diversity that exists in various societies . One style is viewed as more creative than the other , and this goes against the grain of Kirton’s ( 1976 ) contention that both styles are equally creative . On a larger scale , when the categories of responses were analyzed , it is noted that they do not share the explicit notion of what creativity is . Most of the authors in the Handbook of Creativity support the idea that creativity involves the creation of an original and useful product ( Mayer , 1999 ) . In fact , this definition is referred to as the “Western” view ( Lubart & Georgsdottir , 2004 ) . However , in the implicit theories of laypeople in this study , the concept of ‘useful’ is clearly absent in their responses , even in the sample from the United States , a western culture . There is a possibility that laypeople’s implicit view is based solely on novelty and nothing else . Thus , perhaps one can argue that the explicit theories espoused by the experts could derive from their own implicit theories of what constitutes creativity . In studies between Western and Eastern conceptions of creativity , typical approaches can be observed . For example , Asian cultures are normally seen by Westerners as embracing a central ideology like Confucianism or Taoism or beliefs and assumptions like collectivism , filial piety , orientation to a group or being conforming as characteristics that typify an Asian culture . However , studies have pointed out that Asians like the Chinese youths in Hong Kong , Mainland China , and Singapore share individualistic mores like their American 129 counterparts in terms of value orientation ( Lau , 1992 ) . This highlights the fact that sociopolitical factors like modernization and globalization are at work . It might be simplistic to state that the study of creativity within a particular culture only takes into account the beliefs and traditions of that culture . Thus , when creativity is studied within a particular culture , a more holistic approach should be utilized , taking into account its political system and ideology , history as well as other social factors . In addition to this , a Western or Eastern culture is not entirely homogeneous . These are very broad terms that do not allude to a myriad of sub - cultures within a particular national culture . The vast historical and sociopolitical differences in the Western and Eastern cultures simply do not justify treating these groups as uniform entities . Thus , the findings from this study imply that research in Western and Eastern conceptions of creativity should give way to more research within a particular national culture so as to unearth the richness of how creativity is conceived in various sub - cultures within a larger entity . Perhaps instead of coming up with a common definition of creativity that can cross all cultures , the complexities of how creativity is conceived in various cultures should be recognized . In conclusion , it can be noted from the discussion that an explicit theory cannot be assumed to have a shared global understanding of its concepts and ideas . Perhaps this can pave the way for more research in creativity on implicit theories , where there can be a deeper appreciation of how creativity is viewed all 130 over the globe . Also , any explicit theory on a psychological construct can incorporate testing it on the general population by way of implicit theories so as to add more rigor and acceptance within a given society . Recommendations This study took an initial step in examining the various conceptions of creativity within the national cultures of the United States and Singapore as well as the sub - cultures of the Singaporean Chinese , Malays , and Indians . It would indeed be valuable to replicate this study in the future , keeping in mind the following recommendations . Firstly , instead of a convenience sampling of laypeople whereby they were purely volunteers and were willing to participate in the study , random sampling of laypeople could be employed as this is the best way to obtain a representative sample . Furthermore , differences that do occur would be a result of chance , and not the researcher’s conscious or unconscious bias in the selection of the sample . Secondly , in this study , the second part of the questionnaire asked for the participants’ responses that they associate with creativity . It would be more useful to indicate the four Ps of creativity – the person , the product , the process , and the press , so that participants could list their responses in the various categories . This structure may help the researcher to categorize the responses under overarching parameters of the four Ps , since the creativity literature is also 131 concerned with the creative person , creative product , creative process , and the creative press . Thirdly , one limitation is that the sorting of the responses into various categories bring with it the researcher’s bias in how the response should be categorized . Another researcher familiar with creativity , possibly a finishing graduate student of creative studies , could also categorize the responses and the final categorization compared . This exercise can ensure that the responses are more accurately categorized to reduce any bias . Fourthly , the participants in the American and Singaporean samples comprised laypeople with at least a high school or secondary education . A wide range of laypeople from different educational levels and backgrounds would be more desirable . If this is the case , translations in the Singaporean samples into Mandarin , Malay , and Tamil would have to be considered . To obtain an accurate translation of the questionnaire , a back - translation by bilinguals and translators could be carried out and then compared . Lastly , this research can be extended by including religion in the American and Singaporean samples to see if this factor plays a role in how creativity is conceived . Furthermore , since this study looked at the three main ethnic groups in Singapore , it would be interesting to see if sub - cultures within the American sample show any differences in how laypeople view creativity when compared to the national culture of the United States . A possible breakdown of the sub - 132 cultures could include the Anglo - Saxon , the African - American , the Native American , and the Hispanic populations . Summary This final chapter answered each guiding question by presenting the conclusions drawn from the analysis of the quantitative and qualitative data . Implications of this study were also noted , especially in the areas of Kirton’s Adaption - Innovation Theory as well as the role of implicit theories of creativity of laypeople . The chapter concluded with recommendations for future research as well as the limitations of the present study . 133 References Ackerman , P . I . , & Heggestad , E . D . ( 1997 ) . Intelligence , personality , and interests : Evidence for overlapping traits . Psychological Bulletin , 121 , 219 - 245 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Adamopoulos , J . , & Lonner , W . ( 2001 ) . Culture and psychology at a crossroad : Historical perspective and theoretical analysis . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 3 - 7 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Alkeaid , A . A . ( 2004 ) . Cross cultural perceptions of creativity : A sample from Saudi Arabia . Unpublished master’s project . State University College at Buffalo , Center for Studies in Creativity . Buffalo , NY . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context : Update to the social psychology of creativity . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . Ang , W . H . , Yeoh , O . C . ( 1990 ) . 25 years of curriculum development . In J . S . K . Yip & W . K . Sim ( Eds . ) , Evolution of educational excellence : 25 years of education in the Republic of Singapore ( pp . 81 - 105 ) . Singapore : Longman . Bandura , A . ( 1999 ) . Social cognitive theory of personality . In D . Cervone & Y . Shoda ( Eds . ) , The coherence of personality : Social cognitive bases of personality , consistency , variability , and organization ( pp . 185 - 241 ) . New York : Guilford . 134 Barron , F . ( 1968 ) . Creativity and personal freedom . New York : Van Nostrand Publishing . Barron , F . ( 1969 ) . Creative person and creative process . NYC : Holt , Rinehart . Bartlett , F . C . ( 1932 ) . Remembering . London : Cambridge University Press . Beck , A . T . ( 1996 ) . Beyond beliefs : A theory of modes , personality , and psychopathology . In P . M . Salkovskis ( Ed . ) , Frontiers of cognitive therapy ( pp . 1 - 25 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Bergen , R . ( 1992 ) . Beliefs about intelligence and achievement - related behaviors . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . Berlin , B . , & Kay , P . ( 1969 ) . Basic color terms : Their universality and evolution . Berkeley : University of California Press . Berry , J . W . ( 1980 ) . Introduction to Methodology . In H . C . Triandis & W . W . Lambert ( Eds . ) . Handbook of cross - cultural psychology : Methodology ( pp . 1 - 28 ) . Boston , Massachussetts : Allyn and Bacon . Berry , J . W . Poortinga , Y . H . , Pandey , J . , ( Eds . ) . ( 1997 ) . Handbook of cross - cultural psychology , Vol . 1 . Theory and method . Boston : Allyn and Bacon . Besemer , S . P . , & Treffinger , D . J . ( 1981 ) . Analysis of creative products : Review and synthesis . Journal of Creative Behavior , 15 , 158 - 178 . 135 Best , D . L . , & Williams , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Gender and culture . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( 195 - 219 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Betancourt , H . , & Lopez , S . R . ( 1993 ) . The study of culture , ethnicity , and race in American psychology . American Psychologist , 48 , 629 - 637 . Bond , M . H . , & Smith , P . B . ( 1996 ) . Cross - cultural social and organizational psychology . Annual Review of Psychology , 47 , 205 - 235 . Butcher , J . N . , Cheung , F . M . , & Lim , J . ( 2003 ) . Use of the MMPI - 2 with Asian populations . Psychological Assessment , 15 , 248 - 256 . Retrieved March 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Camilleri , C . , & Malewska - Peyre , H . ( 1997 ) . Socialization and identity strategies . In J . W . Berry , P . R . Dasen , & T . S . Saraswathi ( Eds . ) , Handbook of cross - cultural psychology : Basic processes and human development ( Vol . 2 , pp . 41 - 67 ) . Needham Heights , MA : Allyn & Bacon . Campbell , J . D . , Trapnell , P . , Heine , S . J . , Katz , I . M . , Lavallee , L . F . , & Lehman , D . R . ( 1996 ) . The importance of self - defining goals . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 , 395 - 407 . Carey , S . , & Smith , C . ( 1993 ) . On understanding the nature of scientific knowledge . Educational Psychologist , 28 , 235 - 251 . Chan , D . W . , & Chan , L . K . ( 1999 ) . Implicit theories of creativity : Teacher’ perception of student characteristics in Hong Kong . Creativity Research Journal , 12 ( 3 ) , 185 - 195 . 136 Cheung , F . M . , Cheung , S . F . , Wada , S . , & Zhang , J . ( 2003 ) . Indigenous measures of personality assessment in Asian countries : A review . Psychological Assessment , 15 , 280 - 289 . Retrieved March 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Chiu , C . ( 1994 ) . Bases of categorization and person cognition . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Columbia University , New York . Chiu , C . Y . , Hong , Y . Y . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1997 ) . Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of personality . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 ( 1 ) , 19 - 30 . Chiu , L . H . ( 1972 ) . A cross - cultural comparison of cognitive styles in Chinese and American children . Psychology , 8 , 235 - 242 . Choi , I . , Nisbett , R . E . , & Norenzayan , A . ( 1999 ) . Casual attribution across cultures : Variation and universality . Psychological Bulletin , 125 , 47 - 63 . Retrieved December 23 , 2004 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Choi , I . , Nisbett , R . E . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1997 ) . Culture , category salience , and inductive reasoning . Cognition , 65 , 15 - 32 . Chua , B . H . ( 1998a ) . Racial - Singaporeans : Absence after the hyphen . In J . S . Khan ( Ed . ) . Southeast Asian identities : Culture and politics of representation in Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , and Thailand . ( pp . 28 - 50 ) . Singapore : Institute of Southeast Asian Studies . 137 Chua , B . H . ( 1998b ) . Culture , multiracialism , and national identity in Singapore . In CK . H . Chen ( Ed . ) . Trajectories” Inter - Asia cultural studies . ( pp . 186 - 205 ) . New York : Routledge . Clark , L . A . ( 1987 ) . Mutual relevance of mainstream and cross - cultural psychology . Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 55 ( 4 ) . Retrieved October 7 , 2004 , from PsycArticles database . Cole , M . ( 1984 ) . The world beyond our borders : What might our students need to know about it ? American Psychologist , 39 , 998 - 1005 . Costa , P . T . , & McCrae , R . R . ( 1992 ) . Four ways five factors are basic . Personality and Individual Differences , 13 , 653 - 665 . Cousins , S . D . ( 1989 ) . Culture and self - perception in Japan and the U . S . Psychology , 56 , 124 - 131 . Cromer , A . ( 1993 ) . Uncommon sense : The heretical nature of science . New York : Oxford University Press . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1988 ) . Society , culture , and person : A systems view of creativity . In R . Sternbverg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity ( pp . 325 - 339 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1990 ) . The domain of creativity . In M . A . Runco , & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of Creativity ( pp 190 - 212 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications , Inc . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1997 ) . Creativity : Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention . New York : HarperCollins . 138 Dacey , J . ( 1999 ) . Concepts of creativity : A history . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzer ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( Vol . 1 , pp . 309 - 322 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Dacey , J . S . ( 1989 ) . Fundamentals of creative thinking . Lexington , MA : Lexington Books . Das , A . , & Kemp , S . F . ( 1997 ) . Between two worlds : Counseling South Asian Americans . Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development , 25 , 23 - 33 . Davidoff , J . , Davies , I . , & Robeson , D . ( 1999 ) . Color categories in a stone - age tribe . Nature , 398 , 203 - 204 . Davis , G . A . ( 2004 ) . Creativity is forever . Dubuque , Iowa : Kendall / Hunt Publishing Company . Davis J . S . ( 1989 ) . Testing for creative potential . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 14 , 257 - 274 . Davis , I . R . L . , & Corbett , G . G . ( 1997 ) . A cross - cultural study of color grouping : Evidence for weak linguistic relativity . British Journal of Psychology , 88 , 493 - 517 . De Bono , E . ( 1971 ) . Lateral thinking for management . New York : McGraw - Hill . Deregowski , A . R . , & Munro , D . ( 1974 ) . An analysis of “Polyphasic Pictorial Perception . ” Journal of Cross - Cultural psychology , 5 ( 3 ) , 329 - 339 . 139 Diener , C . I . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1978 ) . An analysis of learned helplessness : Continuous changes in performance , strategy and achievement cognitions following failure . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 36 , 451 - 462 . Diener , C . I . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1980 ) . An analysis of learned helplessness : ( II ) The processing of success . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 39 , 940 - 952 . Dinca , M . ( 1999 ) . Creative children in Romanian society . Childhood Education , 75 ( 6 ) , 355 - 358 . Dweck , C . S . ( 1975 ) . The role of expectations and attributions in the alleviation of learned helplessness . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 31 , 674 - 685 . Dweck , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Self - theories : Their role in motivation , personality , and development . Philadelphia , PA : Psychology Press . Dweck , C . S . , Chiu , C . Y . , & Hong , Y . Y . ( 1995a ) . Implicit theories and their role in judgment and reactions : A world from two perspectives . Psychological Inquiry , 6 ( 4 ) , 267 - 285 . Dweck , C . S . , Chiu , C . Y . , & Hong , Y . Y . ( 1995b ) . Implicit theories : Elaboration and extension of the model . Psychological Inquiry , 6 ( 4 ) , 322 - 333 . Dweck , C . S . , Hong , Y . , & Chiu , C . ( 1993 ) . Implicit theories : Individual differences in the likelihood and meaning of dispositional inference . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 19 , 644 - 656 . 140 Dweck , C . S . , & Legget , E . L . ( 1988 ) . A social - cognitive approach to motivation and personality . Psychological Review , 95 , 256 - 273 . Emmons , R . A . ( 2000 ) . Is spirituality an intelligence ? Motivation , cognition , and the psychology of ultimate concern . International Journal for the Psychology of Religion , 10 , 3 - 26 . Erdley , C . S . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1993 ) . Children’s implicit theories as predictors of their social judgments , Child Development , 64 , 863 - 878 . Feist , G . J . ( 1999 ) . The influence of personality on artistic and scientific creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 273 - 296 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fiske , A . P . , Kitayama , S . , Markus , H . R . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 1998 ) . The cultural matrix of social psychology . In D . T . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social psychology ( pp . 915 - 981 ) . New Yrok : McGraw - Hill . Fitz , S . T . ( 1998 ) . Stereotyping , prejudice , and discrimination . In D . T . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social psychology ( 4 th ed . , Vol . 2 , pp . 357 - 411 ) . New York : McGraw Hill . Fitzgerald , J . M . & Mellor , S . ( 1988 ) . How do people think about intelligence ? Multivariate Behavioral Research , 23 , 143 - 157 . 141 Ford , T . E . , Stangor , C . ( 1992 ) . The role of diagnosticity in stereotype formation : Perceiving group means and variances . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 63 , 356 - 367 . Fowers , B . J . , & Richardson , F . C . ( 1996 ) . Why is multiculturalism good ? American Psychologist , 51 , 609 - 621 . Frois , J . P . & Eysenck , H . J . ( 1995 ) . The Visual Aesthetic Sensitivity Test applied to Portuguese children and fine arts students . Creativity Research Journal , 8 , 277 - 284 . Fryer , M . , & Collings , J . A . ( 1991 ) . British teachers views of creativity . Journal of Creative Behavior , 25 , 75 - 81 . Gardiner , H . W . ( 2001 ) . ) . Culture , context , and development . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 101 - 117 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Greenfield , P . M . ( 1997 ) . You can’t take it with you : Testing across cultures . American Psychologist , 52 , 1115 - 1124 . Gergen , K . J . , Gulerce , A . , Lock , A . , & Misra , G . ( 1996 ) . Psychological science in cultural context . American Psychologist , 51 , 496 - 503 . Goh , C . T . ( 1997 ) . Shaping our future : Thinking schools , learning nation . Speech presented at the opening of the 7 th International Conference on Thinking , Singapore . Retrieved July 2 , 2005 , from http : / / www . moe . gov . sg / speeches / 1997 / 020697 . htm 142 Goldsmith , R . E . ( 1987 ) . Creative level and creative style . British Journal of Social Psychology , 26 , 317 - 323 . Goldsmith , R . E . & Matherly , T . A . ( 1987 ) . Adaption - innovation and creativity : A replication and extension . British Journal of Social Psyhology , 26 , 79 - 82 . Goldstein , K . M . , & Blackman , S . ( 1978 ) . Cognitive styles . New York : Wiley . Gonzalez , M . ( 2003 ) . Implicit theories of creativity across cultures . Unpublished master’s thesis , State University College at Buffalo , Center for Studies in Creativity , Buffalo , NY . Greenfield , P . M . ( 1997 ) . You can’t take it with you : Testing across cultures . American Psychologist , 52 , 1115 - 1124 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist . 5 , 444 - 454 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1956 ) . Structure of intellect . Psychological Bulletin , 53 , 267 - 298 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1967 ) . The nature of human intelligence . New York : McGraw - Hill . Guilford , J . P . ( 1975 ) . Varieties of creative giftedness , their measurement and development . Gifted education Quarterly . 19 ( 2 ) . 107 - 121 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1980 ) . Christensen - Guilford fluency tests manual of instructions and interpretations . Orange , CA : Sheridan Psychological Services . Guilford , J . P . ( 1982 ) . Cognitive Psychology’s ambiguities : Some suggested remedies . Psychological Review , 89 , 48 - 59 . Hall , C . C . I . ( 1997 ) . Cultural malpractice : The growing obsolescence of psychology with the changing U . S . population . American Psychologist , 52 , 642 - 651 . 143 Hall , W . , & MacKinnon , D . W . ( 1969 ) . Personality inventory correlates of creativity among architects . Journal of Applied Psychology , 53 , 322 - 326 . Hamilton , D . L . , & Sherman , J . W . ( 1994 ) . Stereotypes . In R . S . Wyer , Jr . , & T . K . Krull ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social cognition ( Vol . 2 , pp . 1 - 68 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hansen , C . ( 1983 ) . Language and logic in ancient China . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press . Harrington , D . M . ( 1990 ) . The ecology of human creativity : A psychological perspective . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of creativity ( pp . 143 - 169 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Harris , R . J . , Schoen , L . M . , & Hensley , D . L . ( 1992 ) . A cross - cultural study of story memory . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 23 , 133 - 147 . Harris , R . J . , Schoen , L . M . , & Lee , D . J . ( 1986 ) . Culture - based distortion in memory of stories . In J . L . Armagost ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the 20 th Mid - American Conference . Manhattan : Kansas State University Press . Haslam , N . , & Fiske , A . P . ( 1992 ) . Implicit relationship prototypes : Investigating five theories of the cognitive organization of social relationships . Journal of Experimental Social Pyschology , 28 , 441 - 474 . Hayes , J . R . ( 1978 ) . Cognitive psychology : Thinking and creating . Homewood , IL : The Dorsey Press . 144 Helsen , R . ( 1996 ) . In search of the creative personality . Creativity Research Journal , 9 ( 4 ) , 295 - 306 . Henderson , V . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1990 ) . Achievement and motivation in adolescence : A new model and data . In S . Feldman and G . Elliot ( Eds . ) , At the threshold : The developing adolescent . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Heine , S . J . , Lehman , D . R . , Markus , H . R . , & Kitayama , S . ( 1999 ) . Is there a universal need for positive self - regard ? Psychological Review , 106 , 766 - 794 . Heine , S . J . , Kitayama , S . , Lehman , D . R . , Takata , T . , Ide , E . , Leung , C . , & Matsumoto , H . ( 2001 ) . Divergent consequences of successes and failure in Japan and North America : An investigation of self - improving motivations and malleable selves . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 81 , 599 - 615 . Hewstone , M . ( 1990 ) . The “ultimate attribution error” ? A review of the literature on intergroup causal attribution . European Journal of social Psychology , 20 , 311 - 335 . Hintzman , D . L . ( 1986 ) . “Schema abstraction” in a multiple - trace memory model . Psychological review , 93 , 411 - 428 . Hirschfield , L . A . ( 1998 ) . Natural assumptions : Race , essence , and taxonomies of human kinds . Social Research , 65 , 331 - 349 . 145 Hofstede , G . ( 1984 ) . Culture’s consequences : International differences in work - related values . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications . Hofstede , G . ( 1991 ) . Cultures and organizations : Software of the mind . Great Britain : McGraw - Hill International . Hofstede , G . ( 1998 ) . Masculinity and femininity : The taboo dimension of national cultures . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Hong , Y . Y . ( 1994 ) . Predicting trait versus process inferences : The role of implicit theories . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Columbia University , New York . Hong . Y . Y . , Chiu , C . Y . , Lin , D . M . , Wan , W . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Implicit theories , attributions , and coping : A meaningful system approach . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 77 ( 3 ) , 588 - 599 . Hong , Y . Y . , Levy , S . R . , & Chiu , C . Y . ( 2001 ) . The contribution of the lay theories approach to the study of groups . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 5 ( 2 ) , 98 - 106 . Hoskens , M . , & DeBoeck , P . ( 1991 ) . An implicit theory of intelligence - related mental activities . Journal of Personality , 59 ( 4 ) , 793 - 814 . Huberman , A . M . , & Miles , M . B . ( 1994 ) . Data management and analysis methods . In N . K . Denzin & Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds . ) . Handbook of qualitative research ( pp . 428 - 444 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications , Inc . 146 Isaksen , S . G . , & Puccio , G . J . ( 1988 ) . Adaption - innovation and the Torrance Tests of Creative thinking : The level - style issue revisited . Psychological Reports , 63 , 659 - 670 . Jahoda , G . ( 1980 ) . Theoretical and systematic approaches in cross - cultural psychology . In H . C . Triandis & W . Berry ( Eds . ) , Handbook of cross - cultural psychology : Vol . 1 . Perspectives ( pp . 69 - 142 ) . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Jahoda , G . & Krewer , B . ( 1997 ) . History of cross - cultural and cultural psychology . In J . W . Berry , Y . H . Poortinga , & J . Pandey ( Eds . ) , Handbook of cross - cultural psychology : Theory and method ( Vol . 1 , pp . 1 - 42 ) . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Jandt , F . E . ( 2004 ) . To the reader . In F . E . Jandt ( Ed . ) , Intercultural communication ( pp . ix ) . Thousand Oaks , California : Sage Publications . Ji , L . J . , Nisbett , R . E . , & Peng , K . ( 2000 ) . Culture , control , and perception of relationships in the environment . Journal of Personlaity and Social Psychology , 78 , 943 - 955 . Retrieved March 10 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Jung , C . ( 1923 ) . Psychological types . New York : Harcourt Brace . Kanagawa , C . , Cross , S . E . , & Markus , H . R . ( 2001 ) . “Who am I ? ” : The cultural psychology of the conceptual self . Personality and Social Psychology bulletin , 27 , 90 - 103 . Kang , T . W . ( 1990 ) . Gaishi : The foreign company in Japan . Tokyo : Tuttle . 147 Kapur , R . L . , Subramanyam , S . , & Shah , A . ( 1997 ) . Creativity in Indian science . Psychology & Developing Societies , 9 , 161 - 187 . Kasof , J . ( 1995 ) . Explaining creativity : the attributional perspective . Creativity Research Journal , 8 , 311 - 366 . Kelly , G . A . ( 1955 ) . The psychology of personal constructs . New York : W . W . Norton and Co . Khaleefa , O . H . , Erdos , G . , & Ashria , I . H . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in an indigenous , Afro - Arab Islamic culture : The case of Sudan . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 30 , 268 - 282 . Kim , M . S . ( 2001 ) . Perspectives on human communication . In Milhouse , V . H . , Asante , M . K . , & Nwosu , P . O . ( Eds . ) . Transcultural realities , 3 - 31 . Kim , U . ( 2001 ) . Culture , science , and indigenous psychologies . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 51 - 75 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Kirton , M . J . ( 1976 ) . Adaptors and innovators : A description and measure . Journal of Applied Psychology , 61 , 622 - 629 . Kirton , M . J . ( 1978 ) . Have adaptors and innovators equal levels of creativity ? Psychological Reports , 42 , 695 - 698 . Kirton , M . J . ( 1987 ) . Adaptors and innovators : Cognitive style and creativity . In S . G . Isaksen ( Ed . ) , Frontiers of creativity research : Beyond the basics ( pp . 282 - 304 ) . Buffalo , NY : Bearly Limited . 148 Kirton , M . J . ( 1994 ) . Adaptors and innovators . London and New York : International Thomson Press . Kirton , M . J . ( 1999a ) . Kirton Adaption - Innovation Inventory Manual . ( 3 rd ed ) . Berkhamstead , UK : Occupational Research Centre . Kirton , M . J . ( 1999b ) . Adaptors and innovators : A description and measure . In G . J . Puccio , & M . C . Murdock ( Eds . ) , Creativity Assessment : Reading and Resources ( pp 121 - 131 ) . Buffalo , NY : Creative Education Foundation . Kirton , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Adaption - Innovation : In the context of diversity and change . New York : Routledge . Kitayama , S . , Markus , H . R . , Matsumoto , H . , & Norasakkunkit , V . ( 1997 ) . Individual and collective processes in the construction of the self : Self - enhancement in the United States and self - criticism in Japan . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 72 , 1245 - 1267 . Kogan , N . ( 1976 ) . Sex differences in creativity and cognitive styles . In S . Messick ( Ed . ) . Individuality in learning ( pp . 93 - 192 ) . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass Publishers . Kroeber , A . L . ( 1944 ) . Configurations of culture growth . Berkeley : University of California Press . Kruglanski , A . W . ( 1990 ) . Lay epistemic theory in social cognitive psychology . Psychological Inquiry , 1 , 181 - 197 . 149 Lambert , W . E . , Tucker , G . R . , & d’Anglejan , A . ( 1973 ) . Cognitive and attitudinal consequences of bilingual schooling : The St . Lambert project through grade five . Journal of Educational Psychology , 65 , 141 - 159 . Lau , S . ( 1992 ) . Collectivism’s individualism : Value preference , personal control , and the desire for freedom among Chinese in Mainland China , Hong Kong , and Singapore . Personality and Individual Differences , 13 , 361 - 366 . Lau , S . , Hui , A . N . N . , Ng , & G . Y . C . ( 2004 ) . Creativity : A meeting between the east and the west . In S . Lau , A . N . N . Hui , & G . Y . C . Ng ( Eds . ) , Creativity : When east meets west ( pp . 1 - 8 ) . Singapore , Republic of Singapore : World Scientific Publishing , Co . Pte . Ltd . Leong , F . T . L . , Okazaki , S . , & Tak , J . ( 2003 ) . Assessment of depression and anxiety in East Asia . Psychological Assessment , 15 , 290 - 305 . Retrieved March 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Leung , K . , Au , A . , & Leung , B . W . C . ( 2004 ) . Creativity and innovation : East - west comparisons with an emphasis on Chinese societies . In S . Lau , A . N . N . Hui , & G . Y . C . Ng ( Eds . ) , Creativity : When east meets west ( pp 113 - 135 ) . Singapore : World Scientific Publishing Co . Pte . Ltd . Levinson , S . L . ( 1996 ) . Frames of reference and Molyneux’s question : Crosslinguistic evidence . In P . Bloom , M . Peterson , L . Nadel , & M . Garrett ( Eds . ) , Language and space ( pp . 109 - 169 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 150 Levy , S . R . ( 1998 ) . Children’s static versus dynamic conceptions of people : Their impact on inter - group attitudes . Doctoral dissertation , Columbia University , New York . Levy , S . R . ( 1999 ) . Reducing prejudice : Lessons from social - cognitive factors underlying perceiver differences in prejudice . Journal of Social Issues , 55 , 745 - 765 . Levy , S . R . & Dweck , C . S . ( 1998 ) . Trait - focused and process - focused social judgment . Social Cognition , 16 , 151 - 172 . Levy , S . R . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1999 ) . The impact of children’s static versus dynamic conceptions of people on stereotype formation . Child Development , 70 , 1163 - 1180 . Levy , S . R . , Plaks , J . E . , Hong , Y . , Chiu , C . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 2001 ) . Static versus dynamic theories and the perception of groups : Different routes to different destinations . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 5 , 156 - 168 . Levy , S . R . , Stroessner , S . J . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1998 ) . Stereotype formation and endorsement : The role of implicit theories . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 ( 6 ) , 1421 - 1436 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Lewis , C . C . ( 1995 ) . Educating hearts and minds . New York : Cambridge University Press . 151 Li , C . , & Shallcross , D . J . ( 1992 ) . The effect of the assumed boundary in the solving of the nine - dot problem in a sample of Chinese and American students 6 - 18 years old . Journal of Creative Behavior , 26 , 53 - 64 . Lim , S . T . , & Gopinathan , S . ( 1990 ) . 25 years of curriculum development . In J . S . K . Yip & W . K . Sim ( Eds . ) , Evolution of educational excellence : 25 years of education in the Republic of Singapore ( pp . 59 - 80 ) . Singapore : Longman . Lim , W . , & Plucker , J . ( 2001 ) . Creativity through a lens of social responsibility : Implicit theories of creativity with Korean samples . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 35 ( 2 ) , 115 - 128 . Lloyd , G . E . R . , ( 1990 ) . Demystifying mentalities . New York : Cambridge University Press . Lonner , W . J . ( 1990 ) . The introductory psychology text and cross - cultural psychology : Beyond Ekman , Whorf , and biased I . Q . tests . In D . Keats , D . Monroe , & L . Mann ( Eds . ) , Heterogeneity in cross - cultural psychology : Selected papers from the ninth international conference of the International Association for Cross - Cultural Psychology ( pp . 4 - 22 ) . Lisse , the Netherlands : Swets and Zeitlinger . Lonner , W . J . , & Adamapolous , J . ( 1997 ) . Culture as antecedent to behavior . In J . W . Berry , Y . H . Poortinga , & J . Pandey ( Eds . ) , Handbook of cross - cultural psychology ; Vol . 1 . Theory and method ( pp . 43 - 83 ) . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 152 Lubart , T . I . , & Georgsdottir , A . ( 2004 ) . Creativity : Developmental and cross - cultural issues . In S . Lau , A . N . N . Hui , & G . Y . C . Ng ( Eds . ) , Creativity : When east meets west ( pp . 23 - 54 ) . Singapore , Republic of Singapore : World Scientific Publishing , Co . Pte . Ltd . Lubart , T . I . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 1998 ) . Creativity across time and place : Life span and cross - cultural perspective . High Ability Studies , 9 , 59 - 74 . Lynott , D . J . , & Woolfolk , A . E . ( 1994 ) . Teachers’ implicit theories of intelligence and their educational goals . Journal of Research and Development in Education , 27 , 253 - 264 . MacKinnon , D . W . ( 1965 ) . Personality and the realization of creative potential . American Psychologist , 20 , pp . 273 - 281 . MacKinnon , D . W . ( 1978 ) . In search of human effectiveness : Identifying and developing creativity . Buffalo , NY : Creative education Foundation . Markus , H . R . , & Kitayama , S . ( 1998 ) . The cultural psychology of personality . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 29 , 63 - 87 . Markus , H . R . , Kitayama , S . ( 1991 ) . Culture and the self : Implications for cognition , emotion , and motivation . Psychological Review , 98 , 224 - 253 . Retrieved March 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Marsella , A . J . ( 1999 ) . Toward a “global - community psychology” : Meeting the needs of a changing world . American Psychologist , 53 , 1282 - 1291 . 153 Martinsen , O . & Kaufmann , G . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive style and creativity . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzer ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( Vol . 1 , pp . 273 - 282 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Martinez , I . , & Shatz , M . ( 1996 ) . Linguistic influences on categorization in preschool children : A crosslinguistic study . Journal of Child Language , 23 , 529 - 545 . Matsumoto , D . ( 1994 ) . People : Psychology from a cultural perspective . Pacific Grove , CA : Brooks / Cole Publishing . Matsumoto , D . ( 2001a ) . Introduction . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 3 - 7 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Matsumoto , D . ( 2001b ) . Culture and emotion . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( 171 - 194 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Fifty years of creativity research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 35 - 61 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Medin , D . L . , Altom , M . W . , Edelson , S . M . , & Freko , D . ( 1982 ) . Correlated symptoms and simulated medical classification . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 8 , 37 - 50 . Messick , S . ( Ed . ) ( 1976 ) . Individuality in learning implications of cognitive styles and creativity for human development . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass Publishers . 154 Messick , S . ( 1984 ) . The nature of cognitive styles : Problems and promises in educational practice . Educational Psychologist , 19 , 59 - 74 . MICA Green Paper ( 2002 ) . Investing in Singapore’s cultural capital’ – A new agenda for a creative and connected nation . Retrieved June 22 , 2005 , from http : / / www . mti . gov . sg / public / ERC / frm _ ERC _ Default . asp ? sid = 131 Minda , J . P . , & Smith , J . D . ( 2001 ) . Protoypes in category learning : The effects of category size , category structure , and stimulus complexity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 10 , 104 - 114 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Mishra , R . C . ( 2001 ) . Cognition across cultures . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 119 - 135 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Mishra , R . C . , Sinha , D . , & Berry , J . W . ( 1996 ) . Ecology , acculturation and psychological adaptation : A case study of Adivasis in Bihar . New Delhi : Sage Publications . Moghaddam , F . ( 1987 ) . Psychology in the three worlds : As reflected in the crisis in social psychology and the move toward indigenous Third World psychology . American Psychologist , 42 , 912 - 920 . Montgomery , D . , Bull , K . S . , & Baloche , L . ( 1993 ) . Characteristics of the creative person . American Behavioral Scientist , 37 ( 1 ) , 68 - 78 . 155 Morris , M . W . , Menon , T . , & Ames , D . R . ( 2001 ) . Culturally conferred conceptions of agency : A key to social perception of persons , groups , and other actors . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 5 , 169 - 182 . Retrieved February 20 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Mudd , S . ( 1986 ) . Analytic review of research on the Kirton adaption - innovation inventory ( KAI ) . Social and Behavioral sciences Documents , 16 , Ms . No . 2775 . Mudd , S . ( 1995 ) . Suggestive parallels between Kirton’s A - I theory of creativity style and Koestler’s bisociative theory of the creative act . Journal of Creative Behavior , 29 , 240 - 254 . Mudd , ( 1996 ) . Kirton’s A - I theory : Evidence bearing on the style / level and factor composition issues . British Journal of Psychology , 87 , 241 - 254 . Mueller , C . M . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1998 ) . Intelligence praise can undermine motivation and performance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 , 33 - 52 . Muneyoshi , H . & Kagawa , Y . ( 2004 , May ) . Implicit versus explicit theories of creativity : East versus West . Poster session presented at the 6 th Student Research and Creativity Celebration , State University College at Buffalo , New York . Myers , I . B . & McCaulley , M . H . ( 1985 ) . Manual : A guide to the development and use of the Myers - Briggs Type Indicator . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . 156 Myers , I . B . , & Myers , P . B . ( 1980 ) . Gifts differing . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . Nakamura , H . ( 1985 ) . Ways of thinking of Eastern peoples . Honolulu : University of Hawaii Press . Neisser , U . ( 1979 ) . The concept of intelligence , In R . J . Sternberg & D . K . Detterman ( EDs . ) , Human intelligence : Perspectives on its theory and measurement ( pp . 179 - 189 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Nemeth , C . J . , & Kwan , J . ( 1987 ) . Minority influence , divergent thinking and detection of correct solutions . Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 17 , 788 - 799 . Nickerson , R . S . ( 1999 ) . Enhancing creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 392 - 430 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Nisbett , R . E . ( 2003 ) . The geography of thought . New York : Free Press . Nisbett , R . E . , Peng , K . , Choi , I . , & Norenzayan , A . ( 2001 ) . Culture and systems of thought : Holistic versus analytic cognition . Psychological Review , 108 ( 2 ) , 291 - 310 . Niu , W . , & Sternberg , R . ( 2002 ) . Contemporary studies on the concept of creativity : The East and West . Journal of Creative Behavior , 36 ( 4 ) , 269 - 284 . 157 Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1987 ) . Attention and learning processes in the identification and categorization of integral stimuli . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 87 - 109 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1992 ) . Exemplar - based approach to relating categorization , identification , and recognition . In F . G . Ashby ( Ed . ) , Multidimensional models of perception and cognition ( pp . 363 - 393 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Osborn , A . F . ( 1953 ) . Applied imagination . New York : Charles Scribner’s Sons . O’Hara , L . A . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 1999 ) . Learning styles . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp 147 - 153 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Olsson , H . , Wennerholm , P . , & Lyxzen , U . ( 2004 ) . Observation : Exemplars , prototypes , and the flexibility of classification models . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 30 ( 4 ) , 936 - 941 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Overton , W . F . ( 1990 ) . Competence and procedures : Constraints on the development of logical reasoning . In W . F . Overton ( Ed . ) , Reasoning , necessity and logic : Developmental perspectives ( pp . 1 - 32 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . 158 Paulhus , D . L . , & Landolt , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Paragons of intelligence : Who gets nominated and why . Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science , 32 ( 3 ) , 168 - 177 . Retrieved March 16 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Parnes , S . J . ( 1992 ) . Sourcebook for creative problem solving . Buffalo , NY : Creative Education Press . Peabody , D . , & Goldberg , L . R . ( 1989 ) . Some determinants of factor structures from personality - trait descriptors . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 , 552 - 576 . Peng , K . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Culture , dialectics , and reasoning about contradiction . American Psychologist , 54 , 741 - 754 . Perez - Pereira , M . ( 1991 ) . The acquisition of gender : What Spanish children tell us . Journal of Child Language , 18 , 571 - 590 . Pettigrew , T . F . ( 1979 ) . The ultimate attribution error : Extending Allport’s cognitive analysis of prejudice . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 5 , 461 - 476 . Pettigrew , T . F . ( 1958 ) . The measurement of category width as a cognitive variable . Journal of Personality , 26 , 532 - 544 . Piaget , J . ( 1960 ) . The child’s conception of physical causality . Paterson , NJ : Littlefield & Adams . Piaget , J . ( 1972 ) . The psychology of intelligence . Totowa , NJ : Littlefield and Adams . 159 Piaget , J . , Garcia , R . , Davidson , P . , & Easley , J . ( 1991 ) . Toward a logic of meanings . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Plaks , J . E . , Levy , S . R . , Dweck , C . S . , & Stroessner , S . J . ( 2004 ) . In the eye of the beholder : Lay theories and the perception of group entitavity , variability , and essence . In V . Yzerbyt , C . M . Judd , & O . Corneille ( Eds . ) . The psychology of group perception : Perceived variability , entitativity , & essentialism ( pp . 127 - 146 ) . New York : Psychology Press . Plucker , J . A . , & Renzulli , J . S . ( 1999 ) . Psychometric approaches to the study of human creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 35 - 61 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Plucker , J . A . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1998 ) . The death of creativity measurement has been greatly exaggerated : Current issues , recent advances , and future directions in creativity assessment . Roeper Review , 21 ( 1 ) , 36 - 39 . Poortinga , Y . H . , van de Vijver , F . J . R . , Joe , R . C . , & Van de Koppel , J . . H . ( 1987 ) . Peeling the onion called culture : A synopsis . In C . Kagitcibasi ( Ed . ) . Growth and progress in cross - cultural psychology ( pp . 22 - 34 ) . Lisse , Netherlands : Swets and Zeitlinger . Puccio , G . J . ( 1987 ) . The effect of cognitive style on problem defining behavior . Unpublished master’s thesis , State University College at Buffalo , Center for Studies in Creativity . Buffalo , NY . 160 Puccio , G . J . & Chimento , M . D . ( 2001 ) . Implicit theories of creativity : Laypersons’ perceptions of the creativity of adaptors and innovators . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 92 , 675 - 681 . Raina , M . K . ( 1999 ) . Cross - cultural differences . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( Vol . 1 , pp 453 - 464 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Raina , M . K . , & Raina , U . ( 1974 ) . Creativity research in cross - cultural perspective . Indian Educational Review , 9 , 1119 - 1133 . Raina , M . K . , Kumar , G . , & Raina , V . K . ( 1980 ) . A cross - cultural study of parental perception of the ideal child . Creative Child and Adult Quarterly , 5 ( 4 ) , 234 - 241 . Raty , H . , & Snellman , L . ( 1997 ) . Children’s images of an intelligent person . Journal of Social Behavior and Personality , 12 , 773 - 784 . Reynold , R . E . , Taylor , M . A . , Steffensen , M . S . , Shirley , L . L . , & Anderson , R . C . ( 1982 ) . Cultural schemata and reading comprehension . Reading Research quarterly , 3 , 353 - 366 . Rhee , E . , Uleman , J . S . , Lee , H . K . , & Roamn , R . J . ( 1996 ) . Spontaneous self - descriptions and ethnic identities in individualist and collectivist cultures . Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 142 - 152 . Riding , R . , & Cheema , I . ( 1991 ) . Cognitive styles – An overview and integration . Educational Psychology , 11 , 193 - 215 . 161 Riding , R . J . ( 1997 ) . On the nature of cognitive style . Educational Psychology , 17 ( 1 / 2 ) , 29 - 50 . Rogoff , B . , & Chavajay , P . ( 1995 ) . What’s become of research on the cultural basis of cognitive development ? American Psychologist , 50 , 859 - 877 . Rosch , E . ( 1975 ) . Cognitive representations of semantic categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 104 , 192 - 233 . Ross , B . M . , & Millsom , C . ( 1970 ) . Repeated memory of oral prose in Ghana and New York . International Journal of Psychology , 5 , 173 - 181 . Ross , M . ( 1989 ) . Relation of implicit theories to the construction of personal histories . Psychological Review , 96 , 341 - 357 . Rudowicz , E . ( 2003 ) . Creativity and culture : A two way interaction . Scandinavian Journal of educational Research , 47 ( 3 ) , 273 - 290 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the Academic Search Premier database . Rudowicz , E . , & Hui , A . ( 1997 ) . The creative personality : Hong Kong perspective . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 34 , 175 - 192 . Rudowicz , E . , & Hui , A . ( 1998 ) . Hong Kong Chinese people’s view of creativity . Giftd Education International , 13 , 159 - 174 . Rudowicz , E . & Yue , X . D . ( 2000 ) . Concepts of creativity : Similarities and differences among Mainland , Hong Kong , and Taiwanese Chinese , The Journal of Creative Behavior , 34 ( 3 ) , 175 - 192 . Runco , M . A . ( 1984 ) . Teachers’ judgments of creativity and social validation of divergent thinking tests . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 59 , 711 - 717 . 162 Runco , M . A . ( 1989 ) . Parents’ and teachers’ ratings of the creativity of children . Journal of Social Behavior and Personality , 4 , 73 - 83 . Runco , M . A . ( 1990 ) . Implicit theories and ideational creativity . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of creativity ( pp . 234 - 252 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications Inc . Runco , M . A . ( 1999a ) . Implicit theories . In M . A . & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp . 27 - 30 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Runco , M . A . ( 1999b ) Developmental trends in creative abilities and potentials . In M . A . & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( Vol . 1 , pp . 537 - 540 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Runco , M . A . , & Bahleda , M . D . ( 1987 ) . Implicit theories of artistic , scientific and everyday creativity . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 29 , 93 - 98 . Runco , M . A . , Johnson , D . J . , & Bear , R . K . ( 1993 ) . Parents’ implicit theory of children’s creativity . Child Study Journal , 23 ( 2 ) , 91 - 113 . Runco , M . A . , & Okuda , S . M . ( 1988 ) . Problem finding , divergent thinking and the creative process . Journal of Youth and Adolescence , 17 , 211 - 220 . Saarilahti , M . , Cramond , B . , & Sieppi , H . ( 1999 ) . Is creativity nurtured in Finnish classrooms ? Childhood education , 75 ( 6 ) , 326 - 331 . Segall , M . H . ( 1979 ) . Cross - cultural psychology : Human behavior in global perspective . Monterey , CA : Brooks & Cole . 163 Segall , M . H . , Dasen , P . R . , Berry , J . W . , & Poortinga , Y . H . ( 1999 ) . Human behavior in global perspective : An introduction to cross - cultural psychology . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Segall , M . H . , Lonner , W . , & Berry , J . W . ( 1998 ) . Cross - cultural psychology as a scholarly discipline : On the flowering of culture in behavioral research . American Psychologist , 53 ( 10 ) , 1101 - 1110 . Shiraev , E . & Levy , D . ( 2001 ) . Introduction to cross - cultural psychology : Critical thinking and contemporary . Needham Heights , MA : Pearson Education Co . Simonton , D . K . ( 1984 ) . Genius , creativity and leadership : Historiometric studies . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 1986 ) . Biographical typicality , eminence and achievement styles . Journal of creative behavior , 20 , 14 - 22 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1994 ) . Greatness : Who makes history and why . New York : Guilford . Simonton , D . K . ( 1999 ) . Creativity from a historiometric perspective . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 116 - 133 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Simonton , D . K . , ( 2000 ) . Creativity – Cognitive , personal , and social aspects . American Psychologist , 55 ( 1 ) , pp . 151 - 158 . 164 Singer , M . R . ( 1998 ) . Culture : A perceptual approach . In M . J . Bennet ( Ed . ) Basic Concepts of Intercultural Communication . Selected Readings . Yarmouth , Maine : Intercultural Press . Singh , R . P . ( 1987 ) . Parental perception about creative children . The Creative Child and Adult Quarterly , 12 ( 1 ) , 39 - 42 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Finke , R . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . The creative cognition approach . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Shweder , R . A . ( 1991 ) . Thinking through cultures – Expeditions in cultural psychology . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Shweder , R . A . ( 1993 ) . The cultural meaning of emotions . In M . Lewis & J . M . Haviland ( Eds . ) . Handbook of emotions ( pp . 417 - 431 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Shweder , R . A . & LeVine , R . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1984 ) . Culture theory : Essays on mind , self , and emotion . New York : Cambridge University Press . Siegler , R . S . , & Richards , D . D . ( 1982 ) . The development of intelligence . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) . Handbook of human intelligence ( pp . 897 - 971 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Smith , J . D . , & Minda , J . P . ( 2000 ) . Thirty categorization results in search of a model . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 , 3 - 27 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . 165 Smith , J . D . , Murray , M . J . , & Minda , J . P . ( 1997 ) . Straight talk about linear separability . Jouranl of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 , 3 - 27 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Smith , E . R . , & Zarate , M . A . ( 1992 ) . Exemplar - based model of social judgment . Psychological Review , 99 , 3 - 21 . Retrieved February 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Soh , K . C . ( 1999 ) . East - west difference in views on creativity : Is Howard Gardner correct ? Yes and no . Journal of Creative Behavior , 33 ( 2 ) , 112 - 125 . Spearman , C . ( 1927 ) . The abilities of man . New York : MacMillan . Steffenson , M . S . , & Calker , L . ( 1982 ) . Intercultural misunderstandings about health care : Recall of descriptions of illness and treatments . Social Science and Medicine , 16 , 1949 - 1954 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1983 ) . Components of human intelligence . Cognition , 15 , 1 - 48 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1982 ) . Handbook of human intelligence . ( Ed . ) , New York : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1985a ) . Beyond IQ . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1985b ) . Implicit theories of intelligence , creativity and wisdom . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 49 ( 3 ) , 607 - 627 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1988 ) . The triarchic mind : A new theory of human intelligence . New York : Penguin Books . 166 Sternberg , R . J . ( 1988 ) . A three - facet model of creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contemporary psychological perspectives ( pp . 125 - 147 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1990 ) . Wisdom and its relation to intelligence and creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Wisdom ( pp . 142 - 159 ) . Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1993 ) . The concept of ‘giftedness’ : A pentagonal implicit theory . In G . R . Bock & K . Ackrill ( Eds . ) , The origins and development of high ability ( pp . 5 - 21 ) . New York : Wiley and Sons . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1995 ) . In search of the human mind . Fort Worth , TX : Harcourt - Brace . Sternberg , R . J . , Conway , B . E . , Ketron , J . L . , & Bernstein , M . ( 1981 ) . People’s conceptions of intelligence . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 41 , 37 - 55 . Sternberg , R . J . & Grigorenko , E . L . ( 1997 ) . Are cognitive styles still in style ? American Psychologist , 52 ( 7 ) , 700 - 712 . Retrieved March 10 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1991 ) . An investment theory of creativity and its development . Human Development , 34 ( 1 ) , 1 - 31 . Retrieved February 18 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Sternberg , R . J . & Davidson , J . E . ( Eds . ) , ( 1995 ) . The nature of insight . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 167 Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1995 ) . Defying the crowd : Cultivating creativity in a culture of conformity . New York : Free Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1996 ) . Investing in creativity . American Psychologist , 51 ( 7 ) , pp . 677 - 688 . Su , S . K . , Chiu , C . Y . , Hong , Y . Y . , Leung , K . , Peng , K . , & Morris , M . W . ( 1999 ) . Self organization and social organization : American and Chinese constructions . In T . R . Tyler , R . Kramer , & O . John ( Eds . ) , The psychology of the social self ( pp . 193 - 222 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Sue , S . & Chang , J . ( 2003 ) . The state of psychological assessment in Asia , Psychological Assessment , 15 ( 3 ) , 306 - 310 . Retrieved March 12 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . Talbot , R . J . ( 1999 ) . Taking style on board ( or how to get used to the idea of creative adaptors and uncreative innovators ) . In G . J . Puccio & M . C . Murdock ( Eds . ) , Creativity Assessment : Readings and resources ( pp . 423 - 434 ) . Buffalo , NY : The Creative Education Foundation Press . Tan , A . I . ( 2004 ) . Singapore’s creativity education : A framework for fostering constructive creativity . In S . Lau , A . N . N . Hui , & G . Y . C . Ng ( Eds . ) , Creativity : When east meets west ( pp 277 - 304 ) . Singapore : World Scientific Publishing Co . Pte . Ltd . The World Fact Book ( 2004 ) . Retrieved 10 January , 2005 , from http : / / www . cia . gov / cia / publications / factbook / geos / sn . html 168 Torrance , E . P . ( 1974 ) . Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking . Lexington , MA : Personnel Press . Torrance , E . P . ( 1987 ) . Teaching for creativity . In S . G . Isaksen ( Ed ) , Frontiers of creativity research : Beyond the basics ( pp . 189 - 215 ) . Buffalo , NY : Bearly Limited . Torrance , E . P . ( 1988 ) . The nature of creativity as manifested in testing . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Torrance , E . P . , & yun Horng , R . Y . ( 1980 ) . Creativity , style of learning and thinking characteristics of adaptors and innovators . The Creative Child Adult Quarterly , V , 80 - 85 . Torrance , E . P . , & Khatena , J . ( 1970 ) . What kind of person are you ? Gifted Child Quarterly , 14 , 71 - 75 . Treffinger , D . J . , & Poggio , J . P . ( 1972 ) . Needed research on the measurement of creativity . Journal of Creative Behavior , 6 , 253 - 267 . Triandis , H . C . ( 1980 ) . Introduction to handbook of cross - cultural psychology . In H . C . Triandis & W . W . Lambert ( Eds . ) . Handbook of cross - cultural psychology : Perspectives ( pp . 1 - 14 ) . Boston , Massachussetts : Allyn and Bacon . Triandis , H . C . ( 1995 ) . Individualism and collectivism . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . 169 Triandis , H . C . ( 2001 ) . Individualism and Collectivism : Past , present , and future . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 35 - 50 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Triandis , H . C . , Bontempo , R . , Villareal , M . J . , Asai , M . , & Lucca , N . ( 1988 ) . Individualism and collectivism : Cross - cultural perspectives on self - ingroup relationships . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 , 323 - 338 . Tronick , E . Z . ( 1992 ) . Introduction : cross - cultural studies of development . Developmental Psychology , 28 ( 4 ) , 566 - 567 . Tweed , R . G . , & Lehman , D . R . ( 2002 ) . Learning considered within a cultural context : Confucian and Socratic approaches . American Psychologist , 57 , 89 - 99 . Retrieved February 10 , 2005 , from the PsycARTICLES database . van de Vijver , F . J . R . ( 2001 ) . The evolution of cross - cultural research methods . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 77 - 97 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . van de Vijver , F . J . R . , & Leung , K . ( 1997 ) . Methods and data analysis for cross - cultural research . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Vernon , P . E . ( 1950 ) . The structure of human abilities . New York : Wiley . Wade , C . , & Tavris , C . ( 1996 ) . Psychology . New York : Harper Collins . Wallach , M . A . ( 1976 ) . Tests tell us little about talent . American Scientist , 57 - 63 . 170 Ward , C . ( 2001 ) . The A , B , Cs of acculturation . In D . Matsumoto ( Ed . ) . The Handbook of Culture and Psychology . ( pp . 411 - 445 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Finke , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Creative cognition . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 189 - 212 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Weiner , R . P . ( 2000 ) . Creativity and beyond . Albany , New York : State University of New York Press . Welchsler , S . M . , & Martinez , A . M . ( 2001 ) . Creativity in Latin America : A cross - cultural perspective from Brazil and Cuba . In M . I . Stein ( Ed . ) , Creativity’s Global Correspondents – 2001 . Delray Beach , FL : Winslow Press . Westby , E . L . , & Dawson , V . L . ( 1995 ) . Creativity : Asset or burden in the classroom ? Creativity Research Journal , 8 ( 1 ) , 1 - 10 . Whorf , B . ( 1956 ) . Language , thought and reality . Cambridge : MIT Press . Witkin , H . A . ( 1977 ) . Cognitive styles in the educational setting . New York University Education Quarterly , 8 , 14 - 20 . Wonder , J . & Blake , J . ( 1992 ) . Creativity east and west : Intuitive vs . logic . Journal of Creative Behavior , 26 , 172 - 185 . World Reference . com Dictionary ( 2005 ) . Retrieved 24 May , 2005 , from http : / / www . wordreference . com / definition / eastern 171 Wright , J . C . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1984 ) . The utility of theories in intuitive statistics : The robustness of theory - based judgments . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 113 , 301 - 322 . Yue , X . D . , & Rudowicz , E . ( 2002 ) . Perception of the most creative Chinese by undergraduates in Beijing , Guangzhou , Hong Kong , and Taipei . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 36 ( 2 ) , 88 - 104 . Yussen , S . R . , & Kane , P . ( 1985 ) . Children’s concept of intelligence . In S . R . Yussen ( Ed . ) , The growth of reflective thinking in children ( pp . 207 - 241 ) . New York : Academic Press . Zhao , W . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 1994 ) . Implicit theories and vulnerability to depression - like responses . Unpublished manuscript . Columbia University . Zilewicz , E . P . ( 1986 ) . Cognitive styles : Strengths and weaknesses when using Creative Problem Solving . Unpublished master’s thesis , State University College at Buffalo , NY . V . 1 Appendix A : Consent Form and Questionnaire 172 Project : “Perceptions of Creativity Across Cultures” Consent form : You have been invited to participate in a research study about perceptions of creativity across cultures by the International Center for Studiesin Creativity , Buffalo , State University of New York , U . S . Goal : To explore the conceptions of creativity across cultures . Procedure : You willbe asked to complete two simple questions that reflect your personalconception of creativity . These . . . i i ol ici i Please note : There are no r any tme you want w der to part pate n th If you have more questions can be completed in less than 5 minutes . . . . . . . . ight or wrong answers . Your participation in this study is completely voluntary . You may quit at thout penalty . All information we obtain from you is strictly confidential . You must be 18 years of age or is study . questions : Please contact Dr . Gerard Puccio ( pucciogj @ buffalostate . edu ) or Suzanna Ramos ( ramosj48 @ buffalostate . edu ) or by phone at 716 - 200 - 8300 , NY , USA . Please complete : Gender ( F / M ) : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Occupation : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Age : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Ethnicity ( Chinese / Malay / Indian ) : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( for Singapore only ) Religion : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Your responses will help us expand our understanding of creativity in other cultures . Thank you for participating ! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix A : Consent Form and Questionnaire 173 Carefully read the descriptions below and respond to questions 1 and 2 . . .  i li l ici i ipli  i lvi l i i  l i l i i  l l i ici  i le  l i i i in l  i ipli i i iall i l  l i i l di l i  i i i l l  l l i i l vi  i  i i l 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Not at all creative Moderately creative Exceptionally creative Person A : Prec se , re abe , eff ent , dsc ned and prudent Concerned wth reso ng probems rather than fndng them Seeks sout ons to probems n tred and understood ways Soves probems through mprovement and greater eff ency Seen as sound , conformng , safe , dependab Seems abe to mantan hgh accuracy the ong run Person B : Seen as undsc ned , thnk ng tangent y , approachng tasks from unsuspected anges Coud be sad to dscover probems and scover sout ons Queres the assumptons , manpuates the probem Is catayst to setted groups , rreverent of ther consensua ews Seen as abras ve Seen as unsound , mpract ca , shocks others 1 ) Using your view of what you believe creativity is , please rate how creative you feel the above persons are : ( Select a number from the above scale that best represents your view of each person . ) Rating for Person A : Rating for Person B : 2 ) When you hear the word “creativity” , what words come into your mind ? Please list below the words you associate with “creativity” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . V . 1 Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 174 Sample A ( The United States ) A1 ) Accurate accurate precise A2 ) Approaches problems in a different way ability to approach problems at a different angle approaches from new angle approaching obstacles in a different way using brainstorming techniques to come up with ideas approaching things from a different angle different angles different ways to approach problem sees things and objects in a new and sometimes different light sees things in a different light A3 ) Arts / Artistic art art crafts minded artful artistic artistic in all areas - dance , performing arts , media etc arts artsy arty fine arts song acting authors writer writing visual doodle drawing scribble painter painting poet poetic needle arts like knitting , crocheting crafts sewing sewing quilts dance sculptor sculpture musical Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 175 A4 ) Beauty appreciative of beauty beautiful beauty A5 ) Big picture all - seeing expansive global thinker good at seeing the whole picture less concerned with details not looking at the surface but rather , trying to go to the core or seeing a bigger picture perspective sees the big picture A6 ) Bold bold courageous daring not afraid to change unafraid A7 ) Brainstorm brainstormer divergent A8 ) Caring caring A9 ) Change change changing not stagnant A10 ) Child - like childlike A11 ) Collaborative ability to work with diverse personalities collaborative Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 176 connecting integrating A12 ) Colorful color coloring of the lines sees in color A13 ) Confident confident A14 ) Crafty crafty A15 ) Create create hands on make something you like to do produce re - building start from scratch - end result a masterpiece start with raw materials to do to make A16 ) Curiosity curious eager inquisitive investigative keen A17 ) Designer / Decorator decorating decorator design designer developer A18 ) Different different different drummer Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 177 different thinking different vision different ways of doing A19 ) Discovery discover problems and solutions discovery A20 ) Dreamer day dreamer dreamer dreams A21 ) Eccentric eccentric eccentric ( at times ) minimal common sense off - beat warped A22 ) Efficient efficient A23 ) Energetic dynamic energetic enthusiastic frenetic high energy vibrant A24 ) Engineer engineer A25 ) Excitement excitement exciting A26 ) Explore exploration exploratory Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 178 explore exploring A27 ) Expressive expression expressive A28 ) Feelings compassionate to other person ' s feelings ( empathetic ) emotional feeling feelings intuitive passion passionate A29 ) Flexible adaptive easy easy going experimental finds various uses for different things flexibility flexible loose non - prescriptive redefined versatility A30 ) Flow flowing fluid free flowing A31 ) Focused focused goal - oriented purposeful A32 ) Free - spirited care - free free free spirit Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 179 free spirited free thinker free thinking free - floating liberal play playful A33 ) Fresh fresh A34 ) Fun doesn ' t take everything so seriously fun make fun A35 ) Futurist futurist A36 ) Gifted gifted A37 ) Holistic holistic A38 ) Hopeful hopeful A39 ) Humor funny humorous uses humor in style witty A40 ) Ideas good ideas idea person ideas many ideas Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 180 A41 ) Imagination " left - brain " imaginable imagination imaginative imagine A42 ) Impractical impractical A43 ) Impulsive impulsive A44 ) Independent independent A45 ) Ingenious having ingenuity ingenious A46 ) Initiative initiative shows initiative A47 ) Innovative innovation innovative innovative ideas innovative process which produces a living growing solution or product innovative thinking innovator A48 ) Insightful insightful A49 ) Inspiration inspirational inspired Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 181 A50 ) Intelligent bright brilliant broad focused clever educated intelligent smart smart thinker A51 ) Interesting interesting special A52 ) Inventive / Invention invent inventing invention inventive inventor A53 ) Listening good listener listening listens A54 ) Motivation motivated motivation from within A55 ) New authentic can put ideas in new ways cutting edge finding new ways to do things new new idea new ideas new ways for old things novel original originality pioneer Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 182 something new something new and different trailblazer uses knowledge of different things to put together new ideas willing to try new things A56 ) Non - conformity non - conforming non - conformist nonconformity non - traditional opposite the norm unruly A57 ) Open / Open - minded open open minded open to new ideas open - mindedness receptive respect differences A58 ) Outgoing extrovert outgoing A59 ) Perceptive extremely perceptive perceptive A60 ) Proactive proactive A61 ) Problem solver able to solve problems find solutions within guidelines finding solutions to unexpected problems finds more than one solution hits the nail on the head looks for problems and solutions problem solver problem solving Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 183 problem / solutions resolving sees possible new solutions and ways to organize existing things solution finder solution - oriented solutions solution - seeker solver tries things in many ways A62 ) Random random A63 ) Reflective pensive reflective A64 ) Resourceful drawing from the well pulling from multiple resources resourceful resourcefulness A65 ) Responsive responsive responsive to the world around them A66 ) Risk taker challenge seeking challenging likes a real challenge risk risk taker risk taking A67 ) Skilled skilled A68 ) Spontaneous spontaneity spontaneous Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 184 A69 ) Surprise ah ha ! surprise surprising unexpected wonder wow A70 ) Talented flair talented A71 ) Tangential tangent tangential A72 ) Think outside the box " out there " a person that thinks outside the box able to see the possibilities and not the limitations creativity is an " out of the box " way to come up with solutions that lead to success doesn ' t necessarily go by the rules - radical goes beyond " safe " boundaries looks outside the box minimal boundaries no boundaries not thinking in the box out of the box out of the box thinker out of the box thinking out of the ordinary outside the box think outside the box thinking out of the box thinking outside the box thinking outside the norm thinks outside the box using methods that are not part of the norm to problem solve A73 ) Thinker a thinker able to think up a question ( as Einstein did ) abstract abstract - thinking Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 185 big thinker broad thinker sharp thinkers thinking A74 ) Thoughtful thoughtful thought - provoking understanding of issues well thought out A75 ) Unassuming unassuming unpretentious unsuspecting A76 ) Unconventional antithesis of the " party line " go against the grain radical rebel spunky stands out unconventional using materials in unusual ways A77 ) Unexplored unexplored unknown unlocked untried A78 ) Unique exception exception focused extraordinary unique unorthodox unorthodoxed Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 186 A79 ) Unlimited unlimited unrestricted A80 ) Unusual unpredictable unusual A81 ) Variety diverse eclectic forever seeking exploratory variables options variety variety of materials and resources variety of solutions A82 ) Vision / Visionary vision visionary with vision A83 ) Miscellaneous ambitious analogy archeology architect believable better birth busy catalyst child - centered cliches used to be creative concentrate conventional culture difficult dirty hands distracting dramatic emergent epiphany essence Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 187 forthright frantic fulfill good graceful grey ( not black or white ) hairstyles helpful high self - esteem higher order intimate introverted jack the box loud makes lemonade from lemons messy metaphor mind going 100 miles a minute motion obscure observer opinionated optimistic organized Pandora ' s box paradigm shift was creative 20 years ago patient physically and emotionally prepared for challenges planner - ideas pleasant political positive practical problem generator progressive prolific pushy relaxation relevance seeking serendipity shapes soul sound speaker suddenly tangible that there are handy the original question is more important than the answer top down Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 188 troublesome twisted urgent wandering ( mind ) wise woodworking works Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 189 Sample B ( Singapore ) B1 ) Abnormal / Weird abnormal abnormality crazy insanity irrational outrageous ridiculous weird B2 ) Accurate sharp spot on B3 ) Active active active mind creativity in putting thoughts into action doing lively B4 ) Adaptability adapt things to serve right adapt to change with positive mindset adaptability B5 ) Adventurous adventurer adventurous B6 ) Approaches problems in a different way consider all factors different angles different approach different perspective different views different ways of doing things look at different angle look at things from different angles look at things in different perspective look at things or problems at a different angle Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 190 looking from different angles B7 ) Arts / Artistic art artistic artist artistically - inclined arts arts dance design drawing food presentation music origami B8 ) Beauty beautiful beauty B9 ) Big picture look at big picture see complete picture from all angles B10 ) Bold beyond the call of duty bold brave courageous dare to dream dare to try dare to try and explore dare to try new things dares to change daring forward gutsy not afraid of being criticized B11 ) Brainstorm able to diverge and converge brainstorming Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 191 B12 ) Change change change mindset change ' normal looking ' things to something different changes embrace changes transforming tsunami willing to change willing to change for better B13 ) Colorful Colorful B14 ) Confident ‘can do ' attitude ‘cannot be done ' is not in the vocabulary confident cool cool and calm B15 ) Create create creation creation of something B16 ) Curiosity curiosity curious inquisitive B17 ) Different a tool to be better than and differentiate from your competitors be different being different can try things in different ways difference different different from normal different from others do differently do something different and reasonable do things differently Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 192 doing and seeing things differently doing things differently doing things in a better , different way exception makes a difference something different think different angles think different from other person think differently think differently from norm thinking differently from the norm very different B18 ) Discovery discover discover new things / methods / solutions and even foresee problems discover problems and discover solutions B19 ) Dreamer dream dreamer dreams B20 ) Energetic energetic enthusiasm restlessness vibrant B21 ) Entrepreneur entrepreneur entrepreneurial B22 ) Excitement exciting B23 ) Explore explore explore new things investigate Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 193 B24 ) Expressive expressive B25 ) Flexible ability to expand adopts an alternative but workable approach flexible not rigid versatility B26 ) Free - spirited carefree free free spirit play plays with colors uninhibited B27 ) Fresh fresh fresh perspective freshness B28 ) Fun fun funky B29 ) Humor humorous sense of humor B30 ) Idealistic idealistic B31 ) Ideas a lot of ideas a person who got a lot of ideas ability to generate ideas full of ideas give ideas Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 194 idea idea come from your mind idea from your mind ideas light bulb light bulb is switched on lots of ideas more ideas provide more or own ideas to give ideas B32 ) Imagination imagination imagination has no boundaries imaginative B33 ) Impractical impractical B34 ) Improvement continual inner drive to improve things to make life better improve improved improvement improvise on existing ideas to improve B35 ) Independent independence independent B36 ) Initiative full of initiative initiative B37 ) Innovative innovate innovation innovative innovativity Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 195 B38 ) Insightful insightful B39 ) Inspiration inspiration inspiration and perspiration inspirational inspiring B40 ) Intelligent bright brilliant clever genius intellectually charged intelligent smart street smart B41 ) Interesting interesting special B42 ) Inventive / Invention inventing invention inventive inventiveness inventor re - inventing to invent something new B43 ) Maverick maverick B44 ) New able to generate new ideas able to mix and match concepts and ideas to come up with new solutions able to think of new idea always can think better than others always come up with funny ideas bold new action which differs from conventional methods Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 196 bringing into being something not there before bringing together of two previously unrelated planes of thought creativity that applies in the form of art expression in presenting a new form create new technique but in the same product e . g . with the same product we can use many ways to make the product look more beautiful creation of the new develop new ideas do new things do something new and discover something new do things or even think of new methods extra originality find new ways of doing things get the new idea give new ideas implement new ideas implement new products invent new ideas likes to try new things never before new new idea new ideas , products , services new solutions new views and possible ideas new way of doing things new ways of doing things novel novelty original originality others have not thought of before pioneering rearranging of the old in new and different ways recommend new things re - creation renew each day is a power of creativity , so even in mission life , he can endure a very dull life and allows his mission to carry on revolutionary seeing old things in new ways seek new ideas for improvement shift paradigm something new the ability to conceptualize and conceive something from nothing think new ideas think to get new method to do for easy way to find new approach in doing things try new things try to do new things unheard untried untried paths Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 197 use newly invented methods to do things Why didn ' t I think of that ? B45 ) Non - conformity non - compliance non - conformance to standard processes / procedures non - conformer non - conforming non - conformist non - conformity non - tradition non - traditional B46 ) Open / Open - minded open open mind open - minded open - mindedness B47 ) Proactive advance advancement pre - empt problems proactive proactive , decisive and assertive in doing things in a new way facing new era of competitions thinking ahead what is the future to be like B48 ) Problem solver a person who does things works , that uncalled for achieving that similar objective in an efficient way ability to solve life problems or ministry problems when no one beside him analyze problem positively constantly working on solving problems decision ease of implementation of solutions problem solving problem solving process provide constructive solutions , not destructive resolving problems seems almost obvious solution short cut to achieve end result simple and straightforward solutions solution solutions solutions ( successful ) Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 198 solve problems solver solving problems in a different manner to provide solutions B49 ) Questioning question questioning B50 ) Refreshing refreshing B51 ) Resourceful resourceful resourcefulness B52 ) Risk taker challenge traditions and norms challenger challenging risk - taker risk - taking B53 ) Shocking absurd illogical shocking B54 ) Skilled creativity in the way one plays sports e . g . basketball everybody wants it and claims to do it , few really know how to B55 ) Spontaneous spontaneous B56 ) Strength / Power power strength strong Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 199 B57 ) Surprise surprise surprising surprising but not outrageous unbelievable unexpected unexpected ideas B58 ) Talented flair talent talented B59 ) Temperamental temperamental B60 ) Think outside the box all things possible break out of the norm looking beyond the obvious no boundaries no boundary no rules not constrained by current status / position not restricted out of the box out of the norm out of this world out - of - box thinker possibilities possibility thinking think out of the box think out the box think outside the box think wild thinking out of the box thinking / doing things without reservations / restrictions B61 ) Thinker ability to think on your feet able to think quickly on the feet lateral quick thinking quick witted Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 200 reasoning think more ideas think openly think very quickly on their feet thinker thinking thinking fast thinking process B62 ) Unconventional Are you sure ? doing things very unusual ideas form an unusual angle non - conventional not having a conventional kind of thinking not just using / depending on practical solutions to problems not mainstream radical strange uncommon unconventional unconventional solutions and approaches B63 ) Unique extraordinary extra - ordinary grabs attention unique unique ideas unorthodox B64 ) Unsystematic disorganized messy no sense of time no time for details not systematic off the cuff sloppy / untidy unsystematic B65 ) Useful constructive save costs save time Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 201 turn / make something useless into useful useful B66 ) Unusual unusual unusual designs unusual ideas very unusual B67 ) Wild thinking / ideas wild wild ideas wild ideas wild imagination wild thinking B68 ) Miscellaneous belief concept consultation control cosmetic critical destructive developmental Edward de Bono effective enhancing enterprising entertaining expensive fast firm food food forgetful / absentminded games gathering great happy hardworking high self - esteem hungry identify image imagery implement Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 202 individualistic initiating and exploring specific results orientation instinct irreverence leading the pack learn things fast learner less efficient less practical loud lower costs more advance natural natural ability nature non - judgmental not a follower opinionated opinion optimistic people performance persistent positive attitude practical productivity realistic rebellion results sample self - instinct serious shadows silly simple simple and elegant space technology style testing to provide good quality usually perceived as a positive trait to have variation work work worldly Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 203 Sample C ( Singaporean Chinese ) C1 ) Abnormal / Weird abnormal absurd crazy crazy ideas eccentric insane misunderstood weird things weirdo C2 ) Adventurous adventurous adventurous be adventurous C3 ) Amazing amazing C4 ) Arts / Artistic art artist artistic arty drawings C5 ) Beauty beautiful beauty lovely C6 ) Bold always try courage dare to fail dare to try dare to try new things daredevil daring daring to try out determined Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 204 willing to try C7 ) Brainstorm convergence divergence C8 ) Change changes modified C9 ) Colorful colorful colors C10 ) Create able to create order out of chaos creation C11 ) Curiosity curiosity curiosity - able to find problems curious C12 ) Different able to produce a piece of work different from others which is usually attractive able to think differently being different from the crowd dare to be different in almost anything different different from the norm different mindsets different perspective do things differently looking at things from a different perspective to make a difference C13 ) Discovery discover exploration explorer mentality frontier willingness to explore seemingly unrelated threads Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 205 C14 ) Excitement exciting C15 ) Feelings emotion oriented passion passionate personal feelings and opinions romantic C16 ) Freedom freedom freedom to express and explore C17 ) Free - spirited free free spirit free thinker playful C18 ) Fresh fresh fresh different approach to problems and to solutions C19 ) Fun fun fun loving hip quirky C20 ) Ideas full of ideas ideas many ideas sharing ideas to spark more ideas C21 ) Imagination imaginative Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 206 C22 ) Improvement constantly making improvements improvement improvement of a system improvements optimization of a system C23 ) Initiative initiative C24 ) Innovative innovation innovative C25 ) Intelligent clever clever genius intelligent smart C26 ) Interesting interesting special special particular C27 ) Inventive / Invention invent invention new inventions that will benefit a lot of people C28 ) Joy enjoyment joy joyful C29 ) New a whole new world of experience able to connect existing thoughts , views , paradigms , into new dimensions breaking new grounds Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 207 discover new things explore new ways to implement finding new solutions to the same problem joining 2 or more seemingly disparate ideas / concepts together i . e . connecting dots make a new product from two or three existing ones never had before never seen before new new and interesting idea new angle new ideas new ways new ways of doing things new ways to do something even better new , coming up with different and revolutionary ideas that enhances life . novel original originality something out of nothing something totally brand new or modified better think of new ideas tired of the same old thing to come up with novel ideas try something new unheard unheard of before unseen of before unthinkable untried ways willing to try new things C30 ) Non - conformity does not follow rules non - conformist non - traditional C31 ) Open / Open - minded more open or incline to non - conforming news open open - minded C32 ) Proactive proactive responsive Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 208 C33 ) Problem solver ability to apply one solution to another situation able to tackle problems / issues successfully , regardless of the personality or impression the person gives competency - able to solve problems does not mind doing his or her own things in solving the problem even though there is risk , even though laughed at . eureka practical workable solutions to existing methods of doing things problem solving shortcuts - simpler and more efficient ways of achieving the desired outcomes simple solutions simple solutions to problems solution solutions solving some problems in the system C34 ) Questioning disruptive questioning rebellious to challenge the norm C35 ) Risk taker challenge assumptions challenges authority challenging challenging assumptions no risk , no venture risk take risks C36 ) Surprise surprise surprising unexpected C37 ) Talented talent talented C38 ) Think outside the box able to see constraints and open space within space Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 209 think out of the box C39 ) Thinker abstract abstract things positive way of thinking thinker thinking thinking cap thinking hats C40 ) Unconventional not be restrained by conventional methodology and traditions radical unconventional C41 ) Unique exception extraordinary extraordinary ideals out of extraordinary thoughts outstanding unique unorthodox wonders wow C42 ) Unlimited " auto - roaming " depth has no definite form wide C43 ) Unpredictable unpredictable unpredictable C44 ) Unsystematic chaos undisciplined unplanned unstructured Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 210 C45 ) Unusual unusual unusual skills C46 ) Wild thinking / ideas let your mind run wild unruly wild C47 ) Miscellaneous break the ice convicted design doing things and adding value in the process efficient enhancement enterprising expensive , copyright , patent eye opening failure fast walking pace glint in the eyes illegal Japan Japanese rock bands mischief observe possible shape simplicity sophisticated spark spendthrift stubborn in own belief unresolved Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 211 Sample D ( Singaporean Malay ) D1 ) Abnormal / Weird irrational a little bit abnormal in thinking and behavior craziness crazy crazy ideas eccentric wacky weird D2 ) Active active kinesthetic lively D3 ) Arts / Artistic aesthetic art artistic artists design music musicians nice design nicely decorated paintbrush poetry songwriters theater writers D4 ) Bold bold bravery daring not afraid to make mistakes not afraid to try outspoken D5 ) Brainstorm brainstorming no judgment of ideas Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 212 tools D6 ) Change adapt to changes change changes D7 ) Colorful colorful colors nice color D8 ) Confident confident ‘never say die’ attitude D9 ) Create ability to create creation creative creativity creator D10 ) Different differences different different perspectives differently doing something different from what others do D11 ) Entrepreneur entrepreneurial entrepreneurship D12 ) Explore alternative explorer Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 213 D13 ) Expressive expressive means of expression D14 ) Feelings able to get the " ahhh " feeling out of me emotional intelligence emotions passion in interests temperamental understanding D15 ) Flexible flexibility flexible D16 ) Fun fun D17 ) Ideas ideator full of ideas ideas D18 ) Imagination imagination imaginative D19 ) Improvement improve keep suggesting improvements D20 ) Innovative innovation innovative D21 ) Inspiration inspirations inspire Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 214 D22 ) Intelligent cleverness cunning genius intelligent interesting quick - witted witty D23 ) Inventive / Invention invent inventions inventive inventiveness inventor D24 ) New new new idea new idea comes from your mind original originality D25 ) Non - conformity non - conformist non - conformity non - traditional transgressing the status quo or social conformity view things above the norm D26 ) Open / Open - minded open - minded open up to more possibilities D27 ) Problem solver problem solving D28 ) Resourceful enterprising productive resourceful Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 215 resourcefulness D29 ) Risk taker challenge challenges D30 ) Spontaneous spontaneity D31 ) Think outside the box beyond borders do things beyond the norm think out of box thinking beyond the box D32 ) Thinker abstract analytical someone who can think talking out from different angles think positively - attitude and mindset thinking thought D33 ) Unconventional controversial unconventional , yet feasible D34 ) Unique exceptional extraordinary one - of - kind produce distinct piece of work or idea something unique the outcome or output usually is out of the norm and could be fascinating unique want to stand out D35 ) Miscellaneous characteristics people ' s behavior a picture tells a thousand words Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 216 appearance architects avant - garde awareness of surrounding be able to visualize bubbles commitment computer concept critical culture culture cupboard easy to understand faster fix flour formula function green has deep understanding of human behavior humanities inclined in non - academic areas laid back language flair learning lies literature M & M chocolates messy MTV myself nurture not nature on his / her own opinionated organization pencil personality practicality prototype rainbow research responsible seeming contradiction sensitive smooth there is no need to be smart use visual - people can think visually in any aspect of angle well furnished Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 217 Sample E ( Singaporean Indian ) E1 ) Abnormal / Weird a little weird abnormal crazy quirky weird E2 ) Active active mind E3 ) Amazing amazing astounding remarkable sensational E4 ) Approaches problems in a different way look at any problem from different angles the road less traveled E5 ) Arts / Artistic art artist artistic arts drawings E6 ) Bold bold daring not afraid of challenging established conventions willing to try E7 ) Different different different perspective different way of doing things thinking differently Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 218 E8 ) Discovery discovery E9 ) Explore enjoys exploring new ideas ready to explore E10 ) Ideas ideas E11 ) Imagination being imaginative imagination imaginative E12 ) Innovative innovation innovations innovative E13 ) Inspiration inspiration inspired E14 ) Interesting interesting E15 ) Inventive / Invention invention inventive E16 ) New coming up with new ideas no matter how weird they can be create new things / ideas looking for new ways to solve problems new new ideas new ways of doing things novel Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 219 novelty original original ideas original in ideas originality originality in ideas originate renewal E17 ) Non - conformity against the grain against the rules non - conformism non - conformist non - conformity E18 ) Open / Open - minded open mind open - minded opportunity E19 ) Problem solver able to seek solutions able to solve problems with ease any person who can solve problems faster and simpler than others decision maker resolve but amicably solution E20 ) Questioning challenging assumptions challenging the norm questions E21 ) Risk taker risk risk - taker risk - takers willing to take risks E22 ) Spontaneous spontaneous Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 220 E23 ) Talented talented talents E24 ) Think outside the box able to think out of the box beyond norm breaking the norm goes against the norm out of the box out of the norm think out of the box thinking out of the box E25 ) Thinker abstract critical analysis inductive reasoning lateral thinking quality thinking which helps in growth thinking E26 ) Unconventional beyond logic non - conventional strange unconventional E27 ) Unexplored uncharted untested untried E28 ) Unique captivating exceptional eye - catching outstanding special unique unique sense of style unorthodox unorthodox methods Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 221 E29 ) Unlimited no limits restrictless unrestrained E30 ) Unusual unusual E31 ) Miscellaneous anti - thesis beneficial betterment brainobics committed development dialectic efforts enlightening face challenges flamboyant futuristic helpful high accuracy hypothesis individualistic initiates marketable moody nice not successful - end up on the streets obstacles overused at times perceptions personality flair phrases popular premises problems productive quantum jump resourceful shocking simplistic sleepless sound , conforming , dependable stress syllogism Appendix B : Master List of Responses with Categories 222 to increase sensory perceptions to make pariah undisciplined very successful Appendix C : Concept Paper 223 Theme : Organizing , Developing and Disseminating Knowledge about Creativity Initiative : Cross - cultural perspectives in the domain of creativity Thesis Title : Cross - cultural studies of implicit theories of creativity : A comparative analysis between the United States and the main ethnic groups in Singapore Purpose and Questions : The purpose of this thesis is to compare the extent of influence of culture on implicit theories of creativity among laypeople from the United States and Singapore in regard to adaptive and innovative styles of creativity as well as their own conceptions of creativity . Since Singapore consists of three main ethnic groups – the Chinese , the Malays and the Indians , comparisons among them will also be explored . The research questions that will guide this study are as follows : • Using Kirton’s explicit theory of Adaption and Innovation to access laypeople’s implicit views of creativity , to what extent do laypeople from various cultures have similar views that adaptors and innovators are equally creative ? • Using Kirton’s explicit theory of Adaption and Innovation to access laypeople’s implicit views of creativity , to what extent do different ethnic groups like the Chinese , the Malays and the Indians within a national culture have similar views that adaptors and innovators are equally creative ? • When asked to define creativity in their own words , to what extent do laypeople from different national cultures in the United States and Singapore hold similar or different conceptions of creativity ? • When asked to define creativity in their own words , to what extent do laypeople from different ethnic groups in Singapore hold similar or different conceptions of creativity ? Rationale and Statement of Significance : Our cultures have a tremendous influence on the way we view the world , the way we communicate and the way we behave , whether we are aware of it or not . At the very heart of the concept of culture is the expectation that different people will possess different values , beliefs and motives reflected in numerous Appendix C : Concept Paper 224 behaviors ( Kim , 2001 ) . The term ‘culture’ does not have a unilateral definition . It could be defined from a historical perspective where traditions are passed on to future generations or from a behavioral perspective , that is , the learned , shared ways of behaving in life . It could also be defined from a symbolic perspective where arbitrarily assigned meanings are shared by the society . Yet again , it could be defined from a normative perspective , which are , the ideals , values and rules for living ( Jandt , 2004 ) . Thus , it is acknowledged that culture can be one or a combination of all these perspectives . However , the common thread underlying these perspectives , is that culture is learned rather than biologically inherited and involves arbitrarily assigned , symbolic meanings . Further , culture can be seen as an implicit theory that guides our behavior ( Bruner , 1990 ) . Since culture plays a part in the way we perceive the world , it can be noted that individuals possess implicit theories that give meaning to their experiences . Implicit theories “are opinions and views held by people other than scientists” and “reflect a kind of tacit knowledge which is quite common” ( Runco , 1999 , p . 27 ) . These implicit theories can create different psychological worlds for individuals , leading them to think , feel , behave and perceive in different ways . As implicit theories provide the key to understanding the social perception of people , the integration of culture in implicit theories can shed further light on how people perceive their environment . Furthermore , by accessing implicit theories from people of various cultures , a framework for analyzing and interpreting human actions can be set up . Thus , explicit theories to explain how reality is constructed can eventually emerge . In fact , cross - cultural psychologists emphasize that the study of diverse cultures not only “tests the generality of a theory developed in one culture” ( Clark , 1987 , pg . 2 ) , but if carried out systematically , may lead to theories of how cultures can exert their influence on individuals . Furthermore , a great value of cross - cultural studies is that “they enhance our sense of human variation” ( Tronick , 1992 , p . 566 ) . When that description is guided by theory , our understanding is greatly enriched . One controversy in the creativity literature concerns whether the concept of creativity is meaningful universally ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ; Plucker & Runco , 1998 ) . Some researchers suggest that people in different cultures perceive creativity differently ( Lubart & Sternberg , 1998 , Rudowicz & Hui , 1997 ) while another group believes that there is a universal understanding of the concept of creativity ( Guilford , 1975 ; Plucker & Runco , 1998 ) . Although there seems to be a major breakthrough where theories of creativity have been established based on the latter point of view , some researchers have suggested that there are “multiple roots for people’s conceptions of creativity “ ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 , p . 270 ) with a “different philosophical base” ( p . 270 ) . Because creativity is considered to be an important concept of human cognition such as motivations , attitudes , emotions and thinking ( Nisbett , et al , 2001 ) it would indeed be beneficial to explore how culture influences people’s perceptions of creativity . Appendix C : Concept Paper 225 In addition to this , to study creativity by focusing on the individual alone is “like trying to understand how an apple tree produces fruit by looking only at the tree and ignoring the sun and the soil that supports its life” ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1990 , p . 203 ) . One must consider the holistic nature of the individual as part of an evolving system within a cultural setting . Since cultural knowledge is conceptualized to be like a lens that affects the individual’s perceptions of visual stimuli ( Hong , et al , 2000 ) , it would be beneficial to conduct cross - cultural studies to explore how certain constructs are viewed to be similar or different . The International Center for Studies in Creativity in Buffalo State College has been engaged in a program of research that had examined perceptions of creativity in various cultural settings like the United States ( Puccio & Chimento , 2001 ) , Argentina ( Gonzalez , 2003 ) , Saudi Arabia ( Alkeaid , 2004 ) and Japan ( Muneyoshi & Kagawa , 2004 ) . The goal of this research is to add to this knowledge base by exploring perceptions of creativity in Singapore , a culture that varies in many aspects from the countries mentioned above . Description of the Method or Process : This study will replicate and extend Chimento’s ( 2001 ) approach with convenience samples taken from laypeople in the United States as well as the three main ethnic groups in Singapore , consisting of the Chinese , the Malays and the Indians . A more detailed description is provided below : ( A ) Sample populations : ( i ) Sample from the United States : An American sample ( Sample A ) would have to be sought since Chimento’s ( 2001 ) study did not include an additional open - ended question that was indicated in Gonzalez’s ( 2003 ) study . The population will consist of 120 laypeople from all walks of life . The participants involved in this study will be selected randomly with respect to gender , age , occupation and education level . Also , they will consist of people who have not had any formal training or background in creativity studies . ( ii ) Sample from Singapore : A sample from Singapore ( Sample B ) was already sought in 2003 by a Singaporean creativity studies student , but this sample was not analyzed . The sample consisted of 200 participants , who were also selected randomly with respect to gender , age , occupation and educational level . Just like the American sample , they had no formal training or background in creativity studies . Another sample from Singapore ( Sample C ) would have to be sought for this study as Appendix C : Concept Paper 226 respondents in Sample B did not indicate their ethnicity in the survey forms . Sample C will consist of at least 40 participants from each main ethnic group in Singapore – the Chinese , Malays and Indians , making it a total of 120 participants in Sample C . A direct comparison between the implicit views of creativity of the national cultures of Sample A ( American ) and Sample B ( Singaporean ) will be carried out . To expand this study , a comparison of the implicit views of creativity from the three ethnic groups in Singapore ( Sample C ) will also be made . ( B ) Survey Form : The survey questions will replicate Gonzalez’s study ( 2003 ) but the only change to the survey forms will be an additional section where the respondents in Sample C will indicate their ethnicity and religion . This is standard practice for Singaporeans when filling out official forms . In the close - ended part of the survey , participants of the study will be asked to rate two different people ( Person A and Person B ) with accompanying descriptions of creativity , based on Kirton’s descriptions of styles of creativity of the adaptor and innovator . It is noted that approximately half of the survey forms will have characteristics of the innovator and labeled as Person A , while the other half will have characteristics of the innovator but labeled as Person B . This arrangement would help to suppress any bias and counter balance the effect of reading first one description and for that reason , rating one person higher than the other . The participants will be asked to rate each person on a numbered scale from one ( not at all creative ) to ten ( exceptionally creative ) . As for the open - ended part of the survey , the participants will be required to list words that come into their minds that are associated with creativity . ( C ) Procedure : Research assistants in the United States and Singapore have been appointed by the researcher to help carry out the surveys . They will be given guidelines by the researcher on how to administer the surveys properly . Prior to administering the survey , each participant would have to complete a consent form authorizing his / her willingness to participate in this research study . Survey forms to participants from the American sample ( Sample A ) will be given individually through personal contacts , keeping in mind the composition of the participants . As for the Singapore samples ( Sample C ) , the surveys will be sent via email to the research assistant based in Singapore so that copies can be made , keeping in mind that half the survey forms have a different arrangement to suppress bias . Participants in Singapore ( Sample C ) are sought from personal contacts , ethnic self - help community groups like CDAC ( Chinese Development Assistance Appendix C : Concept Paper 227 Council ) , Yayasan MENDAKI ( a Malay self - help group ) and SINDA ( Singapore Indian Development Association ) , schools and colleges . Care will be taken to ensure that the Singaporean samples consist of only Singapore citizens as the country has a large proportion of permanent residents from various countries . The survey forms will be in English as this is the lingua franca . Thus , translation to the various languages will not be necessary . When the surveys are completed , photocopies of the forms are kept with the research assistants while the original copies are given to the researcher . Hard copies from the Singapore sample ( Sample C ) will be sent by the research assistant . Personal Learning Goals : • Become familiar with pertinent literature and scholars associated with cross - cultural studies of creativity and implicit theories ; • Gain knowledge and experience with quantitative and qualitative research in the field of creativity ; • Understand the role of implicit theories in other cultures so that the concept of creativity can be understood universally ; • Challenge myself to learn from the process of writing this thesis as much as from the content of the thesis itself ; and • Share the findings to a wider group of people interested in cross - cultural studies in creativity through conference sessions or publications . Outcomes : • Quantitative and qualitative data to build on the existing repository of data obtained from the United States , Argentina and Saudi Arabia ; • ( 2 ) Executive Summaries for Creativity Based Information Research ( CBIR ) ; • ( 1 ) Annotation of this thesis ; and • Thesis write - up . Timeline : • September 2004 Propose concept to potential advisor • October 2004 Become acquainted with related literature Begin work on concept paper for approval • November 2004 Complete concept paper Complete Human Subjects Form Continue literature review Concept paper approved Begin correspondence with research assistants Appendix C : Concept Paper 228 • December 2004 Approval of Concept Paper Send survey forms Track responses of surveys Maintain contact with advisor Continue literature review Complete draft of Chapter One • February 2005 Complete data collection Maintain contact with advisor Complete literature review Complete draft of Chapter Two • March 2005 Analyze survey results Interpret the information Maintain contact with advisor Complete draft of Chapter Three • April 2005 Refine previous drafts of thesis Complete drafts of Chapters Four and Five • June 2005 Refine and finalize draft of thesis Submission of final draft of thesis • July 2005 Master’s thesis approved and signed Graduate Principal Investigators : • Faculty Advisor : Dr . Gerard J . Puccio • Master’s Candidate : Suzanna Jeyanthi Ramos Related Literature : Alkeaid , A . A . ( 2004 ) . Cross cultural perceptions of creativity : A sample from Saudi Arabia . Unpublished master’s project . State University College at Buffalo , Center for Studies in Creativity . Buffalo , NY . Bruner , J . ( 1990 ) . Acts of meaning . Cambridge , Massachussetts : Harvard University Press . Appendix C : Concept Paper 229 Clark , L . A . ( 1987 ) . Mutual relevance of mainstream and cross - cultural psychology . Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 55 ( 4 ) . Retrieved October 7 , 2004 , from PsycArticles database . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1997 ) . Creativity : Flow and psychology of discovery and invention . New York : HarperCollins . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1990 ) . The domain of creativity . In M . A . Runco , & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of Creativity ( pp 190 - 212 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications , Inc . Gonzalez , M . ( 2003 ) . Implicit theories of creativity across cultures . Unpublished master’s thesis , State University College at Buffalo , Center for Studies in Creativity , Buffalo , NY . Guilford , J . P . ( 1975 ) . Varieties of creative giftedness , their measurement and development . Gifted Child Quarterly , 19 ( 2 ) , 107 - 121 . Hong , Y . Y . , Morris , M . W . , Chiu , C . Y . , & Benet - Martinez , V . ( 2000 ) . Multicultural minds : A dynamic constructivist approach to culture and cognition . American Psychologist , 55 ( 7 ) . Retrieved October 7 , 2004 , from PsycArticles database . Jandt , F . E . ( 2004 ) . To the reader . In F . E . Jandt ( Ed . ) , Intercultural communication ( pp . ix ) . Thousand Oaks , California : Sage Publications . Kim , M . S . ( 2001 ) . Perspectives on human communication . In Milhouse , V . H . , Asante , M . K . , & Nwosu , P . O . ( Eds . ) . Transcultural realities , 3 - 31 . Lubart , T . I . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 1998 ) . Creativity : The individual , the systems , the approach . Creativity Research Journal , 1 , 63 - 67 . Nisbett , R . E . , Peng , K . , Choi , I . , & Norenzayan , A . ( 2001 ) . Culture and systems of thought : Holistic versus analytic cognition . Psychological Review , 108 ( 2 ) , 291 - 310 . Niu , W . , & Sternberg , R . ( 2002 ) . Contemporary studies on the concept of creativity : The East and West . Journal of Creative Behavior , 36 ( 4 ) , 269 - 284 . Muneyoshi , H . & Kagawa , Y . ( 2004 , May ) . Implicit versus explicit theories of creativity : East versus West . Poster session presented at the 6 th Student Research and Creativity Celebration , State University College at Buffalo , New York . Appendix C : Concept Paper 230 Plucker , J . A . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1998 ) . The death of creativity measurement has been greatly exaggerated : Current issues , recent advances , and future directions in creativity assessment . Roeper Review , 21 ( 1 ) , 36 - 39 . Puccio , G . J . & Chimento , M . D . ( 2001 ) . Implicit theories of creativity : Laypersons’ perceptions of the creativity of adaptors and innovators . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 92 , 675 - 681 . Rudowicz , E . , & Hui , A . ( 1997 ) . The creative personality : Hong Kong perspective . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 34 , 175 - 192 . Runco , M . ( 1999 ) . Implicit theories . In M . A . & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp . 27 - 30 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Tronick , E . Z . ( 1992 ) . Introduction : cross - cultural studies of development . Developmental Psychology , 28 ( 4 ) , 566 - 567 .