A mid growing concern that environ - mental science will be suppressed by the new administration , scientists and others across the United States have been racing to archive federal climate data . Jeffrey Lockwood’s Be - hind the Carbon Curtain , which tells the story of corporate and political climate science censorship in Wyoming , offers a glimpse into the many forms that scientific suppression can take , giving tangible ex - amples that will do little to quell the grow - ing fear many concerned citizens are feeling around the country . In this provocative page - turner , Lockwood shines a light on acts of censorship that he al - leges have been committed by the Wyoming energy industry and state politicians in the hope of potentially shifting “the balance of power ever so slightly to bring us closer to a tipping point of outrage , action , and change . ” Wyoming provides an ideal lens through which to explore the blurring of corporate in - terests and the power of the state . Wyoming is often referred to as the “energy colony of the United States” ; its economy is relatively simple , being nearly wholly dependent on fossil fuel and other extractive industries . Lockwood maintains that Wyoming’s strong dependence on the energy industry “drives [ state ] politicians and state agencies to battle any regulation hindering fossil fuels—and to silence anyone who might impede extraction by raising concerns for environmental and human well - being . ” Wyoming is a small and relatively homo - geneous state , allowing for clarity in politi - cal positions and stakeholder identity . The state’s citizen legislatures are also in the habit of “put [ ting ] their cards on the table . ” “ [ W ] hat would be hidden as career - ending corruption in other states is worn as a badge of loyalty , ” Lockwood writes , making its state government relatively transparent . Lockwood begins with the story of Carbon Sink : What Goes Around Comes Around , a land art sculpture created by British environmental artist Chris Drury . Installed in 2011 on the University of Wyo - SCIENTIFIC CENSORSHIP Case studies of climate censorship in Wyoming reveal the insidious nature of modern science suppression By Gabrielle Wong - Parodi A state of denial Behind the Carbon Curtain The Energy Industry , Political Censorship , and Free Speech Jef rey A . Lockwood University of New Mexico Press , 2017 . 300 pp . ming’s campus , Carbon Sink featured logs from trees killed by pine beetles arranged in an elegant spiral and interspersed with lumps of coal . The installation drew con - nections between beetle outbreaks and hu - man - caused climate change that allowed the insects to flourish . The backlash was immediate . Local of - ficials declared the sculpture an “insult to the tens of thousands of people across Wyoming that work hard to produce en - ergy , ” and energy industry representatives threatened to pull millions in promised donations should the sculpture remain on campus . Lockwood describes a series of disturbing events , including an incident in which a university administrator privately bragged about sending an image of himself urinating on the installation to a member of the state legislature . A full year before its scheduled removal , the university qui - etly destroyed the sculpture under the pre - tense that it was irreparably damaged by a broken sprinkler . In another example , Lockwood recounts the story of Geoffrey Thyne , a geochem - ist at the University of Wyoming who was pressured to write a letter of retraction af - ter providing a local newspaper with sci - entific estimates for the amount of water required for fracking . Soon after , Thyne’s contract at the University of Wyoming’s Enhanced Oil Recovery Institute ( EORI ) was not renewed . This , writes Lockwood , had a “chilling effect” on the remaining re - search staff at EORI , who are employed on 1 - year , at - will contracts . Other stories highlight an arguably more insidious flavor of censorship : self - censor - ship . In 2012 , David Throgmorton , the well - respected director of the Carbon County Higher Education Center , questioned a proposed $ 2 billion coal - to - liquid conver - sion plant in his regular opinion column in the Rawlins Daily Times . Worried about the energy industry’s reaction , Carbon County commissioners sent a letter to the Educa - tion Center’s board demanding that Throg - morton be censored for his “self - serving attempt to cast doubt on [ the project ] . ” Despite the board’s unequivocal support , Throgmorton quit writing his column , cit - ing the need for the Education Center to maintain good relationships with industry : “Every time I sit down to write about some - thing ( controversial ) , I’m suddenly think - ing , ‘Who am I going to alienate with this one that is going to do us damage ? ’” For those moved to take action by this book , Lockwood advises a mix of courage and caution . His job as a tenured professor at the University of Wyoming is secure ; he can and is obligated to speak truth to power no matter how uncomfortable . But each of us must decide what free speech is worth compared with the cost of speaking out . j 10 . 1126 / science . aam8718 The reviewer is at the Department of Engineering and Public Policy , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 , USA . Email : gwongpar @ cmu . edu Although it’s tempting to attribute science denial to a complex interplay of political , economic , and religious motivations , the root of many miscon - ceptions may be more straightforward . This week on the Science podcast , Jennifer Golbeck interviews cognitive scientist Andrew Shtulman about how children form intuitive , but often wrong , theories about the world and what makes these ideas so hard to shake . sciencemag . org / podcasts 10 . 1126 / science . aan4200 Children require explanations of gravity and perspective before they will reject the intuitive theory that Earth is flat . PODCAST Scienceblind Why Our Intuitive Theories About the World Are So Often Wrong Andrew Shtulman Basic Books , 2017 . 319 pp . P H O T O : V G A J I C / I S T O C K P H O T O 28 APRIL 20 17 • VOL 356 ISSUE 6336 385 DA _ 0428Books . indd 385 4 / 26 / 17 10 : 22 AM Published by AAAS on A p r il 27 , 20 1 7 h tt p : / / s c i e n ce . s c i e n ce m a g . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m ( 6336 ) , 385 . [ doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aan4200 ] 356 Science ( April 27 , 2017 ) So Often Wrong Scienceblind : Why Our Intuitive Theories About the World Are Editor ' s Summary This copy is for your personal , non - commercial use only . Article Tools http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / 356 / 6336 / 385 . 2 article tools : Visit the online version of this article to access the personalization and Permissions http : / / www . sciencemag . org / about / permissions . dtl Obtain information about reproducing this article : is a registered trademark of AAAS . Science Advancement of Science ; all rights reserved . The title Avenue NW , Washington , DC 20005 . Copyright 2016 by the American Association for the in December , by the American Association for the Advancement of Science , 1200 New York ( print ISSN 0036 - 8075 ; online ISSN 1095 - 9203 ) is published weekly , except the last week Science on A p r il 27 , 20 1 7 h tt p : / / s c i e n ce . s c i e n ce m a g . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m