ONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB The Review Process at PSPB : Correlates of Interreviewer Agreement and Manuscript Acceptance Richard E . Petty Monique A . Fleming Ohio State University Leandre R . Fabrigar Queen(cid:146)s University Reviewer agreement and the predictors of publication judgments were investigated for first - submission manuscripts to the Person - ality and Social Psychology Bulletin during a 3 1 / 2 (cid:150)yearperiod ( i . e . , one editor(cid:146)s tenure ) . Among the findingswere the following : Reviewers(cid:146) judgments of manuscripts were multi - rather than unidimensional ; reviewer agreement about methodology and overall recommendation was greater among high - prestige than mixed - prestige reviewers ; authors with high prestige and authors with low professional experience submitted longer manuscripts than their counterparts ; author prestige and text length were positively related to publication judgments of reviewers and editors ; and author gender was related to editor(cid:146)s decisions with female authors receiving less favorable decisions thanmales . The possible mediation of these findings and their implications for understanding the peer - review process in personality and social psychology are discussed . T he journal peer - review process is a central feature of most academic disciplines . Given the consequences of the decisions made within the peer - review process ( e . g . , tenure and salary increments are typically dependent on publication in peer - reviewed academic journals ) ( Gas - ton , 1978 ; Hagstrom , 1974 ; Yoels , 1973 ) , it is not surpris - ing that it has been the focus of much empirical investigation . Although researchers have examined a variety of issues related to the review process , two broad questions have been particularly prominent . One major issue that has received empirical attention has been the extent to which reviewers of the same manuscript agree in their judgments of the quality of the manuscript and the extent to which one or more dimen - sions underlie these judgments ( e . g . , Cicchetti , 1980 ; Cicchetti & Eron , 1979 ; Fiske & Fogg , 1990 ; Hargins & Herting , 1990 ; Hendrick , 1976 , 1977 ; Marsh & Ball , 1981 , 1989 ; O(cid:146)Brien , 1991 ; Scarr & Weber , 1978 ; Scott , 1974 ; Whitehurst , 1984 ; see Marsh & Ball , 1989 , for a review ) . Previous investigations of interreviewer agree - ment have generally found that interrevieweragreement is statistically significant but modest at best . For example , Marsh and Ball ( 1989 ) reported a mean intraclass corre - lation of r = . 27 across 15 studies of academic journal reviews which looked at the level of overall agreement between tworeviewers of the samemanuscript . Although interreviewer reliability has sometimes improved when alternative indices of agreement were computed , inter - rater agreement coefficients have consistently remained below . 60 and sometimes substantially so ( e . g . , O(cid:146)Brien , 1991 ; Whitehurst , 1984 ) . In addition , corrections of in - terreviewer correlations for response bias have pro - duced only small increases in the magnitude of agree - ment ( Marsh & Ball , 1981 , 1989 ) . Research on interreviewer agreement is mixed as to whether reviewer ratings of different manuscript attributes are multi - or Authors(cid:146) Note : This research was supported in part by a National Science Foundation Grant SBR 9520854 to REP , a National Institutes ofMentalHealthpredoctoralfellowshipT32 - MH19728 - 03toMAF , and a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada grant to LRF . We are grateful to Shannon Davis , Kristine Oman , and Erin Strahan for their assistance coding the data . We also appreciate the help of the decision editors for PSPB during the period of this study and the Ohio State social psychology faculty in coding reviewer and author gender . Finally , weappreciatethethoughtful comments on this research provided by members of the 1995 - 1997 Groups for Attitudes and Persuasion at Ohio State , the current editor of PSPB , and three anonymous reviewers . Portions of this research were presented at the 1996 meeting of the American Psychological Association in Toronto . Correspondence should beaddressed to Richard E . Petty , Department ofPsychology , Ohio StateUniversity , 1885NeilAvenue , Columbus , OH 43210 - 1222 ; e - mail : petty . 1 @ osu . edu . PSPB , Vol . 25 No . 2 , February 1999 188 - 203 ' 1999 by the Society for Personality and Social Psychology , Inc . 188 unidimensional . An investigation by Marsh and Ball ( 1989 ) provided some evidence that ratings of different manuscript attributes are distinct . However , in another article , the same authors conducted a multitrait - mul - timethod analysis of reviewer ratings of different manu - script attributes and concluded that attribute ratings could be interpreted as a unidimensional construct of (cid:147)acceptability for publication(cid:148) ( Marsh & Ball , 1981 ) . The second major issue of interest has been identify - ing which factors are related to publication judgments by editors and reviewers ( e . g . , Marsh & Ball , 1989 ; Peters & Ceci , 1982 ; Zuckerman & Merton , 1971 ) . Previous inves - tigations have generally examined either the relation of characteristics of the players in peer review ( e . g . , authors , reviewers , and editors ) or of reviewer ratings of manuscript attributes and recommendations to accep - tance . The former studies have found that both editors(cid:146) decisions and reviewers(cid:146) recommendations for publica - tion become more favorable as the professional prestige of the author increases , as the prestige of the author(cid:146)s institution increases , and perhaps surprisingly , as the professional age or experience of the author decreases ( e . g . , Crane , 1967 ; Goodrich , 1945 ; Gordon , 1980 ; Peters & Ceci , 1982 ; Zuckerman & Merton , 1971 ) . Research is mixed as to whether author and reviewer gender are related to publication judgments ( Gilbert , Williams , & Lundberg , 1994 ; Lloyd , 1990 ) . What is not clear from these studies is whether these variables have their effects on publication judgments because they are related to manuscript quality . Studies examining the relation of reviewer ratings of manuscript attributes to editor(cid:146)s decisions have gener - ally found that reviewers(cid:146) recommendations for publica - tion are highly correlated with editors(cid:146) decisions ( e . g . , Bakanic , McPhail , & Simon , 1987 ; Fogg & Fiske , 1993 ; Lock , 1982 ; Sternberg , Hojjat , Brigockas , & Grigorenko , 1997 ; Zuckerman & Merton , 1971 ) and that reviewers(cid:146) ratings of manuscript attributes predict their own and editors(cid:146) publication judgments ( Marsh & Ball , 1989 ; Sternberg et al . , 1997 ) . There is some question , however , about which manuscript attributes are most strongly associated with publication judgments . In an experimen - tal study , Wilson , DePaulo , Mook , and Klaaren ( 1993 ) found that fictitious studies that were about (cid:147)important(cid:148) topics were judged more likely to be published than identical studies which were about unimportant topics , even when the studies were fatally flawed methodologi - cally . Studies within the review process itself have sug - gested that ratings of both importance and methodology are the most highly related to publication judgments , and in that order ( Marsh & Ball , 1989 ; Sternberg et al . , 1997 ) . Limitations of Past Research Univariate versus multivariate analyses . Although past research has done much to provide insight into the publication process by identifying and investigating im - portant conceptual and empirical issues related to peer - review of journal articles , there are several important limitations . First , individual investigations have typically focused on the relation of a relatively narrow range of variables to publication decisions . One might classify potential predictors of publication judgments as falling into several categories , including characteristics of the manuscript , manuscript authors , reviewers , and editors . To date , most investigations have either examined the relationship of a single variable across several of these categories ( e . g . , gender of author , reviewer , and editor ) ( Gilbert et al . , 1994 ) or of multiple variables falling into a single category ( e . g . , 20 ratings of manuscript attrib - utes ) ( Marsh & Ball , 1989 ) with judgments . Very little research has simultaneously examined the effects of multiple variables falling within several categories . Such an investigation would allow for an assessment of the extent to which each variable is related to judgments , controlling for the effects of other possible predictors . For example , finding that author prestige is related to editorial decision might indicate an author prestige ef - fect per se or might simply be the result of the fact that prestige is correlated with other variables that actually have an impact on editorial decisions that were not included in the analysis ( e . g . , author gender or institu - tional prestige , adequacy of manuscript methodology , etc . ) . In the current research , a wide variety of variables are examined simultaneously . Investigating moderators and mediators . A second and related issue concerns the processes responsible for in - terreviewer agreement and for the effects of variables on publication judgments . In the interreviewer agreement literature , much of the previous research has attempted to establish the level of agreement among reviewers and to determine the optimal method of quantifying the level of reviewer agreement . However , this research typi - cally has not focused on discovering the conditions that facilitate or inhibit agreement among reviewers ( i . e . , moderators of interreviewer agreement ) . By uncovering conditions under which reviewers are more likely to agree or disagree , one can potentially gain a greater understanding of why agreement versus disagreement occurs in the review process . Likewise , previous research on the correlates of manuscript acceptance has focused primarily on estab - lishing the effects of variables rather than attempting to explore the underlying processes by which variables are associated with judgments ( see Wolff , 1973 , for a similar Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 189 view ) . For instance , author prestige might be related to publication recommendations becauseit biases thejudg - ments of editors / reviewers by serving as a peripheral cue to merit ( e . g . , (cid:147)if X wrote it , it must be good(cid:148) ) or because it biases the specific thoughts evaluators have while read - ing the manuscript ( e . g . , filling in missing information with more favorable or unfavorable values ) ( Petty & Cacioppo , 1986 ) . Alternatively , author prestige might influence publication judgments because higher pres - tige authors actually write manuscripts of higher quality , which in turn leads to higher acceptance rates . Examin - ing potential mediators of the relation of variables such as author characteristics to publication recommenda - tions is one method of clarifying the mechanisms under - lying these variables(cid:146) correlation with publication decisions . One previous investigation stands out as a rare at - tempt to examine a diversity of potential factors related to publication judgments and to understand the proc - esses underlying the relation of variables to publication judgments . Bakanic et al . ( 1987 ) looked at the simulta - neous relation of author ( e . g . , gender , prestige of authors(cid:146) institution , academic rank , professional age ) , manuscript ( e . g . , number of authors , method of data collection , and method of analysis ) , and review proce - dure ( e . g . , number of reviewers , time elapsed for deci - sion ) characteristics to reviewers(cid:146) recommendations and editors(cid:146) decisions for a sample of manuscripts submitted to the American Sociological Review . They found that , al - though reviewers(cid:151)from whom the identity of authors was masked(cid:151)were not affected by author characteristics in their recommendations , editors(cid:151)who were aware of authors(cid:146) identities(cid:151)were influenced by author charac - teristics in their judgments of manuscripts . Most inter - estingly , editors were more likely to accept manuscripts by authors at more prestigious institutions than those at less prestigious institutions and were more likely to ac - cept manuscripts by professionally younger or less expe - rienced ( i . e . , few years post - Ph . D . ) than professionally older or more experienced ( many years post - Ph . D . ) authors , even though institutional prestige and profes - sional experience were not related to reviewer recom - mendations . This finding suggests that institutionalpres - tigeand professionalexperiencemight act as twodistinct biasing factors in publication judgments rather than affect judgments strictly by influencing manuscript qual - ity . Thus , editors might favor authors from prestigious institutions because institutional prestige serves as a cue to quality or fosters biased processing of the manuscript . Editors might favor junior authors to give them a break or because of more lenient processing of their manuscripts . The investigation by Bakanic et al . ( 1987 ) raises a number of interesting questions . First , Bakanic et al . and other investigations of institutional prestige have not simultaneously investigated author professional pres - tige . Institutional prestige might influence publication judgments because high - prestige institutions are more likely to attract researchers who are high in professional prestige than are low - prestige institutions . Alternatively , institutional prestige might be related to publication judgments independent of author prestige because it is an indicator of greater research resources , greater ex - pectations regarding publication , and so forth . Only an investigation including both variables can investigate these different possibilities . Second , there could be alternative mechanisms un - derlying correlations of author characteristics with pub - lication judgments that have not been examined , such as institutional prestige or professional experience . Author characteristics might have an impact on publica - tion judgments because they affect the quality or type of manuscript submitted , suggesting that bias is not oper - ating . Bakanic et al . ( 1987 ) examined whether the type of manuscript accounted for the relation of author char - acteristics to judgments , but many of the manuscript characteristics investigated ( e . g . , use of qualitative versus quantitative analysis ) do not generalize well to other academic disciplines . Thus , the question of whether author characteristics have an impact on judgments be - cause they are related to manuscript quality was not directly examined because reviewer perceptions of manuscript attributes ( e . g . , methodology ) were not in - cluded in their analyses . Alternatively , author charac - teristics might be related to publication judgments be - cause they have an impact on the reviewers who are selected to review a manuscript , suggesting a different form of bias is operating ( i . e . , bias in selection of review - ers ) . Previous research suggests that author charac - teristics can affect reviewerselection . For example , Zuck - erman and Merton ( 1971 ) found that authors of high professional status were more likely to have their manu - scripts examined by reviewers of high professional status than were authors of lower prestige . Generalizability of results to personality and social psychol - ogy . A final limitation of previous research for under - standing the review process in personality and social psychology is that , with the exception of investigations of interreviewer agreement ( e . g . , Cicchetti , 1980 ; Cran - dall , 1978 ; Hendrick , 1976 , 1977 ; Scott , 1974 ; White - hurst , 1984 ) , most of this research has been conducted outside the domain of personality and social psychology . The publication process across different disciplines might differ in a number of respects . For example , it has been suggested that standards of evidence might be less ambiguous in the physical than the social sciences and might therefore allow less opportunity for biases to exert influence in the review process ( e . g . , Beyer , 1978 ; Chase , 190 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN 1970 ) . In addition , a survey of editors suggested that different disciplines judge the adequacy of research along different dimensions . Specifically , the social sci - ences might place a higher premium on the theoretical significance of an investigation than do the natural sci - ences ( Chase , 1970 ) . Also , rates of manuscript rejection vary dramatically across disciplines . Zuckerman and Merton ( 1971 ) found a general tendency for rejection rates to be lowest in the physical / biological sciences and highest in the humanities . This substantial variation in rejection rates across disciplines suggests that different processes might be operating in the review process across disciplines . Overview of the Present Study In the present research , we attempted to address two broad questions . First , we explored issues related to interreviewer agreement . We examined the underlying structure of reviewers(cid:146) judgments of manuscript attrib - utes and overall publication recommendations ( i . e . , whether uni - or multidimensional ) and investigated the extent to which reviewers agreed in their ratings of manuscripts . We also examined factors that might influ - ence ( i . e . , moderate ) the extent to which reviewers agreed in their evaluations . A second set of analyses was aimed at determining the factors related to reviewers(cid:146) judgments and editors(cid:146) decisions . Our objective was to establish correlates of reviewer recommendations and editor decisions as well as to examine the processes through which these variables were associated with the publication judgments of reviewers and editors . As noted , past research examining the peer - review process has generally focused on four categories of vari - ables : manuscript characteristics , author characteristics , reviewer characteristics , and editor characteristics . Obvi - ously , within any one category , there are a large number of possible variables one could examine . Generally , we chose to focus on variables within each category for which there was empirical precedent . Finally , because relatively little attention has been devoted to manuscript characteristics in the area of personality and social psy - chology , we chose to examine variables for which there was intuitive reason to believe there might be an impact on the review process in this discipline . METHOD Procedure The database for this study consisted of the reviewer and action editor report forms for every new manuscript submitted to the Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ( PSPB ) during one editorial term ( July 1987 to Decem - ber 1990 ) . This provided a total of 749 original submis - sions . Revisions and resubmissions ( i . e . , previously re - jected manuscripts that weretreatedas newsubmissions ) were not analyzed . Each manuscript submitted was either kept by the editor or sent to one of the journal(cid:146)s seven associate editors . Reviewers provided written com - ments regarding the manuscript andfilled out an accom - panying evaluation sheet . Although decision editors were aware of the identification of the authors , the journal used a masked reviewing procedure so that re - viewers were ( presumably ) unaware of the authors(cid:146)iden - tities . Once all manuscripts had been processed at the end of the journal editor(cid:146)s tenure at PSPB , the following characteristics about the manuscript , authors , reviewers , and decision editor of each manuscript were coded . Manuscript Characteristics Text length . The number of pages included text and footnote pages . We did not count pages with references , author notes , figures , or tables . Number ofexperiments . The number of empiricalstudies reported in each manuscript was recorded ( e . g . , one , two , etc . ) . Meta - analyses , literature reviews , commentar - ies , and re - analyses of data were coded as 0 ( N = 42 ) . Number of references . The number of references in the reference section was recorded . Overall time to decide . The overall time taken to decide whether to publish the manuscript was coded as the length of time in weeks between the date the decision editor received the manuscript from the editorial office and the date the decision editor made her or his judgment . 1 Author Characteristics Previous investigations of the effects of author char - acteristics have typically focused on the characteristics of the prominent author ( e . g . , the sole author , Zuckerman & Merton , 1971 ; the first author , Bakanic et al . , 1987 ; or the corresponding author , Gilbert et al . , 1994 ) . To at - tempt to maintain consistency between our analyses and past investigations , we coded the characteristics of the primary author of manuscripts in our sample . The pri - mary author was a combination of the first and corre - sponding authors ( this was the same individual for 86 . 0 % of the submissions , N = 644 ) , as explained further below . Primary author gender . Because we were interested in the potential biasing effect of one female focal author on publication judgments , if either the first or corre - sponding author were female , primary author gender was coded as 1 . If both the first and corresponding author were male , this variable was coded as 2 . 2 Primary author institutional prestige . Institutional pres - tige was operationalized by combining information from Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 191 two rating systems that were analogous to those used in previous research but based approximately on the time period the study was conducted : ( a ) ratings of the insti - tution(cid:146)s psychologydepartment prestige / qualityand ( b ) productivity of the institution in psychology . The depart - ment prestige / quality rating was an average of judg - ments made by surveyed psychologists of the scholarly competence and achievements of the faculty of research - doctorate psychology programs in the United States , taken from the scholarly quality ratings by the National Research Council ( NRC ) ( Goldberger , Naher , & Flattau , 1995 ) . The 185 institutions included in the NRC study received scholarly quality index ratings ranging from . 20 for the psychology department with the lowest scholarly quality rating to4 . 82 for the department with the highest scholarly quality rating(cid:151)although scores ranging from 0 to 5 . 00 were possible . The measure of the productivity in psychology jour - nals of authors(cid:146) institutions was the list of institutions(cid:146) productivity totals in psychology published by Howard , Cole , and Maxwell ( 1987 ) . This productivity total con - sists of a compilation of frequency and order of author - ship of publications in 13 American Psychological Asso - ciation journals between 1976 and 1985 for institutions in North America . Results were reported for the top 75 most productive institutions , and totals ranged from 41 . 40 to 255 . 71 , with 255 . 71 being the most productive institution . To be consistent with the Howard et al . ( 1987 ) ranking system , even in cases in which the first or corresponding author was not in the psychology depart - ment of their institution , the productivity total of the institution was assigned . For U . S . institutions ( n = 657 ) , the two sources of institutional prestige ( i . e . , department rating and insti - tutional productivity ) were highly correlated ( first authors , r = . 62 , p < . 01 ; corresponding authors , r = . 63 , p < . 01 ) , and thus , each was converted to a common 0 - 1 metric and averaged to create a single index in which both scores were equally weighted . Institutions not on either list were given a zero . For Canadian institutions ( n = 49 ) , only the valid index ( i . e . , institutional produc - tivity ) was used , again converting to a 0 - 1 metric , and institutions not on this list were given a zero . The insti - tution with the highest institutional prestige across the first and corresponding authors was used as a measure of primary author institutional prestige . When both the first and corresponding authors were at non(cid:150)North American institutions for which neither index was valid ( n = 57 ) , primary author prestige was coded as the median from the combined index for U . S . institutions ( no results are changed if the foreign institutions are deleted from the sample ) . In all cases , the authors(cid:146) institutional prestige index was such that higher num - bers indicated a higher level of institutional prestige for the primary author of the manuscript . Primary author prestige / expertise . Membership in the Society of Experimental Social Psychology ( SESP ) was considered an approximate indicator of individual repu - tation in the general domain of personality and social psychology because members must be nominated and voted in by their peers on the basis of their contribution to the field . Thus , a rough index of the individual repu - tations of the first and corresponding authors was ob - tained by coding the authors(cid:146) membership status in SESP . This was done by consulting the 1992 SESP mem - bership list . If either the first or corresponding author was a member of SESP in 1992 , this variable was coded as 2 . If neither the first nor corresponding author be - longed to SESP in 1992 , this variable was coded as 1 . 3 Primary author experience . An index of professional age or degree of professional experience was calculated for first and corresponding authors by subtracting the year the Ph . D . was received from the year the manuscript was submitted . This index ranged from (cid:150)8 to 51 . The oldest professional age across the first and corresponding authors was used as a measure of primary author profes - sional age . Year of Ph . D . was obtained by consulting recent directories of the American Psychological Asso - ciation and the American Psychological Society . When professional age could not be determined for both the first and corresponding authors ( n = 85 ) , the median professional age was used ( no results are changed if these authors are deleted from the sample ) . Reviewer Characteristics and Ratings Reviewer characteristics were coded for each individ - ual who reviewed 1 of the 749 manuscripts received , with up to three reviewers per manuscript ( N = 1 , 636 ) . Be - cause of the small number of cases , if more than three reviewers returned a review of a single manuscript ( n = 22 ) , only the characteristics of the first three reviewers assigned were recorded . Reviewer gender . The gender of each reviewer was coded as 1 for female and 2 for male . Reviewer prestige / expertise . To obtain a rough index of the reputation of a reviewer , the membership status of the reviewer in SESP was also coded , again consulting the 1992 SESP list . If the reviewer was a member of SESP , this variable was coded as 2 ; if not , the variable was coded as 1 . N umber of reviewers . The number of reviews returned for each manuscript was recorded . Time to return to editor . The amount of time each reviewer took to return the review to the decision editor was calculated as the length of time in weeks between the 192 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN date the decision editor mailed the manuscript out to the particular reviewer and the date the review was received by the decision editor . For this calculation , any part of a week was counted as one week . 4 Reviewers(cid:146) ratings of manuscript attributes . Reviewers were given an evaluation sheet on which to indicate their ratings of themanuscript on four dimensions : ( a ) quality of literature review , ( b ) conceptualization / theory / hypotheses , ( c ) methodology / procedures / analyses , and ( d ) importance / significance . These attributes were designed to be distinct from one another yet exhaustive of those that might be considered most relevant to judg - ingan empiricalpersonalityandsocialpsychologymanu - script . Also , there is precedent within the peer - review literature for each ( e . g . , Chase , 1970 ; Marsh & Ball , 1989 ; Sternberg et al . , 1997 ) . Four 3 - point scales wereprovided for these ratings , in which 1 = inadequate , 2 = marginal , and 3 = good for all four scales . 5 Reviewers(cid:146) publication recommendation . Following the scales for the four attribute dimensions , reviewers were asked to provide their overall recommendation regard - ing the manuscript(cid:146)s publication in the journal . A 4 - point scale was provided , in which 1 = accept ( n = 166 ) , 2 = revise ( n = 203 ) , 3 = resubmit ( n = 280 ) , and 4 = reject ( n = 612 ) . 6 Decision Editor Characteristics and Decision 7 Gender of decision editor . The gender of the decision editor for each manuscript was coded as 1 for female ( n = 4 ) and 2 for male ( n = 6 ) . 8 Editor workload . To obtain an index of the editorial workload that a manuscript(cid:146)s decision editor was carry - ing at the time of making his or her final decision , two indicators were combined . Specifically , the number of manuscripts a decision editor was given to handle during the month in which he or she made the final decision on the manuscript in question was added to the number of manuscripts for which a decision was made that month , including the manuscript in question . Adding these two indicators preserved the interval scale properties of each measure and resulted in workload ratings ranging from 1 to 11 manuscripts , with higher numbers indicating a heavier editorial workload at the time of the editorial decision . Time to mail to reviewers . The time it took to mail the manuscript toallreviewers was calculatedforeach manu - script as the length of time in weeks between the date the decision editor received the manuscript from the edito - rial office and the last date the manuscript was mailed to a reviewer . Manuscripts that were mailed to all reviewers on the samedaythey were receivedbythe decisioneditor were assigned a 0 ( n = 112 ) . 9 Time lag for decision to be made . The amount of time the decision editor took to make his or her decision once the last review was received was calculated as the length of time in weeks between the date the last review was re - ceived and the date the editor(cid:146)s decision was made , counting any part of a week as a full week . If the decision was made the same day as the last review was received , then this variable was coded as 0 ( n = 53 ) . 10 Editor(cid:146)s decision regarding publication . Each decision edi - tor was responsible for making the final judgment re - garding whether to publish a particular manuscript he or she was assigned . This judgment was indicated on a 3 - point scale , in which 1 = accept ( n = 4 ) , 2 = revision requested ( n = 196 ) , and 3 = resubmission / rejection ( n = 549 ) . RESULTS Prior to the primary analyses , we constructed a de - scriptive profile of the typical manuscript , author , re - viewer and editor characteristics , and reviewer and edi - tor judgments for articles submitted to PSPB during the review period . These descriptive data can be found in Table 1 . Next , we explored a number of moresubstantive issues . Author Characteristics Predicting Manuscript Attributes First , we examined the extent to which authors with different background characteristics produced manu - scripts with different characteristics . This question has not received attention in previous investigations but may provide insights into the mechanisms by which author characteristics affect publication judgments . In the re - gression analyses we conducted , all variables were rescaled to a common metric ranging from 0 to 1 , retaining the original direction of coding ( for a discussion of this procedure , see King , 1986 ; Luskin , 1991 ) . This allowed for direct comparisons among unstandardized regres - sion coefficients as well as greater ease in interpretation of results . Theonly exceptions were reviewer recommen - dations and editors(cid:146) decisions . These variables were first reverse scaled before being rescaled to a 0 to 1 range , so that higher numbers indicated more favorable judg - ments , to maintain consistency across reviewer and edi - tor judgments and facilitate interpretation of results . Thus , a positive effect of any variable on publication judgments indicates that the variable led to more favor - able judgments . Four multivariate regression analyses were conducted in which all four author characteristics ( i . e . , primary author gender , institutional prestige , author prestige , and professional experience ) were simultaneously used to predict each of the four manuscript characteristics ( i . e . , text length , number of experiments , number of Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 193 references , and overall time to decide ) . These analyses assessed the extent to which each author characteristic predicted each manuscript characteristic after having controlled for the influence of all other author charac - teristics . These analyses revealed that as the authors(cid:146) personal prestige increased , manuscripts included more text ( b = . 04 , p < . 01 ) and contained a greaternumberof empirical studies ( b = . 02 , p < . 05 ) . In addition , as professional experience increased , manuscripts included less text ( b = (cid:150) . 14 , p < . 01 ) and included fewerreferences ( b = (cid:150) . 15 , p < . 01 ) . These results suggest the interesting possibility that author characteristics could affect publication judg - ments because they affect manuscript characteristics . If manuscripts that are longer , report more studies , or include more references are more likely to receive favor - able publication judgments , then author prestige might be associated with more favorable judgments and ad - vanced professional age with less favorable judgments , because they determine such manuscript characteristics rather than because they directly affect judgments . This hypothesis will be tested in our analyses investigating predictors of publication judgments . Predictors of Editor and Reviewer Characteristics . Next , we investigated which factors predicted who served as decision editors and reviewers for manuscripts . This question is interesting in its own right but , more impor - tant for our purposes , can provide additional informa - tion regarding the mechanism by which reviewers agree and by which variables have an impact on publication decisions . The one previous investigation of predictors of editor and reviewer characteristics indicated that fe - male editors were assigned manuscripts from female authors proportionately more often than were male edi - tors and that male reviewers assisted male editors more often than female editors ( Gilbert et al . , 1994 ) . We sought to discover whether such matching effects gener - alize to the peer - review process in personality and social psychology and to other author characteristics ( e . g . , author prestige ) and to examine the relationship of previously unexplored nonauthor variables ( e . g . , manu - script characteristics ) with editor and reviewer charac - teristics . Predictors of editor characteristics . When all four manu - script characteristics and all four author characteristics were simultaneously used to predict editor gender , no significant effects were found . Thus , the author - editor gender matching effect ( Gilbert et al . , 1994 ) was not replicated . Of course , this merely reflects the manuscript assignment pattern of oneeditorand cannot beassumed to generalize to other editors or journals in personality and social psychology . Predictors of reviewer characteristics . Manuscript , author , and editor characteristics were all simultaneously used to predict ( a ) the proportion of prestigious reviewers for a manuscript and ( b ) the proportion of reviewers of the manuscript who were male . Several effects were re - vealed . First , text length ( b = . 34 , p < . 01 ) , author prestige ( b = . 08 , p < . 02 ) , and professional experience ( b = (cid:150) . 23 , p < . 02 ) predicted reviewer prestige , such that prestigious reviewers were assigned manuscripts that were longer , from more prestigious authors , and from more junior authors . Second , a significant effect of editor gender on reviewer gender was found ( b = . 11 , p < . 01 ) , indicating that editors were more likely to send manuscripts to reviewers of their own gender . Thus , the editor - reviewer gender matching effect found by Gilbert et al . ( 1994 ) was replicated . In summary thus far , it appears that authors of high professional or institutional prestige and who are more TABLE 1 : Descriptive Profile of Manuscripts , Authors , Reviewers , and Editors in the Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ( PSPB ) Review Process From July 1987 to December 1990 Standard Variable a Mean Deviation Percentage Manuscript characteristics Text length ( in pages ) 16 . 6 5 . 0 Number of experiments 1 . 2 . 6 Number of references 23 . 6 12 . 0 Overall time to decide ( in weeks ) 11 . 5 5 . 8 Author characteristics Primary author gender ( female / male ) 32 . 3 / 65 . 0 Primary institutional prestige . 27 . 27 Primary author prestige ( SESP / non - SESP ) 27 . 4 / 72 . 6 Primary author experience ( years post - Ph . D . ) 8 . 74 . 36 Reviewer characteristics Reviewer gender ( female / male ) 21 . 9 / 76 . 0 Reviewer prestige ( SESP / non - SESP ) 38 . 0 / 60 . 8 Number of reviewers 2 . 2 . 5 Time to return to editor ( in weeks ) 6 . 2 3 . 7 Editor characteristics Editor gender ( female / male ) 37 . 2 / 62 . 8 Editor workload ( number of manuscripts ) 5 . 4 2 . 2 Time to mail to reviewers ( in weeks ) 2 . 5 3 . 4 Editor time lag ( in weeks ) 2 . 2 3 . 6 Editor decision 2 . 7 . 5 Reviewer ratings Literature rating 2 . 2 . 7 Theory rating 2 . 0 . 8 Methodology rating 1 . 9 . 8 Importance rating 1 . 9 . 8 Recommendation rating 3 . 0 1 . 1 NOTE : SESP = Society of Experimental Social Psychology . When per - centages do not add to 100 , the remainder is missing data . a . See text for description of variables . 194 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN junior submit manuscripts that differ on some objective criteria ( e . g . , length , number of studies ) from those by authors of relatively low professional or institutional prestige or who are more senior . In addition , editors were likely to send manuscripts to reviewers whose gen - der matched theirs , and as text length and author pres - tige increased and professional age decreased , manu - scripts were more likely to be sent to prestigious reviewers . In the next sections , we examine whether these findings help elucidate the questions of when and why reviewers ( dis ) agree and the processes through which variables have an impact on publication judgments . Interreviewer Agreement In exploring interreviewer agreement , we began by determining the overall extent to which reviewers of the same manuscript agreed with one anotherin their assess - ment of the manuscript . Investigations of interreviewer agreement in social psychology journals ( i . e . , PSPB and the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ) have shown that the level of interreviewer agreement is usually in the r = . 20 range ( e . g . , Hendrick , 1977 ; Linder , 1977 ; Scott , 1974 ) . Thus , we expected to find a similar level of agreement . Second , because some investigators have suggested that separate ratings of attributes may not provide addi - tional information in reviewers(cid:146) judgments of manu - script quality that is distinct from the overall publication recommendations , we investigated the underlying struc - ture of reviewers(cid:146) judgments . That is , we explored whether reviewer judgments can best be explained as a single underlying trait of acceptable for publication ( Marsh & Ball , 1981 ) or as separate dimensions . As others have noted ( e . g . , Bakanic et al . , 1987 ) , no meas - ure of manuscript quality that is independent of publi - cation judgments exists . As a consequence , the best available proxy measure of manuscript quality might be reviewer judgments ( see also Marsh & Ball , 1981 ) . The answer to the multiple - or single - dimension question bears on the appropriate methodology to use when conducting analyses using these judgments in the next set of questions to be addressed . For example , if manu - script quality judgments are multidimensional , then rat - ings should be kept as separate indicators of manuscript quality in mediational analyses of predictors of accep - tance . If manuscript quality judgments are all found to assess a single dimension , however , then either an aver - age across judgments or simply the recommendation rating would be most appropriate as an indicator of manuscript quality . Third , we were interested in examining possible mechanisms underlying reviewer agreement . To address this , we examined whether reviewers(cid:146) shared gender or prestige moderated their level of overall agreement of judgments of the same manuscript . To analyze agreement between reviewers , we analyzed all manuscripts for which at least two reviewers provided complete sets of ratings for the four attributes of the manuscript as well as overall recommendation ( n = 551 ) . When more than two reviews were available , the first two reviews received by the editor were used . The zero - order correlations between ratings of Reviewer 1 and Reviewer 2 of each manuscript on each attribute revealed a signifi - cant but modest level of agreement between reviewers in all five judgments ( i . e . , recommendation r = . 29 , litera - ture r = . 25 , theory r = . 23 , methodology r = . 23 , impor - tance r = . 19 ; all ps < . 05 ) consistent with past research ( e . g . , Hendrick , 1977 ; Linder , 1977 ; Scott , 1974 ) . Although statistically significant , these very modest correlations suggest considerable disagreement among reviewers . However , zero - order correlations are likely to underestimate the actual level of consensus among re - viewers because the questions used to assess attributes and recommendations are likely to be imperfect indexes of reviewers(cid:146) judgments , containing some amount of random measurement error , which is likely to attenuate the observed correlations . To account for random error in reviewers(cid:146) judgments and tobetter test the dimension - ality of ratings , we conducted a direct product multitrait - multimethod confirmatory factor analysis on reviewers(cid:146) ratings and recommendations ( see Browne , 1984 , 1989 ) . This model specified the two reviewers as the method factors and the five types of reviewer judgments ( i . e . , literature , theory , methodology , importance , and rec - ommendation ) as the traits , postulating that each re - viewer judgment was a product of both the method of measurement ( i . e . , the specific reviewer making that judgment ) and the underlying trait of the article being assessed by the question ( e . g . , methodology , impor - tance , etc . ) . Thus , this model represented the underly - ing structure of relationships among reviewer judgments as due to both the influence of idiosyncracies in review - ers ( e . g . , systematic tendencies for some reviewers to be harsh and others to be lenient ) and properties of the article itself ( e . g . , its importance ) . Within the context of this model , the extent to which reviewers agreed was indexed bythecorrelation betweenthetwomethod ( i . e . , reviewer ) factors . This analysis suggested that the proposed model fit the data extremely well , as indexed by the root mean squared error of approximation ( RMSEA ) . Methodolo - gists have suggested that an RMSEA of . 05 or less indi - cates excellent fit of the model to the data ( Browne & Cudeck , 1992 ) . The point estimate of the RMSEA ob - tained in our model was . 02 , with the 90 % confidence interval ranging from . 00 to . 04 . The c 2 test of model fit Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 195 revealed that the correlation matrix predicted by the model did not differ significantly from the observed correlation matrix , thus indicating good model fit , c 2 ( 24 ) = 27 . 30 , p = . 29 . This suggested that ourhypothesis that reviewers(cid:146) ratings and recommendations were a function of both the nature of the articles themselves as well as idiosyncrasies in reviewers is a plausible repre - sentation of the data . In addition , the model indicated that therewasa moderatebut statisticallysignificant level of overall agreement between reviewers . The correlation between the two method ( i . e . , reviewer ) factors was r = . 29 , p < . 01 . The excellent model fit suggests that the reviewer judgments in this sample were multidimensional . How - ever , it is possible that a one - trait modelmight fit thedata as well as or better than our model postulating five distinct traits . To directly test this alternative hypothesis , we tested an alternative direct product confirmatory factor analysis model . This second model specified the two reviewers as the method factors and the five reviewer judgments as one overall trait ( e . g . , acceptableness for publication ) rather than five separate traits . This model fit the data relatively poorly because the RMSEA ob - tained for this model was . 09 , with the 90 % confidence interval ranging from . 08 to . 10 . Furthermore , a c 2 difference test between the two models indicated that the five - trait model fit the data significantly better than did the one - trait model , c 2 ( 10 ) = 151 . 4 , p < . 01 . 11 Finally , we turned to the question of whether certain reviewer characteristics increased or decreased the ex - tent to which reviewers agreed with one another . To address this , agreement was analyzed between reviewers who shared the same characteristic and between review - ers who differed . The five - trait direct product confirma - tory factor analysis model was fit to the data for subsam - ples of manuscripts . Specifically , the modelwas tested for separate subsets of the manuscripts in which the two reviewers were gender matched ( n = 378 ) , gender mis - matched ( n = 161 ) , both male ( n = 335 ) , both female ( n = 43 ) , prestige level matched ( n = 328 ) , prestige level mismatched ( n = 218 ) , both high prestige ( n = 237 ) , and both low prestige ( n = 91 ) . Difference tests were con - ducted between the correlations obtained between the two method ( i . e . , reviewer ) factors for each independent sample . These tests revealed that only reviewer prestige appeared to have any influence on level of agreement between reviewers . Specifically , a marginally significant difference between correlations was obtained , suggest - ing that two reviewers who were both high in prestige agreed more in their evaluation of a particular manu - script , r = . 37 , p < . 01 , than did two reviewers whose prestige level was mismatched , r = . 24 , p < . 01 ( z = 1 . 69 , p < . 10 ) . 12 To test if high - prestige reviewers agreed more about all of the attributes or just some of the attributes than did prestige - mismatched reviewers , the level of agreement for prestigious reviewers was compared to the level of agreement of prestige - mismatched reviewers for each of the five reviewer judgments separately . Difference tests revealed that high - prestige reviewers agreed about manuscripts(cid:146) methodology ( r = . 32 ) more than did pres - tige - mismatched reviewers ( r = . 13 , z = 2 . 13 , p < . 05 ) and about their overall recommendations regarding publica - tion ( r = . 40 ) more than did prestige - mismatched review - ers ( r = . 18 , z = 2 . 56 , p < . 05 ) . Thus , it appears that high - prestige reviewers share views about the appropri - ateness of certain methodologies used in research and about whether a manuscript deserves publication . These findings point to possible explanations of ( dis ) agree - ment and rule out others , as will be explained in the discussion . Predictors of Publication Judgments Finally , our analyses explored the factors that are related to editors(cid:146) decisions and reviewers(cid:146) perceptions of and recommendation concerning manuscripts . We used insights gained from our investigation of reviewer judgment dimensionality to guide mediational analyses exploring the mechanisms behind such effects . In inves - tigating predictors of publication judgments , we exam - ined the extent to which various manuscript , author , reviewer , and editor characteristics predicted ( a ) review - ers(cid:146) ratings of manuscript attributes ( i . e . , literature , the - ory , methodology , and importance ) ; ( b ) reviewers(cid:146) pub - lication recommendations ; and ( c ) editors(cid:146) publication decisions . In addition , we examined potential mediation of variables(cid:146) effects by manuscript quality . Because analy - ses of predictors of reviewers(cid:146) judgments are also aimed at illuminating the mechanisms behind predictors of editors(cid:146) decisions , the results for editors(cid:146) decisions will be presented first , those for reviewer recommendations second , and those for reviewer manuscript ratings third , even though these judgments are actually made in the reverse order during the publication process . Editors(cid:146) decisions . To explore the predictors of editors(cid:146) decisions , we conducted two analyses . In the first , all four types of predictor variables ( i . e . , manuscript , author , reviewer , and editor characteristics ) were simultaneously entered into a single multivariate regression predicting editors(cid:146) decisions excluding reviewer judgments ( i . e . , ratings of literature , theory , methodology , importance , and recommendations ) . In the second analysis , we inves - tigated a possible mechanism through which the four types of variables might have had their effects on editors(cid:146) decisions by simultaneously entering all four types of variables into a single multivariate regression predicting editors(cid:146) decisions , which included the five reviewer judg - 196 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN ments . This second analysis provided initial evidence as to the process through which variables were related to decisions . Specifically , any variable that was related to editors(cid:146) decisions through its relation to judgments of manuscript quality would show its effects on editors(cid:146) decisions when reviewer judgments were not controlled but would not continue to affect editors(cid:146) decisions once its shared variance with reviewer judgments was par - tialled . Wealsoreasonedthatanyvariablethat continued to affect editors(cid:146) decisions even when its effects on re - viewer judgments were controlled might be affecting editors(cid:146) decisions as a biasing factor rather than through its impact on manuscript quality . Recall that authors(cid:146) characteristics were masked for reviewers but not for editors . Our second analysis also investigated the impact of each of the reviewers(cid:146) five judgments on editorial decisions while controlling for the effect of the other four judgments and the effects of the four types of predictor variables . The results of the first analysis are shown in the first column of Table 2 . When excluding reviewers(cid:146) ratings , only two variables significantly predicted editors(cid:146) deci - sions : primary author gender and primary author pres - tige . Editors(cid:146) decisions were more favorable for manu - scripts with male than with female primary authors and for manuscripts with a high - rather than a low - prestige primaryauthor , replicating findings byLloyd ( 1990 ) and Zuckerman and Merton ( 1971 ) in the domain of person - ality and social psychology . Interestingly , separate analy - ses for male and female decision editors revealed that male and female editors were equally likely to show bias toward male and prestigious authors . Finally , the analysis also indicated that the amount of variance in editor decisions accounted for by the four types of variables was quite small ( R 2 = . 07 ) . To examine whether primary author gender and author prestige had a direct impact on editors(cid:146) decisions or an indirect impact on editors(cid:146) decisions because they are associated with higher manuscript quality , our sec - ond analysis included all variables in the first analysis plus the five reviewers(cid:146) ratings ( i . e . , literature , theory , methodology , importance , and recommendation ) . The results of this analysis appear in the second column of Table 2 . A first finding worth noting is that the amount of variance accounted for is dramatically larger than that of the first analysis ( R 2 = . 42 versus R 2 = . 07 ) . Thus , reviewer ratings and recommendations accounted for a considerable amount of variance in editor decisions . TABLE 2 : Unstandardized Regression Coefficients for Multivariate Regressions of Manuscript , Author , Reviewer , and Editor Characteristics Predicting Editors(cid:146) Decisions , Reviewers(cid:146) Recommendations , and Reviewers(cid:146) Ratings of Manuscript Attributes Dependent Variable Editors(cid:146) Editors(cid:146) Reviewers(cid:146) Reviewers(cid:146) Decisions Decisions Recommendation Recommendations Predictor Variable ( Analysis 1 ) ( Analysis 2 ) ( Analysis 1 ) ( Analysis 2 ) Literature Theory Method Import Text length . 12 * . 01 . 16 * (cid:150) . 09 * . 21 * * . 29 * * * . 17 * . 30 * * * Number of experiments . 06 . 03 . 19 * . 09 * . 10 . 15 . 09 . 07 Number of references (cid:150) . 04 (cid:150) . 02 . 05 (cid:150) . 07 . 43 * * * . 22 * * . 10 . 02 Overall time to decide (cid:150) . 05 (cid:150) . 15 (cid:150) . 01 . 03 (cid:150) . 11 (cid:150) . 18 (cid:150) . 13 . 11 Primary author gender . 04 * * . 03 * . 03 . 00 . 02 . 04 . 02 . 01 Primary institutional prestige . 04 . 03 . 06 (cid:150) . 02 . 04 . 09 * . 09 * . 07 Primary author prestige . 07 * * * . 04 * . 06 * * . 00 . 04 . 06 * * . 06 . 07 * * Primary author experience (cid:150) . 06 (cid:150) . 02 (cid:150) . 03 (cid:150) . 00 (cid:150) . 15 * (cid:150) . 09 . 03 (cid:150) . 01 Reviewer gender . 02 . 02 . 01 . 02 . 02 . 09 * * (cid:150) . 09 * * (cid:150) . 01 Reviewer prestige . 03 . 05 * * (cid:150) . 03 (cid:150) . 02 . 02 (cid:150) . 04 . 04 (cid:150) . 03 Number of reviewers (cid:150) . 12 (cid:150) . 13 * . 19 * . 03 . 25 * * . 09 . 17 . 14 Time to return to editor . 05 . 10 (cid:150) . 10 . 12 (cid:150) . 35 * * (cid:150) . 17 (cid:150) . 21 (cid:150) . 20 Editor gender . 02 (cid:150) . 01 Editor workload . 02 . 04 Time to mail to reviewers . 07 . 04 Editor time lag . 18 . 11 Literature . 00 . 11 * * * Theory . 01 . 17 * * * Methodology . 01 . 31 * * * Importance . 11 * * . 42 * * * Recommendation . 37 * * * R 2 . 07 . 42 . 05 . 74 . 12 . 10 . 06 . 06 * p < . 10 . * * p < . 05 . * * * p < . 01 . Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 197 However , more than half of the variance remained un - explained , indicating that editors did not completely follow the recommendations of reviewers . Another interesting set of findings from the second analysis are the regression coefficients for reviewer rat - ings . When reviewer ratings are added , ratings of impor - tance and recommendations have independent effects on editors(cid:146) decisions . Reviewers(cid:146) recommendations had more impact than did ratings of importance on editors(cid:146) decisions , F ( 1 , 447 ) = 8 . 49 , p < . 01 , but these analyses are consistent with the notion that editors also take into account reviewers(cid:146) judgments of the importance of the topic . 13 They do not appear to be influenced by review - ers(cid:146) ratings of literature , theory , and method once the effects of importance and overall recommendation have been taken into account . Finally , the effects of both primary author gender and primary author prestige on editors(cid:146) decision decreased somewhat but remained marginally significant . This suggests that manuscript quality may account for some but not all of the variance in the more favorable decisions given to articles written by males and high - prestige authors . 14 Reviewer prestige was uncovered as a significant predictor of editors(cid:146) deci - sions , suggesting that as the prestige of reviewers of a manuscript increased , editors(cid:146) decisions became more favorable . This occurred despite the fact that high - pres - tige reviewers were no more favorable toward manu - scripts than were low - prestige reviewers ( see Table 2 ) . Although speculative , it might be that editors send arti - cles that they anticipate as being of higher quality to more prestigious reviewers , and this a priori anticipation of qualityexplains whyeditors are more favorable toward manuscripts reviewed by prestigious reviewers . Reviewers(cid:146) recommendations and attribute ratings . The next set of analyses investigated the extent to which manuscript characteristics , author characteristics , and reviewercharacteristics influencedreviewers(cid:146)overallrec - ommendations and more specific judgments about the articles they reviewed . These analyses are particularly interesting for two reasons . First , in contrast to many personality and social psychology journals ( e . g . , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ) , at PSPB during this period , the identity of authors was masked for reviewers . Thus , similar to the Bakanic et al . ( 1987 ) investigation , this data set provided the opportunity to investigate the effects of author char - acteristics on reviewerjudgments and , in particular , their recommendations in a context in which reviewers were unaware of these factors . 15 Second , because author iden - tity was masked for reviewers but not editors , this analysis provided an interesting comparison to the analysis of the impact of these variables on editors(cid:146) decisions . If it is the case that author characteristics influenced editors(cid:146) deci - sions because theyweresourcesofbias , onemightexpect the effects of author characteristics to disappear in the analysis of reviewers(cid:146) judgments . On the other hand , if author characteristic effects persist , this could suggest that author characteristics are associated with manu - script quality , which in turn affects both editors(cid:146) and reviewers(cid:146) judgments . Thus , this analysis can provide additional evidence regarding the mechanism through which variables ( i . e . , primary author gender and pri - mary author prestige ) affect editors(cid:146) decisions . To address the first of these questions , two analyses were conducted paralleling those investigating predic - tors of editors(cid:146) decisions . The results of the first analysis are presented in the third column of Table 2 . 16 First , as was true when the parallel analysis was conducted for editors(cid:146) decisions , this analysis revealed that the predic - tors accounted for little of the variance in reviewer rec - ommendations ( R 2 = . 05 ) . The analysis also indicated that primary author prestige predicted recommenda - tions , suggesting that recommendations were more fa - vorable for manuscripts written by relatively high - versus low - prestige authors , even though the reviewers presum - ably did not know who the author was . Finally , there was a marginal tendency for recommendations to be more favorable as the number of reviewers , number of experi - ments , and text length increased . Because author characteristics were masked for re - viewers , it is unlikely that primary author prestige served to bias reviewers(cid:146) recommendations but instead might be associated with manuscript quality , which in turn , had an impact on recommendations . On the other hand , reviewers were not influenced by primary author gender in their judgments , whereas editors were , suggestingthat author gender could have been a biasing factor in edi - tors(cid:146) decisions . Until one controls for the reviewers(cid:146) ratings of the manuscripts(cid:146) attributes , however , these conclusions remain speculative . To provide convergent evidence regarding the mechanism underlying the im - pact of author characteristics on reviewer judgments , a second analysis was conducted . As can be seen in the fourth column of Table 2 , when reviewer attribute rat - ings were added as predictors of recommendations , the amount of variance in reviewer recommendations ac - counted for by the regression model increased dramati - cally ( from R 2 = . 05 to R 2 = . 74 ) . This analysis also indicates that ratings of literature , theory , methodology , and importance each weresignificantly related toreview - ers(cid:146) recommendations . Difference tests between each pair of regression coefficients indicated that importance ratings accounted for a significantly greater amount of variance in recommendations than did ratings of any of the other three dimensions [ literature , F ( 1 , 504 ) = 50 . 39 , p < . 01 ; theory , F ( 1 , 504 ) = 21 . 87 , p < . 01 ; methodology , F ( 1 , 504 ) = 5 . 07 , p < . 05 ] . In addition , ratings of method - ology accounted for a significantly greater amount of 198 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN variance in recommendations than did either literature , F ( 1 , 504 ) = 23 . 05 , p < . 01 , or theory , F ( 1 , 504 ) = 8 . 97 , p < . 01 . Finally , theory did not account for a significantly greater amount of variance in recommendations than did literature , F ( 1 , 504 ) = 1 . 56 , p > . 10 . Thus , it appears that reviewers(cid:146) ratings of the importance of a manuscript had the greatest impact on their recommendations , rat - ings of the methodology of a manuscript had the next greatest impact , and ratings of theory andliteraturewere the smallest determinants of reviewers(cid:146) recommenda - tions , respectively . Importantly , the impact of primary author prestige was reduced to zero , suggesting that this variable had an impact on reviewers(cid:146) recommendations through its im - pact on ratings of manuscript quality . Interestingly , in this analysis , the impact of text length was revealed to be marginally negative , suggesting that as text length in - creased , controlling for its impact on manuscript qual - ity , recommendations became less favorable . The im - pact of number of experiments was unchanged with the inclusion of reviewer attribute ratings , suggesting that this variable might have had some direct impact on recommendations . Finally , we investigated the relation of manuscript , author , and reviewer characteristics to ratings of the manuscript attributes . These analyses can be conceptu - alized as answering the question of whether variables such as author gender , author prestige , institutional prestige , and text length directly affect measures of manuscript quality and , if so , on which dimensions of quality . If a variable does affect ratings of manuscript quality , then the possibility that its influence on publica - tion judgments is mediated by manuscript quality is upheld . If not , it is problematic to argue that a variable(cid:146)s impact was mediated by manuscript quality ( see Baron & Kenny , 1986 ) . Four simultaneous multiple regression analyses were conducted in which the manuscript , author , and reviewer characteristics were used to predict each of the four reviewer attribute ratings averaged across reviewers of a particular manuscript . Results are shown in Table 2 . In summary , looking across reviewer attribute ratings , it appears that the predictors accounted for relatively little variance in judgments ( R 2 ranged from . 06 to . 12 ) . Authorprestige had aconsistent positiveassociationwith ratings of the quality of articles as indexed by ratings of theory and importance . Longer manuscripts received more favorable ratings of literature , theory , methodol - ogy , and importance than did shorter manuscripts , and manuscripts including a greater number of references were rated more favorably on literature and theory than manuscripts reporting fewer references . In addition , male reviewers rated manuscripts(cid:146)theorymore favorably than did female reviewers , whereas female reviewers rated methodology more favorably than did male review - ers . Finally , as the number of reviewers increased , litera - ture ratings became more favorable , and as the time reviewers(cid:146) took to return the manuscript to the editor increased , literature ratings became less favorable . The relation of author prestige to ratings of manu - script attributes are particularly interesting given that reviewers were unaware of authors(cid:146) prestige . Thus , these results , in concert with previous mediational analyses , suggest that it is implausible to attribute the relation of authors(cid:146) prestige to reviewer judgments to some form of bias . Instead , it seems more likely that the effects were due to meaningful differences in the quality of manu - scripts written by authors of relatively high versus low prestige . These results also provide additional evidence suggesting that the relation of authors(cid:146) prestige to edi - tors(cid:146) decisions may have been driven by differences in reviewers(cid:146) ratings of manuscript quality rather than bias on the part of editors . In addition , it is worth noting that , in contrast to the results for editors(cid:146) decisions , primary author gender was not found to be related to reviewer recommendations or to attribute ratings . This provides some evidence for the possibility that author gender could have been a biasing factor in editors(cid:146) decisions , given that editors were aware of this characteristic and reviewers were not . Finally , it appears from these results that the effects of institutional prestige and professional experience on publication judgments found in previous research were largely absent ( Bakanic et al . , 1987 ) . This failure to replicate could be due to the fact that Bakanic et al . did not also include author prestige in their analyses . To test this hypothesis , one additional set of regression analyses was conducted that did not include author prestige . These analyses revealed that institutional prestige was consistently positively associated with publication judg - ments , and mediational analyses suggested that institu - tional prestige was related to publication judgments through its association with judgments of manuscript quality ( i . e . , its correlations with editors(cid:146) decision and reviewers(cid:146) recommendations were eliminated when manuscript attribute ratings were included in analyses ) . Thus , it appears that previous findings of institutional prestige effects on editorial judgments may have been due to a failure to simultaneously investigate the impact of author prestige . However , although the effects of professional experience were in the same direction as found in previous investigations ( i . e . , negative ) when author prestige was excluded , this variable failed to emerge as a significant negative predictor of publication judgments . To investigate whether the univariate profes - sional experience effect on publication judgments found by Zuckerman and Merton ( 1971 ) was replicated , a set of analyses was conducted in which only profes - Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 199 sional age was entered as a predictor of reviewer and editorjudgments . As in the previous analyses ( see Table2 ) , professional experience was only significantly associated with literature ratings . Thus , it appears that the negative impact of professional age or experience on publication judgments found in previous research failed to replicate in this investigation . DISCUSSION Summary and Conclusions There are several noteworthy advances in our under - standing of the publication process from this study re - garding the two focal issues in the peer - review process that have been the subject of most prior research : inter - reviewer agreement on ratings of manuscript quality and associated mechanisms , and predictors of publication judgments and associated mechanisms . Several effects of interreviewer agreement and dimensionality of judg - ments were replicated and extended , and evidence for a moderator of interreviewer agreement was obtained . Specifically , replicating past research in this area and for this journal , it was found that revieweragreement ( a ) was significant but modest for judgments of manuscript at - tributes and recommendations separately ( i . e . , ranging from r = . 19 to r = . 29 ) and ( b ) was significant , but still modest ( r = . 29 ) when collapsed across judgments and random measurement error was controlled . Of greater interest , two new findings emerged regard - ing interreviewer agreement . First , the results support the notion that reviewers meaningfully differentiate among the dimensions of literature , theory , methodol - ogy , importance , and overall recommendation . Second , high - prestige reviewers agreed to a greater extent in their ratings of methodology and overall recommenda - tions than did prestige - mismatched reviewers . This find - ing suggests that reviewer agreement is not the result of a shared perspective on which topics are important in a given discipline , as has been suggested ( e . g . , Crane , 1967 ) , but might be due instead to a shared perspective among high - prestige reviewers about which methodolo - gies are appropriate and , more generally , which manu - scripts deserve to be published . This shared perspective could originate from the training received by high - pres - tige reviewers . Several variables were found to be related to publica - tion judgments , and evidence for the possible mecha - nisms underlying these effects was obtained . Beginning with editors(cid:146) decisions , it was found that reviewers(cid:146) rat - ings of importance and reviewers(cid:146) overall recommenda - tions predicted editors(cid:146)decisions , even when controlling for the effects of all other reviewer judgments ( i . e . , literature , theory , and methodology ratings ) and the effects of manuscript , author , reviewer , and editor char - acteristics . These data are consistent with the view that editors made use of reviewers(cid:146) judgments of the impor - tance of the manuscript in addition to reviewers(cid:146) overall recommendations when making editorial decisions . There was also a tendency for manuscripts with male and high - prestige authors to be viewed more favorably by editors than manuscripts with female or relatively low - prestige authors , even when controlling for the effects of other author , manuscript , reviewer , and editor characteristics . For reviewer judgments , it appears that reviewers(cid:146) ratings of a manuscripts(cid:146) literature review , theory , meth - odology , and importance all contributed significantly to reviewers(cid:146) publication recommendations , even when controlling for the effects of each other and for the effects of manuscript , author , and reviewer charac - teristics . This suggests that reviewer recommendations are a function of at least these four dimensions . In addition , manuscripts by high - prestige authors received more favorable recommendations than did manuscripts by low - prestige authors and more favorable ratings of manuscript quality ( i . e . , theory , methodology , and im - portance ) . These results are consistent with previous research demonstrating that ( a ) reviewer judgments ( in particular , publication recommendations ) have an im - pact on editors(cid:146) decisions , ( b ) reviewer judgments of manuscript attributes generally impact on their recom - mendations , and ( c ) author characteristics have an im - pact on both reviewer and editor judgments . More important , however , several advances in our understanding of the correlates of manuscript accep - tance were made . First , reviewers(cid:146) overall publication recommendations affected editors(cid:146) decisions more than did ratings of importance . Ratings of other dimensions had no independent impact . Analyses also indicated that the reviewers(cid:146) perceptions of importance were the great - est predictor of their publication recommendations , fol - lowed by methodology , theory , and then literature . Second , our results provide some evidence as to the process through which author prestige affects publica - tion judgments of editors and reviewers . Specifically , author prestige predicted both editors(cid:146) decisions and reviewers(cid:146) judgments , even though authors(cid:146) identities were masked for reviewers in this sample ; and its effect on recommendations was eliminated in a mediational analysis , including reviewers(cid:146) perceptions of manuscript quality . In addition , although the relation of author prestige to editors(cid:146) decisions was not completely elimi - nated in mediational analyses , its magnitude was re - duced to almost half ( from b = . 07 , p < . 001 , to b = . 04 , p = . 067 ) . Thus , this pattern of results suggests that author prestige has an impact on publication judgments of both editors and reviewers at least partially through its impact on ratings of manuscript quality . Author pres - 200 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN tige may have continued to have a weak association with editors(cid:146) decisions because manuscript quality may not have been completely captured by our indexes ( e . g . , using reviewers(cid:146) rather than editors(cid:146) judgments of qual - ity in analyses ) . Third , our results provide an advance in our under - standing of the process through which institutional pres - tige affects publication judgments . Specifically , institu - tional prestige predicted both editors(cid:146) decisions and reviewers(cid:146) judgments , and its effects on editors(cid:146) deci - sions and recommendations were eliminated in media - tional analyses . Thus , it appears that institutional pres - tige also has an impact on publication judgments of both editors and reviewers at least partially through its impact on ratings of manuscript quality . Most important , the finding that institutional prestige had an impact on publication judgments but that its effects were almost entirely eliminated when author personal prestige was included in analyses suggests that institutional prestige may have its effects on publication judgments ( through its impact on manuscript quality ) because of its associa - tion with author personal prestige . Fourth , our results provide some evidence about the effects of author gender on publication decisions . Spe - cifically , author gender was related to editors(cid:146) but not reviewers(cid:146) judgments , and the magnitude of its relation - ship to editors(cid:146) decisions was only slightly reduced when reviewers(cid:146) perceptions of manuscript quality were in - cluded in analyses ( from b = . 04 , p = . 034 , to b = . 03 , p = . 056 ) . This pattern of results does not provide a strong case for the notion that author gender affects editors(cid:146) decisionsbecause it affects manuscript qualityasassessed in this investigation . However , there remain three possi - ble explanations for why author gender had an impact on editors(cid:146) decisions . As noted earlier , author gender might have acted as a biasing factor on editors(cid:146) judg - ments . This interpretation is supported by the findings that gender had no impact on reviewer judgments and that the impact of gender on editorial decisions was relatively unaffected when reviewer ratings of manu - script quality were controlled . The antifemale bias inter - pretation is tempered somewhat by the fact that the bias was shown by both male and female decision editors . An alternative to the bias interpretation is that author gen - der might have affected editors(cid:146) decisions because it is correlated with quality dimension ( s ) not included in this investigation . Author gender might have an impact on one or more of these omitted manuscript quality dimen - sions , and its effect on editors(cid:146) decisions might be elimi - nated if the effects of these quality dimension ( s ) were controlled . Finally , it is possible that author gender might affect editors(cid:146) decisions because it is correlated with nonquality related variables not included in this investigation that differentially have an impact on edi - tors(cid:146) and reviewers(cid:146) judgments . For example , editors might take into account the appropriateness of the manuscript for the particular journal and the balance of topic submissions , whereas reviewers do not . Directions for Future Research Several interesting questions remain from this inves - tigation . One interesting question is why reviewers of high prestige agree more than prestige - mismatched re - viewers ( particularly about methodology and standards for publication of research ) . The possibility that high - prestige reviewers come toholdsimilarstandardsregard - ing methodology and publication of research because of similar training experiences should be tested directly . As discussed , another important unresolved issue is the process through which author gender affects editors(cid:146) decisions . Similarly , it is unclear why author professional experience was not found to reliably and negatively affect publication judgments despite the fact that it was operationalized as in previous investigations . Profes - sional age or experiencehas not , toour knowledge , been previously investigated in the domain of personality and social psychology . Thus , our finding may reflect the fact that professional age actually does not have an impact on publication judgments in personality and social psy - chology , whereas it does in other disciplines . Alterna - tively , as always , this null result may be due to insufficient power to obtain the effect . In addition , a greater understanding of publication judgments would be gained from an investigation of predictors of ratings of attributes of personality and social psychology manuscripts , most notably ratings of the importance of a manuscript(cid:151)the biggest determi - nant of reviewer and editor judgments . An investigation in the related fields of learning , memory , and perception ( i . e . , cognitive psychology ) suggests that topics seen as the demonstration of a phenomenon were viewed as less important than were investigations of cognitive proc - esses ( Bruce & Bahrick , 1992 ) . It is possible that manu - scripts in personality and social psychology that are judged as investigations of process are also seen as more important than articles judged as demonstrations of phenomena . Further investigation of the role of ratings of manuscript attributes would also be useful . Investiga - tions examining if other distinct dimensions underlying publication judgments exist ( e . g . , appropriateness for the journal ; see Sternberg et al . , 1997 ) would enhance our understanding of the dimensionality and correlates of publication judgments . It would also be interesting to examine the impact of editors(cid:146) judgments of manuscript quality on editors(cid:146) decisions ( above and beyond that of the ratings of reviewers ) and to determine whether edi - tors and reviewers use the same or different dimensions in reaching their publication judgments . 17 Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 201 Finally , it is worth noting that the present research involved data that were nonexperimental in nature . Such research has obvious merit in that it allows for the in vivo examination of the peer - review process in a con - text in which reviewers(cid:146) and editors(cid:146) decisions have real consequences . However , making inferences regarding causality with nonexperimental data is difficult . For ex - ample , although it is plausible that reviewers(cid:146) percep - tions of individual manuscript attributes ( e . g . , impor - tance ) serve as the basis for reaching an overall recommendation , it is also possible that perceptions of one or more manuscript attributes might be constructed after arriving at the recommendation as a means of justifying the final decision . Plausible reversed causal directions can be postulated for someof the other effects observed in our data . Therefore , one promising direc - tion for future research would be to explore some of the effects demonstrated here in experimental contexts . Al - thoughexperimentalinvestigations might require exam - ining these effects in less naturalistic settings , their higher internal validity would provide a valuable supple - ment to nonexperimental studies , helping to elucidate the psychological processes underlying the peer - review process . NOTES 1 . For105manuscripts , theexactdatethemanuscriptwasreceived from the editorial office was missing ( i . e . , was not recorded by the action editor ) . In these cases , thedatereceived wasestimated from the manuscript number ( because , with rare exception , manuscripts were senttodecisioneditorswithinadayortwoofreceipt ) . Ifthemanuscript number fell into the first fourth of the total number of manuscripts received during thatmonth , thedate received was estimated as thelast dayofthefirstweek ( i . e . , Day7 ) . For thosefallinginthesecond fourth , the date received was estimated as the lastday of the second week ( Day 14 ) , and so on . 2 . Twenty missing cases occurred when neither the coders , pri - mary investigators , decision editors for the journal , nor a consulted sample of social / personality psychologists knew an individual with an ambiguously gendered first name . No guesses were made with regard toambiguouslygenderedfirstnamesofindividuals , andthisprocedure was used for all gender codings . Primary author gender was coded as 1 as long as either the corresponding or first author was female , even in cases when the other individual was of ambiguous gender ( n = 2 ) . However , because knowing that either the corresponding or first author are male does not ensure that the counterpart is also male ; in cases in which corresponding or first author gender was of ambiguous gender and the other was male , primary author gender was coded as missing ( n = 4 ) . 3 . Obviously , as is the case with any index ofprofessional prestige , Society of Experimental Social Psychology ( SESP ) membership is not aperfectmeasureofauthor reputation . Mostnotably , somehigh - status researchers whose work focuses primarily on personality processes might not be members of SESP . However , investigation of a randomly selected sample of manuscripts suggested relatively few submissions wereexclusivelyorientedtopersonality ( i . e . , 7 . 1 % ) . Therefore , itseems unlikelythatourprestigemeasureincorrectlyclassifiedalargenumber of authors in our data set . Such errors in classification would likely weaken any effects for SESP status . 4 . The time to return to the editor of 307 reviews was missing ( out of 1 , 636 total reviews ) either because the date the review was received was not recorded by the decision editor ( n = 286 ) , the date the manuscript was mailed outto thereviewer was not recorded ( n = 8 ) , or both dates were missing ( n = 13 ) . Due to the large number of missing data points , results for this variable should be viewed as suggestive . 5 . These ratings were missing for the following number of reviews out of the total 1 , 636 : literature , n = 266 ; theory , n = 264 ; methodology , n = 278 ; importance , n = 258 . The slightly different totals of missing values across ratings reflects those reviews for which reviewers com - pleted some but not all of the ratings . 6 . A recommendation rating was missing for 254 reviews . The majority of missing reviewer judgment data are due to one decision editor either failing to send evaluation sheets to reviewers or return them to the editor . 7 . Although previous investigations have examined the impact of editor prestige on judgments , editor prestige could not be examined in this study because our general indicator of prestige ( i . e . , member - ship in SESP ) showed no variationacross decision editors ( i . e . , all were members of SESP ) . 8 . Only eight decision editors(cid:151)three females and five males(cid:151) served thejournal atany onetime . However , one male and onefemale editor were each replaced by someone of the same gender , resulting in 10 decision editors over the editorial period under investigation . 9 . In the 105 cases in which the date the manuscript was received by the editorial office was missing , the same estimate as that used to calculate the overall time to decide was used . 10 . This variable was missing for 162 manuscripts , either because the dateof decision was missing ( n = 6 ) or the date the manuscriptwas received by the last reviewer was not recorded ( n = 156 ) . This number is smaller than the total number of missing dates received by reviewers ( n = 286 ) because several missing dates could occur for one particular manuscript , resulting in only one missing time lag value . Regardless , results for this variable should also be viewed as suggestive . 11 . Of course , the possibility remains that some number of factors between one and five might best describe the dimensionality of re - viewer judgments . To explore this possibility , we examined an alterna - tive four - trait model in which the two most highly correlated trait factors ( i . e . , importance and recommendation ) were postulated to representasingletrait . Thismodelwasfoundtofitthedatasignificantly worsethanthefive - traitmodel , c 2 ( 4 ) = 29 . 97 , p < . 01 . Thissuggests that reviewer judgments ofthefourattributes andoverallrecommendation should be examined separately . 12 . The correlation between two reviewers who were both low in prestige , r = . 35 , p < . 01 , was not significantly different from the correlation between reviewers whose prestige level was mismatched ( z = 1 . 03 , p = . 29 ) nor was itsignificantly different from thecorrelation between two reviewers who wereboth high in prestige ( z = . 25 , p = . 80 ) . 13 . It is possible that recommendation had a greater impact than importance for statistically artifactual rather than substantive reasons . Specifically , becauserecommendationsaremadeona4 - pointscaleand importance ratings on a 3 - point scale , the former might be a more reliable scale . To examine this possibility , a second analysis was con - ducted inwhich the resubmissionand rejectcategories for recommen - dation were collapsed into one , creating a 3 - point scale analogous to the scale used for editors(cid:146) decisions . This analysis revealed that recom - mendation still had a greater impact on editors(cid:146) decisions ( b = . 32 , p < . 01 ) than did importance ( b = . 18 , p < . 05 ) , F ( 1 , 447 ) = 4 . 21 , p < . 05 , ruling out the alternative explanation that recommendation had a greater impact because it has a greater number of scale points . 14 . Female reviewers have been found in an experimental simula - tion of the peer review process to bemorelikely to acceptmanuscripts by female authors than male authors and more likely to acceptfemale - authored manuscripts than aremalereviewers ( Lloyd , 1990 ) . Thus , we examinedwhetherthevariablesauthorgender , authorprestige , impor - tance , and recommendation continued to have an impact on editors(cid:146) decisions ( whilecontrollingfor allothervariables ) inseparateanalyses for male and female editors . These analyses revealed that reviewers(cid:146) ratings of theory had a greater impacton thedecisions of maleeditors ( b = . 08 , p > . 10 ) than female editors ( b = (cid:150) . 10 , p < . 10 , z = 2 . 12 , p < . 05 ) . Interestingly , editor gender did not moderate the impact of author gender , author prestige , ratings of importance , or ratings of recom - mendations on decisions . Thus , male and female editors were equally likely to show bias toward male and prestigious authors . A separate analysis suggested that neither reviewer gender nor prestige moder - ated the impact of literature , theory , methodology , or importance on 202 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN recommendations ( whilecontrolling for all other variables ) . Thus , the editor gender effect on the impact of reviewer attribute ratings on judgments was notreplicated for reviewer gender . Obviously , given the number of comparisons being made between coefficients in these analyses , caution should be exercised in interpreting these results . 15 . Research within the review process itself suggests that authors(cid:146) identitiesaresuccessfullykeptmaskedfromreviewersbycurrentlyusedmethods . Specifically , Ceci and Peters ( 1984 ) found that when done correctly ( i . e . , when authors(cid:146) names , institutional affiliations , funding sources , and references to (cid:147)in our previous work(cid:148) are removed from the manuscript ) , about 75 % could not correctly guess the identifica - tion of the author or one of the authors of a manuscript they were reviewing . Most of those who did guess correctly had only moderate confidence that they were right . 16 . Editor characteristics were not expected to have an impact on reviewer judgments and thus are not included in the analyses predict - ing reviewer judgments shown in Table 2 . When editor characteristics wereincluded aspredictors in analysespredictingreviewerjudgments , similar results were obtained . 17 . Unfortunately , the data set did not include editors(cid:146) ratings of the manuscripts on literature , theory , methodology , and importance . REFERENCES Bakanic , V . , McPhail , C . , & Simon , R . J . ( 1987 ) . The manuscript review and decision - making process . American Sociological Review , 52 , 631 - 642 . Baron , R . M . , & Kenny , D . A . ( 1986 ) . Themoderator - mediator variable distinctioninsocialpsychologyresearch : Conceptual , strategic , and statistical considerations . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1173 - 1182 . Beyer , J . ( 1978 ) . Editorial policies and practices among leading jour - nals in four scientific fields . Sociological Quarterly , 19 , 68 - 88 . Browne , M . W . ( 1984 ) . The decomposition of multitrait - multimethod matrices . British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology , 37 , 1 - 21 . Browne , M . W . ( 1989 ) . Relationships between an additive and multi - plicative model for multitrait - multimethod matrices . In R . Coppi & S . Bolasco ( Eds . ) , Multiway dataanalysis ( pp . 507 - 520 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science . Browne , M . W . , & Cudeck , R . ( 1992 ) . Alternative ways of assessing model fit . Sociological Methods and Research , 21 , 230 - 258 . Bruce , D . , & Bahrick , H . P . ( 1992 ) . Perceptions of past research . American Psychologist , 47 , 319 - 328 . Ceci , S . L . , & Peters , D . ( 1984 ) . How blind is blind review ? American Psychologist , 39 , 1491 - 1494 . Chase , J . M . ( 1970 ) . Normativecriteriaforscientificpublication . Ameri - can Sociologist , 4 , 262 - 265 . Cicchetti , D . V . ( 1980 ) . Reliability of reviews for the American Psycholo - gist : A biostatistical assessment of the data . American Psychologist , 35 , 300 - 303 . Cicchetti , D . V . , & Eron , L . D . ( 1979 ) . The reliability of manuscript reviewing for the Journal of Abnormal Psychology . Proceedings of the American Statistical Association ( Social Statistics Section ) , 22 , 596 - 600 . Crandall , R . ( 1978 ) . Interrater agreement is not so bad ! American Psychologist , 33 , 623 - 624 . Crane , D . ( 1967 ) . The gatekeepers of science : Some factors affecting the selection of articles for scientific journals . American Sociologist , 32 , 195 - 201 . Fiske , D . W . , & Fogg , L . ( 1990 ) . Butthe reviewers aremaking different criticisms of my paper ! Diversity and uniqueness in reviewer com - ments . American Psychologist , 45 , 591 - 598 . Fogg , L . , & Fiske , D . W . ( 1993 ) . Foretelling the judgments of reviewers and editors . American Psychologist , 48 , 293 - 294 . Gaston , J . ( 1978 ) . The reward system in British and American science . New York : Wiley . Gilbert , J . R . , Williams , E . S . , & Lundberg , G . D . ( 1994 ) . Istheregender bias in JAMA(cid:146)s peer review process ? Journal of the American Medical Association , 272 , 139 - 142 . Goldberger , M . L . , Naher , B . A . , & Flattau , P . E . ( 1995 ) . Research - doctorate programs in the United States : Continuity and change . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Goodrich , D . W . ( 1945 ) . An analysis of manuscripts received by the editors of the American Sociological Review from May 1 , 1944 to September 1 , 1945 . American Sociological Review , 10 , 716 - 725 . Gordon , M . D . ( 1980 ) . The role of referees in scientific communica - tion . In J . Hartley ( Ed . ) , The psychology of written communication ( pp . 263 - 275 ) . New York : Kogan Page . Hagstrom , W . O . ( 1974 ) . Competition in science . American Sociological Review , 39 , 1 - 18 . Hargins , L . L . , & Herting , J . R . ( 1990 ) . A new approach to referees(cid:146) assessments of manuscripts . Social Science Research , 19 , 1 - 16 . Hendrick , C . ( 1976 ) . Editorialcomment . PersonalityandSocialPsychology Bulletin , 2 , 207 - 208 . Hendrick , C . ( 1977 ) . Editorialcomment . PersonalityandSocialPsychology Bulletin , 3 , 1 - 2 . Howard , G . S . , Cole , D . A . , & Maxwell , S . E . ( 1987 ) . Research produc - tivity in psychology based on publication in the journals of the American Psychological Association . American Psychologist , 42 , 975 - 986 . King , A . ( 1986 ) . How not to lie with statistics : Avoiding common mistakesinquantitativepoliticalscience . American JournalofPolitical Science , 30 , 666 - 687 . Linder , D . E . ( 1977 ) . Evaluation of the Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin by its readers and authors . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 3 , 583 - 591 . Lloyd , M . E . ( 1990 ) . Gender factors in reviewer recommendations for manuscript publication . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 23 , 539 - 543 . Lock , S . ( 1982 ) . A difficultbalance . London : NuttfieldProvicial Hospital Trust . Luskin , R . C . ( 1991 ) . Abusus non tollit usum : Standardized coeffi - cients , correlations , and R 2 . American Journal of Political Science , 35 , 1032 - 1046 . Marsh , H . W . , & Ball , S . ( 1981 ) . Interjudgmental reliability of reviews fortheJournalofEducationalPsychology . Journalof EducationalPsychol - ogy , 73 , 872 - 880 . Marsh , H . W . , & Ball , S . ( 1989 ) . The peer review process used to evaluate manuscripts submitted to academic journals . Journal of Experimental Education , 57 , 151 - 169 . O(cid:146)Brien , R . M . ( 1991 ) . The reliability of composites of referee assess - ments of manuscripts . Social Science Research , 20 , 319 - 328 . Peters , D . P . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 1982 ) . Peer - review practices ofpsychological journals : The fateof published articles , submitted again . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 5 , 743 - 750 . Petty , R . E . , & Cacioppo , J . T . ( 1986 ) . Theelaborationlikelihoodmodel of persuasion . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 19 , pp . 123 - 205 ) . New York : Academic Press . Scarr , S . , & Weber , B . L . ( 1978 ) . The reliability of reviews for the American Psychologist . American Psychologist , 33 , 935 . Scott , W . A . ( 1974 ) . Inter - refereeagreementon somecharacteristics of manuscripts submitted to the Journal of Personality andSocialPsychol - ogy . American Psychologist , 29 , 698 - 702 . Sternberg , R . J . , Hojjat , M . , Brigockas , M . G . , & Grigorenko , E . L . ( 1997 ) . Getting in : Criteriafor acceptanceofmanuscriptsinPsycho - logical Bulletin , 1993 - 1996 . Psychological Bulletin , 121 , 321 - 323 . Whitehurst , G . J . ( 1984 ) . Interrater agreement for journal manuscript reviews . American Psychologist , 39 , 22 - 28 . Wilson , T . D . , DePaulo , B . M . , Mook , D . G . , & Klaaren , K . J . ( 1993 ) . Scientists(cid:146) evaluations of research : Thebiasing effects oftheimpor - tance of the topic . Psychological Science , 4 , 322 - 325 . Wolff , W . M . ( 1973 ) . Publication problems in psychology and an explicit evaluation schema for manuscripts . American Psychologist , 28 , 257 - 261 . Yoels , W . ( 1973 ) . On publishing or perishing : Fact or fiction . American Sociologist , 8 , 128 - 130 . Zuckerman , H . , & Merton , R . K . ( 1971 ) . Patterns of evaluation in science : Institutionalization , structure , and functionsofthereferee system . Minerva , 9 , 66 - 100 . Received July 29 , 1997 Revision Accepted March 11 , 1998 Petty et al . / REVIEW PROCESS AT PSPB 203