Current Biology , Vol . 14 , 1094 – 1098 , June 22 , 2004 ,  2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2004 . 06 . 023 The Role of Substrate Curvature in Actin - Based Pushing Forces extracts , an ATP regeneration system , and fluorescently labeled actin for visualization . In motility chambers , ActA - coated disks were either Ian M . Schwartz , 1 Morton Ehrenberg , 1 , 2 Michael Bindschadler , 1 , 2 and James L . McGrath 1 , * 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering University of Rochester nonmotile and surrounded by diffuse actin clouds or found in one of several motile configurations ( Figure 601 Elmwood Avenue P . O . Box 639 2A ) . To explore the temporal relationship between these states , we documented the evolution of the system for Rochester , New York 14642 5 hr after the introduction of disks to motility chambers ( Table S1 ) . We found that a diffuse cloud of fluorescent actin surrounds all polystyrene disks within 10 min . Over Summary the next few hours , greater than 90 % of the particles become motile as clouds transform into tails that push The extension of the plasma membrane during cell crawling or spreading is known to require actin poly - the disks through extracts . Tails may be centered on the perimeters or faces of disks . At all times the most merization [ 1 ] ; however , the question of how pushing forces derive from actin polymerization remains open . common motile configuration has a tail emanating from each face of a disk , and particles with a tail centered A leading theory ( herein referred to as elastic propul - sion ) illustrates how elastic stresses in networks on only one face are the most rare . Eventually , two - thirds of the disks have two face tails . The data suggest growing on curved surfaces can result in forces that push particles [ 2 , 3 ] . To date all examples of reconsti - that clouds are precursors to both perimeter and face tails and that single face tails may be an unstable config - tuted motility have used curved surfaces , raising the possibility that such squeezing forces are essential uration ( Table S1 ) . By analyzing particle motion using time - lapse micros - for actin - based pushing . By contrast , other theories , such as molecular ratchets [ 4 , 5 ] , neither require nor copy , we found that disks moving via face tails have higheraverage speedsthandisksmoving withperimeter consider surface curvature to explain pushing forces . Here , we critically test the requirement of substrate tails or ActA - coated versions of the microspheres used to make disks ( Figure 2B ) . In the common configuration curvature by reconstituting actin - based motility on polystyrene disks . We find that disks move through where disks have two face tails , the tails are often posi - tioned to push cooperatively ( Figure 2C ) ; however , there extracts in a manner that indicates pushing forces on their flat surfaces and that disks typically move faster are also periods where the opposing tails compete and the particle speed is low ( see Movie 1 ) . than the spheres they are manufactured from . For a subsetofactintailsthatformontheperimeterofdisks , To establish that actin polymerization can push against a flat surface , we present selected examples of we find no correlation between local surface curvature and tail position . Collectively the data indicate that motility in Figure 3 . Choosing particular examples is necessary because while it is possible to infer the net curvature - dependentmechanismsarenotrequiredfor actin - based pushing . forces acting on a particle from its motion , there are many possible force distributions that can give the same net forces . Also complicating is the fact that because Results and Discussion disks are finite in size , curvature - derived forces may act at their edges . Thus the examples shown in Figure 3 To critically investigate the requirements of substrate curvature in actin - based motility , we manufactured are selected because they provide clear examples of pushing against flat faces . polystyrene disks and coated them with ActA , the sur - face protein used by the intracellular pathogen Listeria In the first example of Figure 3 , a disk is fused to an incompletely compressed particle . The clockwise mo - monocytogenes to polymerize host cell actin and be - come motile [ 6 , 7 ] . In recent years polystyrene spheres tion of the assembly suggests that the largest pushing forces occur along the flat face of the disk ( Figure 3A ; coated with ActA [ 8 ] , N - WASP [ 9 ] , or a peptide spanning Movie 2 ) . If pushing occurred exclusively on the curved N - WASP’s essential VCA domain [ 10 ] have been used paths of the incompletely compressed particle , the as - to reconstitute motility in extracts and pure proteins . sembly should rotate counterclockwise . The second ex - We manufactured disks by pressing 3 . 4 (cid:1) m diameter ample shows a disk moving in a spiral due to the con - polystyrene spheres between heated glass slides ( see straints of its own tail ( Figure 3B ; Movie 3 ) . Fluorescent Supplemental Data for details on all methods ) . The re - actin contacts the disk on one flat face but also ad - sulting particles have flat faces (cid:1) 5 (cid:1) m in diameter and vances around the disk’s left periphery . Because the are (cid:1) 0 . 8 (cid:1) m thick ( Figure1 ) . For particles that are aggre - disk advances as it turns , pushing likely occurs on the gated prior to compression so that their lateral expan - face and on the periphery , but only pushing forces on sion is restricted , perimeters emerge with both flat and the face can explain the counterclockwise rotation of curved spans ( Figure 1 ) . For motility experiments , disks the disk . The third case shows the motion of a pair of are coated with saturating amounts of ActA and placed contactingdiskseachwithtails centeredononeflatface in thin ( 8 – 12 (cid:1) m tall ) motility chambers containing brain ( Figure3C ; Movie4 ) . Ingeneral theassembly rotatesand translates ( see Movie 4 ) , but during the two intervals * Correspondence : jmcgrath @ bme . rochester . edu 2 These authors contributed equally to this work . shown the assembly moves in a direction normal to the Surface Curvature and Actin - Based Pushing Forces 1095 Figure 1 . Making Polystyrene Disks ( A ) Light microscope image of a particle doublet before compres - sion . A solution of polystyrene microspheres ( 3 . 4 (cid:1) m ) was dried on clean glass slides so that small aggregates were common . ( B ) Image of a doublet after compression . Compression of the spheres under heat produces flat faces but perimeters of mixed curvatures because lateral expansion is restricted between particle contacts . ( C and D ) Scanning electron micrographs of particles . The particle in ( C ) emerged from an aggregate while that in ( D ) was isolated during compression . All scale bars represent 5 (cid:1) m . face of one of the disks , most consistent with pushing on that face . During the first of these intervals ( Figure 3C , top row ) , a bright spot in upper tail moves backward inthe imagedespitethe forwardmotionof theassembly . This suggests that this tail is not sufficiently anchored to the environment to help push and further argues that the assembly is pushed by the lower tail in a direction normal to disk face it contacts . A final example , provided as Supplemental Data ( Fig - ure S1 ; Movie 5 ) , shows a clockwise rotation of a disk that suggests pushing along the flat portions of its pe - rimeter . This occurs despite the fact that actin contacts both flat and curved spans of the perimeter . If pushing were confined to curved spans of the perimeter , the disk would rotate counterclockwise instead . A periodic pattern of fluorescence , described elsewhere as “hop - ping” [ 9 ] is apparent in Figure S1 . Hopping was occa - Figure 2 . Disk Behaviors in Motility Media sionally seen when particles moved with tails on their ( A ) Disk classifications . Disks could be classified as having : clouds ( nonmotilenucleationstage ) , perimetertails , single - facetailsordou - perimeters ( Figure S1 ; Movies 5 and 6 ) but never ob - ble - facetails . Diskswereaddedtomotilitymediacontainingfluores - served for disks moving via face tails . cent actin for visualization . Our interpretations of disk positions are To investigate a possible relationship between sur - drawn in the second row . The time course of experiments was face curvature and tail positioning , we examined the studied ( Table S1 ) ; after an initial nucleation phase of (cid:1) 1 hr , the subset of disks moving with tails on perimeters with most common configuration was a double - face tail . both flat and curved spans ( typically (cid:1) 20 % of the span ( B ) Disk velocities . The velocity of disks was measured in time - lapse movies by computing the motion of centroids of digitized of these perimeters was contiguous flat ; see Figure1B ) . disk outlines . Error bars are standard errors of the mean and stars Bymeasuringfluorescenceemanatingfromthedigitized indicate significance compared to uncompressed 3 . 4 mircospheres perimeters of disks ( Figure 4A ) , we first established that ( ANOVA , p (cid:2) 0 . 05 ) . curvature did not bias actin nucleation during cloud for - ( C ) Motion of a double - face tail configuration . Mean speed is (cid:1) 0 . 37 mation ( Figure 4B ) . A similar digitization allowed us to (cid:1) m / min . Times are relative to initial frame . The scale bar represents correlate the location of tails with local curvature . After 5 (cid:1) m . Frames are from Movie 1 . normalizing the histogram of tail appearances with re - spect to the amount of perimeter associated with each of three classes of curvature ( convex , flat , or concave ) , and that factors other than curvature explain the posi - tioning of tails on disks . we found no statistical difference between the numbers of tail appearances on flat versus curved perimeters Our data on the behaviors of ActA - coated disks are most significant given a leading theory ( elastic propul - ( Figure 4C ) . Thus the most reasonable interpretation of our data is that tails appear randomly on disk perimeters sion ) suggesting curvature - dependent mechanisms for Current Biology 1096 tility [ 2 ] . A periodic or “hopping” motion has been docu - mented in reconstitution studies and is thought to be a visible manifestation of this cycle [ 10 ] . Additionally , lipid vesicles moving by actin - based motion are deformed in a manner that implies squeezing [ 11 , 12 ] . To date all examples of reconstituted motility have occurred on the curved surfaces of Listeria [ 13 ] , spherical particles [ 8 – 10 ] , or lipid vesicles [ 11 , 12 ] , raising the prospect that curvature - derived forces may be essential for actin - based pushing . Here , we address the potential requirement of surface curvature by identifying specific examples of motility that strongly suggest pushing forces normal to flat sur - faces ( Figure 3 ) . Because individual particles ( at their perimeters ) or particle aggregates do have regions that are not flat , we cannot be sure that curvature - derived hoop stresses do not exist in these examples , only that they are an unlikely explanation for the motions shown . Indeed , in our examples ( Figures3A and 3B ) where parti - cle rotation identifies pushing forces on flat faces , a curved surface replete with actin is found closest to the particle’s center of rotation , suggesting some resistive forces may occur there . Similarly in experiments with deforming vesicles , actin intensity is brightest at the Figure 3 . Motions Indicating Pushing on Flat Surfaces regions of high curvature , which are presumably being ( A ) Circular motion of a disk - particle assembly . These frames from dragged by associations with the tail [ 11 , 12 ] . Thus hoop Movie 2 are 30 min apart . The particle is partially compressed . Inset stresses , with their accompanying frictional tractions , shows the resultant clockwise moment and force that must exist to may be responsible for allowing actin tails to hold onto account for the motion . ( B ) Spiraling disk with a single - face tail . These frames from Movie convex shapes , but our examples suggest that other 3 are 10 min apart . Inset shows the resultant counterclockwise mechanisms exist to account for pushing on flat faces . moment and force that must exist to account for the disk motion . By examining the behavior of VCA - coated spheres ( C ) Translational motions of a two - disk assembly . The sequences with different diameters , Bernheim - Groswasser et al . shown in the top and bottom rows are separate episodes of transla - [ 10 ] provide several lines of evidence suggesting curva - tion along a normal to one of the disks . In the top sequence , a bright ture - dependent forces . Our experiments with disks rep - spotintheuppertailclearlymovesbackwardintheimage ( compare to white line ) despite the forward motion of the assembly . The time resentthelimitofno curvatureandgivesomeapparently interval in each sequence ( from Movie 4 ) is 4 min . The scale bar in contradictory findings . First , Bernheim - Groswasser et ( C ) represents 3 . 5 (cid:1) m . All other scale bars represent 5 (cid:1) m . al . report that VCA - coated spheres move more slowly at lower curvatures ( larger diameters ) [ 10 ] , while we find that disks move faster than the spheres they are manu - both initiating and sustaining actin - based motility [ 2 , factured from . Bernheim - Groswasser et al . also find that 3 , 10 ] . In initiating motility ( symmetry breaking ) , elastic hopping is more pronounced on larger ( curvature propulsion illustrates how circumferential or “hoop” (cid:2) 0 . 25 (cid:1) m (cid:3) 1 ) VCA - saturated spheres . We find that disks stresses build as assembled networks are displaced by pushed on their large , flat surfaces do not hop , while new polymerization at the curved surfaces of spherical disks moving via perimeter tails occasionally do . These particles or Listeria [ 2 , 3 ] . Stresses build until a critical discrepancies may be partly due to differences in ActA hoop stress is reached and a local fracture occurs [ 10 ] . versus VCA - based motility and the use of extracts ver - The fracture allows gel stresses to relax as the particle suspureproteins , butthey mayalsoindicatethatfactors issqueezedoutofasymmetricalactincloud . Supporting other than curvature are important for determining parti - these ideas are data showing that spherical particles cle speeds and for triggering the hopping phenomenon . of smaller diameter ( higher curvature ) break symmetry Others have shown that a wide range of ActA surface faster than larger spheres [ 10 ] , presumably because densityappearstohaveminoreffectsonparticlespeeds they achieve critical stresses more quickly . By these in extracts [ 8 , 14 ] , but other physical parameters such arguments , when gels are grown on particles with both as the particle’s surface area , the tail’s size or density , curved and flat surfaces , they should fracture on curved and the nature of the interactions of the particle with surfaces and relax to flat surfaces to minimize stresses . the walls of the motility chamber may all be important Such a mechanism could explain why tails are typically influences . positioned on the flat faces of disks . However , when we To be clear , elasticity theories do not preclude push - examine the position of tails on perimeters with mixed ing against a flat surface , but they offer no mechan - curvatures , we instead find that tail location is indepen - ism for pushing in this limit . Only in the presence of dent of local curvature ( Figure 4 ) . curvature do the existing theories explain that antago - Elastic propulsion theory also explains how a process nistic stresses willbuild across the dimensionsof the gel of stress build - up , squeezing , slipping / relaxation can to give motion ( elastic propulsion ) . Elastic , antagonistic stresses also occur in molecular ratchet theories [ 4 , 5 ] , continue after symmetry breaking to give sustained mo - Surface Curvature and Actin - Based Pushing Forces 1097 but these are on a molecular scale and carried by the filaments touching the motile surface . One unifying idea is that molecular ratchets may provide the molecular origins of gel stresses for elastic propulsion at high cur - vature . However , ratchet theories are also compatible with the assumption that leading filaments are anchored to a perfectly rigid tail [ 4 , 5 ] , and ratchets need not be the molecular origins for stresses in elastic propulsion . Thus while elastic propulsion and molecular ratchets are compatible , they are also distinguishable and must be tested separately . Our work with motile disks does not challenge the existence of elastic propulsion . It does support the existence of molecular ratchets , but only because they provide viable mechanisms for pushing on a flat surface . Identifying such mechanisms is important because a network advancing a lamellipodium is push - ing against a concave ( or locally flat ) front . If actin - based pushing in reconstituted systems resembles that at the leading edge of cells , then the common mechanism should not require substrate curvature . Supplemental Data Supplemental materials contain additional methodological detail , tabulated data on the evolution of disk configurations , movie ver - sions of the time - lapse sequences in Figures 2C and 3 ( Movies 1 – 4 ) , two movies of disks pushed by perimeter tails ( Movies 5 and 6 ) , and one supplemental figure . The Supplemental Data is available at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 14 / 12 / 1094 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments The authors thank Schwartz’s Forge and Metalworks , Inc . ( Deans - boro , NY ) for help building the custom screw press and Brian McIn - tyre for help with electron microscopy . We thank Daniel Portnoy ( University of California , Berkeley ) for L . monocytogenes strain DPL4010 , and Lisa Cameron ( University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill ) , and Cyrus Wilson and Julie Theriot ( Stanford University ) for assistance with ActA purification . Thanks to Lisa Cameron , Soichiro Yamada , and Jamie Roussie for helpful comments on the text . This work was supported by University of Rochester start - up monies . Received : January 3 , 2004 Revised : April 13 , 2004 Accepted : April 26 , 2004 Published : June 22 , 2004 References 1 . Forscher , P . , and Smith , S . J . ( 1988 ) . Actions of cytochalasins on the organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 1505 – 1516 . Figure 4 . Curvature Effects on CloudNucleation and Tail Formation 2 . Gerbal , F . , Chaikin , P . , Rabin , Y . , and Prost , J . ( 2000 ) . An elastic ( A ) Digitizing disk perimeters . Approximately 20 points / particle de - analysis of Listeria monocytogenes propulsion . Biophys . J . 79 , fined the perimeter of a disk . Local curvature and regions of interest 2259 – 2275 . ( ROIs ) wereconstructedfromthedigitizedcurves ( seeSupplemental 3 . Noireaux , V . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Friederich , E . , Prost , J . , Antony , Experimental Procedures ) . ROIs were used to integrate the local C . , Louvard , D . , and Sykes , C . ( 2000 ) . Growing an actin gel on fluorescence or to detect tails and correlate them with local cur - spherical surfaces . Biophys . J . 78 , 1643 – 1654 . vature . 4 . Dickinson , R . B . , andPurich , D . L . ( 2002 ) . Clamped - filamentelon - ( B ) Correlation of perimeter fluorescence with curvature . Curvature gation model for actin - based motors . Biophys . J . 82 , 605 – 617 . was defined as concave : (cid:3) 1 . 5 to (cid:3) 0 . 1 (cid:1) m (cid:3) 1 , flat (cid:3) 0 . 1 to 0 . 1 (cid:1) m (cid:3) 1 , 5 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 2003 ) . Force generation by Actin orconvex0 . 1to1 . 5 (cid:1) m (cid:3) 1 on413pointsfrom18microdisks . Fluores - polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered filaments . cence valuesare normalized to themean fluorescence foreach disk Biophys . J . 84 , 1591 – 1605 . and show no correlation with curvature ( cross correlation coeffi - 6 . Tilney , L . , andPortnoy , D . ( 1989 ) . Actinfilamentsandthegrowth , cient (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . ( C ) Correlation of tail appearances with local curvature . Histograms show raw appearances of tails on perimeters ( top ) , the distribution of curvature along the particle perimeters ( middle ) and tail appear - analysis ( seeSupplementalExperimentalProcedures ) indicatesthat ances normalized to curvature distributions ( bottom ) . 53 tails were the normalized appearances are not statistically different between identified on 51 disks with mixed curvature perimeters between curvedandflatregions . Errorbarsrepresentthestandarddeviations 3 and 5 hr after introducing particles into extracts . A bootstrap from the bootstrap analysis . Current Biology 1098 movementandspreadoftheintracellularbacterialparasiteliste - ria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 1597 – 1608 . 7 . Kocks , C . , and Cossart , P . ( 1993 ) . Directional actin assembly by Listeria monocytogenes at the site of polar surface expres - sion of the actA gene product involving the actin - bundling pro - tein plastin ( fimbrin ) . Infect . Agents Dis . 2 , 207 – 209 . 8 . Cameron , L . A . , Footer , M . J . , van Oudenaarden , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Motility of ActA protein - coatedmicrospheres driven by actin polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 4908 – 4913 . 9 . Wiesner , S . , Helfer , E . , Didry , D . , Ducouret , G . , Lafuma , F . , Car - lier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 2003 ) . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 387 – 398 . 10 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , Wiesner , S . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Carlier , M . F . , andSykes , C . ( 2002 ) . Thedynamicsofactin - basedmotility depend on surface parameters . Nature 417 , 308 – 311 . 11 . Upadhyaya , A . , Chabot , J . R . , Andreeva , A . , Samadani , A . , and Van Oudenaarden , A . ( 2003 ) . Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4521 – 4526 . 12 . Giardini , P . A . , Fletcher , D . A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Compres - sion forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6493 – 6498 . 13 . Theriot , J . A . , Rosenblatt , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , Goldschmidt - Cler - mont , P . J . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1994 ) . Involvement of profilin in the actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes in cells and in cell - free extracts . Cell 76 , 505 – 517 . 14 . Cameron , L . A . , Svitkina , T . M . , Vignjevic , D . , Theriot , J . A . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) . Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr . Biol . 11 , 130 – 135 .