a r X i v : p h y s i c s / 0302088v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 24 F e b 2003 Growth Velocities of Branched Actin Networks A . E . Carlsson Department of Physics , Washington University , St . Louis , Missouri 63130 - 4899 Abstract The growth of an actin network against an obstacle that stimulates branching locally is studied using several variants of a kinetic rate model based on the orientation - dependent number density of ﬁlaments . The model emphasizes the eﬀects of branching and capping on the density of free ﬁlament ends . The variants diﬀer in their treatment of side vs . end branch - ing and dimensionality , and assume that new branches are generated by existing branches ( autocatalytic behavior ) or independently of existing branches ( nucleation behavior ) . In au - tocatalytic models , the network growth velocity is rigorously independent of the opposing force exerted by the obstacle , and the network density is proportional to the force . The dependence of the growth velocity on the branching and capping rates is evaluated by a nu - merical solution of the rate equations . In side - branching models , the growth velocity drops gradually to zero with decreasing branching rate , while in end - branching models the drop is abrupt . As the capping rate goes to zero , it is found that the behavior of the velocity is sensitive to the thickness of the branching region . Experiments are proposed for using these results to shed light on the nature of the branching process . 1 I . INTRODUCTION In numerous instances of actin - based motility , including extension of lamellipodia in cells 34 , and “rocketing” motion of Listeria monocytogenes 12 , 15 or small beads coated with actin - polymerization activators 5 , 9 , actin ﬁlaments form a branched network struc - ture . Typical densities of ﬁlamentous actin in such networks are 1 mM , and spacings between branches along a ﬁlament are often in the range 40 - 70 nm 35 , 36 . The ﬁla - ments are eventually terminated by capping proteins , which prevent further ﬁlament growth . The branch points have a characteristic angle of 70 ◦ and are decorated by a seven - subunit complex of actin - related proteins , Arp2 / 3 . This complex has a low con - stitutive activity . However , it can be activated directly or indirectly by several agents associated with the obstacle ( the cell membrane or the bacterial / bead surface ) . These agents include the membrane phospholipid P IP 2 , the membrane - associated protein Cdc 42 , and the bacterial surface protein ActA . In the case of Cdc 42 and P IP 2 , inter - mediate proteins such as Scar and WASp are required for Arp2 / 3 activation . These are also constitutively inactive but can be activated by Cdc 42 or P IP 2 . When the Arp2 / 3 is activated , it causes new branches to form on existing ﬁlaments and thereby greatly stimulates actin polymerization in the vicinity of the obstacle . The branching activity of Arp2 / 3 has been conﬁrmed by in vitro studies 27 . While several of the basic biochemical events in the pathway leading to Arp2 / 3 - induced actin assembly are well established , the details of the process by which new ﬁlaments are generated at the obstacle are not well understood . The following issues are among those that are unresolved : • The relative importance of branching along ﬁlament sides and branching at their ends . Initial data 28 comparing the lengths of mother and daughter ﬁlaments ( be - yond the branch point ) found a close correlation , suggesting the dominance of end branching . However , recent total internal - reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy studies 2 , 3 of single ﬁlaments have found that most branches are formed along ﬁl - ament sides . A recent confocal - microscopy study 17 found that branches can form 2 anywhere along the sides of ﬁlaments , but that there were numerous instances of new branches forming very near the barbed end , and branches formed more readily on newly grown ﬁlaments . This suggested that branch formation could be enhanced in the “ATP cap” region near a ﬁlament barbed end . • The thickness of the region near the obstacle where new branches can form . Branch formation could , for example , be activated by direct contact with mem - brane proteins ; on the other hand , Arp2 / 3 could be activated by membrane - bound proteins and subsequently diﬀuse to the branching point , or it could be indirectly activated by eﬀectors of these proteins . In a recently proposed model for ﬁlament generation at membranes 38 , Cdc 42 and P IP 2 in the membrane are ﬁrst activated by an external signal . They interact with WASp , causing it to change to a partly active conformation . Binding of actin to WASp completes its activation . Then the WASp binds to , and activates , the Arp2 / 3 complex , which is also associated with a ﬁlament . Finally , a new ﬁlament grows from the acti - vated Arp2 / 3 complex . In this model , if the WASp is attached to the Cdc 42 and P IP 2 , branching could only occur if the Arp2 / 3 is essentially in physical contact with the obstacle ; if the WASp detaches , the branching region could be wider . • Whether new ﬁlaments are created on existing ﬁlaments , or are created free and subsequently diﬀuse and attach to existing ﬁlaments ( cf . Figure 1 ) . We term these models the autocatalytic and nucleation models , respectively . In autocat - alytic models , the formation rate of new branches is proportional to the number of ﬁlaments or amount of polymerized actin in the branching region ; in nucleation models , it is independent of the number of preexisting branches . The scenario 38 discussed above leads to an autocatalytic behavior if the concentrations of Arp2 / 3 and WASp are not rate - limiting , since the Arp2 / 3 is ﬁlament - asociated . Such autocatalytic models have generally been in favor because of the enhancement of Arp2 / 3 in vitro nucleating activity in the presence of preformed ﬁlamentous actin 16 , 21 , 28 . In the absence of preformed ﬁlaments , actin polymerization in the 3 presence of activated Arp2 / 3 typically has a lag time on the order of minutes ; this lag time is eliminated by the presence of preformed ﬁlaments . We also note that in vitro polymerization kinetics are well described by autocatalytic models 28 . It is plausible that the generation of new ﬁlaments in lamellipodia and around intracellular pathogens / beads involves essentially the same steps as the in vitro studies . However , the sequence of steps may not necessarily be the same as in the in vitro studies . If the concentration of Arp2 / 3 or its activators is rate - limiting , then the generation rate for new ﬁlaments will be nearly independent of the ﬁlament concentration . At present , there appears to be no straightforward ex - perimental method for distinguishing between the autocatalytic and nucleation models in vivo . The true behavior is very likely somewhere between the limiting cases deﬁned here , but these cases form a useful conceptual framework . The main purpose of this paper is to evaluate the dependence of the growth ve - locity of actin networks on key protein concentrations and opposing force , and to ascertain how these dependences are modulated by key molecular - scale details of the branching process , including the relative importance of side and end branching , the thickness of the branching region , and whether the branching process is autocatalytic or nucleation - driven . These predicted dependences can be combined with experimental measurements to establish important molecular aspects of the branching process . Be - cause the autocatalytic model is more plausible in view of existing experimental data , we treat it in more detail ; our treatment of the nucleation model is mainly focused on distinguishing it from the autocatalytic model experimentally . We have previously evaluated 11 the dependence of the growth velocity on branching rate , capping rate , and opposing force , for an autocatalytic branch generation model , using a stochastic simu - lation methodology . These simulations showed that over a limited range of parameters at ﬁxed actin concentration , the growth velocity drops linearly with increasing capping rate , and drops to zero for values of the branching rate at which the number of branches per ﬁlament is less than about 1 . 5 . It was also found that the growth velocity is nearly 4 independent of the applied force . The present paper treats some of the same issues us - ing a deterministic rate - equation model . This approach has three advantages over the stochastic - growth approach . First , it is possible to prove rigorous results within such a model , and this explains some puzzling results of the stochastic - growth simulations . Second , it is possible to treat parameter regimes that were computationally forbidding using the stochastic - simulation methodology , in particular the limits of small capping - protein concentration and slow growth . The former leads to an unwieldy number of branches per ﬁlament , and the latter results are very sensitive to stochastic ﬂuctuations in the simulations . Finally , by analysis of the deterministic equations , it is possible to ﬁnd intuitive explanations for the behavior of the growth velocity . II . AUTOCATALYTIC MODEL Our model assumes a ﬂat obstacle of ﬁnite size in two or three dimensions , although the rigorous results that we prove hold for an obstacle of arbitrary shape . The branching mechanism is such that new ﬁlaments are generated inside a narrow branching region , of thickness d , at the obstacle . Only ﬁlaments within a distance d of the obstacle can branch . In a rigorously two - dimensional model , d would be a width , but since there is a always a third dimension present , we will still call d a thickness . The mathematical approach uses simple rate equations based on the laterally averaged ﬁlament orientation distribution n ( θ , t ) , where t is time , and θ is the angle of a ﬁlament with respect to the normal to the surface ( cf . Figure 1 ) . The component v of the ﬁlament growth velocity in the direction of network growth is related to the orientation by v ( θ ) = V max cos θ , where V max is the growth velocity of a free ﬁlament . The number of ﬁlament ends in the branching region , per unit of obstacle length ( in two dimensions ) or obstacle area ( in three dimensions ) with angles between θ and θ + dθ is n ( θ , t ) dθ . The main factors of interest to us are the formation of new ﬁlaments inside the branching region , the capping of existing ﬁlaments , and the motion of the obstacle away from the ﬁlaments in the branching region . We ignore potential eﬀects of uncapping and branch detachment ; 5 the rationale for this is discussed in the section Sensitivity to Key Approximations . We thus employ the following equation of motion for the ﬁlament orientation dis - tribution : ∂n ( θ , t ) ∂t = k br Z θ max 0 D ( θ , θ ′ ) ν ( θ ′ ) n ( θ ′ , t ) dθ ′ − k cap n ( θ , t ) − H [ V obst − v ( θ ) ] [ ( V obst − v ( θ ) ) / d + ( ν ( θ ) k br − k cap ) ] n ( θ , t ) , ( 1 ) Here θ max is the maximum value of θ ( taken to be 180 ◦ for most of our calculations ) , k br is the total branching rate for a ﬁlament with θ = 0 , k cap is the capping rate , D ( θ , θ ′ ) is the distribution of ﬁlament orientations generated by branching from ﬁlaments of orientation θ ′ , and ν ( θ ) is a factor describing the dependence of ﬁlament length on orientation in side - branching models ; in end - branching models , we take ν ( θ ) = 1 . V obst is the obstacle velocity , and H is the Heaviside step function , deﬁned by H [ V obst − v ( θ ) ] = 1 if V obst > v ( θ ) and H [ V obst − v ( θ ) ] = 0 if V obst ≤ v ( θ ) . For end branching models , we assume that , unless θ is restricted , the overall rate of branching from a given ﬁlament is independent of θ ′ . Thus R 180 ◦ 0 D ( θ , θ ′ ) dθ = 1 for all θ ′ . For side - branching models , we assume that the rate of branching from a given ﬁlament is proportional to the length of its portion inside the branching region , as described by the ν ( θ ) term . Detailed forms for D ( θ , θ ′ ) and ν ( θ ) are given in the next section . The last term on the right - hand side describes ﬁlaments with v < V obst leaving the branching region . The rate of this process is proportional to the spatial number density of ﬁlament ends at the back end of the branching region . ( Here and in the rest of the paper , the term “density” will always refer to number density rather than mass density . ) For most values of θ , the relative velocity of the ﬁlaments and the obstacle is large enough that the distribution is fairly constant in space ; in this case the density can be approximated by n ( θ , t ) / d , leading to the ﬁrst term in square brackets . However , ﬁlaments with v very close to V obst can remain in the branching region long enough that the density at back of the branching region greatly exceeds that at the front , because of exponential growth due to branching ( and modiﬁed by capping ) . For such ﬁlaments , we assume a time growth rate of k br ν ( θ ) − k cap , leading to a spatial growth rate of ( k br ν ( θ ) − k cap ) / ( V obst − v ) . This 6 yields the second term inside the brackets . For ﬁlaments with v > V obst , we include no leaving terms . Filaments are not able to leave at the front end of the branching region because they are blocked by the obstacle , and they cannot grow in from the back end , since branching cuts oﬀ there so that no new ﬁlaments can be nucleated beyond that point . This model is closely related to one previously employed 22 in the calculation of actin ﬁlament orientation distributions near obstacles . The main diﬀerence is that eﬀects of ﬁlaments leaving the branching region are treated explicitly in the present model . This allows us to study the mechanism for establishing the steady - state number of ﬁlaments and velocity ; in Ref . 22 , these were treated as ﬁxed inputs . Our model is also related to those studied in Ref . 25 and Ref . 24 ; the parallel is explored in more detail in the section describing nucleation models . A . Rigorous Properties of Rate Equation In this section , we demonstrate two rigorous steady - state properties of the rate equation ( 1 ) : that the growth velocity is independent of the applied force , and that the network density is proportional to the applied force . These results hold regardless of the form of the branching orientation distribution D ( θ , θ ′ ) , and are independent of the shape of the obstacle . Before proving the results , we ﬁrst clarify the mechanism by which the steady - state V obst is determined . Figure 2 sketches the generic behavior . We consider the limits V obst = 0 and V obst = V max ﬁrst . If V obst = 0 , then the leaving terms vanish for ﬁlaments with θ < 90 ◦ . If we deﬁne k ∗ br as the rate of branching restricted to the subset of ﬁlaments with θ < 90 ◦ , then Eq . ( 1 ) implies that the total number of ﬁlaments touching the obstacle , n touch ( t ) = R 90 ◦ 0 n ( θ , t ) dθ , satisﬁes dn touch / dt ≥ ( k ∗ br − k cap ) n touch ( t ) , ( 2 ) where the relation is an inequality because additional touching branches can be pro - duced by non - touching ﬁlaments . Eq . ( 2 ) gives exponential growth if k ∗ br > k cap . This 7 inequality holds for the networks that have been studied by electron microscopy . Since the θ > 90 ◦ region includes half of the angles available for branching , k ∗ br is roughly half of k br . The ratio k br / k cap , in turn , is the ratio of the ﬁlament length to the branch spacing , and this is ﬁve or more in the observed structures 35 , 36 . Thus dn touch / dt > 0 for V obst = 0 . On the other hand , when V obst is very close to V max , only a very small fraction of newly generated ﬁlaments will touch the obstacle , so capping and leaving terms will dominate . Then dn touch / dt < 0 . The value of dn touch / dt will then cross zero at a value of V obst between 0 and V max , and this determines the steady - state velocity . The above discussion is somewhat incomplete because dn touch / dt is determined not just by n touch , but by the entire distribution n ( θ , t ) . The time evolution of n ( θ , t ) can be described more precisely by noting that the growth or decay of the ﬁlament density is determined by the eigenvalues of the right - hand side of Eq . ( 1 ) . The largest eigenvalue will dominate at large times . For V obst = V max , all of the eigenvalues are negative and the solution decays . For V obst = 0 , there will be a positive eigenvalue , and the ﬁlament density will grow exponentially . At a critical value of V obst , the largest eigenvalue will cross zero , and this is the steady - state value of V obst . The ﬁlament orientation distribution is proportional to the eigenvector corresponding to the zero eigenvalue , as was noted by Ref . 22 . To show that the growth velocity is independent of the applied force , we ﬁrst demon - strate that if n ( θ ) is a steady - state solution , then any multiple of n ( θ ) is also a steady - state solution . This follows immediately from the form of Eq . ( 1 ) , since each term is linear in n ( θ , t ) . We then write the total force exerted by the ﬁlaments on the obstacle as F obst = Z θ obst 0 f ( v ( θ ) ; V obst ) n ( θ ) dθ × ( area or length ) , ( 3 ) where f ( v ( θ ) ; V obst ) is the force exerted by a ﬁlament at an angle θ on an obstacle moving at velocity V obst , θ obst is deﬁned by v ( θ obst ) = V obst , and the total force contains a factor of either area or length according to whether the model is three - or two - dimensional . Filaments growing at angles greater than θ obst exert no force since they 8 do not remain in contact with the obstacle . If a given set [ n ( θ ) , F , V obst ] gives a steady - state solution , then Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) show that for any α the set [ αn ( θ ) , αF , V obst ] will also give a steady - state solution . Thus for any force αF , the steady - state velocity will be V obst ; the ﬁlament orientation distribution is αn ( θ ) , and is thus proportional to the applied force . The physical scenario leading to the obstacle velocity being independent of the applied force is that when the force on the obstacle is increased , the obstacle will temporarily slow , allowing the creation of new ﬁlaments , until the ﬁlament density is precisely that required to compensate for the additional obstacle force . Then the ve - locity returns to its steady - state value . The present results explains the corresponding results found in the stochastic - growth simulations Ref . 11 , which were not previously understood . The result obtained here is signiﬁcantly more general than that obtained in these simulations . The only aspect of Eq . ( 1 ) used to derive the result is that all the terms are linear in n ( θ ) . Therefore , the result would also hold for obstacles of arbitrary shape , for which D ( θ , θ ′ ) would also depend on the position of the branch - ing ﬁlament . It also holds for any form of the interaction force between the ﬁlaments and the obstacle . It continues to hold when several eﬀects not included in the present model are included , but its validity will be limited when ﬁlament - ﬁlament interactions , depletion of actin and actin - binding proteins , and ﬁlament - number ﬂuctuation eﬀects are important . These aspects of the results are discussed in the section Sensitivity to Key Approximations . 9 B . Numerical Solution of Rate Equation Evaluation of the dependence of the growth velocity on the rate parameters k br and k cap provides several avenues for comparing the model predictions with experimental data . These parameters should correspond roughly to the concentration of activated Arp 2 / 3 complex and capping protein . However , the correspondence is not exact , since changes in the concentrations of these proteins can lead to changes in the free actin monomer concentration and thus change V max , as well as k br . In addition , the net branching and capping rates will be determined by capping - uncapping and branching - debranching equilibria , which do not give a strictly linear dependence of the rates on the protein concentrations . In order to evaluate the dependence of the growth velocity on k br and k cap , we solve the rate equation numerically , using four diﬀerent forms for D ( θ , θ ′ ) : • Two - dimensional geometry , end branching . In this geometry , we assume a Gaussian spread of the branching angle of width ∆ θ = 10 ◦ with respect to its average value θ br = 70 ◦ . This value is a rough mean of the measured widths of the distribution in in vitro experiments , which range from 7 ◦ 27 to 10 ◦ − 13 ◦ 7 . Then D ( θ , θ ′ ) = [ exp ( − ( θ − θ ′ − θ br ) 2 / 2∆ θ 2 ) + exp ( − ( θ − θ ′ + θ br ) 2 / 2∆ θ 2 ) + exp ( − ( θ + θ ′ − θ br ) 2 / 2∆ θ 2 ) + exp ( − ( θ + θ ′ + θ br ) 2 / 2∆ θ 2 ) ] / ( 32 π ) 1 / 2 ∆ θ . ( 4 ) The alternating plus and minus signs preceding θ br correspond to branching in clockwise and counterclockwise directions , and those in front of θ ′ account for branching from the right semicircle to the left semicircle . • Three - dimensional geometry , end branching . In this geometry , we assume the same values of θ br = 70 ◦ and ∆ θ = 10 ◦ as in the two - dimensional model . However , in three dimensions the orientation distribution is more complicated because diﬀerent values of the azimuthal angle φ ( the angle describing rotation 10 about the mother ﬁlament ) of the new ﬁlament give diﬀerent values of θ . One readily shows that cos θ = cos θ br cos θ ′ + sin θ br cos φ sin θ ′ , ( 5 ) where φ = 0 is chosen to be in the plane deﬁned by the orientations of the mother ﬁlament and the normal to the obstacle . Then D ( θ , θ ′ ) = ( sin θ / π ) Z π 0 δ [ cos θ − cos θ br cos θ ′ − sin θ br cos φ sin θ ′ ] dφ , ( 6 ) which , after simpliﬁcation , yields D ( θ , θ ′ ) = sin θ / [ π sin θ br sin θ ′ sin φ ] , ( 7 ) where φ is determined by Eq . ( 5 ) and we choose 0 ≤ φ ≤ 180 ◦ . We include the broadening by writing D ( θ , θ ′ ) as a linear combination of terms of the form given by Eq . ( 7 ) , for closely spaced set of values of θ br , with weights determined by the Gaussian distribution used in Eq . ( 4 ) . • Two - dimensional geometry , side branching . When side branching is present , ﬁlaments nearly parallel to the obstacle will have a greater length inside the branching region , and will thus branch more rapidly than those perpendicu - lar to the obstacle . We take this into account by multiplying the end - branching result of Eq . ( 4 ) by the following angular factor , which takes diﬀerent forms for ﬁlaments with v > V obst and those with v < V obst : ν ( θ ′ ) = min [ 1 / cos θ ′ , V max / k cap d ] v > V obst ν ( θ ′ ) = min [ 1 / cos θ ′ , V max / k cap d , V max / 4 ( V obst − v ( θ ′ ) ) ] v < V obst ( 8 ) This factor is approximately equal to the average ﬁlament length , divided by d . In the ﬁrst case , the ﬁlament ends are in contact with the obstacle , and the 1 / cos θ term comes from the length of the piece of an inﬁnitely long ﬁlament that is inside the branching region ; the V max / k cap d term accounts for the ﬁniteness 11 of the ﬁlament length induced by capping . In the second case , the last term accounts for the fact that the ﬁlament length is limited by the amount of time it has spent in the branching region . A calculation assuming uniform ﬁlament distributions shows that the average age of a ﬁlament in the branching region is d / 4 ( V obst − v ( θ ′ ) ) . • Three - dimensional geometry , side branching . The three - dimensional end - branching result , Eq . ( 7 ) , is multiplied by the same factor ν ( θ ′ ) as in the two - dimensional case . To obtain the obstacle velocity , the integral in Eq . ( 1 ) is replaced by a Riemann sum over a ﬁnely spaced set of values of θ and θ ′ . This converts it into a matrix equation of the form dn i / dt = P j A ij n j , where the coeﬃcients A ij include all of the terms in Eq . ( 1 ) . A standard eigenvalue ﬁnder ( “dgees . f” in the Lapack library 4 ) is used to ﬁnd the eigenvalues of the matrix A ij . They are monotonically decreasing as a function of V obst , and a search is made over a range of possible values of V obst to ﬁnd the value of V obst at which the largest eigenvalue is closest to zero , which gives dn i / dt = 0 and thus leads to steady - state behavior . The results are plotted in Figure 3 vs . k br and Figure 4 vs . k cap . In generating Figure 3 , we use a ﬁxed value of 0 . 35 sec − 1 for k cap . This is obtained from measured in vitro capping rate constants 32 of about 3 . 5 µM − 1 sec − 1 and a typical capping - protein concentration 31 of 1 µM , on the assumption that diﬀusion in the cellular environment is slower than that in vitro by a factor of 10 , with a corresponding reduction in the capping rate . Our value of V max , 0 . 27 µm sec − 1 , is obtained from the measured on - rate 30 of roughly 10 µM − 1 sec − 1 , a typical free - actin concentration 31 of 100 µM , and the monomer step size of 2 . 7 nm , together with the diﬀusion - factor reduction used in obtaining k cap . ( Most of the non - polymerized actin in cellular environments is present as proﬁlin - actin complexes , and it is not known at what rate actin in this form contributes to ﬁlament elongation . If its addition rate is much less than that for actin monomers , then the overall scale of the velocities will be reduced . However , when V obst is scaled by V max as 12 in Figures 3 and 4 , the shape of the curves is independent of V max . ) We normalize k br by k cap because the ratio corresponds roughly to the average number of branches per ﬁlament . In these curves and those in Figure 4 , we use d = a , where a = 2 . 7 nm is the step size per monomer ; the eﬀects of varying d are treated in the discussion of Figure 5 below . In both the two - and three - dimensional cases , V obst appears to approach an asymptotic value less than V max for large k br , as was seen in the stochastic - growth simulations 11 . For small k br , the velocity in the end - branching case drops abruptly to zero at a value of k br between k cap and 2 k cap ; for side branching , the decrease is smoother . This diﬀerence was not resolved in the stochastic - growth simulations because they did not treat long enough times . In the two - dimensional geometry , the curve has a shoulder around k br = 2 k cap , which is not seen in the three - dimensional results . We believe that this shoulder is due to the presence of sharp peaks in the ﬁlament orientation distribution around ± 35 ◦ . Such peaks were seen in the analysis of Ref . 22 , and we see similar peaks here . In Figure 4 , we use k br = V max / 20 a = 5sec − 1 , which gives a branch spacing of about 20 monomers at the higher obstacle velocities , roughly commensurate with experimen - tally measured branch spacings 35 . For all four of the branching models considered , V obst drops monotonically and smoothly with k cap for k cap > 0 . 05 k br , as in the stochastic - growth simulations . The asymptotic k cap → 0 value extrapolated from this range is between 0 . 8 V max and 0 . 9 V max . However , for smaller values of k cap , the curve turns up , and approaches V max as k cap → 0 ; this eﬀect was not seen in the stochastic - growth simulations because such small values of k cap could not be treated . We can understand these aspects of the behavior of the growth velocity as follows : • Vanishing of growth velocity at ﬁnite k br / k cap . We note that the only posi - tive term in Eq . ( 1 ) is the branching term . Therefore , when k br = k cap in the end - branching models , the total number of ﬁlaments must decay because leav - ing terms make a negative contribution to its time derivative ( we recall that R 180 ◦ 0 D ( θ , θ ′ ) dθ = 1 ) . Thus no growth is possible for k br / k cap ≤ 1 . The actual 13 threshold is greater , because of the leaving eﬀects . For side - branching models , the situation is diﬀerent because of the ν ( θ ′ ) factor in Eq . ( 1 ) . This factor can be signiﬁcantly greater than unity for ﬁlaments with θ near 90 ◦ , which means that in principle growth is possible for k br / k cap ≤ 1 . As the obstacle slows , the pro - portion of ﬁlaments with θ near 90 ◦ increases because they can remain in contact with the obstacle , and this causes the branching rate per ﬁlament to increase . This explains the small - k br tail in the side - branching results . • Asymptotic velocity . One would expect that as either the branching rate becomes inﬁnite , or the capping rate becomes small , suﬃciently many ﬁlaments would be generated that even the small fraction of the ﬁlaments with θ ≃ 0 would be able to push the obstacle , leaving the other ﬁlaments behind . This would give an asymptotic velocity of V max . This is seen in Figure 4 for very small values of k cap , but the apparent asymptotic velocity extrapolated from higher values is less than V max . To understand this crossover behavior , we note that the branching events can be divided into two types , those occurring on ﬁlaments touching the obstacle , having v > V obst , and those occurring on ﬁlaments in the branching region but not touching the obstacle , which have v < V obst . As above , we will denote the number of ﬁlaments touching the obstacle by n touch . In steady state , contributions to n touch from branching are cancelled by capping eﬀects alone , since the leaving terms do not apply to the touching ﬁlaments . The branching contribution consists of “direct” branching events in which a touching ﬁlament is generated from another touching ﬁlament , and “indirect” events in which a touching ﬁlament is generated from a non - touching one . In general , we expect direct events to dominate if d is much less than the typical branch spacing , since most newly generated non - touching ﬁlaments will not have time to branch before they leave the branching region . If we ignore indirect events entirely , and take ∆ θ = 0 for simplicity , then the angle θ of some of the touching ﬁlaments must exceed θ br / 2 = 35 ◦ for direct branching events to occur . This means that 14 V obst ≤ cos ( 35 ◦ ) V max = 0 . 87 V max , giving an asymptotic value less than V max . This explains the main parts of the curves in Figures 3 and 4 . However , if k cap is very small , it is possible for the indirect events to dominate . Even though they are a small fraction of the total branching events , they can be suﬃcient to cancel a small k cap . For indirect events , there is no geometrical limit on the obstacle velocity . For example , a ﬁlament with θ = 0 will produce a daughter ﬁlament with θ = 70 ◦ , and this ﬁlament can produce its own daughter ﬁlament with θ = 0 . Thus for very small values of k cap , propulsion at velocities near V obst is possible , and in this case indirect processes dominate . Using very large values of k br will also yield an asymptotic velocity of V max , since the relevant quantity in balancing branching with capping is the ratio of the branching to the capping rates . In this case there will be an added eﬀect from the decrease of the average branch spacing , which will also increase the fraction of indirect branching events . The above argument depends on the ratio of d to the relative branch spacing . As d becomes smaller , the magnitude of the indirect branching terms becomes less . One should then have to go to progressively smaller values of k cap to reach the regime where indirect branching dominates and the velocity approaches V max . This is demonstrated in Figure 5 , which shows V obst vs . k cap for a range of values of d ranging up to 10 a , in the three - dimensional side - branching model . The branching layer thickness cannot be much greater than 10 a , because this would lead to exponential growth in the ﬁlament density away from the obstacle , and this has not been observed . It is seen in Figure 5 that the growth velocity varies in a fairly linear fashion with k cap down to a crossover value k ccap , at which it turns upward ; k ccap increases with d . k ccap should be proportional to the rate of indirect branching events . The latter is proportional to both the rate of production k br of new ﬁlaments and the fraction of these new ﬁlaments which branch before they leave the branching region . Since most of the new ﬁlaments will point at angles relatively far from the growth direction , they will leave the branching region 15 rapidly . The fraction that branch before this happens will be proportional to d / l br , where l br is the average spacing between branches along a ﬁlament . Thus k ccap = αk br d / l br ( 9 ) where , α is a dimensionless constant . From our numerical results , we ﬁnd that α = 0 . 2 and α = 0 . 4 for side and end branching , respectively , in three dimensions . The possibility of applying this eﬀect experimentally is evaluated in the Discussion section . III . NUCLEATION MODEL In nucleation models , the obstacle generates new ﬁlaments without making use of the existing ﬁlament network , and it is assumed that the generated ﬁlaments subsequently attach to to this framework . We thus take the overall generation rate for new ﬁlaments to be independent of the ﬁlament density . However , it is not possible for the orientation distribution of new branches to be independent of n ( θ , t ) , since the new branches must satisfy the 70 ◦ branching angle constraint . For this reason , we obtain the equation of motion for the nucleation model by dividing the ﬁrst term in Eq . ( 1 ) by the total rate of new ﬁlament generation , so that ∂n ( θ , t ) ∂t = k nuc B Z θ max 0 D ( θ , θ ′ ) ν ( θ ′ ) n ( θ ′ , t ) dθ ′ − k cap n ( θ , t ) − H [ V obst − v ( θ ) ] [ ( V obst − v ( θ ) ) / d ] n ( θ , t ) , ( 10 ) where k nuc is total the number of ﬁlaments generated per unit time , B = R θ max 0 D ( θ , θ ′ ) ν ( θ ′ ) n ( θ ′ , t ) dθdθ ′ × ( area or length ) , and the other quantitites and parameters are as in the autocatalytic model . The area factor is used for three dimen - sions , the length factor in two dimensions . We ignore the correction used in Eq . ( 1 ) to account for exponential growth of the ﬁlament density , because in nucleation models this does not occur . This rate equation is solved by numerically stepping forward in time , at a ﬁxed obstacle velocity , until a steady - state ﬁlament orientation distribution n ( θ ) is obtained . 16 The force is then obtained via Eq . ( 3 ) . In order to evaluate the right - hand side of Eq . ( 3 ) , it is necessary to take a speciﬁc form for the force - velocity relation of a single ﬁlament . We take the form suggested by Brownian - ratchet theory 26 , 29 : f ( v , V obst ) = kTa V max v ln ( v / V obst ) ( v ≥ V obst ) ( 11 ) f ( v , V obst ) = 0 ( v < V obst ) , ( 12 ) which translates to an exponential dependence when the velocity is given in terms of force . Here the factor of V max v = 1 cos θ accounts for the orientation dependence of the step size per monomer . Figure 6 shows the calculated force - velocity relation for the network in three - dimensional side - and end - branching nucleation models . The parameters , k cap = 0 . 35 sec − 1 and k br = V max / 20 a , are the same as in Figures 3 and 4 . To evaluate k nuc we use the value k nuc / k cap = 100 suggested by experiments 18 on Listeria ; similar results are obtained for the value k nuc / k cap = 10 suggested by experiments 8 on beads , except that the horizontal scale is compressed . For comparison , we include the force - independent behavior found in the autocatalytic models . The network force - velocity relation in the nucleation models diﬀers from the exponential decay for a single ﬁlament in two ways : • There is a very rapid dropoﬀ in the low - force region , where V obst is near V max . For V obst ≃ V max , the number of ﬁlaments is reduced by leaving eﬀects , and only the fraction of ﬁlaments with near - optimal orientations contact the obstacle . Thus only a very small number of ﬁlaments contact the obstacle . This leads to a rapid decrease of the velocity with applied force , since the force per ﬁlament is large . • There is a decay at large forces , but it is slower than exponential . This occurs because with increasing force the load is redistributed between ﬁlaments of dif - ferent orientations . For small forces , ﬁlaments with θ ≃ 0 carry most of the load , because they are the only ones in contact with the obstacle . However , for larger forces , the most rapidly growing ﬁlaments are those with larger values of θ , as was pointed out in previous work developing the Brownian - ratchet model 17 for single ﬁlaments 26 . The velocities of these ﬁlaments decay less rapidly with force , because their orientation gives a smaller step size per monomer . At large forces , ﬁlaments with progressively smaller values of v dominate , reducing the decay rate of the velocity with applied force . The overall shape of the force - velocity relation is quite similar to that obtained by a “tethered - ratchet” model 25 which treats two types of ﬁlaments , “attached” and “work - ing” , where the working ﬁlaments supply the motile force by polymerization . In this model the deviations from exponential behavior result from changes in the relative numbers of attached and working ﬁlaments , an eﬀect not included in the present model . We do not show detailed results for the dependence of the velocity in nucleation models on the rate parameters k br and k cap . However , the main ﬁndings are that the dropoﬀ of velocity with increasing k cap is steeper than in autocatalytic models , and its dropoﬀ with decreasing k nuc is more rapid than its dropoﬀ with decreasing k br in autocatalytic models . IV . SENSITIVITY TO KEY APPROXIMATIONS The preceding sections have presented calculated growth velocities for several mod - els for branch generation during actin - based motility , which diﬀer in their underyling assumptions and give distinct results . We now discuss how these results depend on the approximations and assumptions made in the models . The most important of these are the following : • Neglect of ﬁlament - ﬁlament interactions . The stochastic simulations ( 11 ) showed that at typical polymerized - actin densities , steric volume exclusion has only a small impact . Electrostatic interactions are also expected to have minor ef - fects because the Debye screening length of 1 nm at typical physiological ionic strengths of 150 mM is much less than the typical ﬁlament spacing 1 of 30nm . Thus the neglect of ﬁlament - ﬁlament interactions in the above models seems to 18 be a reasonable approximation . Inclusion of these interactions would cause the velocity to be reduced at large branching rates , small capping rates , and high forces in autocatalytic models . The eﬀects in nucleation models would be weaker because the density of ﬁlaments approaches a constant value at high forces . • Neglect of ﬁlament bending and branch - point elasticity . These eﬀects could lead to individual ﬁlaments changing their orientation over time . However , as dis - cussed above , typical branch - point angle ﬂuctuations are about 10 ◦ . Provided that ﬁlaments remain short , the angle ﬂuctuations from ﬁlament bending are roughly the same as those from the branch points 11 . Thus the changes in ﬁla - ment orientation should not have a major impact on the results . Bending and elasticity could also have a substantial impact on the single ﬁlament force - velocity relation . However , previous work 26 has argued that the exponential form contin - ues to hold when ﬁlament elasticity is included . The actin network can also propagate eﬀective elastic interactions from one point to another . These could lead to long - ranged eﬀective interactions between ﬁla - ments . The major eﬀect of such interactions would be a stiﬀening which would increase with increasing ﬁlament density . Such a stiﬀening would reduce the ﬁlament - end ﬂuctuations in a density - dependent fashion . This would lead to a reduction in network growth velocity with increasing density . However , this eﬀect is expected to be small , because at observed ﬁlament lengths , the thermal ﬂuctu - ations of individual ﬁlaments are already equal to or greater than the monomer size ; the network elasticity would only serve to enhance these . • Neglect of severing and annealing eﬀects . These have been treated previously in a rate - equation model 33 . The rates obtained there are much lower than the capping and branching rates used here . However , if there is a very large acceleration of severing and / or nucleation in the cellular environment , these eﬀects could become important . If ﬁlament severing is independent of interactions between ﬁlaments , the severing terms are linear in the ﬁlament concentration . Thus they would add 19 a linear term to Eq . ( 1 ) . Such a term would transfer free ends in the network from the branching region to regions farther from the obstacle , since the leftover ﬁlament free barbed ends would generally be outside the branching region . The severing eﬀects would thus in some ways act like an increase in k cap or the leaving terms . The force - independence of the velocity in the autocatalytic models would continue to hold because it depends only on the linearity of the rate equation . However , in the nucleation models , inclusion of severing would have the eﬀect of accelerating the dropoﬀ of velocity with applied force . On the other hand , annealing corresponds to nonlinear terms 33 in the rate equa - tion . The most important type of event would be the incorporation of ﬁlament fragments into the network . The resulting eﬀects on the branching region would be small , because the fragments would be overwhelmingly capped . Even the un - capped ones would have a small eﬀect because the likelihood of their free ends being inside the branching region after network incorporation would be small . In addition , the time scales for annealing were found 33 to be on the order of several hours , and thus they are likely too slow to be important here . • Filament uncapping and branch detachment . Spontaneous uncapping rates are estimated 32 to be in the range of 10 − 4 s − 1 . Thus very little uncapping would occur during the time that a capped ﬁlament spends in the branching region . However , obstacle - induced ﬁlament uncapping could occur more rapidly , and this would change the growth velocities . Branch detachment rates are related to the decay of the ﬁlamentous - actin density away from the obstacle . Observations of Listeria tails 37 and tails on beads mimicking Listeria 9 indicate that the tail density decays over a distance of microns away from the obstacle , and similar results are obtained for the network density around lamellipodia 35 . Thus little branch detachment is expected over the thickness of the branching region . • Restrictions on the orientation of new ﬁlaments . Our earlier simulations 11 had suggested that observed ﬁlament structures near the growth front are better 20 described if new branches are allowed only in the forward direction . We have performed runs including such eﬀects , and ﬁnd curves quite similar to those shown above . Provided that k br is adjusted to keep the ﬁlament generation rate constant , the main eﬀect of the orientation restriction is a moderate increase in the growth velocity . • ATP hydrolysis . Hydrolysis of a ﬁlament monomer generally is believed to occur on a time scale of several seconds 6 , and by this time the branching region will have moved away from the monomer . • Depletion of actin and actin - binding proteins . These eﬀects would change the rate parameters in Eq . ( 1 ) , as well as V max and the force - velocity relation . A previous analysis of this issue 11 showed that for obstacles of size up to 1 µm , the depletion eﬀects are less than 20 % . For larger obstacles , the eﬀects can be more signiﬁcant . • Rate - limiting activation steps upstream of the branch - generation step . If the Arp2 / 3 activation process has a long activation time , then there will be a limit to the number of ﬁlaments that can be generated per unit time per unit area of the obstacle . The presence of such activation steps would result in a behavior similar to that of nucleation models , even if preexisting branches are required for new branch nucleation . • Eﬀects of ﬂuctuations due to small numbers of ﬁlaments . We expect these to be proportional to √ N tot . Taking 20 % as a cutoﬀ for ﬂuctuations , substantial corrections to the present results would begin to set in at N tot = 25 . • The relation ( 11 ) between force and ﬁlament velocity , used in the nucleation model . This relation assumes an exponential dependence of the velocity on applied force , and a particular exponential decay parameter . While such a relationship has been found in model calculations 26 , 29 and Brownian - dynamics simulations 10 , the true relation may be more complex or have a diﬀerent decay 21 parameter . In addition , Eq . ( 11 ) ignores potential attachment forces between the ﬁlaments and the obstacle . The presence of such attachments in the case of Listeria has been demonstrated by attempts to detach the bacterium from its tail using optical tweezers 14 , and by measurements of the bacterium position 18 which have found very small ﬂuctuations . In the case of beads , the presence of attach - ments is demonstrated by the continuous motion of a 50 nm bead propelled by a single ﬁlament 9 ; without attachments , the bead would rapidly diﬀuse away from the ﬁlament tip . The results for the velocity in the autocatalytic model would continue to hold regardless of the attachment force , since the force does not enter these calculations . The results for the nucleation model would be strongly inﬂu - enced by attachments , although the nature and magnitude of the eﬀects are not certain . As mentioned above , a recent model 25 has treated the eﬀects of ﬁlament attachments on the force - velocity relation for Listeria , and found that the attach - ments tend to accentuate the dropoﬀ at small forces , and reduce the dropoﬀ at high velocities . Thus they tend to reinforce the behavior found here , and could amplify the diﬀerences between the autocatalytic and nucleation models . V . DISCUSSION The above analysis has shown that both the dependence of the growth velocity on key protein concentrations and the force - velocity relation are sensitive to the de - tails of the generation process for new branches . This motivates measurements of these dependences . Measurement of the dependence of the growth velocity on the ac - tivated Arp2 / 3 and capping - protein ( CP ) concentrations would require the use of a pure - protein medium in order to control secondary eﬀects from the concentrations of other proteins . Such media have been used in studies of both Listeria 20 and plastic beads coated with VCA 5 . In pure - protein media , one could monitor the free - actin concentration in the growth medium as the concentrations of activated Arp2 / 3 and capping protein are changed , and buﬀer the actin appropriately to keep the free - actin 22 concentration constant . Measurements of the dependence of the growth velocity on the Arp2 / 3 concentration at ﬁxed CP concentration could shed light on the relative importance of side and end branching . As indicated in Figure 3 , end - branching models would lead to a sharp cutoﬀ in growth when the Arp2 / 3 concentration drops below a critical value , while side - branching models would display a much more gradual cutoﬀ . Measurements of the dependence of the growth velocity on CP concentration at ﬁxed Arp2 / 3 concentration could , in principle , help establish the thickness of the branching region . The results in Figure 5 show that for a branching region less than a single monomer in thickness , the plot is essentially a straight line as the CP concentration goes to zero . If the branching layer thickness is one or a few monomers , the velocity displays a sharp upturn at small CP concentrations . If the thickness is greater than a few monomers , the velocity curves smoothly upwards as the CP concentration drops . However , because the magnitude of the diﬀerences between the curves is fairly small , obtaining velocity measurements of suﬃcient resolution to assess the branching layer thickness might be impossible . Quantitative measurement of the force - velocity relation would appear to be the most straightforward way of using the present results to evaluate competing models of ﬁlament generation . Such experiments have been performed by using methylcellulose to vary the viscosity , for beads moving in pure - protein media 39 and bacteria moving in cell extracts 23 . Because of the simplicity of the growth medium and moving obstacle , the bead experiments would appear to be the closest to the present calculations . These experiments indicated that , over a broad range of forces up to approximately 50 pN , the velocities of 2 µ m beads varied by only 30 % . This behavior is consistent with the autocatalytic model discussed above . However , we cannot yet draw a deﬁnite conclusion because the nucleation rate in the nucleation model is not ﬁrmly established , and with a very high nucleation rate the velocity could be insensitive to force up to 50 pN . The measurements of bacterial motion found that the velocity at 50 pN opposing force is much less than its value at zero opposing force . These results would suggest that the generation rate of new ﬁlaments is limited , perhaps because of the presence 23 of diﬀerent rate - limiting steps than for the beads . We note , however , that in the bead experiments , a correction for the eﬀects of methylcellulose not related to viscosity was made , and no such correction was made in the bacterium experiments . This could also be an important factor in explaining the diﬀerences between the results . Other possible methods for measuring the force - velocity relation involve the use of laser - based optical - tweezer techniques . In such methods one tracks a ﬂuorescently labeled object ( bead or bacterium ) , and the force is determined by the position of the object relative to the center of the laser spot . One can then impose a feedback loop which keeps the force ﬁxed by motion of the substrate , and then measure the velocity by tracking the object’s coordinates . This method would avoid any uncertainties resulting from the addition of thickeners to the cell extract . However , because optical tweezers are only able to exert forces up to about 40 pN , it would be necessary to use conditions under which not too many ﬁlaments impinge on the object . Two other types of experiments in the literature have some relevance to our results . The ﬁrst involves attempts to stop the motion of Listeria with an optical trap 14 . These experiments found that the trap could temporarily stop the motion , but the bacterium eventually broke free due to an increase in the force supplied by the tail . However , because the force exerted by the trap is only about 10 pN , these experiments are unable to distinguish between the models considered here . The second treats the dynamics of the actin ﬁlament density behind “hopping” Listeria . These are mutants in which roughly 80 residues of the ActA surface protein have been deleted . They move rapidly for short intervals of time , stop for longer periods , then move again and repeat the cycle . Experiments with ﬂuorescent actin 13 , 19 have shown that the ﬂuorescence intensity increases during the stationary period , suggesting that the actin density is building up to counter the forces opposing the motion of the bacterium . However , the opposing force is not known in these experiments . 24 VI . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I am grateful to John Cooper , David Sept , and Jonathan Katz for informative conversations . This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Grant Number GM38542 . 25 1 Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . and Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) . The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 1721 – 1732 . 2 Amann , K . J . and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 a ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin ﬁlament branches from the sides of pre - existing ﬁlaments . Nat . Cell . Biol . 3 , 306 – 310 . 3 Amann , K . J . and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 b ) . Direct real - time observation of actin ﬁlament branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex using total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence mi - croscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sciences , 98 , 15009 – 15013 . 4 Anderson , E . , Bai , Z . , Bischof , C . H . , Blackford , S . , Demmel , J . W . , Dongarra , J . J . , Croz , J . D . , Greenbaum , A . , Hammarling , S . , McKenney , A . and Sorensen , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Lapack User’s Guide , Third Edition . SIAM Press , Philadelphia . 5 Bernheim - Grosswasser , A . , , Wiesner , S . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Carlier , M . - F . and Sykes , C . ( 2002 ) . The dynamics of actin - based motility depends on surface parameters . Nature , 417 , 308 – 311 . 6 Blanchoin , L . and Pollard , T . D . ( 2002 ) . Hydrolysis of ATP by polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not proﬁlin . Biochemistry , 41 , 597 – 602 . 7 Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Interactions of ADF / coﬁlin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and proﬁlin in remodeling of branched actin ﬁlament networks . Current Biology , 10 , 1273 – 1282 . 8 Cameron , L . A . , Footer , M . J . , van Oudenaarden , A . and Theriot , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 96 , 4908 – 4913 . 9 Cameron , L . A . , Svitkina , T . M . , Vignjevic , D . , Theriot , J . A . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) . Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Current Biology , 11 , 130 – 135 . 10 Carlsson , A . E . ( 2000 ) . The force - velocity relation for growing biopolymers . Physical Review E , 62 , 7082 – 7091 . 11 Carlsson , A . E . ( 2001 ) . Growth of branched actin networks against obstacles . Biophys . J . 26 81 , 1907 – 1923 . 12 Dramsi , S . and Cossart , P . ( 1998 ) . Intracellular pathogens and the actin cytoskeleton . Ann . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 137 – 166 . 13 Fung , D . C . and Theriot , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Movement of bacterial pathogens driven by actin polymerization . In Motion Analysis of Living Cells , pp . 157 – 176 . ( Wiley - Liss , New York ) . 14 Gerbal , F . , Laurent , V . , Ott , A . , Carlier , M . - F . , Chaikin , P . and Prost , J . ( 2000 ) . Mea - surement of the elasticity of the actin tail of Listeria monocytogenes . Eur . Biophys . J . 29 , 134 – 140 . 15 Goldberg , M . B . ( 2001 ) . Actin - based motility of intracellular microbial pathogens . Mi - crobiol . Molec . Biol . Rev . 65 , 595 – 626 . 16 Higgs , H . N . , Blanchoin , L . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Inﬂuence of the C terminus of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein WASp and the Arp2 / 3 complex on actin polymeriza - tion . Biochemistry , 38 , 15212 – 15222 . 17 Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . and Condeelis , J . ( 2002 ) . Coﬁlin produces newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Current Biol . 12 , 79 – 84 . 18 Kuo , S . C . and McGrath , J . L . ( 2000 ) . Steps and ﬂuctuations of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature , 407 , 1026 – 1029 . 19 Lasa , I . , Gouin , E . , Goethals , M . , Vancompernolle , K . , David , V . , Vandekerckhove , J . and Cossart , P . ( 1997 ) . Identiﬁcation of two regions in the N - terminal domain of ActA involved in the actin comet tail formation by Listeria monocytogenes . EMBO Journal , 7 , 1531 – 1540 . 20 Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . and Carlier , M . - F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature , 401 , 613 – 616 . 21 Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , D . M . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 96 , 3739 – 3744 . 22 Maly , I . V . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) . Self - organization of a propulsive actin network as 27 an evolutionary process . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . 98 , 11324 – 11329 . 23 McGrath , J . L . , Eungdamrong , N . J . , Fisher , C . I . , Peng , F . , Mahadevan , L . , Mitchison , T . J . and Kuo , S . C . ( 2003 ) . The force - velocity relationship for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . Curr . Biol . ( in press ) . 24 Mogilner , A . and Edelstein - Keshet L . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics in rapidly moving cells : a quantitative analysis . Biophys . J . 83 , 1237 - 1258 . 25 Mogilner , A . and Oster , G . ( 2003 ) . Force generation by actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments . Biophys . J . ( in press ) . 26 Mogilner , A . and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . 27 Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high - aﬃnity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 95 , 6181 – 6186 . 28 Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . and Carlier , M . - F . ( 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nature Cell Biology , 2 , 385 – 391 . 29 Peskin , C . S . , Odell , G . M . and Oster , G . F . ( 1993 ) . Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys . J . 65 , 316 – 342 . 30 Pollard , T . ( 1986 ) . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2747 – 2754 . 31 Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Ann . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Structure , 29 , 545 – 576 . 32 Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . and Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 . 33 Sept , D . , Xu , J . , Pollard , T . D . and McCammon , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Annealing accounts for the length of actin ﬁlaments formed by spontaneous polymerization . Biophys . J . 77 , 28 2911 – 2919 . 34 Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 . 35 Svitkina , T . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamel - lipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . 36 Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 1997 ) . Analy - sis of the actin - myosin ii system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 – 415 . 37 Tilney , L . G . and Tilney , M . S . ( 1994 ) . Methods to visualize actin polymerization associ - ated with bacterial invasion . Methods Enzymol . 236 , 476 – 481 . 38 Wear , M . A . , Schafer , D . A . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Actin dynamics : assembly and disassembly of actin networks . Curr . Biol , 10 , R891 – R895 . 39 Wiesner , S . , Helfer , E . , Didry , D . , Lafuma , F . , Carlier , M . - F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 2003 ) . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . ( in press ) . 29 Figure Captions Figure 1 : Schematic of autocatalytic vs . nucleation - based branch - generation processes . d : branching layer thickness . θ : angle between ﬁlament and growth direction . Figure 2 : Mechanism determining steady - state obstacle velocity V obst in autocatalytic models . V max : free - ﬁlament growth velocity . n touch : total number of ﬁlaments in branching region . Steady - state velocity is that for which dn touch / dt = 0 . Figure 3 : Dependence of steady - state obstacle velocity V obst on branching rate k br , with k cap ﬁxed at 0 . 35 sec − 1 . V max : maximum projected ﬁlament velocity . k cap : capping rate . Solid line : side - branching model in three dimensions . Dotted line : end - branching model in three dimensions . Dashed line : side - branching model in two dimensions . Long - dashed line : end - branching model in two dimensions . Figure 4 : Dependence of steady - state obstacle velocity V obst on capping rate k cap , with k br ﬁxed at V max / 20 a = 5 sec − 1 . V max : maximum projected ﬁlament velocity . k br : branching rate . Solid line : side - branching model in three dimensions . Dotted line : end - branching model in three dimensions . Dashed line : side - branching model in two dimensions . Long - dashed line : end - branching model in two dimensions . Figure 5 : Eﬀect of branching layer thickness d on k cap - dependence of obstacle velocity V obst , with k br ﬁxed at V max / 20 a = 5 sec − 1 . V max : maximum projected ﬁlament velocity . k br : branching rate . Solid line : d = 0 . 1a ( a = monomer size ) . Dotted line : d = a . Dashed line : d = 5a . Long - dashed line : d = 10a . Figure 6 : Force - velocity relation for nucleation and autocatalytic models , with side and end branching . Rate parameters are k cap = 0 . 35 sec − 1 and k br = V max / 20 a = 5 sec − 1 . V obst : obstacle velocity . V max : maximum free - ﬁlament velocity . F obst : force exerted by ﬁlaments on obstacle . a : step size along ﬁlament . 30 Autocatalytic Nucleation Figure 1 d θ V obst 0 dn t ou c h / d t Figure 2 Steady−statevelocity Branching dominates Leaving + cappingdominate 0 V max 0 2 4 6 8 10 k br / k cap 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 V ob s t / V m a x Figure 3 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 k cap / k br 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 V ob s t / V m a x Figure 4 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 k cap / k br 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 V ob s t / V m a x Figure 5 0 50 100 150 200 F obst a / kT 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 V ob s t / V m a x Figure 6 Autocatalytic Nucleation − End Nucleation − Side