Land , Water and Sun Tuning into Socio - Ecological Relations in Radio Design Roberto Cibin Institute of Sociology of the Czech Academy of Sciences & Masaryk University , Czech Republic roberto . cibin @ soc . cas . cz Sarah Robinson Institute of Technology Carlow , Ireland robinsons @ itcarlow . ie Nicola J . Bidwell University College Cork , Ireland & International University of Management , Namibia nic . bidwell @ gmail . com Conor Linehan University College Cork , Ireland conor . linehan @ ucc . ie Laura Maye University College Cork , Ireland laura . maye @ ucc . ie Nadia Pantidi Victoria University of Wellington , New Zealand nadia . pantidi @ vuw . ac . nz Maurizio Teli Aalborg University , Denmark maurizio @ plan . aau . dk ABSTRACT Recent HCI scholarship has critiqued anthropocentrism in design as contributing to the ecological crisis . The current paper contributes theoretically and empirically to this area , adopting the lens of Socio - Ecological Relations , inspired by Environmental History and STS . We argue that a socio - ecological lens can offer practical tools to HCI and Interaction Design to overcome the separation between humanity and nature - as - a - resource . For this reason , our unit of analysis is humanity - in - nature and nature - in - humanity , and we show how this double internality becomes visible using an historical and geographical approach in the design process . Methodologically , using Situational Analysis , we analyse an Action Research project that introduced a digital platform for community radio in rural contexts . We find that Socio - Ecological Relations , performed in specific places , shape the design process and are themselves trans - formed by becoming part of it . We provide a set of sensitivities for operationalizing this approach for design researchers . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Empirical studies in HCI . KEYWORDS Design , Nature , Geography , History , Sustainability , Anthropocene ACM Reference Format : Roberto Cibin , Sarah Robinson , Nicola J . Bidwell , Conor Linehan , Laura Maye , Nadia Pantidi , and Maurizio Teli . 2021 . Land , Water and Sun : Tuning Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8476 - 6 / 21 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462104 into Socio - Ecological Relations in Radio Design . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 16pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462104 1 INTRODUCTION This paper contributes to debate on the interrelationship between nature and design , due to concerns we are not responding rapidly enough to ecological , climate , and environmental crises . Taking inspiration from recent critiques of anthropocentrism in design ( e . g . [ 1 , 2 , 34 , 43 , 46 , 51 , 67 , 69 , 73 ] ) , and long - standing critiques based on Indigenous ways of being ( e . g . [ 12 , 58 , 59 , 68 ] ) , we take as our starting point that the current crises are mainly caused by the capitalist centering of humans , which positions nature as commod - ity . We consider the importance of the interdependence between humans and nature specifically for HCI researchers and design - ers , through an analysis of historical and geographical situated human - nature relations . Building on situated knowledge from an Action Research , we stress that a greater awareness by researchers and designers of this type of interdependence can help in making decisions aimed at counteracting the crises . We start by introducing approaches that question the anthro - pocentric foundations of design ( e . g . [ 39 , 97 , 106 ] ) . Many of these ap - proaches are built in dialogue with Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) ( e . g . [ 22 , 65 , 67 ] ) , Anthropology ( e . g . [ 21 , 39 ] ) and Philosophy of Technology ( e . g . [ 95 ] ) , and consider the ontological separation of humans and nature to be problematic . We show how HCI re - search has explored strategies to bring ecology into design [ 64 ] , “decentering the users in the design process” [ 69 – 71 ] , and granting nature an agentic presence . We argue that nature is fundamental to all design processes , and that it is more apt to consider design as part of nature , and nature as part of design . This idea is inspired by Moore [ 79 ] who critiques the historical dominance of anthro - pocentric dualism as epistemologically supporting the everyday appropriation of nature by technology in capitalism . This human - nature dualism , while problematic and central to the current crises , is part of everyday discourse . To counter this discourse , we argue 1954 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . that examining relations of double internality between humans and nature , beginning with understanding the history and geography of the places in which design takes place , may help create ontologies to build an ecologically focused “new wave” of research in HCI and design [ 44 ] . We suggest that the lens of Socio - Ecological Relations , as developed in Environmental History [ 79 ] , can illuminate the ecological implications of human - nature dualism and open design research to alternative ways to organise life . We illustrate this through reporting empirical work from a project that set up community radio stations in isolated , rural areas of Europe [ 52 ] . This project sought to enhance media pluralism , collective action , and free flow of information , and for radio sta - tions to act as platforms for discussion of different perspectives , and debate about potential solutions to local problems . At the project’s outset , we proposed that collaborative media practices could assist communities in considering different aspects of sustaining commu - nities , including environmental sustainability . Indeed , participants in the radio stations and other unfolding activities voiced several priorities in relation to sustainable communities including preserv - ing heritage , reversing severe rural population decline , developing local industry and local identities and cohesion , and addressing climate change . Examination of community members’ historical relationship with the environment revealed copious connections between humanity and nature , beyond the simple framing of nature as a resource and commodity . This motivated us to apply histori - cal and geographical perspectives in our analysis , which yielded insights about the continuous , and mutually defining relationship between humanity , nature and technology design processes . We propose that accounting for socio - ecological relations is a way for HCI researchers and practitioners , who are not environmental spe - cialists , and who work on projects that do not specifically focus on environmental crises , to adopt a strong position . In addition , this approach can support projects that seek to design technolo - gies with / for communities to overcome dominant nature - society dualisms , produced and reproduced by the capitalist organisation of life . In this paper , we describe interactions between humans , nature and technologies in case studies of setting up community radios in two distinct geographical locations . Data about interactions arose as part of Action Research on setting up the stations , and deploying a novel technology to support radio production and broadcast . Data included interviews with community members , project partners and volunteers ; field notes collected through participant observa - tion ; and minutes from project meetings . The data analysis in this paper did not take place during the action research itself , but af - terwards . Using Clarke’s Situational Analysis [ 27 – 29 ] , we consider how socio - ecological relations are performed in specific places [ 36 , 89 ] . Our analysis shows that socio - ecological relations shape , are integrated into , and transformed by , the design process . Thus , our first contribution to Design and HCI is in describing the value of a socio - ecological relations approach to understanding , and taking account of , nature in our work as designers . Our second contribution is demonstrating how a socio - ecological approach exposes relationality in historically and geographically situated forms . Reflections on the inseparability of humanity and nature have been present for a very long time in numerous aca - demic debates ( including philosophy , biology , ecology , sociology etc . ) and non - western cultures particularly Indigenous societies . Further , debate in HCI and Design , as shown in the next section , has recently started to engage with this inseparability . We believe that mechanisms are needed to ensure this inseparability is clear and ubiquitous in all design projects . Thus , finally , debate in HCI and Design rarely confronts capitalist processes as key drivers in the ecological crisis ; and , any commitment to alternatives are relegated to individual practitioners’ discretion and common sense . Thus , our third contribution is to offer reflections that can help designers when ideating their projects , to avoid considering nature as a re - source to be simply appropriated , a practice that defines capitalism as a way of organizing life . 2 RELATED WORKS In this section , we review literature on the global climate and eco - logical crisis and the need to overcome anthropocentric approaches common to Western research and design . Overcoming anthropocen - trism , for example proposing more - than - human approaches , is of - ten considered a necessity when discussing the contribution that design can provide to sustainability . Moreover , we present HCI and Design literature on sustainability and ecology , underlining how HCI studies in the Global South and in some Indigenous con - texts have long dealt with these issues by stressing the value of observing connections between the social , historical and ecological . After summarizing these debates in HCI , we introduce the lens of socio - ecological relations as a way for researchers and practi - tioners to apply a historical and geographical approach to their observations about interactions between humanity and nature in every design process , taking into account the connection between anthropocentrism and capitalism . 2 . 1 Design , humans , and nature through global crisis The increasingly evident presence of a global climate and ecolog - ical crisis have led to the emergence of debates on the need for a revolution in the ontological foundations of different areas of Design . Various scholars argue that anthropocentrism has failed ( e . g . [ 40 , 97 , 98 ] ) , an argument situated in a long tradition of re - flections in Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) , and that there is a need to overcome the a priori distinction between the natural and the social ( e . g . [ 22 ] ) . Recently , the STS scholar Bruno Latour stressed the necessity to bring nature into political discourse to find a solution to the current crisis , suggesting giving nature the status of a political actor [ 66 , 67 , 97 ] . Other scholars have suggested different relational framings that no longer place humans in the centre and nature in the background , such as observing humans as part of : the Cosmos [ 95 , 106 ] , a multi - naturalism [ 100 , 101 , 105 ] , a pluriverse [ 1 , 39 ] , a World of many Worlds [ 21 ] , socionatures [ 83 ] , or as objects [ 20 , 53 ] . The decentering of humans poses particular problems for Design , hitherto a fundamentally anthropocentric endeavour . For example , scholars from Architectural Design ( e . g . [ 106 ] ) have considered how their discipline can contribute to " re - shaping the co - existence of different entities and disparate technical practices , and to re - architecturing the cosmos " ( [ 105 ] p . 7 ) . Equally , scholars of Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability have recently reflected 1955 Land , Water and Sun DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA on new strategies to overcome the anthropocentric approach . For instance , Tassinari and colleagues propose an " ontological turn " [ 98 ] to overcome the human / non - human dualism through a greater awareness of the interdependence between the different kinds of living beings . In addition , various scholars have started to work on the definition of a Transition Design approach ( e . g . [ 17 , 61 , 62 ] ) to address wicked problems and collaborate on the construction of sustainable futures . In the next section , we will review how HCI research has considered the relation between human and non - human and how the idea of a new ontological turn has developed . 2 . 2 Nature in HCI and the design of technologies There is renewed interest in more - than - human approaches to de - sign that could be considered post - anthropocentric , take for exam - ple , contributions to DIS 2020 ( e . g . [ 5 , 13 , 42 , 45 , 72 , 104 ] ) and PDC 2020 ( e . g . [ 1 , 40 , 98 ] ) . This literature follows the now classic work by Goodman [ 48 ] and DiSalvo and colleagues [ 35 ] , which reviewed HCI’s environmental discourses and approaches to sustainability respectively . Their work helped to define the areas of Sustainable Design ( SID ) and Sustainable HCI ( SHCI ) , that aim to design viable sustainable futures through “rethink [ ing ] the role and outcomes of design . ” ( [ 35 ] p . 1977 ) . More recently , SID and SHCI have focused on the environmental impact of materials and technology [ 14 – 16 ] ; reflected on how sustainable behaviours and practices can be sup - ported through design [ 54 , 76 ] , and on finding commonalities in the different HCI conceptions of sustainability [ 64 ] . In addition , Knowles and colleagues [ 64 ] noted a recent shift in SHCI research that emphasises considering people as “a latent force for good in the fight for sustainability” instead of “contributors to unsustainability” ( [ 64 ] p . 471 ) ( see also the recent contribution of Nardi [ 81 ] ) . These authors also suggested SHCI should not focus on the solution to defined problems but on supporting change in the main framework related to culture and power . In the current paper we stress the importance of considering hu - man and nature as inseparable . Following Moore [ 79 ] , we consider design ( and all human activity ) as part of nature , while nature is also part of human activity , in a mutual relationship where tem - porary distinctions are made , ( if they are ) , only for analytical and practical purposes . We have co - evolved with nature , with the nat - ural world shaping humanity , and humanity shaping the natural world . This belief in the inseparability of humanity and nature is evident in research with and by Indigenous communities ( e . g . [ 12 , 68 ] ) and increasingly in the wider HCI community ( e . g . [ 8 – 11 , 19 ] ) . For instance , Brewer and Dourish [ 19 ] describe ways that history shapes people’s experience of places . They bring as an ex - ample Aboriginal people in Australia who encounter the landscape in terms of its recent human and mythic history . They argue that “places carry the resonance of things that have happened there , of people who have been there and actions that they took” ( [ 19 ] p . 965 ) and this historical aspect links contemporary and histori - cal events and people in the experience of the landscape . Bidwell and co - authors [ 10 ] explain the Aboriginal concept of “country” as “a view of life invested with copious ecological , genealogical and symbolic interconnections between people and places” ( [ 10 ] p . 89 ) . Such interconnections include relationships between flora , fauna , land , water , and fire as well as interactions between people’s movements and cultural and personal memories embedded across many generations [ 10 ] . This research suggests that the interactions between temporality , non - technological encounters and the envi - ronment need to be considered when engaging in design work , and technologies themselves do not just operate in the environment but act as " tools that serve to structure the spaces through which they [ technologies ] move” ( [ 19 ] p . 963 ) . Similarly , Van der Velden and colleagues [ 99 ] draw upon Ingold’s ecological perspective [ 56 , 57 ] in describing how materials have histories . Specifically , the properties of materials emerge from rela - tionships between human and non - human actors . They understand an urban train station as an “environment in flux , as a ‘living’ sys - tem , that requires design approaches that enable us to think about our design and materials , as ongoing , unfolding , and continuing developing” ( [ 99 ] p . 9 ) . Bidwell et al . [ 9 ] draw on Ingold’s perspec - tive [ 55 ] on people being part of the worlds’ ongoing becoming in discussing social and environmental relations in a rural village in South Africa . They focus on the importance of phenomenological insights in how people are part of the social and ecological world’s ongoing emergence , and claim that this sensitizes designers to rela - tionalities in settings that “can better tune the space for sustainable design” ( [ 9 ] p . 35 ) . Recently , HCI scholars have brought nature to the foreground as an attempt to find solutions to the ecological crisis . For instance , Ann Light [ 69 , 70 ] stresses the need for more attention to the non - human world , through the development of an ethic of kinship [ 51 ] between humankind and other species , moving from HCI to Eco - logical Technological ( ETI ) . Akama , Light & Kamihiro [ 1 ] counter notions of human exceptionalism and reiterate the importance of Haraway’s “we inter - are with everything on the planet , ” ( Haraway in [ 1 ] p . 3 ) to reject singular , Western - centric views and promote a deep relationality and a plural approach to design , that draws on Eastern and Indigenous cultures and ontologies . Liu et al . [ 71 ] stress the need of a multispecies perspective and a post - anthropocentric worldview . Using the concept of “collaborative survival” , they work to design provocation tools that make humans aware of the envi - ronment . Smith and colleagues focus on urban contexts “to build interactive systems that are more sensitive to the environmental and cultural capacities of different cities around the world” ( [ 93 ] p . 1714 ) . They use concepts as “naturecultures” , “hybrids” , and “decen - tering the human” to overcome the problematic narrative related to the Anthropocene . In particular , through Haraway’s concept of naturecultures , they stress how “the meaning of nature —what we identify as natural — is not just determined by culture but is also the result of specific historical , material and political conditions of possibility” ( Latimer and Miele in [ 6 , 93 ] ) . Through an alterna - tive agenda for the Design community , Clarke and colleagues [ 30 ] propose to move toward a more - than - human participatory per - spective . The steps the authors suggest are : 1 ) decentering human agencies [ 4 ] ; 2 ) finding ways to consider the more - than - human temporalities in our projects ; 3 ) considering the lessons about the more - than - human present in non - western cultures , as suggested by the discussion on “decolonizing design” [ 107 ] ; 4 ) introduce a more holistic approach to pedagogical practice for the more - than - human . All these contributions provide important and relevant directions for Design research , but they tend to overlook what Nardi and 1956 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . Ekbia defined as the “elephant in the room” of HCI [ 37 , 38 , 82 ] , that is political economy , and the relation between capitalism and the ecological crisis , well captured by the expression Capitalocene to describe the current geological era ( an expression elaborated by Moore himself [ 80 ] , and adopted , for example , by Haraway too [ 50 ] ) . In our work , we set out to answer the call to “find ways” to de - centre humans in design work adopting an approach capable of considering the role of capitalism in the ecological crisis . In the next section , we will describe how the lens of socio - ecological relations considers the historical and geographical situated co - construction of humanity - in - nature and nature - in - humanity in the design of interactive technologies . Through applying this type of socio - ecological lens how capitalism is constructed and constructs humans and nature is rendered visible and space can be made for an understanding of the ecological implications of capitalism for design and HCI research . 2 . 3 Socio - Ecological Relations Discussing the history of capitalism and the transformations of na - ture , Moore [ 79 ] claimed that , to understand the current ecological crisis , we must consider history as the result of a “double internality : humanity - in - nature and nature - in - humanity” [ 79 ] . This concept aims to stress how humanity is part of nature and nature is part of human organizing . A significant example of this double internality are viruses such as SARS - COV - 2 : human organization of economic activities , the food supply chain in particular , is increasing the pos - sibilities for the spillover of viruses from animals to human beings [ 84 , 102 ] . Viruses then take advantage of human organization itself to travel and spread , e . g . through airplanes or crowded places . Then , the “responses” to the virus circulation imply changes in human organizing such as restrictions on movement , the virus mutates , and so on and so forth . Humanity and SARS - COV - 2 have been changing due to their relation , changing the relation itself in the meantime , and being aware of this mutuality is the methodological contribution of Moore’s perspective . In particular , the double internality allows us to focus on the var - ious configurations of forms of life humanity - in - nature and nature - in - humanity produce , what we can refer to as socio - ecological relations . Moore uses this expression as well as the Greek word oikeos to point to the indissolubility of the relation between hu - manity and nature . More specifically , he calls oikeos the “creative , historical , and dialectical relation between , and also always within , human and extra - human natures” ( [ 79 ] p . 46 ) . In this way , the focus is on “the creative and generative relations of species and envi - ronment as the ontological pivot - and methodological premise - of historical change” ( [ 79 ] p . 46 ) . In this narrative , socio - ecological relations are not only the unit of analysis but the locus of agency , as the latter is “ a relational property of specific bundles of human and extra - human natures” ( [ 79 ] p . 47 ) . Therefore , it is in the relations between and within human and extra - human natures that change take place . Design becomes part of this double internality so that the change it instigates takes place through design - in - nature and nature - in design . Analytically , focusing on socio - ecological relations means to consider that human activities of social organization create config - urations of nature that are situated in historical and geographical contexts while , at the same time , the process of nature reproduc - tion operates through human organizations [ 79 ] . Moore’s argument disputes the “human exceptionalism paradigm” [ 1 , 23 , 77 ] , that as - sumes an ontological difference between humans and other parts of nature . This paradigm is what STS scholar Bruno Latour labelled the “ideology of nature” [ 67 ] , that is the assumption that nature is external to human beings . What both Latour and Moore do , among others , is to remind us that humans are part of the natural world and , therefore , humans , animals , plants , minerals , etc . are all sharing and shaping the same world . Nevertheless , the history of modernity and capitalism show how technologies have often been designed and employed to nurture a way of organizing the world based on increased productivity of labour and , more importantly for our perspective , the appropriation of nature considered a “resource” , be it food , minerals , or human life itself ( as in the case of slavery ) . Challenging the epistemology of appropriation , we argue for a new version of HCI capable of avoiding human exceptionalism , of questioning the appropriation of nature , of researching situated socio - ecological relations and , thus , contributing to the task of addressing the ecological crisis in its connection to capitalist epistemology and way of organizing life . This paper seeks to contribute in this space , and to add to the previously cited literature already exploring these relations . Simultaneously , this position also allows us to see how a rela - tional approach can examine the way design processes shape the ontologies of nature , beyond the limitation of focusing on material effects . Going back to Moore’s argument [ 79 ] , human exception - alism , symbolized by the philosophy of René Descartes , has been instrumental in creating the technologies that have nourished the “ideology of nature” . For example , maps have transformed the ge - ographical world into a manipulable reality , making it easier for colonialism to take place and allowing for the construction of in - frastructures - as roads , harbours , or sailing routes - promoting an increased exploitation of minerals , humans , and animals . To sum up , our argument is that , in the current crisis , the ontological premises upon which modern technologies were developed need to be updated in order to focus not only on the material effects of tech - nologies but on building technologies differently , being aware of the processes of appropriation that capitalism , the current organization of life , includes . To address this , we propose to adopt the lens of socio - ecological relations as a way of recognizing and analysing the historically and geographically situated and inextricable relations between hu - manity and non - human nature . Following Moore , we contend that socio - ecological relations as the main units of analysis make us jointly consider geography - the spatial interactions between nat - ural elements and human beings - and history - the stability or interruptions of these interactions through time , and how those relations are fundamentally shaped by the continuous effort of cap - italism to appropriate nature in a cheap way . As our knowledge is situated in the design world , in this paper we interrogate how socio - ecological relations performed in specific places ( in our case , two rural isolated areas where a digital platform to support com - munity radio was introduced ) shapes the design process and are 1957 Land , Water and Sun DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA transformed by becoming part of the design process itself . Equally , we explore how the process of designing technology is at the same time product and producer of socio - ecological relations based on the appropriation of cheap nature or on alternatives to it , the com - mons in particular . Ultimately , we discuss why adopting the lens of socio ecological relations can be useful for HCI and provide a set of sensitivities for operationalizing this approach . 3 METHODOLOGY 3 . 1 Project Description This research is part of Grassroots Radio [ 7 , 18 , 24 – 26 , 78 , 86 – 88 , 90 – 92 , 96 ] , a European project ( 2018 - 2020 ) aimed to develop and test RootIO [ 31 ] , a technology that supports the creation and manage - ment of low - cost and easy - to - use community radio stations . The project’s focus was on fostering media pluralism , communication , and discussion in rural communities . We assumed that new forms of social organisation , promoted by more democratic media , would support communities’ development and their ability to deal with the various challenges related to their sustainability . Ecology was mentioned in the Grant Agreement as the possibility for the project to " establish collaborative media practices in areas where environ - mental sustainability is a priority " [ 41 ] . As the project proceeded , it became more and more clear to us that environmental issues were not at the centre of interest in community discussions , where nature was often framed as a resource to be used to achieve objec - tives linked to a logic of economic growth ( tourism , new jobs etc . ) . At the same time , through deeper examination of the testimonies of community members on their historical relationship with the environment , we realised the presence of a deep connection be - tween the people of that place and the nature surrounding them which went beyond the idea of appropriation . Therefore , during a period of reflection in our Action Research process , we decided to apply historical and geographical perspectives to consider socio - ecological relations , an approach that facilitated the identification of these connections . Action research involves periods of action and reflection , with the analysis reported in this paper forming part of a reflective process . The technology in our project , RootIO , is based on the use of a ra - dio antenna , an FM transmitter and a smartphone . A web platform allows the management of all the tasks related to radio broadcast - ing . The software can manage and broadcast uploaded audio files , podcasts , web - streaming , and live programs made through the use of a regular telephone as a microphone . As a result , a physical studio is not necessary for radio programming . In addition , the development and integration of Text - To - Speech ( TTS ) technology , that enables the transformation of written text into synthetic voice , is considered in this project as an accessibility and labour support feature [ 18 , 90 – 92 ] . The project’s consortium has tested RootIO through the setup of community radio stations in Ireland and Romania , in rural and isolated areas that are usually left out from the interest of the mainstream media . The overall project aim was to support these communities , fostering media pluralism , collective action and the free flow of information , and to learn from their experiences in using the technology platform . The project partners have worked with two geographical communities in each country and their main focus has been on design activities to support the community en - gagement with and through the technology , rather than in the design of the technology itself . Still , the consortium has supported , where needed , the participating communities’ members in activities related to the radio setup such as installing the technical infras - tructure ( antenna , software ) and recruiting new local volunteers . As said , the project sought for radio stations to contribute to the sustainability of rural communities by acting as a platform for dis - cussion of different aspects of sustaining communities , including perspectives and approaches to environmental sustainability . RootIO was previously implemented in rural villages in Uganda . Grassroots Radio’s design process aimed to test the same platform in small European communities , and engage in a process where communities could modify the platform to meet their needs . A con - sortium of seven academic , technology , third sector , and community development partners worked towards this goal . Community part - ners worked with community members to establish community radio stations . They also worked with us as academic partners to collect information useful for design and evaluation [ 25 ] . In Roma - nia , in particular , this involved collaboration with the technology developers to design new features for the platform . In Ireland , ten - sions around the platform’s functionality led to a different design approach , which was community - led and led to the adoption of a different technology solution . The project involved a number of simultaneous and intersecting layers of design . On Island , the design process and the introduction of RootIO into the community led the community to reject its use , and to assert their own agency in finding locally grounded solutions for community radio [ 86 , 87 ] . In Romania , a partnership between the developers and the community partners led to a participatory design process with community partners using RootIO and feeding back design requests to the developers . Design mostly involved pe - riods of action ( using the platform ) and reflection ( trouble - shooting issues that arose , developers adding in different functionalities to address community needs ) . In Romania , design involved expert community members with skills in software development etc . How - ever , this project was socio - technical in nature , and design involved the social as well as the technical . Here , in both Romania and Ire - land , design involved workshops with community members directly , eliciting community needs through ethnography , interviews and workshops and feeding this back into the design of the community radio station’s governance , ethos and content . As academics , some of us were deeply involved in this process as facilitators but it was always community - led . We have explored the types of needs that the community members articulated elsewhere [ 78 ] . We also use the term “community” with the knowledge that it hides intersec - tionalities that exist within the community . We have discussed this in more detail elsewhere ( e . g . , [ 25 ] ) . 3 . 2 The communities involved and the role of the authors and project partners Empirically , this paper reports on the setup and development of two radio stations , one located in a Romanian small village ( hereafter Village ) on a river mouth by the sea , and one located in a small offshore Irish island ( hereafter Island ) . 1958 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . Village has a population of about 800 people . It is located on the delta of a river , and is part of one of the most extensive wetlands in the world . This area is well - known for the presence of numerous ecosystems and its high biodiversity . Access to the village is mainly by boat . For the transport of food , a land path is used , which is interrupted at a certain point by water . An anthropologist who spent various months living with this community , states that in Village the priorities “are distinctive : find food , avoid freezing , prevent drowning and ensure you don’t get caught in a storm when you’re fishing” [ 47 ] . Island has a population of about 200 people and is located in the South West of Ireland , at the entrance of a spectacular bay . It is accessed by the mainland by two car ferries , one serving each end of the island , which is 10 km long and 3 km wide . A mountain range runs through the island ensuring breath - taking natural sceneries . The population has been in decline since the Irish Famine in the 1840s . It has a local primary school , a health centre and Church . The primary occupations are farming , fishing , tourism and marine support services . At the last census there were 74 permanent year round dwellings , with 158 holiday homes - a high proportion of islanders live alone . These two locations are both isolated and separated from the rest of the mainland by natural elements . In both areas , there are few inhabitants , with a continuous decrease in population . Further , these two places share conditions that make them particularly in - teresting : they are small contexts where it is easier to get trained in the individuation of socio - ecological relations , since the represen - tations and the collective identity of the communities are strongly connected to the geographical and historical peculiarities of the places where they live , and to the pervasive presence of natural elements . For this reason , in these contexts it is easier to abandon habits of keeping the social relations separated from the ecological ones [ 79 ] . In addition , the specific loci of this research contribute to the debate about the design of technology in rural and isolated places ( e . g . [ 78 ] ) . The authors belong to the project consortium and are a group of researchers with expertise in HCI , Participatory Design , Applied Psychology , and Science and Technology Studies . As authors , we were involved in the research in varying ways . Some of us participated directly through ethnography , which in - volved interviews , and participant observation in setting up the radio stations . Others were involved through bi - weekly reflection meetings between community partners and academics . Community partners directly involved in setting up the radio stations were part of these bi - weekly reflection and coordination meetings , but community members outside of these organizations did not directly participate . Interestingly , c ommunity partners involved with Island and Vil - lage have differing characteristics and differing relationships with the local community . In Island , our partner was a community de - velopment organization whose members are themselves members of the community , and as such are ‘insiders’ . On the other hand , in Village , two nonprofit media and human rights NGOs based in the capital , and whose members had no previous connection with the community members , were our partners . By community members , we refer mainly to men and women who live in the places where the radio stations are located , and who have been involved in the project by the community partners through public meetings , interviews , word of mouth . A few of these people are migrants who collaborate remotely from different cities or countries . The community members’ level of involvement in the station’s activities varies from supporting the technical activities of setting up and maintaining the station to creating content , music suggestions , or the involvement of new volunteers . More detailed descriptions of the dynamics of interactions between project part - ners and community members can be found in other academic papers published within the project [ 7 , 25 , 86 ] . 3 . 3 Positionality and Reflexivity We intend this paper to contribute to plural and more - than - human perspectives in design , and to show how historic socio - ecological re - lations shape technology design and implementation . We consider the EU project as part of this historically unfolding socio - ecological relations as a more - than - human entity in the unfolding design pro - cess . At the project’s inception , participatory innovation of the RootIO platform was the main focus , assuming that through the project the platform would be modified to suit a variety of rural community needs , with an ultimate goal of developing a system that could be easily adapted to many different rural situations . Participa - tory innovation considered the rural places of this project and their inhabitants as willing participants in the design and action research process . In Ireland this positioning was rejected , whilst in Romania , volunteers dedicated many hours in making RootIO work , feeding back into the design process . Through these differing experiences , the EU project became part of the evolving human - nature relations , and contemporary capitalist relations in these rural contexts . EU research projects provided a temporary means of income for staff from community partners and indeed , for some academic authors on precarious contracts . Both staff and researchers were precari - ous , which influenced the research process in varying ways - some left for more fixed term jobs during the project and others joined mid - way through the project . Amidst this background of precarity , we were also aware that “local community - making infrastructure projects have a temporality that cannot be hurried for them to bear fruit , and to go on bearing fruit into the future” ( [ 103 ] p . 174 ) . Yet these were in tension with the time bound restrictions of the project with finite resources . The Romanian community partners spent much of their time on caretime , and in Ireland , academic authors spent much time on caretime with the Island community . Through reflecting on this , we realised that the project needed to be reattuned , for us to understand the importance of the history and geography of places in the technology process . Sustainability of the community radio stations relied on those that remained and were constant in the rural places , rather than those of us who were passing visitors , in a history of passing visitors e . g . in Ireland , Is - land had been previously colonised and the rural dwellers had bad experiences of other researchers , which in turn influenced their willingness to engage . In these rural contexts , design must be about a commitment to place , and yet we were mindful of the economic realities that prevented us from doing so . Community members that we interacted with were interested in the values of reciprocity and trust , both of which take time to foster . 1959 Land , Water and Sun DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA 3 . 4 Data Collection and Analysis The research follows an Action Research approach [ 49 ] through the analysis of two case studies . We used Action Research because the project was a collaboration between academic researchers , community - partners and community - members to co - create data and knowledge that could support innovation and social change in their locations . The analysis as part of this paper took place after the Action Research of the project , and is an academic reflection on the design process that enabled us to reflect on the role that socio - ecological relations played in the process and to bring this to the fore . It is our reflection on the process , and analysis of data that was collected with community members through ethnography and interviews through the process . The empirical data collected for Village are based on four group interviews that four of the authors conducted with three project community partners : one member of a human rights organisation focused on free communication for public interest , and two mem - bers of a non - profit organisation with experience in journalism and media . Regarding Island , empirical data was collected through : i ) four interviews ( two interviews with community residents and two with community radio volunteers ) ; and ii ) field notes from ethno - graphic participant observation that has been ongoing for over a year . In addition , minutes from project meetings have been con - sidered for both contexts , together with academic and journalistic documentation to obtain more accurate geographical and historical information . The project lasted 3 years and ended in December 2020 . Both communities took at least 1 . 5 years to obtain the licenses and set up the stations . For a year after launching , the stations focused on broadcasting and also implementing the technology , involving volunteers and reflecting on governance . Dealing with these issues , the interviews were conducted at the end of the first year and in the middle of the second . In addition , other sources of data ( field notes , minutes , etc . ) were collected across the whole project . To analyse the data , we adopted Clarke’s Situational Analysis [ 27 – 29 ] , a derivative of Grounded Theory . Situational Analysis uses conceptual maps as primary tools . Maps allow attention to the reflexivity of the researcher , the varied perspectives in the data , absent positions , the consideration of non - human elements and of power . The focus on these dimensions supports us in understanding how the socio - ecological relations performed in specific places shape the design process and are transformed by becoming part of the design process itself . The processes of creation of two radio stations through the use of novel technology in the two geographical communities are the two situations considered . Initially , one author worked on the data related to Village and another one on those related to Island . The process is stylized in Figure 1 . The authors proceeded to a sentence - by - sentence open coding of the interviews ( 1 ) and , in the meantime , they started to populate their respective “messy map” ( 2 ) . This is a situational map where “all the major human , non - human , discursive , historical , symbolic , cultural , political , and other elements in the research situation of concern” ( [ 29 ] p . 13 ) are collected . The analysis of the open codes , and their clustering , helped to populate these maps with more content . We then transformed the two messy maps into ordered maps ( 3 ) . Here , we organised all the data to understand the involvement in the situation of human and non - human actors , the socio - cultural / symbolic and political - economic elements , and the time and space elements [ 27 – 29 ] . Then the authors started an analysis of the relations between the different elements present in the ordered maps ( 4 ) to define the interactions taking place in the two situations . At the end of this process , the authors discussed the situations in the two contexts towards a synthesis of the main points in common and the main differences ( 5 ) . This synthesis has then been discussed with all the other authors to identify cases that can offer a good description of how humans and natural elements co - define themselves , and then underlying how RootIO and the design process enter these relationships ( 6 ) . 4 FINDINGS In the following sections , we present the findings of our analysis in regard to the socio - ecological configurations that shape the design process . Since we propose to adopt the lens of socio - ecological relations , the findings are organized in a series of stories where historically and geographically situated relationsbetweenhumanity and non - human nature take place in the contexts considered . We show , then , how the design process and the technology considered interact with each one of these relations ( Table 1 ) . 4 . 1 The Land Both in Island and Village we observed how the inhabitants con - tinuously reconfigure the lands where they live and at the same time how the shape , characteristics and features of these places , together with the presence of other living beings , configure human life . The design process and the technology must interact with this stratification of historical relations . 4 . 1 . 1 The right spot for the antenna in Village : technicalities , rules and animals . Due to the particular environment described above , people in Village are mainly engaged in fishing activities , the transportation of tourists during the summer , and raising animals . They usually leave cattle to graze freely in the territory , in semi - wilderness . The introduction and development of Radio Platform needed to enter the relation between this particular land and its inhabitants . The hardware often interacts with human and non - human entities thus complicating the radio setup . For example , project partners discussed how they had to find a place for the radio antenna that had internet connection , electricity , permission from the munic - ipality and where the signal could cover the entire Village area . Interestingly , participants used the phrase ‘living body’ to describe the weaving of land and technical infrastructure and the configura - tional interdependencies between the two that were predominant in the radio setup : Part of our trips there [ to Village ] were technical trips - we needed to install the equipment and to make a lot of settings , and to change a lot of devices . This is a continuous activity because also , the technical struc - ture it’s something like the human body . Hhh . living body . Because you see , there are different conditions in both locations , in terms of the internet , in terms of land structure and a lot of things , for this we need to 1960 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . Figure 1 : The different steps made by the authors to analyse the data using Situational Analysis . Table 1 : List of socio - ecological relations in the two contexts and with the studied technology Historical and Geographical relations How the technology is involved The land l The relation between the Villagers and their land ; l The meaning of the mountain at the centre of Island ; l Negotiating with humans and nature to set the antenna ; l How the antenna interacts with symbolism , religion , and the environment ; The sea and the river l The river delta , the fishermen and the reserve ; l Sea , boats and lighthouses ; l Controversies live on FM ; l TTS and wind forecast : new signals from land to sea ; The weather conditions and the sun l How the weather participates in defining the relationship between nature and humans ; l Weather and temporalities through radio and design ; The virus l The virus modifies the life of people ; l Radio and TTS during the lockdown . make every time settings and to change some devices [ . . . ] . ( Mr D . , Romanian community partner ) In order to find the best location to place the antenna , the com - munity partners had to dismiss several solutions because of issues related to positions , costs and bureaucratic implications related to the permission . In addition , a piece of land in public ownership was not considered suitable because of the presence of domestic animals that circulate freely in the village and could destroy the equipment . Finally , the community partners struck a deal with the mayor and the local council for mounting the antenna on the yard of the communal water pump station . This solution was chosen for various reasons : from that position the radio signal could cover all the area of the commune and the surroundings ( including some fishing grounds ) ; it did not require construction permits and there was already a light pole that could be used as a support for the antenna pole ( avoiding the risk of damages caused by animals ) ; the area is easily accessible for maintenance ; the water pump station provides electricity ; and it was rented for an extremely low amount of money . 4 . 1 . 2 The mountain , the antenna and the religion in Island . In Ire - land , the skyline of Island is dominated by a cross , lit up at night on the highest mountain point . Whilst the prominence of the Roman Catholic Church ( RCC ) is declining in Ireland , on Island , the cross remains symbolic of the faith of islanders , who regularly attend Mass as a core community practice considered critical in sustain - ing the island population . Both the symbolism and geography of this site are now intertwined with the community radio . Being the highest point , the cross site was also chosen as the site for the transmitter , mast and antenna , providing the best vantage point to transmit radio to every household on the island , and the sur - rounding rural mainland . The power supply was already in place to light up the cross . Here , we see how religion , nature ( the mountain ) and technology interact in the situation , as well as long histories of cultural symbolism and communication . The symbolism of the cross also alerts us to how religion might influence the community radio content itself . Mass is transmitted as the radio is used to extend important community services to those that cannot be physically present through ill health , migration or age ( we will see later how this has become more evident during the recent pandemic ) . On visiting the island one Sunday and attending the community Mass , we note : We arrive and the Church is half full - we sit half way up . Church filled up fast and I saw people I had never seen before so it’s [ . ] one of the places where people come together as a community . . . The priest started the ceremony by welcoming everyone and explaining that mass was now live on the Island Community Radio on FM and on the world wide web to people listening in around the world . He welcomed people listening in from old folks homes , hospitals or home and I felt that the radio was connecting them into this community event . Mass is popular with the diaspora , people in a neighbouring nursing home , the elderly , those that travel and the sick . The local RCC recently decided which communities would receive regular 1961 Land , Water and Sun DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Mass services in the wider rural area , given a reduced number of priests . The island is one of only two communities spanning to mainland peninsulas and a neighbouring island , to maintain a regular service . Islanders believe this is due to the radio with one sending a message to the station to say : the radio is keeping the Mass on the island and it’s raising the profile of the entire island . . . . In this way technology is used to continue on the tradition of Catholicism in the area , whilst the symbolic positioning of the Cross on the mountain enables an ease of power supply to enable the radio technology to work . 4 . 2 The sea and the river 4 . 2 . 1 The delta , the fishermen and the reserve . The processes of an - thropization over the centuries , and particularly in the 20th century , seem to have seriously jeopardised the survival and the diversity of the Village’s ecosystem [ 32 ] . The management of the area during the Communist government aimed at intensive exploitation of the natural resources . " Brigades " of fishermen were encouraged by the government to fish as many sturgeons as possible , due to the huge revenues made by the export of caviar throughout Europe [ 74 ] . The replacement of the traditional fishing methods by the use of nets , accelerated the sharp decrease in the presence of sturgeons . These appropriation activities have continued also after the fall of Communism , with the presence of a private company to whom the fishermen sold the fish and the caviar . To safeguard the envi - ronmental sustainability of the Delta , since 1990 the area has been transformed into a Biosphere Reserve and included by UNESCO in the international network of biosphere reserves . These processes , together with the incremental introduction of new regulations ( that brought also to the banning of sturgeon fishing ) , have had a con - siderable influence on the life and traditions of the inhabitants of this area . They were saying that they had everything during communism in terms of food . They had fish , even caviar , so it’s like they are joking , when we had noth - ing to eat we were eating caviar . ( Mrs L . , Romanian community partner ) — this [ River ] has to be shared between different villages and the guys in Village , they feel that this area is too small , so everybody is fighting for their rights , some are fighting better , some are closer to the authorities etc . ( Mrs L . , Romanian community partner ) The effort toward an increased environmental sustainability has created tensions between the inhabitants and the main institutions involved in the management of the area . The fishermen denounce how the new rules and institutional configurations have caused the loss of their traditional economic activity . These decisions were taken without offering any tool for the compensation for these losses , leading to the emergence of poaching phenomena which “reinforces corruption and causes the unsustainable use of natural resources” [ 63 , 74 ] . From the early days of the station setup , RootIO was seen as a way to communicate current and historic tensions around economic use / activities of the sea . For this reason , the station has tried to be as much inclusive as possible in the involvement of the different local stakeholders in the decisions about the management of the radio station and in the production of content . The representatives of the fishermen association have expressed their interest in using the radio to make their voices and experiences heard , in opposition to the Reserve Authority and the local administration . We created a radio programme about the lives of the fishermen , [ . . . ] to discuss their own issues , we pushed a lot for them - they have fishermen Associa - tion in Village - we pushed for them to take it over and produce their own content . We were successful now and then . ( Mrs L . , Romanian Community Partner ) . The interactions between the delta , the fish , and the humans have also entered in the space created by the technology that was supposed to be used for the station’s decision - making process . The project partner created a WhatsApp group where all the community members interested in the station could participate in the discussion about its management . The fishermen used this technology to stress their critics against the mayor , accused of not being supportive of their requests . The story just described is a good example of the historical humans’ approach to the appropriation of nature . The loss of fish - ermen’s main livelihoods also shows how sustainability issues can be very complicated , and cannot be tackled just by shifting atten - tion from one actor to another . We see how the radio station can influence these dynamics . 4 . 2 . 2 The sea and the boats : the lighthouse and TTS . . On a bare rocky cliff on the Island’s western tip , accessed only by a rugged trail , a lighthouse marks the western entrance to the harbour on the mainland . Casting two white and red flashes , depending on direction , every ten seconds , it is part of Irish Lights , a network of lighthouses , lightships , and navigation buoys that protect mariners at sea . The 15 . 4 m high , 20 m round , white - painted stone tower was built 170 years ago , during the Great Irish Famine , and for the first 13 years a caretaker on the Island tended its paraffin light , though for most of its life the tower was a daybeacon . Its light was reactivated after a trawler heading to the dockyard port was stranded on a rock , and , nowadays , the lighthouse’s electric lamp , installed in 1965 , and powered by the mains and a standby diesel generator , is maintained by an operator for Irish Lights , who flies by helicopter , from the mainland [ 60 ] . Livelihood and emotional associations between the Island and Irish Lights have extended beyond the lighthouse on the Island , out into the dark Atlantic sea for the last century , as an interview with Mr P . , broadcast on the community radio on 14 June 2020 , illustrates . Like generations of Islanders , Mr P . and Mr P . ’s brother , father and grandfather crewed tenders servicing Ireland’s east and south - west coasts . This skilled and sometimes treacherous work left “ powerful memories ” . Mr P . spoke of a tragedy just before Christmas in the late 1960’s when he and another Islander working on the tender heard the news that the owner and skipper of a fishing trawler , from the Island , had drowned with four crew as winds whipped across the heavy seas [ 94 ] . In our project the radio played a role in linking people on the sea to the land , as we describe in more detail in the section on the virus . The station’s volunteers recorded 1962 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . and transmitted useful information and guidelines on the pandemic in Ireland in the languages of fishermen from different countries stranded in the bay because of the travel restrictions . In former years , Mr P . explained , lightkeepers of remote light - houses radioed about the weather conditions to the Irish Light’s Captain heading towards them to collect them for their regular shore liberty . These days , however , the lighthouse remains im - portant for navigation for those at sea , but less vital for weather - warnings . In the future the Irish radio stations may use the system developed in the project to broadcast weather and wind forecasts for Romanian fishermen as the system responded to the fisherman’s need for weather information . They have a small radio set in those boats when they go to fish , because they are mainly interested in the weather and for this , we created weather bulletin , four times per day , especially for them to send them infor - mation about wind , and of course , the other aspects of the weather , and especially for this they use it . ( Mr D . , Romanian Community Partner ) The fisherman needed updates more often than radio volunteers could produce . Thus , an automated system scrapes open source data on the internet which it then converts using Text To Speech ( TTS ) technology , into a synthetic voice . These audio messages become part of a script and broadcast three times per day , thus connecting a voice created on the land to the sea . The ongoing history in these examples links movements at sea with local livelihoods , loved ones and neighbours , and activates signals from land to sea when waves or viruses strand boats . The examples also reveal that despite the very physical connection in the air , via the electromagnetic radiation of lights and FM signals , there are places where the humanity - in - nature feels safer or at risk . 4 . 3 The weather conditions and the sun Here , we detail how the weather co - define the relationship between nature and humans . Both the Island and Village are peripheries , separated to mainland via the sea and river respectively . Weather influences the frequency of travel to both regions , as well as the sustainability and economy of those locations . Firstly , the seasons have a strong relation with the temporality of these places . The interviewees describe the passing of time as punctuated by the seasons and , in particular , by the summer in opposition to the rest of the year . Due to tourism in both locations , the population trebles or quadruples in summer . The feeling of isolation lived during the winter can change together with the daily rhythm . In the Romanian village , about 80 % of the inhabitants work during summer with tourists that come to relax on the sandy beaches , and to explore the pleasant environment . As one Romanian interviewee says : they [ locals of Village ] are very very busy , it is very crowded there , and they are very busy because there are many festivals , there are many tourists , and it is hard to find them and for them to spend time for this . ( Mrs L . , Romanian community partner ) Tourism in summer has also resulted in a growth of different events and festivals that occur throughout the year . For example , in the Village , a film festival attracts 3 , 000 tourists on average per year [ 63 ] . This event provides a reason for tourists to indulge in the famous fish of the local region , as a way of immersing into the local culture [ 63 ] . On Island , during the heritage week that occurs every summer , the Islanders often take advantage of this national week to host a series of tours across the Island . These tours are designed to emphasize the Island’s rich history and past , but also to draw people closer to the man - made batteries and other historical features on the island . The above highlights how the locals of these regions use these events as a means to draw people closer to the natural and human - constructed works in history . However , the end of the summer represents the moment when the communities come back to their original shape . Within this time , weather can sometimes impede travel to all communities involved . In Island , weather can be the cause of ferries not operating during certain periods , as the sea can sometimes be rough and dangerous . During some winters , the Romanian village can remain isolated for months because of snow and ice : In the next two weeks , they also aim to go back to [ the Romanian village ] to disseminate the questionnaires , and the phones and other equipment will be installed . Access to [ the village ] will be difficult if not impossible due to the weather conditions . ( Mrs L . , Romanian community partner ) In the above quote , one of the community partners in the project highlights the challenges of travelling to Village to conduct neces - sary research and setup of radio equipment as a result of weather conditions during the winter months of 2019 / 2020 . Indeed , the lack of means for accessing the village means that outsiders need to be flexible with respect to their travel plans , and particularly the planning of when certain design work ought to be completed . For locals , however , this isolation also brings another temporality of life that is not seen in the summertime . As one local describes , this type of temporality is only suitable for those with a particular mindset , working within your own time and pace : But then in the winter , I think you have to be suited to this type of role , you know , you’re not perturbed by , you know , not having a lot of people around you . And you’re able to work on your own steam and ini - tiative , it’s not for everyone . ( Mr P . island community member ) The temporality and , as a result , changing pace of life as a result of the seasons has also had an impact on the radio activities . On one hand , the radio has been used as a means to garner further knowledge on festivals occurring during the summer , such as the festival in the small Romanian village . They also pose opportunities to record these happenings , such as the heritage tour . Additionally , the need to record and preserve the heritage of the Island has also resulted in a workshop , which was held during the Island’s heritage event , to provide locals with the tools to record heritage themselves . However , with growing numbers in the summer in both Island and Village , this can also lead to a decline in available volunteers to participate in such extracurricular activities in the summer period . Locals or those who frequently live in those regions have exten - sive knowledge on the terrain and the impact of weather . Designers , material experts and locals may hold different knowledge on the natural elements , which may result in tension , but also important 1963 Land , Water and Sun DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA to unpack for forwarding the design process . As revealed in the Village context , it also provides opportunities to bring people to - gether and solve technical problems , as was the case when a storm emerged that resulted in the antenna breaking and loss in broadcast . A similar incident occurred on Island , where due to high winds that frequent from time to time , resulted in their installed antenna snapping . Following this event , some tension emerged between the designers and the locals and , as a result , challenges with respect to the reliability and durability of the materials were voiced by the locals . Following recommendations from a community radio expert who lives elsewhere , as well as their knowledge of materials re - quired for mounting an antenna in challenging weather conditions , the community erected another mast , which at the moment appears to be functioning and withstand the high winds . While such ten - sions may emerge , for designers this is an important opportunity to reveal socio - ecological relations from different perspectives . 4 . 4 The virus In this section , we describe the relations between the current pan - demic and the overall design and implementation of the community radio stations . There is strong evidence that the coronavirus SARS - CoV - 2 originated in bats [ 75 ] . There is also no doubt that the recent pandemic related to the global spread of this virus has had an enor - mous impact on people’s lives . The interaction with the surrounding environment , economic activities , and social relations have been completely reorganized to respond to this event’s challenges . “the Department of Culture , Heritage and the Gaeltacht reminds individuals , save for the perma - nent residents of those islands and those undertaking essential services , do not visit our offshore islands until 10 August . ” [ 33 ] As shown in the extract , access to Island was restricted to non - residents from March to July 2020 . As in the rest of Ireland , in March 2020 , Island witnessed the closure of all educational and cultural institutions , as well as most businesses , shops and venues . The possibilities of gathering were made more difficult between March and July of 2020 . The Government introduced substantial restrictions on people’s movement together with the request for the elderly and people in certain health conditions to “cocoon” , meaning to protectively isolate at home . Similar initiatives have taken place in Romania . In this situation , Island community radio has modified its initial schedule , starting to add new programmes and new broadcast dates . The Sunday mass could no longer take place in the church and the elderly priest could not leave his house , so he began to broadcast Mass from home using his phone . The radio station also started broadcasting school assemblies of the local secondary school on the mainland . This solution aimed at keeping the students motivated , and enabling the teachers to address queries from families / students on a collective rather than on an individual basis . Initially planned to broadcast on a weekly basis , after the initial broadcast , parents requested that it be aired every day . Broadcasts were initially digital only as the licencing conditions for Island did not permit daily FM broadcasts . In order to enable broadcasts via FM for those who did not have access to the internet , the station’s volunteers decided to upgrade their license , requesting the regulator to upgrade their 30 - days license into a 100 - days license . There are also fishermen from international contexts that are grounded on their boats in the local harbour . Used TTS and native language voice recording to message them to alert them to the content available in their native languages ( Mrs H . , Irish community partner ) The extract shows how to help various boats of fishermen from different countries stranded in the bay because of the travel restric - tions , the station’s volunteers recorded and transmitted messages in their languages containing useful information and guidelines on the pandemic in Ireland . This solution was made possible by taking advantage of the TTS technology . The project partners also scanned their professional and personal contact networks to find speakers that could record audio on their phones in specific lan - guages ( e . g . Filipino Tagalog and Latvian ) , and then sent it to the station’s volunteers to be broadcast . The large Spanish speaking fishing community in the close mainland town reportedly really appreciated being included in this way and now the station’s mem - bers are considering the possibility to involve them in the radio programs . Also Village’s station appropriated the same TTS technology and used it to convert into audio the information about the epidemic sent in paper form by a government organization . The radio station often received these contents at the last minute , and were obliged to broadcast them . In addition , the stations broadcasted reliable medical advice but also programs aimed at offering good news to support people’s mental conditions during the isolation . 5 DISCUSSION This paper aimed to contribute to recent post - anthropocentric orien - tations that refocus HCI to support sustainable ways of living . Our goal was to illustrate the application of a socio - ecological relations approach to an empirical example of design to make this way of ap - proaching design accessible and usable for the practice of HCI and Design researchers and practitioners . The lens of socio - ecological relations , in line with some Indigenous sensibilities ( e . g . [ 12 , 68 ] ) and a growing number of researchers in HCI ( e . g . [ 1 , 30 , 69 ] ) , of - fers an alternative to established Western - centric ways of thinking and working , by focusing attention on the fact that human history and sociality are inseparable from the materiality of nature . Thus , instead of viewing nature as something separate to human life and culture , our unit of analysis is humanity - in - nature and nature - in - humanity . We argue that the adoption of this relational approach can support a “new wave” [ 44 ] of research in HCI . Through our case study of rural community radio , we have demonstrated how socio - ecological relations , performed in specific places , shape the design process and are themselves transformed by becoming part of the design process . In the first section below , we argue the usefulness of adopting the lens of socio - ecological relations for HCI researchers , as it can provide insights that we wouldn’t have had otherwise . In the second section , we provide a set of design sensitivities that can expand the toolbox of researchers and practitioners in their own design work . 1964 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . 5 . 1 What does the socio ecological lens give us that we wouldn’t have otherwise ? In our work , while engaging in a project that intended to support the creation of community radio stations , we encountered many examples of ( sometimes controversial or conflicting ) relationships between humans and their environment , where humans often ap - propriate nature as a resource . When the project was defined , we unconsciously assumed that the natural environments within which the radio stations would take place were inert resources that could be easily appropriated . The only question we posed ourselves was how the communities could use the technology to influence the environmental debate , but little thought was given to how the pres - ence of this new technology could influence and be influenced by the relationship between humans and nature . Such considerations were only possible when we began to rely on an historical and geographical approach to look at these interactions , which revealed inseparable relations between these elements . This reflection did not take place during the action research but afterwards , when we started to retrospectively look at the data collected . We experienced how the technology , and the design process , became involved in these relations and controversies , and modified them , thus high - lighting the need to develop new sensitivities that can help support ecological and human sustainability in an HCI context . There is already a shift in HCI ( e . g . [ 1 , 30 , 43 , 69 , 70 , 98 ] ) towards non - anthropocentric approaches that helps give nature a more cen - tral position . These studies highlight how Western design traditions , and the economic and political systems in which they are entangled , are so deeply anthropocentric and imbued in a relationality with nature that is essentially colonial and extractive [ 79 , 97 ] . We con - tribute through offering practical suggestions to guide researchers in identifying , when defining their projects , assumptions about human - nature relations , making visible ( sometimes unintentional ) positioning of the environment as a commodity . We showed how some HCI research from the Global South and Indigenous contexts ( e . g . [ 8 , 9 , 12 , 19 , 68 ] ) more effectively stresses connections between the social , historical and ecological . By bringing these relations to the fore , these studies make us aware that while nature is funda - mental to design , Western centric design often prioritizes human agency that projects human power into the future . Indeed , it could be argued that in design practice , relations with nature are typically made less visible than social relations , because a dominant design ontology is oriented towards impulses to colonize and narratives that humans , or at least particular cultures of humans , will prevail over the future [ 59 ] , apart from the notable exceptions we have dis - cussed in Section 2 . For this reason , we argue that the observation and consideration of the history and geography of a place can be an important way to sensitize design to critical issues in sustainability , and to understand how nature and humans are inextricable , and how the design process enters in this relation . Taking this socio - ecological approach facilitated an understanding of our work in ways that may not have happened otherwise , and it is the main contribution of this paper to the practice of design research . Firstly , the socio - ecological approach allowed us to understand the ecological complexity of the fishermen’s issue in Romania where sustainability and livelihood collided . Specifically , we saw how policies to protect fish have impacted humans , and how fisher - men wished to use radio technology to elevate their position and advocate for their livelihoods . There was a clear conflict in our data between the image of a continued tradition , and an imagined sustainable future , which seeks to preserve the fish in the delta regardless of how this might impact the livelihood of local human inhabitants . In our context , the radio became a space for debate on such issues , but the small geographic community made these different imagined futures difficult to co - exist , whilst maintaining social harmony [ 86 , 87 ] . It was evident that there are many un - derstandings of sustainability [ 64 ] , what it looks like , and which species are prioritized in various understandings of interdependen - cies [ 48 , 51 ] . Community radio platforms could create a space for deliberation about sustainable futures and , for sure , they have made these controversies visible . Further , the socio - ecological approach made visible the histories of nature , and highlighted that , similarly to urban contexts [ 99 ] , natural materials in rural areas also have histories . Examples in - clude the layers of symbolic meanings present in the mountain’s symbolism linked to religion , or the safety / unsafety connection be - tween the sea and the land on Island . Designers and researchers of technologies need to acknowledge these meanings and histories in their processes and consider the needs of natural elements ( such as caring about the animals when installing the antenna in Romania , or understanding the link with religion in the Irish context ) in any technology implementation . Finally , the lens of socio - ecological relations enriched our un - derstanding of what was going on and allowed us to reframe ( what started as ) a community centered design project into a sustainable initiative . In this respect , we can see the potential opening up to many , if not all , community - centered design projects to be read through the lens of socio - ecological relations , bridging critical and sustainable computing . Engaging in a design process reveals and transforms socio - ecological relations . We have reflected on how each decision and activity of technology design and implementation was always con - nected with the related ecology of place and its temporalities . We saw how the actors involved assigned different meanings to the natural elements with whom they interact , producing different socio - ecological configurations that vary through time . In particu - lar , we presented how the design process is , at the same time , both product and producer of socio - ecological relations . 5 . 2 Socio - ecological sensitivities for HCI researchers and designers Drawing on our findings and discussion , we now provide a set of considerations that can help design researchers , designers and HCI researchers / practitioners to better consider the role of socio - ecological relations in their work and avoid considering nature only as a resource to be exploited . These considerations are not intended to be comprehensive , but rather provide some jumping - off points to bring socio - ecological analysis into HCI research . Our study has focused on socio - ecological relations in a very situated way . Bringing Moore’s approach into the HCI discussion can help the HCI community , in future research , to expand the situated gaze to address directly the forces of capital at play . Given the 1965 Land , Water and Sun DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA urgency of this conversation in the face of the current crises , we anticipate ongoing consideration as to what strategies we should employ . These are intended as our starting point in this ongoing and important discussion . We believe the following are important for all design processes : a ) Considering that social relations , technology and nature are always transforming and co - evolving together . Despite the ongoing crises , visions of technological futures often assume that nature and social relations are stable , and that technology is the only element that changes [ 3 , 85 ] . Our data show how all these elements are closely interdependent and that when doing research or design we need to be flexible to these changes . The most evident example is the with the SARS - CoV - 2 virus which illustrated how the technology we were testing had to deal with this sudden modification to the between humanity and nature , created by the presence of the virus . The radios offered a platform for people to respond to and interact with the pandemic and aimed to support public health through , for example , the use of TTS in communicating public health messaging . The virus also shaped the design and implementation of the radio , by creating an opportunity for an expanded radio licence , a new programming schedule and content . This is a clear example of what we call design - in - nature and nature - in - design . b ) Using methodologies that recognise nature as an implicated actor we can make nature and our assumptions about it more visible in design processes . Adopting a socio - ecological approach comes with a shift in our understanding of nature and its agentic role . We argue that nature needs to be recognized as an implicated actor , one that , in Situational Analysis language , is “physically present but generally silenced / ignored / invisibled by those in power [ . . . ] ” or “ [ . . . ] not physically present in a given social world but solely discursively constructed by others in the situation” ( [ 29 ] p . 93 ) . In turn , HCI researchers and designers need to make implicated actors visible and heard as part of the design process , as for example , the sturgeon in Romania . This approach can be supported by using methods like Situational Analysis , since they offer the right tools ( e . g . considering the reflexivity of the researcher , the presence of absent positions , the consideration of non - human elements and of power in the analysis of qualitative data ) to tune sensitivities to our relationality in and of nature , as suggested by Bidwell et al . [ 9 ] in observing social and environmental relations in a rural village in South Africa . Acquiring such a greater awareness of the power relations between humanity and nature in specific contexts can help designers to imagine new modes of organising the relationship between humans , technology and nature that differ from considerations of nature as commodity . c ) Considering the design implications of materialities , histories and meanings of nature relevant to the design project . In HCI work , and in particular Action Research and Participatory Design , we are mindful about the influence of technology on the routines and lived experience of the communities we work with . By attending to the socio - ecological lens , we showed how it is important to extend this attention to the situated historical relationships between humans and the nature that they are part of . Our findings showed that even for the task of installing a radio antenna , considerations of materiality such as the availability of electricity and internet connection , to elements of the natural world such as land , wind speed and the presence of animals needed to be taken into account . Further , nature is imbued with layers of symbols and meanings , as illustrated by the example of the mountain in Island . It is im - portant to be aware of these meanings when designing with a community , as the way nature is framed can have unexpected im - plications for the outcomes of Action Research and design projects . For instance , the role of religion in society and the ‘natural’ envi - ronment became visible when we realized that religious structures are often installed in places with particular geological qualities , and sometimes these qualities also have certain affordances for communication , such as the cross and antenna on the mountain . What if the presence of the antenna on the mountain gives to the radio station a Catholic connotation ? At the moment this problem did not come up , but we were able to reflect on it only after we applied this socio - ecological approach . d ) Considering socio - ecological temporalities . HCI researchers and designers need to consider how ecological temporalities might affect or shape the design process . Clarke and colleagues [ 30 ] un - derline the opposition between project timescales and the need to plan for longer timescales when dealing with more - than - human issues . We want to add that the attention for the socio - ecological temporalities is not necessarily related only to long periods . For instance , we saw in our work how in both contexts weather and geography influenced the rhythm of life that fluctuates from busy summers with crowded beaches to a slow pace of life , with fewer humans around , for the rest of the year , and we saw how this needs to be considered in the design process . In addition , the radio itself is a technology that does not allow pauses and moments of silence . This pushed the design project to integrate new technologies that can help find a negotiation in the different time horizons between humans and nature . For instance , leveraging technological automa - tion , such as the use of TTS , supported the possibility of delegating some time - consuming and tedious tasks like the weather forecast to the technology . By considering different temporalities , we also realised through this analysis the importance of design from the rural , as Hardy and colleagues advocate [ 52 ] . Our understanding of rural place changed as the project unfolded and the assumptions of the platform were appropriated or rejected by rural dwellers depending on the values that were important in the various rural places . There was a tension between the timeframe of the project and its goals , and that of the need of rural inhabitants to get to know us , for us to commit to place – both of these tensions were amplified by the different temporalities of the neoliberal university and the rural place . 6 CONCLUSION In this paper , we offered new tools to consider the role of nature in the design process . Taking the cue from Science and Technol - ogy Studies and Environmental History , we proposed the lens of socio - ecological relations , as the historically and geographically situated set of relations between humanity and non - human nature . Through empirical cases of the introduction and development of an innovative technology supporting community radio in rural and isolated areas , we have investigated how the socio - ecological relations performed in specific places shape the design process 1966 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . and are transformed by becoming part of the design process itself . The observation of the design process through the lens of socio - ecological relations is a promising research approach that confers to researchers in HCI and Design a new understanding of the relation between their work and nature , what we labelled design - in - nature and nature - in - design . This awareness is fundamental in a historical period characterized by global warming and an ongoing environ - mental crisis . The proposed approach points to socio - ecological relations as the building blocks of an analysis connecting the envi - ronmental crisis to capitalism as a way of organizing life , and we are looking forward for future research expanding on the under - standing of design as a socio - ecological practice . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The Grassroot Wavelengths Project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under Grant Agreement no : 780890 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Yoko Akama , Ann Light , and Takahito Kamihira . 2020 . Expanding Participation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns . In Proceedings of the 16th Partici - patory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 1 ( PDC ’20 ) , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385016 [ 2 ] Fredrik Aspling . 2015 . Animals , plants , people and digital technology : exploring and understanding multispecies - computer interaction . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology ( ACE ’15 ) , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2832932 . 2837010 [ 3 ] Genevieve Bell and Paul Dourish . 2007 . Yesterday’s tomorrows : notes on ubiq - uitous computing’s dominant vision . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 11 , 2 : 133 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 006 - 0071 - x [ 4 ] María Puig de la Bellacasa . 2017 . Matters of Care : Speculative Ethics in More Than Human Worlds . University of Minnesota Press . [ 5 ] Purav Bhardwaj and Cletus V . Joseph . 2020 . Plantimate : Personality Augmenta - tionforFosteringEmpathyTowardsPlants . In CompanionPublicationofthe2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS’ 20 Companion ) , 563 – 567 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3393914 . 3395901 [ 6 ] Nicola J . Bidwell and David Browning . 2010 . Pursuing genius loci : interaction design and natural places . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 14 , 1 : 15 – 30 . [ 7 ] Nicola J . Bidwell , Roberto Cibin , Conor Linehan , Laura Maye , and Sarah Robin - son . 2021 . Being Regulated : Licence to imagine new technology for community radio . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction . [ 8 ] Nicola J . Bidwell , Thomas Reitmaier , Carlos Rey - Moreno , Zukile Roro , Mas - bulele Jay Siya , and Bongiwe Dlutu . 2013 . Timely relations in rural Africa . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Social Implications of Computers in Developing Countries , Ocho Rios , Jamaica . Retrieved from https : / / researchspace . csir . co . za / dspace / handle / 10204 / 6920 [ 9 ] Nicola J . Bidwell , Masbulele Siya , Gary Marsden , William D . Tucker , M . Tshemese , N . Gaven , Senzo Ntlangano , Simon Robinson , and Kristen ALI Eglin - ton . 2013 . Walking and the social life of solar charging in rural Africa . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 20 , 4 : 1 – 33 . [ 10 ] Nicola J . Bidwell , Peta - Marie Standley , Tommy George , and Vicus Steffensen . 2008 . The landscape’s apprentice : lessons for place - centred design from ground - ing documentary . In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on Designing interac - tive systems , 88 – 98 . [ 11 ] Nicola J . Bidwell and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2012 . Audio pacemaker : walking , talking indigenous knowledge . In Proceedings of the South African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information Technologists Conference , 149 – 158 . [ 12 ] Nicola Bidwell and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2015 . At the Intersection of Indigenous and Traditional Knowledge and Technology Design . Informing Science . [ 13 ] Heidi R . Biggs and Audrey Desjardins . 2020 . High Water Pants : Designing Embodied Environmental Speculation . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376429 [ 14 ] Eli Blevis . 2006 . Advancing sustainable interaction design : two perspectives on material effects . Design philosophy papers 4 , 4 : 209 – 230 . [ 15 ] Eli Blevis . 2007 . Sustainable interaction design : invention & disposal , renewal & reuse . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 503 – 512 . [ 16 ] Eli Blevis . 2018 . Seeing What Is and What Can Be : On Sustainability , Respect for Work , and Design for Respect . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1 – 14 . [ 17 ] Joanna Boehnert , Dan Lockton , and Ingrid Mulder . 2018 . Editorial : Designing for transitions . In Proceedings of the Design Research Society Conference DRS2018 , 892 – 895 . [ 18 ] David A . Braude , Matthew P . Aylett , Caoimhín Laoide - Kemp , Simone Ashby , KristenM . Scott , BrianÓRaghallaigh , AnnaBraudo , AlexBrouwer , andAdriana Stan . 2019 . All Together Now : The Living Audio Dataset . In Interspeech 2019 , 1521 – 1525 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21437 / Interspeech . 2019 - 2448 [ 19 ] Johanna Brewer and Paul Dourish . 2008 . Storied spaces : Cultural accounts of mobility , technology , and environmental knowing . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 66 , 12 : 963 – 976 . [ 20 ] LeviR . Bryant . 2011 . TheDemocracyofObjects : OpenHumanitesPress . Retrieved September 15 , 2020 from http : / / www . openhumanitiespress . org / books / titles / the - democracy - of - objects / [ 21 ] Marisol de la Cadena and Mario Blaser . 2018 . A World of Many Worlds . Duke University Press . [ 22 ] M . Callon . 1986 . Some elements of a sociology of translation : domestication of the scallops and the fisherman of St Brieuc bay . In Power , action and belief : a new sociology of knowledge , John Law ( ed . ) . Routledge , London , 196 – 232 . [ 23 ] William R . Catton Jr and Riley E . Dunlap . 1978 . Environmental sociology : A new paradigm . The american sociologist : 41 – 49 . [ 24 ] RobertoCibin , SarahRobinson , KristenM . Scott , DuarteSousa , PetraŽišt , Laura Maye , Mariacristina Sciannamblo , Simone Ashby , Christopher Csíkszentmi - hályi , Nadia Pantidi , and Maurizio Teli . 2020 . Co - designing convivial tools to support participation in community radio . Radio Journal : International Studies in Broadcast & Audio Media 18 , 1 : 43 – 61 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1386 / rjao _ 00015 _ 1 [ 25 ] Roberto Cibin , Sarah Robinson , Maurizio Teli , Conor Linehan , Laura Maye , and Christopher Csíkszentmihályi . 2020 . Shaping Social Innovation in Local Communities : The Contribution of Intermediaries . In Proceedings of the 11th NordicConferenceonHuman - ComputerInteraction : ShapingExperiences , Shaping Society ( NordiCHI ’20 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420178 [ 26 ] RobertoCibin , MaurizioTeli , andSarahRobinson . 2019 . InstitutioningandCom - munity Radio . A comparative perspective . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Transforming Communities ( C & T ’19 ) , 143 – 154 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328320 . 3328392 [ 27 ] Adele E . Clarke . 2005 . Situational Analysis : Grounded Theory After The Postmod - ern Turn . Sage Pubns , Thousand Oaks , Calif . [ 28 ] Adele E . Clarke , Carrie E . Friese , and Rachel S . Washburn . 2017 . Situational Analysis : Grounded Theory After the Interpretive Turn . SAGE Publications , Inc , Los Angeles . [ 29 ] Adele E . Clarke , Carrie Friese , and Rachel Washburn . 2015 . Situational Analysis in Practice : Mapping Research with Grounded Theory . Left Coast Press . [ 30 ] Rachel Clarke , Sara Heitlinger , Ann Light , Laura Forlano , Marcus Foth , and Carl DiSalvo . 2019 . More - than - human participation : design for sustainable smart city futures . Interactions 26 , 3 : 60 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3319075 [ 31 ] Chris Csíkszentmihályi and Jude Mukundane . 2016 . RootIO : ICT + telephony for grassroots radio . In 2016 IST - Africa Week Conference , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ISTAFRICA . 2016 . 7530700 [ 32 ] Danube Delta Biosphere Reserve Authority . Danube Delta - Rezervatia Biosferei Delta Dunarii . Retrieved September 16 , 2020 from http : / / www . ddbra . ro / en / danube - delta - biosphere - reserve / danube - delta [ 33 ] Department of Culture , Heritage and the Gaeltacht . Visiting the Offshore Is - lands . Retrieved September 16 , 2020 from https : / / www . chg . gov . ie / visiting - the - offshore - islands / [ 34 ] Laura Devendorf , Abigail De Kosnik , Kate Mattingly , and Kimiko Ryokai . 2016 . Probing the Potential of Post - Anthropocentric 3D Printing . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) , 170 – 181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901879 [ 35 ] Carl DiSalvo , Phoebe Sengers , and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Mapping the landscape of sustainable HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) , 1975 – 1984 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753625 [ 36 ] Paul Dourish . 2006 . Re - space - ing place : “ place” and " space " ten years on . In Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported coop - erative work , 299 – 308 . [ 37 ] Hamid Ekbia and Bonnie Nardi . 2015 . The political economy of computing : the elephant in the HCI room . Interactions 22 , 6 : 46 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2832117 [ 38 ] Hamid R . Ekbia and Bonnie A . Nardi . 2017 . Heteromation , and Other Stories of Computing and Capitalism . The MIT Press . [ 39 ] Arturo Escobar . 2018 . Designs for the Pluriverse : Radical Interdependence , Auton - omy , and the Making of Worlds . Duke University Press , Durham London . [ 40 ] Arturo Escobar . 2020 . Comunalizando la participación : La co - investigatión y el co - diseño pluriversales / / Communitizing participation : pluriversal collaborative research and co - design practices . [ 41 ] European Commission . 2018 . Grant Agreement - Grassroot Wavelengths . [ 42 ] Jan Fell , Travis Greene , Jyun - Cheng Wang , and Pei - Yi Kuo . 2020 . Beyond Human - Centered Design : Proposing a Biocentric View on Design Research 1967 Land , Water and Sun DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Involving Vegetal Subjects . In Companion Publication of the 2020 ACM De - signing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS’ 20 Companion ) , 209 – 214 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3393914 . 3395883 [ 43 ] Marcus Foth , Monique Mann , Laura Bedford , Walter Fieuw , and Reece Walters . 2020 . A capitalocentric review of technology for sustainable development : The Case for more - than - human design . Association for Progressive Communications ( APC ) , Melville , South Africa . Retrieved September 16 , 2020 from https : / / eprints . qut . edu . au / 203186 / [ 44 ] Christopher Frauenberger . 2019 . Entanglement HCI The Next Wave ? ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 27 , 1 : 1 – 27 . [ 45 ] Fiona French , Clara Mancini , and Helen Sharp . 2020 . More Than Human Aesthetics : Interactive Enrichment for Elephants . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’20 ) , 1661 – 1672 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395445 [ 46 ] Anne Galloway . 2013 . Emergent Media Technologies , Speculation , Expectation , and Human / Nonhuman Relations . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 57 , 1 : 53 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 08838151 . 2012 . 761705 [ 47 ] Roxana Garaiman . 2016 . The life of haholi . PressOne English . Retrieved Septem - ber 16 , 2020 from https : / / pressone . us / the - life - of - haholi / [ 48 ] Elizabeth Goodman . 2009 . Three environmental discourses in human - computer interaction . In CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems . 2535 – 2544 . [ 49 ] Davydd Greenwood and Morten Levin . 2007 . Introduction to Action Research . SAGE Publications , Inc . , 2455 Teller Road , Thousand Oaks California 91320 United States of America . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4135 / 9781412984614 [ 50 ] Donna Haraway . 2015 . Anthropocene , Capitalocene , Plantationocene , Chthu - lucene : Making Kin . Environmental Humanities 6 , 1 : 159 – 165 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1215 / 22011919 - 3615934 [ 51 ] Donna J . Haraway . 2016 . Staying with the trouble : Making kin in the Chthulucene . Duke University Press , Durham . [ 52 ] Jean Hardy , Susan Wyche , and Tiffany Veinot . 2019 . Rural HCI Research : Defi - nitions , Distinctions , Methods , and Opportunities . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW : 196 : 1 - 196 : 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359298 [ 53 ] Graham Harman . 2015 . Object - Oriented Ontology . In The Palgrave Handbook of Posthumanism in Film and Television , Michael Hauskeller , Thomas D . Philbeck and Curtis D . Carbonell ( eds . ) . Palgrave Macmillan UK , London , 401 – 409 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / 9781137430328 _ 40 [ 54 ] Mike Hazas and Lisa Nathan . 2017 . Digital Technology and Sustainability : En - gaging the Paradox . Routledge . [ 55 ] Tim Ingold . 1993 . The temporality of the landscape . World archaeology 25 , 2 : 152 – 174 . [ 56 ] Tim Ingold . 2008 . Bindings against boundaries : entanglements of life in an open world . Environment and planning A 40 , 8 : 1796 – 1810 . [ 57 ] Tim Ingold . 2011 . Being alive : Essays on movement , knowledge and description . Routledge . [ 58 ] Cristina Yumie Aoki Inoue , Paula Franco Moreira , Cristina Yumie Aoki Inoue , and Paula Franco Moreira . 2016 . Many worlds , many nature ( s ) , one planet : indigenous knowledge in the Anthropocene . Revista Brasileira de Política Inter - nacional 59 , 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1590 / 0034 - 7329201600209 [ 59 ] L Irani , J . Vertesi , P . Dourish , K . Philip , and R . E . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on human factors in computing systems , 1311 – 1320 . [ 60 ] Irish Lights . Ardnakinna Lighthouse . Retrieved September 15 , 2020 from https : / / www . irishlights . ie / tourism / our - lighthouses / ardnakinna . aspx [ 61 ] T . Irwin . 2018 . The Emerging Transition Design Approach . In Proceedings of the Design Research Society Conference DRS2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21606 / DRS . 2018 . 210 [ 62 ] Terry Irwin . 2015 . Transition Design : A Proposal for a New Area of Design Practice , Study , and Research . Design and Culture 7 , 2 : 229 – 246 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17547075 . 2015 . 1051829 [ 63 ] Oana Ivan . 2017 . ‘We make more money now , but we don’t talk to each other anymore’ : on new tourism and capitalism in the Danube Delta . Journal of Tourism and Cultural Change 15 , 2 : 122 – 135 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14766825 . 2016 . 1260102 [ 64 ] Bran Knowles , Oliver Bates , and Maria Håkansson . 2018 . This Changes Sustain - ableHCI . In Proceedingsofthe2018CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComput - ing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . Retrieved September 11 , 2020 from https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174045 [ 65 ] Bruno Latour . 2005 . Reassembling the Social : An Introduction to Actor - Network - Theory . Oxford University Press , Oxford . [ 66 ] Bruno Latour . 2017 . Facing Gaia : Eight Lectures on the New Climatic Regime . John Wiley & Sons . [ 67 ] Bruno Latour . 2018 . Down to Earth : Politics in the new climatic regime . John Wiley & Sons . [ 68 ] Chris Lawrence , Tuck Wah Leong , Margot Brereton , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Nic Bidwell , and Greg Wadley . 2019 . Indigenous HCl : Workshop at OzCHI 2019 , Perth . In Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Human - Computer - Interaction ( OZCHI’19 ) , 17 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3369457 . 3369553 [ 69 ] Ann Light , Alison Powell , and Irina Shklovski . 2017 . Design for existential crisis in the anthropocene age . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technologies , 270 – 279 . [ 70 ] Ann Light , Irina Shklovski , and Alison Powell . 2017 . Design for Existential Crisis . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’17 ) , 722 – 734 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3052760 [ 71 ] Jen Liu , Daragh Byrne , and Laura Devendorf . 2018 . Design for Collaborative Survival : An Inquiry into Human - Fungi Relationships . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173614 [ 72 ] Szu - Yu ( Cyn ) Liu , JustinCranshaw , andAstaRoseway . 2020 . MakingAirQuality Data Meaningful : Coupling Objective Measurement with Subjective Experience through Narration . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’20 ) , 1313 – 1326 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395517 [ 73 ] Susan Loh , Marcus Foth , Glenda Amayo Caldwell , Veronica Garcia - Hansen , and Mark Thomson . 2020 . A more - than - human perspective on understanding the performance of the built environment . Architectural Science Review 63 , 3 – 4 : 372 – 383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00038628 . 2019 . 1708258 [ 74 ] AnaMariaLuca , DumitritaHoldis , MiraBalan , andMarcelGascónBarberá . 2020 . Decimated Danube : Sturgeon Revival Efforts Neglect Roots of Poaching . Balkan Insight . Retrieved September 16 , 2020 from https : / / balkaninsight . com / 2020 / 05 / 20 / decimated - danube - sturgeon - revival - efforts - neglect - roots - of - poaching / [ 75 ] Smriti Mallapaty . 2020 . Animal source of the coronavirus continues to elude scientists . Nature . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / d41586 - 020 - 01449 - 8 [ 76 ] Jennifer C . Mankoff , Eli Blevis , Alan Borning , Batya Friedman , Susan R . Fussell , Jay Hasbrouck , Allison Woodruff , and Phoebe Sengers . 2007 . Environmental sustainability and interaction . In CHI’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , 2121 – 2124 . [ 77 ] David Manuel - Navarrete and Christine N . Buzinde . 2010 . Socio - ecological agency : from ‘human exceptionalism’to coping with ‘exceptional’global en - vironmental change . In The international handbook of environmental sociology , Michael R . Redclift and Graham Woodgate ( eds . ) . 136 – 49 . [ 78 ] Laura Maye , Sarah Robinson , Nadia Pantidi , L . Ganea , O . Ganea , Conor Linehan , and John McCarthy . 2020 . Considerations for Implementing Technology to Support Community Radio in Rural Communities . In to be presented at CHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . [ 79 ] JasonW . Moore . 2015 . CapitalismintheWebofLife : EcologyandtheAccumulation of Capital . Verso , New York . [ 80 ] Jason W . Moore . 2016 . Anthropocene or Capitalocene ? : Nature , History , and the Crisis of Capitalism . Pm Press , Oakland , CA . [ 81 ] Bonnie Nardi . 2020 . SIGCHI Social Impact Award Talk - Sustainability and SIGCHI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’20 ) , 1 – 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3386150 [ 82 ] Bonnie Nardi and Hamid Ekbia . 2018 . Developing a political economy per - spective for sustainable HCI . In Digital Technology and Sustainability - En - gaging the Paradox , Mike Hazes and Lisa P . Nathan ( eds . ) . 86 – 102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9774 / GLEAF . 9781315465975 _ 12 [ 83 ] Andrea Nightingale . 2019 . Commoning for inclusion ? commons , exclusion , property and socio - natural becomings . International Journal of the Commons 13 , 1 : 16 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18352 / ijc . 927 [ 84 ] David Quammen . 2012 . Spillover : Animal Infections and the Next Human Pan - demic . W . W . Norton & Company . [ 85 ] Stuart Reeves . 2012 . Envisioning ubiquitous computing . In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( CHI’12 ) , 1573 – 1582 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208278 [ 86 ] Sarah Robinson , Nicola J . Bidwell , Roberto Cibin , Conor Linehan , Laura Maye , John McCarthy , Nadia Pantidi , and Maurizio Teli . 2021 . Islandness and HCI . Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Rural Computing and HCI . [ 87 ] Sarah Robinson , Nicola J . Bidwell , Laura Maye , Nadia Pantidi , and Conor Line - han . 2020 . Participation through substituting and refusing . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference PDC2020 ( Manizales , Colombia ) Vol . 2 . [ 88 ] Mariacristina Sciannamblo , Roberto Cibin , Petra Žišt , Christopher Csíkszent - míhalyi , and Maurizio Teli . 2019 . Co - designing collaborative care work through ethnography . In In Travlou , P . and Ciolfi , L . ( Eds . ) . Ethnographies of Collaborative EconomiesConferenceProceedings . UniversityofEdinburgh , 25October2019 . ISBN 978 - 1 - 912669 - 11 - 0 . Paper No . 9 . [ 89 ] Mariacristina Sciannamblo , Peter Lyle , and Maurizio Teli . 2018 . Fostering Com - monfare . Entanglements between Participatory Design and Feminism . In Pro - ceedings of DRS Design Research Society Conference . [ 90 ] Kristen M . Scott , Simone Ashby , David A . Braude , and Matthew P . Aylett . 2019 . Who Owns Your Voice ? : Ethically Sourced Voices for Non - commercial Tts Applications . In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Conversational User Interfaces ( CUI ’19 ) , 17 : 1 - 17 : 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3342775 . 3342793 [ 91 ] Kristen M . Scott , Simone Ashby , and Roberto Cibin . 2020 . Implementing text - to - speech tools for community radio in remote regions of Romania . In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2020 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and 1968 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Roberto Cibin et al . UbiquitousComputingandProceedingsofthe2020ACMInternationalSymposiumonWearableComputers ( UbiComp - ISWC ’20 ) , 123 – 126 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3410530 . 3414410 [ 92 ] Kristen M . Scott , Simone Ashby , and Julian Hanna . 2020 . “Human , All Too Human” : NOAA Weather Radio and the Emotional Impact of Synthetic Voices . In Proceedingsofthe2020CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( CHI ’20 ) , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376338 [ 93 ] Nancy Smith , Shaowen Bardzell , and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2017 . Designing for Co - habitation : Naturecultures , Hybrids , and Decentering the Human in Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , 1714 – 1725 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025948 [ 94 ] Southern Star . 2018 . Castletownbere tragedy took five lives . The Southern Star . Retrieved September 15 , 2020 from https : / / www . southernstar . ie / news / castletownbere - tragedy - took - five - lives - 4166874 [ 95 ] Isabelle Stengers . 2010 . Cosmopolitics . University of Minnesota Press . [ 96 ] Miriam Sturdee , Sarah Robinson , and Conor Linehan . 2020 . Research Journeys : Making the Invisible , Visual . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interac - tive Systems Conference ( DIS ’20 ) , 2163 – 2175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395590 [ 97 ] Virginia Tassinari and Ezio Manzini . 2019 . Designing as politics ( of nature ) . In DESIS Philosophy Talk # 7 . Retrieved from https : / / www . desis - philosophytalks . org / desis - philosophy - talk - 7 - 1 - designing - as - politics - of - nature - polimi / [ 98 ] Virginia Tassinari , Ezio Manzini , Arturo Escobar , Liesbeth Huybrechts , and Annalinda De Rosa . The Politics of Nature . Designing for an Ontological Turn . DESIS Philosophy Talk # 7 . 2 . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volum 3 . Retrieved from http : / / www . pdc2020 . org / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 06 / The - Politics - of - Nature . - Designing - for - an - Ontological - Turn . - DESIS - Philosophy - Talk - 7 . 2 . pdf [ 99 ] Maja Van der Velden , Tone Bratteteig , and Sisse Finken . 2009 . Entangled Matter : Thinking Differently about Materials in Design . Nordes , 3 . [ 100 ] Eduardo Viveiros de Castro . 1998 . Les pronoms cosmologiques et le perspec - tivisme amérindien . In Gilles Deleuze . Une vie philosophique . 429 – 462 . [ 101 ] EduardoViveirosdeCastro . 2004 . ExchangingPerspectives : TheTransformation of Objects into Subjects in Amerindian Ontologies . Common Knowledge 10 , 3 : 463 – 484 . [ 102 ] Rob Wallace . 2016 . Big Farms Make Big Flu : Dispatches on Infectious Disease , Agribusiness , and the Nature of Science . NYU Press , New York . [ 103 ] Laura Watts . 2018 . Energy at the end of the world : An Orkney Islands saga . MIT Press . [ 104 ] Sarah Webber , Marcus Carter , Wally Smith , and Frank Vetere . 2020 . Co - Designing with Orangutans : Enhancing the Design of Enrichment for Animals . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’20 ) , 1713 – 1725 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395559 [ 105 ] Albena Yaneva . 2017 . What is Cosmopolitical Design . In What is cosmopolitical design ? : design , nature and the built environment , Albena Yaneva and Alejandro Zaera ( eds . ) . Taylor & Francis . [ 106 ] AlbenaYanevaandAlejandroZaera . 2017 . Whatiscosmopoliticaldesign ? : design , nature and the built environment . Taylor & Francis . [ 107 ] Decolonising Design . Retrieved September 16 , 2020 from https : / / www . decolonisingdesign . com / 1969