DIS ' 97 : Designing Interactive Systems ( August 18 - 20 , 1997 ) ACM : Amsterdam . ACM . pp . 223 - 234 HCI , Natural Science and Design : A Framework for Triangulation Across Disciplines Wendy E . Mackay & Anne - Laure Fayard Centre d ' Études de la Navigation Aérienne Orly Sud 205 94542 ORLY AÉROGARES FRANCE mackay @ lri . fr fayard @ cena . dgac . fr ABSTRACT Human - computer interaction is multidisciplinary , drawing paradigms and techniques from both the natural sciences and the design disciplines . HCI cannot be considered a pure natural science because it studies the interaction between people and artificially - created artifacts , rather than naturally - occurring phenomena , which violates several basic assumptions of natural science . Similarly , HCI cannot be considered a pure design discipline because it strives to independently verify design decisions and processes , and borrows many values from scientists . The purpose of this paper is to provide a simple framework that describes how the research and design models underlying HCI can be integrated . We explore the relationships among these approaches in the context of a particular research site , CENA , the Centre d ' Études de la Navigation Aérienne , and illustrate how the various disciplines can contribute to a complex design problem : improving the interface to the French air traffic control system . The framework provides one perspective for understanding the various research approaches , and , more importantly , suggests new research directions . The resulting cross - disciplinary triangulation can increase the effectiveness of the individual research and design approaches . KEYWORDS : CSCW , design , theory , augmented reality INTRODUCTION How do we design new computer systems that support expert users in complex , real - time collaborative work environments , especially when they already have well - established , successful work practices and no tolerance for error ? The field of Human - Computer Interaction addresses such questions with a multidisciplinary approach , drawing tools , techniques and paradigms from a variety of existing disciplines in both science and design . 1 Members of the HCI community pursue a variety of goals ranging from providing general theories and principles , to reporting on detailed observations of actual use , to creating innovative new designs . How do we decide among the multitude of paradigms available to us ? Unlike researchers or designers working within a single academic discipline , with well - established procedures for conducting their work , we find ourselves constantly borrowing , inventing and re - inventing techniques as we go . We draw from both science and design and must be able to converse with researchers and designers completely immersed in their individual disciplines . We work at both applied and theoretical levels ( and find most of the debates challenging whether a particular study is " scientific enough " to be unproductive ) . Because we create working prototypes , we select the methods that seem most appropriate for the problem at hand . At the same time , we must conduct our work in a way that is fundamentally sound at the level of each discipline we draw from and viewed as legitimate by our academic colleagues . The purpose of this paper is to provide a framework for viewing the different disciplines that contribute to HCI , including the epistemological origins of the scientific branches . Our hope is to draw attention to the most important assumptions underlying each and to point out their key similarities , especially when they are based upon the same underlying scientific approach . We also make a fundamental distinction between the sciences and design and show why a multidisciplinary field like HCI must necessarily draw from and benefit from both . Rather than discuss these at a purely theoretical level , we use our own research setting to illustrate how a wide variety of approaches can be useful in addressing a complex user interface design problem . The paper first introduces the research environment at the CENA , which conducts research on the French air traffic control system . We then present a model that illustrates how HCI draws from both the natural sciences and design 1 Our own backgrounds include a mix of disciplines : experimental psychology , study of innovation & software product design , and philosophy & cognitive science . - 2 - disciplines and discuss key assumptions of each . We then discuss why HCI is neither a science nor a design discipline , because the focus of the work is the study of the interaction between people and artificially - constructed artifacts . We use the range of research strategies used at CENA to illustrate how science and design disciplines can be integrated to address a complex , real - world HCI problem . We conclude with a general discussion of how designing interactive systems can be effectively served by techniques drawn from science , design and new techniques constructed specifically for HCI . The framework presented in the paper can help suggest new research directions and facilitate triangulation , i . e . the use of different methods to address the same problem . RESEARCH SETTING : CENA CENA , the Centre d ' Études de la Navigation Aérienne , is responsible for the design and implementation of new technologies to support the air traffic control system in France . The Paris center for en route air traffic control , located in Athis Mons next to Orly airport , handles one of the most complex air traffic patterns in Europe . This is due both to geography , given the importance of the London - Paris - Frankfurt triangle , and history , given the difficulty of flying over Eastern Europe during the cold war . Like its counterparts around the world , the current system was designed and introduced after World War II and the use of RADAR and paper flight strips has not changed fundamentally since the 1960s . The French system is extraordinarily safe : since its inception in the early 1950 ' s , no plane crashes have been attributed to the civilian air traffic controllers . 2 Of course , the system has evolved over the years : improved RADAR and other technologies have been introduced and the organization of the flight sectors have been changed to meet changing traffic patterns . Even so , the basic methods remain the same , with relatively minor variations evident at the country , flight center , sector , team and individual level . If the system is so safe , why change it ? The first reason is technical : much of the existing technology is very old and difficult or impossible to replace . If the systems must be replaced anyway , it makes sense to take advantage of the tremendous advances in computing achieved over the past few decades . The second reason is both ethical and political : levels of air traffic are increasing rapidly and the current system is extremely , but not completely , safe . A recent article in the International Herald Tribune ( 15 Jan . 1997 ) warns that if current safety levels are maintained and the traffic continues to increase at its present rate , a plane will crash somewhere in the world every week by the year 2004 . Airline management and government officials are concerned that the public will perceive this as unacceptably high ( despite the fact that flying remains several orders of magnitude safer than driving a car if we look at kilometers traveled ) . Either the level of safety must be increased or limits must be placed on the number 2 A mid - air collision occurred in 1973 , when military air traffic controllers took over temporarily during a civilian controller strike . The strike was quickly resolved and French controllers have had significantly more power and better working conditions since then . of flights . Given the economic consequences of the latter , it is not surprising that attempts are underway to reexamine and improve the current air traffic system . CENA is responsible for research in France on air traffic control . with researchers from a variety of disciplines , including engineers , computer scientists , cognitive ergonomists , ethnographers and former air traffic controllers . Clearly , all of these skills are required , given the complexity and difficulty of the task at hand . Yet , given the difficulties of communication across disciplines , much of the work tends to be done in isolation . The phenomenon is familiar in the HCI community : system designers often have little interaction with controllers or the researchers who study them . Although controllers are often asked their opinions or invited to test simulations of the system , they are rarely active throughout the design process . A major project has been underway for over a decade that has resulted in the purchase of large , high - definition computer screens and the development of a major software system to replace the existing one . The " furniture " designed for the system is about to be introduced , but questions are now being raised about some of the software design decisions . Attempts to create electronic versions of flight strips , accessed by a mouse and a computer keyboard , appear to be slower and more prone to error than writing on paper flight strips . As in similar attempts to automate highly complex collaborative work settings , e . g . , Suchman , ( 1987 ) , Zuboff ( 1988 ) , Barley et al . ( 1988 ) and Mackay ( 1990 ) , some important , possibly invisible , aspects of the current system do not appear to have an effective counterpart in the new system . The problem now is to find an effective solution : we need to build upon existing results and techniques and develop a prototype system that takes advantage of modern computer technology , increases safety without loss of efficiency and respects and enhances the existing work practices of air traffic controllers . Ethnographic studies can illuminate important aspects of the work setting that must be accounted for in any new system . Heath and Luff ( 1991 ) , in their extensive studies of the management of subway trains in the London Underground , highlighted the importance of the peripheral awareness of each other ' s activities . What appears to be a single - user task is in fact highly dependent upon an implicit understanding of the work of others . Studies of air traffic controllers , e . g . , Gras et al . , ( 1994 ) and Hopkin ( 1995 ) emphasize the complexity and subtlety of the interactions among controllers . Preux ( 1994 ) studied the specific role of the paper flight strip , not only as an individual memory aid , but also as a focal point for cooperative work . Studies of the English en route air traffic controllers , Hughes et al . ( 1992 ) and Bentley et al . ( 1992 ) confirm the critical role of the flight strip and question the wisdom of replacing them with electronic imitations that reduce the level of cooperative work . Harper et al . , ( 1991 ) concluded that it is the gestalt of the strips , rather than the absolute information they contain , that facilitates cooperation among team members and hand - offs between shifts . - 3 - Our own research is based upon an ethnographic study in which we followed a team of controllers through their schedule for a period of four months . We were particularly interested in the role of paper flight strips and our observations match those described in the English system ( with some interesting cultural differences . ) The next step is to build a series of design prototypes . We have chosen to pursue a different design direction than in the English studies and are exploring an approach called " Augmented Reality " ( Wellner , Mackay & Gold , 1993 , Mackay , 1996 ) . The goal is to preserve and augment rather than replace existing real - world artifacts . In our specific case , we are trying to create a system that preserves the flexibility and subtlety of the paper flight strips , while capturing information that will be useful in tools that aid the controllers . To be successful , we must draw upon techniques from a variety of research and design disciplines . We must understand as much as we can about the actual activities of controllers and their current interaction with paper flight strips , in both qualitative and quantitative terms . We must generate new design ideas , using researchers , designers and users ( controllers ) to provide innovations . Finally , we must be able to distinguish among different design possibilities and select those that make the most sense in the current context . The techniques require the full range of disciplines found in HCI . The next section presents a framework that describes them and discusses their underlying assumptions , placing them within a unified context for design . NATURAL SCIENCE , DESIGN AND HCI Human - computer interaction , like other multidisciplinary fields , borrows techniques from its component disciplines and must determine how they relate to each other . While it may be appropriate for some to engage in heated debates about competing approaches , it is rare to find a designer who finds this useful . What is more important is to understand enough about each approach and the corresponding assumptions to be able to choose which is most appropriate for addressing a particular design problem . Psychology Sociology Anthropology IndustrialDesign Typography GraphicDesign Engineering , Design & Fine Arts HCI HumanFactors ComputerScience Natural & Social Sciences Figure 1 : Human - computer interaction , like human factors and computer science , is a multidisciplinary field that draws from both scientific and design disciplines . Figure 1 presents some of the component disciplines that contribute to the study of human computer interaction . The full range of natural and social sciences is represented by the box at the top . Although they differ greatly in subject matter and specific methods , they all derive their basic values and assumptions from a general model that governs all scientific disciplines . The corresponding box at the bottom represents schools of Fine Arts and the engineering and design disciplines . These also differ greatly in subject matter and specific methods , but share the goal of creating new artifacts . The sciences are divided into separate disciplines , such as Psychology , Sociology and Anthropology , represented by rounded rectangles . Scientists within these disciplines operate within paradigms ( Kuhn , 1962 , Latour , 1987 ) , that dictate which questions are considered " interesting " and which specific methods can be used to address those questions . Within any branch or sub - area , researchers can range from highly theoretical to highly applied . Various engineering and design disciplines , including Graphic Design , Typography and Industrial Design are also represented by rounded rectangles . Designers and artists in particular operate within schools that dictate aesthetics and " style " . The ovals in the center represent multidisciplinary fields . Each multidisciplinary field draws concepts and methods from particular branches ( shown as small circles ) of its component scientific and design disciplines . For example , HCI borrows from Cognitive Psychology and Ethnography ( branches of Psychology and Anthropology ) as well as typeface design ( a branch of Typography ) . HCI also draws from other multidisciplinary fields , particularly Human Factors and Computer Science . The latter can be considered one of the " Sciences of the Artificial " ( Simon , 1969 ) , yet still requires aspects of engineering and design . Figure 1 is not meant to be exhaustive , but rather to illustrate why HCI is neither a scientific nor a design discipline , but actively incorporates aspects of both . Although similar in some respects , science and design differ in many assumptions and values . For example , while both scientists and designers are trained in an apprenticeship , the measures of success are quite different . A science graduate student works in a laboratory with a senior scientist ; develops an original thesis and conducts original research to support that thesis , which is evaluated by other senior scientists . The terminal degree is a Ph . D . and the expected career path is to become either a professor or a research scientist in an industrial laboratory ( such as Bell Labs or Xerox PARC ) or a government laboratory ( such as the American National Institute of Health or the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ) . Design students usually work in design studios with other designers . Engineering and computer science students usually have internships where they work with senior engineers in industry . Students create a variety of artifacts , some assigned as learning exercises and some in the context of real projects . The terminal academic degree for a designer is usually a Master ' s degree , which is awarded based upon a portfolio or collection of previous work . Computer programmers similarly demonstrate their prowess based on programs created for class projects or products developed during internships . - 4 - Some design areas are more theoretical , such as cubism or impressionism in the fine arts . Others are more applied , such as typography and graphic design . Unlike scientists , who generally believe in a notion of " progress " and accumulation of knowledge , designers create new artifacts within a series of evolving styles . A few design schools emphasize the perspective of the user . For example , the notion of a pattern language ( Alexander et al . , 1977 ) encourages architects to think about the perspective of the users of the spaces being created . HCI is a new field and , not surprisingly , most senior members of the community come from other branches of science or schools of design or engineering . Unfortunately , people trained in one discipline often find themselves using techniques from another area without understanding the underlying assumptions and techniques . This causes problems when the techniques are misapplied , most notably in the statistical analysis of experiments , but in other areas as well . HCI and Natural Science This section provides a brief explanation of the basic scientific approach , comparing and contrasting the two most important historical models : the deductive ( Figure 2 ) and the inductive ( Figure 3 ) . The deductive model attempts to deduce or derive properties of the real world from theory , whereas the inductive model attempts to induce or generalize theories from observations of real world phenomena . ( See Lo See ( 1993 ) for an introduction to the history of science . ) The boxes in each figure represent phenomena that exist in the real world . The scientific method provides specific techniques for moving cyclically between the theoretical level , which describes natural phenomena in general terms , and the empirical level , in which people describe phenomena they observe in the real world . The Deductive Model dates back to Galileo and is also referred to as the hypothetico - deductive model . The purpose is to generate a set of hypotheses that can explain real - world phenomena : It is the most general model in epistemology and philosophy of science ( Gillies ( 1993 ) and O ' Hew ( 1989 ) provide good introductions to the philosophy of science ) . The scientist begins with a theory about a particular phenomenon . She makes a specific prediction , in the form of a hypothesis , about the behavior of the phenomenon ( first box , Figure 1 ) . An experiment , usually conducted in a laboratory , systematically manipulates a set of independent variables and measures the results with respect to a set of dependent variables . Other factors that may affect the results are either eliminated or varied systematically through control conditions . Once the results of the experiment are analyzed , the original theory is re - examined and a revised hypothesis is created . The scientist can then proceed to test the revised hypothesis with a new , more precise , controlled experiments . The scientists values reliability , which means that the same results will be obtained if the experiment is repeated under the same conditions , and validity , which means that the results can be generalized beyond the specific experimental setting in the laboratory . Theory Observation Hypothesis Revised Hypothesis Experiment New Experiment * Natural Phenomena * * * * Figure 2 : Deductive Model : Begin with a theory about a naturally - occurring phenomenon , generate a testable hypothesis , test it with a controlled experiment , revise the hypothesis and test again with a new controlled experiment . Of course , theories must come from somewhere . Scientists present their theories in the context of other theories and previous observations of the real world . However , in the basic deductive method , the cycle always begins with a theory , followed by an experiment or test . Within the social sciences , Experimental Psychologists are most likely to follow this model . The Inductive Model dates back to Bacon ' s conception of science and the inductive method . The purpose is to construct the best description ( as opposed to explanation ) of the real world . In contrast to the Deductive Model , the Inductive Model begins with natural phenomena observed in the real world ( box 1 , Figure 3 ) . The scientist observes phenomena in the real world ( as opposed to the laboratory ) , without having a preconceived idea of what he is looking for . He then attempts to describe a framework or model that explains the phenomenon . It is assumed that questions will emerge , so the next step is to return to the real world to make further specific observations that validate or contradict the original framework . The results are then incorporated into a modified framework . Traditional Sociology and Anthropology follow this model . Theory Framework ModifiedFramework GeneralField Study SpecificField Study Observation * Natural Phenomena * * * * F igure 3 : Inductive Model : Begin by observing phenomena in the real world ( avoiding pre - conceived notions ) , develop a framework to describe the phenomena , make new observations with respect to questions that emerged from the original observations , and modify the framework as required . The Deductive and Inductive Models share an important characteristic . Both assume the existence of two " worlds " : the theoretical and the empirical ( or " real world " ) . For both , research consists of moving cyclically back and forth between theory and observation in an attempt to understand phenomena in the real world . Both models may incorporate both quantitative and qualitative data , although the deductive model is more often quantitative - 5 - and the inductive is more often qualitative . Standard statistical approaches , e . g . hypothesis testing and regression analysis , can be applied to the deductive model . Exploratory data analysis ( Hartwig & Dearing , 1979 , provide a useful introduction whereas Tukey & Mosteller , 1977 provide an in - depth presentation ) is based upon the same underlying mathematical models , but is used for quantitative analysis of inductive approaches . The goal of exploratory data analysis is to iteratively identify and display the " smooth " ( i . e . , the general distribution ( s ) of the data ) and the " rough " ( i . e . , the variability or error in the data ) . Both the deductive and inductive models adhere to the scientific method and make certain assumptions : • Natural phenomena exist and can be isolated for study . • Observers are unbiased . 3 • Repeated observations under the same conditions will yield the same results . • Conclusions drawn from observations in one setting can be generalized to other settings . The main difference between the models lies in the starting point of the cycle : The Deductive Model starts from theory and the Inductive Model starts from observation . These models also differ in the specific ways in which theories are stated and observations are conducted ( Chalmers 1976 ) . Challenging the basic models The scientific method has proven extraordinarily productive and most working scientists in the natural sciences follow variations of these models . However , it is important to note that these models have been severely critiqued and some of the most basic assumptions have been challenged . Popper ( 1963 ) challenged both models , on different grounds . He disagreed with the Inductive Model ' s approach of starting with observation . However , he also disagreed with the Deductive Model ' s approach of attempting to confirm a particular hypothesis . He claimed that , although it is possible to find data to corroborate a hypothesis , one can never actually confirm it . A counter - example is always theoretically possible . His solution was to pose the hypotheses differently , so that experiments try explicitly to find a counter - example to the hypothesis . The hypothesis can be accepted as conditionally true , until an objection can be found . This strategy is called " falsification " and forms the basis for most of today ' s experimental designs that fit the Deductive Model . Note that this implies that experiments can never actually prove hypotheses : they can only increase our confidence in them . This is the reason for the careful wording necessary when reporting the results of statistical analyses of experiments . The Inductive Model has also been challenged . Many anthropologists now reject the notion of " unbiased observers " . Margaret Mead popularized the notion of 3 This is a controversial point : many social scientists argue that they are necessarily biased in their observations and attempt to make those biases explicit . " cultural relativism " , which assumes that researchers bring their own biases to the situation . Many ethnographers , who make long - term , detailed observations of people in other cultures , now explicitly try to identify as many of their own biases as possible . They also encourage their readers to do the same and judge the work in the context of these three perspectives . Each research strategy has strengths and weaknesses . McGrath et al . ( 1982 ) argue persuasively that individual experiments or studies all have serious flaws and cannot , by themselves , be considered " answers " . Choosing a Research Model Why do scientists choose one model over another ? Sometimes the answer is practical : the phenomena being studied greatly affect the theories and types of observations used . For example , an experimental psychologist studying the perception of color can be reasonably confident that experiments conducted in the lab will be relevant outside of the lab . This is less clear for a sociologist studying the effects of socio - economic status on political beliefs and is clearly absurd for an anthropologist interested in coming - of - age rituals in aboriginal peoples . Another important factor is the time frame : psychologists tend to study phenomena that occur within a range of a millisecond to an hour . Sociologists tend to study phenomena that occur over hours , days , weeks or years . Anthropologists tend to study phenomena that are grounded within a long - term historical context of years , decades or even centuries . Clearly , the ways of looking at these phenomena must differ . As a field , Human - Computer Interaction poses a wide range of questions , crossing the boundaries of these disciplines . Why don ' t we simply consider HCI to be a natural science and select particular methods as needed ? The problem is that we are interested in artifacts made by people and the design process is quite different from the scientific method . Figure 4 illustrates how designers and engineers work from early prototypes to finished products , using guidelines and rules of thumb ( e . g . , Smith and Mosier , 1984 and Mayhew , 1992 ) or principles drawn from experimental Psychology ( Fleming and Levie , 1978 ) . Guidelines Design of Artifacts Prototype 2 Prototype 1 * Artifacts * * Product Figure 4 : Designers and engineers work with guidelines and rules of thumb to create new technology . The major difficulty for HCI is that the object of study is not an independent natural phenomenon , as in all of the sciences . Nor is it solely the creation of new artifacts , as in the design and engineering disciplines . HCI studies the interaction between people and artificially - created - 6 - artifacts . The study of dynamic phenomena , such as human learning , is already problematic for the social sciences ( Sidman 1977 ) . HCI compounds the problem by constantly changing the underlying technology being studied . Even more difficult is the finding that the interaction of people and technology is co - adaptive ( Mackay , 1990 ) : people both adapt to the technology and they actively adapt it for their own purposes . Thus , the problem is not static : the " same " technology is often very different in different environments . People are influenced by how the people around them interact with the technology . Not surprisingly , the HCI community has adopted iterative design as a way of addressing the changing nature of user ' s interaction with changing technology ( Norman and Draper , 1986 ) . By studying users , both to evaluate the technology and to generate design ideas , we can build better systems . How can we view these techniques with respect to the deductive and inductive models of science ? Figure 5 illustrates how to integrate the various aspects of the two major scientific approaches , as well as design , to represent the range of activities in Human - Computer Interaction . Theory Observation Design of Artifacts Prototype Model Revised Model Field Study Simulation Evaluation * Interaction with artifacts * * * * * * Figure 5 : HCI creates and examines the interaction of people with artificially - created artifacts , moving between theory and empirical observation . The boxes represent the interaction with artificially - created artifacts , rather than independent natural phenomena as in Figures 2 & 3 or design artifacts as in Figure 4 . Figure 5 illustrates how design and both scientific models can be integrated for the range of activities found in HCI . At the theoretical level , we can create and revise interaction models based upon observations of users interacting with artifacts . At the empirical or real - world level , we can observe how people interact with various technologies and develop models of use . In both cases , we can draw from theory and observation to instantiate new artifacts , ranging from early simulations to working prototypes to products . These artifacts constantly evolve and influence or change models at the theoretical level and observations at the empirical level . One can argue that scientists strive to understand whereas designers strive to create . HCI is an interdisciplinary field that must do both . Particular design techniques can now be mapped to this perspective . Task analyses or models such as GOMS ( Card et al . , 1983 ) provide cognitive models of users ' interactions with artifacts and are essentially deductive approaches . In contrast , scenario - based design ( Carroll , 1995 , Mackay & Bødker , 1994 ) and participatory design in general ( Kyng & Greenbaum , 1991 ) draw their ideas from observations of interactions in the real world and are essentially inductive . System software evaluation techniques , such as Cognitive Walkthroughs ( John & Packer , 1995 ) and Heuristic Evaluations ( Nielsen & Phillips , 1993 ) begin with design artifacts and use guidelines to evaluate them whereas Design Rationale ( McLean et al . , 1991 ) seeks to preserve explanations of how the designs were created . Researchers working within the HCI paradigm shown in Figure 5 may choose any or all of the above . Applying the Framework at CENA CENA conducts or sponsors a wide variety of different research projects . We decided to evaluate our framework by examining whether it captures the full range of activities , both scientific and design . The following six projects are derived from different groups within the organization and represent a broad range of goals and methods . Each project can be classified initially , based upon the way the participants talk about the goals of their projects . These goals correspond roughly with the approaches outlined in Figures 2 , 3 and 4 , i . e . , developing theories ( deductive model ) , enriching descriptions ( inductive model ) or creating new technologies ( design model ) . In each case , the basic model , whether scientific or design - oriented , provides a good indication of the focus of the project . However , even though particular projects are grounded in one of these three approaches , they rarely use one approach exclusively . Conducting research and design activities that meet the needs of a particular user population generate specific requirements that force each project to move outside of the basic paradigm . None can be described exclusively on the basis of Figures 2 , 3 or 4 : yet all fit into the more complex , interdisciplinary framework presented in Figure 5 . This section briefly describes six recent or on - going projects at CENA and maps them onto our HCI framework . For each project , we identify the goals , the backgrounds of the researchers or designers , and the basic project design . Specialists in circadian rhythms and the medical corps at the Laboratory of applied anthropology in Paris conducted a 3 - year study of the sleep patterns of controllers , using interviews and physiological tests ( Figure 6 ) . An important finding was that controllers have lower fatigue and increased vigilance when their schedules begin at successively later times during the day . Although the original study did not consider the practical consequences for the controllers , another internal group responsible for work schedules was able to use the findings to revise the existing schedules . The 10 - day pattern of work and rest days has been changed to 12 days , with two different kinds of night shifts ( DNA , 1997 ) . The resulting schedule is much more complex and the controllers have not yet decided whether or not they like it . - 7 - Sleep Study : Theory Observation Design of Artifacts RevisedSchedule Descriptive Model Field Study Evaluation * Interaction with artifacts * * * * Figure 6 : A study of the controllers ' sleep patterns : The researchers examined the existing schedule and , together with their knowledge of human biological rhythms , created a new schedule , which was implemented 12 January , 1997 . This study combines applied biology and applied psychology . The field study approach is important to determine how the controllers ' ability to interact with the control system changes according to their sleep patterns . The result of the study has a direct impact on the controller ' s lives , through the change in the schedule . Figure 7 presents work done on SIM - COOP , one of a number of projects being conducted by ARAHIIMS . Theory Observation Design of Artifacts SoftwareSimulation Cognitive Model Specific Model Field Study * Interaction with artifacts * * * * * * ModelSimulation Revised Model Figure 7 : SIM - COOP : The ARAMIIHS group focuses on developing cognitive models of air traffic controllers , informed by observation in the field and simulated in Prolog . ARAMIIHS is an external research group that works with CENA . As cognitive ergonomists , they are interested in analyzing the tasks and communication patterns of the controllers and building theoretical models to describe the activities . They draw from several theoretical paradigms , including speech act theory and relevance theory . Some of the work involves observation of controllers in the field , while other research involves creating cognitive models , which are then implemented in Prolog ( e . g . , Simcoop , ( Zorola - Villarreal et al . , 1996 ) and used to simulate a variety of air traffic control situations . The research paradigm strongly emphasizes the theoretical level , through the construction of cognitive models , but also sees the value in conducting field studies to understand specific types of interaction in the field . Figure 8 presents CINDI , an experiment designed to compare different interaction techniques using the mouse and keyboard , under varying levels of mental load and interruptions . Theory Observation Design of Artifacts Hypothesis RevisedHypothesis ExperimentPrototype ControlledExperiment * Interaction with artifacts * * * * Figure 8 : The CINDI project examined which of several interaction techniques was most effective for changing flight information . Subjects were systematically exposed to a variety of conditions , using an experimental prototype in a laboratory setting , and response times and errors were measured . Air traffic controllers frequently issue commands to change flight level or direction , often while being interrupted or working on another task . Future interfaces that involve " electronic flight strips " would require controllers to issue these commands to a computer . CINDI ( Mertz , 1996 ) compares a set of different interaction techniques , selecting a new flight level from one of several menus or typing it on the keyboard , in a situation designed to simulate the stress and interruptions common in real air traffic control settings . CINDI uses an experimental protocol based on the deductive model used in Experimental Psychology . Subjects , with varying backgrounds including computer science , engineering , ergonomics and air traffic control , were asked to make a series of changes to existing flight levels . Mertz created an experimental prototype using existing 3 menus , 2 modified menus and a keyboard interface . " Mental load " was operationalized by creating an increasingly difficult set of tasks . In the simplest condition , subjects were asked to change a series of flight levels using one of the interaction techniques . In the more complex condition , subjects were asked to perform a parallel task : a red or green light would appear on the screen and the subject would press the corresponding left or right foot pedal . The most complex condition added a third parallel task : subjects were asked to memorize and later recall a set of words spoken by the experimenter . The null hypothesis stated that no differences would obtain among the various interaction styles , regardless of the level of mental load . The dependent variables were time to completion and numbers of errors . Controlled experiments such as CINDI are rare at CENA . However , they provide an effective method of getting information - 8 - about specific design alternatives . This research paradigm strongly emphasizes the deductive approach and is a classic example of a social sciences experiment . Figure 9 presents ERATO , a system designed to support air traffic controllers as they try to manage a stream of upcoming air conflicts . Theory Observation Design of Artifacts DesignPrototype Descriptive Model Field Study Evaluationby Simulation * Interaction with artifacts * * * * * DesignPrototype Figure 9 : ERATO . Based on field observations and a descriptive model , the project is now iteratively designing a prototype that is being tested with simulated air traffic using real air traffic controllers . ERATO ( Leroux , 1993a , 1993b ) is being designed by a former air traffic controller who was originally trained as an engineer . Based on his experience in the field , Leroux developed a descriptive model of the problems controllers face when trying to resolve a series of air traffic conflicts . For example , they cannot simply solve problems as they appear , but must wait until the appropriate time to issue new instructions to the pilots . The controller might decide to ask the pilot to change direction after reaching a certain beacon , estimated to be in about 15 minutes at the current speed . The problem is to remember what to do at the right time , in a highly interrupt - driven environment . ERATO introduces the concept of an agenda or timeline that provides controllers with a temporal view of upcoming conflicts and reminding the controller when it is appropriate to take action . Leroux is now working with an interdisciplinary team to create a working prototype with a variety of such tools . Different versions of the prototype are tested by creating simulations and inviting current air traffic controllers to try the system . The simulations are videotaped and the group looks at the differences between the controllers performance in settings with and without ERATO . The goal of ERATO is to provide an effective tool that helps controllers make informed decisions under stressful , high conflict conditions . The perspective is to provide advice rather than replace the controller . The on - going participation of a small group of currently - active controllers is considered essential to the success of the project . Although ERATO fits into the design model , it is clear that the project is also informed by both observation and a descriptive model . Figure 10 presents GRIGRI , part of the Imagine project . Observation Design of Artifacts SpecificPrototype ExistingHardware InformalEvaluation * * * Guidelines * Interaction with artifacts Figure 10 : GRIGRI : Based on informal observations of writing on paper strips , a prototype that provides pen - based input to air traffic control was created and evaluated . GRIGRI ( Chatty & Lecoanet , 1996 ) also follows the design model , but from a very different perspective . The Imagine engineering group were interested in whether a particular hardware device , a graphics tablet , would be useful to controllers , given the existing activity of writing on paper flight strips . They created a set of standard marks for common activities , such as changing direction or modifying the flight level . They then displayed an electronic version of the flight strip on a screen and asked controllers to write on the graphics tablet , modifying the strips with the standard marks . GRIGRI then interprets the marks and makes the appropriate modifications to the strip . Unlike CINDI , the GRIGRI tests were conducted with real air traffic controllers . Rather than concentrating on basic performance issues , the goal was to determine whether the idea was worth pursuing and whether or not controllers would find the approach acceptable . GRIGRI fits easily into the design model , yet provides an evaluation step that is deductive in nature . Theory Observation Design of Artifacts Prototypes Descriptive Model GeneralField Study FocusedField Study * Interaction with artifacts * * * * User Workshop RevisedDescription Figure 11 : The augmented flight strips project ( Mackay & Fayard , in preparation ) is a design project with both inductive and deductive aspects . Figure 11 presents our own work . Like the English studies of air traffic control ( Hughes et al . , 1992 , Bentley et al . , 1992 ) , we use a combination of ethnography and design . However , our direction is different : augmented - 9 - reality rather than another mouse / keyboard interface . We seek to maintain the existing paper flight strips , with all their subtlety and flexibility , and augment them , by capturing information and displaying it to the controllers . We feel that augmented reality is a very promising research direction because we ground it not in the technology itself , but in the existing work practices of the organization . Our prototyping strategies are also different : we are explicitly trying to create opportunities for controllers to generate innovative ideas . The project began with an in - depth study of one team of controllers under a full range of traffic conditions . We are performing both qualitative and quantitative analyses of the data , which includes 40 hours of video , detailed notes and informal discussions with controllers . We are particularly interested in the cooperative interactions among controllers with respect to paper flight strips , the RADAR and other technologies . We also use a variety of design strategies , including various rapid prototyping techniques and user - researcher workshops that generate ideas via brainstorming , scenario - building and evaluation of prototypes . Our goal is to innovate : not just to create something new for controllers , but also to explore the variety of ways in which we can augment useful artifacts in real user settings . The final result will be two or more prototypes that will be formally evaluated at the end of the project . TRIANGULATION IN RESEARCH & DESIGN Although the group of projects we have chosen is not exhaustive , we feel that it is representative of the range of projects conducted at CENA . The different research groups are easily distinguishable , not only by their goals but by their different approaches . Yet many aspects of the work are similar or complementary and few of the projects fit into a standard research design . How can we take advantage of this range of activities ? McGrath et al . ( 1982 ) explore the problems of conducting research in the social sciences . They argue persuasively that each individual method makes trade - offs between the fundamental problems they want to avoid and the problems they are willing to accept . Figure 12 ( Source : Runkel and McGrath , 1972 ) shows 8 different research strategies , each of which forces a trade - off among different threats to validity ( Cook & Campbell , 1979 ) . They state that , all other things being equal , it is always best to maximize : generalizability with respect to populations ( A ) , precision in control and measurement of variables related to the behavior of interest ( B ) and existential realism for the participants and of the context in which behavior is observed ( C ) . For example , if one uses a controlled laboratory experiment to maximize precision in control and measurement of variables ( B ) , one risks low generalizability to other populations and lack of realism with respect to the work context . It is simply not possible to use a single study that addresses all the possible threats to validity . The solution is triangulation : using more than one research approach to address the same question . Triangulation sometimes refers to the use of different methods within one paradigm , such as using different methods of operationalizing behavior for different experiments . We argue that triangulation across scientific and design disciplines is more likely to be beneficial , especially in interdisciplinary fields such as HCI . A C B I II II I III IV IV III Field Experiments Field Studies ComputerSimulations FormalTheory SampleSurveys JudgementTasks LaboratoryExperiments ExperimentalSimulations Particular Behavior Systems Universal Behavior Systems UnobtrusiveResearchOperations ObtrusiveResearchOperations Figure 12 : The eight major research strategies can be related to one another along several dimensions . Source : Runkel and McGrath ( 1972 ) . I . Settings in Natural systems II . Contrived and created settings III . Behavior not setting dependent IV . No observation of behavior required A . Point of maximum concern with generality over actors . B . Point of maximum concern with precision of measurement of behavior . C . Point of maximum concern with system character of context . Unfortunately , individual researchers cannot be expert in all the component disciplines and rarely have the resources to conduct a wide range of different studies . On the other hand , research laboratories such as CENA that investigate complex real - world problems generally employ researchers and designers with different backgrounds . Researchers in such environments can , by relating their work to each other , triangulate across disciplines and avoid many of the problems inherent in single - discipline based research . Addressing individual problems with multiple methods should produce results that are significantly more robust and useful . The framework presented in Figure 5 attempts to relate the wide variety of research activities in HCI , both scientific and design . If we can avoid creating a " Tower of Babel " and learn to talk to each other , we can benefit from each other ' s work and find more productive solutions to our research problems . CONCLUSIONS Designers are faced with a bewildering array of different methods and philosophical perspectives . Bellotti et al . ( 1995 ) address the question of whether or not the science base of HCI has anything to contribute to real design . They conclude that theoretically - grounded HCI techniques - 10 - can be effective , but only if the " end - user requirements of the design practitioners are properly understood , and the value of such techniques can be demonstrated " . Showing how these techniques , along with their underlying assumptions , relate to standard design practices , should help to achieve this goal . Individual research strategies are necessarily limited and contain serious flaws . Yet what is a weakness for individual research paradigms is actually a strength for HCI : if we can understand the relationships among them , we can triangulate across our component disciplines and improve the validity and value of our research . The framework we present here seeks to provide a simple demonstration of how scientific and design disciplines in HCI relate to each other . By presenting the component disciplines in the context of interaction between users and computers , we can re - examine our own research setting and clarify how the different kinds of work can benefit from each other . The illustration of the framework with projects from a real - world research setting , CENA , shows how , despite its simplicity , the framework covers a wide range of research and design activities . Our goal is not only to describe , but also to suggest fruitful directions for additional research . By triangulating across the scientific and design disciplines that compose HCI , we can increase the validity of our research results and , we hope , make them more useful to real - world problems . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Merci à l ' Équipe 9W ! Lotte Bailyn provided the original insight about the relationship between the theoretical and empirical levels . Also , our thanks to Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Marie Christine Bresolle , Dominique Colin De Verdière , Stéphane Chatty and Christophe Mertz for their comments on earlier drafts and to Marcel Leroux for his support . REFERENCES Alexander , C . , Ishikawa , S . , and Silverstein , M . ( 1977 ) A Pattern Language . New York : Oxford University Press . Barley , S . R . , Meyer , G . W . , Gash , D . C . ( 1988 ) . Cultures of Culture : Academics , Practitioners and the Pragmatics of Normative Control . Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol . 33 , pp . 24 - 60 . Bellotti , V . , Buckingham Shum , S . , MacLean , A . , Hammond , N . ( 1995 ) Multidisciplinary modelling in HCI design . . . in theory and in practice . In Proceedings of CHI ' 95 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing ( pp . 429 - 436 ) Boulder , Colorado : ACM Press . Bentley , R . , Hughes , J . A . , Randall , D . , Rodden , T . , Sawyer , P . , Shapiro , D . and Somerville , I . ( 1992 ) Ethnographically - informed systems design for air traffic control . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 92 , ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . ( pp . 122 - 129 ) Toronto , Ontario : ACM Press . Bressolle , M . C . , Pavard , B . , and Leroux , M . ( 1995 ) The role of multimodal communicaton in cooperaton and intention recognition : The case of Air Traffic Control . In CMC ' 95 , The International Conference on Cooperative and Multimodal Communication : Theory and Applications . Eindhoven , The Netherlands . Card , S . , Moran , T . , and Newell , A . ( 1983 ) T h e Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction . Hillsdale , N . J . : Lawrence Ehrlbaum Associates . Carroll , J . ( 1995 ) Scenario - based design . Envisioning work and technology in system development . NY : Wiley & Sons . Chalmers , A . F . ( 1976 ) What is this thing called Science ? An Assessment of the Nature and Status of Science and its methods . St . Lucie : University of Queensland Press . Chatty , S . & Lecoanet , P . ( 1996 ) Pen Computing and Air Traffic Control . In Proceedings of CHI ' 96 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing , ( pp . 87 - 94 ) Vancouver , British Columbia : ACM Press . Cook , T . and Campbell , D . ( 1979 ) Q u a s i - Experimentation : Design and Analysis Issues for Field Settings . Boston , MA : Houghton - Mifflin Company . DNA ( January , 1997 ) La Lettre de la Direction de la Navigation Aérienne . No . 22 . Fleming , M . and Levie , W . H . ( 1978 ) Instructional Message Design . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology Publications . Gillies , D . ( 1993 ) Philosophy of Science in the 20th Century . Oxford : Blackwell Press . Gras , A . , Moricot , Poirot - Delpech , S . L . , and Scardigli , V . ( 1994 ) Faced with automation : The pilot , the controller and the engineer . Publications of the Sorbonne : Paris . Harper , R . , Hughes , J . , and Shapiro , D . ( 1991 ) Harmonious working and CSCW : Computer Technology and Air Traffic Control . In Studies in CSCW : Theory , Practice and Design . Bowers , J . and Bedford , S . , Eds . North Holland : Amsterdam . pp . 225 - 235 . Hartwig , F . and Dearing , B . E . ( 1979 ) Exploratory Data Analysis . Sage University Paper Series on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences , 07 - 001 . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications . Heath , C . and Luff , P . ( 1991 ) Collaborative Activity and Technological Design : Task Coordination in the London Underground Control Rooms . In Proceedings of ECSCW ' 91 , The European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . Kluwer Press . Hopkin , V . D . ( 1995 ) Human Factors in Air Traffic Control . London : Taylor & Francis . Hughes , J . A . , Randall , D . and Shapiro , D . ( October , 1992 ) Faltering from Ethnography to Design . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 92 , ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . ( pp . 115 - 122 ) Toronto , Ontario : ACM Press . John , B . and Packer , H . ( 1995 ) Learning and using the Cognitive Walkthrough method : A case study - 11 - approach . In Proceedings of CHI ' 95 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing ( pp . 429 - 436 ) Boulder , CO : ACM Press . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1962 ) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Kyng , M . & Greenbaum , J . ( 1991 ) Design at Work . Hillsdale , NJ . : Lawrence Ehrlbaum . Latour , B . ( 1987 ) . Science in Action . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Leroux , M . ( 1993a ) The role of expert systems in future cooperative tools for air traffic controllers . In Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology . ( pp . 26 - 29 ) . Columbus , OH . Leroux , M . ( 1993b ) ERATO : Vers une nouvelle philosophie de coopération homme - machine dans l ' ATC . In Le Transpondeur , No . 9 . Lo See , J . A . , ( 1993 ) A Historical Introduction to the Philosophy of Science . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Mackay , W . ( 1990 ) Users and Customizable software : A Co - Adaptive Phenomenon . Doctoral Dissertation , The Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Cambridge , MA . Mackay , W . ( March 1995 ) . Réalité Augmentée : le meilleur des deux mondes . La Recherche , numéro spécial ( No . 285 ) L ' ordinateur au doigt et à l ' œil . Mackay , W . and Bødker , S . ( 1994 ) Workshop on Scenario - Based Design . In CHI ' 94 Conference Companion . , Boston , MA : ACM Press . MacLean , A . , Young , R . , Bellotti , V . and Moran , T . ( 1991 ) Questions , Options and Criteria : Elements of design space analysis . Human - Computer Interaction . Vol . 6 , No . 3 & 4 . pp . 201 - 250 . McGrath , J . , Martin , J . & Kulka , J . ( 1982 ) Judgement Calls in Research . CA : Sage Publications . Mayhew , D . J . ( 1992 ) Principles and Guidelines in Software User Interface Design . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Mertz , C . ( 1996 ) Résultats de l ' expérimentation CINDI . CENA Technical Report , NR96 - 304 . Nielsen , J . and Phillips , V . L . ( 1993 ) Estimating the relative usability of two interfaces : Heuristic , format and empirical methods . In Proceedings of INTERCHI ' 93 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing ( pp . 214 - 221 ) Amsterdam , The Netherlands : ACM Press . Norman , D . A . and Draper , S . W . ( 1986 ) . User - Centered System Design . Hillsdale , New Jersey : Ehrlbaum Associates . O ' Hew , A . ( 1989 ) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science . Oxford : Clarendon Press . Popper , K . R . ( 1963 ) Conjectures and Refutations . Routledge & Kegan Paul . Preux , F . ( 1994 ) Rôle des strips dans l ' activité des contrôleurs . Sélection Professionnelle IEEAC . CENA . Runkel , P . and McGrath , J . ( 1972 ) Research on Human Behavior : A Systematic Guide to Method . NY : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . Smith , S . , and Mosier , J . ( 1986 ) Guidelines for Desiging User Interface Software . Report ESD - TR - 86 - 278 , The MITRE Corporation , Bedford , MA . Sidman , M . ( 1960 ) . Tactics of Scientific Resarch : Evaluating Experimental Data in Psychology . New York , NY : Basic Books . Simon , H . A . ( 1969 ) The Sciences of the Artificial . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) . Plans and Situated Actions . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Wellner , P . , Mackay , W . and Gold , R . ( 1993 ) Computer - Augmented Environments : Back to the Real World . Special issue of Communications of the ACM , Vol . 36 , No . 7 . Zorola - Villarreal , R . , Pavard , B . , and Bastide , R . ( 1995 ) SIM - COOP : A Tool to analyse and predict cooperation in complex environments . A Case Study : The introduction of a datalink between controllers and pilots . In the Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Human - Machine Interaction and Artificial Intelligence in Aerospace , IHM - AI - AS 95 , Toulouse , France . Zuboff , S . ( 1988 ) . In the Age of the Smart Machine . New York : Basic Books .