Objective : Objective : Describe Cognitive Flexibility Theory Describe Cognitive Flexibility Theory and consider its application to and consider its application to Instructional Design . Instructional Design . We will also examine We will also examine the Flexibly Adaptive Instruction the Flexibly Adaptive Instruction model , and the adaptable instructional model , and the adaptable instructional design software program STAR . design software program STAR . Cognitive Flexibility Theory Cognitive Flexibility Theory Theory developed by Dr . Rand J . Spiro Theory developed by Dr . Rand J . Spiro University of Illinois at Urbana University of Illinois at Urbana - - ChampaignChampaign An explanation of some of the underlying An explanation of some of the underlying mechanisms of how people learn . mechanisms of how people learn . Addresses the realities of advanced Addresses the realities of advanced learning for problems with complex learning for problems with complex solutionssolutions “ “ Cognitive Flexibility Theory : Cognitive Flexibility Theory : Advanced Knowledge Acquisition Advanced Knowledge Acquisition in Ill in Ill - - Structured Domains Structured Domains”” Rand J . Spiro Rand J . Spiro University of Illinois at Urbana University of Illinois at Urbana - - ChampaignChampaign Richard R . Richard R . CoulsonCoulson Paul J . Paul J . FeltovichFeltovich Daniel K . Anderson Daniel K . Anderson Southern Illinois University School of Medicine Southern Illinois University School of Medicine from Theoretical Models and Processes of from Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading 1994 Reading 1994 Differences in Differences in Knowledge Acquisition Knowledge Acquisition Introductory Introductory Knowledge : Knowledge : Expose learner to content Expose learner to content and give them a general and give them a general orientation to the field . orientation to the field . Advanced Advanced Knowledge : Knowledge : Learner should be able to Learner should be able to reason with knowledge reason with knowledge and apply it flexibly to and apply it flexibly to different contexts different contexts Problem : Problem : Structured methods used to teach Structured methods used to teach introductory knowledge may actually conflict with advanced introductory knowledge may actually conflict with advanced knowledge acquisition because of the way they knowledge acquisition because of the way they compartmentalize knowledge compartmentalize knowledge Demonstration Demonstration (cid:139) Real World Ill - Structured Real World Ill - Structured Real World Ill structured Problem What interferes with advanced knowledge What interferes with advanced knowledge acquisition ? acquisition ? ““Reductive Bias Reductive Bias”” ! ! (cid:139)(cid:139) 1 . 1 . OversimplificationOversimplification of complex structures of complex structures - - routines , methods , irregularity is made regular , routines , methods , irregularity is made regular , chaos is made orderly chaos is made orderly (cid:139)(cid:139) 2 . Over reliance on a single mental representation . 2 . Over reliance on a single mental representation . (cid:139)(cid:139) 3 . Over reliance on top 3 . Over reliance on top - - down processing , generic down processing , generic abstractionsabstractions - - knowing knowing ““how cases go how cases go”” . . (cid:139)(cid:139) 4 . Context independent conceptual representation 4 . Context independent conceptual representation - - contexts are represented as being overly uniform . contexts are represented as being overly uniform . (cid:139)(cid:139) 5 . Over 5 . Over - - reliance on fixed protocols and reliance on fixed protocols and structures prepackaged schemata structures prepackaged schemata presented as recipes presented as recipes (cid:139)(cid:139) 6 . Rigid compartmentalization of 6 . Rigid compartmentalization of knowledge components . Components of knowledge components . Components of knowledge are interdependent and should knowledge are interdependent and should be taught as being linked be taught as being linked - - instead of instead of separate . separate . What interferes with advanced What interferes with advanced knowledge acquisition ? knowledge acquisition ? (cid:139)(cid:139) 7 . Passive transmission of knowledge 7 . Passive transmission of knowledge - - knowledge is handed to the learner who knowledge is handed to the learner who receives it passively receives it passively - - cannot integrate with cannot integrate with personal experience , active exploration , personal experience , active exploration , etcetc What interferes with advanced What interferes with advanced knowledge acquisition ? knowledge acquisition ? Cognitive Flexibility Theory Cognitive Flexibility Theory Landscape Analogy Landscape Analogy Advanced knowledge is Advanced knowledge is a a ““crisscriss - - crossed crossed landscapelandscape”” Spiro et Spiro et al . , 1987 , & al . , 1987 , & WittengensteinWittengenstein , 1953 , , 1953 , ( as cited in Spiro et ( as cited in Spiro et al . 1995 ) a nonlinear al . 1995 ) a nonlinear exploration of complex exploration of complex subject matter , on subject matter , on different different occassionsoccassions from different from different directions . directions . Spiro et al . Spiro et al . ’’ss Themes of advanced Themes of advanced knowledge acquisition : knowledge acquisition : (cid:139)(cid:139) Avoidance of over Avoidance of over simplification simplification (cid:139)(cid:139) Multiple Multiple representations at representations at different levels of different levels of instructioninstruction - - revisiting revisiting and rearranging and rearranging them present the them present the same concept in same concept in different contexts . different contexts . Themes of advanced knowledge Themes of advanced knowledge acquisitionacquisition (cid:139)(cid:139) Problems will vary Problems will vary greatly from case to greatly from case to case , with different case , with different variables . variables . (cid:139)(cid:139) The ability to respond The ability to respond to the great diversity to the great diversity of cases comes from of cases comes from reasoning , using reasoning , using knowledge gained in knowledge gained in previous cases previous cases Themes of advanced knowledge Themes of advanced knowledge acquisition : acquisition : (cid:139)(cid:139) Concepts and Concepts and principles will be principles will be applied differently in applied differently in different contexts different contexts (cid:139)(cid:139) Instead of retrieving Instead of retrieving intact pre intact pre - - existing existing knowledge , flexible knowledge , flexible rere - - assembly of assembly of knowledge knowledge – – erector erector set metaphor ( Spiro set metaphor ( Spiro et al . 1995 ) et al . 1995 ) Themes of advanced knowledge Themes of advanced knowledge acquisitionacquisition (cid:139)(cid:139) Knowledge must be Knowledge must be assembled from assembled from different sources . different sources . (cid:139)(cid:139) Concepts cannot be Concepts cannot be thought of as separate thought of as separate ““chapterschapters”” , but rather , but rather intertwined and intertwined and interconnectedinterconnected Themes of advanced knowledge Themes of advanced knowledge acquisitionacquisition (cid:139)(cid:139) Learners must be Learners must be able to explore able to explore complex knowledge complex knowledge in many directions , in many directions , with expert guidance . with expert guidance . (cid:139)(cid:139) Hypertext programs Hypertext programs are ideally suited for are ideally suited for this . this . Advanced knowledge domains Advanced knowledge domains Rand Rand ’ ’ s s Random Access Instruction Random Access Instruction (cid:139)(cid:139) A type of A type of Constructivist theory Constructivist theory - - (cid:139)(cid:139) Instead of retrieving Instead of retrieving intact pre intact pre - - existing existing knowledge , CFT knowledge , CFT assembles the existing assembles the existing knowledge flexibly to knowledge flexibly to fit the needs of a new fit the needs of a new situation . situation . Rand Rand ’ ’ s s Random Access Instruction Random Access Instruction (cid:139)(cid:139) Ill structured knowledge Ill structured knowledge involves multiple schemas , involves multiple schemas , perspectives , perspectives , organizational principles ; organizational principles ; the pattern varies greatly the pattern varies greatly across cases . across cases . LearningLearning - - mental mental representations and representations and instructional approaches instructional approaches should all be flexible . should all be flexible . Citizen Kane example Citizen Kane example Rand Rand ’ ’ s s Random Access Instruction Random Access Instruction (cid:139)(cid:139) Knowledge has to be used in many ways that Knowledge has to be used in many ways that cancan’’t be anticipated in advance . t be anticipated in advance . Construction of new understandings in the novel Construction of new understandings in the novel and situation specific . and situation specific . (cid:139)(cid:139) Multiple juxtapositions of content Multiple juxtapositions of content Rand Rand ’ ’ s s Random Access Instruction Random Access Instruction (cid:139)(cid:139) CrissCriss cross the landscape for new insights and cross the landscape for new insights and understandings . Return to the same situation understandings . Return to the same situation from different directions from different directions (cid:139)(cid:139) Mastery of complexity is now transferable to Mastery of complexity is now transferable to other situations . other situations . (cid:139)(cid:139) Hypertext Hypertext – – explore many aspects of the subject explore many aspects of the subject mattermatter Is it ill structured ? Is it ill structured ? (cid:139)(cid:139) Spiro says that any problem that Spiro says that any problem that involves cases is ill involves cases is ill - - structured ( Spiro structured ( Spiro et al . 1996 ) et al . 1996 ) - - medicine , literary medicine , literary review , history review , history (cid:139)(cid:139) They may contain structured They may contain structured principles . principles . Is it ill structured ? Is it ill structured ? Examples : Examples : (cid:139)(cid:139) CSICSI (cid:139)(cid:139) Amazing Race Amazing Race (cid:139)(cid:139) JeopardyJeopardy (cid:139)(cid:139) CSI Forensics professor CSI Forensics professor (cid:139)(cid:139) With the popularity of recent TV series , With the popularity of recent TV series , more learners are enrolling in college more learners are enrolling in college forensics courses . forensics courses . (cid:139)(cid:139) You will develop an instructional design to You will develop an instructional design to train learners how to use evidence to train learners how to use evidence to investigate crime scenes . investigate crime scenes . (cid:139)(cid:139) Is this an ill Is this an ill - - structured problem ? structured problem ? (cid:139)(cid:139) Does it contain structured principles ? Does it contain structured principles ? (cid:139)(cid:139) How will you teach learners to be able to How will you teach learners to be able to solve this problem ? solve this problem ? The Amazing Race Coach The Amazing Race Coach (cid:139)(cid:139) YouYou’’ve been hired by Colin and Christie to ve been hired by Colin and Christie to coach them to win the Amazing Race . coach them to win the Amazing Race . They will pay you 10 % of their winnings They will pay you 10 % of their winnings - - $ 100 , 000 . $ 100 , 000 . (cid:139)(cid:139) Is this an ill Is this an ill - - structured problem ? structured problem ? (cid:139)(cid:139) Does it contain structured principles ? Does it contain structured principles ? (cid:139)(cid:139) How will you coach them ? How will you coach them ? (cid:139)(cid:139) Jeopardy Coach Jeopardy Coach (cid:139)(cid:139) An A & M student has landed a spot on An A & M student has landed a spot on JeopardyJeopardy’’s College Game show . She asks s College Game show . She asks you to coach her so that she can win the you to coach her so that she can win the game . You do quantitative research on game . You do quantitative research on past shows , and discover that 60 per cent past shows , and discover that 60 per cent of the game questions have to do with of the game questions have to do with either history or geography . either history or geography . (cid:139)(cid:139) Is this an ill Is this an ill - - structured problem ? structured problem ? (cid:139)(cid:139) Does it have well structured principles ? Does it have well structured principles ? (cid:139)(cid:139) How will you coach this student ? How will you coach this student ? Flexibly Adaptive Learning Flexibly Adaptive Learning Daniel L . Schwartz , Sean Daniel L . Schwartz , Sean BrophyBrophy , , XiaodongXiaodong Lin , & John Lin , & John BransfordBransford Learning Technology Center Learning Technology Center Vanderbilt University Vanderbilt University (cid:139)(cid:139) Reaction to Reaction to ““inert knowledge inert knowledge”” : : students students fail to apply their relevant knowledge in fail to apply their relevant knowledge in novel settings novel settings (cid:139)(cid:139) Concerns about problem based learning , Concerns about problem based learning , case based learning : case based learning : student engagement student engagement may be mistaken for learning . Rocket may be mistaken for learning . Rocket example . example . (cid:139)(cid:139) Constructivist activities : Constructivist activities : may eliminate may eliminate traditional activities traditional activities - - such as fact based such as fact based readings or lectures readings or lectures Concerns about teaching methods S T A R Legacy S T A R Legacy Software Technology for Action Software Technology for Action and Reflection and Reflection (cid:139)(cid:139) An adaptable instructional design software An adaptable instructional design software based on CFT . Uses Problem Based based on CFT . Uses Problem Based Learning , Collaborative Learning , Project Learning , Collaborative Learning , Project Based Learning , Case Based Learning . Based Learning , Case Based Learning . Results can be archived for future Results can be archived for future reference . reference . S T A R S T A R - - uses problem based , case based uses problem based , case based and project based learning and project based learning (cid:139)(cid:139) Learner centered Learner centered (cid:139)(cid:139) Knowledge centered Knowledge centered (cid:139)(cid:139) Assessed by both learners & Assessed by both learners & teachersteachers (cid:139)(cid:139) Includes community environments Includes community environments & collaboration & collaboration S T A R S T A R featuresfeatures (cid:139)(cid:139) Explicit inquiry model Explicit inquiry model (cid:139)(cid:139) Components arranged in a single Components arranged in a single learning cycle learning cycle (cid:139)(cid:139) Multiple learning cycles so learners can Multiple learning cycles so learners can progressively deepen their progressively deepen their understandingunderstanding (cid:139)(cid:139) Reflection on the overall learning Reflection on the overall learning process , includes creating legacies for process , includes creating legacies for other people to use . other people to use . S T A R S T A R S T A R S T A R (cid:139)(cid:139) 1 . Challenge 1 . Challenge - - gives students gives students progressively complex problems progressively complex problems (cid:139)(cid:139) 2 . Generate ideas 2 . Generate ideas (cid:139)(cid:139) 3 . Multiple perspectives 3 . Multiple perspectives - - share ideas share ideas (cid:139)(cid:139) 4 . Research and revise 4 . Research and revise - - develop their develop their solutionssolutions S T A R S T A R (cid:139)(cid:139) 5 . Test Your Mettle 5 . Test Your Mettle - - formative evaluations , formative evaluations , quizzes , hands on projects , quizzes , hands on projects , (cid:139)(cid:139) 6 . Go public 6 . Go public - - present final solution present final solution (cid:139)(cid:139) 7 . Look ahead and Reflect back 7 . Look ahead and Reflect back - - Preview Preview the knowledge domain , set goals , the knowledge domain , set goals , compare new responses to original ones compare new responses to original ones Homework Homework (cid:139)(cid:139) Using the STAR model , write a brief description of a Using the STAR model , write a brief description of a flexibly adaptive instructional design for an ill flexibly adaptive instructional design for an ill structured problem in your area of interest . structured problem in your area of interest . (cid:139)(cid:139) Give at least one example of the activities that Give at least one example of the activities that learners will find on each point of the star . learners will find on each point of the star . (cid:139)(cid:139) We will refer to these next week in our discussion of We will refer to these next week in our discussion of MerrillMerrill’’s Instructional Transaction Theory . s Instructional Transaction Theory . CFT Research Question CFT Research Question What role does visualization play in What role does visualization play in solving ill solving ill - - structured problems ? structured problems ? Bibliography Bibliography (cid:139)(cid:139) FeltovichFeltovich , P . J . , Spiro , R . J . , , P . J . , Spiro , R . J . , CoulsonCoulson , R . L . , & , R . L . , & FeltovichFeltovich , J . ( 1996 ) . , J . ( 1996 ) . Collaboration Collaboration within and among minds : Mastering complexity , within and among minds : Mastering complexity , individually and in groups . individually and in groups . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc , Hillsdale , NJ : England . Retrie Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc , Hillsdale , NJ : England . Retrieved ved November 20 , 2005 , from November 20 , 2005 , from PsycINFOPsycINFO database . database . (cid:139)(cid:139) Schwartz , D . L . , Lin , X . , Schwartz , D . L . , Lin , X . , BrophyBrophy , S . , & , S . , & BransfordBransford , J . D . ( 1999 ) . , J . D . ( 1999 ) . Toward the Toward the development of flexibly adaptive instructional designs development of flexibly adaptive instructional designs . Lawrence Erlbaum . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers , Mahwah , NJ : US . Retrieved November 20 , 2 Associates , Publishers , Mahwah , NJ : US . Retrieved November 20 , 2005 , from 005 , from PsycINFOPsycINFO database . database . (cid:139)(cid:139) Spiro , R . J . , Spiro , R . J . , CoulsonCoulson , R . L . , , R . L . , FeltovichFeltovich , P . J . , & Anderson , D . K . ( 1994 ) . , P . J . , & Anderson , D . K . ( 1994 ) . Cognitive flexibility theory : Advanced knowledge acquisition in Cognitive flexibility theory : Advanced knowledge acquisition in illill - - structured domains . International Reading Association , Newark , D structured domains . International Reading Association , Newark , DE : E : US . US . Retrieved November 20 , 2005 , from Retrieved November 20 , 2005 , from PsycINFOPsycINFO database database (cid:139)(cid:139) Spiro , R . J . , Spiro , R . J . , FeltovichFeltovich , P . J . , Jacobson , M . J . , & , P . J . , Jacobson , M . J . , & CoulsonCoulson , R . L . ( 1995 ) . , R . L . ( 1995 ) . Cognitive flexibility , constructivism , and hypertext : Random acc Cognitive flexibility , constructivism , and hypertext : Random access ess instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill - - structured structured domains . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc , Hillsdale , NJ : Englan domains . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc , Hillsdale , NJ : England . d . Retrieved November 20 , 2005 , from Retrieved November 20 , 2005 , from PsycINFOPsycINFO database . database . Thank You ! Thank You ! Nancy Wood for EDTC 655 Fall 2005 Dr . Lauren Cifuentes Texas A & M University , College Station