Integrins in Point Contacts Mediate Cell Spreading : Factors That Regulate Integrin Accumulation in Point Contacts vs . Focal Contacts N . Tawil , E Wilson , and S . Carbonetto The Center for Neuroscience Research , McGill University , Montreal General Hospital Research Institute , Montreal , Quebec H3G IA4 , Canada Abstract . We have studied the function and distribu - tion of the o ~ 1 / 31 , o ~ 5 / 31 and 0 ~ 6 ~ 1 heterodimers on type - 1 astrocytes with antibodies specific for integrin subunits ( or1 , ors , or6 , and / 31 ) . The c ~ 1 / 31 heterodimer mediates adhesion to laminin and collagen , the otsfll to fibronectin in an RGD - dependent manner , The 0 ~ 5 / ~ 1 integrin is found in focal contacts in long - term cul - tures of well - spread astrocytes colocalizing with vincu - lin and the termini of actin stress fibers . 0tl / 31 heterodi - mers can occasionally be found as small aggregates within focal contacts but they do not accumulate there . Instead , 0 ~ 1 / 31 integrins are found in punctate deposits called point contacts which are distributed over the upper and the lower cell surfaces whether laminin , collagen , fibronectin or polylysine is used as a sub - stratum . Unlike focal contacts , point contacts contain clathrin but rarely codistribute with actin or vinculin . Two observations indicate that these point contacts are functional . First , mAb 3A3 , directed against the rat o ~ subunit , inhibits the attachment of astrocytes to lami - nin and collagen . Second , during the spreading of as - trocytes , a band of point contacts forms around the cell perimeter at a time when no focal contacts are visible . While o ~ / 31 integrins are found only in point contacts in astrocytes , the otd31 integrin , another lami - nin receptor , is localized within focal contacts . Moreover , o , / 31 heterodimers accumulate in focal con - tacts in fibroblasts . Thus , the ot subunit contributes , independent of its ligand , to functional integrin hetero - dimer accumulation in focal contacts or in point con - tacts . This accumulation varies among different cell types with apparently identical heterodimers as well as with the motile state ( spreading vs . flattened ) of the same cells . C ELLS in Culture form specialized contacts among them - selves and with their extracellular matrix ( ECM ) ~ that are often identical to those found in vivo ( Geiger et al . , 1985 ; Burridge et al . , 1988 ) . Integrins , the major fam - ily of ECM receptors ( Hynes et al . , 1987 ; Hemler , M . E . , 1990 ; Ruoslahti , E . , 1991 ) , are well known to concentrate within attachment sites called focal contacts ( Chen et al . , 1985 ; Damsky et al . , 1985 ; and for review see Burridge et al . , 1988 ) . lntegrins in focal contacts bind to extracellular ligands such as laminin , collagen or fibronectin within the ECM as well as the cytoskeletal proteins vinculin , talin and ot - actinin ( Horwitz et al . , 1986 ; Tapley et al . , 1989 ; Otey et al . , 1990 ) via their cytoplasmic tails . Much attention has fo - cused on focal contacts because of their characteristic and well - ordered structure . However , several other types of sub - stratum contacts have been reported including : podosomes , dot contacts , and point contacts ( Tarone et al . , 1985 ; Nermut et al . , 1991 ; Streeter and Rees , 1987 ) . Podosomes are de - scribed as large aggregates ( 200 - - 400 nm ) containing actin ( Tarone et al . , 1985 ) . Point contacts and dot contacts are 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : ECM , extraceIlular matrix ; NEM , N - ethyl maleimide . small ( 90 - 200 rum ) punctate regions of the cell closely ap - posed ( 15 nm ) to the substratum ( Streeter and Rees 1987 ; Nermut et al . , 1991 ) . We have been drawn to the study of these nonfocal contacts by our interest in neural cells in which focal contacts tend to be sparse or nonexistent ( Wil - son , P . , N . Tawil , and S . Carbonetto . 1991 . International Brain Research Organization Abstracts . 3 : 59 ) . Here we show that well - spread astroglia in culture form both focal contacts and point contacts . These cells express multiple integrins of the / 3 ~ subclass including the ot ~ fl ~ , ots / 3 ~ , and otd31 heterodimers . While ot5 / 31 and cxd3t heterodi - mers accumulate within focal contacts , the o ~ d51 integrins are concentrated in punctate arrays , essentially identical to point contacts described by Nermut et al . ( 1991 ) . ct ~ / 3 ~ bet - erodimers can be found within focal contacts but their occur - rence there is no greater than elsewhere on the cell surface . Since o ~ sflt , c ~ 3 ~ , and oLd ~ 1 integrins share the same / 3 subunit we conclude that the ot subunit is involved in regula - tion of integrin accumulation within the two different types of cell - substratum contacts . Localization of the ot ~ / 5 ~ het - erodimer is ligand independent and found in point contacts on astrocytes regardless of the substratum ( collagen , lami - (cid:14)9 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 01 / 261 / 11 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , Number 1 , January 1993 261 - 271 261 nin , or fibronectin ) . In contrast , the a ~ integrin , also a laminin receptor , is found within focal contacts on the same cells . The early stages of cell attachment and spreading are mediated exclusively by integrins in point contacts . These and other data directly implicate integrins in point contacts in this motile phase of these otherwise sessile astrocytes . Fi - nally , c ~ integrins in well - spread rat fibroblasts , unlike well - spread astrocytes , were localized to focal contacts . Even though an ot subunlt may be involved in the localization of integrins to two types of cell - substratum contacts within the same cell , there are cell - specific mechanisms which regulate the interaction of the same heterodimer with intra - cellular proteins targeting its accumulation in point contacts or focal contacts . Materials and Methods Cells and Cell Culture Cell cultures highly enriched in type 1 astrocytes ( > 95 % ) were prepared according to methods described previously ( McCarthy and De Vellis , 1980 ; Noble et al . , 1984 ) . Briefly , day 1 postnatal rat cerebral cortices were treated with trypsin ( 0 . 25 % in Minimal Essential Medium ( MEM ; Gibco Laboratories , Grand City , NY ) for 30 rain at 37 ~ following trituration cells were seeded into poly - L - lysine - coated culture flasks . After 10 d in cul - ture , flasks were shaken overnight in DME ; Gibeo Laboratories ) . The sus - pended cells were discarded and the attached cells were removed by trypsin ( 0 . 25 % ) , seeded into poly - L - lysine - coated flasks ( 5 pg / mi ) , treated with 0 . 01 mM cytosine arabinoside for I wk , and then left in CNS medium which consists of DME medium with 10 % FCS . Primary cultures of heart fibro - blasts were prepared by simply excising heart tissue from newborn rats , trypsinizing it , and plating the cells on polylysine - coated dishes . Antibodies The mAb 3A3 is of the IgGt subclass and is directed against the rat cq subunit ( Turner et al . , 1989 ) . Anti - fit antiserum was made to a purified / ~ 1 subunit Ohwil et al . , 1990 ) . Anti - c ~ 5 and anti - a6 antisera ( a generous gift from Dr . Erldd Ruoslahti , La Jolla Cancer Research Institute , San Diego , CA ) were made to peptides whose sequences were derived from the cyto - plasmic domain of the as or a6 subonits , mAbs to vinculin - and rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin were purchased ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) . Immunocytochemistry Type 1 astrocytes or heart fibroblasts were harvested from confluent cul - tures after treatment with 5 mM EDTA in Hanks ' solution without Ca 2 + or Mg 2 + ( Gibeo Laboratories ) for 10 rain at 37 ~ The cells were centrifuged at 1 , 000 rpm for l0 rain , resuspended in DME with 10 % FCS , and seeded at 37 ~ on polylysine - , laminin - , or fibronectin - coated glass coverslips . 2 - 12 h later , cells were rinsed with PBS , and fixed with 3 % paraformalde - hyde in 100 mM phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , for 10 rain . When required , cells were permeabilized with cold 0 . 1 % NP - 40 or 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 10 rain . After rinsing with PBS , cells were incubated with primary antibod - ies in 10 % FCS in DME ( Gibco Laboratories ) for 1 h at 37 ~ The cells were then rinsed several times with PBS and incubated for another hour with rhodamine or FITC - conjugated goat anti - rabbit or anti - mouse antisera ( Bio / Can Scientific Inc . , West Grove , PA ) in 10 % FCS in DME . The cover - slips were washed with PBS and mounted onto glass slides in a solution of 0 . 1 M Tris and 70 % glycerol at pH 7 . 0 or in Immunoflnor mounting medium ( ICN Radiochemicals , Irvine , CA ) . The slides were examined with a Zeiss epifluoresconce microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) . Experi - ments in which astrocytes were sheared were carried out essentially as de - scribed by Avnur and Geiger ( 1981 ) . Briefly , ceils on coverslips were rinsed in buffer A ( 50 mM MES , 4 - morpholoin - ethanesulfonic acid , 5 mM MgC12 , 3 mM EGTA , pH 6 . 0 ) , and then incubated in buffer B ( buffer A plus 1 mM ZnC12 ) for , ~ 2 min at room temperature . The cells were sheared from the coverslips with several brisk streams ofPBS ( pH 7 . 2 ) from a Pasteur pipette . This procedure removed all of the cell except for those regions of the ventral surface in close contact with the substratum . These preparations were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde and labeled as described above . Inhibition of Cell Attachment Cell attachment assays were carried out in 96 - well plates using methods similar to those reported previously ( Turner et al . , 1989 ) . The wells were coated overnight with 5 # g / ml of laminin , collagen , fibronectin , or polyly - sine in PBS in 4 ~ After rinsing with PBS three times , wells were blocked with 20 mg / ml BSA in PBS for 3 h . Type 1 astrocytes were radiolabeled with IYans - [ 35S ] methionine in CNS medium ( ICN Radiochemicals ) for 24 h . Radiolabeled astrocytes were harvested with 5 mM EDTA and rinsed twice with PBS containing 1 mM CaC12 , and 1 mM MgC12 to remove unincorporated [ 35S ] methionine , cells were then resuspended at 4 (cid:141) 106 cells per ml in PBS with CaC12 and MgC12 . Antibodies ( Fab fragments of anti - ~ l antisera , Fab fragment of anti - rabbit antiserum , or mAb 3A3 ) or peptides ( RGD or RGE ) were incubated with the resuspended cells for 10 min and then equal aliquots of cells were added to each well and allowed to attach for 90 rain at 37 ~ Unattached coils were removed by washing the wells three times with PBS . Attached cells were extracted with 1 % NP - 40 for 10 rain and the extracts transferred to scintillation vials for counting in beta counter . Assays were performed in duplicate and repeated in at least two separate experiments . The percentage of attached cells calculated as follows : CPM of radiolabeled cells in wells containin 8 antibodies (cid:141) 100 % . CPM of radiolabeled cells in wells without antibodies Immunoprecipitation Type 1 astrocytes were surface labeled with [ l ~ I ] iodine as described by Tomaselli et al . 0987 ) . In brief , confluent cultures of cells were washed Figure 1 . Type 1 astrocytes express al / 3 ~ and as / ~ integrins . Type 1 astrocytes were surface labeled with [ 25I ] iodine and extracted with 1 % NP - 40 detergent . The extract was used for immunoprecipitation with anti - / ~ , anti - as antisera , and mAb 3A3 . Samples were ana - lyzed on 6 % SDS - PAGE gels under reducing conditions and the ra - diolabeled bands were visualized with autoradiography as described in Materials and Methods . ( Lane 1 ) Anti - / 31 antiserum ; ( lane 2 ) mAb 3A3 ; ( lane 3 ) anti - c , 5 antiserum ; ( lane 4 ) normal rabbit se - rum . Molecular mass markers are indicated on the left . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 262 Figure 2 . ( A ) Inhibition by anti - / ~ anfisera of type 1 astrocyte adhesion to laminin , collagen and fibronectin . [ ~ S ] - mcthionine - labeled astrocytes were allowed to attach to microwells coated with laminin , collagen , fibronectin , or polylysine in the presence of different anti - bodies as described in Materials and Methods . After 90 rain , wells were rinsed to remove the nonadherent cells . The adherent cells were extracted with 1 % NP - 40 and transferred to scintillation vials and their cpm were determined with a beta counter . Data are expressed as a percentage of cells attached to the different substrata in the absence of antibody ( see Methods ) . Each bar represents the mean of two experiments done in duplicate . In each experiment , the standard error was < 5 % . Fab fragments of anti - / ~ antisera ( 500 - - 600 ~ g / ml ) in - hibited the attachment of type 1 astrocytes to laminin ( LM ) , collagen ( CL ) , and fibronectin ( FN ) by > 90 % . Fab fragments of normal rabbit serum had no inhibitory effect in this adhesion assay . ( B ) The effect of mAb 3A3 on the attachment of type - 1 astrocytes to laminin ( LM ) , collagen ( CL ) , and polylysine ( PL ) . [ asS ] methionine - labeled astrocytes were allowed to adhere to coated substrata in the presence of two different concentrations of mAb 3A3 . The experiment was carried as explained in A . Data are expressed as the percent of attachment in the absence of an antibody . JG22 , a mAb against the chick / ~ t subunit had no effect on the attachment of astrocytes to the above sub - strata ( data not shown ) . Each bar represents the mean of two experiments with duplicate wells in each experiment . The average standard error is < 3 % . ( C ) The effect of RGD peptide on the attachment of type 1 astrocytes to fibronectin or polylysine . [ s ~ S ] methionine - labeled astrocytes were allowed to adhere to coated wells in the presence of different concentrations of RGD or control ( RGE ) peptide for 90 rain . Cell attachment was quantified as in A . Data are expressed as a percentage of attachment in the presence of RGE which had no effect on attachment . Each bar represents two separate experiments with duplicate determinations in each . The average standard error is < 3 % . with PBS three times , harvested with 5 mM EDTA in HBSS without Ca 2 + and Mg 2 + , resuspended in PBS , and labeled with 0 . 5 mCi of [ 125I ] iedine . Cells were then washed to remove unincorporated iodine and then extracted with 1 % NP - 40 in PBS for 40 min at 4 " C in the presence of 1 mM of the following protease inhibitors : PMSF , N - ethyl maleimide ( NEM ) , and soy - bean trypsin inhibitor . The extract was then centrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 35 min at 4 " C , and the pellet was discarded . Equal amounts of radioactivity from the supernatant ( 2 (cid:141) 107 cpm ) were added to PBS solution contain - ing 50 ttg / ml of antibodies . After incubation with gentle shaking for 3 - 4 h at 4 ~ 100 td of 50 % ( vol / vol ) protein - A Sepharose stored in 1 % NP - 40 ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) was added to each mixture and shaken overnight at 4 ~ Since mAb 3A3 is an lgGl and does not bind well to protein - A Sepharose , an anti - mouse IgGi antibody was added to the mixture for 1 - 2 h , and then the protein - A Sepbarose beads were added as before . The next day , the beads were washed five times with I % NP . . 40 in PBS to remove the unbound proteins . The bound proteins were elutad from the beads by boiling for 5 rain in SDS - PAGE sample buffer without ~ - mercaptoe ~ h ~ nol and then samples were electrophoresed on 6 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels , stained , dried , and autoradiographed . Results Asnocy ~ Express ~ / 31 , a , ~ , and a , ~ Interns In a previous study , we have shown that astrocytes express integrins from the ~ , subclass ( Tawil et al . , 1990 ) . To fur - ther identify these integrins , type 1 astrocytes were surface labeled with [ l " I ] iodine and then extracted with 1 % NP - 40 detergent . Anti - B1 antisera immunoprecipitated four pro - teins from these astrocyte extracts . The four bands were of 200 , 170 , 150 , and 115 kD under nonreducing conditions on SDS - polyacrylamide gels . The lowest band migrates as a / ~ subunit ( Fig . l , lane / ) in agreement with other studies ( Turner et al . , 1989 ; Tawil et ai . , 1990 ) . The other three bands were characterized further by immunoprecipitation with antibodies specific for integrin c ~ subunits , mAb 3A3 recognizes the c ~ 1 subunit ( Tamer et al . , 1989 ; 3llwil et al . , 1990 ) and immunoprecipitated a band of 200 kD along with a band at 115 kD representing the ot ~ and the / ~ subunits , respectively ( Fig . 1 , lane 2 ) . Antisera to the c ~ 5 subunit im - munoprecipitated two bands at 150 and 115 kD ( Fig . I , lane 3 ) while immunoprecipitation with anti - ~ antisera immu - noprecipitated bands at 210 , 140 , and 115 kD representing r and cede , integrins ( ' Ikwil , N . , P . Wdson , and S . Car - bonetto , manuscript in preparation ) . The 170 - kD protein immunoprecipitated with anti - 13t antisera has not been identified and may represent a novel c ~ subunit . Thus type 1 astrocTtes express integrins from the t5 ~ subclass including previously identified heterodimers a ~ / ~ l , ots ~ , and o ~ d ~ . ~ 1 ~ 1 Integrin Mediates the Attachment of Astmcytes to Laminin and Collagen , ~ Integrin Mediates Attachment to Fibronectin To determine which integrins astrocytes use in their binding to ECM molecules , we used a cell attachment assay in which either anti - integrin antibodies or ARG - GLY - ASP ( RGD ) synthetic peptides were assayed for inhibition of astrocyte at - tachment to different ECM substrata . Fab fragments of anti - / ~ , antisera inhibited almost completely the attachment of astrocytes to laminin , collagen and to fibronectin ( Fig . 2 A ) suggesting that astrocytes attach to these ECM molecules mainly through members of the ~ 1 integrin family , mAb 3A3 inhibited the attachment of astrocytes to laminin and collagen by 75 and 85 % , respectively , ( Fig . 2 B ) indicating that the - I / ~ i integrin is the main laminin and collagen receptor on astrocytes . Anti - c ~ antisera used for immuno - precipitation Studies are directed at a synthetic peptide derived from the cytoplasmic tail of the or5 subunit and there - fore would not be expected to inldbit cell attachment . How - ever , the - sB ~ integrin binds to the RGD sequence of fibro - nectin ( Ruoslahti and Pierschbacber , 1986 ) and soluble RGD inhibited by 65 % the attachment of astrocytes to fibronectin ( Fig . 2 C ) . RGE peptide , a control peptide , had no effect on the adhesion of astrocytes to fibronectin ( Fig . 2 C ) . These Tawil et aL lntegrin localization in Point vs . Focal Contacts 263 Figure 3 . Immunocytochemi - cal studies of astrocytes with anti - ~ , , anti - a ~ antisera , and anti - vinculin antibodies . Type 1 astrocytes were allowed to attach and spread for a mini - mum of 24 h on polylysine , laminin , or fibronectin over - night . The cells were then fixed and permeabllized and allowed to react with primary antibodies for 1 h at 37 ~ and then with FITC - conjugated anti - rabbit antisera for another hour . ( , 4 ) Labeling with anti - / ~ antisera or ( C ) anti - o ~ 5 an - tisera detected with fluores - cein conjugated anti - rabbit antisera ; ( B and D ) the same cells double labeled with anti - vinculin antibodies detected with rhodamine anti - mouse antibodies . ( E ) Labeling with anti - St antibodies gave two patterns , focal contacts ( ar - row ) , and point contacts . Many point contacts are visible over the ceil surface . Bar , 10 ~ tm . data suggest that while the cq / 3 ~ integrin mediates the at - tachment of astrocytes mainly to laminin and collagen , the c ~ s / ~ t integrin mediates their attachment to fibronectin . a ~ f31 and ad31 Integrins Are Localized to Focal Contacts while ~ 1f3 ~ Inte ~ rins Are Concentrated in Point Contacts Immunocytochemical studies were performed to determine the distribution of aiB , , as / ~ l , and a ~ 1 integrins on type - I astrocytes on different substrata . In fixed and permeabilized astrocytes , anti - ~ antisera prominently labeled linear ar - rays of integrins ( Fig . 3 a , arrow ) on the lower cell surface which can be readily identified as focal contacts by virtue of their arrow codistribution with vinculin ( Fig . 3 b , arrow ) . Labeling with anti - a ~ antisera ( Fig . 3 c , arrow ) was simi - larly localized to focal contacts codistributing with vinculin ( Fig . 3 d , arrow ) as was labeling with anti - c ~ antisera ( Fig . 4 d ) . Essentially identical results were seen in long - term cultures 1 - 3 d after seeding on laminin - , fibronectin - , or polylysine - coated substrata . In addition to focal contacts , anti - ill antisera labeled many small aggregates of integrins over the cell surface ( Fig . 3 e ) . Interestingly , mAb 3A3 - labeled well - spread astrocytes only in this punctate pattern and not in focal contacts ( Fig . 4 a ) regardless of the sub - stratum ( polylysine , collagen , or laminin ) . The same pattern of labeling was seen on live ceils at 37 ~ ( data not shown ) . To reduce antibody - induced redistribution and endocytosis of membrane proteins at this temperature , the labeling was also performed at 4 ~ again with similar results . The punc - tare appearance seen with mAb 3A3 is distinct from that seen following labeling with fluorescent wheat germ agglutinin which labeled astrocytes diffusely ( Fig . 4 b ) suggesting that these punctate deposits are not in foldings of the plasma membrane but are aggregates of cqBl integrins in an other - wise uniform distribution of cell - surface glycoproteins . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 . 1993 264 Figure 4 . Immunocytochemi - cal studies of r r integrins on astrocytes and fibroblasts cultured on laminin or colla - gen substrata . ( a ) Labeling of an astrocyte on laminin with mAb 3A3 shows a punctate pattern with concentrations at the cell periphery . ( b ) An astro - cyte labeled with wheat germ agglutinin has a much more diffuse uniform labeling . Many of the intensely bright spots are aggregates of lectin that can be seen over the culture dish as well as the cell . ( c ) Rat fibroblasts labeled with mAb 3A3 also shows prominent fo - cal contacts ( arrow ) . ( d ) As - trocytes seeded on laminin - coated coverslips and labeled with anti - c ~ antisera , have prominent focal contacts ( ar - row ) . Bar , 10 / ~ m . Carter et al . ( 1991 ) have suggested that functionally inhibi - tory antibodies to integrins may be competitively excluded from binding to integrins within focal contacts by their ligands . Several data suggest that the failure of mAb 3A3 to label focal contacts is not the result of a restricted access to its antigen on the lower cell surface or receptor occupancy by ligand . First , as mentioned above , antisera to the ~ 1 subunit readily labeled focal contacts in astrocytes under identical conditions ( Fig . 3 a ) . Similar labeling of focal con - tacts was seen with antisera to the o ~ 6 subunit ( Fig . 4 d ) ; o ~ 6 like o ~ 1 / ~ 1 heterodimers recognize laminin ( Sounenberg et al . , 1988 ) . Second , when astrocytes were labeled under con - ditions in which mAb 3A3 detaches cells , those remaining on the substratum and in the process of being detached , con - tained no visible focal contacts ( data not shown ) . Third , mAb 3A3 clearly labels focal contacts in rat heart fibroblasts that are attached and spread on collagen ( Fig . 4 c ; Gullberg et al . , 1990 ) . Thus , similar to Wayner and co - workers ( 1991 ) , we find that functionally inhibitory mAbs are not al - ways competitively excluded from focal contacts , but may identify functional receptors in nonfocal contacts . Although the o ~ t / 31 integrins were in punctate arrays , it was not clear whether all of these arrays participated in at - tachment of ceils to their substrata . To examine more closely sites of adhesion , therefore , we employed a technique pri - marily used to study cell - substratum adhesions . It involves shearing well - spread cells , from the coverslips to leave be - hind portions of their ventral surfaces tightly adherent to the substratum ( Avnur and Geiger , 1981 ) . Labeling these sheared cells with both anti - / ~ t antisera and mAb 3A3 showed that the areas which remain adherent to the substra - tum had abundant focal contacts as well as many punctate deposits distributed over the lower cell surface . In several in - stances , punctate deposits containing the otl / 31 integrins could be seen within vinculin - containing focal contacts ( Fig . 5 ) , although they rarely accumulated to a density greater than that seen on the rest of the cell or formed continuous linear arrays like a ~ l and a5 / 31 hcterodimers ( Fig . 4 d ) . After dual - labeling studies with mAb 3A3 ( Fig . 6 a ) and rhodamine - phailoidin ( Fig . 6 b ) or with anti - / 31 antisera ( Fig . 6 c ) and vinculin ( Fig . 6 d ) , a small subset of the point contacts were found to contain actin or vinculin . Many point contacts , however , colocalized with clathrin as shown by dual labeling with mAb 3A3 ( Fig . 6 e ) and anti - clathrin an - tisera ( Fig . 6 f ) . In the studies of Nerrnut et al . ( 1991 ) integrins of the / 31 subclass were found within point contacts in transformed cells . To further confirm these observations , we examined the expression of integrins in a Schwannoma cell line . We found that / 51 integrins were found mainly in point contacts ; no focal contacts were seen on these cells ( Fig . 7 , a and b ) . Imrnunoprecipitation studies showed that these cells have three to five different 131 heterodimers ( Fig . 8 ) . Thus , sev - erai integrins with / ~ 1 subunits , and not only the otl / ~ 1 , may be localized to point contacts . We conclude that multiple / ~ 1 integrins are distributed in focal contacts as well as in point contacts . While the a5 / 31 and ad3 ~ integrins on astrocytcs form focal contacts colo - calizing with vinculin and the end of actin cables , the otd3 ~ heterodimer fails to accumulate there and is instead found in point contacts . Some point contacts are seen within the fo - cal contacts but they don ' t accumulate there . Only a small subset of them colocalize with vinculin or actin , the majority with clathrin . Integrins in Point Contacts Are Important in the Attachment and Spreading of Astrocytes Immunocytochemical studies shown above , in addition to the cell attachment data , suggest that o ~ t / ~ l integrins con - centrated in point contacts aid in the attachment of astrocytes to laminin and collagen . However , the presence of some ag - gregates of o ~ 1 / ~ 1 integrins in focal contacts raises the ques - tion of whether this small population are the only functional heterodimers . This seems not to be the case since astrocytes Tawil et al . lntegrin Localization in Point vs . Focal Contacts 265 Figure 5 . r aggregates are found in focal contacts but do not accumulate there . Astro - cytes were allowed to adhere and spread for at least 48 h on polylysine , laminin , or fibm - nectin coverslips and then were sheared ( Materials and Methods ) to remove most of the cell . Some cytoskeletal proteins and parts of the mem - brane firmly adherent to the substratum remained attached . a Shows labeling with mAb 3A3 and b shows labeling with phalloidin revealing the distri - bution of microfilaments . An inset ( in A ) is enlarged in c and the same area from b is en - larged in d . Punctate deposits of a1 / ~ 1 integrins can be found ( c , arrow ) colocalizing with phalloidin in focal contacts ( d , arrow ) . Bar , 10 t ~ m . in the process of attaching and spreading lack focal contacts . This can be seen in Fig . 9 where point contacts containing - 1 / ~ 1 integrins are distributed in a band surrounding the pe - riphery of the spreading cells . A similar distribution is also seen with anti - ~ l antisera ( Fig . 9 , b - d ) or anti - c ~ 5 antisera ( data not shown ) . The same obtains in fibroblasts where the c ~ B1 heterodimer is found in focal contacts in well - spread cells ( Fig . 9 f ) but is in point contacts before they flatten ( Fig . 9 e ) . In this early stage of cell spreading several inte - grins are found in point contacts and at a later stage , some of these heterodimers are found in focal contacts . These data also suggest that focal contacts are not necessary for the spreading of astrocytes or fibroblasts which is mediated by integrins in point contacts . Note also , that in the early stages of cell spreading ( Fig . 9 a ) there is a diffuse distribution of integrins in the middle of the cell . This diffuse distribution diminishes at later stages of spreading when more point con - tacts are seen ( Fig . 9 b ) , and it likely represents a pool of integrins that move into point contacts as the cell continues to spread . This reorganization into point contacts may con - tribute to adhesion of motile ceils or motile regions of cells which became stabilized by subsequent formation of focal contacts . Discussion The experiments described here were aimed at characteriz - ing point contacts structurally and functionally as well as describing factors that regulate integrin localization within point or focal contacts . That the o ~ 1 / ~ 1 beterodimer is found constitutively in point contacts on astrocytes has led us to ob - servations that these contacts function in cell - substratum adhesion especially during flattening of these normally ses - sile cells . In addition , we have found that localization of inte - grins in point vs . focal contacts varies with the o ~ subunit al - though this can be strongly influenced by the cell type in which apparently identical beterodimers are expressed . Integrins in Point Contacts Mediate Spreading of Astrocytes In time - lapse studies of spreading astrocytes the periphery is the most active portion of the cell ( W ' ilson , P . , and S . Car - bonetto , unpublished observations ) and is surrounded by a ring of lameilipodia evidently responsible for the flattening of these otherwise sessile cells . As astrocytes attach and spread onto culture substrata coated with laminin , collagen or fibronectin , small aggregates of integrins ( Fig . 9 ) form a band around the periphery of the cell . The integrins in these bands have several features of cell - substratum adhesions called point contacts ( discussed below ) , mAb 3A3 labels the integrin o ~ / ~ 1 which is localized exclusively in point con - tacts ( Fig . 4 a ) and serves as a marker for them . Since we have shown that rnAh 3A3 inhibits the adhesion of astrocytes ( Tawil et al . , 1990 ; Fig . 2 b ) to laminin and collagen , it fol - lows that this heterodimer in point contacts is functional . In addition , antisera to the 131 subunit and the RGD peptide in - hibit attachment of astrocytes ( Fig . 2 a and b ) suggesting that point contacts function in the early stages of astrocyte flat - tening . Point contacts have been identified previously by interfer - ence reflection microscopy , immunocytochemistry , and EM as regions of the cell closely apposed to the substratum ( Ney - fakh et al . , 1983 ; Vasiliev et al . , 1985 ; Streeter and Rees , 1987 ; Nermut et al . , 1991 ) . Several features of the punctate deposits of ~ , / 3 ~ integrins found on the substratum side of sheared astrocyte preparations make it likely that these are point contacts rather than podosomes ( Streeter and Rees , 1987 ; Nermut et al . , 1991 ) . First , punctate deposits of c ~ l / ~ l integrins have the dimensions ( 0 . 2 - 0 . 3 / ~ m ) of point contacts ( Fig . 4 a ) . Second , unlike focal contacts , one class of point contacts are not associated with vinculin or actin ( Nermut et al . , 1991 ; Fig . 6 ) but instead colocalize with clathrin ( Fig . 6 f ) . Third , after shearing of cells , the punctate deposits of integrins and point contacts remain ( Fig . 5 ) firmly adherent to the substratum ( Nermut et al . , 1991 ) . Fourth , both point The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 266 Figure 6 . Colocalization of vinculin , actin and clathrin in point contacts . Astrocytes attached to laminin were sheared as explained in Materials and Methods and then labeled as in Fig . 5 . Double - labeled astrocytes with mAb 3A3 ( a ) and phalloidin ( b ) or with anti - / 3 ~ an - tisera ( c ) and vinculin ( d ) . Some punctatr contacts colocalize with vinculin ( arrows ) . However , many point contacts , labeled in e with mAb 3A3 , colocalize with clathrin f . Bar , 10 ~ m . contacts ( Neyfakh et al . , 1983 ; Vasiliev , 1985 ) and the inte - grin aggregates ( Fig . 9 ) are prominent on the leading edge of spreading cells . Additionally , Nermut et al . ( 1991 ) , have reported that integrins of the / ~ class found within point contacts are involved in fibroblast motility ( Nermut et al . , 1991 ) . Consistent with this point of view , RN22 cells , a Schwannoma cell line that is motile , rarely forms focal con - tacts and their ~ , integrins are localized within point con - tacts ( Fig . 7 ) . However , the association of otl / ~ containing point contacts with cell motility is not absolute for such con - Tawil et al . Integrin Localization in Point vs . Focal Contacts 267 Figure 7 . Immunocytochemi - cal studies of RN22 Schwan - noma cells . ( a and b ) RN22 Schwannoma cells were al - lowed to adhere and spread on laminin and then fixed and labeled with anti - / 31 antisera following the procedure in Fig . 3 . No focal contacts were seen , only a punctate distribution of / 51 integrins . Bar , 10 ~ m . tacts exist even in stationary astrocytes ( Fig . 4 a ) . Indeed , long - term incubation of well - spread astrocytes with mAb 3A3 detached the cells from laminin and collagen substrata , though it localizes in a punctate pattern over the cell surface ( Tawil , N . J . , and S . Carbonetto , unpublished data ) . While we emphasize the dominant contribution of point contacts to cell adhesion during cell spreading , they also appear to con - tribute , along with focal contacts , to the adhesion of flattened cells . Figure 8 . Immunoprecipita - don with anti - ~ l antisera from RN22 Schwannoma cell line . [ 12Sl ] iodine - labeled RN22 Schwarmoma cells were ex - tracted and the lysates were used for immunoprecipitation as explained in Fig . 1 . ( Lane A ) Anti - / ~ l antisera ; ( lane B ) normal rabbit serum . Integrin Heterodimers with the Different a Subunits Localize to Point Contacts or Focal Contacts Integrin localization in focal contacts depends on interaction with cytoskeletal proteins ( Burridge et al . , 1988 ) . Mutation of the cytoplasmic tail of the 131 subunit results in failure to form focal contacts and reduced cell - substratum adhesion ( Solowska et al . , 1989 ; Hayashi et al . , 1990 ; Marcantonio et al . , 1990 ; Rezka et al . , 1992 ) . In addition integrins are recruited into focal contacts as a function of the ligand coated on the substratum ( Singer et al . , 1988 ) . Since the al - pha subunits largely ( Hemler , 1990 ) , but not exclusively ( Vogel et al . , 1990 ; Smith et al . , 1990 ; Bodary and McLean , 1990 ) , determine ligand specificity they also influence this integrin localization . Our studies support the notion that the ot subunit contributes to the localization of integrins on the cell surface by showing that ai / ~ i and a5 / ~ 1 , both functional on astrocytes , are found in distinct types of cell - substratum contacts on flattened cells . Astrocytes also have an o ~ d ~ integrin which , like the al / ~ , recognizes laminin ( Sonnen - berg et al . , 1988 ) . Localization of the o ~ d ~ heterodimer to focal ( Fig . 4 ) contacts on astrocytes where o ~ J ~ is found only in point contacts is apparently not dictated by the ligand alone . Our antisera to the a6 subunit is not functionally in - hibitory and we have not been able to show that the otd3 ~ re - ceptor is actually interacting with laminin , though its partici - pation in focal contacts is certainly consistent with this . In fact , the al / ~ 1 integrin is found in point contacts regardless of the ligand ( laminin , fibronectin , and polylysine ) on the substratum . It function , of course , requires laminin or colla - gen and the detachment by mAb 3A3 of long - term cultures , ( Tawil , N . J . , and S . Carbonetto , unpublished results ) but not freshly attaching cells ( Fig . 2 ) , from polylysine likely re - flects the fact that astrocytes synthesize and assemble lami - nin matrices ( Liesi , 1985 ; David , 1988 ; Ard and Bunge , 1988 ) . Similarly , the localization of ots # ~ in focal contacts on substrata initially coated with polylysine likely reflects the production of fibronectin by these same cells ( Price and Hynes , 1985 ) . The contribution of the cytoplasmic regions of alpha subunits to cell - surface localization has been less well stud - ied than that of the cytoplasmic domains of the / 3 subunits or of the a subunits ' extracellular domains . In one study , de - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 268 Figure 9 . tmmtmocytochemi - cal localization of integrins on spreading astrocytes and fibro - blasts . Astrocytes were al - lowed to attach and spread on laminin or fibronectin for 2 h , and then fixed and labeled as in Fig . 5 withmAb 3A3 ( onlam - inin ) , ( a ) or anti - # ~ antisera ( on fibronectin ) ( b ) . ( c and d ) Astrocytes 2 - 4 h after seed - ing on fibmneetin - eoated eov - erslips and labeled with anti - ill antisem . Notice that mAb 3A3 , or anti - # l antisera show integ - rim localized only within point contacts as the cells spread ; la - beling within anti - ~ s antisera gave a similar result ( data not shown ) . ( e ) Rat fibroblasts spreading on fibronectin and labeled with mAb 3A3 also re - veal no focal contacts seen in early stages of spreading as compared with spread fibro - blasts ( f ) . Bar , 10 tan . letion of the cytoplasmic domain of the oft subunit did not alter cell attachment mediated by LFA - 1 binding to ICAM - 1 in short - term adhesion assays ( Hibbs et al . , 1991 ) . On the other hand , several recent studies suggest that heterodimers with overlapping ligand specificities have distinct cellular distributions ( Elites et al . , 1991 ; Wayner et al . , 1991 ) . This is manifest in our studies where both ot ~ l and otd ~ t recog - nize laminin but segregate to point vs . focal contacts , respec - tively . These data suggest indirectly that the o ~ subunit modu - lates heterodimer interaction with cytoplasmic proteins . The cytoplasmic regions are among the most highly variable regions of the c ~ subunits and offer potential for producing distinct intracellular signals from heterodimers that may bind the same ligand . It is also evident from our studies that the interactions be - tween the integrins and cytoskeletal proteins are not dictated merely by the subunit composition of the heterodimers . The 0 ~ 5 / ~ 1 and other ~ 1 integrins which are found in focal con - tacts in flattened astrocytes are only in point contacts as as - trocytes spread . Conversely , the c ~ / 3 ~ heterodimer , which is found in point contacts on flattened astrocytes , localizes within focal contacts on rat fibroblasts ( Fig . 4 c ; Gullberg et al . , 1990 ) . Although the subunit composition contributes to the localization of functional integrins within point or fo - Tawil et al . Integrin Localization in Point vs . Focal Contacts 269 c , . ~ : , ~ t (cid:12)9 Point Contacts Astrocytes 0 ~ 1131 ~ ; . ~ , ~ ~ Focal iontscts m 131 ~ ; , ~ , , ? Flbroblasts CXs ~ I d ~ . u , , ~ m ~ a , ~ , ~ i (cid:12)9 Point Contacts Figure 10 . Hypothetical scheme describing the genesis of point and focal contacts on rat astrocyms . Unattached astrocytes have a diffuse distribution of integrins on their surface . During attachment and spreading point contacts of # ~ integrins become apparent over the lamellipodia of the cell . Independent of the ligand , the a ~ B ~ het - erodimer remains in point contacts on astrocytes , although in fibro - blasts this heterodimer accumtdates in focal contacts . The aSBl and a ~ integrins also accumulate first in point contacts and later in focal contacts once the ceils have flattened . It is unclear whether these are recruited from the pool of diffuse receptors . cal contacts , this localization may be overridden depending on the cell type and on whether or not the cell is spreading . Integrin Redistribution during Cell Attachment and Spreading Fig . 10 illustrates a scheme for the targeting of integrins to point contacts and focal contacts during cell attachment and spreading . DmSng the initial stages of cell attachment , astro - cytes or fibroblasts are spherical with a small flattened region at the lower cell surface . At this time , a large pool of / ~ integrins , including the ott ~ heterodimer , are diffusely dis - tributed at the main portion of the cell . As the cell spreads , a diffuse collection of 3 ~ integrins ( Fig . 9 a ) is seen over the nucleus but the o ~ 3 ~ integrin has been recruited into point contacts ( Fig . 9 b ) . Still later , in flattened cells , several ~ L integrins ( a5 / 3 ~ , a ~ 31 ) are found in focal contacts ( Fig . 3 , a and c , and 4 , c and d ) , in astrocytes and fibroblasts , though at / ~ heterodimers in astrocytes , unlike fibroblasts , are found only in point contacts ( Fig . 4 a ) . In principle , the localization of integrins within cell - sub - stratum contacts could involve redistribution of presynthe - sized receptors at the cell surface as well as selective inser - tion or degradation of newly synthesized receptors . Receptor metabolism appears unlikely to be a major factor in the lo - calization of receptors in cultured cells which occurs in the 1 - 2 h that the cells take to flatten ; although there is evidence for rapid insertion of integrins in lymphocytes ( Isenberg et al . , 1987 ) . In rat astrocytes that have been sheared to remove all but the most adherent portion of the lower cell surface , we have observed clusters of o ~ fl ~ integrins within regions of focal contacts ( Fig . 5 ) suggesting that these clusters are not constrained from moving into focal contacts . Once there , however , the clusters do not accumulate to form the rela - tively high density seen with the a ~ 3 ~ , ot ~ 3 ~ heterodimers . In the case of the ct ~ Bt integrin in point contacts , there is lit - fie codistribution with vinculin , talin , or actinin ( Fig . 6 ) but colocalization instead with clathrin ( Fig . 6 ) . Clathrin is a well - known component of coated pits responsible for endo - cytosis of cell surface receptors ( Goldstein et al . , 1985 ) . Bretscher ( 1989 , 1992 ) has suggested that endocytosis of in - tegrins is intimately linked with cell motility via cycling of receptors in and out of the cell surface . He proposes that the accumulations of receptors at the periphery of spreading cells ( Damsky et al . , 1985 ) results from addition to the sur - face of unligated receptors . We have found accumulations of integrins in point contacts at the cell periphery , however , we believe that these receptors on spreading astrocytes ( Fig . 9 ) are functioning and hence bound with ligand since antibodies to the ot ~ 3t heterodimer or to the ~ subunit alone block as - trocyte spreading . That these point contacts codistribute with clathrin is in keeping with Bretscher ' s suggestion that an endocytic - like mechanism is involved in cell motility . Adhesion of receptors followed by endocytosis , may be important in the transient cell - substratum contacts that participate in motility . Within the cytoplasmic domain of the 3 subunit are two regions ( cyto 2 and 3 ; Rezka et al . , 1992 ) which contain amino acid sequences similar or identical to the NPXY sequence that is involved in internalization of cell - surface receptors into coated pits ( Chela et al . , 1990 ) . Rezka et al . 0992 ) report that mutation of these sequences substantially reduces the lo - calization of integrins in focal contacts ; no data are given of their effects on cell adhesion , motility or localization in point contacts . In our studies clathrin colocalizcs with the Otl ~ t integrin in point contacts but not with intagrins in focal con - tacts . Conceivably focal contacts derive from point contacts ( Fig . 10 ) and disruption of the cyto 2 or 3 domains ( Reszka et al . , 1990 ) interferes with the formation of clathrin - containing point contacts and hence focal contacts . Possibly related to this hypothesis , Wayner et al . 0991 ) have shown that the ot4 ~ 3 integrin but not the otv ~ 5 localizes in focal con - tacts . The latter has a distribution which is punctate and seems very similar to that of the at / 3 ~ integrin in point con - tacts . Interestingly the - v / 35 heterodimer has an eight amino acid insert near its presumed cyto 3 region that is not found in the ~ 3 subunit and may alter its cytoplasmic interactions . Taken together these data suggest that the involvement of integrins with clathrin - mediated endocytosis may be a mech - anism for regulating cell motility and that this in turn is a function of both / 3 and a subunits . An attractive feature of this proposal is that it has the potential for rapid regulation of adhesion , certainly within the 1 - 2 h during which cells in culture flatten , and possibly within the minutes required for cell guidance . We thank K . Hastings and P . Richardson for their helpful conunents on this manuscript . P . Wilson was the recipient of a Medical Research Council postdoctoral fellowship . This work was supported by a grant to S . Carbonetto from the MRC ( MT 10182 ) . Received for publication 6 March 1992 and in revised form 8 September 1992 . References Ard , M . D . , and R . P . Bunge . 1988 . Heparan sulfate proteogycan and laminin immunoreactivity : its relationship to differentiation and to neurite growth . J . Neurosci . 8 ( 8 ) : 2844 - 2858 . Avnur , Z . , and B . Geiger . 1981 . Substrate - arta ~ hed membrane of caltured cells . Isolation and characterization of ventral cell membrane and associated cytoskeleton . J . Mol . Biol . 153 : 361 - 379 . Bershadsky , A . D . , I . S . Tint , A . A . Neyfakh Jr , , and J . M . Vasiliev . 1985 . Focal contacts of normal and RSV4ransformed quail cells . Exp . Cell Res . 158 : 433 - 444 . Bodary , S . C . , and J . W ~ McLean . 1990 . The integriu El subunit associates with the vitronectin receptor cr to form a novel vitronectin receptor in a hu * man embryonic kidney cell line . $ . BioL Chem . 265 : 5938 - 5941 . Bretscher , M . S . 1989 . Endocytosis and recycling of the fibrnnectin receptor The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 270 in CHO cells . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 8 : 1341 - 1348 . Bretscher , M . S . 1992 . Cells use their transferrin receptors for locomotion . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 11 : 383 - 389 . Burridge , K . , K . Fath , T . Kelly , G . Nuckolls , and C . Tamer . 1988 . Focal adhe - sions : transmembrane junctions between the extracellniar matrix and the cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 4 : 487 - 525 . Carter , W . G . , E . A . Wayner , T . S . Bouchard , and P . Kaur . 1990 . The role of integrin o ~ 2 / ~ 1 and ~ x3 / ~ l in cell - cell and cell - substrate adhesion of human epidermal cells . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 1387 - 1404 . Carter , W . G . , P . Kaur , S . G . Gill , P . J . Gahr , andE . A . Wayner . 1991 . Dis - tinct functions for integrins ot3 / ~ l in focal adhesion and a6 ~ 4 / bnilous pem - phigoid antigen in a new stable anchoring contacts ( SAC ) of keratinoc / ytes : relation to bemidesmosomes . J . Cell Biol . 111 ( 6 ) : 3141 - 3154 . Cben , W . - T . , E . Hasegawa , T . Hasegawa , C . Weinstock , and K . M . Yamada . 1985 . Development of cell surface linkage complexes in cultured fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 1103 - 1114 . Chan , W . J . , J . L . Goldstein , and M . S . Brown . 1990 . NPXY , a sequence often found in cytoplasmic tails , is required for coated pit mediated internalization of the low density lipoprotein receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 3116 - 3123 . Damsky , C . H . , K . A . Knudsen , D . Bradley , C . A . Buck , and A . F . Horwitz . 1985 . Distribution of the cell substratum attachment ( CSAT ) antigen on myogenic and fibroblastic cells in culture . J . Cell Biol . 1 ( 30 : 1528 - 1539 . David , S . 1988 . Neurite outgrowth from mammalian CNS neurons on astro - cyrus in vitro may not be mediated primarily by laminin . J . Neuroc ~ ol . 17 : 131 - 144 . Elices , M . J . , L . A . Urry , and M . E . Hemier . 1991 . Receptor functions for the integrin VLA - 3 : fibronectin , collagen and laminin binding are differen - tially influenced by ARG - GLY - ASP peptide and by divalent cations . J . Cell Biol . 112 ( 1 ) : 169 - 181 . Geiger , B . , T . Volk , and T . Volberg . 1985 . Molecular heterogeneity of adhe - runs junctions . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 1523 - 1531 . Goldstein , J . L . , M . S . Brown , R . G . W . Anderson , D . W . Russell , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Receptor mediated endocytosis . Ann . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 40 . Gullberg , D . , D . C . Turner , T . K . Borg , L . Terracio , and K . Rubin . 1990 . Different ~ l - integrin collagen receptors on rat hepatocytes and cardiac fibroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 190 : 254 - 264 . Hayashi , Y . , B . Haimovich , A . Reszka , D . Boettiger , and A . Horwitz . 1990 . Expression and function of chicken integrin / ~ z subunit and its cytoplasmic domain mutants in mouse N1H 3T3 cells . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 175 - 184 . Hemier , M . E . 1990 . VLA proteins in the integrin family : structures , functions and their role on leukocytes . Annu . Rev . lmmanol . 8 : 365 - 400 . Hibbs , M . L . , H . Xu , A . Stacker , and T . A . Springer . 1991 . Regulation of adhesion to ICAM - 1 by the cytoplasmic domain of LFA - 1 integrin ~ subuult . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 251 : 1611 - 1613 . Horwitz , A . , K . Duggan , C . Buck , M . C . Beckerle , and K . Burridge . 1986 . Interaction of plasma membrane fibronectin receptor with tniin , a transmem - brahe linkage . Nature ( Lond . ) . 320 : 531 - 533 . Hynes , R . O . 1987 . Integrins : a family of cell surface receptors . Cell . 48 : 549 - 554 . Isenberg , W . M . , R . P . McEver , D . R . Phillips , M . A . Shuman , and D . F . Bainton . 1987 . The platelet fibrinogen receptor : an immunogold - surface replica study of agonist - induced ligand binding and receptor clustering . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 1655 - 1663 . Liesi , P . 1985 . Do neurons in the vertebrate CNS migrate on laminin ? EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 4 : 1163 - 1170 . Marcantonio , E . E . , J . - L . Guan , J . E . Trevithick , and R . O . Hynes . 1990 . Map - ping of the functional determinants of the integrin ~ cytoplasmic domain by site - directed mutegenesis . Cell Regul . 1 : 597 - 604 . McCarthy , K . D . , and J . De Vellis . 1980 . Preparation of separate astroglial and oligodendroglial cell cultures from rat cerebral tissue . J . Cell Biol . 85 : 890 - 902 . Nermut , M . V . , P . Eason , E . M . Hirst , and S . Kellie . 1991 . Cell / substratom adhesion in RSV - transfurmed rat fibroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 193 : 382 - 397 . Neyfakh , A . A . Jr . , I . S . Tint , T . M . Svitikina , A . D . Bershadsky , and V . I . Gelfand . 1983 . Visualization of cellular focal contacts using a monoclonal antibody to 80 kD serum protein adsorbed on the substratum . Exp . CellRes . 149 : 387 - 396 . Noble , - ~ Vl . , J . Fok - Seang , and J . Cohen . 1984 . Gila are a unique substrate for the in vitro growth of central nervous system neurons . J . Neumsci . 4 ( 7 ) : 1892 - 1903 . Otey , C . A . , F . M . Pavalko , and K . Burridge . 1990 . An interaction between c ~ - actinin and the 81 integrin subunit in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 721 - 729 . Price , J . , and R . O . Hynes . 1985 . Astrocytes in culture synthesize and secrete a variant form of fibronectin . J . Neurosci . 5 ( 8 ) : 2205 - 2211 . Reszka , A . A . , Y . Hayashi , and A . F . Horwitz . 1992 . Identification of amino acid sequences in the integrin / ~ : cytoplasmic domain implicated in cytoskeletal association . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 1321 - 1330 . Ruoslahti , E . 1991 . Integrins . J . Clin . Invest . 87 : 1 - 5 . Ruoslahti , E . , and M . D . Pierschbacber . 1986 . Arg - Gly - Asp : a versatile cell recognition signal . Cell . 4 . 4 : 517 - 518 . Singer , I . I . , S . Scout , D . W . Kawka , D . M . Kazazis , J . Gailit , and E . Ruos - lahti . 1988 . Cell surface distribution of fibronectin and vitronectin receptors depends on substrate composition and extracellular matrix accumulation . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 2171 - 2182 . Smith , J . W . , D . J . Vestal , S . V . Irwin , T . A . Burk , and D . A . Cheresh . 1990 . Purification and functional characterization of integrin r an adhesion receptor for vitronectin . 3 " . Biol . Chem . 265 : 11008 - 11013 . Solowska , J . , J . - L . Guan , E . E . Marcantonio , J . E . Trevithick , C . A . Buck , and R . O . Hynes . 1989 . Expression of normal and mutant avian integrin subunits in rodent cells . 3 . Cell Biol . 109 : 853 - 861 . Sounenberg , A . , P . W . Modderman , and F . Hogervorst . 1988 . Laminin recep - tor on platelets is the integrin VLA6 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 336 : 487 - 489 . Streeter , H . B . , and D . A . Rues . 1987 . Fibroblast adhesion to RGDS shows novel features compared with fibronectin . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 507 - 515 . Tapley , P . , A . Horwitz , C . Buck , K . Burridge , K . Duggan , and L . Rohr - schneider . 1989 . Integrins isolated from rous sarcoma virus - transformed chicken embryo fibroblasts . Oncogene . 4 : 325 - 333 . Tarone , G . , D . Cirillo , F . G . Giancotti , P . M . Comoglio , andP . M . Marchisio . 1985 . Runs sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere primarily at dis - crete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . F _ . rp . Cell Res . 159 : 141 - 157 . Tawll , N . J . , M . Houde , R . Blacher , F . Esch , L . F . Reichardt , D . C . Tamer , and S . Carbonetto . 1990 . ottdSL integrin heterodimer functions as dual lami - nin / collagen receptor in neural cells . Biochemistry . 29 : 6450 - 6544 . Tomaselli , K . J . , C . H . Damsky , and L . F . Reichardi . 1987 . Interaction of a neural cell line ( PC - 12 ) with laminin , collagen IV , and fibronectin : identification of integrin - related glycoprotein involved in attachment and process outgrowth . Y . Cell Biol . 105 : 2347 - 2358 . Turner , D . C . , L . A . Flier , and S . Carbonetto . 1989 . Identification of a cell - surface protein involved in PC - 12 cell - substratum adhesion and neurite growth on laminin and collagen . J . Neurosci . 9 : 3287 - 3296 . Vasiliev , J . M . 1985 . Spreading of nun - transformed and transformed cells . Bio - chim . Biophys . Acta . 780 : 21 - 65 . Vogel , B . E . , G . Tarone , F . G . Giancotti , J . Gallit , and E . Ruoslahti . 1990 . A novel flbronectin receptor with an unexpected subunit composition ( av ~ 51 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 5934 - 5937 . Wayner , E . A . , R . A . Orlando , and D . A . Cheresh . 1991 . Integrin o ~ VB ~ and aV05 contribute to cell attachment to vitronectin but differentially distribute on the cell surface . J . Cell Biol . 113 ( 4 ) : 919 - 929 , Tawil et al . lntegrin Localization in Point vs . Focal Contacts 271