This article appeared in a journal published by Elsevier . The attached copy is furnished to the author for internal non - commercial research and education use , including for instruction at the authors institution and sharing with colleagues . Other uses , including reproduction and distribution , or selling or licensing copies , or posting to personal , institutional or third party websites are prohibited . In most cases authors are permitted to post their version of the article ( e . g . in Word or Tex form ) to their personal website or institutional repository . Authors requiring further information regarding Elsevier’s archiving and manuscript policies are encouraged to visit : http : / / www . elsevier . com / copyright Author ' s personal copy Cognitive control , hierarchy , and the rostro – caudal organization of the frontal lobes David Badre Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences and Department of Psychology , Brown University , Box 1978 , Providence , RI 02912 - 1978 , USA Cognitive control supports ﬂexible behavior by selecting actions that are consistent with our goals and appro - priate for our environment . The prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) has an established role in cognitive control , and research on the functional organization of PFC promises to contribute to our understanding of the architecture of control . A recently popular hypothesis is that the rostro – caudal axis of PFC supports a control hierarchy whereby posterior - to - anterior PFC mediates progressively abs - tract , higher - order control . This review discusses evi - dence for a rostro – caudal gradient of function in PFC and the theories proposed to account for these results , including domain generality in working memory , rela - tional complexity , the temporal organization of behavior and abstract representational hierarchy . Distinctions among these frameworks are considered as a basis for future research . Introduction Cognitive control permits selection of actions that are consistent with our goals and context . The prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) is a central component in the network of brain regions supporting cognitive control [ 1 – 9 ] . Thus , a fruitful approach to understanding the architecture of control has been to investigate the functional organiz - ation of the PFC . In recent years , functionally selective PFC sub - regions have been associated with distinct forms of control [ 10 – 15 ] . However , it remains an important goal to understand these isolated control functions in context of broader functional and neuroanatomical organizing principles [ 2 , 13 , 16 ] . This review considers one such orga - nizing hypothesis : that the rostro – caudal axis of the frontal lobes is organized hierarchically , whereby posterior frontal regions support control involving temporally proximate , concrete action representations , and the anterior PFC supports control involving temporally extended , abstract representations [ 5 , 16 – 24 ] ( Figure 1 ) . Of course , there are diverse ways of deﬁning ‘abstraction’ and , likewise , many processing schemes by which these levels might interact , including non - hierarchical ones . Here , the evidence and associated theories of a frontal rostro – caudal gradient of function are reviewed . Hierarchy in action and the action system Hierarchical structures occur throughout artiﬁcial and natural systems . The deﬁning properties of hierarchy depend on whether one is emphasizing processing or representation . Processing hierarchies require that super - ordinate levels , operating over longer time scales , asym - metrically modulate subordinate processing [ 25 , 26 ] . Representational hierarchies require that superordinate representations form abstractions over subordinate representations , favoring generality over detail and allow - ing information to be inherited asymmetrically from higher to lower levels [ 26 , 27 ] . The representation and control of action is often con - ceptualized hierarchically in both processing and repres - entational senses [ 28 – 31 ] . Lashley [ 28 ] ﬁrst noted that behaviorist theories of chaining – whereby an action ( e . g . grinding coffee ) triggers the next in sequence ( e . g . put grounds in machine ) – could not account for several observations about sequential action , such as errors of omission ( e . g . starting the coffee machine having forgotten to add grounds ) . Without an abstract , temporally extended representation of the task context ( e . g . coffee making ) , an action chain would terminate following an omission . Sim - ilarly , the task - switching literature has indicated that selection of task sets and task sequences can occur without being inﬂuenced by the subordinate constituents of those sets [ 32 – 34 ] . Thus , representations of complex actions can apparently be maintained simultaneously at multiple levels ranging from abstract goals ( e . g . make coffee ) to sub - goals ( e . g . grind beans ) to concrete motor outputs . However , the fact that a task can be represented hier - archically does not require that the action system itself consist of structurally distinct processing levels . Single - level neural networks can represent both general and speciﬁc information [ 35 ] . And , Botvinick and Plaut [ 36 ] have demonstrated that goals and sub - goal representa - tions of sequential actions can be represented simul - taneously in a single layer neural network . Thus , the neural data become crucial in distinguishing whether structurally and spatially distinct neural processors sup - port hierarchical representation and control of action [ 37 ] . Fuster’s perception – action cycle [ 21 – 23 ] was among the ﬁrst to directly relate a hierarchical theory of action to the organization of the brain . Fuster proposed a series of loops between perceptual hierarchies in posterior neocortex and regions along the rostro – caudal axis of the frontal lobes . Review Corresponding author : Badre , D . ( David _ Badre @ brown . edu ) . 1364 - 6613 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2008 . 02 . 004 Available online 9 April 2008 193 Author ' s personal copy According to the theory , as actions are speciﬁed from abstract plans to concrete responses , progressively posterior regions of lateral frontal cortex are responsible for integrating more concrete information over more prox - imate time intervals . Critically , this rostro – caudal hierar - chy does not reﬂect stages of processing but , rather , describes how action representations are selected , main - tained and inhibited at multiple levels of abstraction . Thus , the perception – action cycle proposes that the hier - archical structure of action might be represented in the organization of cortical areas and the interactions between the rostro – caudal axis of the frontal lobes and posterior neocortex . The basic properties of the perception – action cycle are reﬂected in the recent frameworks discussed in the remainder of this review . The rostro – caudal axis of PFC and working memory : domain generality Working memory refers to active maintenance and manip - ulation of information over a brief interval in the service of a task . Initial evidence for rostro – caudal distinctions within the PFC comes from experiments designed to test regional differences based on working memory domain . In general , regional distinctions based on the content of main - tained information , such as spatial or object , remain con - troversial [ 38 – 40 ] . However , when content - based distinctions are evident , they are typically observed in caudal PFC structures [ 24 , 41 – 44 ] . By contrast , rostral PFC regions seem to be capable of maintaining information from multiple domains , such as object and spatial , in addition to integrated cross - domain information , such as an object in a particular location [ 44 – 49 ] . Based on this and other evidence , domain generality versus domain speciﬁcity has been hypothesized to distinguish rostral from caudal PFC [ 18 , 20 , 24 , 41 , 50 ] ( Figure 2a ) , and this distinction is supported by a double dissociation between posterior and mid - dorsolateral PFC ( DLPFC ) regions [ 24 , 51 , 52 ] . In particular , lesions to areas 6 and 8 ( periarcuate area ) in the monkey disrupt perform - ance of domain - speciﬁc conditional motor tasks but not that of a domain - general monitoring task . By contrast , lesions to the mid - DLPFC impair performance of monitor - ing but not of conditional motor behavior . This distinction of domain generality versus speciﬁcity does not provide evidence that the processors involved hold a hierarchical relationship to one another , and the double dissociation might argue otherwise ( see later ) . However , there is evidence that these regions do interact hierarchi - cally . Sakai and Passingham [ 53 , 54 ] have demonstrated that activation during a preparatory interval in the anterior DLPFC / frontal polar cortex ( FPC ) correlates with activation in the caudal superior frontal gyrus ( BA 8 ) or caudal inferior frontal gyrus ( BA 44 ) depending on whether an upcoming task is spatial or verbal , respectively . These data were interpreted as indicating that regions in anterior PFC maintain domain general rules that instantiate task sets among posterior neocortical regions . However , a recent experiment [ 55 ] has demonstrated that patients with damage to the anterior DLPFC / FPC , and who exhibit task - switching deﬁcits , are still capable of establishing normal pre - task activation in the preserved regions of posterior PFC . Notably , functional connectivity among the full network of task - related regions is disturbed , indi - cating that maintenance of higher - order rules in anterior DLPFC might serve to establish effective network dynamics among task - related regions . The rostro – caudal axis of PFC and abstract thought : relational complexity Christoff and colleagues [ 20 , 56 , 57 ] ( also see Refs [ 2 , 58 , 59 ] ) have proposed a framework for the rostro – caudal gradient in the frontal lobe that is also based on the content of working memory representations . But , rather than empha - sizing domain , abstraction derives from relational com - plexity [ 56 ] ( Figure 2b ) . The number of variable dimensions that must be integrated to determine a response determines the order of relational complexity [ 60 , 61 ] . First - order relational complexity , associated with ventrolateral PFC ( VLPFC ) , maintains rules involving item properties ( e . g . ‘what is the color ? ’ ) [ 56 ] . By contrast , second - order relational complexity derives from simple relationships between concrete properties ( e . g . ‘do the colors match ? ’ ) and is associated with DLPFC , which is consistent with neurophysiological evidence [ 62 , 63 ] . This distinction between DLPFC and VLPFC follows from clas - sical distinctions between dorsal and ventral PFC in work - ing memory processes [ 13 , 45 ] , and is supported more recently by a dissociation between attention to items in VLPFC versus item categories in DLPFC [ 64 ] . Higher , third - order relational complexity is associated with FPC and entails evaluation of relationships among relationships [ 56 – 58 , 65 ] . For instance , subjects decide whether the mismatching dimension ( texture or shape ) of a target pair matches the mismatching dimension of a Figure 1 . Schematic of major anatomical sub - divisions in the frontal lobes . Boundaries and Brodmann areas ( BA ) are only approximate . Arrows indicate anatomical directions of anterior / rostral ( front ) versus posterior / caudal ( back ) and dorsal ( up ) versus ventral ( down ) . From caudal to rostral , labeled areas include motor cortex , dorsal ( PMd ) and ventral premotor cortex , dorsal ( pre - PMd ) and ventral aspects of anterior premotor cortex , ventro - ( VLPFC ) and dorsolateral PFC ( DLPFC ) , and lateral frontal polar cortex ( FPC ) . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 12 No . 5 194 Author ' s personal copy subsequently presented target pair [ 57 ] . Responding requires evaluation of the relationship of two relation - ships . Evaluating this third - order relationship is associ - ated with activation in FPC . In a review of the FPC literature , Ramnani and Owen [ 59 ] noted that many tasks engage FPC , such as sub - goaling or episodic recognition , that do not obviously involve third - order relationships in the strict sense described here . Thus , Ramnani and Owen [ 59 ] broadened the proposed role of FPC to include inte - grating the outcomes of multiple cognitive operations , including relational ones . Relational complexity proposes that the rostro – caudal organization of PFC can be viewed as a progression in the level of abstraction of working memory representations . Reasoning and problem solving are hypothesized to require the ability to integrate multiple relationships sim - ultaneously [ 60 , 61 ] , and so the theory indicates that FPC is central to the highest levels of reasoning and thought [ 56 , 57 ] . However , as higher - order relationships depend on lower - order relationships , higher levels need not asym - metrically inﬂuence lower - levels . Indeed , modulation could reasonably be assumed to occur in both directions [ 56 ] . Thus , relational complexity is heterarchical , requir - ing neither modulation nor inheritance of information asymmetrically from higher to lower levels . This feature might distinguish this framework from the hierarchical perspectives described in the following section . The rostro – caudal axis of PFC and cognitive control : representational hierarchy Cognitive - control theories propose that the PFC maintains contextual information to bias selection of relevant representations over competitors [ 6 , 66 – 69 ] ( Box 1 ) . Within a uniform computational control structure , there is opportunity for hierarchy among both the repres - entations that compete for processing and the representa - tions that are maintained to provide a control signal . Representational hierarchy ranked by the control signal The ‘cascade model’ [ 5 , 70 , 71 ] is an elegant cognitive control framework that makes predictions about the ros - tro – caudal organization of the PFC ( Figure 2c ) . In cascade , control resolves competition among alternative action representations based on mutual information with contex - tual information , also termed control signals . Crucially , the control signals relate to one another hierarchically , in that information is inherited from superordinate to sub - ordinate levels , and separate signals are processed by spatially distinct regions along the rostro – caudal axis of the PFC . At the lowest level , sensory control is supported by premotor cortex and selects a motor response based on a sensory input . Next , contextual control , supported by posterior PFC , selects an action based on an environmental contextual cue . Episodic control , supported by anterior DLPFC , selects an action based on an ongoing temporal context . Finally , a highest level , branching control , sup - ported by FPC , selects action representations based on a pending temporal context . Thus , from caudal to rostral , regions of the PFC are distinguished based on their reliance on control signals that differ temporally , from immediate environment ( sensory and context ) , to current temporal frame ( episodic ) , to a pending frame ( branching ) . An inﬂuential study by Koechlin et al . [ 71 ] provided functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) evidence for the lower three levels of the cascade model . In separate Figure 2 . Theoretical accountsofthe rostro – caudalgradient in thePFC . ( a ) From aworking memory perspective , rostraland caudal PFCcan bedistinguishedon thebasis of processingdomaingeneralversusspecificrepresentations [ 20 , 24 , 41 ] . Hierarchicalversionsofthisperspectiveproposethatdomain - specificposteriorfrontalregionscanbe modulated by the maintenance domain general rules in anterior DLPFC and FPC [ 50 , 54 ] . ( b ) Relational complexity proposes a gradient in the PFC with respect to evaluation of simple stimulus properties , first - order relationships among the properties , and second - order relationships among relationships [ 56 , 57 ] . ( c ) The cascade model proposes four levels of control that are distinguished by temporally disparate control signals , either sensory , context , episodic or branching [ 5 ] . ( d ) Abstract representational hierarchy proposes that regions of the PFC are distinguished by the level of abstraction at which representations compete in a hierarchy of action representations [ 74 ] . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 12 No . 5 195 Author ' s personal copy experiments , subjects selected one of two button - press responses based on a colored cue ( sensory control ) , or one of two letter - judgment tasks based on a colored cue ( contextual control ) . A third manipulation arranged the color mappings in both experiments such that a given color mapped to a different response or task across different blocks of the experiments . Thus , the appropriate color mapping had to be selected based on an ongoing temporal frame ( episodic control ) . Consistent with the control signal distinctions of the cascade model , the dorsal premotor cortex ( PMd ) was active across all three levels , the anterior premotor ( pre - PMd ) / posterior DLPFC was active across sensory and context levels , and the anterior DLPFC was active only for the highest episodic level . Finally , effective connectivity revealed that activation in posterior regions co - varied with activity in more anterior regions but not vice versa , which is potentially consistent with an anterior - to - posterior inheritance of information . Evidence for the highest level , branching control , comes from a separate experiment in which FPC was activated when performance of one task had to be interrupted during performance of an intervening task [ 72 ] . Such sub - goaling effects in FPC are highly replicable across various paradigms [ 1 , 73 ] . From the cascade perspective , this activity reﬂects the mainten - ance of a more temporally distant event than the ongoing episode , and so ranks higher in the temporal organiz - ation of PFC . Representational hierarchy ranked by the control demand Recently , Badre and D’Esposito [ 74 ] proposed a related alternative to a control signal account of hierarchy in PFC . We suggested that the rostro – caudal hierarchy can be better understood in terms of differences in control demands , deﬁned based on the form of the representa - tions that compete during action selection ( Figure 2d ) . As noted earlier , action representations might be organized hierarchically , such that more abstract action repres - entations designate a set of more speciﬁc representa - tions . For example , a task - set can be said to be abstract because it generalizes across a set of speciﬁc stimulus – response mappings . As representations at pro - gressively abstract levels compete , distinct control pro - cessors along the rostro – caudal axis of the PFC might resolve the competition . Koechlin and Summerﬁeld [ 5 ] suggested that selecting responses versus classes of responses might distinguish the sensory and context levels of the cascade model . And , based on an experiment that increased the response sequence chunking over three levels [ 70 ] , they argued that such a progression should be conﬁned to premotor cortex and posterior DLPFC . However , activation associated with the highest level of this experiment ( the third order of abstraction ) seemed to be close to the episodic site from Koechlin et al . [ 71 ] , albeit more ventral . Thus , could differ - ences in control demands rather than control signals account for the rostro – caudal gradient ? To distinguish between these hypotheses , we tested control demands at increasing orders of abstraction while also being explicit about the form of the control signal [ 17 ] ( Box 2 ) : ( i ) the response experiment required selection of a stimulus - response mapping , a ﬁrst - order abstraction , based on a perceptual cue ( context and / or sensory control ) ; ( ii ) the feature experiment required selection of a set of stimulus – response mappings , a second - order abstrac - tion , based on a perceptual cue ( context and / or sensory control ) ; ( iii ) the dimension experiment required selection of a set of sets of stimulus – response mappings , a third - order abstraction , based on a perceptual cue ( context and / or sensory control ) ; ( iv ) the context experiment required selection of a set of sets of sets of stimulus – response mappings , a fourth - order abstraction , based on information from a current temporal frame ( episodic control ) . Frontal hierarchy ranked by the control signal predicted that the response , feature and dimension experiments should be conﬁned to the posterior frontal sector , and the context experiment should activate anterior DLPFC . By Box 1 . Mechanisms of hierarchical control Formal models of cognitive control make explicit how control might be implemented within a hierarchy . One influential class of connectionist models of control derives from the assumptions of biased competition [ 66 – 69 , 76 , 77 ] . Competition arises when bottom - up input produces activation of multiple response pathways . This competition can be quantified as Hopfield energy , which is the sum of the products of all the nodes in a layer weighted by their competitive , lateral inhibitory connections [ 66 , 78 ] . Assuming mu - tually equivalent competition , at a given overall level of activation , energy in the network will be maximal when all units are equivalently active . In response to competition , a recurrent layer that maintains task - relevant contextual information biases task - relevant responses over competitors . A sophisticated biased competition framework by O’Reilly and colleagues [ 69 , 76 , 79 ] implements hierarchical control through multiple contextual layers at different levels of abstraction and recursion . An early variant of the model [ 79 ] , motivated by a double dissociation in the intra – extra - dimensional switching task [ 80 ] , included two hierarchically related working memory buffers that separately maintain the recently rewarded dimension ( e . g . a category of shapes ) or feature ( e . g . a particular shape ) . These buffers independently bias dimension or feature in a common representational space and are rapidly updated in response to conflict between predicted and actual outcomes . ‘Lesioning’ each of these layers simulated a double dissociation between reversals at feature or dimension levels . More recent versions of the model are capable of modeling different cognitive control tasks and even show generalization to novel tasks [ 76 ] . O’Reilly and colleagues have suggested that this hierarchical architecture reflects the gradient of abstraction along the rostro – caudal axis of the PFC [ 69 , 76 ] . The cascade model [ 5 , 71 ] shares fundamental properties with the biased competition framework . The primary control demand is uncertainty or entropy . Uncertainty increases with the number of candidate responses . For any number of responses , uncertainty will be maximal when the response probabilities are equivalent . Given that relative activation among competing response units in a network relates directly to the probability distributions of those responses [ 81 ] , entropy will exhibit similar dynamics as Hopfield energy when all responses are equally likely . Control is expressed as the reduction in uncertainty ( mutual information ) given some additional signal ( sensory , context or episodic ) . Different regions of the PFC are specialized for different types of control signals and signals sum from super - to sub - ordinate levels [ 5 , 71 ] . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 12 No . 5 196 Author ' s personal copy contrast , hierarchy ranked by the control demand predicted that the dimension experiment ( third order ) would produce activation in anterior DLPFC and the context experiment ( fourth order ) in FPC . Theresultsfromthisexperimentsupportarostro – caudal gradient distinguished by the control demand ( Figure 3a ) . A clear progression was evident in PMd , pre - PMd , inferior frontal sulcus / DLPFC , and FPC based on the parametric manipulation of competition in the response , feature , dimension and context experiments , respectively . The context experiment required episodic control but resulted in activation in the FPC , rostral - to - anterior DLPFC ( Figure 3b ) . By contrast , the dimension experiment did not require episodic control but resulted in activation in the anterior DLPFC ( Figure 3b ) . Thus , anterior DLPFC and FPC are inconsistently activated based solely on the pre - sence of an episodic control signal . Likewise , anterior DLPFC , pre - PMd or PMd were all activated when using the same sensory control signal . By contrast , the abstract rank of the competing representations seemed systemati - cally related to which regions of the frontal lobe were activated . Distinguishing theories of rostro - caudal function Progressively anterior regions of the frontal cortex support increasingly complex , abstract representations and pro - cesses . On this point , the frameworks reviewed here agree . However , there are several points of divergence among the frameworks that are theoretically signiﬁcant for our un - derstanding of frontal - lobe function and cognitive control . Hierarchy versus non - hierarchy A key point to resolve is whether the gradient of function in the frontal lobes truly reﬂects a hierarchical system . Not all of the frameworks are hierarchical . For instance , the domain generality versus speciﬁcity distinction [ 24 ] is non - hierarchical and the relational complexity perspective is heterarchical . The cascade [ 5 ] , Sakai and Passingham [ 53 , 54 ] , and Badre and D’Esposito [ 74 ] frameworks are hierarchical in that superordinate , anterior regions are hypothesized to asymmetrically modulate processing in posterior , subordinate regions and / or to operate on hier - archically abstract representations . Evidence from explicit hierarchical control manipulations [ 71 , 74 ] and functional connectivity analyses [ 53 , 71 ] strongly support these perspectives . Still , the double dissociation in the monkey [ 24 ] leaves such an organization in doubt . In a hierarchical system , damage to posterior processors should impair behavior even when anterior processors are intact . Thus , it will be crucial to further investigate this important result to verify a hierarchical organization of the frontal lobes . Hierarchical views also suffer from the limitation that higher - order representations could be generated indeﬁ - nitely . Obviously , PFC cannot extend rostrally without limit . Future research should investigate the signiﬁcance of this limitation for the proposed frameworks , such as whether higher - order structures become chunked or if there exists some fundamental capacity limitation for the control of action [ 75 , 76 ] . Ranking the functional gradient A second critical point to resolve is what factor dis - tinguishes regions of the PFC . One principal difference among the frameworks , perhaps captured directly between Box 2 . Testing hierarchy ranked by the control demand In a recent experiment , Badre and D’Esposito [ 74 ] tested whether the rostro – caudal frontal gradient is ranked by the level of abstraction at which representations compete . Four fMRI experiments tested control demands by increasing the number of competing alter - natives parametrically at four levels of abstraction . In each experiment , the number of alternatives varied between blocks . Subjects were aware of the number of alternatives on each block . In the ‘response experiment’ ( Figure Ia ) , subjects saw one colored square at a time and then selected a response based on a learned mapping between the color and response . The number of candidate responses could increase from one to four , thereby increasing competition . In the ‘feature experiment’ ( Figure Ib ) , subjects saw objects presented inside colored squares . The subject made a positive response whenever a particular feature was represented in the object , such as a particular texture , and made a negative response to other features . On a given trial , the feature that cued a positive response depended on the colored cue . The number of candidate features that could potentially cue a positive response increased from one to four and so increased competition . In the ‘dimension experiment’ ( Figure Ic ) , subjects saw two objects inside a colored square ; four dimensions ( i . e . texture , shape , size and orientation ) of the objects varied from trial to trial . Subjects decided if the objects matched along one of the four dimensions . The relevant dimension was cued by the color of the square . Increasing the number of potentially relevant dimensions ( from one to four ) resulted in increased competition . Finally , in the ‘context experi - ment’ ( Figure Ic ) , the task was identical to the dimension experi - ment , except that there were always two dimensions from which to choose . In this experiment , competition was manipulated among overlapping color - to - dimension mappings using the frequency manipulation described by Koechlin et al . [ 71 ] . The results of these experiments ( see Figure 3 in main text ) support a rostro – caudal hierarchy that is ranked by the level of abstraction of competing action representations . Figure I . Task schematics depicting trial events in the four tasks used to test representational hierarchy from Badre and D’Esposito [ 74 ] . ( a ) In the response experiment , subjects responded with key presses ( number in quotes ) to colored squares . Conflict was manipulated based on the number of key - press alternatives within a block of trials . ( b ) In the feature experiment , subjects made positive or negative responses to specific features of objects , such as a textureof thecentral object , with a positiveresponse dependenton thecolored square . Conflict was manipulated by increasing the number of alternative features within a block of trails that could cue a positive response . ( c ) In both the dimension and context experiments , subjects decided if two objects matched along a perceptual dimension determined by the colored square . Conflict in the dimension experiment was manipulated by increasing the number of alternative dimensions within a block , and conflict in the context experiment was manipulated by varying the frequency of sets of color to dimension mappings . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 12 No . 5 197 Author ' s personal copy the cascade model and Badre and D’Esposito views , is whether the abstractness of control signal or control demand determines regional differences in the frontal lobes . As noted , it seems to be difﬁcult to account for the Badre and D’Esposito [ 17 ] results from a strict control signal perspective . However , Koechlin et al . [ 71 ] found that anterior DLPFC and pre - PMd were active under con - ditions of episodic control when only a response had to be selected . Thus , why did selection at an apparent second - order abstraction require DLPFC ? One potential account of this result is that heteromodal cortex in the PFC has access to more information , in - cluding mnemonic information , than the premotor cortex does . This does not mean that PFC organization is deter - mined by the form of the control signal per se , but it does predict limitations on the extent to which premotor cortex can enact control . Temporal versus representational abstraction The frameworks can be further distinguished by their emphasis on temporal versus representational abstrac - tion . For example , anterior PFC might maintain infor - mation over longer intervals , as with episodic or branching control [ 72 ] , or might differentially rely on information from memory versus the environment [ 20 , 24 , 71 ] . To some extent , representations that are more Figure 3 . Results from the response , feature , dimension and context experiments and comparison to the model of Koechlin et al . [ 71 ] . ( a ) The whole - brain analysis [ 74 ] ( i ) shows a clear caudal - to - rostral progression in activation as conflict was manipulated in the response ( blue ; PMd ) , feature ( purple ; prePMd ) , dimension [ green ; inferior frontal sulcus ( IFS ) / DLPFC ) and context ( red ; FPC ) experiments . These activationsreflectthe parametricmanipulationof conflict ateach level , derivedfrom the event - related signal change or , in the case of FPC , in the sustained signal over the block of trials ( ii ) . Note that this parametric manipulation rules out certain alternative accounts . For example , the inclusion of a match decision or two stimuli in the dimension experiment does not account for activation in IFS / DLPFC because , when only one dimension is relevant , a match decision is still required and two stimuli are still present but activity is at baseline . ( b ) Abstract relational hierarchy seems to provide a parsimonious account of rostro – caudal gradient across the models of Koechlin et al . [ 71 ] , and Badre and D’Esposito [ 74 ] . Spheres with diameters of 8 mm ( within the smoothing kernel of each experiment ) were centered on maxima from response ( i ) , feature ( iii ) , dimension ( v ) and context ( vi ) manipulations of D’Esposito and Badre [ 74 ] ( red ) , and on the sensory ( ii ) , context ( iv ) andepisodic ( vi ) manipulationsofKoechlin etal . [ 71 ] ( blue ) . ThesesphereswererenderedonaninflatedTalairachsurface . Notethatthespheresare for precise illustration of proximity but do not represent actual spread of activation in each experiment . Broken lines separate manipulations at equivalent levels of abstraction in a representational hierarchy . Equivalent episodic and contextual control manipulations across the two experiments are also labeled . Parts ( a ) ( i ) and ( b ) adapted , with permission , from Ref . [ 74 ] . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 12 No . 5 198 Author ' s personal copy abstract are relevant for longer , so it remains to be seen whether a strong distinction can be made between temporal and representational abstraction . However , apart from FPC , it does seem that anterior PFC has both sensory and mnemonic information available for control , rather than demonstrating a unique preference for remem - bered information . Concluding remarks The fact that behavior can be organized hierarchically does not require that the system itself be structured hierarchi - cally . Nevertheless , growing evidence supports spatially distinct regions of the frontal lobe that process differen - tially abstract components of action selection . Consider - able controversy persists regarding the factors that distinguish this functional gradient and whether these processors interact hierarchically . Resolving these points of controversy will be fundamental to our understanding of frontal - lobe function and the control of action ( Box 3 ) . Acknowledgements I thank M . D’Esposito , B . Buchsbaum and V . Van Veen for their valuable comments and discussions while writing this review . My work is supported by a National Research Service Award ( F32 NS053337 ) . References 1 Badre , D . and Wagner , A . D . ( 2004 ) Selection , integration , and conﬂict monitoring ; assessing the nature and generality of prefrontal cognitive control mechanisms . Neuron 41 , 473 – 487 2 Bunge , S . A . ( 2004 ) How we use rules to select actions : a review of evidence from cognitive neuroscience . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 4 , 564 – 579 3 D’Esposito , M . et al . ( 1995 ) The neural basis of the central executive system of working memory . Nature 378 , 279 – 281 4 Duncan , J . ( 2001 ) An adaptive coding model of neural function in prefrontal cortex . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 2 , 820 – 829 5 Koechlin , E . and Summerﬁeld , C . ( 2007 ) An information theoretical approachtoprefrontalexecutivefunction . TrendsCogn . Sci . 11 , 229 – 235 6 Miller , E . K . and Cohen , J . D . ( 2001 ) An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 24 , 167 – 202 7 Norman , D . A . and Shallice , T . ( 1986 ) Attention to action : willed and automatic control of behaviour . In Consciousness and Self Regulation : Advances in Research and Theory ( Vol . 4 ) ( Davidson , R . et al . , eds ) , pp . 1 – 18 , Plenum 8 Passingham , R . E . ( 1993 ) Thefrontal lobes and voluntary action , Oxford University Press 9 Stuss , D . T . and Benson , D . F . ( 1987 ) The frontal lobes and control of cognition and memory . In The Frontal Lobes Revisited ( Perecman , E . , ed . ) , pp . 141 – 158 , The IRBN Press 10 Aron , A . R . et al . ( 2004 ) Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex . Trends Cogn . Sci . 8 , 170 – 177 11 Badre , D . et al . ( 2005 ) Dissociable controlled retrieval and generalized selection mechanisms in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex . Neuron 47 , 907 – 918 12 Brass , M . et al . ( 2005 ) The role of the inferior frontal junction area in cognitive control . Trends Cogn . Sci . 9 , 314 – 316 13 Petrides , M . ( 2005 ) Lateral prefrontal cortex : architectonic and functional organization . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 360 , 781 – 795 14 Koechlin , E . et al . ( 2000 ) Dissociating the role of the medial and lateral anterior prefrontal cortex in human planning . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 7651 – 7656 15 MacDonald , A . W . , 3rd et al . ( 2000 ) Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control . Science 288 , 1835 – 1838 16 Wood , J . N . andGrafman , J . ( 2003 ) Humanprefrontal cortex : processing and representational perspectives . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 4 , 139 – 147 17 Badre , D . and Wagner , A . D . ( 2007 ) Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory . Neuropsychologia 45 , 2883 – 2901 18 Buckner , R . L . ( 2003 ) Functional - anatomic correlates of control processes in memory . J . Neurosci . 23 , 3999 – 4004 19 Bunge , S . A . and Zelazo , P . D . ( 2006 ) A brain - based account of the developmentofruleuseinchildhood . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 15 , 118 – 121 20 Christoff , K . and Gabrieli , J . D . E . ( 2000 ) The frontopolar cortex and human cognition : evidencefor a rostrocaudal hierarchical organization within the human prefrontal cortex . Psychobiology 28 , 168 – 186 21 Fuster , J . M . ( 1997 ) The prefrontal cortex : anatomy , physiology , and neuropsychology of the frontal lobe , Lippincott – Raven Publishers 22 Fuster , J . M . ( 2001 ) The prefrontal cortex – an update : time is of the essence . Neuron 30 , 319 – 333 23 Fuster , J . M . ( 2004 ) Upper processing stages of the perception - action cycle . Trends Cogn . Sci . 8 , 143 – 145 24 Petrides , M . ( 2006 ) The rostro – caudal axis of cognitive control processing within lateral frontal cortex . In From Monkey Brain to Human Brain : A Fyssen Foundation Symposium ( Dehaene , S . , ed . ) , pp . 293 – 314 , The MIT Press 25 Broadbent , D . E . ( 1977 ) Levels , hierarchies , and the locus of control . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 29 , 181 – 201 26 Newell , A . ( 1990 ) Uniﬁed theories of cognition , Harvard University Press 27 Cohen , G . ( 2000 ) Hierarchical models in cognition : do they have psychological reality ? Eur . J . Cogn . Psychol . 12 , 1 – 36 28 Lashley , K . S . ( 1951 ) The problem of serial order in behavior . In Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior ( Jeffress , L . A . , ed . ) , pp . 112 – 136 , Wiley 29 Rosenbaum , D . A . ( 1987 ) Hierarchical organization of motor programs . In NeuralandBehavioralApproachestoHigherBrainFunctions ( Wise , S . , ed . ) , pp . 45 – 66 , Wiley 30 Schank , R . C . and Abelson , R . ( 1977 ) Scripts , plans , goals , and understanding , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 31 Cooper , R . P . and Shallice , T . ( 2006 ) Hierarchical schemas and goals in the control of sequential behavior . Psychol . Rev . 113 , 887 – 916 32 Gopher , D . et al . ( 2000 ) Switching tasks and attentional policies . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 129 , 308 – 339 33 Rubinstein , J . S . et al . ( 2001 ) Executive control of cognitive processes in task switching . J . Exp . Psychol . Hum . Percept . Perform . 27 , 763 – 797 34 Schneider , D . W . and Logan , G . D . ( 2006 ) Hierarchical control of cognitive processes : switching tasks in sequences . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 135 , 623 – 640 35 McClelland , J . L . and Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1985 ) Distributed memory and the representation of general and speciﬁc information . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 114 , 159 – 197 36 Botvinick , M . and Plaut , D . C . ( 2004 ) Doing without schema hierarchies : a recurrent connectionist approach to normal and impaired routine sequential action . Psychol . Rev . 111 , 395 – 429 37 Botvinick , M . M . ( 2007 ) Multilevel structure in behaviour and in the brain : a model of Fuster’s hierarchy . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 362 , 1615 – 1626 38 Miller , E . K . ( 2000 ) The prefrontal cortex : No simple matter . Neuroimage 11 , 447 – 450 39 Postle , B . R . ( 2006 ) Working memory as an emergent property of the mind and brain . Neuroscience 139 , 23 – 38 Box 3 . Questions for future research (cid:2) Is the rostro – caudal gradient in the frontal lobe a hierarchical system ? (cid:2) What factor governs functional distinctions along the rostro – caudal gradient ? (cid:2) Is there a fundamental distinction between temporal and repre - sentational abstraction within the PFC ? (cid:2) How is the number of hierarchical levels constrained ? (cid:2) How does PFC represent non - hierarchical action structures ( e . g . heterarchical ) ? (cid:2) Does hierarchy extend to the control of memory , which , like action , exhibits hierarchical properties ? (cid:2) How are novel tasks and rule structures acquired within this architecture ? (cid:2) How does the rostro – caudal frontal lobe development impact a child’s ability to reason and organize their behavior ? Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 12 No . 5 199 Author ' s personal copy 40 Rainer , G . et al . ( 1998 ) Memory ﬁelds of neurons in primate prefrontal cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 15008 – 15013 41 Courtney , S . M . ( 2004 ) Attention and cognitive control as emergent properties of information representation in working memory . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 4 , 501 – 516 42 Levy , R . and Goldman - Rakic , P . S . ( 2000 ) Segregation of working memory functions within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex . Exp . Brain Res . 133 , 23 – 32 43 Sala , J . B . et al . ( 2003 ) Functional topography of a distributed neural system for spatial and nonspatial information maintenance in working memory . Neuropsychologia 41 , 341 – 356 44 Smith , E . E . and Jonides , J . ( 1999 ) Storage and executive processes in the frontal lobes . Science 283 , 1657 – 1661 45 D’Esposito , M . et al . ( 1999 ) Maintenance versus manipulation of information held in working memory : an event - related fMRI study . Brain Cogn . 41 , 66 – 86 46 Fuster , J . M . et al . ( 2000 ) Cross - modal and cross - temporal association in neurons of frontal cortex . Nature 405 , 347 – 351 47 Owen , A . M . et al . ( 1998 ) Functional organization of spatial and nonspatial working memory processing within the human lateral frontal cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 7721 – 7726 48 Postle , B . R . and D’Esposito , M . ( 1999 ) What – then – where in visual working memory : an event - related fMRI study . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 11 , 585 – 597 49 Prabhakaran , V . et al . ( 2000 ) Integration of diverse information in working memory within the frontal lobe . Nat . Neurosci . 3 , 85 – 90 50 Courtney , S . M . et al . ( 2007 ) A hierarchical biased - competition model of domain - dependent working memory maintenance and executive control . In The Cognitive Neuroscience of Working Memory ( Osaka , N . et al . , eds ) , pp . 369 – 383 , Oxford University Press 51 Petrides , M . ( 1987 ) Conditional learning and the primate frontal cortex . In The Frontal Lobes Revisited ( Perecman , E . , ed . ) , pp . 91 – 108 , IRBN Press 52 Petrides , M . ( 1991 ) Monitoring of selections of visual stimuli and the primate frontal cortex . Proc . Biol . Sci . 246 , 293 – 298 53 Sakai , K . and Passingham , R . E . ( 2003 ) Prefrontal interactions reﬂect future task operations . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 75 – 81 54 Sakai , K . and Passingham , R . E . ( 2006 ) Prefrontal set activity predicts rule - speciﬁc neural processing during subsequent cognitive performance . J . Neurosci . 26 , 1211 – 1218 55 Rowe , J . B . et al . ( 2007 ) Is the prefrontal cortex necessary for establishing cognitive sets ? J . Neurosci . 27 , 13303 – 13310 56 Christoff , K . and Keramatian , K . ( 2007 ) Abstraction of mental representations : theoretical considerations and neuroscientiﬁc evidence . In Perspectives on Rule - Guided Behavior ( Bunge , S . A . and Wallis , J . D . , eds ) , pp . 107 – 126 , Oxford University Press 57 Christoff , K . et al . ( 2003 ) Evaluating self - generated information : Anterior prefrontal contributions to human cognition . Behav . Neurosci . 117 , 1161 – 1168 58 Bunge , S . A . et al . ( 2005 ) Analogical reasoning and prefrontal cortex : evidence for separable retrieval and integration mechanisms . Cereb . Cortex 15 , 239 – 249 59 Ramnani , N . and Owen , A . M . ( 2004 ) Anterior prefrontal cortex : insights into function from anatomy and neuroimaging . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 5 , 184 – 194 60 Halford , G . S . ( 1993 ) Children’s understanding : the development of mental models , Erlbaum 61 Robin , N . and Holyoak , K . J . ( 1995 ) Relational complexity and the functions of the prefrontal cortex . In The Cognitive Neurosciences ( Gazzaniga , M . S . , ed . ) , pp . 987 – 997 , MIT Press 62 Wallis , J . D . et al . ( 2001 ) Single neurons in prefrontal cortex encode abstract rules . Nature 411 , 953 – 956 63 Wallis , J . D . and Miller , E . K . ( 2003 ) From rule to response : neuronal processes in the premotor and prefrontal cortex . J . Neurophysiol . 90 , 1790 – 1806 64 Hampshire , A . et al . ( 2007 ) Selective tuning of the blood oxygenation level - dependent response during simple target detection dissociates human frontoparietal subregions . J . Neurosci . 27 , 6219 – 6223 65 Bunge , S . A . et al . ( 2003 ) Neural circuits subserving the retrieval and maintenance of abstract rules . J . Neurophysiol . 90 , 3419 – 3428 66 Botvinick , M . M . et al . ( 2001 ) Conﬂict monitoring and cognitive control . Psychol . Rev . 108 , 624 – 652 67 Cohen , J . D . et al . ( 1990 ) On the control of automatic processes : a parallel distributed processing account of the Stroop effect . Psychol . Rev . 97 , 332 – 361 68 Desimone , R . and Duncan , J . ( 1995 ) Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 18 , 193 – 222 69 O’Reilly , R . C . and Frank , M . J . ( 2006 ) Making working memory work : a computational model of learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia . Neural Comput . 18 , 283 – 328 70 Koechlin , E . and Jubault , T . ( 2006 ) Broca’s area and the hierarchical organization of human behavior . Neuron 50 , 963 – 974 71 Koechlin , E . et al . ( 2003 ) The architecture of cognitive control in the human prefrontal cortex . Science 302 , 1181 – 1185 72 Koechlin , E . et al . ( 1999 ) The role of the anterior prefrontal cortex in human cognition . Nature 399 , 148 – 151 73 Braver , T . S . and Bongiolatti , S . R . ( 2002 ) The role of frontopolar cortex in subgoal processing during working memory . Neuroimage 15 , 523 – 536 74 Badre , D . and D’Esposito , M . ( 2007 ) Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence for a hierarchical organization of the prefrontal cortex . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 19 , 2082 – 2099 75 Koechlin , E . and Hyaﬁl , A . ( 2007 ) Anterior prefrontal function and the limits of human decision - making . Science 318 , 594 – 598 76 Hazy , T . E . et al . ( 2007 ) Towards an executive without a homunculus : computational models of the prefrontal cortex / basal ganglia system . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 362 , 1601 – 1613 77 Badre , D . and Wagner , A . D . ( 2006 ) Computational and neurobiological mechanisms underlying cognitive ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 7186 – 7191 78 Hopﬁeld , J . J . ( 1982 ) Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 79 , 2554 – 2558 79 O’Reilly , R . C . et al . ( 2002 ) Prefrontal cortex and dynamic categorization tasks : representational organization and neuromodulatory control . Cereb . Cortex 12 , 246 – 257 80 Dias , R . et al . ( 1997 ) Dissociable forms of inhibitory control within prefrontal cortex with an analog of the Wisconsin Card Sort Test : restriction to novel situations and independence from ‘on - line’ processing . J . Neurosci . 17 , 9285 – 9297 81 Usher , M . andMcClelland , J . L . ( 2001 ) Onthetime courseofperceptual choice : the leaky competing accumulator model . Psychol . Rev . 108 , 550 – 592 Free journals for developing countries In 2002 , the WHO and six medical journal publishers launched the Health InterNetwork Access to Research Initiative , which enabled nearly 70 of the world’s poorest countries to gain free or reduced - cost access to biomedical literature through the internet . Currently more than 70 publishers are participating in the program , providing access to over 2000 journals . Gro Harlem Brundtland , former director - general for the WHO , said that this initiative was ‘‘perhaps the biggest step ever taken towards reducing the health information gap between rich and poor countries’’ . For more information , visit www . who . int / hinari Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 12 No . 5 200