Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa Sarina Till ∗ Independent Institute of Education and University of Cape Town South Africa ctill @ varsitycollege . co . za Jaydon Farao ∗ University of Cape Town South Africa Toshka Lauren Coleman University of Cape Town South Africa Londiwe Deborah Shandu Human Sciences Research Council South Africa Nonkululeko Khuzwayo Human Sciences Research Council South Africa Livhuwani Muthelo University in Limpopo South Africa Masenyani Oupa Mbombi University in Limpopo South Africa Mamare Motlhatlhedi University in Limpopo South Africa Molebogeng Motlhatlhedi University of the Witwatersrand South Africa Gugulethu Mabena University of the Witwatersrand South Africa Alastair Van Heerden Human Sciences Research Council South Africa Tebogo Maria Mothiba University of Limpopo South Africa Shane Norris University of the Witwatersrand South Africa University of SouthamptonUK Nervo Verdezoto † Cardiff UniversityUK verdezotodiasn @ cardiff . ac . uk Melissa Densmore † University of Cape Town South Africa melissa . densmore @ uct . ac . za ABSTRACT In this article , we report on methodological reflections that emerged during community - based co - design workshops exploring mater - nal and child health challenges across four provinces in rural and urban South Africa . Based on these workshops , we present how cultural norms such as hlonipha facilitated learning opportunities for participants’ engagement with gender norms and relations with community leaders and senior members of the community . We also describe stark contrasts with regards to cultural norms between rural and urban sites and their implications for co - design activities . By reflecting on the multi - linguistic , social , and cultural challenges conducting workshops across geographic locations , we discuss how ∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research . † Co - Principal Investigators . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9388 - 1 / 22 / 08 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3536169 . 3537786 cultural nuances influenced co - design workshops and artefacts . Adjustments to the rhythms of the workshops and co - design ac - tivities enabled " transferability " between rural and urban settings , and across diverse cultures , regardless of whether these settings include members from the same cultures . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Participatory design ; Con - textual design ; Field studies . KEYWORDS multi - cultural , inter - disciplinary , community - based co - design , cul - tural norms , maternal and child health . ACM Reference Format : Sarina Till , Jaydon Farao , Toshka Lauren Coleman , Londiwe Deborah Shandu , Nonkululeko Khuzwayo , Livhuwani Muthelo , Masenyani Oupa Mbombi , Mamare Motlhatlhedi , Molebogeng Motlhatlhedi , Gugulethu Mabena , Alastair Van Heerden , Tebogo Maria Mothiba , Shane Norris , Nervo Verdezoto , and Melissa Densmore . 2022 . Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa . In Participatory Design Con - ference 2022 : Volume 1 ( PDC 2022 Vol . 1 ) , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , New - castle upon Tyne , United Kingdom . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3536169 . 3537786 120 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Till and Farao , et al . 1 INTRODUCTION Collaborative design , or co - design focuses on the empowerment and inclusion of communities inexperienced in design work ; democratis - ing design and creating sustainable and context - appropriate inno - vations . Sanders and Stappers’s [ 51 ] definition of co - design as " the creativity of designers and people not trained in design , working together in the design process , " has been a reference point for many projects seeking to involve communities and marginalised people in the development of solutions to local challenges [ 15 , 28 , 52 , 56 ] . The Information & Communication Technologies for Development ( ICT4D ) community acknowledges the importance of co - design as a means of mitigating the ethical and design conflicts that arise when working in diverse , under - resourced , and often exploited settings , which has led to the need to understand how to conduct co - design appropriately and effectively in different contexts [ 28 , 61 ] . Co - design is rooted in participatory design ( PD ) , a design approach conceived in Scandinavian workplaces in the 1970s , and its con - cerned with the democratisation of innovation and design pro - cesses [ 20 , 46 ] . While co - design is seen as a step forward from user - centred design ( UCD ) , and emphasises the role of communities in decision - making processes within the design and development of solutions to their problems , it has maintained elements of its Western origins [ 62 ] . This has complicated the purpose of co - design as a liberating and inclusive design approach since it reinforces the power differentials between researchers and participants , partic - ularly in under - served communities [ 25 ] . Researcher - participant power dynamics have always been a challenge in ICT4D work , and with co - design similar challenges arise . Alienation of participants through use of foreign materials [ 27 ] , assumptions of equal educa - tional backgrounds , and reinforced professional hierarchies have played a role in how co - design projects have been conducted , espe - cially in the Global South . On the African continent , co - design has become increasingly popular which has illuminated the contextual and ethical challenges the application of this method faces [ 28 , 61 ] . In this paper we report methodological challenges , diverse cul - tural nuances to consider , and lessons learned while conducting co - design workshops across geographical locations and cultures in four South African provinces , in the context of digital maternal and child health . We explore the application and transferability of co - design activities and discuss the cross - cultural and contex - tual experiences . This paper contributes and extends research to community - based co - design practices in multicultural , multifac - eted settings within South Africa , and lessons of community - based co - design engagement in such settings . 2 BACKGROUND 2 . 1 Challenges of community - based co - design and ICT4D Community - based co - design ( CBCD ) is the application of co - design techniques with the active involvement of the community being designed with , while embracing their values and norms . As Groen - eveld , Boess , and Freudenthal [ 21 ] state , the CBCD approach treats community members as " equal partners in the design process . " Furthermore , CBCD should also acknowledge power differentials and enable an environment where all stakeholders , designers , re - searchers , and other community members , can create collectively . The aim being to instill ownership , embrace the expertise of the community on their own challenges , and encourage full partic - ipation of community members in developing solutions . While these objectives are ideal , there are a multitude of challenges that co - design face in multi - cultural and diverse settings . Presenting foreign modes of engagement to communities as a means to address local issues can be " intrusive or harmful to certain communities " [ 25 ] . Co - design , as practiced by many HCI researchers , involves a consideration of many assumptions not necessarily held by the community . Language is a significant bar - rier to successful community engagement more so within multi - disciplinary teams when trying to reach common understand - ings [ 47 ] . This is further exacerbated when English - speaking re - searchers enter into communities who are non - native English speak - ers [ 59 ] . This has an impact on both the success of co - design activi - ties , and how the activities and outputs may conflict with specific cultural norms . Stakeholders’ different and conflicting interests can also complicate the co - design process , with multifarious motiva - tions influencing how people participate [ 7 ] . Additionally , a contrast in values and goals of community collaborators and external organ - isations they are affiliated with can impede on co - design processes , as shown in the work of Gautam et al . involving vulnerable pop - ulations in Nepal [ 18 ] . They underscore the role of participatory design as a means of negotiating values [ 22 ] to achieve " compre - hensive democratic participation " [ 18 ] . They also raise concerns about the ramifications of prioritizing certain vulnerable voices and how it could impact relationships with organizations that are designed to aid the community , leading to long - term ethical con - cerns . These are all ongoing tensions that need to be identified and explored when engaging with communities . The design tensions framework [ 58 ] , which highlights the challenges of conducting collaborative research , emphasises the importance of reflection on design activities especially when conflicts and divergences in un - derstanding can impact research . It serves as a guide for navigating systems and communities holistically , especially in the relations that exist within the community networks . Power , time , and space , all which influence how human beings communicate in groups , have culturally - embedded properties that impact how communities function [ 26 ] . According to Foucault , power can be defined as relations between parties and is also de - fined by those parties [ 16 ] . He elaborates further that a person or collective influences others’ actions by their own actions , demon - strating an exercise of their power [ 13 ] . These power dynamics , if misunderstood and mishandled , can have adverse effects on co - design and implementation [ 13 ] . Culturally - specific perceptions of space and territory have characteristics that contribute to how co - design is conducted as well [ 26 , 53 ] . Spatial rules and cultural norms are important values to communities , with governing struc - tures , communal spaces , and dedicated areas and buildings forming part of community culture . As such , it is essential for external re - searchers to be aware of any imposition on these norms in an effort to mitigate " cultural shock " in which there is unfamiliar behaviour and a lack of familiar environmental elements [ 23 ] . Understand - ing the cultural context will direct the approach researchers take and positively influence respect and consideration of beliefs in 121 Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom the community [ 28 ] . Many of the challenges mentioned relate to acknowledging and navigating how power dynamics function in the relationships within the project , and within the community itself . Community - based co - design as part of ICT4D work is dif - ficult to implement with many challenges , as researchers enter into an unfamiliar context with limited methods of engagement . ICT4D Ethics [ 12 ] and the San Code of Research Ethics [ 54 ] 1 are imperative resources to consider and enforce when working with multi - cultural and marginalised communities . Addressing this , one has to consider methods that embrace , rather than diminish , the norms and values of communities [ 44 ] . 2 . 2 Methods across cultural contexts Conducting co - design methods across different cultural and geo - graphical contexts comes with various methodological challenges . Winschiers - Theophilus et al . [ 63 ] highlight the complications in contextualised research and transferability in their community - based co - design work conducted in rural sites in Namibia and Malaysia . They identified some key concerns that contributed to " cross - contextual transferability " . These included community en - gagement , where deeper engagement leads to more " transferable " and transmissible innovations , and context , describing how com - mon contexts and community needs in which co - design takes place leads to an increase in success of the end product and its evaluation across the regions . The works of Winschiers - Theophilus et al . [ 63 ] as well as others [ 28 , 59 , 61 ] aim to establish a mutual collaborator relationship between researchers , participants , and other stakehold - ers [ 32 ] but how this is achieved across cultural contexts remains a challenge . Postcolonial computing , as proposed by Irani et al . [ 29 ] offers an approach that regards diverse cultural epistemologies and historical contexts as a means of understanding and designing with communities for development . Delving deeper into cultural reali - ties and working with vulnerable populations , the field of maternal and child health in various contexts requires additional care and consideration [ 3 , 57 ] . 2 . 3 Digital maternal and child health Maternal and neonatal mortality is one of the major global health challenges , with low - and middle - income countries ( LMICs ) be - ing significantly more affected and burdened [ 38 ] . In recent years , the use of digital health to support the care and health services of mothers in under - resourced areas has thus become prominent [ 6 ] . Co - design , as a means to innovate with and for mothers , is also popular , but not without obstacles . Wardle et al . [ 61 ] explore a co - design methodological approach with breastfeeding mothers in Cape Town , South Africa , using brainstorming and prototyping workshops . They formulated three factors to consider when design - ing with breastfeeding mothers including a focus on how engage - ment with design activities is influenced by caring for a baby , and empowering mothers through positive reinforcement . Mustafa et al . [ 39 ] also offer valuable insights into how religion and patriarchy impact design for maternal and child health in an under - resourced community in Pakistan . Lack of agency of mothers over their own health , misinformation , and household power dynamics are some of the significant contributors to how design of interventions are 1 https : / / www . globalcodeofconduct . org / affiliated - codes / impacted . Additionally , existing interventions are poorly suited for many contexts , especially when cultural factors mentioned are ig - nored in design [ 29 ] . D’Ignazio et al . [ 14 ] and Gibson & Hanson [ 19 ] both employ workshop co - design methods when engaging with mothers . They uncover key insights into such design , including how feminist HCI [ 5 ] is an appropriate framework for co - design work with mothers , and how deviations from a planned approach may sometimes be necessary in certain circumstances . Lastly , Kumar et al . [ 30 ] identify the need for a " long , holistic , and intersectional view " of the wellbeing of women and the use of deep engagement with communities and multiple stakeholders to achieve this . Inter - sectionality [ 9 ] , an integral framework for feminist HCI [ 5 ] and the empathic engagement effective CBCD demands . While the above studies provide a valuable basis for co - design with mothers , each study does so in a single context . This presents an opportunity to explore how co - designing with mothers can be conducted across cultural contexts in a localised region , and whether such " transferability " of co - design methods is appropriate to support the design of culturally sensitive research and technolo - gies for maternal health in the Global South , with a particular focus on four different provinces in South Africa . 3 METHODS 3 . 1 Research Design This paper reports on the use of community - based co - design work - shops to explore maternal and child health challenges and digital health opportunities in South Africa . These co - design workshops took place as part of a larger project initiated by an interdisci - plinary team of researchers within and beyond South Africa , across social sciences , computer sciences and medical sciences . The project consisted of three phases . First , a Scoping Review was conducted to better understand how community - based co - design and ICTs health innovations manifested around maternal and child health in South Africa . Second , interviews with key community stakeholders such as mothers , fathers , other caregivers , and Community Health Workers ( CHWs ) were conducted to better understand the chal - lenges these stakeholders faced when accessing maternal and child health ( MCH ) care . We finally concluded this study with genera - tive CBCD workshops which allowed the community to prioritise the challenges identified in Phase II to brainstorm and prototype possible solutions . The work reported in this paper includes only the co - design work from Phase III . The previous two phases will be reported separately . The overall project and every phase of re - search received ethical approval from four local ethics committees in South Africa ( University of Cape Town , University of Limpopo , The Human Sciences Research Council , and University of Witwa - tersrand ) and one abroad ( Cardiff’s School of Computer Science and Informatics ) . 3 . 2 Research Sites South Africa is a diverse country with a population of approximately 58 . 8 million people 2 and 11 official languages spoken by the various cultures found in the 9 provinces of the country 3 . 2 http : / / www . statssa . gov . za / ? p = 12362 3 https : / / www . brandsouthafrica . com / south - africa - fast - facts / geography - facts / language 122 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Till and Farao , et al . The co - design phase of the project took place across different geographical locations in South Africa : Sweetwaters - KwaZulu - Natal ( KZN ) , Soweto - Gauteng province , Ga Dikgale , Ga Mamabolo and Ga Mothiba within rural Limpopo province , and Athlone in Western Cape . The research sites were purposefully selected to ensure geographical and cultural variation [ 43 ] , taking advantage of the existing relationships with the communities from the local collaborators in each site . The research sites were spread across South Africa , some within rural areas ( KZN and Limpopo ) and some in urban areas ( Gauteng and Western Cape ) , also including low - resource communities that would benefit most from digital MCH . The diverse nature of South Africa made the selection of the correct facilitators crucial to the success of the workshops . The 11 official languages also vary according to the provinces . For example 95 % of the people living in the Limpopo province speak Sepedi whereas isiZulu is spoken by 79 % of the people from KwaZulu - Natal , and Soweto represented various cultures such as SeTswana , SeSotho , and isiZulu . 3 . 2 . 1 Sweetwaters - KwaZulu - Natal Province . The first community engagement workshop took place at a community - based research center in Sweetwaters . Sweetwaters is 97Km outside Pietermar - itzburg in the uMgungundlovu district and is zoned as a rural area with a household income of R2 , 400 per month 4 ( $ 1 = R14 . 68 ) . This community comprises of around six hundred thousand people and is representative of the Zulu population in KZN with 100 % of the population listed as Zulu speakers 5 . 3 . 2 . 2 Soweto - Gauteng Province . The second community engage - ment workshop was scheduled at a health - based research centre within a local hospital precinct in Soweto , a peri - urban , low to mid - dle income area in Gauteng , South Africa . Soweto is South Africa’s largest township located in Johannesburg . This township comprises of around 1 , 3 million with the dominant language being isiZulu 6 . The average monthly income for this region is R2 , 500 7 . 3 . 2 . 3 Dikgale - Limpopo Province . The Limpopo province hosted our third workshop . Ga - Digkale is zoned as a rural , low income area with a monthly income of R1 , 250 8 and is located 90km east of Polokwane . This community is representative of the Sepedi people with 95 % of the 9 353 people in this population listed as speaking Sepedi 9 . 3 . 2 . 4 Cape Town - Western Cape Province . The final workshop was conducted with a local NGO that is based in Athlone , and offers services such as physical , speech , and occupational therapy to mothers of special needs children who would otherwise not be able to afford these services . Athlone has a population of roughly 33 , 314 people . The area is zoned as urban with a monthly income of around 4 , 775 ZAR per month . This population is predominantly 4 http : / / www . statssa . gov . za / publications / P0318 / P03182019 . pdf 5 https : / / wazimap . co . za / profiles / municipality - KZN225 - the - msunduzi / 6 http : / / www . statssa . gov . za / publications / P0318 / P03182019 . pdf 7 https : / / wazimap . co . za / profiles / ward - 79800042 - city - of - johannesburg - ward - 42 - 79800042 / 8 http : / / www . statssa . gov . za / publications / P0318 / P03182019 . pdf 9 https : / / wazimap . co . za / profiles / ward - 94703017 - makhuduthamaga - ward - 17 - 94703017 / English speaking with approximately 59 % of the population listed as English speaking followed by 29 % Afrikaans and 8 % isiXhosa 10 . 3 . 3 Challenge Identification To contextualize the work reported in this paper for the co - design phase , we provide a summary of the second phase that involved conducting telephonic and in person interviews with mothers and fathers . These interviews aimed to better understand the challenges the participants faced while trying to access health services for themselves or their children . The interviews were conducted from January to June 2021 , either in person or online , depending on the COVID - 19 infection rate and subsequent lock - downs present in the country . Informed consent was obtained verbally or written before each interview and participants were invited to take part in the workshops discussed in this article . We conducted 58 inter - views . This included eight participants from Cape Town , twelve from Limpopo , ten from Sweetwaters , and 28 from Soweto . The interviews were conducted in the local language and the calls were recorded . The recordings were transcribed and analysed by five researchers using thematic analysis . Based on the findings from the interviews and the insights from the scoping review , we identified ten challenges that became the starting point for the co - design phase reported in this paper . These challenges are : 1 ) Parent well - being , 2 ) Traditional healers versus western medicine , 3 ) Postpar - tum care , 4 ) Building parenting skills in early life , 5 ) Accessible and affordable access to health information , 6 ) COVID - 19 vaccine hesitancy , 7 ) Misinformation , 8 ) Personalised and timely support , 9 ) Health worker emotional support for parents and other care givers and finally 10 ) Involving fathers . These challenges include the challenges that affect both urban and rural communities . 3 . 4 Challenge Prioritization 3 . 4 . 1 Developing Challenge and Design Cards . As visual methods have shown their potential to actively engage with the commu - nity while capturing maternal health lived experiences [ 3 , 4 ] , we designed a collection of challenge and design cards ( see figure 1 ) to visualize the identified challenges and aid the discussion and brainstorming of potential solutions . Design cards have been suc - cessfully used to graphically depict complex concepts , facilitate brainstorming , share understanding [ 34 , 47 ] , and to facilitate co - design while developing sensitivity and empathy [ 2 , 31 , 37 , 57 , 64 ] . Considering the literacy levels of the communities , the cards were designed with minimal writing and used pictorials , aiming for a more realistic visual styles [ 1 ] to support the understanding and sharing of the lived experiences of our communities . These black and white images further depict men and women representative of the communities used in this study , aligned with existing litera - ture [ 55 , 60 ] . The buildings and surrounds depicted in the images are representative of both rural and urban settings . Graphics were used to enable cost - saving replication and transferability across regions and cultures and the text on the cards were translated into the languages of each community . Limitations on the use of the cards included oversimplification of challenges and overloading of 10 https : / / wazimap . co . za / profiles / ward - 19100049 - city - of - cape - town - ward - 49 - 19100049 / 123 Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom information . These were mitigated by merely using the cards as a starting point for reflection and discussion on local challenges . 3 . 4 . 2 Accounting for the local socio - cultural context . Language is known as a significant barrier to fruitful engagements between researchers and communities who do not share the same language and culture [ 47 , 59 ] . It was clear that the workshops needed to be facilitated by researchers who not only spoke the local language , but also understood the cultural norms and customs of the people in each of the provinces visited during this study [ 42 ] . We up - skilled research facilitators by training local researchers with similar levels of experience in qualitative research who also spoke the local language . Two members of the research team with experience in co - design and design thinking engaged with the local researchers to test the co - design activities . 3 . 4 . 3 Participants . Through the help of our local collaborators we recruited a total of 43 community participants including mothers , fathers , and CHWs . We provide more details on these participants in Table 1 . 3 . 4 . 4 Co - design Workshops . Each workshop started with the fa - cilitators welcoming the participants and setting the stage by ex - plaining that every contribution provided by the community would be considered valuable . The researchers reaffirmed consent which included recordings , photographs , and video to ensure that the par - ticipants were still comfortable to engage in the workshop . This was done verbally in KZN , Gauteng , and the Western Cape , and written consent was obtained in Limpopo in their local language ( Sepedi ) . The workshops included the following three activities : 1 ) challenge card discussion and challenge prioritization , 2 ) brainstorming , and 3 ) low fidelity prototyping . • Challenge card discussion and prioritization : It was im - portant to ensure that the researchers , facilitators , and par - ticipants had a shared understanding of the challenges il - lustrated by each challenge card , to enable the participants to prioritise the challenges as a group . This was achieved by using the challenge cards as an ice breaker activity dur - ing which the facilitators asked participants to explain what they see in each of the illustrations . Thereafter , the facilita - tor asked the participants to give an example of an instance when they faced similar challenges in their daily lives . Fi - nally the facilitator ensured that the participants and the researchers agreed on the challenges depicted on the cards by asking the community if they agreed with the title dis - played on the card in the local language . The cards where then placed on a wall to allow the participants to rate the challenges according to how much the challenge affected them . The top two or three challenges were then selected for the brainstorming session which we discuss next . • Brainstorming Session : We started this session by explain - ing each of the design cards , paying special attention to the technology design cards to ensure that the participants un - derstood how the technology illustrated in each card worked and how it could be implemented . The participants were then divided into groups in separate rooms with the facilitators . The researchers were present only as a support mechanism should the facilitators need any assistance in rolling out the co - design activities . The participants were provided with the design cards ( see figure 1 ) which depicted possible re - sources ( people , places and technologies ) that could be used to generate solutions for the elected challenges , as well as cardboard posters and markers . The facilitators asked the community members to come up with as many solutions as they could think of and to use the design cards to help them ideate these solution during a one - hour session . • Low Fidelity Prototyping Session : In the last co - design activity , participants were briefed to engage in low - fidelity prototyping . During the training of facilitators , how to present prototyping as an activity was discussed for each context . Simplified definitions of prototyping were brain - stormed , including : creating examples of the ideas using the materials provided ; making physical representations of the brainstormed ideas ; and using the craft materials to bring ideas to life . It was made clear that low - fidelity meant that creations do not need to be sophisticated and advanced , but rather just an example to visualise and explain how ideas could work . By making use of arts and craft supplies , as well as the design cards , participants were thus tasked to pro - totype at least one of the potential solutions that emerged from the brainstorming session . Participants were guided on how to use different crafting supplies to represent an idea or parts thereof , especially if any participants got confused with the activity . Effort was made to ensure participants’ imaginations were not limited by creating examples unre - lated to their chosen ideas , and to be as abstract as possible using the materials provided . The aim was to overcome any barriers to creativity when wanting to represent unfamiliar concepts . Since this was a new activity for most participants , there was the risk that they would replicate any example shown to them and thus create a bias and limit the diversity of prototypes created . The prototyping session lasted for an hour . The session was concluded with the participants presenting their potential solutions to the group . 3 . 5 Data Analysis Notes from three sites were taken by a bilingual researcher and the audio recordings were transcribed to support the analysis . For the remaining site a local facilitator transcribed and translated the audio recorded isiZulu to English and also supported the analysis . We reviewed the notes , identifying similarities and differences in the conducting of workshops and how the participants responded after the workshops were concluded . All the collected materials which included recordings , photographs , and notes were thematically analyzed . These themes were iterated upon and the most prominent findings are described below . The data analysis for this study took place after the field work was completed . Thus , we could not include the participants of the study in our data analysis and had to refer back to video , audio , and written notes to validate the themes identified . 4 FINDINGS In this section we discuss the cultural norms and that played out in the activities of the co - design workshops and how these norms 124 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Till and Farao , et al . Figure 1 : Example of an MCH challenge card ( top ) and design cards ( bottom ) Table 1 : Breakdown of participants . Site Mothers Fathers CHWs Workshop duration KZN 7 1 2 6h30 Soweto 9 0 2 5h00 Limpopo 5 5 2 5h30 Western Cape 8 0 2 6h00 affected the workshops . We also discuss the complexities that arose in our ranking process and the impact of using the design cards to support the brainstorming and prototyping sessions . 4 . 1 Unpacking Cultural Observations 4 . 1 . 1 Hlonipha . Hlonipha is a cultural politeness phenomenon [ 41 ] present in both language and cultural practice , found in South Africa and other African countries [ 17 , 36 ] , which strongly dictates gender norms and be further extended into how it affects men and women differently [ 49 ] , as it also refers to how women are allowed to speak , especially in the company of men . For example , it is expected that you do not look men or elders in the eye while speaking to them . Fandrych [ 17 ] explains that this practice is so entrenched in South African cultures that the Sotho set of languages can be discussed as two separate dialects , namely Sesali spoken by women and Senna spoken by men . This occurs because there are terms regarding sexual organs that women from the cultures that practice hlonipha are not allowed to use . This manifested in the rural areas with the women , particularly those in KZN , who were uncomfortable with discussing the Postpartum Care design cards . The facilitators in KZN reassured the participants that there is no topic that they could not discuss openly and freely . However , the KZN - based participants only fully discussed this card once explicit permission to do so was obtained from the male participant . In addition , participants in Limpopo , similar to KZN , were also more reserved when discussing this card , with one male participant politely refusing to discuss the card , stating : " No , No I am out . Skip me . " - Father , Limpopo The Involving Fathers also highlighted gender issues . The rural mothers in KZN did not believe that involving fathers is a challenge or priority within their community . Much of Zulu culture believe that it is a woman’s job to raise the children . It is not a role that is traditionally fulfilled by men . The female participants discussed the fact that having partners who are not involved in the upbringing of their children is challenging . As expected very few mothers voted for this card as one of the challenges they would like to explore further , regardless of the fact that this card was discussed in de - tail during the sessions . This can be attributed to the fact that the women believe child rearing is solely their responsibility and fa - thers only render financial support portraying a largely patriarchal community . This card brought more attention to absent fathers in Limpopo ; surprisingly , it was the fathers who led the discussion , not the mothers . The male community leaders started the conversation by stating : " This is a problem in our community . Fathers get bored with their children at home and go to the tavern . They are like visitors in their own homes . We need to teach 125 Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom men about raising children . " - Father and community leader , Limpopo One father disagreed , and stated that he would have liked to be more involved in his child’s life : " I disagree . Women will not let men take the journey with their children . " - Father , Limpopo Some mothers agreed that fathers are absent ; however , at least one mother stated that she has a husband who is very present in raising their child . Unfortunately this card did not receive many votes . In fact , it received the least amount of votes and had to be discounted . This was interesting to observe , because this commu - nity kept looking for the presence of fathers in all the challenge cards where they were not explicitly depicted . They kept asking : " Where is the father ? " – Mother , Limpopo , " Is this a single mother ? " – Father , Limpopo Hlonipha also touches on the patriarchal nature still present in some South African cultures where respect is shown in terms of seniority first followed by gender [ 33 ] . This was prominent in both KZN where the women had to ask explicit permission to discuss taboo issues in the presence of males . We observed how cultural norms , absent at the other sites , manifested in Limpopo . This being the workshop with the most male participants . The workshop in this region included two male participants who were members from the local royal family as well as a Headsman who served as a representative of the royal council . This altered the workshop dynamics with a member or the royal family opening the workshop and welcoming both the researchers and the participants . This community would also allow the members of the royal family to answer any questions asked by the facilitator first . There are , in contrast , instances where the dominance of the community leaders opened the door for discussions of taboo topics with the Headsman openly addressing the Postpartum Care card by stating : " This is a mom , who we should be taken care of at home " - Father and community leader , Limpopo The participants further deferred the leadership of the brain - storming and prototyping activities to two senior community mem - bers . These observations have implications impacting our co - design work across low - income communities , especially when considering methodologies that aim to lessen power imbalances and instill equal - ity in research activities . This can be very difficult to do in settings as experienced by Mustafa et al . in Pakistan and Bangladesh [ 39 , 40 ] and is relevant in this context , where cultural practices such as hlonipha are at play . Female participants will always be disadvan - taged in these settings and limited in their responses if the existing dynamics persist during their life time . Finally , hlonipha also loosely translates to respect and is present not only in African cultures but also African languages . The practice and observation of hlonipha is very important to African cultures , with Zulu people believing you are not subscribing to Zulu prin - ciples if you do not practice ukuhlonipha [ 49 ] . This concept can be found in the Sotho - Tswana cultures as well [ 17 ] . The rural sites allowed each participant to explain what he or she saw in a chal - lenge card , one by one , without interruption , before moving on to the next participant . This occurred because it is considered rude in Zulu and other African cultures to interrupt someone while they are speaking . This embodiment of hlonipha ultimately led to the workshops taking far longer than initially intended . 4 . 1 . 2 Impact of geography on culture . The workshops reaffirm the existing urban - rural differences , as the two rural sites ( KZN and Limpopo ) included fathers as participants whereas the two urban sites ( Gauteng and Western Cape ) had no fathers attending the workshops . Indeed , we did not observe any gender issues influ - encing the workshops at the urban sites as there were no male participants , resulting in an environment that enabled the women to talk freely . The workshops at the urban site also had a less formal arrangement in regards to turn taking . All the participants freely discussed bodily issues , absent fathers , religion , and all the other challenge cards . Women participants from the urban sites candidly discussed the involving fathers card for a long time . One mother from Gauteng burst out in laughter when this card was displayed , stating : " Where are the fathers ? there are no fathers . . . " - Mother , Gauteng The urban women were able to discuss sensitive topics such as involving fathers and postpartum care more freely than their rural counterparts highlighting the conflicts of hlonipha with gender - equality . Interestingly at the urban sites we also observed an active partic - ipation of more experienced and older women / mothers who joined the discussion , encouraging young mothers to involve the fathers of their children in their upbringing . For example , an experienced mother commented : " Fathers can do everything mothers can . They can feed the baby , they can change nappies , they can do it all . You must make them do it . Don’t just ask for money for support . " - older Mother , Gauteng The workshops and in particular the design cards encourage women to reflect on the parenting expectations bringing forward many concerns . While discussing the Parental well - being challenge card paternal involvement ( or lack thereof ) in child rearing was a major concern as one of our participants commented : " This goes back to involving fathers [ another card ] . Peo - ple think mothers are strong . They can multi - task , [ but ] parents need a break from parenting . Men say . . . a woman is sent by God , then they treat us like we do not have feelings . " - Mother Gauteng The design cards helped women externalise their emotions and parental concerns that were explicitly put forward in the brain - storming and prototyping sessions , with mothers indicating that fathers should provide practical and emotional support to mothers ( see figure 2 . ) Similar to Gauteng’s participants , participants in Western Cape responded jokingly to it as they expressed the absence of fathers in their and their children’s lives . While many mothers at the Cape Town site expressed that fathers do not want to be involved in their children’s lives , the women also stated that there are few fathers who expressed that they would like to be involved . However , MCH information , programs and interventions are not catered for them , so often they felt left out of the conversation . Mothers reflected on how the society needs to change in connection to 126 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Till and Farao , et al . Figure 2 : The Involving Fathers challenge is addressed in the parental well - being prototyping session how children are raised and about the potential benefits of father’s involvement practically and emotionally . A mother expressed her personal experience : “My husband became a complete alcoholic because he could not deal with his feelings . We ended up divorced . ” - Mother , Cape Town 4 . 2 Co - Design Sessions : Challenges with research tools and artefacts It was not only the cultural norms that impacted our methodology . Some of our research tools and artefacts also introduced complexity that we did not foresee . We discuss these next . 4 . 2 . 1 Challenging Ranking . Ranking the challenge cards proved to be problematic . Although we initially planned to conduct the ranking of the cards individually for every site , this was not often possible . Ultimately we ended up adapting the ranking methods for each site . For the first workshop in KZN the local facilitator with experience working with the communities suggested to do the ranking collectively rather than individually as they considered it will be too complex for the mothers . The challenge cards were numbered 1 - 10 , in no particular order , and a voting system where the participants raised their hands to vote for the priority of the challenge was implemented . However , this way of ranking led to many of the cards receiving an equal amount of votes , which made it difficult to identify the most prevalent challenges . We then had to conduct to second round of voting to help prioritize the cards . We slightly readjusted the ranking for the following activities in an attempt to get a simpler ranking process . In Gauteng , we provided the participants with different coloured stickers that represented the numbers 1 ( most important ) to 10 ( least important ) to help the prioritization ( see figure 3 ) . We displayed the challenge cards on the walls of the community hall and asked the participants to place a sticker , corresponding to the priority of the challenge , on each challenge card . Unfortunately , this method of ranking still did not go as planned as we expected each card to receive the same number of stickers as participants present . However , some challenge cards ended up with less stickers indicating that all the participants did prioritise the affected cards . Luckily identifying the top ranked cards was evident by the shape or colour of the stickers used for the scoring system . Although the same ranking system used in the previous work - shops was enforced in the Western Cape workshop , we adjusted the ranking by encouraging participants to first personally rank a smaller set of all 10 challenge cards in front of them . Participants were then asked to cast their vote using the stickers on the chal - lenge cards displayed in the room . This site voted almost identically for all the cards . For instance , all the participants casted the same vote by placing red stickers on the Parental well - being card ( see figure 3 ) . This did not occur at any other site . This may be influenced by participants having more time to individually rank the cards first , without peer or time pressure . It was also clear that the responses and ratings from the participants was influenced by having children with special needs . For example , it should be noted that this com - munity leaned more towards parent well - being card reflecting on the traumatic experiences finding out their child will have special needs and the ongoing counselling they needed afterwards . 4 . 2 . 2 Prototyping and brainstorming challenges . Although the chal - lenge and design cards supported workshop discussions and cap - tured participants’ reflections on maternal and child health chal - lenges , we also observed unintended consequences . The partici - pants skipped the brainstorming session in all the sites excluding Cape Town , and started prototyping using the design cards instead of coming up with a list of potential solutions . This had a knock - on effect on the prototyping session in particular as participants did not select a single solution to prototype , but simply used the prototyping materials to recreate some of the original solution ( see figure 3 , images D and E ) . In addition , participants had difficulty using the technology de - sign cards when they did not fully understand all the technologies presented despite the facilitators explaining each technology before the brainstorming sessions . The facilitators re - explained whenever they were asked ; however , terms like Internet - in - a - box , Community wireless networks , and chatbots were foreign to these communities 127 Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Figure 3 : A ) An example of ranking system , B ) Rankings for the the " Involving father’s " challenge card in Gauteng , C ) Parent wellbeing card in Western Cape , D ) An example of brainstorming and prototyping on one board , and E ) brainstorming with design cards leading to no deeper information explored in prototyping . leading to the participants defaulting to familiar concepts such as mobile data and WiFi . So it is possible that chatbots , data collection apps and sensor data were not explored due to their unfamiliarity to the community . The Western Cape site responded differently during the brain - storming and prototyping sessions . To ensure that the participants understood the principles of the technology cards , the facilitator de - scribed them and offered supporting examples . It was evident that this was needed and helped the participants understand the technol - ogy they were not familiar with . The follow - up brainstorming and prototyping session did generate multiple ideas by the participants . Probing participants was encouraged , and often needed , as it led to interesting insights and conversations on how technology can fit into their current ecosystems and everyday realities . It should be noted that this workshop was attended by a researcher in the network who had extensive experience in co - design . Last but not least , participants also found the amount of craft material overwhelming on all the sites and elected to use only a fraction of the crafts with some participants stating : " Do I have to use any of this stuff ? " - Mother , Gauteng and : " Do we have to use all of this stuff ? " - Father , Limpopo 5 DISCUSSION Our study highlights key challenges on the use of co - design work - shops in low - constraint settings across geographical locations with different languages and cultural dynamics . Here , we aim to con - tribute by providing methodological reflections and lessons learned [ 48 ] to support the development of co - design workshops to support not only the understanding of inequalities but also support the design of cultural sensitive content and research [ 11 ] 5 . 1 Adapting methods to local cultural dynamics 5 . 1 . 1 Adapting to Geography . Our findings highlighted several cultural differences in practice not only in the different provinces of South Africa , but also between rural and urban settings that influenced how the co - design workshops were conducted . During our engagements , we needed to adjust the temporal rhythms of the workshops to account for geographical and cultural diversity , especially for the rural communities of Limpopo and KZN to give extra time and accommodate the cultural practices and norms of the community . With regard to the urban sites , only the Western Cape workshop went slightly over the allocated time frame . This finding has implications for how community - based co - design is conducted in similar settings . Aligned with Rosner [ 48 ] , it is advisable to plan a flexible time frame to conduct co - design activities in rural settings to enable participants to feel comfortable and encourage free partic - ipation . Luthuli [ 35 ] explains that the presence of hlonipha is more prominent in rural areas because urbanization often dilutes cultural norms , as different cultures mix and start to learn from each other . This means that the exact same methods will not be suitable to both urban and rural settings , even if these settings include people from the same culture . 5 . 1 . 2 Adapting to gender norms and recognising the implications of hlonipha . The main goal of the workshops was ultimately to make use of community - based co - design aiming to be more inclusive by involving the communities we are designing for in the design decisions and activities . We refer to Sanders and Stappers [ 51 ] who talk about the inclusion of communities as equal partners in the design process as well as Groeneveld and Fruedenthal [ 21 ] who state that community - based co - design treats community members as equal partners . While we believe in these principles , it is also important to acknowledge that it will be challenging to include 128 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Till and Farao , et al . women from these communities as equals due to the strong gender norms present in patriarchal societies ( e . g . , [ 39 ] ) . In some cases it is advisable to separate men and women , especially in the rural areas if the data being gathered includes sensitive topics or lan - guage which women practicing hlonipha will not be able to engage with . Researchers will ultimately lose the opportunity to gather rich data if the women are not able to freely talk and share their experiences that embed culturally loaded topics . This separation , however , would come at the cost of involving fathers collectively and may contribute to the divide in gender roles and understand - ing of MCH challenges . It is thus necessary to acknowledge the potential conflicts in regards to gender issues and balance these scenarios to ensure an active engagement from all participants . It is possible to offer gender equity workshops before any workshops take place ; however , hlonipha is not necessarily practiced in an oppressive manner and women from these cultures might be as invested in these practices as the men are [ 41 ] . In our workshops , it was valuable to recognize that the behaviour of the participants in the workshops was not necessarily rooted in power differen - tials , but rather in cultural norms and traditions that even though it might disempower women , we needed to respect it in order to maintain the power relations present in our activities . The aforementioned cultural norms were not present in the ur - ban settings . This could be because no men attended the workshops ; however , both Rudwick [ 50 ] and Fandrych [ 17 ] found that not only urban women , but also urban men , have started to critically engage with patriarchal practices and different interpretations of hlonipha . Luthuli [ 35 ] further argues that urban areas are in the process of phasing out hlonipha . These tensions between urban and rural settings create a complex multi - stakeholder environment where the dynamics between the groups impact the outcome and quality of the co - design activities and the design of any socio - technical intervention . Whilst this study experienced the affects of hlonipha as chal - lenging , the presence of hlonipha should be seen as an opportunity to consider more effective co - design activities . 5 . 1 . 3 Adapting to community hierarchies and seniority . Finally , many African cultures still follow a patriarchal system [ 17 ] where respect is not only based on gender , but also on seniority . We expe - rienced the impact of community leaders in our co - design activities with the members from the royal family naturally leading all the activities , even though there were other men who took part in the workshop . In this case the power relations were profoundly com - plicated with the status and decisions made by senior participants impacting how others engaged and responded [ 16 ] . These relations were observed in the hierarchy of seniority and then gender , al - though the senior members were men as well . While we wanted to include fathers in the workshops , traditional African culture still places the onus of child rearing on the mother . Many of the MCH challenges discussed would therefore mostly affect the women in the room , as understood by local cultures . The design of any arte - fact aimed at addressing these challenges should include fathers , but should ideally enjoy equal input , if not more , from the mothers . In addition , few participants recognized the important role of the father and suggested to reinforce their role in a child’s development to provide practical and emotional support . Thus , fathers would need not only encouragement , but also to be considered , whenever possible , when discussing how to foster active parental involvement during co - design activities . In our case , we let the norms play out as it was too late to adjust our methodology to accommodate this scenario . If we had known from the start that we would be honored with the presence of members of the royal family , we would have asked the community liaisons to communicate with these leaders to negotiate the best way to enable the mothers to lead the conversa - tion with their support and guidance . The result was a tension that tried to balance the contextual hierarchies and unexpected impact of these hierarchies playing out in the workshop , with the overall objective of encouraging active engagement among all participants in developing ideas that will support them . 5 . 2 Co - Design materials and artefacts : Beyond visual representations 5 . 2 . 1 Unintended interpretations of Challenge Cards . The challenge cards which were initially devised with the intention to provide a common understanding of challenges raised unexpected and di - verse interpretations across various contexts . COVID - 19 , for in - stance , was only explicitly represented on two challenge cards ; however , at the Limpopo workshop , most challenge cards were linked to COVID - 19 and its accompanying restrictions on daily living . We later discovered that community gatherings regarding COVID - 19 and vaccines had been taking place . This , paired with the Limpopo province reporting some of the highest COVID - 19 vaccine uptake rates nationally , largely attributed to a successful community - based health information campaign , might explain how COVID - 19 formed part of the participants’ interpretations of the challenge cards . While it may be necessary to make efforts to clearly distinguish between challenges , it is also valuable to understand the meaning ascribed to each of the cards . Furthermore , what the community is experiencing culturally , at the time and space the co - design workshop takes place [ 26 ] , should be understood as best as possible , either through early engagements with community members or liaising with community leaders . For instance , conducting workshops during a pandemic , where partici - pants have been inundated and overwhelmed with information , can have an impact on the engagements and outcomes of the co - design workshop . These considerations are important to contextualize any emerging ideas and recognize the possible influences of each site’s cultural reality that may complicate the ideation process . While the visual representation of the cards help to elicit per - sonal narratives and reflections , especially highlighting different mothering experiences , one particular card was the exception i . e . , the " Involving Fathers " card . In Limpopo , the absence of fathers in the majority of cards was questioned and consequently the lack of paternal representation led to a common interpretation and inquiry on this omission . Even though we had accounted for the absence of fathers as a challenge in the community , we projected this is - sue into the formulation of the challenge cards . Evidently , there was an assumption that the cards will be considered as separated challenges , requiring participants to respond to what is intended to be represented in isolation on challenge cards . In reality , these challenges are intertwined and are co - existent within these commu - nities , making it difficult to elicit a response on each individual card 129 Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom without referencing others . While the challenges were informed by engagement with the community participants , the illustrations thereof were only validated by the local researchers . This empha - sises once again the need for involving participants throughout the formulation of the design activities and materials as one runs the risk of maintaining alienating or foreign processes that distract from the generative activities . Lastly , the manner in which responses were evoked played a role in how challenge cards were interpreted . When asked to respond to the challenge cards , the use of language can impact the quality of response received . For instance , asking " What do you see on this card ? " compared to " What is happening on this card ? " evoked vary - ing responses , not entirely expected . The former generated literal explanations of the cards , with responses describing details seen , while the latter provided a contextual understanding of the cards and its depiction of the challenge triggering more reflection . Lan - guage usage and the importance of appropriate translation for the context proved vital to achieving co - design tasks and contributed to a shared understanding of the activities and challenges [ 59 ] . While having a local facilitator who communicates in the local language is beneficial to community - based co - design , how infor - mation and prompts are translated and communicated also impact the interpretation of activities and the consequent generation of ideas based on an understanding of the challenge . This is influenced by how co - design methods are " transferred " [ 63 ] across contexts , and the efforts to make the workshop appropriate for diverse and multi - cultural communities . 5 . 2 . 2 Accounting for the different roles of the design cards . All the sites , with the exception of the Western Cape site , used the design cards not to brainstorm , but rather to start prototyping immediately . They then moved on and recreated their initial prototype using craft material instead of delving deeper into a single solution . This is contradictory to the planned co - design process where participants brainstorm a challenge by listing many possible solutions and then moving to the prototyping phase where they prototype a single - selected solution [ 10 ] . Design cards are often used in HCI research and has proven beneficial for ideation and concept deployment [ 24 ] . However , the ease of use provided by these cards makes it easy for participants to move straight to a possible prototype , which makes it difficult to gauge further depth and development in the subse - quent prototyping session . Aarts et al . [ 1 ] further explain that it is important to not only carefully design the design - cards themselves , but also the process to be followed when using the cards if they are truly going to serve as a medium for capturing ideas . In our case , the design cards process was loosely defined , which led to the deviation from the intended process to accommodate different modes of participation [ 48 ] . This divergence in understanding had implications for the research findings and needed to be reflected upon [ 58 ] . The participants actively enjoyed the prototyping activ - ity and the artefacts graphically depicted their solutions ; however , the prototyping session did not significantly add more depth to our community challenges . Finally , with the exception of the Western Cape site , the inclusion of technologies not known to the community limited the uptake of these technologies in the brainstorming and prototyping sessions . Brewer [ 8 ] and Ramachandran [ 45 ] reported similar findings in early stages of co - design . In our study , this was present throughout the different workshops . At the Western Cape site , the facilitator provided in - depth examples of chat - bots on her phone , and related these examples to government chat - bots that the community has used . This tangible example led these groups to consider chat - bots in a meaningful and innovative manner in their solutions . While we avoided a " blue sky " ideation [ 25 ] through the use of diverse design cards that proved useful to support prototyping , participants should fully understand the scope of the technologies in the design cards for the ideation and prototyping phase to be successful with these communities . Thus it is important to consider the use of tangible examples of the technologies , then continuing to support the creative process and provide more depth into the prototyping results . 6 CONCLUSION This paper has described how cultural norms and different ge - ographies influence community - based co - design workshops both positively and negatively across communities in South Africa . In - cluding members of the community in the planning of co - design workshops is needed to adequately account for any cultural norms and to adjust co - design activities to each socio - cultural context . Our workshops highlighted that including translators who enable the community to express themselves in their own language is not enough to obtain full and free participation . The research facilita - tors should also have a deep understanding of the cultures of the participants in order to respectfully and meaningfully handle any cultural nuances that arise , especially in rural settings . How they transfer methods and techniques across cultures and geographies needs careful consideration , even if , in our case , workshops are conducted in similar settings in a single country . Gender sensitiza - tion is very important at the beginning of the session to mitigate gender issues and facilitate a more equity - driven engagement with co - design activities . Although the use of design cards provoked reflections and empathy with the challenges during the workshops , they need to be carefully considered as these artefacts also produced unintended consequences shaping brainstorming sessions into pro - totyping sessions . In our case , the design cards were successful in enabling prototyping , more than the craft materials supplied . Fi - nally , the inclusion of complex and foreign technologies to research participants can be done positively if the practical and tangible examples are provided to demystify these technologies . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank all the participants in the study including the CoMaCH UK - South Africa Network members as well as local and international partners , cross - disciplinary co - researchers as well as practitioners with experience engaging with communities . We would also like to thank Prof . Simone Honikman ( University of Cape Town ) , Prof . Emman Haycraft ( Loughborough university ) , and Dr . Francisco Nunes ( Fraunhofer Portugal AICOS ) for provid - ing comments to the ethics protocol of the co - design activities . This study was funded by the UKRI GCRF Digital Innovation for De - velopment in Africa ( DIDA ) awards ( Ref : EP / T030429 / 1 ) . Jaydon Farao was financially supported by Hasso Plattner Institute for Dig - ital Engineering , through the HPI Research School at UCT . Nervo 130 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Till and Farao , et al . Verdezoto would also like to acknowledge the Centre for Artifi - cial Intelligence , Robotics and Human - Machine Systems ( IROHMS ) operation C82092 , part - funded by the European Regional Develop - ment Fund ( ERDF ) through the Welsh Government . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Tessa Aarts , Linas K . Gabrielaitis , Lianne C . de Jong , Renee Noortman , Emma M . van Zoelen , Sophia Kotea , Silvia Cazacu , Lesley L . Lock , and Panos Markopoulos . 2020 . Design Card Sets : Systematic Literature Survey and Card Sorting Study . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( Eindhoven , Netherlands ) ( DIS ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 419 – 428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395516 [ 2 ] AmidAyobi , AnnaliGrimes , SueMackinnon , EwanSoubutts , RachelEardley , Zoe Banks Gross , Rachael Gooberman - Hill , and Aisling Ann O’Kane . 2021 . Designing Visual Cards for Digital Mental Health Research with Ethnic Minorities . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( DIS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 942 – 954 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462085 [ 3 ] NaveenBagalkot , SyedaZainabAkbar , SwatiSharma , NicolaMackintosh , Deirdre Harrington , PaulaGriffiths , JudithAngelittaNoronha , andNervoVerdezoto . 2022 . Embodied Negotiations , Practices and Experiences Interacting with Pregnancy Care Infrastructures in South India . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems ( NewOrleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI’22 ) . AssociationforComputing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 286 , 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501950 [ 4 ] Naveen Bagalkot , Nervo Verdezoto , Anushri Ghode , Shipra Purohit , Lakshmi Murthy , Nicola Mackintosh , and Paula Griffiths . 2020 . Beyond Health Lit - eracy : Navigating Boundaries and Relationships During High - Risk Pregnan - cies : Challenges and Opportunities for Digital Health in North - West India . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society ( Tallinn , Estonia ) ( NordiCHI ’20 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420126 [ 5 ] ShaowenBardzell . 2010 . FeministHCI : TakingStockandOutlininganAgendafor Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Atlanta , Georgia , USA ) ( CHI ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1301 – 1310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 [ 6 ] Peter Barron , Yogan Pillay , Antonio Fernandes , Jane Sebidi , and Rob Allen . 2016 . The MomConnect mHealth initiative in South Africa : Early impact on the supply side of MCH services . Journal of public health policy 37 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 201 – 212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41271 - 016 - 0015 - 2 [ 7 ] Margot Brereton and Jacob Buur . 2008 . New challenges for design participation in the era of ubiquitous computing . Co - Design 4 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 101 – 113 . [ 8 ] Eric Brewer , Michael Demmer , Bowei Du , Melissa Ho , Matthew Kam , Sergiu Nedevschi , Joyojeet Pal , Rabin Patra , Sonesh Surana , and Kevin Fall . 2005 . The case for technology in developing regions . Computer 38 , 6 ( 2005 ) , 25 – 38 . [ 9 ] Kimberle Crenshaw . 1990 . Mapping the margins : Intersectionality , identity politics , and violence against women of color . Stan . L . Rev . 43 ( 1990 ) , 1241 . [ 10 ] Rikke Friss Dam and Teo Yu Siang . 2020 . Design thinking : Get started with prototyping . Interaction Design Foundation ( 2020 ) . [ 11 ] Hilary Davis and Jenny Waycott . 2015 . Ethical Encounters : HCI Research in Sensitive and Complex Settings . In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction ( Parkville , VIC , Australia ) ( OzCHI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 667 – 669 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838834 [ 12 ] Andy Dearden and Dorothea Kleine . 2018 . Minimum ethical standards for ICTD / ICT4D research . ( 2018 ) . [ 13 ] Chiara Del Gaudio , Alfredo Jefferson de Oliveira , and Carlo Franzato . 2014 . The Influence of Local Powers on Participatory Design Processes in Marginalized ConflictAreas . In Proceedingsofthe13thParticipatoryDesignConference : Research Papers - Volume1 ( Windhoek , Namibia ) ( PDC’14 ) . AssociationforComputingMa - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 131 – 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661440 [ 14 ] Catherine D’Ignazio , Alexis Hope , Becky Michelson , Robyn Churchill , and Ethan Zuckerman . 2016 . A Feminist HCI Approach to Designing Postpartum Technolo - gies : " When I First Saw a Breast Pump I Was Wondering If It Was a Joke " . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2612 – 2622 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858460 [ 15 ] Sara Donetto , Paola Pierri , Vicki Tsianakas , and Glenn Robert . 2015 . Experience - based co - design and healthcare improvement : realizing participatory design in the public sector . The Design Journal 18 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 227 – 248 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2752 / 175630615X14212498964312 [ 16 ] Michel Foucault . 1982 . The subject and power . Critical inquiry 8 , 4 ( 1982 ) , 777 – 795 . [ 17 ] Ingrid Frandrych . 2012 . Between tradition and the requirements of modern life : Hlonipha in southern Bantu societies , with special reference to Lesotho . Journal of Languages and Culture 3 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 67 – 73 . [ 18 ] AakashGautam , ChandaniShrestha , AndrewKulak , SteveHarrison , andDeborah Tatar . 2018 . Participatory tensions in working with a vulnerable population . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 . 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210629 [ 19 ] Lorna Gibson and Vicki L . Hanson . 2013 . Digital Motherhood : How Does Tech - nology Help New Mothers ? . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Paris , France ) ( CHI ’13 ) . Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 313 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470700 [ 20 ] Judith Gregory . 2003 . Scandinavian approaches to participatory design . Interna - tional Journal of Engineering Education 19 , 1 ( 2003 ) , 62 – 74 . [ 21 ] Bob S Groeneveld , Stella U Boess , and Adinda Freudenthal . 2013 . Community - based co - design for informal care : bridging the gap between technology and context . IFAC Proceedings Volumes 46 , 15 ( 2013 ) , 266 – 273 . [ 22 ] Erik Grönvall , Lone Malmborg , and Jörn Messeter . 2016 . Negotiation of Values as Driver in Community - Based PD . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( Aarhus , Denmark ) ( PDC ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 41 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940308 [ 23 ] Edward Twitchell Hall . 1984 . The Dance of Life : The Other Dimension of Time . Anchor . [ 24 ] Lalita Haritaipan , Miki Saijo , Celine Mougenot , et al . 2018 . Leveraging creativity of design students with a magic - based inspiration tool . In DS 93 : Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Engineering and Product Design Education ( E & PDE 2018 ) , Dyson School of Engineering , Imperial College , London . 6th - 7th September 2018 . 265 – 270 . [ 25 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory design engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 26 ] Rüdiger Heimgärtner . 2013 . Reflections on a model of culturally influenced human – computer interaction to cover cultural contexts in HCI design . Inter - national Journal of Human - Computer Interaction 29 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 205 – 219 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2013 . 765761 [ 27 ] IsaacHoleman , EdwinBlake , MelissaDensmore , MaletsabisaMolapo , FionaSsozi , Elizabeth Goodman , Indrani Medhi Thies , and Susan Wyche . 2017 . Co - Design Across Borders Special Interest Group . ( 2017 ) , 1318 – 1321 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3049288 [ 28 ] Sofia Hussain , Elizabeth B - N Sanders , and Martin Steinert . 2012 . Participatory design with marginalized people in developing countries : Challenges and oppor - tunities experienced in a field study in Cambodia . International Journal of Design 6 , 2 ( 2012 ) . [ 29 ] LillyIrani , JanetVertesi , PaulDourish , KavitaPhilip , andRebeccaE . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Atlanta , Georgia , USA ) ( CHI ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1311 – 1320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753522 [ 30 ] Neha Kumar , Naveena Karusala , Azra Ismail , and Anupriya Tuli . 2020 . Taking the Long , Holistic , and Intersectional View to Women’s Wellbeing . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 27 , 4 , Article 23 ( July 2020 ) , 32 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3397159 [ 31 ] Daniel Lafrenière , Tom Dayton , and Michael Muller . 1999 . Variations of a Theme : Card - BasedTechniquesforParticipatoryAnalysisandDesign . In CHI’99Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ) ( CHIEA’99 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 151 – 152 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 632716 . 632807 [ 32 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based Research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CSCW ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1348 – 1358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 [ 33 ] Morakeng E . K . Lebaka . 2019 . Ancestral beliefs in modern cultural and religious practices - The case of the Bapedi tribe . HTS Theological Studies 75 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4102 / hts . v75i1 . 5173 Publisher : AOSIS Publishing . [ 34 ] Andrés Lucero , Peter Dalsgaard , Kim Halskov , and Jacob Buur . 2016 . Designing with cards . In Collaboration in creative design . Springer , 75 – 95 . [ 35 ] Thobekile Patience Luthuli . 2007 . Assessing politeness , language and gender in hlonipha . Ph . D . Dissertation . [ 36 ] Sinfree Makoni . 2015 . Introduction : Politeness in Africa . Journal of Politeness Research 11 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 1 – 5 . [ 37 ] Dawn Mannay , Jordon Creaghan , Dunla Gallagher , Ruby Marzella , Sherelle Ma - son , Melanie Morgan , and Aimee Grant . 2018 . Negotiating closed doors and constraining deadlines : the potential of visual ethnography to effectually explore private and public spaces of motherhood and parenting . Journal of contemporary ethnography 47 , 6 ( 2018 ) , 758 – 781 . 131 Community - based Co - design across Geographic Locations and Cultures : Methodological Lessons from Co - design Workshops in South Africa PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 - September 1 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom [ 38 ] JohnWMcArthur , KristaRasmussen , andGavinYamey . 2018 . Howmanylivesare at stake ? Assessing 2030 sustainable development goal trajectories for maternal and child health . Bmj 360 ( 2018 ) . [ 39 ] MaryamMustafa , AmnaBatool , BeenishFatima , FareedaNawaz , KentaroToyama , and Agha Ali Raza . 2020 . Patriarchy , Maternal Health and Spiritual Healing : Designing Maternal Health Interventions in Pakistan . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376294 [ 40 ] Maryam Mustafa , Shaimaa Lazem , Ebtisam Alabdulqader , Kentaro Toyama , Shar - ifa Sultana , Samia Ibtasam , Richard Anderson , and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed . 2020 . IslamicHCI : DesigningwithandwithinMuslimPopulations . In ExtendedAbstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI EA ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3375151 [ 41 ] AbigailHNeely . 2021 . Hloniphaandhealth : ancestors , taboosandsocialmedicine in South Africa . Africa 91 , 3 ( 2021 ) , 473 – 492 . [ 42 ] Cynthia Danisile NTULI . 2012 . Intercultural Misunderstanding in South Africa : An Analysis of Nonverbal Communication Behaviour in Context . Intercultural Communication Studies 21 , 2 ( 2012 ) . [ 43 ] Lawrence A . Palinkas , Sarah M . Horwitz , Carla A . Green , Jennifer P . Wisdom , Naihua Duan , and Kimberly Hoagwood . 2015 . Purposeful Sampling for Qualita - tive Data Collection and Analysis in Mixed Method Implementation Research . Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research 42 , 5 ( Sept . 2015 ) , 533 – 544 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10488 - 013 - 0528 - y Company : Springer Distributor : Springer Institution : Springer Label : Springer Number : 5 Publisher : Springer US . [ 44 ] Robert Racadio , Emma J . Rose , and Beth E . Kolko . 2014 . Research at the Margin : Participatory Design and Community Based Participatory Research . In Proceed - ings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium Papers , and Keynote Abstracts - Vol - ume 2 ( Windhoek , Namibia ) ( PDC ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 49 – 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662188 [ 45 ] Divya Ramachandran , Matthew Kam , Jane Chiu , John Canny , and James F . Frankel . 2007 . Social Dynamics of Early Stage Co - design in Developing Re - gions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1087 – 1096 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240790 [ 46 ] ToniRobertsonandJesperSimonsen . 2012 . ParticipatoryDesign : anintroduction . In Routledge international handbook of participatory design . Routledge , 1 – 9 . [ 47 ] Heydy Robles , Janitza Guerrero , Humberto LLinas , and PEDRO MONTERO . 2019 . Online Teacher - Students Interactions Using WhatsApp in a Law Course . Journal of Information Technology Education : Research 18 , 1 ( Jan . 2019 ) , 231 – 252 . https : / / www . learntechlib . org / p / 216662 Publisher : Informing Science Institute . [ 48 ] Daniela K . Rosner , Saba Kawas , Wenqi Li , Nicole Tilly , and Yi - Chen Sung . 2016 . Out of Time , Out of Place : Reflections on Design Workshops as a Research Method . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Co - operative Work & Social Computing ( San Francisco , California , USA ) ( CSCW ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1131 – 1141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820021 [ 49 ] Stephanie Rudwick and Magcino Shange . 2009 . Sociolinguistic oppression or expression of ’Zuluness’ ? ’IsiHlonipho’ among isiZulu - speaking females . Southern African Linguistics and Applied Language Studies ( Nov . 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2989 / 16073610609486435 Publisher : Taylor & Francis Group . [ 50 ] Stephanie Inge Rudwick . 2008 . Shifting norms of linguistic and cultural respect : Hybrid sociolinguistic Zulu identities . Nordic Journal of African Studies 17 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 152 – 174 . [ 51 ] Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . Co - design 4 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880701875068 [ 52 ] Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2014 . Probes , toolkits and proto - types : three approaches to making in codesigning . CoDesign 10 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 5 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 888183 [ 53 ] Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Bo Westerlund . 2011 . Experiencing , exploring and experimenting in and with co - design spaces . Nordes 4 ( 2011 ) . [ 54 ] Doris Schroeder , Kate Chatfield , Michelle Singh , Roger Chennells , and Peter Herissone - Kelly . 2019 . The San Code of research ethics . In Equitable Research Partnerships . Springer , 73 – 87 . [ 55 ] PSchumacher . 2009 . Pictorialcommunicationindevelopingcountries : aliterature review . [ 56 ] Marc Steen , Menno Manschot , and Nicole De Koning . 2011 . Benefits of co - design in service design projects . International Journal of Design 5 , 2 ( 2011 ) . [ 57 ] Reem Talhouk , Sandra Mesmar , Anja Thieme , Madeline Balaam , Patrick Olivier , Chaza Akik , and Hala Ghattas . 2016 . Syrian Refugees and Digital Health in Lebanon : Opportunities for Improving Antenatal Health . In Proceedings of the 2016CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( SanJose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 331 – 342 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858331 [ 58 ] Deborah Tatar . 2007 . The design tensions framework . Human – Computer Interac - tion 22 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 413 – 451 . [ 59 ] Leah Teeters , A Susan Jurow , and Molly Shea . 2016 . The challenge and promise of community co - design . In Design as Scholarship . Routledge , 41 – 54 . [ 60 ] Johan H . van Heerden and Rudi W . De Lange . 1998 . The formative research process in developing and designing tuberculosis prevention and treatment display cards aimed at a community with a low level of literacy . [ 61 ] Chelsea - Joy Wardle , Mitchell Green , Christine Wanjiru Mburu , and Melissa Densmore . 2018 . ExploringCo - DesignwithBreastfeedingMothers . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174056 [ 62 ] HeikeWinschiers - TheophilusandNicolaJBidwell . 2013 . TowardanAfro - Centric indigenous HCI paradigm . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction 29 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 243 – 255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2013 . 765763 [ 63 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Naska Winschiers - Goagoses , Kasper Rodil , Edwin Blake , Tariq Zaman , Gereon Koch Kapuire , and Richard Kamukuenjandje . 2013 . Moving awayfrom Erindi - roukambe : Transferability of arural community - based co - design . ( 2013 ) . [ 64 ] Christiane Wölfel and Timothy Merritt . 2013 . Method card design dimensions : A survey of card - based design tools . In IFIP conference on human - computer interac - tion . Springer , 479 – 486 . 132