Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Editorial www . thelancet . com Vol 395 May 23 , 2020 1587 For more on the effects of COVID - 19 in racial and ethnic minority groups see https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / need - extra - precautions / racial - ethnic - minorities . html For the International Labour Organization report see https : / / www . ilo . org / global / about - the - ilo / newsroom / news / WCMS _ 741358 / lang - - en / index . htm For more on the COVID - 19 crisis and informal and migrant workers see https : / / oecd - development - matters . org / 2020 / 04 / 22 / the - covid - 19 - crisis - income - support - to - informal - workers - is - necessary - and - possible / The plight of essential workers during the COVID - 19 pandemic The COVID - 19 pandemic has vividly highlighted how much society depends upon essential workers . Praise for the heroic work being done by health - care workers to save lives worldwide in dangerous , exhausting conditions is everywhere . But those same workers are often left unprotected by governments and systems that have failed to supply them with enough personal protective equipment ( PPE ) , supplies , and resources to do their jobs . In April alone , there were an estimated 27 COVID - 19 - related health worker deaths in the USA , 106 in the UK , and 180 in Russia , with tens of thousands of infections . The actual numbers are probably much higher . But essential work extends beyond health care . Although some people have been able to shift their jobs to their homes , millions of workers have jobs that cannot be done at home—not only custodial staff and orderlies in hospitals , but also teachers and child - care workers , grocery clerks and supermarket workers , delivery people , factory and farm workers , and restaurant staff , often without adequate PPE . These people leave their homes to help maintain a semblance of normality for others , at great risk to themselves and their families . What constitutes an essential worker in the USA varies by state , but black and Latino Americans make up a large part of the essential workforce and have been dispropor - tionately affected by COVID - 19 . In New York City , over 60 % of COVID - 19 deaths have been in black and Latino populations . Meat processing plants have become hotspots for transmission , with 700 new cases at a Texas plant on May 16 . 81 employees at a Walmart in Massachusetts tested positive for COVID - 19 on May 2 . Those who would rather quit their jobs than be exposed to a dangerous work situation face a daunting prospect in the USA . 36 million people have filed for unemployment in the past 2 months and quitting a job ( even one that is unsafe ) would disqualify workers from unemployment insurance benefits . In the UK , 33 % ( 10·6 million people ) of the total workforce are deemed key workers according to the Office for National Statistics . Despite a government plan to pay furloughed workers 80 % of their salary , many low - wage workers such as cleaners , migrant and seasonal workers , and student labourers might not be eligible . Transport staff have been particularly hard hit . In New York City , 120 employees of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority ( MTA ) have died due to COVID - 19 , and nearly 4000 have tested positive . The MTA changed guidance to advise wearing face masks before the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) and WHO shifted their guidance , but being exposed to the public , even with adequate PPE , presents dangers . At least 28 London bus drivers have died due to COVID - 19 , and a UK railway worker , Belly Mujinga , died after being spat on by a passenger who claimed to have COVID - 19 , leaving behind an 11 - year - old daughter . The International Labour Organization has reported that 2·7 billion people—81 % of the world’s workforce— had been affected by lockdown measures . 61 % of workers are from the informal sector , 90 % of whom are in low - income and middle - income countries , and social protection measures are often inadequate , with a lack of access to health - care support and economic protections . Informal and migrant workers are likely to fall through the cracks and ensuring their safety must be a priority . Some US states are considering reopening restaurants , bars , gyms , and swimming pools , without a viable system in place to test , trace , and isolate people , and a CDC draft plan to lift the lockdown has been watered down by the Trump administration . In Germany , infection rates rose as lockdown restrictions began to ease and in the UK Boris Johnson’s vague , amorphous plan to end lockdown has caused confusion and angered many . Gifted with a 2 - month lockdown and a chance to lay the groundwork for a staged , successful reopening , many western leaders have instead prevaricated , shifted blame , and appear not to grasp the dangers of lifting lockdown without robust testing and mitigation strategies in place . The rush towards a premature , ill - advised end to the lockdown risks a second wave of infections that could surpass the first , and essential workers who never got a chance to isolate and consider their health during the first wave will face the greatest risk to their lives . When this pandemic has ended , we cannot allow a return to the status quo ante . We must ensure that essential workers can do their jobs safely , and that they have adequate health care and paid sick leave to safeguard their health beyond extraordinary pandemics . Essential workers are just that—essential—and by protecting their health , we protect the health and wellbeing of us all . N i cc o l o G u a s t i / G e tt y I m a g e s n The Lancet