 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2001 / 06 / 1341 / 13 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , Number 7 , June 25 , 2001 1341 – 1353 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 153 / 7 / 1341 1341 Kinetics of Core Histones in Living Human Cells : Little Exchange of H3 and H4 and Some Rapid Exchange of H2B Hiroshi Kimura and Peter R . Cook Sir William Dunn School of Pathology , University of Oxford , Oxford OX1 3RE , United Kingdom Abstract . Histones H2A and H2B form part of the same nucleosomal structure as H3 and H4 . Stable HeLa cell lines expressing histones H2B , H3 , and H4 tagged with green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) were established ; the tagged molecules were assembled into nucleosomes . Although H2B - GFP was distributed like DNA , H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP were concentrated in euchromatin during interphase and in R - bands in mitotic chromo - somes . These differences probably result from an unreg - ulated production of tagged histones and differences in exchange . In both single cells and heterokaryons , pho - tobleaching revealed that H2B - GFP exchanged more rapidly than H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP . About 3 % of H2B exchanged within minutes , whereas (cid:2) 40 % did so slowly ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 130 min ) . The rapidly exchanging fraction disap - peared in 5 , 6 - dichloro - 1 - (cid:2) - D - ribofuranosylbenzimidazole and so may represent H2B in transcriptionally active chromatin . The slowly exchanging fraction was proba - bly associated with chromatin domains surrounding ac - tive units . H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP were assembled into chromatin when DNA was replicated , and then (cid:3) 80 % remained bound permanently . These results reveal that the inner core of the nucleosome is very stable , whereas H2B on the surface of active nucleosomes exchanges continually . Key words : cell fusion • FRAP • histone actetylation • nucleosome • transcription Introduction DNA is packaged in eukaryotic cells into nucleosomes ; (cid:2) 146 base pairs are wrapped around an octamer contain - ing two copies of each of the four core histones , H2A , H2B , H3 , and H4 ( Luger et al . , 1997 ) . Nucleosomes are as - sembled with the assistance of chaperones like chromatin assembly factor 1 soon after DNA is made ; DNA is first wrapped around H3 - H4 tetramer before two H2A - H2B dimers are added ( Ridgway and Almouzni , 2000 ; Ver - reault , 2000 ) . In vitro studies show that the core histones are bound tightly to DNA in the nucleosome , and these in - teractions are probably “loosened” to allow other proteins such as polymerases access to the template ( Workman and Kingston , 1998 ; Wolffe and Hayes , 1999 ) . Current work focuses on how transcriptional activators , histone acetyl - transferases and deacetylases , and chromatin remodelling complexes alter chromatin structure both locally at the nu - cleosome and more globally at the level of a chromatin do - main ( Belmont et al . , 1999 ; Peterson and Workman , 2000 ; Wolffe and Hayes , 1999 ) . Various approaches have been used to assess how stably histones are bound . In a seminal series of studies , cells were incubated in radioactive amino acids , and exchange of newly made ( that is , radiolabeled ) histones with preex - isting ones was monitored ; H2A and H2B exchanged more rapidly than H3 and H4 , and some of this exchange ap - peared to depend on continuing transcription ( Jackson , 1990 ) . Other indirect approaches illustrate how complex the interactions are . For example , RNA polymerases usu - ally transcribe nucleosomal templates in vitro less effi - ciently than naked ones ( Wolffe and Hayes , 1999 ) , often without nucleosomal dissociation ( Bednar et al . , 1999 ) . Transcription also seems to disrupt nucleosome structure in vivo ( Orphanides and Reinberg , 2000 ) , but this need not necessarily be a direct consequence ; for example , elon - gation by RNA polymerase II disrupts nucleosomes on the yeast hsp82 gene , but elongation by T7 RNA polymerase does not ( Sathyanarayana et al . , 1999 ) . Depleting histone H4 in yeast might also be expected to “loosen” template – nucleosome interactions and improve polymerase access ; whereas 15 % of the genes were transcribed more rapidly , 10 % became less active ( Wyrick et al . , 1999 ) . Given the central role that histone DNA binding plays in gene ex - pression , we reinvestigated the problem using an alterna - tive technique . The localization and kinetics of molecules within living cells can be monitored using the green fluorescent protein Address correspondence to P . R . Cook , Sir William Dunn School of Pathol - ogy , University of Oxford , South Parks Rd . , Oxford OX1 3RE , UK . Tel . : 44 - 1865 - 275528 . Fax : 44 - 1865 - 275515 . E - mail : peter . cook @ path . ox . ac . uk on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 1342 ( GFP ) 1 . A hybrid gene encoding the protein of interest fused with GFP is expressed in a cell so that the hybrid protein can be localized by its autofluorescence . This ap - proach has been used with H2A , H2B , and the linker his - tone H1 ( Kanda et al . , 1998 ; Dey et al . , 2000 , Lever et al . , 2000 , Misteli et al . , 2000 ; Perche et al . , 2000 ; Phair and Misteli , 2000 ) . Photobleaching techniques such as FRAP then permit analysis of diffusion coefficients , rates of ex - change of tagged proteins between different cellular com - partments , and the proportions of mobile and immobile fractions ( Ellenberg and Lippincott - Schwartz , 1999 ; White and Stelzer , 1999 ; Misteli , 2001 ) . After bleaching a small area in the nuclei , little H2A - GFP and H2B - GFP entered the bleached area over a period of several tens of seconds , suggesting that they were immobilized in nucleosomes ; in contrast , H1 enters rapidly to restore fluorescence ( Dey et al . , 2000 ; Lever et al . , 2000 , Misteli et al . , 2000 ; Perche et al . , 2000 ; Phair and Misteli , 2000 ) . We assessed how tightly histones were bound to DNA using three of the four core histones tagged with an “en - hanced” version of GFP . Expression plasmids encoding his - tones H2B , H3 , and H4 were constructed and transfected into HeLa cells , and clones expressing the tagged histones were derived . The cells progressed around the cell cycle with unchanged kinetics , and biochemical analyses showed that the tagged histones behaved much like their natural counterparts . Importantly , the tagged histones were incor - porated into chromatin when it was replicated . However , although the three histones are found in equimolar amounts in most nucleosomes , H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP proved to be distributed differently from H2B - GFP . Ki - netic analysis over several hours then showed that these differences resulted partly from differences in rates of in - corporation into chromatin . H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP were assembled into chromatin when DNA was replicated , and then (cid:3) 80 % remained bound permanently . In contrast , a significant fraction ( (cid:2) 40 % ) of H2B - GFP exchanged slowly , whereas (cid:2) 3 % did so very rapidly ( that is , within minutes ) . This rapidly exchanging fraction disappeared when transcription was inhibited by 5 , 6 - dichloro - 1 - (cid:2) - D - ribofuranosylbenzimidazole ( DRB ) . These results reveal that the inner core of the nucleosome is very stable , whereas H2B on the surface of active nucleosomes is con - tinually exchanging . Materials and Methods Plasmid Construction , Transfection , and Cell Fusion Human H3 and H4 genes ( sequence data available from GenBank / EMBL / DDBJ under accession nos . X0900 , X60483 ) and the H2B - GFP expression vector were gifts from Y . Ishimi , T . Kanda , and G . Wahl ( The Salk Institute , La Jolla , CA ) ( Ishimi et al . , 1998 ; Kanda et al . , 1998 ) . The H3 - GFP expression vector ( pBOS - H3 - N - GFP ) was made in two steps . First , the H3 - coding region was amplified ( primers CCCGGTAC - CCATGGCTCGTACTAAAC , GCGGGATCCGCTCTTTCTCCGC - GAATGC ) , and the PCR fragment and pBOS - H2BGFP - N1 were cut ( KpnI , BamHI ) and ligated ; the resulting plasmid is similar to the H2B - GFP vector . Next , the BamHI - NotI fragment was replaced with the BglII - NotI fragment of pEGFP - N1 ( CLONTECH Laboratories , Inc . ) to gener - ate pBOS - H3 - N - GFP , which encodes the H3 - GFP gene with a 23 - residue linker driven by the elongation factor ( EF ) 1 (cid:4) promoter and a blasticidin S resistance gene ( Mizushima and Nagata , 1990 ; Izumi et al . , 1991 ) . pBOS - H4 - N - GFP was made similarly using primers CCCGGTACCCAT - GTCTGGCCGCGGCAA and GCGGGATCCCCACCGAAACCGTA - GAGGGC ; it encodes the H4 - GFP gene with a 23 - residue linker . HeLa cells were transfected ( GenePorter ; Gene Therapy Systems ) , 2 (cid:5) g / ml blas - ticidin S ( Invitrogen ) was added after 24 h , and bright autofluorescent drug - resistant clones were selected for further analysis . Patterns of fluo - rescence were similar in different cell lines , regardless of average inten - sity . Different clones had unchanged cell cycles measured using a FACS ® ( Kimura et al . , 1995 ) , and typical populations contained the following fractions of G1 , S , and G2 / M cells , respectively : HeLa , 52 , 24 , and 24 % ; HeLa : H2B - GFP , 47 , 27 , and 26 % ; HeLa : H3 - GFP , 47 , 28 , and 25 % ; and HeLa : H4 - GFP , 45 , 25 , and 30 % . Cells were fused using polyethylene gly - col ( Schmidt - Zachmann et al . , 1993 ) after prelabeling DNA in “recipi - ents” by “bead loading” ( Manders et al . , 1999 ) with Cy3 - dUTP ( Amer - sham Pharmacia Biotech ) or growth for 24 h in 50 (cid:5) M BrdU . Gel Electrophoresis and Immunoblotting Proteins were resolved in polyacrylamide gels and immunodetected ( Kimura et al . , 1999 ) using rabbit anti - GFP ( 8367 - 1 ; CLONTECH Labo - ratories , Inc . ) , anti - H2B , anti - H3 COOH - terminal peptide and anti - H4 ( Stemmer et al . , 1997 ) , anti - acetylated or phosphorylated H3 ( Upstate Biotechnology ) , and anti - acetylated H4 ( Serotec ) . For Fig . 2 B , cells in physiological buffer ( PB ) ( Kimura et al . , 1999 ) were divided into five 100 - (cid:5) l aliquots . One ( “total” ) was mixed with 100 (cid:5) l PB . Others were mixed with 100 (cid:5) l PB plus 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 and NaCl to give a final concentra - tion of 0 – 2 M . After incubation ( 10 min at 0 (cid:6) C ) and pelleting ( 20 , 000 g for 1 h at 4 (cid:6) C ) , the supernatant ( 180 (cid:5) l ) was collected and mixed with an equal volume of loading buffer . The pellet was resuspended in 180 (cid:5) l PB and 200 (cid:5) l 2 (cid:7) loading buffer added . For Fig . 2 , C and D , permeabilized cells were digested with HaeIII ( Kimura et al . , 1999 ) ; the supernatant was spun on a 10 – 30 % glycerol gradient at 40 , 000 rpm for 1 . 5 h using SW55Ti , and 20 fractions were collected . After denaturation in 1 % SDS , every other fraction was analyzed using gels ( only fractions 1 – 11 are shown ) . For Fig . 2 E , 100 (cid:5) l nucleosome core particles ( Kanda et al . , 1998 ) were immunoprecipitated using 10 (cid:5) l anti - GFP antibody ( 8372 - 2 ; CLONTECH Laboratories , Inc . ) and 500 (cid:5) l protein A Dynabeads ( Dynal ) . After wash - ing ( five times at 4 (cid:6) C ) in a buffer ( 10 mM Tris , 10 mM EDTA , 250 mM NaCl , pH 8 . 0 ) with 0 . 1 % Tween 20 and once in the buffer without Tween 20 , the beads and the original nucleosome sample were incubated in 1 % SDS . DNA was purified by phenol / chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation and separated in 1 . 2 % agarose gel . The nucleosomal pro - teins were also resolved in a 15 % polyacrylamide gel stained with Coo - massie , and band intensities were measured . Immunofluorescence and Microscopy General procedures for fixation , immunolabeling , and image collection using an MRC1000 confocal microscope have been described ( Kimura et al . , 1999 ; Manders et al . , 1999 ) . Cells grown on glass - bottomed dishes ( Mat - Tek ) in 100 ng / ml Hoechst 33342 ( Haraguchi et al . , 1997 ) were im - aged using a ZEISS Axiovert . Metaphase spreads were prepared using methanol - acetic acid or by cytospin , stained with 20 ng / ml Hoechst 33342 , and images were collected ; both methods gave similar distributions of his - tone - GFP , but fluorescence was weaker with methanol - acetic acid . For Fig . 3 , an image was collected using the MRC1000 ( closed pinhole of 0 . 7 mm , 1 % laser power , slow scan mode , Kalman filtration of five to six im - ages ) , an area covering parts of donor and recipient was nuclei scanned ( 10 (cid:7) zoom ; 100 % power ) several times ( 20 – 30 s ) until most signal disap - peared from the bleached area , and images were collected subsequently using the original settings . FRAP was performed using a Bio - Rad Laboratories (cid:5) Radiance confo - cal microscope ( 25 mW Ar laser ; ZEISS Axiovert ; 63 (cid:7) PlanApo , objec - tive 1 . 4 NA ) . Cells on a glass - bottomed dish were grown at 37 (cid:6) C on a heated stage ( Manders et al . , 1999 ) . One equatorial image ( with maximal nuclear area ) was collected ( 0 . 3 % power ; pinhole aperture of 4 ; fast scan mode ; 7 (cid:7) zoom ; Kalman filtration of three images ) , and 1 . 9 (cid:7) 1 . 9 (cid:5) m 2 was bleached by scanning twice ( (cid:2) 0 . 2 s ) with 100 % power . After 15 – 30 s , second and subsequent images were collected using the original settings . The net intensity ( after background subtraction ) of the bleached area rel - ative to that of the whole nucleus in each frame was measured using Im - ageJ version 1 . 16f ( provided by W . Rasband , National Institutes of Health ; http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) , and the intensity relative to the pre - bleached image was determined ( Phair and Misteli , 2000 ) . Cells fixed with 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : actD , actinomycin D ; DRB , 5 , 6 - dichloro - 1 - (cid:2) - D - ribofuranosylbenzimidazole ; EF , elongation factor ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; PB , physiological buffer . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 Kimura and Cook Histone Dynamics in Living Cells 1343 4 % paraformaldehyde ( 30 min ) were used to provide “immobile” pro - teins , and after photobleaching they were used for determining “baseline” levels of autofluorescence ( see Fig . 6 H ) . Nuclei moved during the long periods used in Fig . 6 , and images of single equatorial sections ( with maxi - mal nuclear area ) were collected subsequently . As most nuclear move - ments were rotations about the z axis , the bleached area could be identi - fied easily ( see Fig . 6 A ) ; data from the few nuclei that rotated about the xy axis were discarded . In Fig . 6 , association / dissociation kinetics were an - alyzed , assuming that tagged histones diffuse throughout nuclei in sec - onds . If there were one exchanging ( “slow” ) and one nonexchanging ( “very slow” ) population of histone - GFP , recovery should occur exponen - tially and be governed by R (cid:8) C (cid:9) P ( 1 (cid:10) exp (cid:10) k t ) , where R (cid:8) relative inten - sity , C (cid:8) constant value at time zero , P (cid:8) plateau value , k (cid:8) association constant , and t (cid:8) time . Then , the t 1 / 2 (cid:8) (cid:10) ln ( 1 / 2 ) / k . Curves were analyzed using GraphPad Prism version 3 . 02 ( http : / / www . graphpad . com ) . If there were two exchanging populations ( “rapid” and “slow” ) , recovery is gov - erned by R (cid:8) C (cid:9) P ( 1 (cid:10) exp (cid:10) k t ) (cid:9) P 2 ( 1 (cid:10) exp (cid:10) k2 t ) , where P 1 and k 1 refer to population 1 and P 2 and k 2 to population 2 . Results Cell Lines Expressing Histone - GFPs HeLa cells were transfected with an expression plasmid encoding histone H2B - GFP , H3 - GFP , or H4 - GFP under the control of the EF1 (cid:4) promoter ( Kanda et al . , 1998 ) . 20 – 40 % colonies growing in the antibiotic were autofluores - cent , and three of the brightest clones , named HeLa : H2B - GFP , HeLa : H3 - GFP , and HeLa : H4 - GFP , were selected for further analysis . All three progressed around the cell cycle with the same kinetics as parental cells ( as described in Materials and Methods ) . As found previously ( Kanda et al . , 1998 ) , H2B - GFP in living cells was concentrated in het - erochromatin at the nuclear and nucleolar periphery ( Fig . 1 A ) , which was brightly stained with Hoechst 33342 ( Fig . 1 C ; colocalization is indicated by yellow in the merge in Fig . 1 D ) . In mitotic cells , H2B - GFP was found exclusively in condensed chromosomes ( Fig . 1 , A – D ) , and in spreads it was again distributed like the dye ( Fig . 1 , E and F ) . Surprisingly , H3 - GFP was distributed differently . It was more diffusely spread than H2B - GFP ( Fig . 1 , G compared with A ) , and comparison with Hoechst staining ( Fig . 1 I ) showed it was more concentrated in euchromatin , giving tinges of green and red in the merge ( Fig . 1 J ) . In mitotic chromosomes , it gave an R - band – like pattern complemen - tary to the Hoechst pattern ( Fig . 1 K and L ; insets show chromosome 1 , and the red and green in the merge high - light complementarity ) . H4 - GFP was distributed like H3 - GFP ( Fig . 1 , N – S ) . H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP might behave differently from en - dogenous histones because the bulky tag prevents their in - corporation into dense heterochromatin or promotes their dissociation . As we shall see , both are incorporated if present late in S phase when heterochromatin is replicated ( see Fig . 3 O ) , and then they remain bound through mito - sis ( see Fig . 3 R ) . Since synthesis of native histones is tightly coupled to DNA synthesis ( Osley , 1991 ) and since these tagged histones are under the control of an unregu - lated promoter , the different distributions probably result from an unregulated accumulation of unincorporated pools during G1 phase coupled with an inevitable incorpo - ration of those pools when euchromatin is replicated early during S phase ; as a result , little H3 - GFP or H4 - GFP re - main to be incorporated later into heterochromatin ( see Fig . 7 , A and B ) . Although H2B - GFP synthesis is also un - coupled from replication , its continuous exchange ensures that its distribution reflects that of DNA . Histone - GFPs Are Incorporated into Chromatin We confirmed by immunoblotting that each line expressed the appropriate set of histones . Thus , an antibody directed against GFP detected one band of expected size in all three lines , but it did not detect the parent ( Fig . 2 A , first lane ) . In addition , an antibody detecting both H2B and H1 gave two bands due to endogenous forms in all of the lines plus H2B - GFP in the expected line ( Fig . 2 A , second lane ) . Quantitative analysis of Coomassie - stained bands from nucleosomal preparations ( Fig . 2 E ) showed that tagged histone represented 4 – 10 % of the total histone and that there were roughly 1 (cid:7) 10 7 , 0 . 4 (cid:7) 10 7 , and 0 . 5 (cid:7) 10 7 mole - cules of H2B - GFP , H3 - GFP , and H4 - GFP , respectively ( not shown ) . Six criteria were used to assess whether the tagged his - tones were incorporated into chromatin . First , they were phosphorylated ( not shown ) and acetylated like their un - tagged counterparts ; antibodies against acetylated H3 and H4 detected endogenous forms in all of the lines plus the expected forms in transfectants ( Fig . 2 A , third and fourth lanes ) . Second , pools of soluble ( unincorporated ) histones were small , and the majority resisted extraction with NaCl , indicating that most are tightly bound . Thus , each line was lysed in an isotonic buffer supplemented with 0 – 2 M NaCl ( Fig . 2 B , top panel ) . In the absence of NaCl , few histones were detected in the supernatant . 0 . 5 M NaCl extracted many proteins including H1 , but core histones remained in the pellet . 1 M NaCl removed some H2A and H2B , and 2 M NaCl removed all of the core histones . Immunoblotting showed that tagged and untagged histones had similar ex - traction profiles ( Fig . 2 B , bottom panels ) . Third , the his - tone - GFPs had the expected sensitivity to nucleases . Cells were lysed and treated with increasing concentrations of HaeIII to release chromatin into the supernatant ; then , progressively fewer histones were recovered in the pel - let ( Fig . 2 C , top panel ) . Quantitative immunoblotting showed the tagged forms behaved much like the natural ones , although H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP appeared slightly more sensitive to detachment ( Fig . 2 C , bottom panels ) . Fourth , histone - GFPs sedimented down a glycerol gradi - ent with oligonucleosomes released by HaeIII digestion ( Fig . 2 D ; not shown ) . Fifth , mononucleosomal core parti - cles released by micrococcal nuclease and then immuno - precipitated with anti - GFP contained DNA fragments of the appropriate size ( Fig . 2 E ) . Sixth , H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP are incorporated into the appropriate replication foci with newly made DNA ( even replication foci in hetero - chromatin ) ( see below ) . These results suggest that the his - tone - GFPs are incorporated into chromatin much like en - dogenous histones . Several details seen in Fig . 2 B ( and in overexposures ; not shown ) are consistent with previous work , and inter - pretations are discussed later . ( a ) Tagged H2B represents (cid:2) 10 % of all H2B ( as described above ) , and it should be de - tected easily if produced in addition to the normal amount . Since no H2B is seen , production of the natural histone must be reduced in compensation ( Osley , 1991 ) . ( b ) Unlike H2B - GFP or native H3 and H4 , small amounts of H3 - GFP on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 1344 and H4 - GFP are detected in the supernatant after extrac - tion with 0 or 0 . 5 M NaCl . This is consistent with the pres - ence of a small soluble pool ( see below ) . ( c ) In addition to H2B and H2B - GFP , slightly more H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP are detected in the supernatant after extraction with 1 M NaCl ; these are probably highly acetylated forms present in early replicating euchromatin . As a result , these forms con - tain high concentrations of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP ( see also Perry and Chalkley , 1982 ; Li et al . , 1993 ) . Different Populations of Histone - GFPs Detected in Heterokaryons Incorporation of histone - GFPs into chromatin was exam - ined using living heterokaryons ; this enables us to monitor their localization and mobility just after they had entered nuclei . HeLa cells expressing histone - GFP were fused with their nonexpressing counterparts to give heterokaryons containing autofluorescent “donor” and nonfluorescing “recipient” nuclei ; over the next few hours , recipient nu - clei gradually gained fluorescence ( Fig . 3 A ) . This increase is due to the slow import of both newly made and preexist - ing histone - GFP . Preliminary experiments revealed strik - ing differences in the patterns of incorporation of the different tagged histones ( not shown ) ; therefore , their mo - bility was also investigated by photobleaching a rectangu - lar area in the cell ( Fig . 3 A ) . If molecules of histone - GFP outside the bleached area are mobile , many will repopu - late the bleached area to give a uniform but reduced fluo - rescence throughout the nucleus . But if proteins are im - mobile , the bleached area persists . One trikaryon containing H2B - GFP that gave typical results is illustrated in Fig . 3 B . 5 : 45 h after fusion , the two recipient nuclei ( arrowheads ) had gained some H2B - GFP to give a weak and diffusely spread fluorescence . This fluorescence was not concentrated in heterochromatin as in the donor nucleus ( arrow ) . ( This donor is overexposed . [ Fig . 1 A , inset ] . ) Rather , the diffuse pattern was reminis - cent of that seen in cells expressing H3 - GFP or H4 - GFP ( that is , enriched in euchromatin as in Fig . 1 , G and N ) . Then , the rectangular region was bleached , and an image was collected immediately . The bleached region in donor Figure 1 . GFP - tagged histones in HeLa cells imaged by confocal and conventional microscopy . ( A , G , and N ) Single optical sections show H2B - GFP is more concentrated in heterochromatin than H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP . ( Insets ) High power views . ( B – D , H – J , and O – Q ) In each case , three views of the same field of live cells stained with Hoechst 33342 are shown ( GFP and Hoechst are green and red in merges ) . ( E – F , K – L , and R – S ) Metaphase spreads were prepared , DNA was stained with Hoechst , and two views of the same field were collected . ( Inset ) Chromosome 1 ( merge in middle ) . Bars , 10 (cid:5) m . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 Kimura and Cook Histone Dynamics in Living Cells 1345 and recipient nuclei remained ( Fig . 3 C ) , indicating that H2B - GFP was so immobile that little was able to enter the rectangular area during and / or after bleaching . Analogous experiments with H4 - GFP gave different re - sults . Thus , the trikaryon illustrated in Fig . 3 D contains two recipient nuclei with different patterns : one homogeneous ( open arrowhead ) and the other ( filled arrowhead ) with foci reminiscent of the replication sites seen in mid – S phase ( O’Keefe et al . , 1992 ) . Photobleaching then reduces fluores - cence throughout one recipient nucleus but not the other ( Fig . 3 E ) . In one ( open arrowhead ) , H4 - GFP is so mobile it repopulates the bleached area , whereas in the other ( filled arrowhead ) it is essentially immobile . Many such experi - ments confirmed this general conclusion : when H4 - GFP ( and H3 - GFP ; not shown ) is distributed homogeneously , it is mobile ( and so unincorporated ) , and when focally con - centrated it is immobile ( and so incorporated ) . When repli - cation after cell fusion is inhibited by aphidicolin , no recipi - ent nucleus showing the focal concentration was observed ( not shown ) . This suggests that H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP , un - like H2B - GFP , might be incorporated into nucleosomes only when chromatin is replicated during S phase . Incorporation of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP during S Phase We confirmed this replication - dependent incorporation of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP using the strategy outlined on the right of Fig . 3 A . Cells expressing histone - GFP were fused Figure 2 . GFP - tagged histones behave like their endogenous counterparts . ( A ) Expression and acetylation . GFP , H2B , acety - lated H3 , and acetylated H4 are detected in immunoblots of the total proteins in parental cells and the three clones . Band intensi - ties do not directly reflect expression levels because differences in charge and size affect transfer during blotting ; thus , the H2B - GFP band in the second lane is more intense than the H2B band be - cause it is transferred more efficiently and not because its expres - sion level is higher ( see also Kanda et al . , 1998 ) . ( B ) Solubility in NaCl . Cells were lysed in PB plus 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 0 – 2 M NaCl and pelleted . Proteins from whole cells ( total ) , the superna - tant ( sup ) , and pellet were resolved in gels and stained with Coo - massie blue ( top panel shows line expressing H2B - GFP ) or blotted and probed with the antibodies indicated on the right ( cell line shown on the left ) . ( C ) Sensitivity to HaeIII . ( Top panel ) Cells ex - pressing H2B - GFP were lysed , incubated with or without HaeIII , and pelleted ; then , proteins in the pellet were resolved by electro - phoresis , stained with Coomassie ( top ) , or immunoblotted using anti - GFP ( bottom ) . ( Lanes 1 – 4 ) All without HaeIII ( loadings of 1 / 8 (cid:7) , 1 / 4 (cid:7) , 1 / 2 (cid:7) , and 1 (cid:7) , respectively ) . ( Lanes 5 – 8 ) Treated with 0 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 , or 2 . 5 U / (cid:5) l HaeIII ( all loadings 1 (cid:7) ) . ( Bottom panels ) The amounts of H4 and tagged histones remaining in pellets from the three clones after nuclease treatment and pelleting ( from band intensities in stained gels and blots ) . ( D ) Cosedimentation with nucleosomal “ladder . ” Cells expressing H3 - GFP were per - meabilized , incubated with HaeIII , and pelleted ; after spinning re - leased chromatin fragments in the supernatant through a glycerol gradient , DNA and proteins in the different fractions were ana - lyzed by gel electrophoresis ( “input” refers to material applied to the gradient ) . ( Top ) Nucleosomal “ladders” revealed after stain - ing DNA with ethidium . ( Bottom ) H3 - GFP detected by immuno - blotting using anti - GFP ; it is present in all fractions except the topmost . ( E ) Immunoprecipitation with DNA . Nucleosome core particles were prepared using micrococcal nuclease from four lines and immunoprecipitated using anti - GFP . Then , DNA in the starting material ( total ; 1 / 5 (cid:7) loading ) and immunoprecipitated pellet ( IP ) was resolved by electrophoresis and stained with ethidium ; core DNA fragments are immunoprecipitated from all lines except the parent . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 1346 Figure 3 . Different behavior of histone - GFPs in heterokaryons . ( A ) Assays . Donor cells expressing histone - GFP are fused with recip - ient HeLa ; the recipient nucleus in the resulting heterokaryon gains histone - GFP . ( A , left , B – E ) A rectangular area is photobleached . If histone - GFP is mobile , molecules from outside repopulate the bleached area , reducing fluorescence throughout nuclei ; if immobile , the bleached area persists . ( A , right , F – T ) Heterokaryons are loaded with Cy3 - dUTP , and any S phase nuclei incorporate Cy3 - dUTP into characteristic foci . Heterokaryons may then pass through mitosis , and chromosomes originally from different nuclei segregate and as - semble into chimeric daughter nuclei . The stages when confocal images are collected are indicated . ( B and C ) 5 : 45 h after fusion , this trikaryon contains one bright donor ( arrow ) and two recipients that have gained H2B - GFP ( arrowheads ) . Now , the rectangular area is bleached . Approximately 1 min later , the bleached area in all three nuclei still persists , showing that H2B - GFP is immobile over this time scale . ( D and E ) 5 : 33 h after fusion , this trikaryon contains one bright donor ( arrow ) , one recipient with some H4 - GFP distributed in a pattern reminiscent of late - replicating DNA ( filled arrowhead ) , and one recipient with diffusely spread H4 - GFP ( open arrowhead ) . After bleaching , most fluorescence is lost from the latter , showing that the H4 - GFP within it is mobile . In contrast , bleached areas in the other two persist , indicating that their H4 - GFP is immobile . ( F – H ) Tetrakaryon with one donor and three recipients ; Cy3 labeling shows that no nuclei are in S phase , and all recipients possess diffuse distributions of H2B - GFP . ( I – K ) Trikaryon with two donors and one recipient . The recipient has a Cy3 pattern characteristic of mid – S phase . Some H2B - GFP is distributed diffusely , and some is con - centrated in replication foci ( yellow in the merge ) . ( L – N ) Dikaryon . Only the donor is labeled with Cy3 and so was in S phase ; H3 - GFP is spread homogeneously throughout the nucleoplasm in the non – S phase recipient . ( O – Q ) Tetrakaryon with one donor and three re - cipients . All recipients incorporated Cy3 into a mid – S phase pattern , and H3 - GFP is distributed similarly ; this suggests that the two were incorporated together . ( R – T ) Chimeric nucleus containing H4 - GFP concentrated at the bottom derived from donor chromosomes and Cy3 at the top derived from recipients . The perinucleolar H4 - GFP foci originally in the recipient retain their characteristic organi - zation through mitosis , showing that some H4 - GFP remains bound stably . Bars , 10 (cid:5) m . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 Kimura and Cook Histone Dynamics in Living Cells 1347 with nonexpressors ( as before ) , and the resulting het - erokaryons were loaded with Cy3 - dUTP . Cy3 - dUTP quickly diffuses throughout the cell and often becomes concentrated in cytoplasmic vesicles ; however , if any nuclei are in S phase they are incorporated into DNA to give characteristic fluorescent foci ( Manders et al . , 1999 ) . When the heterokaryon progresses through mitosis and nuclei re - form in daughters , chromosomes originally from donor and recipient nuclei may end up in one ( chimeric ) nucleus . Fig . 3 , F – H , illustrates three views of a living tet - rakaryon with one donor nucleus expressing H2B - GFP and three recipients . No nuclei are in S phase , since none are labeled with Cy3 ( Fig . 3 G ) . All of the recipients have acquired roughly similar distributions of H2B - GFP , al - though with differing intensities ( Fig . 3 F ) . Molecules seem first to pass from the donor to the nearest recipient , probably because nuclear import is relatively rapid com - pared with diffusion through the cytoplasm . In Fig . 3 , I – K , the heterokaryon contains one recipient nucleus that has incorporated Cy3 into the pattern characteristic of mid – S phase ( Fig . 3 J ) . Some H2B - GFP is diffusely spread , and some is concentrated in replication foci ( Fig . 3 I ) , giving yellow in the merge ( Fig . 3 K ) . This suggests that some H2B - GFP is incorporated without replication and some coincidentally with DNA synthesis . Although patterns of H2B - GFP in non – S and S phase re - cipients are similar , those of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP ( not shown ) are not . Thus , H3 - GFP is spread homogeneously throughout the nucleoplasm in non – S phase recipients ( Fig . 3 , L – N ) but concentrated in replication foci in S phase recipients ( Fig . 3 , O – Q ; note yellow in the merge ) . This is again consistent with preferential incorporation of H3 - GFP into chromatin during DNA synthesis . If the nucleus is not in S phase , these tagged histones can enter to give a homo - geneous distribution ( Fig . 3 D , open arrowhead ; Fig . 3 , L – N ) ; however , they are not incorporated into chromatin , and they remain mobile ( Fig . 3 E , open arrowhead ) . These focal concentrations of histone - GFP can be main - tained stably through mitosis . Thus , the nucleus illustrated in Fig . 3 , R – T , contains two regions . The lower half is rich in nucleoplasmic H4 - GFP but contains little Cy3 ; it is de - rived from a donor nucleus in a heterokaryon . The top half is rich in Cy3 with local concentrations of H4 - GFP around nucleoli ; it is derived from a recipient nucleus that was in S phase just after fusion . This heterokaryon passed through mitosis during the next (cid:2) 20 h , and focal concentrations of H4 - GFP persisted as chromosomes from the two nuclei were incorporated into one ( chimeric ) daughter . Similar results were obtained with H3 - GFP ( not shown ) . The slow equilibration of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP was confirmed using a different strategy . In this strategy , cells were pulse - labeled with Cy3 - dUTP before fusion , and chi - meric nuclei were generated as before ( Fig . 4 A ) . Three views of two living daughters each with a chimeric nucleus are illustrated in Fig . 4 , B – D . 16 h after fusion , H3 - GFP and Cy3 - DNA are still concentrated in separate parts of the nuclei ; H3 - GFP is bound so stably it fails to equili - brate . Recipient cells were also prelabeled with BrdU so that DNA in chimeric nuclei could be immunolabeled ( Fig . 4 , E – G ) . Then , GFP fluorescence in donor and recip - ient ( that is , Br - containing ) parts was measured and ex - pressed as a ratio . Quantitative analysis of many such chi - meric nuclei ( and of dikaryons in the same population ) revealed that H2B - GFP spread more rapidly than H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP into a recipient region ; for example , H2B - GFP had completely equilibrated within 48 h ( that is , the ratio reached unity ) , but the other two had not equili - brated after 96 h ( Fig . 4 H ) . This faster H2B - GFP equili - bration could be due to its faster synthesis . Then , it should equilibrate between different regions of chimeric nuclei and between the different nuclei in dikaryon at the same rate . Unlike H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP , it equilibrated faster between the different regions in chimeric nuclei ( Fig . 4 H ) , suggesting that the differences seen arise from differences in exchange rate . FRAP : Analysis over Seconds Reveals Different Soluble Pools We next examined the striking differences in histone mo - bility seen in Fig . 3 , B – E , using the strategy illustrated in Fig . 5 A . A small area in a recipient nucleus was bleached ( at t 0 ) and the intensity within it monitored every 15 s for 2 min ( between t 15 and t 120 ) . If all of the molecules are “mo - bile” ( that is , freely diffusible or able to dissociate and re - bind within 15 s ) , the intensity in the bleached area rela - tive to that in the whole nucleus will rise within 15 s to the maximum and will not change thereafter ( scenario 1 ) . If all are “immobile” ( that is , bound for (cid:3) 15 s ) , sampling after 15 s will reveal a slow ( s ) or rapid ( r ) recovery depending on rates of dissociation and reassociation ( scenario 2 ) . If a fraction is “mobile , ” that fraction will recover by t 15 , and any subsequent increase will also depend on dissociation and association rates ( scenario 3 ) . Images from a typical experiment are shown in Fig . 5 B , and results from several are presented in Fig . 5 C . Data from H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP in non – S phase recipi - ent nuclei fit scenario 1 ; fluorescence recovers within 15 s and remains constant thereafter ( Fig . 5 C , top left ; not shown ) . Although these two enter recipient nuclei in 1 or 2 h after fusion , they are not assembled into chromatin . In S phase recipients , some H3 - GFP is immobilized during the same period ( not shown ) . In contrast , H2B - GFP in recipi - ents behaves quite differently , with results fitting scenario 3 , curve s ( Fig . 5 C , top left ) . This suggests that H2B - GFP enters recipients and is incorporated into chromatin ( and therefore immobilized ) . These results confirm that H2B - GFP is incorporated quickly and that unincorporated pools of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP accumulate in non – S phase cells . This strategy was now used to investigate how different inhibitors affected incorporation of H2B - GFP . Actinomy - cin D ( actD ) increased the slope of the curve in recipients ( Fig . 5 C , top right , (cid:9) actD ) ; this increase in exchange rate could be due to competition for binding sites or alterations in supercoiling rather than through a general inhibition of transcription ( Hendzel and Davie , 1990 ; Jackson , 1990 ) . DRB , an inhibitor of RNA polymerase II ( Sehgal et al . , 1976 ) , increased the mobile fraction ( Fig . 5 C , bottom left , (cid:9) DRB ) . ( We also used the specific inhibitor of pol II , (cid:4) - amanitin , but found that high concentrations and long exposures were needed to ensure substantial inhibition , and these complicated interpretation . ) In contrast , aphidi - colin , an inhibitor of DNA polymerases involved in both replication and repair ( Wang , 1991 ) , had little effect ( Fig . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 1348 5 C , bottom right , (cid:9) aphi ) . These measurements over peri - ods of tens of seconds suggest transcription by RNA poly - merase II promotes exchange of some H2B - GFP . FRAP : Analysis over Hours Reveals Different Bound Populations A small area in the nucleus of a single ( unfused ) cell was bleached , and images were collected for 8 . 5 h ( Fig . 6 A ) ; some cells entered mitosis during this period and most di - vided subsequently , suggesting that bleaching and imaging did not affect viability ( see also Kruhlak et al . , 2000 ) . H2B - GFP fluorescence fell on bleaching further than H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP fluorescence ( Fig . 6 B ) , indicating that more H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP ( (cid:2) 9 versus (cid:2) 4 % H2B - GFP ) are mobile and able to diffuse back into the bleached area be - fore collection of the first image . Subsequently , H2B - GFP fluorescence recovered more rapidly ( Fig . 6 B ) . Unfortu - nately , interpretation is complicated by synthesis of new protein . Therefore , protein synthesis was inhibited with cycloheximide , which also inhibits replication ( Bonner et al . , 1988 ) . Then , the same general patterns were found , suggesting that most recovery depends on exchange of preexisting histone - GFPs . However , the “mobile” fraction of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP increased slightly , and the recov - ery of all of the histones was slower ( Fig . 6 C ) . These recovery curves are simply explained if there are at least two exchanging populations : a “slow” one respon - sible for the partial recovery during the first 8 . 5 h and a “very slow” population that was so immobile that it never exchanged during this period ( Fig . 6 H ) . ( Both popula - tions exchange too slowly to be detected during the 120 s used with heterokaryons and therefore constitute the “im - mobile” fraction seen in Fig . 5 . ) About 40 % of H2B - GFP exchanged slowly ( Fig . 6 I , row 1 ) , but only 16 % H3 - GFP and 22 % H4 - GFP ( Fig . 6 I , row 4 ; not shown ) . Although all of the data in Fig . 6 , B – G , can be fitted assuming there are two exchanging populations , the data for H2B - GFP are fitted even better if there is an additional “rapid” pop - ulation that dominates initial recovery ( Fig . 6 H ) ; then , 3 % H2B - GFP would exchanged rapidly and 40 % would ex - change slowly with the remainder being immobile ( Fig . 6 I , row 2 ) . ( Analysis of the kinetics yields the minimum num - ber of populations required to fit the data , and more popu - lations may actually exist . ) DRB slowed recovery of H2B - GFP ( Fig . 6 D ) , suggest - ing that some exchange depended on transcription , and the kinetics in cycloheximide were best fitted if DRB - induced complete loss of the “rapid” fraction ( Fig . 6 I , row 3 ) . These results and those on heterokaryons ( Fig . 5 ) suggest that the “rapid” and “slow” populations are transcription depen - dent and independent , respectively . In contrast , DRB alone Figure 4 . Slow equilibration of histone - GFP in chimeric nuclei . ( A ) Assays . HeLa cells were labeled with Cy3 - dUTP or BrdU , fused with cells expressing histone - GFP , and the resulting hetero - karyons were allowed to pass through mitosis so that chromo - somes from different nuclei assembled into one chimeric daughter . Recipient chromosomes are identified in living cells or indirectly by immunolabeling fixed cells . ( B – D ) HeLa cells were loaded with Cy3 - dUTP , grown for 20 h , fused with cells expressing H3 - GFP , and regrown for (cid:2) 16 h . Three views of one confocal section through two living chimeric daughters are shown ; H3 - GFP in each daughter is concentrated in one part , and Cy3 - DNA is concen - trated in the other . ( E – G ) HeLa cells were grown in BrdU for 24 h , fused , fixed 36 h later , Br - DNA immunolabeled , and three views of one confocal section of a chimeric nucleus were collected . H2B - GFP remains concentrated in donor heterochromatin ( ar - row ) , but has not yet equilibrated with recipient heterochromatin ( arrowhead ) . ( H ) The intensity of histone - GFP autofluorescence in recipient regions ( containing Br - DNA ) relative to that in donor regions ( lacking Br - DNA ) was measured using images of chimeric nuclei ( chi ; n (cid:3) 29 ) like those in E – G and of nuclei in dikaryons ( di ; n (cid:3) 19 ) in the same population . Bars , 10 (cid:5) m . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 Kimura and Cook Histone Dynamics in Living Cells 1349 and in cycloheximide had little effect on H3 - GFP or H4 - GFP ( Fig . 6 , F and G ; not shown ) , consistent with transcrip - tion - independent exchange of their “slow” fractions . Discussion Various interrelated factors probably promote histone ex - change , including the direct action of polymerases and re - modelling complexes , acetylation and methylation of nucleosomal components , and the supercoiling and compaction of templates . For example , an elongating polymerase might temporarily displace H2A and H2B or even a whole nucleosome ; alternatively , it might transfer a newly encountered octamer from one side to another without release ( van - Holde et al . , 1992 ; Bednar et al . , 1999 ) . Histone acetylation reduces the positive charge on a histone and could therefore weaken binding to negatively charged DNA ; indeed , it has subtle effects on nucleosome stability in vitro ( Turner , 1991 ; Ito et al . , 2000 ) . Since chro - matin in active transcription units is hyper - acetylated and may be depleted of H2A / H2B and since histone acetylases are associated with transcriptional activators and poly - merases , nucleosomes at promoters or next to an engaged polymerase might be destabilized ( Perry et al . , 1993 ; Wolffe and Hayes , 1999 ; Orphanides and Reinberg , 2000 ) . Alternatively , acetylation of nucleosomes throughout ac - tive domains ( Hebbes et al . , 1994 ) suggests that exchange may be more widespread . Since we still know little about the stability of nucleoso - mal histones in vivo , we analyzed the dynamics of three histones tagged with GFP in living cells . Expression plas - mids encoding histones H2B , H3 , and H4 connected through COOH - terminal linkers of six residues to GFP were constructed . The COOH terminus of H2B lies on the nucleosomal surface ( Luger et al . , 1997 ) and brightly fluo - rescing cell lines expressing H2B - GFP were obtained readily ( see also Kanda et al . , 1998 ) . However , the COOH termini of H3 and H4 lie internally , and only a few lines expressing low levels of H3 - GFP or H4 - GFP were ob - tained ( not shown ) ; presumably , the bulky GFP moiety is not easily accommodated in a nucleosome . In contrast , many brightly fluorescing lines were derived using linkers of 23 residues , which could extend to the exterior . Three clones were selected for further study ; they expressed H2B - GFP with a short linker and H3 - GFP or H4 - GFP with the longer linker . All progressed around the cell cycle with unchanged kinetics ( as described in Materials and Methods ) , and all three tagged molecules were incorpo - rated into chromatin : little soluble form could be detected ( Fig . 2 B ) and all resisted extraction by NaCl but could be detached by nucleases ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) , cosedimented with oligonucleosomes released by HaeIII ( Fig . 2 D ) , and could be immunoprecipitated with appropriately sized DNA fragments from mononucleosomes prepared using micrococcal nuclease ( Fig . 2 E ) . In addition , they were ap - propriately acetylated and phosphorylated ( Fig . 2 A ; not shown ) , and most importantly they were incorporated with a DNA precursor , Cy3 - dUTP , into the appropriate replication foci during S phase ( for example , Fig . 3 , K , Q , and T ) . These results suggest they are all assembled into nucleosomes much like their untagged counterparts . Different Distributions Explained by Unregulated Expression H2B - GFP was distributed in the cell line much like DNA ( Fig . 1 , A – F ) , but H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP were concen - trated in euchromatin during interphase ( Fig . 1 , G – S ) and in R - bands in mitotic chromosomes ( Fig . 1 , K , L , R , and S ) . The latter distribution could arise if there were large Figure 5 . Soluble pools measured using FRAP . ( A ) Strategy and different scenarios illustrating how the mobile fraction af - fects recovery ( as described in Results ) . ( B ) 2 : 26 h after fusion , images were collected shortly before and after bleaching part of a recipient nucleus in a dikaryon . ( C ) Relative intensities ( (cid:11) SDs ; n (cid:8) 10 – 16 ) of bleached areas . In some cases , actD ( 5 (cid:5) g / ml ) , DRB ( 100 nM ) , or aphidicolin ( aphi ; 5 (cid:5) g / ml ) was added 1 h be - fore fusion . Results for H2B - GFP in S phase and non – S phase nuclei are pooled , since they differed little . Curves for H2B - GFP without inhibitor ( left , top and bottom ) are presented in the other panels in grey . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 1350 soluble pools or if the bulky tag decreased incorporation into ( or increased dissociation from ) heterochromatin . However , bleaching a small area in nuclei expressing H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP did not change the general pattern ( not shown ) , making it unlikely that a large soluble pool ex - isted . In addition , both H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP are incorpo - rated into heterochromatin late during S phase when it is replicated ( Fig . 3 , D and O – Q ) , and once incorporated Figure 6 . Different kinetic populations of histone - GFPs revealed by FRAP . ( A ) A small area within the nucleus of a cell expressing histone - GFP was bleached , and confocal images were collected every 10 min for 1 h and every 30 min thereafter . Typical images are shown . ( B – G ) Relative intensities ( (cid:11) SD ; n (cid:8) 9 – 22 ) within bleached areas were measured using images like those in A . In some cases , 20 (cid:5) g / ml cycloheximide ( CHX ; C , E , and G ) or 100 nM DRB ( D – G ) was added 30 – 60 min before bleaching . Grey lines ( con ) in D – G are reproduced from those in B and C . ( H ) Interpretation . The intensity is reduced by bleaching to a “baseline” ( determined using fixed cells ) , and it then recovers as unbleached molecules enter . The rate and extent of recovery depend on the contribution of different ki - netic fractions . Here , a “mobile” fraction diffuses in before the first image can be collected after bleaching . Then , a “rapid” fraction is initially dominant before a “slow” fraction becomes progressively more important ; a “very slow” fraction enters too slowly to be moni - tored during the experiment . ( I ) Percentage of the population and association t 1 / 2 of different fractions ( determined using data from C , E , and G ) . The percentage of the “mobile” fraction was generally increased in CHX so the value without CHX is also shown in brackets ( a ) . With H2B - GFP in CHX ( row 2 ) , the curve was best fitted assuming there was also a “rapid” population ( b ) . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 Kimura and Cook Histone Dynamics in Living Cells 1351 both are stably maintained through mitosis ( Fig . 3 R ) . Since these possibilities can be eliminated , the differences probably result from an unregulated production of histone message ( Fig . 7 A ) . Thus , levels of messages encoding the natural histones rise and fall 35 - fold during entry and exit from S phase due to increases in message production and stability ( Osley , 1991 ) . However , the tagged histones are under the ( unregulated ) control of the EF1 (cid:4) promoter , and the resulting messages are probably polyadenylated inappropriately . Then , H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP will accumu - late during G1 phase to form a soluble pool and will inevi - tably be incorporated into euchromatin as soon as replica - tion begins ( Fig . 7 B ) . Various observations support this interpretation : the appropriate pools are detected bio - chemically ( Fig . 2 ) and by photobleaching ( Figs . 3 , 5 , and 6 ) , and few molecules are incorporated except during S phase ( Figs . 3 – 6 ) . Although synthesis of H2B - GFP is also uncoupled from replication , its continuous exchange en - sures that its distribution reflects that of DNA . Later in S phase , H2B - GFP released from active chromatin is still available for assembly into heterochromatin ; however , several cell generations are needed for full equilibration ( for example , Fig . 4 , E – H ) . Some Exchange of H2B - GFP but Little of H3 - GFP or H4 - GFP FRAP studies over periods of several minutes show that H2A - GFP and H2B - GFP are stably incorporated into chro - matin , whereas H1 - GFP exchanges rapidly ( Dey et al . , 2000 ; Lever et al . , 2000 ; Misteli et al . , 2000 ; Perche et al . , 2000 ; Phair and Misteli , 2000 ) . Using four different approaches , we show that some H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP and even more H2B - GFP exchange over longer periods . After photo - bleaching part of a “recipient” nucleus in a heterokaryon , most newly acquired H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP but not H2B - GFP can reenter the bleached area over the next few min - utes ( Fig . 3 , B – E , and Fig . 5 ) ; the first two remain unincor - porated and can diffuse freely , but H2B - GFP has been immobilized by incorporation in euchromatin ( Fig . 3 B ) . Second , quantitative analysis with both heterokaryons and chimeric nuclei show that H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP take twice as long as H2B - GFP to equilibrate between donor and re - cipient chromatin ( Fig . 4 H ) . Third , after photobleaching a small area in single cells they enter the bleached area more slowly ( Fig . 6 , B and C ) . Fourth , once incorporated into rep - lication foci during S phase ( Fig . 3 , O – Q ) they are stably maintained and can even persist through mitosis ( for exam - ple , Fig . 3 , R – T ) . These results are consistent with those ob - tained previously ( Jackson and Chalkley , 1985 ; Louters and Chalkley , 1985 ; Hendzel and Davie , 1990 ) . Transcriptional Activity of the Different Populations Quantitative analysis of data obtained using FRAP over 8 h enabled rough estimates of how much and how rapidly the histones exchanged ( Fig . 6 ) . All contained at least two ki - netic populations : a “slow” one responsible for partial re - covery and a “very slow” one that appeared essentially im - mobile ( Fig . 6 , H and I ) . However , data for H2B - GFP could be fitted even better if there was an additional “rapid” fraction ( Fig . 6 I , row 2 ) . What underlies such dif - ferences in exchange ? The “rapid” fraction ( apparent association t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 6 min ) of H2B - GFP represents (cid:2) 3 % of the total ( Fig . 6 I , row 2 ) . It is probably derived from active transcription units , since an equivalent fraction of the genome is transcribed and addition of the transcriptional inhibitor , DRB , eliminates it ( Fig . 6 I , rows 2 and 3 ) . Moreover , DRB prevents immo - bilization of the mobile fraction in heterokaryons ( Fig . 5 C ) . These results are consistent with transcription by RNA polymerase II either directly or through the agency of as - sociated factors such as facilitating chromatin transcrip - tion ( Orphanides and Reinberg , 2000 ) , driving H2A and H2B off the template . Unfortunately , DRB is a protein ki - nase inhibitor that could act in other ways ( for example , through histone phosphorylation ) . Therefore , we tested Figure 7 . Models for histone exchange . ( A ) Changes in histone levels during the cell cycle . Endogenous histones are made mainly during S phase when a soluble pool is seen . Tagged his - tones are made continuously ; the soluble pool that accumulates by the end of G1 phase is depleted in S phase ( as histones are in - corporated ) and then replenished in G2 phase . ( B ) Incorporation of tagged histones ( black areas ) into chromatin . Nucleosomes are represented as circles with eight sectors , DNA as a forked line . H2B - GFP exchanges with H2B before , during ( not shown ) , and after replication . H3 - GFP is mainly incorporated into nucleo - some cores near the replication fork ; subsequently , it does not exchange . ( C ) Different kinetic populations . H2B is found in four populations : 4 % diffuses freely , 3 % in active transcription units exchanges rapidly ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 6 min ) , 40 % in the surrounding domains exchanges slowly ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 130 min ) , and 53 % in heterochromatin is essentially immobile ( t 1 / 2 (cid:3) 510 min ) . Although H2A was not studied , it is assumed to behave like H2B . H3 is found in three populations : (cid:12) 16 % diffuses freely , (cid:12) 16 % in and around active transcription units exchanges slowly ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 130 min ) , and (cid:3) 68 % is essentially immobile ( this constitutes (cid:3) 80 % of the incorpo - rated fraction ) . H4 behaved similarly to H3 . The diffusing and slowly exchanging fractions of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP are overes - timated because expression of the tagged histones is unregulated . DRB affects exchange as indicated . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 1352 other inhibitors of transcription . ActD has been used pre - viously to study exchange ( Hendzel and Davie , 1990 ; Jack - son , 1990 ) , and it increased H2B - GFP exchange ( Fig . 5 C ; not shown ) . However , it could also act indirectly by loos - ening interactions between H2B and DNA either by com - peting with histones for binding sites or by altering DNA supercoiling . Indeed , H2A and H2B are extracted more easily with NaCl after incubating permeabilized cells with actD or ethidium , another intercalator ( not shown ) . (cid:4) - Ama - nitin , a specific inhibitor of RNA polymerase II , also proved unsuitable because such long incubations were re - quired to obtain substantial inhibition of transcription ( not shown ; Nguyen et al . , 1996 ) . Therefore , results obtained with these other inhibitors were difficult to interpret . The “slow” population of H2B - GFP ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 130 min ) constitutes (cid:2) 40 % of the total ( Fig . 6 I , row 2 , and Fig . 7 C ) . As this fraction is 10 - fold larger than that occupied by active transcription units , it may be derived from the nu - clease - sensitive domains of equivalent size that flank such units ( Bell and Felsenfeld , 1999 ) . Then , DRB would be ex - pected to have little effect on it ( Fig . 6 I , row 3 ) . Since these domains also contain acetylated H3 and H4 ( Hebbes et al . , 1994 ; O’Neill et al . , 1999 ) , perhaps acetylation drives exchange by altering nucleosomal structure , recruiting other factors , or “opening” chromatin . The remaining (cid:2) 53 % , which was essentially immobile ( t 1 / 2 (cid:3) 510 min ) , probably represents heterochromatin ( see also Fig . 4 E , arrow ) . As analysis of the kinetics yields the minimum number of populations required to fit the data , further subpopulations ( for example , centromeric heterochroma - tin ) may be contained within this immobile fraction . Only (cid:2) 20 % of H3 - GFP and H4 - GFP exchanged ( Fig . 6 and Fig . 7 ) . This exchange was not stimulated by transcrip - tion or replication ; DRB had little effect ( Fig . 6 , D , E , and I ) , and these histones remained through S phase ( Figs . 4 and 6 ) ; therefore , it is probably driven by other factors that remodel or by acetylate euchromatin . ( Even less H3 and H4 may exchange , since they are more concentrated in heterochromatin than their tagged counterparts , and they will do so more slowly since their soluble pools are lower [ Fig . 1 and Fig . 2 B ] . ) Any data obtained using FRAP should be treated cau - tiously because photobleaching could damage DNA and activate repair pathways , and in turn these could indirectly affect histone exchange ( Ridgway and Almouzni , 2000 ) . However , the main conclusions concerning the different behavior of H2B - GFP and H3 / H4 - GFP were supported by others obtained using unbleached heterokaryons ( Figs . 3 and 4 ) . Concluding Remarks Although H3 and H4 form part of the same nucleosomal structure as H2A and H2B , their stabilities in chromatin are clearly very different . Most H3 and H4 are incorpo - rated into chromatin as DNA is replicated ( Fig . 7 B ) , and thereafter (cid:3) 80 % remains bound permanently ( Fig . 7 C ) . In contrast , (cid:2) 3 % H2B exchanges very rapidly ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 6 min ) , (cid:2) 40 % slowly ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) 130 min ) , and (cid:2) 53 % does not exchange ( Fig . 7 C ) . The sizes of the exchanging popula - tions suggest that they might be associated with active transcription units , their surrounding chromatin domains , and heterochromatin , respectively . The stability of the central H3 and H4 coupled with the lability of the outer H2A and H2B suggest simple ways of maintaining epige - netic marks ( Turner , 2000 ) ; modification of H3 and H4 could provide a long term “memory , ” whereas modifying the latter would provide a more transient “signal . ” We thank Y . Ishimi , S . Muller , and T . Kanda and G . Wahl for kindly sup - plying the histone H3 and H4 genes , antihistone antibodies , and H2B - GFP expression vectors , respectively . We also thank S . Cobbold , P . Lewis , C . - Y . Lin , D . Mason , and N . Takagi for their help . This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust . Submitted : 8 March 2001 Revised : 4 May 2001 Accepted : 8 May 2001 References Bednar , J . , V . M . Studitsky , S . A . Grigoryev , G . Felsenfeld , and C . L . Woodcock . 1999 . The nature of the nucleosomal barrier to transcription : direct observa - tion of paused intermediates by electron cryomicroscopy . Mol . Cell . 4 : 377 – 386 . Bell , A . C . , and G . Felsenfeld . 1999 . Stopped at the border : boundaries and insu - lators . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 9 : 191 – 198 . Belmont , A . S . , S . Dietzel , A . C . Nye , Y . G . Strukov , and T . Tumbar . 1999 . Large - scale chromatin structure and function . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 : 307 – 311 . Bonner , W . M . , R . S . Wu , H . T . Panusz , and C . Muneses . 1988 . Kinetics of accu - mulation and depletion of soluble newly synthesized histone in the recipro - cal regulation of histone and DNA synthesis . Biochemistry . 27 : 6542 – 6550 . Dey , A . , J . Ellenberg , A . Farina , A . E . Coleman , T . Maruyama , S . Sciortino , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and K . Ozato . 2000 . A bromodomain protein , MCAP , associates with mitotic chromosomes and affects G ( 2 ) - to - M transition . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 6537 – 6549 . Ellenberg , J . , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 1999 . Dynamics and mobility of nu - clear envelope proteins in interphase and mitotic cells revealed by green flu - orescent protein chimeras . Methods . 19 : 362 – 372 . Haraguchi , T . , T . Kaneda , and Y . Hiraoka . 1997 . Dynamics of chromosomes and microtubules visualized by multiple - wavelength fluorescence imaging in living mammalian cells : effects of mitotic inhibitors on cell cycle progression . Genes Cells . 2 : 369 – 380 . Hebbes , T . R . , A . L . Clayton , A . W . Thorne , and C . Crane - Robinson . 1994 . Core histone hyperacetylation co - maps with generalized DNase I sensitivity in the chicken b - globin chromosomal domain . EMBO J . 13 : 1823 – 1830 . Hendzel , M . J . , and J . R . Davie . 1990 . Nucleosomal histones of transcriptionally active / competent chromatin preferentially exchange with newly synthesized histones in quiescent chicken erythrocytes . Biochem . J . 271 : 67 – 73 . Ishimi , Y . , Y . Komamura , Z . You , and H . Kimura . 1998 . Biochemical function of mouse minichromosome maintenance 2 protein . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 8369 – 8375 . Ito , T . , T . Ikehara , T . Nakagawa , W . L . Kraus , and M . Muramatsu . 2000 . p300 - mediated acetylation facilitates the transfer of histone H2A - H2B dimers from nucleosomes to a histone chaperone . Genes Dev . 14 : 1899 – 1907 . Izumi , M . , H . Miyazawa , T . Kamakura , I . Yamaguchi , T . Endo , and F . Ha - naoka . 1991 . Blasticidin S - resistance gene ( bsr ) : a novel selectable marker for mammalian cells . Exp . Cell Res . 197 : 229 – 233 . Jackson , V . , and R . Chalkley . 1985 . Histone synthesis and deposition in the G1 and S phases of hepatoma tissue culture cells . Biochemistry . 24 : 6921 – 6930 . Jackson , V . 1990 . In vivo studies on the dynamics of histone - DNA interaction : evidence for nucleosome dissolution during replication and transcription and a low level of dissolution independent of both . Biochemistry . 29 : 719 – 731 . Kanda , T . , K . F . Sullivan , and G . M . Wahl . 1998 . Histone - GFP fusion protein en - ables sensitive analysis of chromosome dynamics in living mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 8 : 377 – 385 . Kimura , H . , N . Takizawa , N . Nozaki , and K . Sugimoto . 1995 . Molecular cloning of cDNA encoding mouse Cdc21 and CDC46 homologs and characterization of the products : physical interaction between P1 ( MCM3 ) and CDC46 pro - teins . Nucl . Acids Res . 23 : 2097 – 2104 . Kimura , H . , Y . Tao , R . G . Roeder , and P . R . Cook . 1999 . Quantitation of RNA polymerase II and its transcription factors in an HeLa cells : little soluble ho - loenzyme but significant amounts of polymerases attached to the nuclear substructure . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 : 5383 – 5392 . Kruhlak , M . J . , M . A . Lever , W . Fischle , E . Verdin , D . P . Bazett - Jones , and M . J . Hendzel . 2000 . Reduced mobility of the alternate splicing factor ( ASF ) through the nucleoplasm and steady state speckle compartments . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 41 – 51 . Lever , M . A . , J . P . H . Th’ng , X . Sun , and M . J . Hendzel . 2000 . Rapid exchange of histone H1 . 1 on chromatin in living human cells . Nature . 408 : 873 – 876 . Li , W . , S . Nagaraja , G . P . Delcuve , M . J . Hendzel , and J . R . Davie . 1993 . Effects on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001 Kimura and Cook Histone Dynamics in Living Cells 1353 of histone acetylation , ubiquitination and variants on nucleosome stability . Biochem . J . 296 : 737 – 744 . Louters , L . , and R . Chalkley . 1985 . Exchange of histones H1 , H2A , and H2B in vivo . Biochemistry . 4 : 3080 – 3085 . Luger , K . , A . W . Mäder , R . K . Richmond , D . F . Sargent , and T . J . Richmond . 1997 . Crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle at 2 . 8 Å resolution . Nature . 389 : 251 – 260 . Manders , E . M . M . , H . Kimura , and P . R . Cook . 1999 . Direct imaging of DNA in living cells reveals the dynamics of chromosome formation . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 813 – 821 . Misteli , T . 2001 . Protein dynamics : implications for nuclear architecture and gene expression . Science . 291 : 843 – 847 . Misteli , T . , A . Gunjan , R . Hock , M . Bustin , and D . T . Brown . 2000 . Dynamic binding of histone H1 to chromatin in living cells . Nature . 408 : 877 – 881 . Mizushima , S . , and S . Nagata . 1990 . pEF - BOS , a powerful mammalian expres - sion vector . Nucleic Acids Res . 18 : 5322 . Nguyen V . T . , F . Giannoni , M . F . Dubois , S . J . Seo , M . Vigneron , C . Kedinger , and O . Bensaude . 1996 . In vivo degradation of RNA polymerase II largest subunit triggered by alpha - amanitin . Nucl . Acids Res . 24 : 2924 – 2929 . O’Keefe , R . T . , S . C . Henderson , and D . L . Spector . 1992 . Dynamic organization of DNA replication in mammalian cell nuclei : spatially and temporally de - fined replication of chromosome - specific alpha - satellite DNA sequences . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 1095 – 1110 . O’Neill , L . P . , A . M . Keohane , J . S . Lavender , V . McCabe , E . Heard , P . Avner , N . Brockdorff , and B . M . Turner . 1999 . A developmental switch in H4 acety - lation upstream of Xist plays a role in X chromosome inactivation . EMBO J . 18 : 2897 – 2907 . Orphanides , G . , and D . Reinberg . 2000 . RNA polymerase II elongation through chromatin . Nature . 407 : 471 – 475 . Osley , M . A . 1991 . The regulation of histone synthesis in the cell cycle . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 60 : 827 – 861 . Perche , P . - Y . , C . Vourc’h , L . Konecny , C . Souchier , M . Robert - Nicoud , S . Dim - itrov , and S . Khochbin . 2000 . Higher concentrations of histone macroH2A in the Barr body are correlated with higher nucleosome density . Curr . Biol . 10 : 1531 – 1534 . Perry , M . , and R . Chalkley . 1982 . Histone acetylation increases the solubility of chromatin and occurs sequentially over most of the chromatin . A novel model for the biological role of histone acetylation . J . Biol . Chem . 257 : 7336 – 7347 . Perry , C . A . , C . A . Dadd , C . D . Allis , and A . T . Annunziato . 1993 . Analysis of nu - cleosome assembly and histone exchange using antibodies specific for acety - lated H4 . Biochemistry . 32 : 13605 – 13614 . Peterson , C . L . , and J . L . Workman . 2000 . Promoter targeting and chromatin re - modeling by the SWI / SNF complex . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 10 : 187 – 192 . Phair , R . D . , and T . Misteli . 2000 . High mobility of proteins in the mammalian cell nucleus . Nature . 404 : 604 – 609 . Ridgway , P . , and G . Almouzni . 2000 . CAF - 1 and the inheritance of chromatin states : at the crossroads of DNA replication and repair . J . Cell Sci . 133 : 2647 – 2658 . Sathyanarayana , U . G . , L . A . Freeman . , M . - S . Lee , and W . T . Garrard . 1999 . RNA polymerase - specific nucleosome disruption by transcription in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 16431 – 16436 . Schmidt - Zachmann , M . S . , C . Dargemont , L . C . Kuhn , and E . A . Nigg . 1993 . Nu - clear export of proteins : the role of nuclear retention . Cell . 74 : 493 – 504 . Sehgal , P . B . , J . E . Darnell , and I . Tamm . 1976 . The inhibition by DRB ( 5 , 6 - dichloro - 1 - beta - D - ribofuranosylbenzimidazole ) of hnRNA and mRNA pro - duction in HeLa cells . Cell . 9 : 473 – 480 . Stemmer , C . , J . - P . Briand , and S . Muller . 1997 . Mapping of linear histone re - gions exposed at the surface of the nucleosome in solution . J . Mol . Biol . 273 : 52 – 60 . Turner , B . M . 1991 . Histone acetylation and control of gene expression . J . Cell Sci . 99 : 13 – 20 . Turner , B . M . 2000 . Histone acetylation and epigenetic code . BioEssays . 22 : 836 – 845 . van - Holde , K . E . , D . E . Lohr , and C . Robert . 1992 . What happens to nucleo - somes during transcription ? J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 2837 – 2840 . Verreault , A . 2000 . De novo nucleosome assembly : new pieces in old puzzle . Genes Dev . 14 : 1430 – 1438 . Wang , T . S . 1991 . Eukaryotic DNA polymerases . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 60 : 513 – 552 . White , J . , and E . Stelzer . 1999 . Photobleaching GFP reveals protein dynamics inside live cells . Trends Cell Biol . 9 : 61 – 65 . Wolffe , A . P . , and J . J . Hayes . 1999 . Chromatin disruption and modification . Nucl . Acids Res . 27 : 711 – 720 . Workman , J . L . , and R . E . Kingston . 1998 . Alteration of nucleosome structure as a mechanism of transcriptional regulation . Ann . Rev . Biochem . 67 : 545 – 579 . Wyrick , J . J . , F . C . P . Hostege , E . G . Jennings , H . C . Causton , D . Shore , M . Grun - stein , E . S . Lander , and R . A . Young . 1999 . Chromosomal landscape of nu - cleosome - dependent gene expression and silencing in yeast . Nature . 402 : 418 – 421 . on M a y 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published June 18 , 2001