a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0206467v1 [ c ond - m a t . s t a t - m ec h ] 24 J un 2002 Modern architecture of random graphs : Constructions and correlations S . N . Dorogovtsev , 1 , 2 , ∗ J . F . F . Mendes , 1 , † and A . N . Samukhin 1 , 2 , ‡ 1 Departamento de F´ısica and Centro de F´ısica do Porto , Faculdade de Ciˆencias , Universidade do Porto Rua do Campo Alegre 687 , 4169 - 007 Porto , Portugal 2 A . F . Ioﬀe Physico - Technical Institute , 194021 St . Petersburg , Russia 1 . Basic constructions . 2 . Equilibrium and nonequilibrium networks . 3 . Equilibrium uncorre - lated networks . 4 . Nonequilibrium nongrowing scale - free nets . 5 . Types of correlations . 6 . When pair correlations are important . 7 . When loops are important . 8 . Pair degree - degree correlations in growing networks . 9 . How to construct an equilibrium net with given degree - degree correla - tions . 10 . How to construct a growing scale - free net with a given clustering ( towards a real - space renormalization group for networks ) . ( a talk given at XVIII Sitges Conference ) I . BASIC CONSTRUCTIONS The basis of network science are construction proce - dures . There are four main constructions of networks ( and a large number of their versions and variations ) : ( 1 ) Classical random graphs of Erd¨os and R´enyi [ 1 ] ( ∼ 1960 ) . In general terms , these are graphs with a ﬁxed number of vertices , which are connected , at ran - dom , by edges . Classical random graphs have a Poisson degree distribution . ( 2 ) The random graphs with a given degree distribution , or , more rigorously , the labeled random graphs with a given degree sequence , which are also called the conﬁguration model , see a long list of references [ 2 ] starting from 1972 ( ! ) . In general terms , these are graphs , maximum random under the constraint that their degree dis - tribution is a given function . When this function is Poisson , ( 2 ) is reduced to ( 1 ) . ( 3 ) Small - world networks which were introduced by Watts and Strogatz [ 3 ] ( 1998 ) . In general terms , this is the superposition of reg - ular lattices and the classical random graphs . The small - world networks combine the compactness of the classical random graphs and the strong clus - tering of many regular lattices . This construction realize a simple way of the introduction of the par - ticular type of correlations ( the clustering ) in net - works . ( 4 ) Networks , growing under the mechanism of prefer - ential linking which were introduced by Barab´asi and Albert [ 4 ] ( 1999 ) . Into this class of constructions , we include much more general models of networks , evolving by the addition of vertices and edges , than the original Barab´asi - Albert model . For example , random link - ing is a particular case of the preferential linking . II . EQUILIBRIUM AND NONEQUILIBRIUM NETWORKS As the objects of statistical physics , networks can be equilibrium ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) ←→ nonequilibrium ( 4 ) . The second division is according to the form of degree distributions : rapidly decreasing degree distributions ←→ fat - tailed degree distributions ( with divergent higher moments ) . The third division is into uncorrelated ( 1 , 2 ) ←→ correlated ( 3 , 4 ) networks . Uncorrelated random graphs with a given degree dis - tribution ( 2 ) have a tree - like ( locally ) structure . The structure of these networks , from the point of view of a vertex , belonging to a “giant connected component” , is schematically shown in Fig . 1 . Notice that loops are present only at a large scale . FIG . 1 . 1 III . EQUILIBRIUM UNCORRELATED NETWORKS A . Conﬁguration construction In statistical mechanics a random network is a statistical ensemble of graphs . That is , what is observed are members of statistical en - sembles , or , which is the same , their particular realiza - tions . A random graph with a given degree distribution ( the conﬁguration model ( 2 ) ) is a statistical ensemble , which includes all possible networks with a given degree dis - tribution and given numbers of vertices N and edges L . Each member of the ensemble is taken with an equal sta - tistical weight . In fact , these are maximum random graphs under the constraint that their degree distributions are given func - tions . To construct a large typical realization of this graph , one can use the following procedure ( see Fig . 2 ) : ( i ) Prepare N vertices , i = 1 , . . . , N . ( ii ) Attach to each vertex k i ends of edges taken from the given distribution P ( k ) . ( iii ) Connect at random ends of pairs of quills of the resulting “family of hedgehogs” . a ) b ) 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 FIG . 2 . B . Dynamical construction These graphs can be also constructed dynamically by many ways ( see Refs . [ 5 – 7 ] ) . For example , let N and L be ﬁxed . • At each time step , rewire a randomly chosen end of a randomly chosen edge to a preferentially chosen vertex : the probability that the edge end becomes attached to a vertex of degree k is proportional to a function f ( k ) of this degree . In the long - time limit , the network will have a stationary degree distribution which is determined by the form of f ( k ) . For example , if f ( k ) ∝ k + 1 − γ for k → ∞ , the network is scale - free at some critical value of the mean degree , k c , P c ( k ) ∝ k − γ ( see Fig . 3 ) . For smaller k , this power law has a size - independent cut - oﬀ . For k > k c , a ﬁnite fraction of edges is condensed on a single ( or a few ) vertices , and the rest vertices have the same degree distribution as at the critical point [ 5 , 6 , 8 ] . k CONDENSED PHASE P c ( k ) & N ( k − k c ) condensedona“single” vertex k = h f ( k ) i : k c P c ( k ) ∝ k − γ NORMAL PHASE exponentialsize - independent cutoﬀ of P c ( k ) 0 − ✻ FIG . 3 . IV . NONEQUILIBRIUM NONGROWING SCALE - FREE NETS Even networks with a constant number of vertices and edges may be nonequilibrium and may be “scale - free” . See the following illustrative example of a network with ﬁnite numbers of vertices N and edges L , k = 2 L / N ( Fig . 4 ) . ( i ) At each time step choose , at random , a vertex . ( ii ) Rewire all the edge ends from this vertex to pref - erentially chosen vertices . ( iii ) For each of these ends , the probability that it be - comes attached to a vertex of degree k is propor - tional to k + A . The resulting network ( in the long - time limit ) is scale free : P ( k ) ∝ k − γ with exponent γ = 2 + A / k . 2 chosen vertices preferentially chosen vertex randomly FIG . 4 . Another example is : ( i ) At each time step choose , at random , a vertex . ( ii ) Rewire all the edge ends from this vertex to ver - tices , which are chosen according to the following rule : ( a ) with probability p , an edge end is rewired to a randomly chosen vertex , ( b ) with probability 1 − p , an edge end is rewired to a vertex chosen with preference , proportional to its degree k . The resulting network ( in the long - time limit ) is scale free : P ( k ) ∝ k − γ with exponent γ = 2 + p / ( 1 − p ) . V . TYPES OF CORRELATIONS The very particular kinds of correlations are : ( a ) Correlations of the degrees of nearest - neighbor ver - tices . This means that the joint degree - degree dis - tribution of end vertices of edges does not factor : P ( k , k ′ ) 6 = kP ( k ) k ′ P ( k ′ ) [ P kP ( k ) ] 2 . ( 1 ) ( b ) Loops , and so , in particular , clustering , since the clustering , in general terms , is the concentration of loops of length three in a network . In uncorrelated networks , loops and clustering are only size eﬀects . The growth of a network produces a wide spectrum of correlations which cannot be reduced to only ( a ) and ( b ) . VI . WHEN PAIR CORRELATIONS ARE IMPORTANT For example , • In uncorrelated scale - free equilibrium networks with γ ≤ 3 , an average shortest - path length ℓ ( N ) grows with a number of vertices N slower than N ( a super - small - world eﬀect [ 9 ] ) . ←→ • On the other hand , as a rule , pair correlations in real nets are such that the average degree of the nearest neighbors of a vertex is a decreasing func - tion k nn ( k ) of its degree k . In such a situation , a standard relation ℓ ∼ ln N / ln k is valid . In a number of real nets , ℓ ( N ) is nearly constant in a wide range of variation of N ( see , e . g . , networks of metabolic reactions [ 10 ] ) . The reason for this constancy is not “the super - small - world eﬀect” but the increase of k ( N ) with N : these nets become more “dense” as they grow . Notice that in all the real scale - free nets , the ratio ℓ real / ( ln N / ln k ) is in a surprisingly narrow range be - tween 1 / 2 and 2 . VII . WHEN LOOPS ARE IMPORTANT In statistical physics , and so in networks , loops are re - sponsible for ﬂuctuation phenomena in a critical region . VIII . PAIR DEGREE - DEGREE CORRELATIONS IN GROWING NETWORKS Pair degree - degree correlations is the generic property of growing networks . For example , consider a scale - free citation graph . By deﬁnition , a citation graph is a growing network , in which new connections between already existing vertices are im - possible : new edges connect new and old vertices . Let γ < 3 . Then , the asymptotic expression for the joint degree - degree distribution [ 11 ] for nearest neighbor vertices is P ( k , k ′ ) k ≫ k ′ ≫ 1 ∝ k − ( γ − 1 ) k ′− 2 . ( 2 ) This gives the following form of the average degree of the nearest neighbors of a vertex as a function k nn ( k ) of its degree k ( see Fig . 5 ) : • at small enough k , k nn ( k ) ∝ k − ( 3 − γ ) ; • at larger k , k nn logarithmically depends on k . 3 ln < k > nn ln k FIG . 5 . So , in this respect , the case γ = 3 , that is , the Barab´asi - Albert model , is exceptional : in this event , the pair correlations are small . When γ of a citation graph is greater than 3 , the slope of the curve in Fig . 5 becomes positive . Even if the attaching is random ( the net is exponential ) the strong pair correlations are present : for the highest degree k , k nn ( k ) ∼ k , and k nn ( 1 ) = k . One can easily change pair correlations by changing , e . g . , an additional attractiveness A in the preference function k + A . One can also regulate correlations by introducing , in addition , a new channel of linking of al - ready existing edges . So , the slope of the dependence k nn ( k ) strongly depends on a model . One may say , the smallness of pair correlations in grow - ing networks is a rare event and not a standard situation . The standard mechanisms of the network growth neces - sarily produce these correlations . IX . HOW TO CONSTRUCT AN EQUILIBRIUM NET WITH GIVEN DEGREE - DEGREE CORRELATIONS A . Conﬁguration construction In the spirit of the conﬁguration model , one can con - struct the equilibrium net with a given pair degree - degree P ( k , k ′ ) and a given number N of vertices as a statistical ensemble . Members of this statistical ensemble are all networks with a given P ( k , k ′ ) . Each member is taken with an equal statistical weight . These are networks , maximum random under the con - straint that their pair degree - degree distribution is equal to a given P ( k , k ′ ) [ 12 ] . To construct a large typical realization of this graph for large N , one can use the following way . Notice that in these networks , the ordinary degree dis - tribution follows from the degree - degree distribution : X k P ( k , k ′ ) = kP ( k ) P k kP ( k ) . ( 3 ) This relation gives the function P ( k ) up to a constant factor , which , in turn , can be obtained from the normal - ization condition P k P ( k ) = 1 . Thus we obtain k =  X k , k ′ P ( k , k ′ ) / k   − 1 , ( 4 ) and so the total number of edges is known , L = kN / 2 . So , we have N and L ﬁxed and can formulate the con - struction procedure as it follows : ( i ) Using the given P ( k , k ′ ) ﬁnd the total number of edges , L . ( ii ) Create the inﬁnite number L of pairs of integers ( k , k ′ ) distributed as P ( k , k ′ ) . These pairs play the role of L edges with ends of degrees k and k ′ . ( iii ) Select , at random , groups of ends of degree k , each one consisting of k ends . Tie them in bunches , each of k tails . These bunches are vertices of degree k . One can check that this procedures is possible in the thermodynamic limit , and it generates tree - like ( locally ) graphs with the low number of loops like in uncorrelated networks ( see Fig . 1 ) . B . Dynamical construction An equilibrium random graph with pair degree - degree correlations of nearest neighbor vertices also may be con - structed dynamically . Let us introduce a new category , pair preference and a pair preference function , f ( k , k ′ ) . This is a more general notion than a one - vertex preference , where the probabil - ity that the edge becomes attached , f ( k ) , depends only on the degree of a vertex . Indeed , an edge has not one but two ends . In general , they must become attached not to one but to two vertices , and so it is a combination of two degrees that is natural form of preference . Let N and L be ﬁxed . • At each time step , we choose , at random , an edge and remove it to a pair of vertices of degrees k and k ′ , which is chosen with probability , proportional to a given function f ( k , k ′ ) ( see Fig . 6 ) . At long times , the network approaches a state with a stationary pair degree - degree degree distribution of near - est neighbor vertices , P ( k , k ′ ) , which is determined by the form of f ( k , k ′ ) . ( For growing networks , a similar procedure was dis - cussed in the talk of L . Pietronero at this conference . ) For a related construction procedure , see Ref . [ 13 ] . 4 edge between preferentially chosen vertices chosen edge randomly FIG . 6 . A randomly chosen edge become removed to a pair of vertices of degrees k and k ′ , which is chosen with probability , proportional to a preference function f ( k , k ′ ) . X . HOW TO CONSTRUCT A GROWING SCALE - FREE NET WITH A GIVEN CLUSTERING ( TOWARDS A REAL - SPACE RENORMALIZATION GROUP FOR NETWORKS ) Here we present a simple way to construct random growing correlated clustered , scale - free , etc . networks . The procedure is based on the stochastic transformation of each edge of a network at each step of the evolution . Numerous versions of this process are possible . A sim - ple particular case is shown in Fig . 7 ( a ) . With some probabilities , a vertex is transformed to distinct conﬁgu - rations of edges and vertices . A C B A C B p 1−p p p p a ) b ) c ) 1 1 FIG . 7 . If p = 1 , we have a deterministic growing graph [ 14 ] . Another representation of Fig . 7 ( a ) is given by Fig . 7 ( b ) . For p → 0 but p 6 = 0 , this construction coincide with a known random network , growing by attaching of new vertices to randomly chosen edges . Notice that the clustering coeﬃcients of these nets are ﬁnite in the large network limit . Another possible construction , shown in Fig . 7 ( c ) , co - incides with the Barab´asi - Albert model in the case p → 0 but p 6 = 0 . We show only particular conﬁgurations on the left - hand parts of Fig . 7 . In general , they can be of a very general form ( see Fig . 8 ( a ) ) , and so , they can be even trees ( Fig . 8 ( b ) ) [ 15 ] . Notice , that we used only the transformations that produce networks with the small - world eﬀect and fat - tailed degree distributions ( non - fractals : ℓ ( N ) ∝ ln N grows slower than any power of N ) . Compare them , e . g . , with contrasting fractal trees [ 16 ] . b ) a ) FIG . 8 . In fact , the presented transformations are very similar to those which are used in a standard real space renormal - ization group for disordered lattice models . This is also called “positional renormalization group” . The technique of the real space renormalization group is well developed for disordered lattices . So , its application to these grow - ing random networks is a standard routine . Note that all the constructions in this talk are analyt - ically treatable . Thus , correlations in networks are natural . ∗ Electronic address : sdorogov @ fc . up . pt † Electronic address : jfmendes @ fc . up . pt ‡ Electronic address : samukhin @ fc . up . pt [ 1 ] P . Erd¨os and A . R´enyi , Publications Mathematicae 6 , 290 ( 1959 ) ; Publ . Math . Inst . Hung . Acad . Sci . 5 , 17 ( 1960 ) . [ 2 ] A . Bekessy , P . Bekessy , and J . Komlos , Stud . Sci . Math . Hungar . 7 , 343 ( 1972 ) ; E . A . Bender and E . R . Canﬁeld , J . Combinatorial Theory A 24 , 296 ( 1978 ) ; B . Ballob´as , 5 Eur . J . Comb . 1 , 311 ( 1980 ) ; N . C . Wormald , J . Combi - natorial Theory B 31 , 156 , 168 ( 1981 ) ; M . Molloy and B . Reed , Random Structures and Algorithms 6 , 161 ( 1995 ) . [ 3 ] D . J . Watts and S . H . Strogatz , Nature 393 , 440 ( 1998 ) . [ 4 ] A . - L . Barab´asi and R . Albert , Science 286 , 509 ( 1999 ) ; R . Albert and A . - L . Barab´asi , Rev . Mod . Phys . 74 , 47 ( 2002 ) . [ 5 ] Z . Burda , J . D . Correia , and A . Krzywicki , Phys . Rev . E 64 , 046118 ( 2001 ) . [ 6 ] S . N . Dorogovtsev , J . F . F . Mendes , and A . N . Samukhin , cond - mat / 0204111 . [ 7 ] M . Bauer and D . Bernard , cond - mat / 0206150 . [ 8 ] Z . Burda , D . Johnston , J . Jurkiewicz , M . Kaminski , M . A . Nowak , G . Papp , and I . Zahed , Phys . Rev . E 65 , 026102 ( 2002 ) . [ 9 ] R . Cohen and S . Havlin , cond - mat / 0205476 ; B . Bollob´as and O . Riordan , preprint . [ 10 ] H . Jeong , S . P . Mason , A . - L . Barab´asi , and Z . N . Oltvai , Nature , 411 , 41 ( 2001 ) . [ 11 ] P . L . Krapivsky and S . Redner , Phys . Rev . E 63 , 066123 ( 2001 ) . [ 12 ] M . E . J . Newman , Assortative mixing in networks , cond - mat / 0205405 . [ 13 ] J . Berg and M . L¨assig , cond - mat / 0205589 . [ 14 ] S . N . Dorogovtsev and J . F . F . Mendes , Adv . Phys . 51 , 1079 ( 2002 ) ; S . N . Dorogovtsev , A . V . Golt - sev , and J . F . F . Mendes , cond - mat / 0112143 . [ 15 ] S . Jung , S . Kim , and B . Kahng , Phys . Rev . E 65 , 056101 ( 2002 ) . [ 16 ] N . Vandewalle and M . Ausloos , Phys . Rev . E 55 , 94 ( 1997 ) . 6