 Chapter 2 . 15 Designing and Reusing Learning Objects to Streamline WBI Development Pam T . Northrup University of West Florida , USA Karen L . Rasmussen University of West Florida , USA David B . Dawson University of West Florida , USA Copyright © 2008 , IGI Global , distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . ABSTRACT Reusable Learning Objects ( RLOs ) and reusable information objects ( RIOs ) are tools that facili - tate quick , systematic , and effective design and development of Web - based instruction . Learning objects form the basis of an online professional development program targeted toward teachers who must learn and implement new strategies and approaches for teaching in a convenient and flexible environment . Using learning objects , fol - lowing the Cisco model , to develop instructional components for repurposing provides designers with the flexibility to meet different goals and instructional needs of a variety of education and training settings . InTRoduCTIon In the past few years , the World Wide Web has emerged as a primary technology - based delivery environment affecting the way people commu - nicate and do business ; it is poised to create a paradigm shift in the way people learn ( Wiley , 2001 ) . With this trend , there are new technical and instructional demands being placed on in - structional designers to get materials to the Web quickly , provide just - in - time instruction , and make modifications to instructional materials on the fly . These demands have forced instructional designers to re - examine the work processes of designing and developing high - quality instruc - tional materials . Current instructional design models have been touted as ‘slow and clumsy’ resulting in instruction that takes too long to get to market ( Gordon & Zemke , 2001 ) . Thirty years of evidence supports  Designing and Reusing Learning Objects to Streamline WBI Development a systems approach that produces solid instruc - tional products and , in fact , the proposition that students do learn as a result of the instruction . Although the intent of design models is to serve as a heuristic for targeting specific instructional goals to solve organizational performance prob - lems , many designers following the ISD process re - invent the wheel every time new instruction is developed . In one branch of the military , an analysis of courses revealed that there were over 150 courses on ‘pumps’ and new ones were con - tinuing to be developed . In many organizations , this re - design and re - development continues to occur . ( Imagine how many courses on customer service exist ! ) Rather than re - developing the same course over and over again , it is time to flatten the knowledge silos , see what else is out there , and parcel out components of various types of instruction that can be re - purposed for differing goals and instructional needs . In the 21 st century , with the rapid advances in information exchange and mass data storage , these knowledge silos no longer have to exist . In the past five years , several technological developments have emerged that assist design - ers in getting content out to end users as quickly as possible . Tools such as learning management systems , content management systems , and task management systems now exist . These systems provide templates that sit on top of high - end databases enabling designers and non - designers to enter content into databases that can then be filtered back into their instructional lessons . The value of directly inputting content into databases lies in the designers’ flexibility to locate specific resources to use and re - use for multiple purposes . The problem is that unless data input follows a common standard , it may not be able to be re - purposed and shared with others . In the late 1990s , the Advanced Distributed Learning movement began as an approach to al - low the armed services to create and share their instructional resources rather than to replicate content on similar topics across and even within the branches of the military . This movement has resulted in the development of learning object systems that , to date , have focused on techno - logical attributes , metadata standards , and system specifications that define levels of granularity and interoperability ( Singh , 2000 ) . Out of this work , SCORM - compliant standards were developed and are evident in many software applications on the market today . With research that provides system specifica - tions and standards , it is now time to consider the implications for instructional designers who will be designing and re - using learning objects . This chapter will provide a foundation for the design of Reusable Learning Objects through discussion of a project to design reusable online professional development in a partnership between the University of West Florida ( UWF ) and Santa Rosa County School District . Teachers across the State of Florida are being held accountable for student progress at unprecedented levels through a student assessment called the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test ( FCAT ) . Teach - ers are being required to learn new strategies and approaches for teaching and learning in Reading , Math , and Science without being provided time outside of the classroom during the school day for professional development . In addition , teachers are at various levels of need and desire for pro - fessional development opportunities . The school district is seeking ways to provide professional development to teachers that is convenient and flexible for their busy schedules . In partnership with researchers from UWF , a series of Online Professional Development ( OPD ) courses were developed as learning objects that could be used and reused , based on the professional development needs of the teacher . WhAT ARe leARnIng oBjeCTS ? The Learning Objects Standards Committee has formulated a definition of learning objects that is 9 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / designing - reusing - learning - objects - streamline / 18201 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , InfoSci - Social Technologies , Business - Technology - Solution , Communications , Social Science , and Healthcare , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Media and Communications , Contemporary Research in Information Science and Technology , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content What We Know About Spreadsheet Errors Raymond R . Panko ( 1998 ) . Journal of End User Computing ( pp . 15 - 21 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / know - spreadsheet - errors / 55750 ? camid = 4v1a Probes as a People - Oriented Method Connor Graham and Mark Rouncefield ( 2011 ) . International Journal of People - Oriented Programming ( pp . 25 - 52 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / probes - people - oriented - method / 53808 ? camid = 4v1a Studying the Translations of NHSnet Edgar A . Whitley and Athanasia Pouloudi ( 2002 ) . Advanced Topics in End User Computing , Volume 1 ( pp . 158 - 176 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / studying - translations - nhsnet / 4430 ? camid = 4v1a The Use of an Alternative Source of Expertise for the Development of Microcomputer Expert Systems Gary Grudnitski and Robert L . Black ( 1990 ) . Journal of Microcomputer Systems Management ( pp . 2 - 14 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / use - alternative - source - expertise - development / 55656 ? camid = 4v1a