Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 64 ( 2006 ) 962 – 973 Are physically embodied social agents better than disembodied social agents ? : The effects of physical embodiment , tactile interaction , and people’s loneliness in human – robot interaction Kwan Min Lee a , (cid:1) , Younbo Jung a , Jaywoo Kim b , Sang Ryong Kim b a Annenberg School for Communication , University of Southern California , 3502 Watt Way , Los Angeles , CA 90089 - 0281 , USA b Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology ( SAIT ) , San 14 - 1 , Nongseo - ri , Giheung - eup , Yongin - si , Gyeonggi - do , S . Korea Received 5 January 2005 ; received in revised form 30 April 2006 ; accepted 1 May 2006 Communicated by S . Brave Available online 16 June 2006 Abstract Two experiments were conducted to investigate the effects of physical embodiment in human – agent interaction . Experiment 1 ( N ¼ 32 ) shows positive effects of physical embodiment on the feeling of an agent’s social presence , the evaluation of the agent , the assessment of public evaluation of the agent , and the evaluation of the interaction with the agent . A path analysis reveals that the feeling of the agent’s social presence mediates the participants’ evaluation of the social agent . Experiment 2 ( N ¼ 32 ) shows that physical embodiment with restricted tactile interaction causes null or even negative effects in human – agent interaction . In addition , Experiment 2 indicates that lonely people feel higher social presence of social agents , and provide more positive social responses to social agents than non - lonely people . The importance of physical embodiment and tactile communication in human – agent interaction and the diverse role of social robots , especially for the lonely population , are discussed . r 2006 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : Physical embodiment ; Human – robot interaction ; Presence ; Social presence ; Social agents ; Computers are social actors ( CASA ) ; Social robots ; Human – agent interaction ; Tactile communication ; Loneliness 1 . Introduction Social robots are a new type of robot whose major purpose is to interact with humans in socially meaningful ways ( Breazeal , 2002 ; Fong et al . , 2003 ; Lee et al . , 2004 ) . In other words , social robots are designed to evoke mean - ingful social interaction with their users . For example , David , in the movie ‘‘A . I . ’’ directed by Steven Spielberg , is a social robot whose main purpose is to share emotional bonding ( especially the feeling of love ) with human beings . In reality we have not seen such a sophisticated social robot as David . Nevertheless , the movie successfully informs the public of the possibility that social robots could be as successful social actors as human beings . Given the above deﬁnition , social robots , unlike utility robots , do not necessarily need to have physical embodi - ment to accomplish their purpose . Physical embodiment is a mandatory requirement for other types of robots , because they are built to accomplish labor - intensive physical work , ranging from household chores ( e . g . , cleaning , mowing , cooking ) to industrial manufacturing ( e . g . , product assembly and delivery ) and military opera - tions ( e . g . , tele - surveillance , bombing and destroying ) . For social robots , however , physical embodiment may not be mandatory , because their major purpose—social interac - tion—is not directly related to physical activities per se ; social interaction can be accomplished in both embodied and disembodied ways . Therefore , one of the most fundamental questions about social robots is whether or not there is added value of ARTICLE IN PRESS www . elsevier . com / locate / ijhcs 1071 - 5819 / $ - see front matter r 2006 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2006 . 05 . 002 (cid:1) Corresponding author . Tel . : + 12137403935 ; fax : + 12137400014 . E - mail addresses : kwanminL @ usc . edu ( K . M . Lee ) , younboju @ usc . edu ( Y . Jung ) , jaywoo @ sait . samsung . co . kr ( J . Kim ) , srkim @ sait . samsung . co . kr ( S . R . Kim ) . physical embodiment for successful social interaction between humans and social agents . This is a critical question to industry practitioners , due to the high costs for manufacturing physically embodied robots , not to mention the technical difﬁculties . This is theoretically important also , because it tackles one of the core issues in human – agent interaction—the role of physical embodi - ment in social interaction between humans and agents ( see Dautenhahn , 1997 ) . Despite the practical and theoretical importance of physical embodiment in human – agent interaction , there are very limited empirical studies on this issue . In the current study , we directly address this issue with two experiments . 2 . Literature review 2 . 1 . Physical embodiment Embodiment is a loaded term and has various meanings in philosophy , phenomenology , psychology , engineering , and everyday life . The explication of this concept is beyond the scope of the current paper . Instead , we are focusing on the widely accepted meaning of embodiment in the ﬁelds of Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AI ) and Robotics—physical instan - tiation , or more simply , bodily presence ( see Ziemke , 2001 for detailed discussion about ﬁve different notions of embodiment ) . Embodied agents or systems need to have embedded sensors and motors—sensorimotor embodi - ment—so that they can physically connect with their environment ( Brooks , 2002 ) . A physically embodied robot , thus , should have both an actual physical shape and embedded sensors and motors . Given the above deﬁnition , what will be the effects of an agent’s physical embodiment—more speciﬁcally bodily presence—in human – agent interaction ? One possible posi - tive effect of an agent’s physical embodiment is that physical embodiment may result in better affordance , which may lead to less frustration for people . Affordance refers to fundamental properties of a device that deter - mines its way of use ( Norman , 1988 ) . For example , a door bar provides a strong clue for pushing to open the door . Similarly , a physically embodied agent with its hands raised toward its users may provide a clue for a proper social interaction ( e . g . , hand - shaking , high - ﬁve ) . In fact , it is well known among the robotics community that the form and structure of a robot can easily establish some sort of social expectations from its users ( Fong et al . , 2003 ) . Therefore , a physically embodied agent may facilitate better social interaction with its users by providing more affordance for proper social interaction than a disembo - died agent may . Bartneck ( 2002 ) conducted an empirical study to examine the effects of embodiment of an emotional robot , eMuu . Although he did not ﬁnd the effect of embodiment on people’s enjoyment of the interaction due to the lack of actual physical interaction during the experiment , he found a signiﬁcant social facilitation effect in his study . Speciﬁ - cally , participants who engaged in a special form of social interaction—negotiation—spent signiﬁcantly more effort and received higher scores when they interacted with an actual eMuu—a physically embodied agent—than when they interacted with a screen character version of eMuu—a disembodied agent . The result clearly indicates that physical embodiment facilitates social interaction . We believe that the social facilitation effect comes from increased social presence ( see the next section for a detailed discussion on the concept of social presence in human – agent interaction ) that might be made possible by physical embodiment . Based on the above discussion , we set the following hypotheses : H1 - 1 . People will evaluate a physically embodied agent—a social robot—more positively than a disembodied agent—a screen character version of the social robot . H1 - 2 . People will be more socially attracted to a physically embodied agent—a social robot—than a disembodied agent—a screen character version of the social robot . H1 - 3 . People will evaluate their interaction with a physi - cally embodied agent—a social robot—more positively than their interaction with a disembodied agent—a screen character version of the social robot . One’s own personal evaluation of an agent and one’s assessment of other people’s evaluation of the agent might differ due to the third - person effects ( see Perloff , 1993 ) . Thus , we set a separate hypothesis on participants’ assessments of other people’s evaluation of the agent : H1 - 4 . People will assess that other people will evaluate a physically embodied agent—a social robot—more posi - tively than a disembodied agent—a screen character version of the social robot . 2 . 2 . Social presence Researchers have realized that the feeling of presence— the perceptual illusion of non - mediation ( Lombard et al . , 2000 ) —lies at the heart of almost all mediated experiences , from reading a novel to interacting with computers ( Lee , 2004a ) . According to Lee ( 2004a ) , there are three types of presence—physical , social , and self presence . Physical presence is the feeling that virtual objects are real . Physical presence occurs when technology users do not notice either the para - authentic nature of mediated objects ( or environ - ments ) or the artiﬁcial nature of simulated objects ( or environments ) . For example , when users of a virtual reality system try to avoid virtual rocks moving toward them , they are experiencing a strong sense of physical presence of the rocks . That is , they respond to the virtual rocks as if those were real ones , when they feel a strong sense of physical presence . Social presence , in short , is a mental simulation of other intelligences ( Biocca , 1997 ) . Successful simulation of other intelligences occurs when technology users do not notice either the artiﬁciality or para - authenticity of ARTICLE IN PRESS K . M . Lee et al . / Int . J . Human - Computer Studies 64 ( 2006 ) 962 – 973 963