ARTICLE IN PRESS JID : FINEC [ m3Gdc ; January 23 , 2018 ; 9 : 4 ] Journal of Financial Economics 0 0 0 ( 2018 ) 1 – 21 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Financial Economics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jfec Management sub - advising in the mutual fund industry (cid:2) David Moreno a , Rosa Rodríguez a , Rafael Zambrana b , ∗ a Universidad Carlos III de Madrid - Department of Business Administration , C / Madrid , 126 – 28903 Getafe ( Madrid ) , Spain b Nova School of Business and Economics , Campus de Campolide , 1099 - 032 , Lisboa , Portugal . a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 28 September 2015 Revised 16 January 2017 Accepted 13 February 2017 Available online xxx JEL classiﬁcation : G11 G20 L24 M55 Keywords : Outsourcing Sub - advisor Mutual funds Management company Incentive contracts Fund performance Market share Agency issue a b s t r a c t This is a study of how contractual mechanisms can mitigate agency conﬂicts in sub - advised mutual funds . Sub - advising contracts allow fund families to expand their product offerings to include new investment styles and thereby gain market share . We show that costly contractual arrangements , such as co - branding , multi - advising , and performance - based compensation , can mitigate agency conﬂicts in outsourcing and protect investors from potential underperformance . Fund families will ﬁnd it cost - effective to implement such incentive mechanisms only when investors are sophisticated in assessing manager skill . The ﬁndings help to explain why a large percentage of fund families outsource their funds to advisory ﬁrms . © 2018 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . (cid:2) We are grateful to Diane Del Guercio , Egemen Genc , and Hai Tran for providing us with the data on side - by - side management . We thank Car - los Bellon , Claudia Custodio , Miguel Ferreira , Jose - Miguel Gaspar , Javier Gil - Bazo , Alexander Kempf , Jose Maria Marin , Melissa Prado , Pablo Ruiz - Verdu , David Solomon , Helena Veiga , Fernando Zapatero and participants at the Finance Forum meetings , UC3M , University of Zaragoza , Univer - sity CEU , Paris Dauphine University , ESSEC , ITAM , Nova Business School , MFA , FMA , and EFMA meetings for thoughtful comments . The authors are also grateful to Bill Schwert ( the editor ) and Roger M . Edelen ( ref - eree ) for their help in improving the manuscript through a most con - structive review process . Rafael Zambrana acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the FCT Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia under the project UID / ECO / 00124 / 2013 and POR Lisboa ( LISBOA - 01 - 0145 - FEDER - 007722 ) . David Moreno and Rosa Rodríguez thank ﬁnancial support from Ministe - rio de Economía , Industria y Competitividad ( through projects ECO2016 - 77807 - P and ECO2015 - 67035 - P ) , WRDS - UC3M ( FEDER UNCC315 - EE - 3636 ) , CAM grant S2015 / HUM - 3353 ( EARLYFIN - CM ) and Bank of Spain ( grant PR71 / 15 - 20229 ) . ∗ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : jdmoreno @ emp . uc3m . es ( D . Moreno ) , rosa . rodriguez @ uc3m . es ( R . Rodríguez ) , rafael . zambrana @ novasbe . pt ( R . Zambrana ) . 1 . Introduction A highly competitive asset management industry and the drive to gain market share have made sub - advising portfolio management a valuable choice for asset man - agers . The number of outsourced mutual funds has grown considerably in the last decade . According to the Invest - ment Company Institute , by 2009 , nearly 40 % of US mutual funds used at least one sub - advisor ( aﬃliated or unaﬃli - ated with the fund family ) to manage portfolios , compared to 25 % in 1999 . By 2011 , the value of sub - advised funds was about $ 1 . 7 trillion . 1 One beneﬁt of external advising ( sub - advising ) is ac - cess to talent that is not available in - house . Yet sub - 1 See http : / / www . frcnet . com / documents / sub - advisory - mutual - fund - assets - to - reach - 2 % 202 - trillion - by - 2016 . pdf for detailed information . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jﬁneco . 2018 . 01 . 004 0304 - 405X / © 2018 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Please cite this article as : D . Moreno et al . , Management sub - advising in the mutual fund industry , Journal of Financial Economics ( 2018 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jﬁneco . 2018 . 01 . 004 2 D . Moreno et al . / Journal of Financial Economics 0 0 0 ( 2018 ) 1 – 21 ARTICLE IN PRESS JID : FINEC [ m3Gdc ; January 23 , 2018 ; 9 : 4 ] advisors generally manage funds for clients besides their own funds . This can present conﬂicts of interest , result - ing in agency costs and lower returns . Research shows that management companies tend to favor their own mutual funds over sub - advised funds through preferential treat - ment in initial public offering ( IPO ) allocations and abnor - mal cross - trading activities ( Chen et al . , 2013 ; Chuprinin et al . , 2015 ) . Why then the signiﬁcant growth of outsourc - ing contracts , and what is the principal beneﬁt ? Our study of the growth of sub - advising shows that outsourcing helps fund families gain market share in an in - creasingly competitive industry . We explore different con - tractual mechanisms that might mitigate the agency con - ﬂicts inherent in outsourcing portfolio management . We ﬁnd that mechanisms for co - branding , multi - advising , and performance - based compensation help to overcome the lower returns of sub - advised portfolios . Interestingly , we observe that asset managers do not ﬁnd it cost - effective to implement these mechanisms in funds whose clients are relatively uninformed or naïve in assessing a sub - advisor’s contribution to returns . We ar - gue that fund families use these costly contractual arrange - ments to protect their more sophisticated clients from the potential underperformance of funds whose management is outsourced . In this regard , outsourcing can lead to high - quality managed portfolios , allow asset management ﬁrms to offer new investment styles , and help ﬁrms gain added market share . In this paper , we assess the primary beneﬁts of del - egating portfolio management responsibilities to unaﬃli - ated managers and explain why the practice has become so popular in recent decades . Our main result shows that underperformance is not intrinsic in sub - advised funds . Sub - advisors can deliver performance that is as good as the performance of internally managed funds , if speciﬁc types of arrangements ( co - branding , multi - advising , or per - formance fees ) are used to protect against conﬂicts of in - terest in the sub - advisory ﬁrm . The ﬁrst contractual arrangement we examine is co - branding . Under a co - branding arrangement , the fund family partners with a sub - advisor to capitalize on the sub - advisor’s reputation ( by including the name of the sub - advisor in the fund name ) . The motivation is to attract new investors and align incentives . 2 This should mitigate conﬂicts of interest , as the sub - advisor cares about its reputation as well as management and compensation . The contract design literature indicates that ﬁrm reputation and brand name provide incentives to assure contract performance and protect against adverse selection ( e . g . , Marshall , 1949 ; Klein and Leﬄer , 1981 ) . Co - branding relies upon the value of repeat sales to satisﬁed customers as a way to prevent underperformance . The second mechanism is multi - advising . This is an agreement between the fund family and more than one 2 For instance , the Metropolitan Series Fund ( advisor ) outsourced one of its funds to BlackRock ( sub - advisor ) under the name BlackRock Aggres - sive Growth . More recently , Metropolitan Series Fund approved a change of sub - advisor to Frontier Capital Management , and the name of the port - folio became Frontier Mid Cap Growth . sub - advisor . 3 We expect multi - advisory agreements to ad - dress management conﬂicts of interest for two reasons . First , the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) ex - empts multi - advising funds from the requirement to gain shareholder approval to terminate sub - advisory contracts . 4 This exemption makes it easier to terminate contracts for poor performance and prompts greater competition among sub - advisors . Our evidence is consistent with Chevalier and Ellison ( 1997 , 1999 ) and Kempf et al . ( 2009 ) , who claim that the risk of job loss is an important determinant of managerial behavior . 5 Second , we argue that because multi - advising contracts involve compensation that is shared by all sub - advisors subject to the contract , external managers will monitor each other . This is consistent with the literature on con - tractual theory that proﬁt sharing generates mutual moni - toring and peer pressure that positively affect ﬁrm produc - tivity ( Kandel and Lazear , 1992 ; Kruse et al . , 2010 ) . The third contractual arrangement is performance - based fee compensation . There is an extensive literature analyzing performance - based contracts to solve problems of moral hazard or adverse selection ( e . g . , Holmstrom , 1979 ; Shavell , 1979 ) . In the mutual fund industry , perfor - mance fee compensation has been proposed to eliminate conﬂicts of interest between the portfolio manager and mutual fund investors . 6 Starks ( 1987 ) claims that symmetric contracts are better than bonus contracts in motivating manager performance , while Stoughton ( 1993 ) and Li and Tiwari ( 2009 ) , among others , point out that symmetric could not be the optimal structure in some cases . Ou - Yang ( 2003 ) analyzes the rela - tionship between an investor and a professional portfolio manager in a continuous - time principal - agent framework and ﬁnds that optimal contracts are of a symmetric form . Elton et al . ( 2003 ) ﬁnd evidence that US mutual funds with explicit incentive fees outperform similar funds without explicit incentive fees . More recently , Kyle et al . ( 2011 ) , in a model that endogenizes information acquisition , conclude that linear contracts could induce managers to apply more effort to inf ormation acquisition . We hypothesize that link - ing management compensation to performance will align managerial incentives , solving agency issues and positively affecting fund performance . We ﬁrst show that the various contractual arrange - ments reduce the underperformance of sub - advised funds by mitigating potential conﬂicts of interest and aligning 3 For instance , JP Morgan Multi Manager Small Cap Growth Fund is externally co - managed by BlackRock Capital Management , ClariVest , UBS Global Asset Management , and Oberweis Asset Management . 4 See SEC Release N . s . 33 - 8312 , 34 - 4 86 83 , IC - 26230 , available at http : / / www . sec . gov / rules . shtml . 5 This self - enforcement mechanism that assures performance by threat - ening termination of a relationship has also been examined by Klein and Leﬄer ( 1981 ) , among others . 6 Legally , if a mutual fund decides to charge an incentive fee , it must use a type of fee known as a “fulcrum fee , ” which constitutes a symmet - ric contract in which manager compensation relates investment perfor - mance to some benchmark . For example , the International Equity Fund of Accessor Capital Management compensates the sub - advisor Pictet Asset Management by a combination of a ﬁxed rate and a ﬂoating rate based on its performance under a fulcrum fee arrangement . Please cite this article as : D . Moreno et al . , Management sub - advising in the mutual fund industry , Journal of Financial Economics ( 2018 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jﬁneco . 2018 . 01 . 004