Presenting to Local and Remote Audiences : Design and Use of the TELEP System Gavin Jancke , Jonathan Grudin , Anoop Gupta Microsoft Research One Microsoft Way Redmond , WA 98052 - 6399 { gavinj ; jgrudin ; anoop } @ microsoft . com ABSTRACT The current generation of desktop computers and networks are bringing streaming audio and video into widespread use . A small investment allows presentations or lectures to be multicast , enabling passive viewing from offices or rooms . We surveyed experienced viewers of multicast presentations and designed a lightweight system that creates greater awareness in the presentation room of remote viewers and allows remote viewers to interact with each other and the speaker . We report on the design , use , and modification of the system , and discuss design tradeoffs . Keywords Tele - Presentation , Streaming Media INTRODUCTION The well - publicized availability of audio and video over the Internet and intranets ushers in new uses for digital technology , ranging from entertainment to distance education . Desktop computers can handle real - time audio and video . Many networks ( including the Internet ) require upgrading , but the technology is available . If streaming media prove to be of value , they can be delivered . At Microsoft , as at many large corporations , presentations are now broadcast “live” over the corporate intranet , 5 - 10 research lectures and an equal number of more general presentations every week . Broadcasts include audio , video and slides . By clicking on web pages that list talks , employees can attend from their offices or even from home . Clearly , there are potential benefits for remote viewers . They do not have to travel to attend the talk ; if the talk is uninteresting they can quit without wasting time or risking offending a speaker or host , and if parts of the talk are uninteresting , they can multitask with other work ( e . g . , read email ) . However , there are also potential disadvantages . First , from a speaker’s perspective , remote viewing can result in fewer people attending live in the lecture room . To the extent that speakers are unaware of the remote audience , they may perceive a small live audience as lack of interest in their work . They may be offended or less motivated to deliver a good talk . It is not uncommon to hear a host reassure a speaker facing a small live audience with words to the effect of “Don’t be deceived by the small audience in the room , lots of people are watching remotely . ” Second , remote - viewers do not experience the ambience and subtlety of the live talk and audience . They cannot see the expressions of other audience members , whisper a question to a colleague , or direct questions to a speaker . Live audience members’ questions are often inaudible to remote users unless repeated by the speaker . Finally , a live audience member , like the speaker , may infer from a small live audience a lack of interest in the topic ( which is generally of greater interest to those who traveled to the lecture room ) . The live experience is also diminished by the inability of remote viewers to ask questions . Although one obvious way to eliminate these disadvantages is to disallow broadcast of talks , in this paper we explore how technology could enhance the benefits and minimize the disadvantages . We report on TELEP ( short for telepresence ) , a system designed to provide speakers and local audiences with greater awareness of remote viewers , to provide remote viewers with a means to interact with speakers and each other , and to do this in a lightweight manner that requires little of remote viewers and almost no additional work by speakers . TELEP is a working system currently used for seminars . In this paper we report on its design—the system components , the user interface and interaction paradigm—and the design tradeoffs we faced . We also report on audience behavior before and after the deployment of TELEP . The paper is organized as follows . Following a section on related work , we present design goals and a TELEP system overview . The next section presents the TELEP interface and design tradeoffs . We then describe experience with broadcast presentations before and after deployment . The final sections highlight lessons learned . RELATED WORK For decades , videoconferencing systems ( e . g . , PictureTel [ 16 ] ) have linked two or more rooms with bi - directional audio - video channels and split - screen displays or multiple television monitors . Our design focus is different . There may be scores of people attending remotely , each from an office . An office may or may not have a camera or microphone . The situation is much more asymmetric ; consequently , the tradeoffs differ . Distance education programs face similar challenge . Stanford University’s SITN program has offered courses to students at Bay Area companies for over 25 years [ 18 ] , broadcasting from a classroom via a microwave channel . The students sit at designated conference rooms within their companies to watch lectures . They can ask questions by a telephone call to the classroom . We can confirm from personal experience teaching at Stanford that lecturer awareness of remote students is minimal . One has no idea how many are attending “live” remotely or how many have a VCR turned on to record for later viewing . Remote students do not have precise control over when to interrupt , so their questions occur as “crackling voices” in the middle of a lecturer’s sentences . TELEP is designed for a different context . Research seminars are usually given by visitors who use the system only once . Classroom instructors will use a system repeatedly , giving instructor and students more time and greater incentive to interact and establish a relationship . Remote students often have an investment in understanding the material that is equal to live students , which is often not the case in the situation we target . TELEP also differs in assuming more technology infrastructure , through which it can provide significantly greater awareness of remote viewers . Closest to our work are systems targeted for desktop - to - desktop presentations ( i . e . , all viewers are remote , the speaker is in an office or studio without a local audience ) . Examples include Forum from Sun [ 4 - 6 ] , Flatland from MSR [ 13 ] , and commercial products such as Centra [ 14 ] , NetPodium [ 15 ] , and PlaceWare [ 17 ] . They may broadcast a speaker’s audio - video and slides , and include additional capabilities for asking and responding to multiple - choice questions . Viewers can raise hands , ask questions via audio - channel or chat , and vote . A list of attendees is available to the speaker and viewers . Restriction to text is common , as the systems are often designed to support very large audiences and do not assume high connection bandwidth . TELEP also provides awareness and interactivity , but the circumstances and features differ . The systems above were built for speakers with no local audience—they could devote more attention to complex software interfaces . Rich back - channels and awareness were particularly important because the speakers had no live audiences . Experiments have shown that although remote viewers like the systems , speakers are unsettled by the lack of feedback they would get from a local audience ; the software interaction channels that have been tried did not fully compensate [ 5 , 13 ] . In contrast , TELEP focuses on mixed live ( local ) and remote audiences . Because speakers must devote considerable attention to the live audience , we have kept their interface simple , requiring no keyboard use . Presence of a live audience also affects how the remote audiences can be displayed to the speaker . By assuming higher bandwidth connectivity , we can evaluate graphical representations of remote viewers ( image or video ) for the first time in this context . The existence of a live audience may reduce the pressure on the technology and increase the chance of success . Consider , by analogy , early radio , which started without studio audiences but introduced them because performers preferred a live audience . In an extension to their work on Forum , Sun researchers conducted unpublished studies of “Forum Studio” with mixed live and remote audiences ( John Tang , Rick Levenson , Ellen Isaacs , personal communications , 1999 ) . Speakers stood before a podium containing a recessed computer monitor and used the Forum software to interact with remote viewers . Preliminary results contrasting local - only , remote - only , and mixed audiences showed that mixed audiences may learn less . Engaging with two audiences can distract speakers . Distant audience members may feel excluded , and a live audience may be distracted by a speaker’s efforts to deal with the technology . TELEP differs in two important ways : it does not require speakers to use technology , and our initial remote viewers have had up to two years experience passively attending lectures . TELEP can only maintain or increase their sense of inclusion , making successful reception easier to achieve . Finally , research on supporting informal interaction ( e . g . , Bellcore Cruiser [ 8 ] , Xerox PARC and NYNEX Portholes [ 1 , 2 ] , Sun Montage [ 11 ] , University of Toronto CAVECAT [ 9 ] , NTT Clearboard [ 7 ] , and University of Calgary prototypes [ 3 ] ) has addressed quite different scenarios , yet it has influenced our work . TELEP OVERVIEW Prior to deploying TELEP , we examined the use of the preexisting passive viewing system through observation and surveys of speakers , live audiences , and remote viewers . These data are discussed later . In this section we cover the design goals and provide an overview of the system Design Goals and Constraints (cid:1)(cid:2) Presentations with a “live” audience in the lecture room and a remote audience attending from desktops . (cid:1)(cid:2) The lecture room interface should benefit both the speaker and the live audience . (cid:1)(cid:2) Medium - sized ( fewer than 100 ) remote audiences , with access to computer but not necessarily a microphone or camera . (cid:1)(cid:2) Support for one - time visiting speakers . They should not have to use a keyboard . Suitable protocols for interaction should arise as naturally as possible . (cid:1)(cid:2) Assumption of adequate network bandwidth and computation , so it is feasible to multicast and render low - resolution video of remote viewers . (cid:1)(cid:2) Until proven to be reliable and acceptable , TELEP should be decoupled from pre - existing software used to watch the video of speakers and slides . A TELEP failure should not prevent people from viewing talks in the familiar non - interactive fashion . Collaboration Server Windows Media Server Presenter 10 - 15 s ec . l a t e n c y … R e m o t e C li e n t s S er v er s L ec t u re R oo m TELEP System LightweightVideo Multicast System Side wall TELEP display Figure 1 : TELEP System Overview TELEP System Overview Figure 1 illustrates the interrelation of TELEP components . There are two parallel systems . The first , shown on the left , is the pre - existing system that multicasts presentations for passive viewing . Based on Microsoft Windows Media Server , it broadcasts a speaker’s audio , video and slides . The corresponding display seen by remote viewers appears in the right window of Figure 2 . The slides switch automatically as the speaker advances them . A key aspect is that the video - encoder , video - server , and client - side buffering , introduce a 10 - 15 second delay before the audio - video is received by the remote audience . This is not an issue for purely passive remote viewing , but it clearly constrains interaction between the speaker and remote audience members using TELEP . Figure 2 : Remote User Layout : TELEP window on left , web page with speaker video and slides on right The second component is shown on the top - right in Figure 1 . It produces the features in the left window of Figure 2 on remote users’ desktops , and a lecture - room display as shown in Figure 3 . We discuss these interfaces in detail in the next section . Underlying the TELEP system is a collaboration server , built on MSR’s Virtual World Server [ 12 ] . It communicates remote viewer actions ( e . g . , raising hand , voting , chat ) to other remote viewers and in some cases to the lecture room display . To give remote attendees with cameras the option of using streaming video for their representation , we added a custom lightweight video multicast system . This distributes video ( no audio ) of remote viewers to other remote viewers and the lecture room . The video encoder is designed to consume minimal processor cycles as it extracts and compresses live video frames from the video capture hardware . Multicast IP was chosen as an efficient network transport to distribute the video streams between remote clients and the lecture room client . The collaboration server manages the IP addresses and ports required for multiple concurrent streams . The video stream decoder reads multicast video frames , decompresses them , and displays them in real - time . It is sufficiently lightweight that thirty or more videos can be played without saturating the processor . The decoder is adaptive : If processor use exceeds a threshold , the frame rate is decreased to avoid overwhelming the system . DESIGN OF TELEP INTERFACE In this section we present initial designs of interfaces for the lecture room and for remote viewers , along with considerations that affected the designs . Figure 3 : TELEP Lecture Room Display TELEP Lecture Room Interface In the lecture room , a dynamic , high - quality image is projected onto a large screen to the speaker’s left ( Figure 3 ) . This TELEP display , visible to all in the room , is distinct from the normal projection of slides or overheads onto a screen behind the speaker . It constantly displays a representation of the remote audience . Remote viewers can choose to appear as a live video feed from a desktop camera ( for those who have one ) , a static digital image ( for those with images in the system ) , a generic head and shoulders profile , or their logon alias at the bottom of the display ( this is how users of the passive viewing system are represented ) . An image is accompanied by a viewer’s full name or first name if the name is long . The total number of remote viewers ( including passive viewers ) appears in the upper left . The images fill from the bottom and diminish in size in subsequent rows , giving a front - to - back impression . They range from 96x96 to 32x32 pixels , fonts from 11 to 8 pt Verdana . With this system , up to 38 images can be displayed ; additional viewers can only watch . Overflow mechanisms are considered in the final section . The black background was chosen to minimize increases in ambient light in the darkened lecture hall . However , a result is that the appearance or disappearance of images is quite noticeable to the live audience . Remote viewers can control their representation on the lecture - room display in several ways . The border around the first author’s image in the bottom row indicates that he has begun typing a question ( it is yellow on the actual display ) . The number on the right indicates its position in the question queue . The animated keyboard beneath the image signals typing . When sent , a question appears in a large box , possibly overlaying other images until closed . Remote viewers can “raise a hand , ” as five viewers have done , enabling a speaker to verbally poll the entire audience . ( The total of remote hands raised is not provided , though it could be if there is demand . ) Viewers can change their representation ( camera , still image , generic ) at any time , or close TELEP and disappear from view . Of course , remote viewers can stop paying attention without visibly exiting by simply muting the sound . Given our goal of minimizing speaker training , speakers do not directly manipulate the lecture - room interface . They use the standard forward audio - video channel to encourage questions , respond to questions when asked , and they can only verbally manage the question queue if conflicts arise . TELEP Remote Viewer Interface As noted above , TELEP currently runs alongside the pre - existing unidirectional presentation application , a web page consisting of two frames : one for the video of the speaker and one for slides . The slide frame can alternatively display other details : talk abstract , speaker biography , and so forth . Audio , video , and slide transitions are synchronized . Figure 2 is a typical arrangement , with these two frames in the center and right , and the TELEP window on the left . The TELEP window , shown in detail in Figure 4 , is divided into three main sections . The upper section has controls and indicators for the interactive features , system configuration and state information . The scrollable central section displays the representations chosen by the other remote attendees currently using the system . The lower section shows viewers who are preparing or waiting to send questions to the presenter . This question queue is intended to facilitate the development of social protocols to govern turn - taking . The principal interaction features ( asking questions , chatting , raising a hand ) are described in the next subsection . The Configure button allows viewers to select or change representation forms . They can select live video if they have a camera . Most employees in the research division have photo images in a departmental database , which TELEP can locate . Many viewers are outside Microsoft Research , so we are developing a way for anyone to provide an image . A viewer sees a preview of their image before it is sent . The icons to the right of the Configure button launch a TELEP feedback window , a dynamically captured snapshot of the lecture - room display , and TELEP Help respectively . The only information provided uniquely by the snapshot is the arrangement of the remote viewers . Figure 4 : TELEP window for remote viewer In the middle section , the number of remote viewers visible without scrolling would be greater if images were not displayed . The images could create more of a sense of co - presence . With viewers using photos they could also serve a minor community - building role (cid:3) many remote viewers are not acquainted but could easily cross paths in the future . Asking the Presenter a Question When the Ask Question button is clicked , a window appears on the viewers display ( Figure 5 ) , a yellow border and question queue number immediately appears around the image in the lecture room ( Figure 3 ) , and an entry appears in the question queue on all remote displays . A prompt at the bottom of the window informs the viewer how to proceed based on their queue position and current state . Figure 5 : “Ask Question” window ( questioner’s view ) . The remote viewer types text in the edit field at the bottom . If no other question is queued , the Send button is green and the prompt indicates that the question may be sent . Otherwise the Send button is red and the prompt indicates that another questioner is ahead in the queue . When a question is sent , the text moves to the central area ( as in Figure 5 ) . At this point , a similar window appears on all other displays . ( The lecture room display has no text entry field . ) On remote displays the text entry field appears and the button to its right is labeled Reply , inviting others to respond to the question . The questioner may clarify or follow up the question , or thank the speaker , after hearing the response . Upon sending a question , a viewer is prompted to use the button in the upper right to close when done , to free the queue . If a remote viewer sends a question when the Send button is red , it appears and the previously visible question is closed . This potentially anti - social queue - jumping feature is provided so that the discussion can move on if the previous questioner forgot to close and free the queue . This is a consequence of the minimal speaker - side interface . We initially included more information about questioners in the window , drawn from the corporate personnel database . It was thought this might be useful for speakers , but early tests of the system indicated that speakers were not likely to use it , and it annoyed some viewers ( privacy ) . Remote Viewer Chat Feature TELEP has a chat facility for use among remote viewers , not shown in the lecture room [ cf . 9 ] . Invoked using the Chat button ( Figure 4 ) , a window appears ( Figure 6 ) . Clicking on a remote viewer’s image opens another chat window for a private message . To reduce window clutter , when a message is typed and sent , the private chat window disappears and the message appears in the public chat window prefaced by “ ( person A to person B ) ” to signal that only the two can see it . Figure 6 : Chat window ( remote only ) Hand Raising or Voting A presenter may request a show of hands . As the local audience responds , remote viewers can click a button , causing hands to appear by their images ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . The vote tally is incremented . After thirty seconds , the hands disappear . TELEP Installation , Invocation , and Maintenance Ease of discovery and installation were considered to be critically important . For this reason , both email announcements of talks and the web calendar provide live links to the TELEP installation guide ( or to TELEP once it is installed ) . Installation requires one button click , and subsequent modifications are automatically installed when TELEP is launched . This feature has been critical to adoption . USER EXPERIENCE PRIOR TO TELEP Within Microsoft Research , over 500 presentations to live audiences were multicast over the preceding two years . A distribution list of 1500 people receives talk announcements , which contain live links for viewing the presentation ( and now for TELEP ) . Thus , many employees are fully familiar with viewing presentations live on their desktop , without interactivity . For them , the obvious comparison with TELEP is not attending in person , but between attending passively and attending with the interactivity TELEP affords . We were able to collect baseline data on how people attending in person ( speakers and audience ) regarded the remote viewers before and after TELEP was introduced , and how remote viewers assessed their experience before and after introduction of the system . Initial Survey of Remote Viewing Experience Prior to the release of TELEP , we prepared a web - based survey and emailed its URL to the presentation announcement distribution list . This survey was designed to assess overall levels of satisfaction and problems with the pre - existing passive remote viewing system . We do not know how many of the recipients had used the system . We received 182 replies , primarily from people with an active interest in viewing presentations remotely . The average number of presentations they reported watching remotely was 9 . 7 ; the median was 5 . On average , they reported staying tuned through 54 % of a presentation . They were asked to indicate their satisfaction with the system on a 0 = Not at all to 6 = Extremely satisfied scale . The average was 3 . 65 , slightly above the midpoint , with eight zeros and twelve 6’s . Respondents were asked how the system could be improved . The most frequent responses were requests for improved audio ( in particular , for microphones that could capture live audience questions and comments ) , improved video , improved slide quality ( if speakers do not make slides available in advance , they are simply shown in the video window and are not very readable ) and greater system reliability . The most frequently requested software functionality was for remote viewer interaction with the speaker , requested by 18 respondents . Baseline Survey of Local and Remote Experience Next , prior to the announcement of TELEP , a paper survey was given to 11 speakers following their presentations to gauge their awareness of remote viewers and cameras , and to guess at the size of the remote audience . The local audiences ranged from 15 to 100 , the remote audiences from 8 to 57 , on average about 60 % the local audience . 101 live audience members from eight of the talks filled out paper surveys that asked the same questions , as well as how much they had attended to the talk , daydreamed , did other work , and so forth . As noted in the introduction , remote viewing could increase multitasking or openness to distraction . We also measured live audience attrition . For four talks , we asked remote viewers to fill out a web survey that addressed the same issues . We received 31 responses . Speakers (cid:1)(cid:2) Speakers were oblivious to the remote audience . Although informed prior to talks of the ceiling - mounted cameras , nine of eleven speakers rated their awareness of remote viewers as 0 on a 0 - to - 6 scale , with one 1 and one 2 . Ten rated the effect on their behavior at 0 , with one 1 . All speakers reported never looking at a camera . (cid:1)(cid:2) Speakers underestimated the remote audience size . Might speakers imagine a large remote audience and be disturbed to have TELEP reveal its size ? This concern appears to be unfounded : 9 of 11 speakers underestimated the remote audience size ; only one greatly exaggerated it . ( Actual average was 29 , estimates averaged 27 . ) Local Audience (cid:1)(cid:2) Local audiences are oblivious to remote audience . Local audience members know that lectures are broadcast , but reported not being aware during a talk : their average rating was 0 . 5 on a 0 to 6 scale , with four in five rating it 0 . They rated the effect on their behavior even lower at 0 . 2 . (cid:1)(cid:2) They slightly underestimate remote audience size . In only one case did an audience overestimate the remote audience size . The consensus was extremely close , but low . (cid:1)(cid:2) They report focusing on the talk 82 % of the time . The speaker had the viewers’ attention 81 . 6 % of the time , thinking or daydreaming 15 . 6 % , reading or working 1 . 3 % , and other ( sleeping , looking at people , etc . ) 1 . 6 % . Remote Audience (cid:1)(cid:2) They reported higher attrition than in the room . For the live audiences measured , 65 % to 90 % of attendees stayed to the end . Remote viewers reported making it through only on average 37 % to 67 % of different talks . (cid:1)(cid:2) They reported greater awareness of local audience . The average across presentations was 3 . 2 , with behavior affected rated at 1 . 4 . These are low , but much higher than the local audience awareness . Several specified the benefits of hearing audience questions when they were audible or repeated by the speaker , and frustration when not . (cid:1)(cid:2) They overestimated remote audience size and under - estimated live audience size . Remote viewers were the only group to overestimate remote attendance . When averaged , they were close , but overestimated every talk . Their estimates of live audiences were low for all talks except one . They do see occasional camera shots of the audience , but not of the whole room . (cid:1)(cid:2) When they were watching , they reported focusing on talks 56 % of the time . The speaker received 55 . 6 % of their attention , thinking or daydreaming 9 . 8 % , reading or other work up to 32 % and “other” 2 . 6 % . For several talks , one author attended and observed interaction . No speaker was seen to poll the audience . Many questions included clarification or follow - up , which TELEP supports but the audio delay makes difficult . Many questions or comments were longer than we would expect people to type . Occasionally a discussion broke out . VIEWER EXPERIENCES WITH TELEP The first formal use of TELEP was a presentation to introduce TELEP itself . It was treated as a pilot and to obtain feedback . Some of the design features described above were influenced by this feedback . TELEP has since been in regular use . It is described briefly to speakers along with the usual A / V preparation , typically a few minutes before the presentation . The authors have not intervened appreciably , other than to observe and collect data . TELEP participation in talks has ranged from 2 to 40 . Survey data addressing awareness issues are discussed below . The interaction to date has consisted of spontaneous questions from remote viewers and a little chat among remote viewers : there has been no polling . Questions have ranged from zero to three for a talk . To date , remote questions have not coincided or required queuing . The appearance of questions has not generally been noted by speakers , but audience members ( not the authors ) have pointed them out . The audience has explained the latency , but speakers have to decide how to handle it . The appearance of the “question being typed” indication forces speakers to decide whether to wait or continue—and questions have been longer than we anticipated , longer than our fixed - size window could handle on occasion . To date , chat has been used more among remote viewers , the camera operator , and the author - observers to discuss TELEP than for content . Placing private chat ( appropriately labeled ) in the same window as public chat has resulted in replies to private messages almost invariably being made in that window , meaning that they were made public . Speakers were surveyed immediately following nine talks . For 8 of these , paper surveys were distributed to the live audience ; 82 were filled out . 15 remote TELEP viewers responded to a request to fill out a web survey . During two recent talks , email was sent to 36 people using the passive system only , asking them to select among alternative explanations for why they were not using TELEP . This timely intrusion yielded a 70 % response rate , including a few lengthy discussions . ( Response rates to other surveys : 100 % of speakers , over 50 % of local audiences and TELEP users , and about 25 % of remote audiences when polled after a talk had completed . ) Speaker Reactions to TELEP (cid:1)(cid:2) Speakers generally found TELEP interesting . They did not seem bothered , although two wrote that some training would be useful , presumably for handling questions and the 15 - second latency . (cid:1)(cid:2) Speakers became aware of the remote audience . Awareness rose from 0 . 3 to 2 . 2 on the 0 to 6 scale , with no presenter indicating zero . 5 of 9 reported an effect on their behavior , but not much : the average rose from 0 . 1 from 0 . 8 . (cid:1)(cid:2) Speakers equated the remote audience to images . Speakers estimated the remote audience size to be roughly the maximum number of images at any one time . They overlooked the aliases of passive viewers , even when these had been explained , and did not consider remote viewer turnover . ( The total number of remote viewers could be twice the number appearing at any one time . ) (cid:1)(cid:2) Speakers equated the display with the camera . Speakers reported looking at a camera 2 . 6 times ( versus 0 pre - TELEP ) . They actually were looking at the display , which was not near a camera . Local Audience Reactions to TELEP (cid:1)(cid:2) The audience generally found TELEP interesting . Most comments were positive , but some reported being distracted by changing images , especially video . (cid:1)(cid:2) They became more aware of the remote audience . Their awareness rose from 0 . 5 to 2 . 9 on the 0 to 6 scale . About half reported some effect on their behavior , with the average rising to 1 . 0 from 0 . 2 . (cid:1)(cid:2) Their remote audience size estimates reflected the number watching at one time . Their estimates reflected the total shown on the display when around its peak . Given the relatively high turnover , this is considerably less than the total present overall . (cid:1)(cid:2) Their focus on the talk may have dropped slightly . They reported 77 % of their attention on the speaker ( down 5 % ) , 14 . 8 % daydreaming or thinking , 4 . 6 % other work ( up 4 % ) , and 2 . 5 % “other” ( up 1 % ) , with many attributing this last to the TELEP display . This is a possible negative effect , but it is small and may decline as familiarity rises . Remote Viewer Reactions to TELEP (cid:1)(cid:2) Satisfaction reported for TELEP is quite high . TELEP received 4 . 4 on the 0 - 6 scale , up from 3 . 6 for the passive viewing system . But there were few 6’s and numerous suggestions for improvement . (cid:1)(cid:2) Their estimates of remote audience size dropped . They appeared to base the estimate on the number of TELEP viewers , not considering the passive viewers . (cid:1)(cid:2) Attention to speakers dropped somewhat . TELEP users reported attending to the speaker 44 % of the time , down 12 % from passive viewers . Most of this was a 350 % increase in “Other” activity , which several identified as being TELEP experimentation . Future polling will determine whether or not this will drop with experience . (cid:1)(cid:2) Some remote viewers prefer anonymity . Several of those still watching passively mentioned the desire to be invisible , particularly when attending in the background . “More often I ' m watching it ( a presentation ) in the background , and so prefer to remain in the background . There ' s a certain symmetry to it . ” “I would use Telep , if my identity were only revealed when I asked a question . ” LESSONS LEARNED : REDESIGNING TELEP TELEP is in routine use , requires little maintenance , and is liked by its self - selected users . Nevertheless , many of the features were not used as expected ; these lessons guided the design of the next version . Use of live video by remote viewers for representation on the lecture - room display was not successful . The live audience found it distracting , and remote viewers with cameras did not want to be seen multitasking , on the phone , and so forth . It appears though , they may be willing to show this view to other remote viewers , and they may like to turn it on when directing a question to the speaker . Anonymous representations are needed , perhaps as an unlabeled smaller image to the back of the display . All remote viewers should probably be represented to restore the relatively accurate estimates of remote attendance . Arguably , remote questioners should have to be identified . A camera should be placed near the display , since speakers assume one is there . The arrival of a question should be signaled by a sound . Possibly the projection should be behind the audience rather than to its side , or in both places . Some remote viewers noted that just as local audiences can see them , they would like a camera view of the audience . The signaling of a question being typed was disruptive : speakers did not know whether to wait or continue . We also found that remote viewers are willing to ask questions , but they do so rarely and almost never queue questions . Design should focus on simplifying the initial - question case . Displaying public and private chat messages in one window was confusing and lead to inadvertent exposure . For the lectures we observed , audience polling is extremely rare . More complex methods of presenting alternatives and tallying votes may be useful in other settings . Reducing the 15 - second delay in presentations reaching remote viewers to a few seconds would enable remote viewers with microphones to have an audio channel to speakers . This was a feature of the Sun Forum system . However , it is more complicated than it first seems . Questioners often prefer to catch a speaker’s attention before speaking . Remote viewers may rarely use this without a more complex interface . A New Version of TELEP We have now released a version of TELEP designed to profit from the experiences described above . It is integrated into the viewing system , so all remote viewers participate . Representation options have been expanded : Viewers can identify an image or use a camera snapshot as a still image . They can independently choose to show their name or be anonymous . The display can accommodate up to 60 images , moving anonymous images to the rear and moving images forward as vacancies occur to reduce visual disruption . Questions are not foreshadowed in the lecture room until sent , at which point a sound signals their arrival . Dynamic messages guide viewers when multiple questions are being queued . Public and private chat are distinct windows . A header indicates that chat is not seen in the lecture room . We are starting to collect data on the use of the new system . With users no longer self - selected and the basic problems addressed , we will observe how use of the system evolves . CONCLUDING REMARKS Although TELEP has enabled more interaction , a larger purpose was to raise mutual awareness of local and remote participants , and among remote participants . Indications are that it is succeeding in this . This could have important indirect consequences . Our initial survey found that major dissatisfactions of remote viewers included not having questions asked loudly enough or repeated by the speaker , not having slides delivered early enough to put online , not having legible overheads or whiteboard writing . As speakers and ( equally importantly ) their local hosts become more aware of the remote viewers , these problems will be more naturally addressed . With use of TELEP , will more attention to remote viewers be at the expense of the local audience ? Will it lead more people to attend remotely , where they are subject to more distractions ? Will smaller live audiences demotivate speakers , or will more interaction with remote , often large audiences compensate ? These are interesting questions that longer - term studies with TELEP will help answer . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Steve White worked on early version of prortotype , Jeremy Crawford and James Crawford of MSRN helped with deployment , and Harry Chesley and Lili Cheng of the MSR Virtual Worlds Group contributed . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Dourish , P . and Bly , S . ( 1992 ) . Portholes : Supporting awareness in a distributed work group . Proc . CHI’92 , 541 - 547 . ACM . [ 2 ] Girgensohn , A . , Lee , A . and Turner , T . ( 1999 ) . Being in public and reciprocity : Design for Portholes and user preference . Proc . INTERACT’99 , 459 - 465 . [ 3 ] Gutwin , C . , Roseman , M . and Greenberg , S . ( 1996 ) . A usability study of awareness widgets in a shared workspace groupware system . Proc . CSCW’96 , 258 - 267 . ACM . [ 4 ] Isaacs , E . A . , Morris , T . , and Rodriguez , T . K . ( 1994 ) . A forum for supporting interactive presentations to distributed audiences . Proc . CSCW ’94 , 405 - 416 . ACM . [ 5 ] Isaacs , E . A . , Morris , T . , Rodriguez , T . K . , and Tang , J . C . ( 1995 ) . A comparison of face - to - face and distributed presentations . Proc . CHI ’95 , 354 - 361 , ACM . [ 6 ] Isaacs , E . A . , and Tang , J . C . ( 1997 ) . Studying video - based collaboration in context : From small workgroups to large organizations . In K . E . Finn , A . J . Sellen & S . B . Wilbur ( Eds . ) , Video - Mediated Communication , 173 - 197 . Erlbaum . [ 7 ] Ishii , H . , Kobayashi , M . , and Arita , K . ( 1994 ) . Iterative design of seamless collaboration media : From Team - WorkStation to ClearBoard . Comm . of ACM , 37 , 8 , 83 - 97 . [ 8 ] Mantei , M . M . , Baecker , R . M . Sellen , A . J . , Buxton , W . A . S . and Milligan , T . ( 1991 ) . Experiences in the use of a media space . Proc . CHI’91 , 203 - 208 . [ 9 ] Rekimoto , J . , Ayatsuka , Y . , Uoi , H . & Arai , T . ( 1998 ) . Adding another communication channel to reality : An experience with a chat - augmented conference . CHI ' 98 Summary , 271 - 272 . [ 10 ] Root , R . W . ( 1998 ) . Design of a multi - media vehicle for social browsing . Proc . CSCW’88 , 25 - 38 . ACM . [ 11 ] Tang , J . C and Rua , M . ( 1994 ) . Montage : Providing teleproximity for distributed groups . Proc . CHI’94 , 37 - 43 . [ 12 ] Vellon , M . , Marple , K . Mitchell , D . and Drucker , S . 1998 . The Architecture of a Distributed Virtual Worlds System . Proc . of the 4th Conference on Object - Oriented Technologies and Systems ( COOTS ) . 1998 . [ 13 ] White , S . A . , Gupta , A . , Grudin , J . , Chesley , H . , Kimberly , G . and Sanocki , E . ( 2000 ) . Evolving use of a system to support education at a distance . To appear in Proc . HICSS - 33 . IEEE . [ 14 ] Centra Symposium Software . http : / / www . centra . com . / [ 15 ] NetPodium . http : / / www . netpodium . com / [ 16 ] PictureTel Systems . http : / / www . picturetel . com / [ 17 ] Placeware Conference Center . http : / / www . placeware . com / [ 18 ] Stanford Instructional Television Network . http : / / www - sitn . stanford . edu