Sustained Protein Kinase D Activation Mediates Respiratory Syncytial Virus - Induced Airway Barrier Disruption Fariba Rezaee , a Samantha A . DeSando , a Andrei I . Ivanov , b Timothy J . Chapman , c Sara A . Knowlden , c Lisa A . Beck , d Steve N . Georas c Division of Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine , Department of Pediatrics , University of Rochester Medical Center , Rochester , New York , USA a ; Human and Molecular Genetics , Virginia Commonwealth University , Richmond , Virginia , USA b ; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Department of Medicine , c Department of Dermatology , d University of Rochester Medical Center , Rochester , New York , USA Understanding the regulation of airway epithelial barrier function is a new frontier in asthma and respiratory viral infections . Despite recent progress , little is known about how respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) acts at mucosal sites , and very little is known about its ability to inﬂuence airway epithelial barrier function . Here , we studied the effect of RSV infection on the airway epithe - lial barrier using model epithelia . 16HBE14o - bronchial epithelial cells were grown on Transwell inserts and infected with RSV strain A2 . We analyzed ( i ) epithelial apical junction complex ( AJC ) function , measuring transepithelial electrical resistance ( TEER ) and permeability to ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - conjugated dextran , and ( ii ) AJC structure using immunoﬂuores - cent staining . Cells were pretreated or not with protein kinase D ( PKD ) inhibitors . UV - irradiated RSV served as a negative con - trol . RSV infection led to a signiﬁcant reduction in TEER and increase in permeability . Additionally it caused disruption of the AJC and remodeling of the apical actin cytoskeleton . Pretreatment with two structurally unrelated PKD inhibitors markedly attenuated RSV - induced effects . RSV induced phosphorylation of the actin binding protein cortactin in a PKD - dependent man - ner . UV - inactivated RSV had no effect on AJC function or structure . Our results suggest that RSV - induced airway epithelial bar - rier disruption involves PKD - dependent actin cytoskeletal remodeling , possibly dependent on cortactin activation . Deﬁning the mechanisms by which RSV disrupts epithelial structure and function should enhance our understanding of the association be - tween respiratory viral infections , airway inﬂammation , and allergen sensitization . Impaired barrier function may open a poten - tial new therapeutic target for RSV - mediated lung diseases . R espiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) is the most common respira - tory pathogen in infants and young children ( 1 ) and an im - portantcauseofdeathinchildhood ( 2 ) . RSVhasbeenidentiﬁedas a source of morbidity and mortality in elderly and high - risk adults ( 3 ) . RSV infects airway epithelial cells and is thought to cause tissue pathology by inducing the expression of proinﬂammatory mediators , leading to airway inﬂammation and , ultimately , an antiviral immune response ( 4 ) . RSV also induces the expression of antiapoptotic genes and promotes epithelial cell survival , which is probably a strategy to ensure viral replication in infected cells ( 5 ) . Emerging evidence points to a role for airway barrier dysfunc - tion during respiratory viral infections ( 6 ) , as well as in stable asthmatics ( 7 ) . The airway barrier is made up of the surface mucus layer , as well as apical junction complexes ( AJC ) that regulate paracellular permeability ( 8 ) . Previously we demonstrated that polyinosinic - polycytidylic acid [ poly ( I - C ) ] , a synthetic double - stranded RNA and viral mimetic , induces potent breakdown of the airway epithelial AJC in a protein kinase D ( PKD ) - dependent manner ( 9 ) . PKD , formerly known as PKC (cid:1) , is a serine / threonine protein kinase family consisting of three isoforms ( PKD1 to - 3 ) ( 10 ) . The PKD family is involved in a number of important cell functions , including survival , migration , differentiation , prolifer - ation , and membrane trafﬁcking ( 11 ) . Interestingly , PKD was re - cently shown to be an upstream regulator of cortactin , an actin binding protein involved in actin polymerization and regulation of junctional structures in other cell types ( 12 , 13 ) . Although ac - tivation of epithelial PKC plays a role in the early stages of RSV infection ( 14 , 15 ) , we have limited understanding of the expres - sion and function of PKD in epithelial cells in the context of nat - urally occurring viral infections . Furthermore , whether cortactin - dependent actin polymerization is involved in AJC disassembly in the airway is not known . In the current study we sought to address these gaps in our knowledge by studying the effect of RSV infection on airway epi - thelial AJC structure and function . We tested the hypothesis that RSV mediates AJC disassembly and remodeling of the perijunc - tional F - actin cytoskeleton in a PKD - dependent manner . We show that RSV induces potent breakdown of AJC structure and function in the absence of cell death , and we propose a model in which RSV replication leads to sustained PKD activation , phos - phorylation of cortactin , actin remodeling , and AJC disassembly . These ﬁndings provide new knowledge about RSV effects on the airway barrier and identify new pharmacologic targets to explore in the treatment of RSV - induced lung infections . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies . The following primary monoclonal antibodies ( MAbs ) and polyclonal antibodies ( PAbs ) were used to detect junctional and signaling proteins by immunoﬂuorescent labeling and immunoblotting : anti - oc - cludin , anti - zonula occludens protein 1 ( ZO - 1 ) , and anti - E - cadherin MAbs ( Invitrogen , Camarillo , CA ) ; anti - (cid:2) - cateninMAb ( BDBioscience ) ; anti - Toll - like receptor 3 ( TLR3 ) ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA ) ; phospho - PKD / PKC ( Ser 744 / 748 ) and PKD / PKC (cid:1) and cleaved caspase 3 PAb ( Cell Signaling , Danvers , Mass ) ; phospho - cortactin PAb ( anti - cortactin Received 11 June 2013 Accepted 29 July 2013 Published ahead of print 7 August 2013 Address correspondence to Fariba Rezaee , fariba _ rezaee @ urmc . rochester . edu . Copyright © 2013 , American Society for Microbiology . All Rights Reserved . doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 01573 - 13 11088 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology p . 11088 – 11095 October 2013 Volume 87 Number 20 on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m [ pS405 ] phosphospeciﬁc PAb ) ( Protea Bioscience , San Jose , CA ) ; and anti - cortactin ( p80 / 85 ) clone 4F11 MAb ( Millipore , Billerica , MA ) . Fluo - rescentlylabeledphalloidin594and488 ( Invitrogen , Camarillo , CA ) were used to visualize actin ﬁlaments . Anti - rabbit and anti - mouse secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa - 488 or Alexa - 568 were obtained from In - vitrogen ( Camarillo , CA ) . Mouse and rabbit horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from GE Healthcare ( Fairﬁeld , CT ) . Chemicals and reagents . The PKC inhibitors Gö6976 and Gö6983 were obtained from EMD Biosciences ( Billerica , MA ) . The PKC inhibitor GF109203X was obtained from Calbiochem . The PKD inhibitor CID755673 was a kind gift from Elizabeth R . Sharlow ( University of Vir - ginia ; it is also commercially available from Tocris [ number 3327 ] ) . Flu - orescein - conjugated 3 - kDa dextran was obtained from Invitrogen ( Ca - marillo , CA ) . Palivizumab ( Synagis ) was obtained from MedImmune . Airway epithelial cell culture . 16HBE14o - human bronchial epithe - lial cells ( a gift from Dieter C . Gruenert , University of California—San Francisco ) were cultured in collagen - coated transwells as previously de - scribed ( 9 ) . The cells were cultured on 0 . 4 - (cid:1) m - or 5 . 0 - (cid:1) m - pore - size ﬁl - ters ( Transwell ; Costar , Cambridge , MA ) forimmunoﬂuorescentstaining and permeability studies , respectively . For biochemical experiments , the cells were cultured in 24 - well plastic plates . Respiratory syncytial virus . Polarized human airway epithelial cells were infected apically with RSV derived from RSV strain A2 ( a kind gift from Edward E . Walsh , University of Rochester , Rochester , NY ) . In some experiments , we used rgRSV ( RSV derived from RSV A2 expressing the green ﬂuorescent protein gene ) , a kind gift from Mark Peeples ( Nation - wide Children’s Hospital Research Institute , Columbus , OH ) and Peter Collins ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) , as described pre - viously ( 16 , 17 ) . UV - inactivated RSV ( UV - RSV ) was used as a negative control . UV inactivation was performed by exposure of RSV to UVB ir - radiation for 20 min . Inactivation of RSV replication was conﬁrmed by a plaque - forming assay . TEER . Transepithelial electrical resistance ( TEER ) was measured with an EVOMX volt - ohm meter ( World Precision Instruments , Sarasota , FL ) as previously described ( 9 ) . Data are presented as percent changes com - pared to time zero . Experiments were performed when TEER reached (cid:3) 500 (cid:4) (cid:5) cm 2 . Paracellular ﬂux of ﬂuorescent markers . Permeability assays were performedbymeasuringtheﬂuxofapicallyaddedﬂuoresceinisothiocya - nate ( FITC ) - conjugated 3 - kDa dextran ( Invitrogen , Camarillo , CA ) from the apical to the basal chamber across epithelial monolayers ( 9 ) . The re - sults were expressed as the fold changes from baseline . Cell cytotoxicity and apoptosis assays . All cultures were monitored daily for cytopathic effect by light microscopy . Following the indicated timepoints , supernatantwascollectedforcytotoxicityassaybymeasuring the release of the cytosolic enzyme lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) extracel - lularly ( LDH detection kit ; Clontech , CA ) ( 9 ) . To analyze cell death by apoptosis , protein was extracted and Western blotting was performed with a cleaved caspase 3 PAb ( Cell Signaling , Danvers , MA ) . Immunoﬂuorescence staining of junctional proteins . As in previous studies ( 9 ) , after the indicated treatments , cell monolayers were ﬁxed and analyzed by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . The ﬁxed cells were incu - bated with speciﬁc primary antibodies directed against ZO - 1 , occludin , E - cadherin , and (cid:2) - catenin , followed by incubation with Alexa Fluor - la - beled secondary antibodies and mounting with Prolong Gold antifade mounting medium ( Invitrogen , Camarillo , CA ) . Immunoﬂuorescently labeled cell monolayers were examined with a scanning confocal micro - scope . Single - plane confocal images were taken with an Olympus FV1000 laserscanningconfocalmicroscopeattheUniversityofRochesterMedicalCenterConfocalandConventionalMicroscopyCore . A 100 (cid:5) U Plan S Apo 1 . 4 - numerical - aperture ( NA ) ( oil ) objective was used , and images weretakenat512by512resolutionwithaKalmansettingof14 . Allimages were optimized so that the ﬂuorescence intensity remained in the linear range . Images were processed with Adobe Photoshop software . AnalysisofTJproteinsbyimmunoblotting . Aftertheindicatedtreat - ments , cell monolayers grown in cell culture plates were washed with cold phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and lysed in RIPA lysis buffer ( Sigma ) . The protein concentration was quantiﬁed by bicinchoninic acid protein assay ( Pierce , Cheshire , United Kingdom ) , followed by resolution on SDS - PAGEandtransfertopolyvinylidenediﬂuoride ( PVDF ) membranes ( Bio - Rad ) . The membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with the indicated primary antibodies and then fo r 1 h atroom temperature with horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies . The blots were exposed to enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) ( RPN 2106 ; GE Health - care , Fairﬁeld , CT ) and subjected to autoradiography . Glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA ) was used as a lane - loading control . Densitometric quantiﬁcation was performed using NIH Image J software . Extraction of RNA and quantitative real - time PCR analysis . Total RNA was extracted from epithelial cells using an E . Z . N . A total RNA kit ( Omega Bio - Tek , Norcross , GA ) , and cDNA was synthesized using an iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) and ampliﬁed by real - time PCR with a iQ5 multicolor Real - Time PCR Detection System ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) using iQ SYBR green Supermix ( Bio - Rad , Her - cules , CA ) and primers targeting the 87 - bp sequence of the RSV strain A2 genome , which encodes the viral fusion ( F ) protein ( 5 = CACCCTGTTGG AAAC 3 = and 5 = CTCTGTCAGTTCTTG 3 = ; Sigma Aldrich ) . Statistical analysis . Data were analyzed using Prism software ( Graph - Pad , San Diego , CA ) and Microsoft Excel . The data are representative of three or more experiments and are means (cid:6) standard errors of the mean ( SEM ) . The data were evaluated statistically with analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) and the Student t test , with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons . Signiﬁcance was considered to be a P value of less than 0 . 05 . RESULTS RSV infection decreased resistance and increased the permea - bility of polarized airway epithelial cells . RSV is known to infect human and mouse airway epithelial cells , leading to cytokine / chemokine production and airway inﬂammation ( 4 ) . We previ - ously showed that poly ( I - C ) , a mimic of viral infection , induced paracellular permeability of airway epithelial cells ( 9 ) . Here , we hypothesized that RSV can disrupt AJC . To test this possibility , we used polarized 16HBE140 - human bronchial epithelial cells , which maintain tight junctions ( TJ ) and adherens junctions ( AJ ) similarly to primary human bronchial epithelial cells ( 6 , 9 ) . We began by growing 16HBE cells on semipermeable inserts ( see Ma - terials and Methods ) and infected them apically with RSV strain A2 ( courtesy of Edward Walsh , University of Rochester , Roches - ter , NY ) at multiplicities of infection ( MOIs ) ranging from 0 . 05 to 1 . 0 . RSV induced a marked decrease in TEER , consistent with barrier disruption ( Fig . 1A ) . The effect of RSV was both dose and time dependent , resulting in sustained decreases in TEER for up to 72 h ( Fig . 1A ) . RSV infection also led to signiﬁcant increases in the paracellular ﬂux of ﬂuorescein - conjugated 3 - kDa dextran ( Fig . 1B ) , indicatingincreasedpermeabilitytomacromolecules . Insub - sequent studies , we used RSV at an MOI of 0 . 5 . RSV infection did not induce cell cytotoxicity or apoptosis . To investigate whether RSV infection induced cytotoxicity or apoptosis in epithelial cells , we infected cells with RSV at an MOI of 0 . 5 and collected cell supernatants at different time points for cytotoxicity assays ( see Materials and Methods ) . As a positive con - trol , we treated the cells with 2 % Triton , whereas cell culture me - dium was used as a negative control . Importantly , similar to other reports ( 5 , 18 , 19 ) , we found no evidence of RSV - induced cell cytotoxicity ( Fig . 2A ) . In an independent experiment , conﬂuent Respiratory Syncytial Virus Disrupts Airway Barrier October 2013 Volume 87 Number 20 jvi . asm . org 11089 on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m polarized epithelial cells were infected with RSV ( MOI , 0 . 5 ) , and whole - cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting for cleaved caspase 3 as a marker of apoptosis . We found no evidence of apop - tosis in RSV - infected epithelia ( Fig . 2B ) . RSV infection induces AJC disassembly in airway epithelial cells , whichrequireslivereplicatingvirus . Wenextexaminedthe effect of RSV or UV - inactivated RSV on AJC structure and func - tion . Polarized16HBE140 - cell monolayers were infected apically with live RSV ( MOI , 0 . 5 ) or equivalent amounts of UV - irradiated RSV , and the AJC structure was determined using immunoﬂuo - rescence labeling and confocal microscopy for different TJ ( occlu - din and ZO - 1 ) or AJ ( E - cadherin and (cid:2) - catenin ) proteins . In comparison with control uninfected cells , which showed a normal “chicken wire” appearance of AJ and TJ structure , RSV - infected cells exhibited marked disruption of the AJC , with evidence of gaps and breaks in junctional strands ( Fig . 3A , arrowheads ) . In spite of the breakdown of the AJC , epithelial nuclei remained in - tact ( data not shown ) . Interestingly , UV - irradiated RSV did not disrupt apical junc - tion structure , and in contrast to nonirradiated intact virus , UV - RSV also did not induce junctional dysfunction , as determined by measuring TEER ( Fig . 3B ) and paracellular ﬂux of ﬂuorescein - conjugated 3 - kDa dextran ( data not shown ) . RSV infection induced PKD phosphorylation . In other cell types , apical junction complex dysfunction can occur via suppres - sion of expression of junctional components or by expression - independent mechanisms . Western blotting of whole - cell lysates revealed that total expression of key junctional components was largely unaltered following RSV infection ( Fig . 3C and D ) . This contrasted with marked disruption of AJC formation at the apical membrane as detected using confocal microscopy ( Fig . 3A ) . Ex - pression - independent AJC disruption often involves junctional internalization driven by actin cytoskeletal remodeling ( 20 ) . When we analyzed actin structure in RSV - infected epithelial cells , we found marked redistribution of cortical actin ﬁbers ( Fig . 4A ) . PKD is now known to play an important role in cell motility and cytoskeletal rearrangements ( 11 , 12 ) , but very little is known about this signaling molecule in the airway . We examined activa - tion of PKD in RSV - infected epithelial cells by monitoring PKD phosphorylation ( Ser 744 / 748 ) by Western blotting . Interestingly , RSV infection resulted in biphasic PKD phosphorylation with bothearly ( 2 - to3 - h ) andlate ( 48 - h ) kinetics ( Fig . 4BandC ) . Only the early wave of PKD phosphorylation occurred using UV - inac - tivated RSV ( Fig . 4D and E ) , suggesting that this early phosphor - ylation depended on viral entry whereas the later phase required viral replication ( see below ) . RSV - induced epithelial permeability is mediated by PKD . Previous studies have shown the role of PKC signaling in epithelial cell tight - junction integrity ( 20 ) , and activation of different PKC family members plays a role in the early stages of RSV infection ( 14 , 15 ) . In order to determine whether these protein kinases con - tributed to RSV - induced AJC dysfunction , we used a panel of inhibitors targeting both classical and atypical PKC family mem - bers ( Gö6983 and GF109203X ) , as well as PKD ( Gö6976 ) . Inter - estingly , only Gö6976 ( Fig . 5A ) , and not other inhibitors ( data not shown ) , attenuated the effect of RSV infection on epithelial per - meability and AJC structure . To conﬁrm the role of PKD signaling FIG 1 RSV infection disrupts the barrier function of airway epithelial cells . ConﬂuentepithelialcellmonolayerswereinfectedwithRSVatMOIsof0 . 05to 1 . 0 for 72 h . ( A ) TEER was measured with a volt - ohm meter at different time points after infection . RSV causes a dose - and time - dependent decrease in TEER when data are expressed relative to TEER measured at time zero ( values of approximately 500 (cid:4) (cid:5) cm 2 , which was set as 100 % ) . ( B ) Permeability assays were performed with 3 - kDa ﬂuorescein - conjugated dextran at 48 and 72 h post - RSV infection . The data show that RSV causes a time - and dose - dependent increase in permeability . The data are representative of 2 or 3 in - dependent experiments . Differences between control and RSV - infected cells were analyzed by ANOVA . * * * , P (cid:7) 0 . 001 . The error bars indicate SEM . FIG 2 RSV infection does not induce cell cytotoxicity or apoptosis . ( A ) 16HBE140 - cell monolayers were infected with RSV at an MOI of 0 . 5 or with control medium for 0 to 48 h . ( A ) Results showing cytotoxicity indexes of infected cells compared with untreated cells . Medium alone was used as a negative control , and cells lysed with Triton served as a positive control . The error bars indicate SEM . ( B ) Conﬂuent polarized epithelial cells were infected with RSV at an MOI of 0 . 5 or with control medium . The cell lysates were immunoblotted and probed with antibodies against cleaved caspase 3 . Cell lysate from cytochrome c - treated and untreated Jurkat cells ( Cell Signaling ) were used as positive ( (cid:8) con ) and negative ( (cid:9) con ) controls . A representative blot from 3 independent experiments is shown . Rezaee et al . 11090 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m in RSV - induced disrupted barrier structure , we next used a novel benzoxoloazepinolone PKD inhibitor ( CID755673 , provided by E . Sharlow , University of Virginia [ UVA ] ) , which is selective , cell permeable , and structurally unrelated to Gö6976 ( 21 , 22 ) . This compound also strikingly prevented RSV - induced barrier disrup - tion , conﬁrming a role for PKD in RSV - induced AJC disassembly ( Fig . 5A ) and increased permeability ( Fig . 5B ) . Similarly RSV , but not UV - RSV , upregulated expression of the key viral sensor TLR3 ( Fig . 6A and B ) . This indicates that live replicating virus is re - quired to induce epithelial junction dysfunction . Interestingly the PKD antagonist also blocked the upregulation of TLR3 ( Fig . 6A ) . RSV - induced phosphorylation of cortactin is dependent on PKD signaling . To further dissect the mechanism of RSV - in - duced AJC disruption , we sought to examine the molecular events involved in AJC disruption induced by RSV and dependent on PKD . PKD was recently shown to be an upstream regulator of cortactin , an actin binding protein involved in actin polymeriza - tion ( 12 , 13 ) . We next assessed the expression of total cortactin and phospho - cortactin ( Ser 405 ) at different time points following RSV infection . Similar to the case of PKD , RSV infection resulted in a biphasic pattern of cortactin phosphorylation ( Fig . 7A and B ) . Importantly , both phases of cortactin phosphorylation were de - pendent upon PKD , but only the early phase occurred using UV - RSV ( Fig . 7C and D ) . Confocal microscopy revealed increased colocalization of actin and cortactin in response to RSV infection ( Fig . 7E , yellow staining ) . Taken together , these data support a model in which RSV infection and replication induce sustained PKD phosphorylation , leading to cortactin - dependent remodel - ing of the actin cytoskeleton , destabilizing membrane apical junc - tion complexes . PKD inhibitor did not inhibit early RSV infection or RSV replication . One possible explanation for the observed effects of PKD inhibitors is that they prevent RSV uptake or replication . To test this , epithelial cells were infected with RSV at a multiplicity of infection of 0 . 05 to 0 . 5 in the presence or absence of PKD inhibi - tion . Palivizumab , a known monoclonal antibody against RSV fusion protein , was used as a positive control for suppression of viral infection . Importantly , we observed no signiﬁcant differ - ences in RSV infectivity in the presence of PKD inhibition ( Fig . 8A and B ) . In addition , PKD inhibition did not affect viral replica - tion , as similar viral loads were recovered from RSV - infected cells in the presence or absence of the inhibitor ( Fig . 8C ) . DISCUSSION Apical junctional complexes are an integral part of the airway epithelial barrier . Although epithelial barrier dysfunction is in - creasingly associated with disease states , including asthma ( 7 ) , the molecular mechanisms involved are not well understood . Tight junctions and adherens junctions are dynamic structures that are responsive to diverse environmental stimuli ( 23 ) . Here , we show that RSV , a common respiratory virus associated with substantial morbidity , induces epithelial barrier dysfunction in a PKD - de - pendent manner . RSV infection causes barrier dysfunction with - out altering the expression of key junctional components and in - stead appears to induce disassembly of epithelial junction complexes by destabilizing the cortical actin cytoskeleton in a cor - FIG3 RSV - inducedAJCdisassemblyrequireslivereplicatingvirus . Polarized16HBE140 - monolayerswereinfectedwithRSVatanMOIof0 . 5 , controlmedium , oranequalamountofUV - irradiatedRSVfor48h . ( A ) Apicaljunctioncomplexeswerevisualizedbyimmunoﬂuorescentstainingandconfocalmicroscopy . The arrows indicate normal chicken wire appearance of membrane AJC . The arrowheads indicate gaps in AJC integrity and ZO - 1 localized to intracellular vacuoles . ( B ) TEER was measured using a volt - ohm meter at the indicated time points . UV - inactivated RSV did not cause epithelial junction disassembly or change s in TEER . The images are representative of at least 3 independent experiments . Differences between control , UV - irradiated RSV - , and RSV - infected cells were analyzed by ANOVA . * * * , P (cid:7) 0 . 001 . The error bars indicate SEM . ( C ) RSV infection did not change AJC protein expression . Total cell lysates of control and RSV - infectedepithelialcellswereanalyzedbyWesternblottingwithantibodiesdirectedagainstdifferentTJandAJcomponents . Immunoblotsrepresentativeof different time points postinfection are shown . ( D ) Densitometric quantiﬁcation of at least 3 independent experiments . Respiratory Syncytial Virus Disrupts Airway Barrier October 2013 Volume 87 Number 20 jvi . asm . org 11091 on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tactin - dependent manner . Our results highlight a novel molecular pathway of airway barrier dysfunction that likely contributes to RSV - induced airway inﬂammation . Respiratory viruses , including rhinovirus ( RV ) and RSV , have been previously shown to cause airway epithelial barrier dysfunc - tion via different mechanisms . Hershenson and colleagues have shown that RV causes epithelial junction dysfunction in a NOX1 - dependent manner ( 6 , 24 ) , whereas Singh et al . showed that RSV FIG 4 RSVinfectioninducesredistributionofcorticalactinﬁbersandPKDphosphorylation . ConﬂuentpolarizedepithelialcellswereinfectedwithRSVatanMOIof 0 . 5orwithmediumcontrolattheindicatedtimepoints . ( A ) Theactincytoskeletonwasvisualizedbyﬂuorescentlylabeledphalloidinandconfocalmicroscopy . ( B ) Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting with antibodies against phospho - PKD ( Ph - PKD ) / PKC ( Ser 744 / 748 ) , total PKD , and GAPDH . RSV infection induced PKD phosphorylationbeginningat3h , withanotherpeakat24h . TheexpressionoftotalPKDalsoslightlyincreasedatlatertimepoints ( (cid:1) 24h ) . Theimagesarerepresentative of 3 independent experiments . ( C ) Densitometric quantiﬁcation of at least 3 independent experiments for Ph - PKD and PKD Western blotting using RSV asshown in panelB . ( D ) PolarizedepithelialcellswereinfectedwithUV - irradiatedRSV . Likelivevirus , UV - irradiatedvirusledtoincreasedexpressionofphospho - PKDatearlytime points . However , thesecondpeakwasnotobservedinUV - inactivatedRSV , conﬁrmingthatthelateeffectrequireslivereplicatingvirus . ( E ) Densitometricquantiﬁcation of at least 3 independent experiments using UV - irradiated virus as shown in panel D . The error bars indicate SEM . * , P (cid:7) 0 . 05 ; * * , P (cid:7) 0 . 01 ; * * * , P (cid:7) 0 . 001 . FIG5 RSV - inducedepithelialjunctiondisassemblyismediatedbyPKD . ( A ) Conﬂuent16HBE140 - cellmonolayerswereinfectedwithRSVatanMOIof0 . 5for 48 h in the presence or absence of two structurally unrelated PKD inhibitors ( Gö6976 [ 10 (cid:1) M ; Calbiochem ] and CID755673 [ 10 (cid:1) M ; Tocris ] ) . TJ and AJ were visualizedbyimmunoﬂuorescentstainingandconfocalmicroscopy . NotetheintactAJandTJstainingincontrolnoninfectedcells ( arrows ) , whichwasdisrupted in RSV - infected cells ( arrowheads ) . AJ and TJ surface expression were restored in RSV - infected cells pretreated with two structurally unrelated PKD inhibitors . ( B ) Cells were infected with RSV at an MOI of 0 . 5 for 48 h in the presence or absence of PKD inhibitors , and a permeability assay with 3 - kDa ﬂuorescein - conjugated dextran was performed at 48 h posttreatment . Both inhibitors signiﬁcantly attenuated the barrier - disrupting effects of RSV . The images are representative of at least 3 independent experiments . The data are presented as means plus SEM of 3 experiments . * * * , P (cid:7) 0 . 001 . Rezaee et al . 11092 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m infection reduced transepithelial electrical resistance across air - way epithelial monolayers ( 25 ) . Our results clearly show that RSV infection leads to marked disassembly of AJC , resulting in in - creased paracellular permeability ( Fig . 1A and B ) . Inducible junc - tion dysfunction may promote viral replication by allowing para - cellular escape of basolateral viral particles ( 26 ) . We speculate that another consequence of virus - induced epithelial permeability might be increased “outside - in” translocation of inhaled particles that are deposited in the airway . In the case of inhaled aeroaller - gens , increased paracellular translocation facilitates uptake by in - traepithelial dendritic cells and may help explain the association between respiratory viral infection and allergen sensitization in asthma . The observation that RSV also paradoxically promotes epithe - lial cell survival ( 5 , 18 , 19 , 27 ) raises the intriguing possibility that a “leaky airway” may persist after acute infection . At present , there are no assays of outside - in airway epithelial barrier function in human subjects in routine clinical use , but development of such assays may prove useful in the future to determine the clinical signiﬁcance of the mechanisms we report here . Originally known as PKC (cid:1) , this molecule was renamed PKD because it has a different structure and substrate speciﬁcity than other PKC family members ( 10 , 28 ) . In other cell types , PKD regulates cell shape and motility , in part by controlling actin dy - namics , but it has not been well studied in the lung ( 12 , 29 – 32 ) . A recent study uncovered a key role for PKD in a mouse model of hypersensitivity pneumonitis ( 33 ) , and the Caenorhabiditis elegans PKD homolog DKF - 2 was found to regulate intestinal in - nate immunity ( 34 ) . Thus , PKD may play a broader role in regu - lating airway mucosal immune responses , and further study of the expression and function of this signaling molecule in asthma and otherairwaydiseasesseemswarranted . Therecentdevelopmentof selective benzoxoloazepinolone PKD inhibitor ( Fig . 5 and 7 ) should accelerate research in this area ( 22 , 35 – 37 ) . The compound is a potent and cell - permeable inhibitor of PKD . Although any chemical inhibitor might have potential off - target effects , we used two structurally unrelated antagonists that prevented RSV - in - duced junctional disassembly , as well as PKD phosphorylation , thus fulﬁlling two key criteria of inhibitor speciﬁcity ( 38 ) . We found that RSV , similar to the synthetic double - stranded RNA poly ( I - C ) ( 9 ) , induced phosphorylation of PKD on Ser 744 / 748 , a key step in PKD activation ( 39 ) . Both RSV infection and exposure disrupted apical junction complexes in a PKD - de - pendent manner , and both also led to PKD - dependent cortactin phosphorylation ( Fig . 7 and data not shown ) . Thus , even though they engage different pattern recognition receptors , RSV and poly ( I - C ) converge on PKD and cortactin to cause epithelial bar - rier dysfunction . Our kinetic analysis uncovered temporally distinct patterns of FIG 6 RSV induces upregulation of TLR3 , which requires infection with live replicating virus and is inhibited by PKD inhibitor . ( A ) Conﬂuent polarized epithelial cells were infected with RSV at an MOI of 0 . 5 or with medium control at the indicated time points . Cell lysates were immunoblotted and probed with antibodies against TLR3 . ( B ) UV irradiation of RSV did not change virus - induced TLR expression . Polarized epithelial cells were infected with equal amounts of UV - irradiated RSV , and the protein was subjected to Western blot analysis . No change in TLR3 expression was noted with UV irradiation , which again indicates the requirement for live replicating virus in this process . The images are representative of at least 3 independent experi - ments . FIG 7 RSV infection induced phosphorylation of cortactin , which was inhibited by a PKD inhibitor . Conﬂuent polarized epithelial cells were infected with RSV at an MOI of 0 . 5 or with medium control at the indicated time points . Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting with antibodies directed against phospho - cortactin ( pS405 ) , total cortactin ( p80 / 85 ; clone 4F11 ) , and GAPDH . ( A ) RSV infection caused cortactin phosphorylation , which was blocked by PKD inhibition . ( B ) Densitometric quantiﬁcation of at least 3 independent experiments as shown in panel A . The error bars indicate SEM . * * , P (cid:7) 0 . 01 . ( C ) UV inactivation of RSV changed the pattern of cortactin phosphorylation . Polarized epithelial cells were infected with UV - irradiated RSV . Like live virus , irradiated virus led to expression of phospho - cortactin at early time points . However , the second peak was not observed in UV - inactivated RSV , conﬁrming that the late effect requires live replicating virus . ( D ) Densitometric quantiﬁcation of at least 3 independent experiments as shown in panel C . * , P (cid:7) 0 . 05 ; * * * , P (cid:7) 0 . 001 . ( E ) Confocal images of epithelial cells show marked redistribution of cortical actin ﬁbers and redistribution of cortactin in RSV - infected cells into intracellular vesicles . The bottom row shows increased colocalization of actin and cortactin in response to RSV infection ( yellow staining ) . The data are representative of 3 independent experiments . Respiratory Syncytial Virus Disrupts Airway Barrier October 2013 Volume 87 Number 20 jvi . asm . org 11093 on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m activation of signaling molecules in response to RSV and UV - inactivated RSV , which allowed us to construct the following model . UV - RSV induced only the early phase of PKD and cortac - tin phosphorylation ( Fig . 4D and 7C ) without affecting AJC struc - ture or function ( Fig . 3A and B ) . In contrast , nonirradiated RSV induced both early and sustained PKD activation and cortactin phosphorylation ( Fig . 4B and 7A ) . This suggests that live replicat - ing virus is required to cause sustained PKD activation and sufﬁ - cient cortactin - dependent actin remodeling to cause AJC disas - sembly . This model is consistent with earlier work by Monick et al . showing that RSV induced biphasic PKC and MAPK activation in A549 cells ( 14 ) . Since RSV ( and not UV - RSV ) also resulted in upregulation of TLR3 ( Fig . 6A and B ) , which we previously found was responsible in part for poly ( I - C ) - induced AJC disassembly ( 9 ) , we speculate that sustained viral replication generates a posi - tive - feedback loop amplifying signaling modules that lead to bar - rier dysfunction . RSV was discovered more than 50 years ago and continues to be a chief cause of hospitalization worldwide , not only in infants , but also in older and high - risk adults ( 3 ) . RSV infection in child - hood has been linked to chronic inﬂammation and asthma ( 40 – 42 ) , and although we have a very detailed understanding of RSV immunopathogenesis ( 43 – 47 ) , current treatment strategies for RSV infection are largely supportive . Palivizumab , which is ap - proved for RSV prophylaxis in high - risk infants , has only moder - ately decreased hospital admission due to RSV infection ( 48 , 49 ) . Here , we report a new pathway of RSV - induced junctional com - plex disassembly that likely contributes to airway epithelial barrier dysfunction and inﬂammation in vivo . Therapeutic strategies that interfere with virus - induced barrier dysfunction and restore epi - thelial barrier integrity may hold promise in the future . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dieter C . Gruenert ( University of California ) for providing 16HBE14o - and Elizabeth R . Sharlow ( University of Virginia ) for provid - ing protein kinase D inhibitor ( CID755673 ) . We gratefully acknowledge Edward E . Walsh for providing RSVA2 and for his helpful suggestions during the course of these studies . We gratefully acknowledge Mark Peeples ( Nationwide Children’s Hospital Research Institute , OH ) and Peter Collins ( NIH ) for providing the rgRSV244 . We thank Linda Calla - han and Paivi Jordan ( URMC Confocal Imaging Core ) for their helpful assistance . This work was supported by NIH T32 HD057821 ( F . R . ) , NIH K12HD068373 ( F . R . ) , NIH R01 HL071933 ( S . N . G . ) , NIH P30 ES001247 ( S . N . G . ) , NIH DK084953 ( A . I . I . ) , DK083968 ( A . I . I . ) , and NIH F32 HL110718 ( T . J . C . ) . All of the authors approved the ﬁnal submitted version of the manu - script . REFERENCES 1 . Hall CB , Weinberg GA , Iwane MK , Blumkin AK , Edwards KM , Staat MA , Auinger P , Grifﬁn MR , Poehling KA , Erdman D , Grijalva CG , Zhu Y , Szilagyi P . 2009 . The burden of respiratory syncytial virus infection in young children . N . Engl . J . Med . 360 : 588 – 598 . 2 . Nair H , Nokes DJ , Gessner BD , Dherani M , Madhi SA , Singleton RJ , O’Brien KL , Roca A , Wright PF , Bruce N , Chandran A , Theodoratou E , Sutanto A , Sedyaningsih ER , Ngama M , Munywoki PK , Kartasasmita C , Simoes EA , Rudan I , Weber MW , Campbell H . 2010 . Global burden of acute lower respiratory infections due to respiratory syncytial virus in young children : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Lancet 375 : 1545 – 1555 . 3 . Falsey AR , Hennessey PA , Formica MA , Cox C , Walsh EE . 2005 . Respiratory syncytial virus infection in elderly and high - risk adults . N . Engl . J . Med . 352 : 1749 – 1759 . 4 . Lotz MT , Peebles RS , Jr . 2012 . Mechanisms of respiratory syncytial virus modulation of airway immune responses . Curr . Allergy Asthma Rep . 12 : 380 – 387 . 5 . Domachowske JB , Bonville CA , Mortelliti AJ , Colella CB , Kim U , RosenbergHF . 2000 . Respiratorysyncytialvirusinfectioninducesexpres - sion of the anti - apoptosis gene IEX - 1L in human respiratory epithelial cells . J . Infect . Dis . 181 : 824 – 830 . 6 . Sajjan U , Wang Q , Zhao Y , Gruenert DC , Hershenson MB . 2008 . Rhinovirus disrupts the barrier function of polarized airway epithelial cells . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 178 : 1271 – 1281 . 7 . Xiao C , Puddicombe SM , Field S , Haywood J , Broughton - Head V , Puxeddu I , Haitchi HM , Vernon - Wilson E , Sammut D , Bedke N , Cremin C , Sones J , Djukanovic R , Howarth PH , Collins JE , Holgate ST , MonkP , DaviesDE . 2011 . Defectiveepithelialbarrierfunctioninasthma . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 128 : 549 – 556 . 8 . Niessen CM . 2007 . Tight junctions / adherens junctions : basic structure and function . J . Investig . Dermatol . 127 : 2525 – 2532 . 9 . Rezaee F , Meednu N , Emo JA , Saatian B , Chapman TJ , Naydenov NG , De Benedetto A , Beck LA , Ivanov AI , Georas SN . 2011 . Polyinosinic : polycytidylicacidinducesproteinkinaseD - dependentdisassemblyofapi - cal junctions and barrier dysfunction in airway epithelial cells . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 128 : 1216 – 1224 . 10 . Valverde AM , Sinnett - Smith J , Van Lint J , Rozengurt E . 1994 . Molec - FIG8 PKDinhibitordidnotinhibitearlyRSVinfectionorviralreplicationinepithelialcells . PolarizedepithelialcellswerepreincubatedwithPKDinhibitorfor 2 h , followed by infection with rgRSV at an MOI of 0 . 05 to 0 . 5 , and rinsed twice with PBS after 2 h , followed by incubation at 37°C for 16 h . Palivizumab , a monoclonal antibody against RSV fusion ( F ) protein , was used as a positive control , which was also added 2 h before RSV infection . Sixteen hours post - RSV infection , live cells were subjected to ﬂuorescence microscopy . ( A and B ) GFP (cid:8) cells are readily apparent after rgRSV infection , which was completely inhibited using pavilizumab . In contrast , the PKD inhibitor did not affect the number of GFP (cid:8) cells . A representative example ( A , lower right ) and averages of 3 experiments ( B ) are shown . ( C ) In parallel , inhibition of PKD did not affect RSV replication , as determined in cells infected with RSV A2 and by RT - PCR with primers that amplify the RSV A2 F protein . The images are representative of 3 independent experiments . The data are representative of three experiments ( n (cid:10) 3 per experiment ) . The error bars indicate SEM . Rezaee et al . 11094 jvi . asm . org Journal of Virology on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ular cloning and characterization of protein kinase D : a target for diacyl - glycerol and phorbol esters with a distinctive catalytic domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 : 8572 – 8576 . 11 . Eiseler T , Schmid MA , Topbas F , Pﬁzenmaier K , Hausser A . 2007 . PKD is recruited to sites of actin remodelling at the leading edge and negatively regulates cell migration . FEBS Lett . 581 : 4279 – 4287 . 12 . Eiseler T , Hausser A , De Kimpe L , Van Lint J , Pﬁzenmaier K . 2010 . Protein kinase D controls actin polymerization and cell motility through phosphorylation of cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 18672 – 18683 . 13 . Bougneres L , Girardin SE , Weed SA , Karginov AV , Olivo - Marin JC , Parsons JT , Sansonetti PJ , Van Nhieu GT . 2004 . Cortactin and Crk cooperate to trigger actin polymerization during Shigella invasion of epi - thelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 166 : 225 – 235 . 14 . Monick M , Staber J , Thomas K , Hunninghake G . 2001 . Respiratory syncytial virus infection results in activation of multiple protein kinase C isoforms leading to activation of mitogen - activated protein kinase . J . Im - munol . 166 : 2681 – 2687 . 15 . San - Juan - Vergara H , Peeples ME , Lockey RF , Mohapatra SS . 2004 . Protein kinase C - alpha activity is required for respiratory syncytial virus fusion to human bronchial epithelial cells . J . Virol . 78 : 13717 – 13726 . 16 . Hallak LK , Spillmann D , Collins PL , Peeples ME . 2000 . Glycosamino - glycan sulfation requirements for respiratory syncytial virus infection . J . Virol . 74 : 10508 – 10513 . 17 . Rezaee F , Gibson LF , Piktel D , Othumpangat S , Piedimonte G . 2011 . Respiratorysyncytialvirusinfectioninhumanbonemarrowstromalcells . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 45 : 277 – 286 . 18 . Groskreutz DJ , Monick MM , Yarovinsky TO , Powers LS , Quelle DE , Varga SM , Look DC , Hunninghake GW . 2007 . Respiratory syncytial virus decreases p53 protein to prolong survival of airway epithelial cells . J . Immunol . 179 : 2741 – 2747 . 19 . Bitko V , Shulyayeva O , Mazumder B , Musiyenko A , Ramaswamy M , Look DC , Barik S . 2007 . Nonstructural proteins of respiratory syncytial virus suppress premature apoptosis by an NF - kappaB - dependent , inter - feron - independent mechanism and facilitate virus growth . J . Virol . 81 : 1786 – 1795 . 20 . Ivanov AI . 2008 . Actin motors that drive formation and disassembly of epithelial apical junctions . Front . Biosci . 13 : 6662 – 6681 . 21 . George A , Pushkaran S , Li L , An X , Zheng Y , Mohandas N , Joiner CH , KalfaTA . 2010 . Alteredphosphorylationofcytoskeletonproteinsinsickle red blood cells : the role of protein kinase C , Rac GTPases , and reactive oxygen species . Blood Cells Mol . Dis . 45 : 41 – 45 . 22 . Sharlow ER , Giridhar KV , LaValle CR , Chen J , Leimgruber S , Barrett R , Bravo - Altamirano K , Wipf P , Lazo JS , Wang QJ . 2008 . Potent and selective disruption of protein kinase D functionality by a benzoxoloaz - epinolone . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 33516 – 33526 . 23 . TurnerJR . 2009 . Intestinalmucosalbarrierfunctioninhealthanddisease . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 9 : 799 – 809 . 24 . Comstock AT , Ganesan S , Chattoraj A , Faris AN , Margolis BL , Hersh - enson MB , Sajjan US . 2011 . Rhinovirus - induced barrier dysfunction in polarizedairwayepithelialcellsismediatedbyNADPHoxidase1 . J . Virol . 85 : 6795 – 6808 . 25 . Singh D , McCann KL , Imani F . 2007 . MAPK and heat shock protein 27 activation are associated with respiratory syncytial virus induction of hu - manbronchialepithelialmonolayerdisruption . Am . J . Physiol . LungCell . Mol . Physiol . 293 : L436 – L445 . 26 . Walters RW , Freimuth P , Moninger TO , Ganske I , Zabner J , Welsh MJ . 2002 . Adenovirus ﬁber disrupts CAR - mediated intercellular adhesion al - lowing virus escape . Cell 110 : 789 – 799 . 27 . Zhang L , Peeples ME , Boucher RC , Collins PL , Pickles RJ . 2002 . Respiratory syncytial virus infection of human airway epithelial cells is polarized , speciﬁc to ciliated cells , and without obvious cytopathology . J . Virol . 76 : 5654 – 5666 . 28 . Nishikawa K , Toker A , Johannes FJ , Songyang Z , Cantley LC . 1997 . Determination of the speciﬁc substrate sequence motifs of protein kinase C isozymes . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 952 – 960 . 29 . Sinnett - Smith J , Rozengurt N , Kui R , Huang C , Rozengurt E . 2011 . Protein kinase D1 mediates stimulation of DNA synthesis and prolifera - tion in intestinal epithelial IEC - 18 cells and in mouse intestinal crypts . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 511 – 520 . 30 . Sinnett - Smith J , Jacamo R , Kui R , Wang YM , Young SH , Rey O , Waldron RT , Rozengurt E . 2009 . Protein kinase D mediates mitogenic signalingbyGq - coupledreceptorsthroughproteinkinaseC - independent regulation of activation loop Ser744 and Ser748 phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 13434 – 13445 . 31 . Ziegler S , Eiseler T , Scholz RP , Beck A , Link G , Hausser A . 2011 . A novel protein kinase D phosphorylation site in the tumor suppressor Rab inter - actor 1 is critical for coordination of cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 : 570 – 580 . 32 . Matthews SA , Navarro MN , Sinclair LV , Emslie E , Feijoo - Carnero C , Cantrell DA . 2010 . Unique functions for protein kinase D1 and protein kinase D2 in mammalian cells . Biochem . J . 432 : 153 – 163 . 33 . Kim YI , Park JE , Brand DD , Fitzpatrick EA , Yi AK . 2010 . Protein kinase D1 is essential for the proinﬂammatory response induced by hypersensi - tivity pneumonitis - causing thermophilic actinomycetes Saccharopoly - spora rectivirgula . J . Immunol . 184 : 3145 – 3156 . 34 . Ren M , Feng H , Fu Y , Land M , Rubin CS . 2009 . Protein kinase D is an essential regulator of C . elegans innate immunity . Immunity 30 : 521 – 532 . 35 . Bravo - Altamirano K , George KM , Frantz MC , Lavalle CR , Tandon M , Leimgruber S , Sharlow ER , Lazo JS , Wang QJ , Wipf P . 2011 . Synthesis and structure - activity relationships of benzothienothiazepinone inhibi - tors of protein kinase D . ACS Med . Chem . Lett . 2 : 154 – 159 . 36 . George KM , Frantz MC , Bravo - Altamirano K , Lavalle CR , Tandon M , Leimgruber S , Sharlow ER , Lazo JS , Wang QJ , Wipf P . 2011 . Design , synthesis , and biological evaluation of PKD inhibitors . Pharmaceutics 3 : 186 – 228 . 37 . Sharlow ER , Mustata Wilson G , Close D , Leimgruber S , Tandon M , Reed RB , Shun TY , Wang QJ , Wipf P , Lazo JS . 2011 . Discovery of diverse small molecule chemotypes with cell - based PKD1 inhibitory ac - tivity . PLoS One 6 : e25134 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0025134 . 38 . Cohen P . 2010 . Guidelines for the effective use of chemical inhibitors of protein function to understand their roles in cell regulation . Biochem . J . 425 : 53 – 54 . 39 . Iglesias T , Waldron RT , Rozengurt E . 1998 . Identiﬁcation of in vivo phosphorylation sites required for protein kinase D activation . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 27662 – 27667 . 40 . Sigurs N , Bjarnason R , Sigurbergsson F , Kjellman B . 2000 . Respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis in infancy is an important risk factor for asthmaandallergyatage7 . Am . J . Respir . Crit . CareMed . 161 : 1501 – 1507 . 41 . Stein RT , Sherrill D , Morgan WJ , Holberg CJ , Halonen M , Taussig LM , Wright AL , Martinez FD . 1999 . Respiratory syncytial virus in early life and risk of wheeze and allergy by age 13 years . Lancet 354 : 541 – 545 . 42 . Peebles RS , Jr . 2004 . Viral infections , atopy , and asthma : is there a causal relationship ? J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 113 : S15 – S18 . 43 . Becker S , Reed W , Henderson FW , Noah TL . 1997 . RSV infection of human airway epithelial cells causes production of the beta - chemokine RANTES . Am . J . Physiol . 272 : L512 – L520 . 44 . Zhang Y , Luxon BA , Casola A , Garofalo RP , Jamaluddin M , Brasier AR . 2001 . Expression of respiratory syncytial virus - induced chemokine gene networks in lower airway epithelial cells revealed by cDNA microarrays . J . Virol . 75 : 9044 – 9058 . 45 . Piedimonte G , Hegele RG , Auais A . 2004 . Persistent airway inﬂamma - tionafterresolutionofrespiratorysyncytialvirusinfectioninrats . Pediatr . Res . 55 : 657 – 665 . 46 . King KA , Hu C , Rodriguez MM , Romaguera R , Jiang X , Piedimonte G . 2001 . Exaggerated neurogenic inﬂammation and substance P receptor upregulation in RSV - infected weanling rats . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 24 : 101 – 107 . 47 . Piedimonte G . 2003 . Contribution of neuroimmune mechanisms to air - way inﬂammation and remodeling during and after respiratory syncytial virus infection . Pediatr . Infect . Dis . J . 22 : S66 – S75 . 48 . Bauer G , Bossi L , Santoalla M , Rodriguez S , Farina D , Speranza AM . 2009 . Impact of a respiratory disease prevention program in high - risk preterm infants : a prospective , multicentric study . Arch . Argentin . Pediatr . 107 : 111 – 118 . ( In Spanish ) . 49 . IMpact - RSV Study Group . 1998 . Palivizumab , a humanized respiratory syncytial virus monoclonal antibody , reduces hospitalization from respi - ratory syncytial virus infection in high - risk infants . Pediatrics 102 : 531 – 537 . Respiratory Syncytial Virus Disrupts Airway Barrier October 2013 Volume 87 Number 20 jvi . asm . org 11095 on J une 1 , 2015 b y F L O R I D A I N T L UN I V / G L810 h tt p : / / j v i . a s m . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m