ABSTRACT Humor in the classroom has been shown to have many positive effects on attention , attitude , and engagement in higher order thinking skills . This study examined the effect on motivation and science performance of using humorous cartoons to teach mineral and rock concepts to sixth grade students as compared to more traditional methods . Four classes of students were randomly assigned to two groups , A ( N = 30 ) and B ( N = 33 ) that alternated between conditions for two units : minerals and rocks . Performance was determined using open - ended identical pretest / posttest instruments . Both groups received quality instruction on concepts addressed by the assessment , accessed the text , examined specimens , worked in cooperative groups , and attended class for equal amounts of time . Experimental procedures included viewing cartoons , interpreting the science facts , identifying the humor mechanism , improving cartoons , completing given cartoons , and creating original cartoons . Control procedures included lecture , discussion , written exercises and creation of a study outline . Students in the experimental condition exhibited higher motivation and significantly higher gain scores than students in the control condition ( 23 . 5 % gain compared to 12 . 3 % ) . Cohen ' s effect size was large , 0 . 953 . Students ' higher performance is attributed to their intense engagement with the content through the scaffolded cartoon activities . INTRODUCTION Reasons for Using Humor in Teaching - Humor in the classroom brings many desirable effects . It increases students ' attention and motivates them to participate in lessons ( Ulloth , 2002 ) . Attention is one of the most important factors in learning , as students must first pay attention to something in order to remember it ( Higbee , 1996 ) . Wittrock ( 1986 ) found that attention to a learning task was more important to student retention of information than the amount of time spent on the task . Unfortunately , Snell ( 2000 ) observed that attention spans of today ' s students are shorter than previous generations , owing in part to long - term exposure to rapidly changing electronic media images . Recent evidence from a study by Christakis , Zimmerman , DiGiuseppe , and McCarty ( 2004 ) supports this assertion . They found that an increase in the hours of television viewed per day for young children was associated with a later rise in attentional problems . Our society uses entertainment to boost interest : through movie previews , video games , and television commercials , with performers at fairs or sales , with fortunes or jokes in bubblegum and cookies , and with toys packaged in fast food meals . Because of these changes in entertainment expectations and attention spans of today ' s students , education methods may also need to change to include new ways to engage students . McLaughlin ( 2001 ) and Cookson ( 2003 ) contend that humor is the easiest form of engagement available to teachers because students must pay attention to understand the jokes . Some teach ers be lieve us ing hu mor in a class room is un pro fes sional . Early au thors of lit er a ture ad dress ing hu mor in schools viewed it as un dig ni fied and un nec es - sary ( Fisher , 1997 ) . How ever , re cent in ves ti ga tors have shown that hu mor can in spire and mo ti vate stu dents to achieve ments that were oth er wise thought un at tain able ( Guthrie , 1999 ) . Not only can humor maintain student attention , but also it can increase motivation by breaking tension and decreasing anxiety ( Guthrie , 1999 ) . This enhances positive attitudes toward the subject . James ( 2001 ) observed that administrators viewed classrooms without humor as having a high degree of order , but students found such classes boring . Students saw classes that incorporated humor as attention grabbing and highly supportive . Interestingly , the same study found that colleagues viewed teachers who used humor as having positive , caring classrooms . Gurtler ( 2002 ) found that teachers with a perceived sense of humor tended to encourage social learning and have more cooperative classrooms . A study by Ulloth ( 2002 ) showed that humor enabled the instructor to break down the barrier between the teacher and the student , allowing learning to be more comfortable . Berk ( 2002 ) contended that the two most important reasons to use humor are to build the teacher - student connection and to engage students in learning . Other studies ( Mitchell and McNally 2004 ; Flowers , 2001 ; Aria , 2002 ; Doring , 2002 ; James , 2001 ) highlighted the effectiveness of humor in increasing creativity in the classroom , noting that students who listened to humorous tapes or comedic movies scored better on creativity tests . Different Types of Humor - There are three main theories of humor ( James , 2001 ) . One theory is the superiority theory , which states that humor stems from a perception of superiority over another . This occurs when a member of one group ridicules another because he / she doesn ' t fit within the group norms . Because students need to feel that the classroom environment is safe and the teacher is a caring person , an instructor must be careful with this humor to make sure no people are belittled . However , when humor is applied to non - human groups ( minerals or rocks of the current study , for example ) this type of humor may be appropriate . Figure 1A , a cartoon drawn by the second author , illustrates this type of humor . A second theory is the relief theory , which asserts that humor is used as a tension reliever or as a defense mechanism . Jokes made about negative aspects of our lives , such as death or uncomfortable situations , support this theory . McLaughlin ( 2001 ) tells how job lay - offs were made funny as an employer hired a comedian to 548 Journal of Geoscience Education , v . 53 , n . 5 , November , 2005 , p . 548 - 558 Using Humorous Cartoons to Teach Mineral and Rock Concepts in Sixth Grade Science Class Audrey C . Rule Department of Curriculum and Instruction , State University of New York at Oswego , Oswego , NY 13126 , arule @ oswego . edu Jeremie Auge Department of Curriculum and Instruction , State University of New York at Oswego , Oswego , NY 13126 , jauge @ apw . cnyric . org help employees see the lighter side of the situation . Hawkey ( 1998 ) also used this type of humor to make the classroom environment more productive and relaxed . There is clearly room for use of this theory in the classroom setting , especially when applied to pressures students feel during tests . Berk ( 2000 ) , in a six - year study of undergraduate and graduate classes , found that humor inserted into tests reduced anxiety and improved performance among students . Figures 1B and 1C illustrate this type of humor . Flannery ( 1993 ) found that some science teachers communicate their excessively serious attitudes toward science to their classes , generating unnecessary tension and intimidating students . Humor can lighten and brighten a serious subject , allowing students to take the risks necessary to tackle a daunting subject ( Ulloth , 2002 ) . In a study involving students in a technology class , Flowers ( 2001 ) observed that humor allowed him to close the teacher - student gap and make work between himself and the students more cooperative . Williams ( 1995 ) gave extra credit to students who wrote limericks that were selected and read during a college chemistry class . Students said that the poetry lightened the class and gave a necessary break to refocus their attention . Humor can also be used in classroom management or in dealing with potentially dangerous situations . It is difficult for a student to remain destructive or aggressive when that same student is laughing . Using humor as a deescalating practice aids in the classroom management and keeps the classroom safe ( Richardson and Shupe , 2003 ) . The third theory of humor is the incongruity theory . This type of humor involves surprise , twists , word plays or absurd situations . Figures 1C and 1D illustrate this idea . The reinterpretation of a situation or event allows students to use higher level thinking skills ( Aria , 2002 ) . Often these thinking skills involve parody or analogy . There is much evidence for the effectiveness of using analogy in teaching ( Brown , 1994 ; Clement , 1993 ; Duit , 1991 ; Glynn , 1989 ; Harrison and Treagust , 1993 ; Lin , Shiau , and Lawrenz , 1996 ; Rule and Furletti , 2004 ; Rule and Rust , 2001 , Silkebakken and Camp , 1993 ; Sutton , 1993 ; Thiele and Treagust , 1991 , 1994 ; Zook , 1991 , among others ) . An analogy allows students to view the target concept in a more familiar way , thereby making many different connections between the new concept and previous knowledge . Similarly , a humorous parody involves seeing an unfamiliar concept in a recognized context , facilitating insights and highlighting similarities . The mental processes involved in recognizing humor are very similar to those used in creativity ( Derks , 1987 ; O ' Quinn and Derks , 1997 ) and problem solving ( Goldstein , Harmon , McGee , and Karasik , 1975 ; Johnson , 1990 ) . Suls ( 1972 , 1983 ) identified two main parts to mental processing of humor . The first stage is the Rule and Auge - Using Humorous Cartoons to Teach Mineral and Rock Concepts 549 Figure 1 . Examples of cartoons presented to students during instruction . recognition of the incongruity in the humorous situation , which resembles identifying the problem ( part of problem solving ) . The second stage is comprehension of the punchline , which is similar to solving the problem . Because both humor and problem solving involve the same thought processes , they reinforce each other ( Berk , 2002 ) . In this way , the use of humor has a positive impact on learning . Standards and Focus of the Study - This investigation explores the use of humorous cartoons in the teaching of rock and mineral concepts in a sixth grade general science classroom . The National Science Education Science Content Standards ( National Research Council , 1996 , p . 149 ) state in Physical Science Content Standard B , " As a result of their activities in grades 5 - 8 , all students should develop an understanding of properties and changes of properties in matter . " Determining the physical properties of minerals supports this standard . Content Standard D addressing Earth ( p . 158 ) , " As a result of their activities in grades 5 - 8 , all students should develop an understanding of the structure of the Earth system . " This includes the rock cycle , concepts of weathering , erosion , deposition , soils , effects of organisms , burial of sediments , compaction , recrystallization , metamorphism , volcanism , and plate tectonis . The study of minerals , rocks , and the rock cycle is supported by the Benchmarks for Science Literacy ( American Association for the advancement of Science , 1993 ) . Under the heading of " The Physical Setting , " students in grades 6 through 8 should study the Earth , processes that shape the Earth , and the structure of matter . These standards address very similar ideas as described for the National Science Teaching Standards above . Additionally , the state in which the study took place , New York , has science content standards ( The University of the State of New York and the State Education Department , 2001 ) for intermediate grades ( 5 - 8 ) . One of the " Physical Setting Skills " that intermediate level students should master is to " use a diagram of the rock cycle to determine geological processes that led to the formation of a specific rock type " ( p . 11 ) . Also , performance indicator 2 . 1e ( p . 22 ) states that students should know that " Rocks are composed of minerals . Only a few rock - forming minerals make up most of the rocks of Earth . Minerals are identified on the basis of physical properties such as streak , hardness , and reaction to acid . " The creative aspects of learning through humor address a science domain that is often neglected , the Creativity Domain defined by Yager ( 2000 ) in " A vision for what science education should be like for the first 25 years of the new millennium . " Some of the activities suggested for this domain that are supported by teaching with cartoons are : combining objects and ideas in new ways , producing unusual ideas , and solving problems or puzzles . These activities exercise critical and creative thinking skills that support learning . It is hypothesized that students taught science concepts through viewing , critiquing , improving , completing , and creating humorous cartoons will retain the information better than students taught using more traditional methods as demonstrated by performance gains on a pretest - posttest assessment . It is also hypothesized that a class environment of recognizing and creating humor will result in higher motivation for students under the experimental condition . METHOD Subjects and Setting - The study took place at a rural middle school in central New York State . Four classes of 14 , 16 , 16 , and 17 students ( N = 63 ) enrolled in sixth grade science classes taught by the second author participated . Classes were randomly assigned to groups and conditions . A class of 14 students and a class of 16 students formed Group A ; another class of 16 students and a class of 17 students formed Group B . Consent of parents , school officials , and human subjects committee of the overseeing university was obtained for all participants . Procedure - The investigation had a pretest / posttest counterbalanced design . This study examined the effect of presenting content material related to minerals and rocks through humorous cartoons and cartoon - writing activities as compared to traditional methods of lecture , text , and worksheets . Classes alternated between the control and experimental condition for the two units of study : " Minerals " and " Rocks , " as shown in Table 1 . In stru men ta tion - Iden ti cal pre test / posttest as sess - ments com posed of two sec tions ( one part fo cus ing on min er als , the other on rocks ) that mea sured stu dent per - for mance on sev eral dif fer ent con cepts re lated to min er - als and rocks was ad min is tered be fore the start of the study and at its con clu sion . Each of the two sec tions had 42 pos si ble points . The main concepts covered by the minerals section were the criteria for a mineral ( naturally occurring , inorganic , solid , definite composition , crystal structure ) and the physical properties of minerals ( hardness including Mohs Scale , color , streak , luster , density , crystal form , cleavage or fracture , habit , and special properties such as fluorescence , radioactivity , and magnetism ) . The two test questions for this unit were : 1 ) List five important criteria for deciding if a substance is a mineral or not . Give two examples for each - one of a mineral that fulfills the criterion , and one of a substance that does not . 2 ) What are the nine tests or observation methods that geologists use in identifying a mineral ? Give two different mineral examples of each . The concepts addressed by the rocks section of the test included the classification of rocks by texture , mineral composition , origin and uses of the three types of rocks ( igneous , sedimentary , metamorphic ) , and the rock cycle . Students also needed to identify , define , or apply the following terms or concepts to the appropriate rocks : extrusive , intrusive , high or low silica content , glassy , fine , coarse or porphyritic texture ( igneous rocks ) ; clastic , chemical , organic , along with erosion , deposition , compaction , and cementation ( sedimentary rocks ) ; and foliated or non - foliated ( metamorphic rocks ) . 550 Journal of Geoscience Education , v . 53 , n . 5 , November , 2005 , p . 548 - 558 Class A B Condition MineralsUnit Experimental Control RocksUnit Control Experimental Number of Students 30 33 Female 20 16 Male 10 17 Table 1 . Demographics of the sample population and experiemental set - up . The seven test questions for the rock unit ware : 1 ) Name the three major classification categories of rocks . Then , using an example rock from each of the three categories , describe the three methods that geologists use to determine which type of rock it is . 2 ) What is the primary human use of all or any of the three rock types ? 3 ) What are the three ways that geologists classify an igneous rock ? Give an example of each using technical terms as much as possible . 4 ) Describe the process of formation of a clastic sedimentary rock and provide two different examples . 5 ) Identify the other two types of sedimentary rock , tell how each forms , and provide two examples for each . 6 ) Describe how metamorphic rocks are formed and the major way they are classified . Provide two examples for each type of classification , telling the starting and ending material . 7 ) Draw and label the rock cycle . The students were surveyed for their thoughts about the two units of instruction at the close of the study with ten questions shown with results in Table 3 . They were also asked the following two questions . Which method of learning about Earth ' s materials did you like or enjoy most and why ? Which method helped you learn the most and why ? Control of Variables - Students operating under both conditions had access to the text ( Vogel , 2002 ) , worked in small cooperative groups , and had the same experiences with mineral and rock specimens . Each group participated in seven thirty - nine minute lessons for each of the two units . The concepts addressed on the pretest / posttest were emphasized in both conditions and available in the text . The second author taught all lessons of both conditions with confidence and enthusiasm . He had been teaching these units previously using the traditional methods described under the control condition with success . However , he was curious to see the effects on student performance and motivation of using cartoons to teach about minerals and rocks . Experimental Group Procedures - The following procedures were implemented for the experimental condition . 1 . The instructor showed portions of the electronic slide show , discussing and highlighting the science content . Each cartoon slide was preceded by a slide that presented information about a mineral or rock concept . Often , this explanatory slide showed photographs of specimens with accompanying definitions or criteria . The following cartoon then directly applied this content in a humorous way . 2 . Students were encouraged to work cooperatively in small groups during all lessons . 3 . Students received a paper handout that showed three cartoons on a page with space next to each for writing . The authors created the cartoons used in this study . Students : 1 ) defined the science concept Rule and Auge - Using Humorous Cartoons to Teach Mineral and Rock Concepts 551 Figure 2 . Cartoons presented during instruction with student humor improvements . addressed by the cartoon and 2 ) described the reason why the cartoon was humorous . 4 . The instructor discussed the limits of appropriate humor for the classroom : no put - downs of other students or racial / ethnic / religious groups , no profanity , no vulgarity , no sexual content . The instructor suggested that any student wondering about appropriateness of humor should discuss it with the instructor . Puns , word plays , parodies on current events or common human experiences were suggested as good situations for humor . 5 . Students then worked in groups and chose two cartoons to edit . Adding or changing parts to make it funnier improved one cartoon . The other cartoon was changed to improve the teaching of the science concepts . Figures 2A and 2B show cartoons made by the first author . 2C and 2D are student variations on these cartoons that improved the humor . Figures 3A and 3B show additional cartoons made by the first author . Figures 3C and 3D are student cartoons that increase the amount of science information presented . 6 . Students were given partially completed cartoons and added details to them to teach a science concept in a humorous way . Figures 4A and 4B show two of the partly completed cartoons offered to students . Figures 4C and 4D show examples of student work . 7 . Students created their own original cartoons to teach science concepts related to the unit . They completed cartoons as homework assignments . Figures 5A - D present four examples of original student cartoons . 8 . Students had the text available as a reference for additional information . 9 . Hand specimens of the rocks or minerals were discussed and passed around . Control Group Procedures - The following procedures were implemented in the control condition . 1 . The instructor asked students to tell what they knew about the science topic and discussed student ideas . 2 . The instructor lectured about the science information , stopping to discuss difficult concepts . 3 . Stu dents , work ing in co op er a tive groups , com pleted guided read ing and study worksheets ( Prentice Hall , 2000a and 2000b ) that co or di nated with the text ( Vogel , 2002 ) . Ac tiv ities in cluded com plet ing mul ti - ple - choice ques tions , fill - in - the - blank ques tions for def i ni tions of terms , true and false , as well as short an swer ques tions . 4 . The instructor reviewed the correct answers for the exercises and discussed the concepts . 5 . Students completed a worksheet assignment as homework made by the publishers of the text that corresponded with the unit . 6 . The instructor reviewed the correct answers for the exercises and discussed the concepts . 552 Journal of Geoscience Education , v . 53 , n . 5 , November , 2005 , p . 548 - 558 Figure 3 . Cartoons presented during instruction with student science content improvements . 7 . Students completed enrichment assignments that coordinated with the text . 8 . Students were asked to produce their own study guides to use in reviewing for the quiz on the topic being addressed ( minerals or rocks ) . They were allowed to work with a partner in creating the study guide . 9 . Students read the text as they developed the study sheet . 10 . Hand specimens were discussed and passed around . RESULTS The mean pretest , posttest , and gain scores are shown in Table 2 for students studying the two units , " Minerals " and " Rocks " under different conditions . The attitude survey and tabulated student responses are shown in Table 3 . Table 4 lists the frequency of different responses for additional questions about the condition students enjoyed more and the one in which students thought they learned best along with reasons why they perceived it was better for learning . ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS Pretest Results - Pretest scores in Table 2 show that all students in both groups had very little background knowledge in minerals and rocks , the two units of instruction . The highest any one student scored on the pretest was a score of 5 out of 42 on the rock pretest and a score of 1 out of 42 on the minerals pretest . The mean pretest score of the experimental groups on both units combined was 0 . 4 ( out of 42 ) while the mean pretest score of the control groups on both units combined was 0 . 3 . Therefore , both groups were essentially the same in initial knowledge . Posttest and Gain Score Results - Groups under both conditions gained knowledge through the lessons . However , groups in the experimental condition made significantly larger gains . An analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) conducted on gain scores of students for both units ( minerals and rocks combined ) revealed a significant difference in gain scores between the two conditions ( F = 28 . 58 , df = 1 / 124 , p < 0 . 001 ) . The mean gain score for students learning either mineral concepts or rock concepts under the experimental condition was 9 . 9 points ( 23 . 5 % ) , as compared to only 5 . 2 points ( 12 . 3 % ) under the control conditions . Student performance in each of the two units revealed a comparable pattern . In the experimental condition of both units , students had similar mean gain scores : 9 . 8 points ( 23 . 3 % ) for minerals and 10 . 0 points ( 23 . 7 % ) for rocks . Students studying in the control group Rule and Auge - Using Humorous Cartoons to Teach Mineral and Rock Concepts 553 Figure 4 . Unfinished cartoons and completed examples . conditions had much smaller mean gain scores : 6 . 3 points ( 14 . 9 % ) for minerals and 3 . 9 points ( 9 . 4 % ) for rocks . Students in the control condition did better on the minerals unit than on the rocks unit . This is perhaps because students studying minerals in the control condition completed the written exercises quickly and had extra time to devote to review of the material with the teacher . This did not occur during the rocks unit . The repetition of concepts may account for better student performance on minerals in the control condition . Effect Size - The analysis of variance described above , though providing information of the statistical significance of student performance differences under the control and experimental conditions , does not reflect the magnitude of the effect . The American Psychological Association , in their publication manual ( 2001 ) , which defines guidelines for publication adhered to by many education journals , suggests that an effect size be reported for quantitative studies in the social sciences ( this would include geoscience education studies ) . A common measure is Cohen ' s effect size ( Cohen , 1988 ) , the standardized mean difference between the experimental and control groups . The formula for this calculation is the mean of the experimental group minus the mean of the control group divided by the pooled standard deviation . The pooled standard deviation is the square root of the average of the squared standard deviations . The calculated value of the effect size for gain scores in this study was 0 . 953 . The effect size for this study is large and may be interpreted in two ways . First , it can be thought of as the average percentile standing of students during the experimental condition relative to the average performance of students under the control condition . An effect size of 0 . 953 indicates that the mean of the student performance using cartoons is at the 83rd percentile of the untreated group - indicating that students learning under the experimental condition performed far above the typical performance of students under the control condition . The effect size can also be interpreted as the percent of nonoverlap of the scores obtained for the experimental condition with those of the control condition . An effect size of 0 . 953 indicates a nonoverlap of about 54 % in the two distributions . This shows that there was a large difference between student performances under the two conditions . The effect size calculation , therefore , shows that the treatment of viewing , analyzing , improving , and creating cartoons had a significant and large effect on student performance . Teacher ' s Observations - Students reacted differently to the two conditions . Most students enjoyed learning science in the new method of using cartoons as evidenced by their enthusiasm in class . Students asked daily if they would be watching the cartoons , and if they 554 Journal of Geoscience Education , v . 53 , n . 5 , November , 2005 , p . 548 - 558 Figure 5 . Students’ original cartoons . would have the chance to draw their own cartoons . They quickly took their seats and frequently were ready to begin class before the late bell rang . Many students voiced that they really liked the cartoon slide shows and would like to learn more topics in this manner throughout the year . Students in the control condition were disappointed that they were not shown the cartoon slide shows . They frequently commented that it was " unfair " that the other class was able to learn through cartoons . Many students in the control condition exhibited little excitement about science class , a strong contrast to their behavior in the experimental condition . The teacher had to request that students take their seats to begin the day ' s lesson . Students collectively groaned " oh " when the day ' s activities were described , followed almost immediately by , " Why can ' t we see the cartoons ? " However , some students thought they learned better through more traditional means . One student was adamant that she " hated " the cartoons and was not learning the material through this condition . She wanted to read the textbook while the other students were watching the slides , but this was not allowed . Interestingly , this same student scored 6 points higher on her post - test when she was in the experimental group compared to her performance under the control condition . Clearly , her perception of learning during the two conditions was faulty . This is most likely a consequence of her unfamiliarity with this method of teaching and learning . She may have felt more comfortable with the traditional method and unsure of her learning under a new condition that seemed too much like play . Student Responses to the Survey Questions - Table 3 shows that a majority of students preferred the cartoon method of learning to the traditional method of note taking and written exercises . The reasons students gave for this choice were enjoyment of humor , enhanced discussions , novelty of the method , opportunity to draw cartoons , and ease of understanding concepts . Students who thought they learned best with cartoons noted their attention - grabbing nature , the facilitation of comprehension of the cartoons , more examples and better descriptions of concepts , the need to pay attention to understand the jokes , and the ease of recalling the cartoon examples . Students who thought they learned better under the control conditions stated that it was easier for them to use a method closely tied to the text with which they were familiar and which distracted them less . Limitations of the Study - Students did not perform as well on the assessment as the investigators had hoped . The test required sixth grade students to remember and produce too many details for their first experiences with minerals and rocks . Therefore , their scores were low . However , the test remains a good measure of the science information retained by students . In How Students Learn : History , Mathematics , and Science in the Classroom ( Donovan and Bransford , 2005 ) , the Board on Behavioral , Cognitive , and Sensory Science and Education discussed the importance of students knowing both " Big Ideas " of science and facts : " knowledge of facts and knowledge of important organizing ideas are mutually supportive . . . Studies of experts and novices . . . demonstrate that experts know considerably more relevant detail than novices in tasks within their domain and have better memory for these details . . . But the reason they remember more is that what novices see as separate pieces of information , experts see as organized sets of ideas " ( p . 7 ) . In our assessment , we asked students to both address organizing ideas such as physical properties of minerals or components of the rock cycle , and to give factual examples such as specific minerals and their properties . Because there were only seven 39 - minute lessons on each topic , because students started with no prior knowledge in these specific minerals / rocks content areas , and because the test asked students to produce examples from memory rather than choose from possible responses ( as in multiple choice or matching ) the amount of learning of details they exhibited on this assessment was appropriate . The instructor also administered the same unit tests ( a minerals test and a rocks test ) to students as he had used in previous years . Scores on this multiple - choice , modified true - false , short answer , and essay unit test supplied by the textbook publisher ( Prentice Hall , 2002c ) followed the same pattern of scores as occurred on this study ' s pretest / posttest . Students scored higher on the two tests when in the experimental condition . Class A ' s mean on the minerals unit test was 84 . 8 % with a standard deviation of 12 . 3 % ( experimental condition ) , while Class B ' s mean was 77 . 1 % with a standard deviation of 14 . 9 % ( control condition ) . Similarly , Class B ' s mean on the rocks unit test was 83 . 9 % with a standard deviation of 12 . 1 % ( experimental ) , and Class A ' s mean was 76 . 8 % with a standard deviation of 15 . 5 % ( control ) . Rule and Auge - Using Humorous Cartoons to Teach Mineral and Rock Concepts 555 Group N Condition Topic Pretest Posttest Gain Points out of 42 % Points out of 42 % Points out of 42 % A 30 Experimental Minerals 0 . 0 ( 0 . 0 ) 0 . 0 ( 0 . 0 ) 9 . 8 ( 7 . 0 ) 23 . 3 ( 16 . 7 ) 9 . 8 ( 7 . 0 ) 23 . 3 ( 16 . 7 ) B 33 Control 0 . 1 ( 0 . 2 ) 0 . 1 ( 0 . 6 ) 6 . 3 ( 3 . 5 ) 15 . 1 ( 8 . 4 ) 6 . 3 ( 3 . 6 ) 14 . 9 ( 0 . 8 ) B 33 Experimental Rocks 0 . 8 ( 1 . 5 ) 2 . 0 ( 3 . 5 ) 10 . 8 ( 6 . 0 ) 25 . 8 ( 14 . 4 ) 10 . 0 ( 5 . 4 ) 23 . 7 ( 12 . 8 ) A 30 Control 0 . 6 ( 1 . 1 ) 1 . 3 ( 2 . 6 ) 4 . 5 ( 3 . 0 ) 10 . 7 ( 7 . 2 ) 3 . 9 ( 2 . 7 ) 9 . 4 ( 6 . 4 ) A & B 63 Experimental Both 0 . 4 ( 1 . 1 ) 1 . 1 ( 2 . 7 ) 10 . 3 ( 6 . 5 ) 24 . 6 ( 15 . 4 ) 9 . 9 ( 6 . 1 ) 23 . 5 ( 14 . 6 ) A & B 63 Control 0 . 3 ( 0 . 8 ) 0 . 7 ( 1 . 9 ) 5 . 5 ( 3 . 4 ) 13 . 0 ( 8 . 1 ) 5 . 2 ( 3 . 4 ) 12 . 3 ( 8 . 0 ) Table 2 . Mean pretest , posttest , and gain scores for student performance on the mineral and rock assessment . Standard deviations are shown in parentheses . A limitation for the experimental condition was the availability of technology in the school building . There were several days that the LCD projector used to present the cartoon slide show was not available . At those times black and white , rather than color , copies of the slides were shown using an overhead projector . A stack of overheads proved to be difficult for the teacher to manage and hindered the smooth progression of the lesson as compared to the electronic slide show . This wasted some of the teaching time for the experimental condition . Another limitation for the experimental condition involved the humorous circumstances depicted in the cartoons . It was difficult to find contemporary issues to make light of for all of the different science concepts taught in the two units of study . For this reason some of the humor used in the cartoons was " dated , " meaning the parody referred to past styles or events with which students were unfamiliar . The " age " of the humor made some of the cartoons more difficult for the students to understand . The teacher explained the humor , but funny situations closer to sixth grade students ' backgrounds may better facilitate their understanding . Conclusion - Teaching science to middle school students is a challenging task . Educators must seek new and exciting ways to reach these young teenagers . Using humor appeals to students while boosting their learning . As evidenced by this study , students that learned using cartoons achieved higher test scores as well as provided examples of why they enjoyed learning in this manner . The cartoons were an effective pedagogical technique because they created a learning environment in which students : 1 ) experienced a high degree of motivation to recognize and produce humor ; 2 ) viewed and analyzed visual images that enhanced memory ( for a discussion of the importance of visuals , see Rule , 2003 ) ; 3 ) made numerous connections between the new material and prior knowledge through parody and analogy ( similar to results of study using analogies by Rule and Furletti , 2004 ) ; 4 ) identified concepts of which they were unsure and sought clarification from the instructor or text as they attempted to create or improve cartoons ( for a discussion of the importance of self - assessment , see Vye et . al , 1998 or Donovan and Bransford , 2005 , p 10 - 11 ) ; and 5 ) engaged in self - motivated practice as they reviewed cartoons for improvement and created their own cartoons . An important point here is that viewing cartoons is not enough : students need to analyze , critique , improve , and create their own cartoons . It is this intense involvement with and practice of the concepts in a self - motivated way that helps students understand and remember them . The success of the cartoon activities can be related to social learning theory and constructivism . Vygotsky ' s social learning theory ( Kozulin , 2003 ) stipulates that mediating agents help the learner make sense of the environment , facilitating learning . Vygotsky ' s concept of a student ' s " Zone of Proximal Development " asserts that each student has psychological functions that are emerging but not fully developed . Others ( the teacher and peers ) , through mediation such as encouragement , modeling , or explanation , assist the student in acquiring emerging skills or concepts into the student ' s actual development . As students worked in small groups on the cartoon activities , they encouraged each other and discussed ideas , which enhanced their learning . The teacher , through the tools of the slide shows , the organization of the activities , and by interaction with students , was also a mediating agent . The activities were scaffolded so that the students first recognized science content and humor in the cartoons ; secondly , added to these components ; then completed partially - finished cartoons ; and finally , created original cartoons . This sequence moved the student forward step by step to higher levels of thinking , pushing the boundaries of the zone of proximal development . According to constructivist learning theory , in order to learn , students must engage with information and process it deeply enough to fit the new concepts into their views of how the world works . As students interpreted , edited , completed , and created cartoons , they interacted intensely with the content , organizing , recognizing , and internalizing the concepts . They self - assessed their learning as they tried to put ideas together to improve or create cartoons and consulted 556 Journal of Geoscience Education , v . 53 , n . 5 , November , 2005 , p . 548 - 558 Statements to which students respond Agreed Neutral Disagreed Agreed Neutral Disagreed Group and Condition for Minerals Unit Group A Experimental Condition Group B Control Condition 1 . I liked learning about minerals . 19 8 3 15 12 6 2 . I now know a lot about minerals . 18 13 2 15 13 5 3 . My teacher’s method of teaching about minerals worked well . 28 1 1 16 9 8 4 . I enjoyed learning about minerals more than other science topics so far this year . 24 3 3 8 13 13 5 . It was easier for me to learn about minerals than other science topics . 22 7 1 10 11 12 Group and Condition for Rock Unit Group A Control Condition Groub B Experimental Condition 6 . I liked learning about rocks . 8 15 7 27 5 1 7 . I now know a lot about rocks . 12 16 1 26 5 3 8 . My teacher’s method of teaching about rocks worked well . 9 14 4 24 3 5 9 . I enjoyed learning about rocks more than other science topics this year . 5 12 13 22 8 3 10 . It was easier for me to learn about rocks than other science topics this year . 5 19 5 26 4 3 Table 3 . Survey results of students in both groups . peers , the teacher , or their textbook for verification of their ideas . They made numerous connections to prior knowledge as they searched for appropriate parodies or situations for their original cartoons . These activities reinforced the learning , allowing them to outperform students in the control condition who were not as engaged with the material . Additional research will determine whether the use of this model of interpreting , editing , completing , and originating humorous cartoons can be extrapolated into other units of study , as well as other subjects . Humor is a technique that has been overlooked in the field of education , and studies like this and others mentioned earlier in the literature review provide evidence that it is a method that needs to be taken more seriously . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank the following students for their cartoon drawings that appear in this article : Zach Dolan , Angela Dusharm , John Fischer , Zana Gervaise , Tricia Murphy , Cassy Page , Brooke Pidkaminy , and Joette Payne . REFERENCES American Association for the Advancement of Science , 1993 , Benchmarks for science literacy . Washington , DC , Author , 217 p . American Psychological Association , 2001 , Publication manual of the American Psychological Association ( 5th edition ) , Washington , DC , American Psychological Association . Aria , C . , 2002 , The use of humor in vocabulary instruction , Unpublished masters thesis , Kean University , Eric Document Reproduction Service No . ED 463 537 , 50 p . Berk , R . , 2000 , Does humor in course tests reduce anxiety and improve performance ? College Teaching , v . 48 , p . 151 - 158 . Berk , R . A . , 2002 , Humor as an instructional defibrillator : Evidence - based techniques in teaching and assessment , Sterling , VA , Stylus , 268 p . Brown , D . E . , 1994 , Facilitating conceptual change using analogies and explanatory models , International Journal of Science Education , v . 16 , p . 201 - 214 . Clement , J . , 1993 , Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students ' preconceptions in physics , Journal of Research in Science Teaching , v . 30 , p . 1241 - 1257 . Cohen , J . , 1988 , Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences ( 2nd ed . ) , Hillsdale , NJ , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 567 p . Cookson , P . , Jr . , 2003 , The elements of trust , Teach PreK - 8 , v . 34 , p . 12 . Christakis , D . A . , Zimmerman , F . J . , DiGiuseppe , D . L . , and McCarty , C . A . , 2004 , Early television exposure and subsequent attentional problems in children , Pediatrics , v . 113 , p . 708 - 713 . Derks , P . L . , 1987 , Humor production : an examination of three models of creativity , Journal of Creative Behavior , v . 21 , p . 326 - 326 . Donovan , M . S . , and Bransford , J . D . , eds . , 2005 , How students learn : History , mathematics , and science in the classroom , Washington , DC , National Academies Press , 616 p . Doring , A . , 2002 , The use of cartoons as a teaching and learning strategy with adult learners . New Zealand Journal of Adult Learning , v . 30 , p . 56 - 62 . Duit , R . , 1991 , On the role of analogies and metaphors in learning science , Science Education , v . 75 , p . 649 - 672 . Fisher , M . , 1997 , The effect of humor on learning in a planetarium , Science Education , v . 81 p . 703 - 713 . Flannery , M . , 1993 , Making science a laughing matter , Journal of College Science Teaching , v . 22 , p . 239 - 241 . Flowers , J . , 2001 , The value of humor in technology education , The Technology Teacher , v . 60 , p . 10 - 13 . Glynn , S . M . , 1989 , Explaining science concepts : A teaching with analogies model , In : Glynn , S . M . , Yeany , R . H . , and Britton , B . K . , editors , The Psychology of learning science Hillsdale , NY , Erlbaum , p 219 - 240 . Goldstein , J . H . , Harmon , J . McGhee , P . E . , and Karasik , R . , 1975 , Test of an information processing model of humor : Physiological response changes during problem and riddle solving , Journal of General Psychology , v . 92 , p . 59 - 68 . Gurtler , L . , 2002 , Humor in educational contexts , Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association , Chicago , IL , ERIC Document Reproduction Service No . ED 470 407 , 18 p . Guthrie , P . , 1999 , Knowledge through humor : an original approach for teaching developmental readers , Presented at the annual meeting of the National Institute for Staff and Organizational Development International Conference on Teaching and Rule and Auge - Using Humorous Cartoons to Teach Mineral and Rock Concepts 557 Situation and Preception N Reasons students enjoyed the cartoons Learning with the cartoons was more fun and they were funny . 17 We were able to discuss the concepts more . 10 It was something different , not the same old thing . 8 I really like to draw , and I could during this unit . 7 Cartoons made it easier to understand . 7 Reasons students enjoyed the traditional condition It is easier . 6 The book has more details . 5 More experience learning from the book . 1 Reasons students thought they learned better with cartoons It was more fun / funny and that helped me pay attention . 15 I was able to understand the cartoons better . 8 I learn better when I can see examples . 7 The descriptions were better in the cartoons . 2 I had to pay more attention to understand . 1 It is easier to remember the cartoon examples . 1 Reasons student thought they learned better with the traditional method . It is easier to follow along with the book . 5 There are more details in the book . 5 I have more experience with the traditional way . 3 We fool around less when we use the book . 2 Table 4 Student responses to final questions . Some students offered multiple reasons . N equals the number of students responding with that idea . Leadership Excellence , Austin , TX , Eric Document Reproduction Service No . ED 434 328 , 48 p . Harrison , A . G . , and Treagust , D . F . , 1993 , Teaching with analogies : A case study in grade - 10 optics , Journal of Research in Science Teaching , v . 30 , p . 1291 - 1307 . Hawkey , R . , 1998 , Have you heard the one about…science ? . School Science Review , v . 80 p . 29 - 36 . Higbee , K . L . , 1996 , Your memory : How it works and how to improve it , New York , Marlowe and Company , 265 p . James , D . , 2001 , Split a gut and learn : Theory and research , Unpublished manuscript , Eric Document Reproduction Service No . ED 458 671 , 10 p . Johnson , A . M . , 1990 , A study of humor and the right hemisphere , Perceptual and Motor Skills , v . 70 , p . 995 - 1002 . Kozulin , A . , 2003 , Psychological tools and mediated learning , In : Kozulin , A . , Gindid , B . , Ageyev , V . S . , and Miller , S . M . ( eds . ) , Vygotsky ' s educational theory in cultural context , p . 15 - 38 , Cambridge , UK , Cambridge University Press . Lin , H . , Shiau , B . , and Lawrenz , F . , 1996 , The effectiveness of teaching science with pictorial analogies , Research in Science Education , v . 26 , p . 495 - 511 . McDermott , P . , and Rothenberg , J . , 1999 , Teaching in high poverty , urban schools - learning from practitioners and students , Presented at annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , Montreal , Canada , ERIC Document Reproduction Service No . ED 431 058 , 19 p . McLaughlin , K . , 2001 , The lighter side of learning , Training , v . 38 , p . 48 , 50 , 52 . Mitchell , M . , and McNally , K . , 2004 , Using humor in the classroom , Techniques , v . 79 , p . 22 - 25 . National Research Council , 1996 , National science education standards : Observe , interact , change , learn , Washington , DC , National Academy Press , 262 p . O ' Quin , K . and Derks , P . L . , 1997 , Humor and creativity : A review of the empirical literature , In : Runco , M . , editor , Creativity research handbook , Cresskill , NJ , Hampton Press , p . 223 - 252 . Prentice Hall , 2002a , Scientific Explorer . Inside earth : Guided reading and study workbook , Needham , MA , Prentice Hall . Prentice Hall , 2002b , Teaching resources with color transparencies for inside earth , Needham , MA , Prentice Hall . Prentice Hall , 2002c , Prentice Hall Resource Pro : Test Generator , Needham , MA , Prentice Hall . Richardson , B . and Shupe , M . , 2003 , The importance of teacher self - awareness in working with students with emotional and behavioral disorders , Teaching Exceptional Children , v . 36 , p . 8 - 13 . Rule , A . C . , 2003 , The rhyming peg mnemonic device applied to learning the Mohs scale of hardness , Journal of Geoscience Education , v . 51 , p . 465 - 73 . Rule , A . C . and Furletti , C . , 2004 , Using form and function analogy object boxes to teach human body systems , School Science and Mathematics , v . 104 , p . 155 - 169 . Rule , A . C . , and Rust , C . , 2001 , A bat is like a . . . , Science and Children , v . 39 , p . 26 - 31 . Silkebakken , G . and Camp , D . , 1993 , A five - step strategy for teaching analogous reasoning to middle school students , Middle School Journal , v . 24 , p . 47 - 50 . Snell , J . C . , 2000 , Teaching gen X and Y : An essay part 2 : Teaching strategies , College Student Journal , v . 34 , p . 482 - 484 . Suls , J . M . , 1972 , A two - stage model for the appreciation of jokes and cartoons : An information - processing analysis , In : Goldstein , J . H . , Jeffrey , H . , and McGhee , P . E . , editors , The psychology of humor : Theoretical perspective and empirical issues , New York , Academic Press , p . 81 - 100 . Suls , J . M . , 1983 , Cognitive processes in humor appreciation , In : McGhee , P . E . , and Goldstein , J . H . , editors , Handbook of humor research : Volume I , basic issues , New York , Springer - Verlag , p . 39 - 58 . Sutton , C . , 1993 , Figuring out a scientific understanding , Journal of Research in Science Teaching , v . 30 , p . 1215 - 1227 . The University of the State of New York , The State Education Department , 2001 , Intermediate level science core curriculum : Grades 5 - 8 . [ online ] . Available : http : / / www . emsc . nysed . gov / ciai / mst / pub / intersci . pdf Thiele , R , and Treagust , D . F . , 1991 , Using analogies to aid understanding in secondary chemistry education , ERIC Document Reproduction Service No . Ed 349 164 , 14 p . Thiele , R , and Treagust , D . F . , 1994 , An interpretive examination of high school chemistry teacher ' s analogical explanations , Journal of Research in Science Teaching , v . 31 , p 227 - 242 . Ulloth , J . , 2002 , The benefits of humor in nursing education , Journal of Nursing Education , v . 41 p . 476 - 481 . Vogel , C . , 2002 , Science explorer : inside earth ( 1st ed . ) , Needham , MA , Prentice Hall . Vye , N . J . , D . L . Schwartz , J . D . Bransford , B . J . Barron , L . Zech , and Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt , 1998 , SMART environments that support monitoring , reflection , and revision , in Hacker , D . , Dunlosky , J . , and Graesser , A . , editors , Metacognition in Educational Theory and Practice , Mahwah , NJ , Erlbaum . Williams , F . , 1995 , There once was a teacher from tech… : the use of chemical limericks in the classroom , Journal of Chemical Education , v . 72 , p . 1123 - 1124 . Wittrock , M . C . , 1986 , Students ' thought processes , In : Wittrock , M . C . , Editor , Handbook of research on teaching , New York : McMillan , p . 297 - 314 . Yager , R . E . , 2000 , A vision for what science education should be like for the first 25 years of the new millennium , School Science and Mathematics , v . 100 , p . 327 - 341 . Zook , K . B . , 1991 , Effects of analogical processes on learning and misrepresentation , Educational Psychology Review , v . 3 , p . 41 - 72 . 558 Journal of Geoscience Education , v . 53 , n . 5 , November , 2005 , p . 548 - 558 Practical , creative , and innovative ideas for teaching geoscience Name ( print or type ) Phone Mailing Address Fax City State Country Postal Code E - mail College / University Professor at Pre - College Teacher at Other at Checks ( US funds only ) are payable to National Association of Geoscience Teachers . Mail to : NAGT , 31 Crestview Dr . , Napa , CA 94558 USA Please charge my credit card for my membership fees Visa MC Credit Card # Exp . Date Signature The membership year runs from January through December , and members receive 5 issues of JGE per year . Subscrip - tions received after June 1 will begin receiving the Journal in January of the following year . Back issues are available for $ 15 each ( $ 18 foreign ) . * To qualify for student rate , indicate status below , and obtain verification from an NAGT member . Undergraduate Graduate Signature of NAGT member School National Association of Geoscience Teachers Individual Subscription & Membership Rates ( US Funds ) Regular USA $ 35 _ _ _ Outside USA $ 47 _ _ _ Student * USA $ 20 _ _ _ Student * outside USA $ 32 _ _ _ Retired NAGT member $ 30 _ _ _ Library Subscriptions Regular USA $ 75 _ _ _ Outside USA $ 87 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ New _ _ _ _ Renewal