Pablo Rougerie Veronika Miskolci Dianne Cox Generation of membrane structures during phagocytosis and chemotaxis of macrophages : role and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton Authors’ addresses Pablo Rougerie 1 , Veronika Miskolci 1 , Dianne Cox 1 , 2 , 3 1 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY , USA . 2 Developmental and Molecular Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY , USA . 3 Gruss - Lipper Biophotonics Center , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY , USA . Correspondence to : Dianne Cox Gruss - Lipper Biophotonics Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine 1300 Morris Park Ave . MRRC306 Bronx , NY 10461 , USA Tel . : + 1 718 430 4005 Fax : + 1 718 430 8996 e - mail : dianne . cox @ einstein . yu . edu Acknowledgements This work was supported by NIH grant GM071828 ( D . C . ) . V . M . is a recipient of Cellular , Molecular Biology and Genetics training grant GM007491 . We would like to thank Michael Cammer for critical reading of the manuscript . The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to declare . This article is part of a series of reviews covering The Cytoskeleton appearing in Volume 256 of Immunological Reviews . Summary : Macrophages are best known for their protective search and destroy functions against invading microorganisms . These processes are commonly known as chemotaxis and phagocytosis . Both of these pro - cesses require actin cytoskeletal remodeling to produce distinct F - actin - rich membrane structures called lamellipodia and phagocytic cups . This review will focus on the mechanisms by which macrophages regulate actin polymerization through initial receptor signaling and subsequent Arp2 / 3 activation by nucleation - promoting factors like the WASP / WAVE family , followed by remodeling of actin networks to produce these very distinct structures . Keywords : chemotaxis , GPCR , CSF - 1 , WASP / WAVE , Arp2 / 3 , phagocytosis General introduction Elie Metchnikoff was the ﬁrst to morphologically distinguish macrophages from other white blood cells , and his pioneer - ing work laid the foundation for our understanding and recognition of these immune cells as indispensable to our innate and adaptive immunity ( 1 ) . Macrophages are best known for their protective functions that include seeking out and eliminating infectious agents , repairing tissue dam - age , and mediating inﬂammatory response ( 2 ) . In addition , macrophages play important roles in homeostatic tissue maintenance . Macrophages are resident cells in tissues including lung ( alveolar ) , liver ( Kuppfer cells ) , brain ( microglia ) , and bone ( osteoclast ) , originating from either primitive myeloid progenitors , which arise in the yolk sac , or recruited peripheral monocyte precursors that differentiate into mature macrophages in situ ( 3 ) . Macrophages possess a highly specialized set of abilities that allow them to carry out these important functions . Macrophages are highly motile cells that are able to move in a wide range of environments . Monocyte / macrophages Immunological Reviews 2013 Vol . 256 : 222 – 239 Printed in Singapore . All rights reserved © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 0105 - 2896 © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 222 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 are capable of endothelial transmigration ( diapedesis ) that consist of paracellular or transcellular transmigration across the endothelial cells of blood vessels followed by breaking through the associated basement membrane ( 4 ) . Monocyte / macrophages are also able to migrate along two - dimensional ( 2D ) surfaces such as blood vessel walls , as in patrolling monocytes ( 5 ) , as well as in complex three - dimensional ( 3D ) extracellular environments . Furthermore , macrophages have the ability to alternate between amoeboid - or mesen - chymal - like migratory modes in 3D environments ( 6 ) . Another major feature of macrophages is their ability to internalize particles larger than 0 . 5 l m by a process known as phagocytosis ( hence their name – big eaters ) . As opposed to other ways to internalize external content , such as endo - cytosis or macro - and micropinocytosis , phagocytosis targets big solid particles and needs to be triggered by direct ligand – receptor contacts between the particle and the phagocyte . The ability of phagocytes to engulf and ingest external pathogens , dead cells , or many other types of parti - cles is a fundamental process in homeostasis and the immune defense of the organism ( 7 ) . The nucleation - promoting factors : key to F - actin formation Both migration and phagocytosis involve two processes : ﬁrst the sensing of external cues ( chemoattractants or phagocytic targets ) , and second the controlled generation of mechanical forces which will lead to conspicuous deformation of the cell body . These changes in cell morphology are dependent on Arp2 / 3 - triggered actin polymerization ( 8 , 9 ) . Indeed , the Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for many cellular functions in addition to phagocytosis and migration including endocy - tosis , endosomal fusion and formation of adhesions and junctions ( reviewed in 10 ) . Consistent with its importance in cell function , Arp2 / 3 is normally kept in an inactivate state until needed for the formation of F - actin and it relies on nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) to favor the initia - tion of new ﬁlaments . Many of the NPFs for Arp2 / 3 belong to the well - known Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family . This family consists of WASP ( restricted to hematopoietic cells ) , neural WASP ( N - WASP ) , WASP family verprolin - homologous proteins ( WAVE ) 1 , 2 , and 3 , and other more exotic members WASH , WHAMM , and JMY . WHAMM has been shown to be important for endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) to Golgi transport ( 11 ) , and WASH is involved in vesicle trafﬁcking ( 12 ) . While JMY has been implicated in cell motility and actin polymerization in an Arp2 / 3 - independent manner ( 13 ) , the other members stim - ulate de novo actin polymerization by binding to and activat - ing the Arp2 / 3 complex via their conserved VCA domain ( verprolin homology , central hydrophobic , and acid regions ) ( 10 ) . Only WASP , N - WASP , and WAVE 2 have been implicated in the macrophage functions that are discussed here . More information of the other members of the WASP family can be found elsewhere ( 14 ) . Adjacent to the VCA domain , a proline - rich region represents a binding site for SH3 domain - containing proteins and is also shared by these WASP family proteins . The N - termini are more divergent with WASP and N - WASP bearing a WASP homology domain ( WH1 ) , followed by a short basic region and a GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) capable of binding GTP - loaded Cdc42 ( Fig . 1A ) . WIP ( WASP - interacting protein ) interacts with the WH1 domain of N - WASP and WASP and performs critical regulatory functions and is primarily required for the stability of WASP protein levels in vivo ( 15 ) . A B Fig . 1 . Mechanism of activation of WASP / N - WASP . ( A ) Domain structure of WASP and N - WASP ( N - WASP differs from WASP by containing an additional V domain ) . ( B ) Mechanism of activation of WASP by relaxation of the autoinhibited conformation allowing for actin monomer and Arp2 / 3 binding to the VCA domain . Note that other pathways can induce or potentiate activation of WASP . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 223 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups Additional structural differences between WASP and N - WASP may be responsible for the different functions of these proteins in vivo . In particular , N - WASP has an addi - tional verprolin homology domain that enhances actin poly - merization in vitro compared to WASP ( 16 ) . Like Arp2 / 3 , the NPFs are also kept in an inactive state until needed . Both WASP and N - WASP are autoinhibited through the sequestration of the VCA domain by its binding to the GBD . Activation of WASP family members occurs through a con - formational change that frees the VCA domain to bind to the Arp2 / 3 complex and can occur through multiple mech - anisms such as binding of Cdc42 or SH3 domain - containing proteins ( Fig . 1B ) . Subsequent oligomerization of the VCA domain can also increase actin polymerization ( reviewed in 17 ) . Additional signals can also activate WASP and tyrosine phosphorylation on Tyr291 residue of WASP results in activation of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization in vitro ( 18 ) . Cdc42 - dependent WASP conformational opening is a prerequisite for the tyrosine phosphorylation of WASP and related effects ( 19 , 20 ) , demonstrating a key role for Cdc42 in WASP function . Although there are three members of the WAVE family , monocytes express both WAVE 1 and WAVE 2 , and only WAVE 2 , the ubiquitously expressed family member , is present in mature macrophages ( 21 ) . WAVE proteins pos - sess their own N - terminal WAVE homology domain ( WH2 ) immediately followed by a basic stretch that binds to PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 , a proline - rich region known to interact with SH3 domain - containing proteins , and a C - terminal VCA domain found in all WASP / WAVE proteins ( Fig . 2A ) . The WH2 domain of WAVE binds to a complex of proteins called the Abi1 complex that is important in WAVE protein stabiliza - tion . Importantly , while WAVE proteins do not have a com - parable region to the GBD of WASP , it is a downstream effector of Rac . The interaction of Rac with WAVE proteins has been proposed to occur through either the Abi1 com - plex or with IRSp53 ( reviewed in 22 – 24 ) . Recently , the mechanism by which WAVE is activated has been identiﬁed through structural analysis , where the binding of Rac and phospholipids recruits WAVE2 to the membrane and frees the VCA domain for Arp2 / 3 binding ( 25 ) ( Fig . 2B ) . In addi - tion , there is evidence for the importance of phosphoryla - tion of WAVE and the Abi1 complex in the regulation of WAVE activity ( reviewed in 26 ) . All these suggest that the regulation of WAVE proteins is as complex , if not more so , than the WASP family members . Overall , the WASP / WAVE NPFs can be seen as signaling hubs that integrate various upstream cues to elicit appropriate actin responses . Despite the functional importance of actin response in migration and phagocytosis , many gaps exist in our under - standing of its dynamics leading to the generation of distinct F - actin - rich membrane structures . This review presents our current knowledge . Phagocytosis Phagocytosis requires a conspicuous change in shape of the cell : it needs to deform to engulf particles that may repre - sent a substantial fraction of its cellular size . It is now beyond doubt that the actin cytoskeleton , as a major actor of cellular morphology , is the primary force driving phago - cytosis . However , more than a 100 years after the ﬁrst description of this phenomenon , many gray areas remain . One of the difﬁculties encountered when studying phago - cytosis is the tremendous diversity of receptors and ligands that can trigger it , each resulting in different downstream pathways . In macrophages , research has mostly focused on two phagocytic receptors : the Fc c receptor ( Fc c R ) and the complement receptor 3 ( CR3 ) ( also known as integrin a M b 2 , Mac1 , and CD11b / CD18 ) . The former helps recog - nize particles opsonized by antibodies and the latter binds particles coated with the complement molecule C3b . Given that most of the available data have been obtained with the Fc c R - triggered phagocytosis , we use it as a stan - dard model . Similarities and differences with CR3 - triggered A B Fig . 2 . Mechanism of activation of WAVE . ( A ) Domain structure of WAVE 2 . ( B ) Mechanism of WAVE 2 activation downstream of Rac1 . Rac1 does not bind directly to WAVE complex , but depends instead on interactions with Abi1 and IRSp53 . WAVE complex in turn activates the ARP2 / 3 complex , which nucleates branched F - actin . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 224 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups phagocytosis will be discussed in the second part . This review focuses only on actin and actin - related roles in phagocytosis . Fc c R phagocytosis In pioneer studies several decades ago , it was observed that macrophages in the presence of IgG - opsonized beads would progressively extend membrane processes to wrap around the bead until engulfment was complete . However , when only one hemisphere of the beads was coated , the macro - phages stopped at the boundary between the opsonin and the IgG - free halves ( 27 ) . The term ‘zipper model’ has thus been coined to describe the idea that the IgG - coated surface was acting as a railway to guide the extending membrane of the macrophages around the particle . This model has evolved over the years . It appeared that Fc c Rs are not passive sticky molecules and their lateral mobility and clustering are necessary for phagocytosis to occur ( 28 ) . Also , it has recently been demonstrated that the IgG coating is not sufﬁ - cient , as certain shapes are not suitable for engulfment ( 29 ) . However , the central idea remains that there is a succession of local signaling hotspots as phagocytosis progresses . Fc c R - triggered phagocytosis occurs as a continuous , pro - gressive transition . The process has generally been subdi - vided into steps that are mostly based on morphological observations . Although no clear - cut molecular markers of each step have been deﬁned , some molecules can be associ - ated with or play a predominant role in the different stages of progression leading to internalization allowing the divi - sion of the phagocytic process into four steps ( Fig . 3 ) . The ﬁrst very transient step is when the early stages of signaling downstream of Fc c R occur . Some core elements of phagocy - tosis , such as the molecular pathways leading to actin poly - merization , are recruited and activated at the site of particle binding . At this stage , no clear protrusions are morphologi - cally detectable , but F - actin is assembled beneath the particle . The second step is the extension of an initial pseudopod protruding along the targeted particle generating a detectable phagocytic cup . The third step involves the continuous extension of the pseudopod , where the phagocytic cup wraps around to the most distal parts of the particle . The reason for considering this as a separate step is that it necessitates the utilization of different molecular events to overcome mechanical constraints involved in the engulfment of large particles ( see below ) . Eventually , during the fourth step , the rims join on the distal side of the particle during the closure step . The rim of the phagocytic cup fuses , sealing the phagocytic cup into a completely internalized phagosome . Important events take place subsequently , such as phagosome retraction and maturation , that are very important in our understanding of pathogens killing or evasion ( 30 ) . Initial cup formation ( step 1 ) Three classes of Fc c Rs have been recognized : Fc c RI , Fc c RII , and Fc c RIII with several individual receptor isoforms ( 31 ) . Most of these Fc c R isoforms , including Fc c RI , Fc c RIIA , and Fc c RIIIA , are able to mediate phagocytosis ( 32 ) . Clustering of Fc c Rs with Fc domains of IgG triggers phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motifs that are located either in the cytoplasmic domain of Fc c RIIA or in c chains associated with Fc c RI and Fc c RIIIA and play a key role in the transduction of phagocytic signaling cascades leading to particle engulfment ( 33 ) . One of the consequences of early Fc c R signaling is a rapid formation of F - actin that is an absolute requisite for phago - cytosis , as cells pretreated with polymerization inhibitory drugs are unable to even initiate a phagocytic cup ( 34 , 35 ) . Several NPFs are involved in the initial F - actin generation at this stage . The importance of WASP as a key activator of actin polymerization is illustrated in WAS patients . The plethora of immunological defects in WAS patients indicates the critical role of WASP for normal function across the hematopoietic cell lineage ( 36 ) . Lorenzi and colleagues ( 37 ) established that macrophages from WAS patients lacked WASP and presented a marked impairment in actin polymerization at phagocytic cups resulting in reduced phagocytosis . Experiments in primary macrophages and macrophage cell lines using short - interfering RNA ( siRNA ) to reduce endogenous levels of WASP conﬁrm that WASP is recruited at the phagocytic cup and is strongly required for actin polymerization , cup initiation , and , logically , complete phagocytosis ( 38 , 39 ) . Another member of the WASP family , N - WASP , is also recruited at the phagocytic cup ; its role , however , might differ from WASP ( see below ) . Con - sistent with the role of WASP , a study has reported the recruitment of Arp2 / 3 to the phagocytic cup ( 8 ) . Also , artiﬁcial disruption of the binding between WASP and Arp2 / 3 by overexpression of the VCA domain of WASP leads to a loss of preferential recruitment of F - actin at the cup , and decrease in cup formation and phagocytosis in macrophage cell lines ( 8 ) . All this evidence together demon - strates that the engagement of Fc c R rapidly leads to an activation of WASP and a subsequent Arp2 / 3 - mediated generation of a branched F - actin network . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 225 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups One can wonder how the actin - regulating proteins such as WASP and Arp2 / 3 are recruited and activated down - stream of Fc c R . Most probably , several intertwined pathways are involved and many unknown elements remain . First , an hypothesis based on membrane dynamics can be suggested for the recruitment of WASP at the cup . Magenau and col - leagues ( 40 ) have recently proposed that macrophages undergo a rapid actin - independent ceramide and lipid rafts enrichment of the membrane at the site of contact with IgG - coated beads . Importantly , inhibition of this membrane enrichment causes a marked defect of F - actin polymerization and phagocytosis . The authors suggest that the enrichment generates strain forces bending the membrane inward . Pro - teins containing BAR domains can recognize such a local deformation . Among them , formin - binding protein 17 ( FBP17 ) has been reported to recruit WASP and its partner WIP to the nascent phagocytic cup ( 41 ) . Reduction in FBP17 levels leads to a threefold decrease in phagocytic cup formation . Therefore , it is possible that the contact between IgG and Fc c R triggers a very swift modiﬁcation in the mem - brane with passive curving causing the initial recruitment of FBP17 and WASP - WIP , thus allowing the early formation of Fig . 3 . The four steps of Fc c R - driven phagocytosis . Note that some molecules have been omitted for clarity of the ﬁgure . For example , PI3K is present and active all around the cup ; Rac2 is present and active at the base of the cup . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 226 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups F - actin . Second , in addition to recruitment , WASP also needs to be activated . This can be achieved by several pathways . The most well - studied upstream inducers of F - actin are the RhoGTPases , and it is therefore not surprising that they play a central role in phagocytic cup formation . Several have been linked to a downstream actin polymerization . WASP is a well - known target of Cdc42 , which is rapidly activated downstream of the Fc c R ( 42 , 43 ) , and it has been clearly demonstrated that the activity of Cdc42 has a pivotal role in WASP activation and induction of cup formation and phago - cytosis ( 38 , 44 , 45 ) . However , WASP may not be completely responsible for all the actin polymerization that occurs downstream of Fc c Rs . The guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav that has activity to several RhoGTPases including Rac , Cdc42 , and Rho ( 46 ) is also required for Fc c R - mediated Rac activation and phagocytosis ( 47 ) . Both Rac1 and Rac2 are activated shortly after Fc c R triggering albeit with slightly different kinetics and localization patterns suggesting that they have different functions in phagocytosis ( 42 , 43 ) . Several groups observed that dominant negative mutants of Rac1 , functional silencing of Rac1 , or Rac1 / 2 double - knockout bone mar - row – derived macrophages impair both the accumulation of F - actin in cups and phagocytosis ( 44 , 45 , 48 ) . Some contro - versy remains , as in a different study Rac1 was not required for phagocytosis in a siRNA screen using a macrophage cell line ( 49 ) . This discrepancy might be explained by potential compensation by Rac2 which is also required for phagocytosis ( 50 ) . We can conclude nonetheless that all three of these Rho - GTPases contribute to actin polymerization to various extents during this initial step in the formation of the phagocytic cup . The actual pathway linking Rac to actin polymerization is yet unclear . While Rac1 is well known to activate Arp2 / 3 through the WAVE complex , WAVE2 surprisingly is not required for Fc c R phagocytosis in macrophages ( 21 ) . It is possible that Rac1 indirectly promotes actin polymerization and cup formation through generation of another very important WASP activators : PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ( 51 ) . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is gen - erated upon Fc c R binding by PIPKIa ( 51 ) , and the inhibition of PIPKIa decreases PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 accumulation . This diminishes and slows down F - actin production , and eventually results in a defect of phagocytosis ( 52 ) . Importantly , some groups have indeed described a role for Rac1 in activating PIPKI ( phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase I ) ( 53 ) , although this remains to be conﬁrmed in macrophages . The importance of the dynamics of F - actin in shaping the phagocytic cup is further reinforced by the observation that Ena / VASP is rapidly recruited to the cup . Ena / VASP is a ligand of the G - actin partner proﬁlin and therefore helps recruit monomeric actin at the sites of intense polymeriza - tion . Elegant SEM shows that the disruption of Ena / VASP activity completely abolished F - actin accumulation and cup formation at the sites of Fc c R triggering ( 54 ) . Given that PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is also a docking site for the aforementioned BAR domain - containing FBP17 , it becomes clear that different pathways involving RhoGTPases , some phosphoinositides , and other proteins act synergistically to trigger an early recruitment and activation of WASP , Arp2 / 3 , and F - actin accumulation thereby setting the stage for cup progression around the particle . Initial pseudopod extension ( step 2 ) Accumulation of F - actin at the zone of contact with the tar - get results in the progression of the cup to enwrap the particle . The behavior of a growing phagocytic cup also depends on the size , the shape , and the stiffness of the par - ticles . One clear observation is that as the polymerization of actin continues it generates the force required for the pro - gression of the phagocytic cup . This could be due to contin - uous actin polymerization alone or by the involvement of myosin motor proteins . Several studies have reported that actin progresses as a ring moving from the base to the tip of the cup ( 42 , 43 ) . Many of the upstream regulators of F - actin formation described in the ﬁrst step also play a role in this step as well . Of course , given the progression of the actin ring , this requires tight spatiotemporal control . Consistent with its prominent role in cup initiation , Cdc42 presents a pattern similar to the progression of the ring of actin : the fraction of active Cdc42 is concentrated at the rim of the extending cup ( 42 , 43 ) . It would be reasonable to assume that WASP activity follows the same kind of pattern . It is possible that not only the activation of Cdc42 is necessary for the produc - tion of F - actin but also that its restriction to a limited zone ensures a directed displacement of the area of polymeriza - tion by creating de facto a rim to base polarity in the cup . Supporting this concept is the observation that the overexpression of constitutively active Cdc42 leads to a loss in the constraint of F - actin to the extending rim , as well as a defect in the completion of phagocytosis ( 43 ) . Both Rac1 and Rac2 show different localization patterns , being active all around the cup or more restricted to the base of the phagocytic cup , respectively . However , the consequences of this pattern on F - actin dynamics are not clear . Given that all © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 227 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups these RhoGTPases are activated at several times and locations during phagocytosis makes the study of these proteins in the later steps of phagocytosis complicated . Manipulation of both the spatial and temporal regulation of these proteins would be needed to determine the role of continuous actin polymerization and of the individual RhoGTPases in pseudo - pod extension during phagocytosis . In addition to actin polymerization , the progression of the phagocytic cup is accompanied by myosin contractility , observable when deformable particles are used ( 42 ) . Acto - myosin contraction has been predicted in a mechanical model of neutrophil phagocytosis as a mechanism to avoid the particle being pushed away by the force of actin poly - merization at the membrane – particle interface ( 55 ) . This membrane proximal contraction might also be important to create a bracing force allowing a better coupling of actin ﬁbers to the membrane and hence a better transmission of mechanical forces . This coupling has been described in the context of cell migration ( 56 ) as a molecular clutch between the cytoskeleton , the membrane , and the surface onto which the protrusion is progressing . Importantly , it has been conﬁrmed in macrophages that myosin II is responsible for the tight apposition of the cup around the particle ( 35 ) and for phagocytosis ( 57 ) . When myosin II is inhibited , an F - actin - rich cup still forms but remains loose and is unable to elongate ( 35 ) . This indicates that actin is able to poly - merize and to initiate pseudopod extension without a local binding of Fc c R , and that long - distance elongation requires an actomyosin - mediated adhesion onto the particle . The signals triggering actomyosin contraction down - stream of Fc c Rs are not clear . RhoA would be a good candi - date for myosin II activation , and the speciﬁc inhibition of Rho with C3 transferase was originally shown to prevent Fc c R - mediated phagocytosis ( 58 ) . While there was no effect of Rho inhibition in another study ( 45 ) , in a more recent study Rho was shown to be necessary for efﬁcient phagocytosis in primary macrophages , but dispensable for actin polymerization ( 48 ) . Overall , these studies suggest that Rho activity is required for Fc c R phagocytosis but not for actin polymerization . It is apparent that while actin polymerization is required for the progression of the phagocytic cup , other factors are also necessary ( 59 ) . When the cell is presented with an IgG - coated surface instead of a discrete particle to ingest , where extension of the basal side of the cell is comparable with a unique big and ﬂat phagocytic cup , the cell extends and spreads on the surface . Using this technique , it has been shown that WASP , albeit important for the global amount of F - actin in macrophages , was only partially required for cell spreading , whereas the WASP family member N - WASP was required for spreading ( 38 ) . This suggests that N - WASP has a speciﬁc role in membrane extension and may be important for the growth of pseudopods during the third step of phagocytosis . Maximal pseudopod extension ( step 3 ) Pseudopodial extension is naturally accompanied by an evo - lution of mechanical stress parameters , and the cell mem - brane and the underlying cortical actin are deformable to a limited extent . Indeed , the increase in membrane area dur - ing protrusion is opposed by an intrinsic physical feature of the cell called cortical tension ( 60 ) . An increase in the cellu - lar cortical tension can be observed during neutrophil phagocytosis ( 61 ) . If the extent of pseudopodial extension is large , for example , when a particle being engulfed is above a certain size , the polymerization force generated by actin dynamics would not be sufﬁcient to override the opposing increased cortical tension . The pseudopod’s exten - sion would then be stalled and phagocytosis would remain incomplete . For the pseudopod’s extension to be maximal , a number of speciﬁc actors are required . Several mechanisms may contribute to maximal pseudopodial extension . One possible mechanism would be by simply relaxing ( i . e . decreasing ) the cortical tension . Such a relaxation of the cortical tension may be achieved by delivery of new membrane , and several groups observed this event to occur at the base of the cup ( 59 , 62 ) . Arf6 has been implicated in the delivery of VAMP3 vesicles to the phagocytic cup ( 63 , 64 ) for phagocytosis . Cargo delivery therefore requires free access to the forming phagosome , and may require the depolymerization of actin in this area . Consistent with the role of actin depolymerization in vesicle fusion , when the level of F - actin is artiﬁcially maintained high around the cup , vesicle trafﬁcking is abrogated , and while the phagocy - tic cup forms , it only partly elongates but remains unable to fully enclose the particle ( 62 , 65 ) . Consistent with a need for actin depolymerization to allow for vesicle fusion , it has been observed in many stud - ies that the production of F - actin during phagocytosis is transient . More precisely , the depolymerization of F - actin starts at the base of the cup , thereby creating a ring of F - actin progression at the tip of the extending phagocytic cup . Even in experimental settings where F - actin surrounds most of the cup without appearing as a bona ﬁde ring , the © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 228 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups base of the cup rapidly loses its F - actin ( 65 ) . At least two mechanisms have been suggested to explain the drop of F - actin at the base . First , the same phenotype of stalled cup formation has been observed in cells with pharmacological inhibition of PI 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) ( 35 , 59 , 66 ) . This leads to an important idea in the ﬁeld : Although being present and active throughout phagocytosis , PI3K is not required for step 1 ( initial cup formation ) or for step 2 ( initial pseudo - pod elongation ) , but is important to step 3 and transition to step 4 ( closure ) . The mechanical importance of PI3K activity is well illustrated by the fact that the dependency of cells on PI3K activity is detectable when using large beads ( 5 l m of diameter ) and not with small beads ( 2 l m ) . Engulfment of smaller beads requires less membrane extension and there - fore mechanisms leading to cortical tension relaxation become dispensable . One functional link between PI3K activity and actin depolymerization has been established by Beemiller and colleagues ( 43 ) . Using pharmacological inhib - itors of PI3K , they demonstrated that PI3K was responsible for the extinction of Cdc42 activity , thereby halting WASP - mediated actin polymerization ( 43 ) . The second mechanism stems from the observation that the needed depolymerization at the base of the phagocytic cup extensively depends on the synchronized loss of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 which is a key factor controlling the amount of F - actin in the cup ( 51 , 62 , 65 ) . At least three synergistic pathways can cause this loss of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . First , PLC hydrolyzes PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 into DAG and IP 3 . Consistently , inhibition of PLC leads to an increase in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and actin - rich stalled phag - ocytic cups ( 51 , 65 ) . Second , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is also hydrolyzed into PI4P by the phosphatase OCRL1 . OCRL1 is delivered to the base of the phagocytic cup and its reduction leads to an increase in the amount of F - actin and decreases the efﬁ - ciency of phagocytosis ( 62 ) . However , as OCRL1 is targeted to the cup by vesicle trafﬁcking , its recruitment would require an initial depolymerization of F - actin and therefore may constitute a positive feedback loop of F - actin loss . Third , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is consumed by PI3K that transforms it into PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . PI3K actually seems to be a crucial player in the maximal extension of pseudopods . Indeed , PI3K activity controls other elements of the cytoskeleton necessary to the maximal elongation of pseudopods . For instance , myosin X is recruited upon PI3K activity , and disruption of its activity impairs the spreading of macrophages on IgG - coated surfaces ( 67 ) . Importantly , the requirement for myosin X is dependent of the size of the target particles and the incom - plete phagocytosis upon myosin X inhibition is rescued when cells are presented with smaller sized particles . This is consistent with a regulation of myosin X recruitment by PI3K . It also suggests that this myosin partakes in the regula - tion of the balance between polymerization force and corti - cal tension , probably through an action on actin ﬁlaments . However , the mechanical details are currently unknown . Phagosome closure ( step 4 ) The last step of phagocytosis is the closure of the phagocytic cup with the target particle being sealed inside . The closure of the cup can be experimentally detected when particles become completely inaccessible to immunostaining without permeabilization ( 59 ) . It is actually difﬁcult to set a clear limit between step 3 ( pseudopod elongation ) and step 4 ( closure ) . Some authors refer to all the events past the moment where PI3K becomes necessary in step 3 as ‘closure’ , whereas others adopt a narrower deﬁnition and only consider the last moments when the rims of the cup fuse together . In spite of many studies , little is known about phagocytic cup closure in Fc c R phagocytosis and the role of actin in it . If we adopt a broad deﬁnition of what the closure is , we can say that the most noticeable feature of this step is a growing requirement for actomyosin contractility . Several myosins are recruited to the phagocytic cup ( 68 ) . Among them , myosin IC appears to accumulate in a PI3K - dependent manner at the tip of the phagocytic cup ( 68 , 69 ) and there - fore could be a candidate to induce a purse string actomyo - sin contraction closing the cup . However , the lack of speciﬁc inhibitors and biosensors of atypical myosins signiﬁ - cantly hinders the study of contractility during closure . Finally the closure step brings up the questions of mem - brane fusion and signal arrest , but these are yet to be investigated . CR3 phagocytosis Complement - triggered phagocytosis is another widespread phagocytic pathway involved in innate immunity . Upon opsonization by the soluble complement molecule C3bi , particles can be recognized by CR3 and ingested . The CR3 - triggered phagocytosis is probably the second most studied pathway after Fc c R . Both pathways share many com - mon elements , although certain differences remain . A ﬁrst obvious difference is in the nature of the receptor : CR3 , also known as a M b 2 , is an integrin . b 2 integrins rest in a bent low - afﬁnity conformation until intracellular , or inside - out , signals switch them to extended intermediate - afﬁnity © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 229 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups conformation . They then naturally oscillate to an open high - afﬁnity conformation and are locked in that state upon ligand binding . Stabilization of the high - afﬁnity conformation by ligand results in signaling from the integrin to downstream pathways , a process termed ‘outside - in’ . The speciﬁc mecha - nism of integrin activation suggests an important difference between CR3 and Fc c R phagocytosis : the need for an inde - pendent inside - out activation of a M b 2 by external cues implies that the cells need to be put in an ‘activated’ state before phagocytosis begins , which could have important conse - quences on the dynamics of the cytoskeleton . Initial studies reported conspicuous differences in the pro - cess of phagocytosis . Whereas the Fc c R triggered the forma - tion of a well - characterized phagocytic cup protruding outward , CR3 activation was described as causing the particle to sink into the cytoplasm ( 34 ) . Both types of phagocytosis required actin polymerization , but the CR3 - triggered sink was conceptually closer to endocytosis , whereas the Fc c R - triggered cup looked more similar to the macropinocytic process . Such a morphological difference suggested dissimilarities in the molecular pathways . These observations suggested that although many cytoskeleton - related elements were shared , their patterns of distribution were different ( 70 ) . More recent observations , however , indicate that a classic phagocytic cup may occur during CR3 - mediated phagocyto - sis ( 71 ) . The nature and morphology of these structures are debated . Indeed , pseudopods have been described either as forming a tight ‘classic’ cup ( 48 ) or slightly less protruding extensions ( 49 ) . Another study reports even looser F - actin - rich protrusions called rufﬂes ( 72 ) . In this work , rufﬂes are generated by external cues such as phorbol myristate acetate or lipopolysaccharide independently of CR3 binding . CR3 accumulates in the rufﬂes that therefore maximize the cap - ture of particles prior to phagocytosis . Both the sinking and rufﬂing models could , however , be combined . It is concep - tually possible that the inside - out signal leading to activa - tion of CR3 also triggers rufﬂing aiding in the capturing particles . Once the particles are bound , the rufﬂes might collapse and a depression might then appear as the particle sinks . Speciﬁc pathways : importance of RhoA and formins Despite the Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis ( 8 ) , the NPFs regulating this process remain unclear . The participation of Rac1 / 2 and Cdc42 in actin dynamics appears to be a point of difference between the two modes of phagocytosis . As previously mentioned , Cdc42 is central in Fc c - mediated phagocytosis and Rac1 / 2 is likely to act on F - actin production . By contrast , it is clear that Cdc42 and its downstream effector WASP are not required for CR3 phagocytosis ( 38 , 45 , D . Cox and H . Park , unpublished observations ) . However , the involvement of Rac1 / 2 remains unclear . Several reports state that Rac1 / 2 is not required for CR3 phagocytosis using cell lines ( 45 , 49 ) , whereas work with primary macrophages described a role for Rac1 / 2 in F - actin accumulation at the cup and phagocy - tosis ( 48 ) . This discrepancy may be due to the use of differ - ent cellular models and the possibility of compensation by related family members when one protein is absent . Another important difference of CR3 - mediated phagocy - tosis may be the involvement of RhoA . While its role in Fc c R - triggered phagocytosis is controversial ( 45 , 48 , 49 , 58 ) , it is absolutely required in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis ( 45 , 48 , 49 ) . Beyond its expected role in actomyosin con - tractility through the ROCK – myosin II pathway ( 57 ) , the activity of RhoA seems to be an important regulator of actin dynamics in CR3 - triggered phagocytosis . Indeed , reduction in RhoA levels in macrophage cell lines markedly reduces the accumulation of F - actin ( 49 ) . RhoA may play a more unique role in actin responses downstream of CR3 by acti - vating formins . Indeed , the formin mDia , a known effector of RhoA , is speciﬁcally recruited at sites of phagocytosis upon CR3 binding and not Fc c R . Consistently , reduction in mDia causes a loss of F - actin at the phagocytic cups and an overall decrease in phagocytosis efﬁciency ( 73 ) . RhoA can also enhance formin - mediated actin polymerization by fostering the binding between G - actin and proﬁlin ( 74 ) . Given that formins generate unbranched F - actin ﬁlaments as opposed to Arp2 / 3 , which nucleates branched F - actin mesh - works , one can then wonder at the morphological and mechanical implications of the speciﬁc role of formins in CR3 - triggered engulfment of particles , compared to the Fc c R - dependent phagocytosis . Another functional consequence of the use of formins in CR3 phagocytosis is the coordination between actin cyto - skeleton and microtubules . Microtubules have long been associated with CR3 phagocytosis ( 70 ) , and mDia is deliv - ered to the site of phagocytosis by the microtubule - binding protein CLIP - 170 ( 75 ) . Consequently , disruption of CLIP - 170 / mDia interaction causes a defect in F - actin generation and phagocytosis . In a reverse effect , mDia also regulates microtubules dynamics in other cellular models ( 76 ) . It appears then that the speciﬁc use of the RhoA – formin axis © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 230 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups downstream of CR3 leads to a joint actin / microtubules dynamics important for phagocytosis . Summary A lot of data are now available about the actin response dur - ing phagocytosis . The polymerization force developed by the actin cytoskeleton is a central player in the change in shape of the cell . A ring a polymerizing actin pushes the membrane around the target particle , forming a cup . The role of actin goes beyond the protrusion and serves as a substrate for myosin contractility as well as a potential site for target vesicle trafﬁcking . The idea that the phagocytic cup is a dynamically organized structure , with distinct patterns of molecules is now accepted . Many upstream regu - lators of actin are involved , particularly the RhoGTPases and the phosphoinositides and their associated enzymes ( such as PI3K ) . Other elements of the cytoskeleton are also involved like several atypical myosin and the microtubules . Several general questions remain only partly answered and should constitute points of focus in the ﬁeld . In spite of infor - mative pioneer studies , a uniﬁed understanding of the kinetics of the phagocytic cup is lacking . Higher resolution informa - tion of the activities of the major regulators , both in space and in time , would allow us to build a more detailed and comprehensive model of phagocytosis . Noticeable progress has been made in the development of sensitive biosensors in the past years and these tools would surely prove beneﬁcial . While it is generally admitted that signaling differs between Fc c R - and CR3 - driven processes , the morphological and biochemical discrepancies between these two modes of phagocytosis remain to be clearly established . A more sys - tematic comparison between the two in the future studies would then be valuable . Beyond the differences , it would be crucial to determine whether these two different initial signaling processes have the exact same outcome or if there are subtle yet important immunological or homeostatic con - sequences of uptake by these two different systems . Chemotaxis Sites of infection or injury secrete an array of inﬂammatory cytokines that act as chemoattractants orchestrating the recruitment of monocytes / macrophages . Macrophages have the ability to sense and migrate along an external gradient of soluble factors , known as directed migration or chemo - taxis ( 77 ) . Macrophages use highly dynamic cytoskeletal remodeling to move through tissues of various topological and physical properties . Motility cycle and leading - edge protrusions Whereas tissues are three - dimensional structures with highly variable properties , most of our understanding of cell motil - ity comes from studies of cells in two dimensions where they move on uniform ﬂat surfaces . Microscopy has revealed that during migration cells cycle through a set of actin - dependent events that include the extension of an actin - rich membrane protrusion , stabilization of the protrusion via integrin - mediated attachment to the underlying extracellular substrate , and the actomyosin - based contraction of the body and detachment at the rear ( 78 ) . Chemotaxis adds an addi - tional level of complexity beginning with the detection of an external gradient through signaling via speciﬁc cell sur - face receptors ( 77 , 79 ) , which remain equally distributed on the entire surface of cells during migration , including macrophages ( 80 ) . It has been suggested that Rho GTPases , together with PI3K , contribute to asymmetric PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 distribution via a positive feedback loop ( 81 ) . Intracellular signaling downstream of these receptors induces the exten - sion of an F - actin - rich protrusion toward the chemoattrac - tant source . Protrusions set key parameters of trajectory , including speed and direction of the cell ( 82 ) . Efﬁcient che - motaxis requires that cells migrate with directional persis - tence toward the chemoattractant source . It is believed that cells manifest persistence by continuously restricting lateral protrusion and favoring formation ( via actin polymeriza - tion ) and stabilization ( via adhesions ) of the actin - rich protrusion at the leading edge , toward the source of chemo - attractant . This must rely on signaling networks at the lead - ing edge to regulate actin polymerization and adhesions ( 83 ) . Several types of protrusions have been observed at the leading edge , depending on the cell and motility type ( 84 ) . This review focuses on lamellipodia ( also commonly called pseudopodia ) , as they are believed to be the major source of adhesion and force generation of the motile macrophage . These protrusions are thin , sheet - like membrane extensions . The lamellipodium of ﬁbroblasts was ﬁrst described in the landmark studies of Abercrombie as a thin region extending immediately from the plasma membrane , lacking organelles , and only weakly attaching . Between the lamellipodia and the cell body is the lamella , which is thicker , containing organelles and strong adhesion sites . More importantly , these two regions have distinct and independent actin networks . The lamellipodium is structured by dendritically branched actin ﬁlaments with growth mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( 85 , 86 ) . Arp2 / 3 - mediated de novo actin © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 231 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups polymerization immediately at the plasma membrane gener - ates protrusive force ( 84 , 87 ) , and it is essential for persis - tent directional migration ( 88 ) . The extension of a leading lamellipodium during chemo - taxis bears many similarities in structure to that of a phagocy - tic cup , but with less precise spatial speciﬁcity . Both are deﬁned in response to initial signaling induced by ligand binding followed by the extension of an actin - driven protrusion . However , during chemotaxis the initial protrusion needs to be stabilized through substrate adhesion ( Fig . 4 ) . CSF - 1 - stimulated migration Colony - stimulating factor - 1 ( CSF - 1 ) - induced chemotaxis has been studied extensively in macrophages ( reviewed in 89 ) . CSF - 1 , also known as MCSF , is primarily a macrophage growth factor stimulating its survival , proliferation , and terminal differentiation from peripheral monocyte to macro - phage , and it also acts as a potent chemoattractant ( 90 ) . CSF - 1 - mediated macrophage recruitment and chemotaxis play key roles not only in normal physiological processes , but is associated with the progression of several human inﬂammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis , arthritis , and metastatic progression of cancer ( 91 – 93 ) . CSF - 1 signaling is linked to actin cytoskeleton rearrangement via the actin NPFs of the WASP / WAVE family . CSF - 1 signals through its receptor tyrosine kinase ( CSF - 1R ) leading to tyrosine phosphorylation events that are important for the control of actin dynamics ( reviewed in 94 ) . The CSF - 1R belongs to the class III receptor tyrosine kinase subfamily , which contains a split cytoplasmic kinase domain . CSF - 1 binding induces receptor dimerization , kinase activation , and phosphorylation of seven of twenty tyrosine residues in the cytoplasmic domain . Phosphoryla - tion of these tyrosine residues on the CSF - 1R creates bind - ing sites for Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) or phosphotyrosine - binding domain ( PTB ) signaling proteins ( 95 – 97 ) , such as SFKs and PI3K , that are known to mediate chemotaxis as well as various cellular responses ( reviewed in 98 ) . PI3K - and CSF - 1 - induced actin polymerization Current evidence overwhelmingly suggests that PI3K is required for migration and actin polymerization in macro - phages . Receptor activation , which may be spatially local - ized , leads to local accumulation of PI3K lipid products at the plasma membrane . This becomes a critical link to down - stream Rho - GTPase - mediated NPF activation to regulate the actin cytoskeleton . The p85 regulatory subunit of PI3K asso - ciates with the CSF - 1R following CSF - 1 treatment , and CSF - 1 chemotaxis is reduced in p85 - deﬁcient macrophages ( 99 , 100 ) . Studies examining the role of SHIP ( SH2 domain - containing inositol phosphatase ) , a negative regulator of PI3K , also supports the requirement of PI3K in macrophage chemotaxis ( 101 ) . Among the several different PI3K catalytic subunits regulated by the p85 subunit of PI3K , p110 d appears to be the most critical isoform regulating CSF - 1 - induced actin remodeling and migration using either injec - tion of isoform - speciﬁc antibodies or inhibitors ( 102 – 104 ) . Primary macrophages derived from a mouse containing a replacement of the endogenous isoform with a kinase - dead p110 d version conﬁrmed reduced F - actin content and for - mation of F - actin - rich membrane protrusions in response to CSF - 1 , and impaired chemotaxis ( 103 ) . The importance of Fig . 4 . Formation of chemotactic protrusions . Signaling pathways downstream of GPCR or CSF - 1R lead to activation of WAVE 2 and N - WASP / WASP . However , subsequent actin polymerization serves different purposes , WAVE 2 being major in the generation of a forward thrust of the membrane , WASP being more important for stabilization of protrusions . To illustrate these two non - overlapping roles of F - actin , two different colors have been used : blue for the WAVE 2 – ARP2 / 3 axis and purple for the WASP – ARP2 / 3 axis . Note that some molecules have been omitted for clarity of the ﬁgure . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 232 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups PI3K in CSF - 1 - mediated signaling is further substantiated in studies using CSF - 1R - deﬁcient macrophages reconstituted with a CSF - 1R that is deﬁcient in a single tyrosine residue , Y721 ( M (cid:3) / (cid:3) . Y712F ) , that mediates the direct interaction of the p85 regulatory subunit of PI3K with the CSF - 1R ( 105 ) . M (cid:3) / (cid:3) Y721F BMMs exhibited reduced CSF - 1 - induced PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 production , impaired chemotaxis , and diminished formation of membrane protrusions in response to global CSF - 1 stimulation . Unlike Fc c R signaling , PI3K plays an important role in actin polymerization downstream of CSF - 1R signaling , and actin polymerization in response to CSF - 1 is completely abolished by treating cells with PI3K inhibitors ( 68 ) . It is clear that actin polymerization in response to CSF - 1 is required for the extension of lamellipodial protrusions . Similar to what occurs during the progression of the phago - cytic cup , RhoGTPases and the WASP / WAVE family of NPFs are major downstream effectors in the production of chemotactic lamellipodia . Cdc42 and Rac are required for CSF - 1 - elicited actin - rich protrusions ( 44 , 106 ) through the activation of NPFs like the WASP / WAVE family members . The importance of WASP in macrophage - directed migration , speciﬁcally chemotaxis , was clearly established from studies that tested macrophages or monocytes derived from WAS patients . WAS patient – derived monocytes / macrophages dis - played reduced chemotaxis to CSF - 1 , MCP - 1 , and fMLP and failure to polarize ; however , they were still motile ( 107 , 108 ) . Interestingly , consistent with a role for Cdc42 in WASP activation ( 19 , 109 ) , macrophages were also able to migrate without Cdc42 but do not migrate directionally ( 110 ) . These results suggest that WASP was not required for the generation of lamellipodia in response to CSF - 1 , but was required for a different but necessary step in chemotaxis that will be described later . Lamellipodial extension by WAVE 2 The only other major WASP / WAVE family member expressed in macrophages is the ubiquitously expressed WAVE2 . WAVE2 is well known to be required for the gener - ation of protrusions in multiple cell types . Macrophages depend on WAVE2 for actin polymerization and the produc - tion of protrusions in response to CSF - 1 . Macrophages with reduced levels of WAVE2 fail to migrate in response to CSF - 1 . A study using constitutively active forms of Rac1 failed to rescue F - actin - rich membrane protrusions in macrophages with reduced WAVE2 expression leading to the conclusion that in macrophages Rac1 is a required link with WAVE2 ( 21 ) . As WAVE2 does not contain a GBD domain , the interaction between Rac and WAVE2 is indirect and can occur through the binding of Rac with either the Abi1 complex or with IRSp53 ( Fig . 2A ) . Studies in macrophages suggest that WAVE2 - stimulated protrusions are dependent on IRSp53 , and blockage of the interaction between IRSp53 and WAVE2 inhibits CSF - 1 - stimulated protrusions and IRSp53 is required for chemotaxis to CSF - 1 ( 111 ) . This also suggests that while WAVE2 - mediated actin polymerization is important in many cell types , different upstream regulators may be required depend ending on the cell studied . WASP and lamellipodial stabilization Whereas WASP is required for macrophage chemotaxis to CSF - 1 , it is not required for the production of F - actin - rich protrusions , leading to the question of additional roles of actin polymerization , and of WASP , in chemotaxis . Interest - ingly , although tyrosine phosphorylation is not required for WASP activation ( 19 ) , it still plays an important role in chemotaxis in addition to phagocytosis , as expression of the phosphodeﬁcient WASPY291F mutants in macrophages resulted in diminished chemotaxis ( 110 ) . Chemoattractant stimulation of motile cells often leads to biphasic actin responses in cells such as Dictyostylium amoe - bae , neutrophils , and carcinoma cells . The initial spike in actin polymerization correlates with directional sensing and is followed by secondary responses over the next several minutes that are associated with motility ( 112 ) . Activation of the CSF - 1R also induces a biphasic actin polymerization ( 109 ) with an initial peak of F - actin polymerization that correlates with the early activation of WASP and is depen - dent on WASP activity ( 19 , 109 ) , suggesting that WASP was required for directional sensing . However , high - resolution time - lapse imaging demonstrated that despite delayed - onset WASP - deﬁcient macrophages were still able to respond directionally to the gradient source , but these directional protrusions exhibited a decreased persistence suggesting that WASP was required for later steps in the generation of che - motactic protrusions ( 109 ) . Consistent with a role for WASP phosphorylation in chemotaxis , expression of a phosphode - ﬁcient form of WASP ( WASPY291F ) behaved similarly to WASP - deﬁcient cells , but with somewhat enhanced delay in the onset of the protrusion ( 109 ) . A role for WASP in protrusion stabilization could be to favor the adhesion of the lamellipodium onto the substrate . Often lamellipodia that do not attach sufﬁciently are observed to fold back at the cell edge toward the cell body , a phenomenon often described as rufﬂing ( 113 , 114 ) . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 233 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups Most cell types studied as models of motility utilize large focal adhesions to attach to the underlying substratum , but macrophages utilize different strategies . Monocyte - derived cells employ small phosphopaxillin - rich point complexes , focal complexes , and podosomes to adhere and migrate ( 115 , 116 ) , and the absence of either Pyk2 or Fak alters adhesion dynamics and decreases lamellipodial persistence ( 117 ) . Podosomes are larger in size than focal complexes and contain an actin - rich core formed through WASP - mediated Arp2 / 3 activation and surrounded by a ring of adhesion pro - teins such as integrins , vinculin , and talin . In addition , podosomes are much more dynamic than focal adhesions ( 118 ) . Although podosomes share similar components of focal adhesions , such as Pyk2 , FAK , and SFKs , their distinct properties suggest that these structures have speciﬁc regula - tion and functions in macrophage biology ( reviewed in 119 ) . Podosomes have been implicated in cell migration on planar surfaces and CSF - 1 can induce the formation of macrophage podosomes in a PI3K - dependent manner ( 120 ) . Studies of macrophages obtained from WAS patients , which lack podo - somes , have impaired chemotaxis to CSF - 1 , MCP - 1 , and fMLP , suggesting that podosomes may be critical for directional migration ( 107 , 108 ) . A role for podosomes in the stabiliza - tion of lamellipodia is supported by the fact that podosomes form at the leading edge of cells during migration ( 121 ) and the requirement for WASP in lamellipodial persistence ( 109 ) . In monocyte - derived dendritic cells , HS1 ( hematopoietic line - age cell - speciﬁc protein 1 ) , the hematopoietic homolog of cortactin , was also found to regulate podosome dynamics through interaction with WASP and to be required for direc - tional persistence ( 122 ) . In addition , studies in neutrophils suggest that the upstream activator of WASP , Cdc42 , stabilizes directional protrusions , but the mechanism of how Cdc42 mediates these effects in neutrophils remains unknown ( 123 ) . However , the WASP – podosome link remains speculative with no direct evidence connecting podosomes to chemotaxis . WAVE2 activation and recruitment to chemotactic protru - sions is independent of WASP ( 109 ) , strongly suggesting that WASP and WAVE2 have non - overlapping roles , but work in coordinated fashion to generate an efﬁcient chemotactic pseudopod . In this model , WASP is necessary for keeping the protrusion on course , whereas WAVE2 would supply branched actin network for the formation of the chemotactic pseudopod ( Fig . 4 ) . How the WASP - Arp2 / 3 generated actin network plays a different role than the WAVE - ARP2 / 3 one is a fascinating question yet to be investigated . It would be interesting to visualize the coordination of localized WASP and WAVE2 activities in stimulated protrusions . Myosin - mediated contractility Cells need a certain level of adhesiveness on the exterior and tension in the interior to generate traction force for migra - tion ( 124 , 125 ) . Rho is a well - known mediator of adhesion and RhoA - mediated contractility is essential for macrophage migration , as C3 transferase treatment inhibits CSF - 1 - induced migration ( 80 ) . However , different members of the Rho family may play different roles in migration . Macro - phages express RhoA and RhoB and lack the other major isoform RhoC . RhoB controls cell adhesion through regu - lated integrin expression that may play an important role in stabilizing protrusions during motility . This is consistent with observations that genetic deletion of RhoB adversely affects macrophage migration on select substrates . Further - more , RhoA is important in tail retraction during macro - phage chemotaxis ( 126 ) probably through regulation of myosin activity . Similar to phagocytosis , myosin - mediated contractility is important for cell migration ( 127 ) . Myosins exert their con - tractile forces onto actin ﬁlaments ; hence , myosin activity and actin dynamics are intimately connected . While there are detailed studies on the role of myosin in other cells types ( 128 – 130 ) , our understanding of the role of myosin in macrophage migration and its role in the regulation of chemotactic protrusion are limited . Although the role of myosin during CSF - 1 - stimulated locomotive protrusions has not been directly examined , the regulatory light chain of myosin ( MLRC ) associates with the CSF - 1R in response to CSF - 1 ( 99 ) . Also , studies on a regulator of myosin S100A4 suggest that myosin plays an important role in generating stable protrusions during macrophage chemotaxis ( 131 ) . S100A4 is a Ca 2 + - dependent molecular switch that interacts with a wide range of downstream targets , one of them being non - muscle myosin IIA . Li et al . have shown that loss of S100A4 results in overassembly of myosin IIA and b - actin , resulting in decreased persistence and size of pro - trusions leading to defects in chemotaxis . This has direct relevance in vivo , as S100A4 (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice had signiﬁcantly decreased macrophage recruitment to inﬂammatory chal - lenge . The role of other myosin family members in macro - phage chemotaxis has not been investigated . While many of the individual signaling components that regulate formation and stability of F - actin - rich lamellipodia have been identiﬁed using motility and chemotaxis assays , it is still an open question what their precise role in generating chemotactic pseudopods is . More precisely , the functional connection among behavior ( migration ) , morphology ( protrusions and © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 234 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups contraction ) , and biochemistry ( signaling pathways ) studies remains to be established and is an important challenge in the times ahead . A more high - resolution analysis of chemo - tactic protrusions would aid in our understanding of the precise roles of these proteins , including WASP , in macro - phage chemotaxis . A greater challenge will be to determine how the activities of these different regulators are coordi - nated in space and time to lead to efﬁcient chemotaxis . G - protein - coupled receptor - stimulated protrusions Chemokines also act through G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) to mediate their biological effects . Different model systems have been extensively used to characterize the sig - naling pathways that regulate directed migration via GPCR , including cAMP in Dictyostelium ( 132 ) and N - formyl - methio - nine - leucine - phenylalanine ( fMLP ) in neutrophils ( 82 , 133 ) . However , GPCR - mediated chemotaxis of macrophages is largely understudied , and as such , the mechanism by which GPCR activation and signaling is linked to actin cytoskeletal rearrangement and pseudopod extension is currently undeﬁned . Recent studies indicate that tyrosine kinases , such as Src family kinases ( SFKs ) , and PI3K also serve as effectors for several GPCRs ( reviewed in 134 , 135 ) . This ﬁnding suggests that many of the proteins that play a role in CSF - 1 - mediated chemotaxis , discussed earlier , may also be impor - tant for chemotaxis via GPCRs . Actin polymerization and protrusions downstream of GPCRs It is well known that macrophages respond by rapid actin remodeling and robust formation of F - actin - rich membrane protrusions downstream of GPCR activation . CX3CL1 has been shown to induce rapid actin reorganization , production of F - actin - rich pseudopods , and directed migration in macro - phages that is contingent upon tyrosine phosphorylation by the non - receptor cytoplasmic Syk tyrosine kinase ( 136 ) . Syk leads to Cdc42 and Rac1 activation in a PI3K - dependent man - ner , although with differential activation kinetics ( 137 ) . Expression of dominant negative Rac1 and Cdc42 nearly com - pletely abolishes fMLP - induced membrane rufﬂing , indicating the critical role of these RhoGTPases in GPCR - mediated actin rearrangement ( 44 ) . MIP - 1 a also induces lamellipodia forma - tion in a Rac1 - dependent , but RhoA - and Cdc42 - independent manner ( 138 ) . Similarly , the chemokine RANTES activates Rac1 . Micropipette experiments which selectively deliver chemokines locally to one side of a cell revealed that Rac was required for macrophages to be able to polarize and extend leading - edge protrusions toward the chemoattractant gradient and to translocate in response to a directional source of RAN - TES ( 139 ) . Interestingly , the activation of Rac1 required PI3K and causes the activation of PAK2 . Although RANTES has been shown to cause actin cytoskeleton remodeling and lamellipo - dia formation , the direct role and mechanism of the PI3K - Rac1 - PAK2 or other signaling axes on actin rearrangement has not been examined in detail ( 138 ) . It is likely that Rac1 and Cdc42 are equally involved in the generation of chemo - tactic lamellipodia in a context of directed migration to many GPCRs , although it is yet to be clearly proven . Not surprisingly , the WASP family of NPFs is also required for chemokine - induced migration downstream of the Rho - GTPases ( reviewed in 140 ) . CX3CL1 - induced activation of Cdc42 and Rac1 results in WASP and WAVE2 activation , respectively ( 137 ) . Similar to CSF - 1 , WASP and WAVE2 appear to have different roles in CX3CL1 - induced chemo - taxis . WAVE2 activation was required for both the formation of F - actin - rich membrane protrusions as well as for chemo - taxis . Interestingly , Cdc42 - mediated WASP activity appeared to be essential for chemotaxis only , as diminished endoge - nous WASP levels did not impair membrane protrusion formation as dramatically as that of WAVE2 . Importantly , tyrosine phosphorylation of WASP was also required in CX3CL1 - induced chemotaxis . The role of WASP in CX3CL1 chemotaxis appears to be very similar to that of CSF - 1 che - motaxis , suggesting that WASP may be required for the stabilization of protrusions . Studies in neutrophils provide some clues for how WASP may function . WASP - deﬁcient neutrophils exhibited defective b 2 - integrin clustering associ - ated with reduced adhesion which resulted in reduced migration toward fMLP as well as reduced transendothelial migration ( 141 ) . As discussed earlier , integrin - mediated adhesions play an important role in persistent migration by stabilizing protrusions , and lamellipodia that fail to attach to the extracellular substratum lead to inefﬁcient chemotaxis in different cell types ( 83 , 113 ) . In addition , WASP may play multiple roles in chemotaxis . In a recent report , Kumar et al . ( 142 ) found that WASP , under the control of Cdc42 , regu - lates neutrophil polarity by stabilizing microtubules via CD11b clustering in the uropod . Mechanisms that control polarity by deﬁning the rear of the cell may also lead to the stabilization of the leading edge , thereby promoting persis - tence in directional migration ( 83 ) . Obviously , these observations would need to be conﬁrmed in macrophages . In summary , although WASP appears to be generally required for GPCR - mediated chemotaxis in macrophages , it has only © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 235 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups been directly characterized in the case of CX3CL1 - mediated actin remodeling . In addition , while it is clear that WASP and WAVE2 play critical roles in CX3CL - 1 - induced chemotaxis , their precise roles in regulating the dynamics of GPCR - mediated pseudopod extension are yet to be examined . Myosins are also important for GPCR - mediated macro - phage chemotaxis . Wilson et al . ( 143 ) examined the role of myosin light - chain phosphorylation in macrophage motility . Either inhibition of myosin light - chain kinase ( MLCK ) using a MLCK - speciﬁc antibody or overexpressing a constitutively active form of the kinase in macrophages reduced macro - phage chemotaxis . More interestingly , they found that phosphorylation of Myosin II light chain had to be tightly controlled , as either increase or decrease in phosphorylation inhibited chemotaxis ( 143 ) . The importance of myosin II for macrophage chemotaxis is further evidenced by in vivo studies on inﬂammatory inﬁltration . Inhibition of either Rho kinase that phosphorylates myosin light chain or myosin II was associated with decreased macrophage recruitment in vivo in different disease models ( 144 , 145 ) . Although it is clear that myosin II is required for macrophage chemotaxis , its speciﬁc role in generating chemotactic protrusions has not been directly examined . Other myosin family members also play a role in chemotaxis . A study by Hanley et al . shows that without Myosin IXb macrophages do not extend lamellipodia and have severely reduced migration speed , with an impaired overall chemotactic ability and a deﬁciency in polarization ( 146 ) . Interestingly , myosin IXb (cid:3) / (cid:3) macro - phages display similar phenotype to cells microinjected with constitutively active RhoA ( 106 ) . However , the interpretation of this observation is complicated by the fact that myosin IXb acts as a RhoGAP that modulates Rho activity . The data on the roles of the downstream effectors mediat - ing chemotaxis to GPCR ligands suggest that the pathways are very similar to those elicited by CSF - 1 . However , differ - ences do exist between chemotaxis via tyrosine kinase and G - protein - coupled receptors . Indeed , the requirement for Syk is dependent on the receptor class involved , as CSF - 1 - induced chemotaxis was still normal in macrophages after reduction in endogenous Syk expression ( 136 ) . Syk did not directly phosphorylate WASP , although was still prerequisite for tyrosine phosphorylation of WASP . Instead , as shown by pharmacological inhibitors , SFKs mediate tyrosine phosphor - ylation of WASP ( 137 ) . Rather , Syk seems to be important for the activation of major upstream regulators of WASP and WAVE 2 : the Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 ( 137 ) . Another interesting consideration of GPCR - mediated in comparison to receptor tyrosine kinase - mediated chemotaxis is the role of actin dynamics . Macrophages display biphasic F - actin peaks in response to CSF - 1 that have separate and indepen - dent roles where the ﬁrst peak appears to mediate persis - tence under the control of WASP . Interestingly , macrophages display a rapid single - phase F - actin peak in response to CXC3L1 ( 136 ) and an overall much faster generation of protrusions downstream of GPCR ( D . Cox , personal observations ) , unlike the slower biphasic response to CSF - 1 . Overall , this suggests that macrophages , although employing similar ( overlapping ) signaling components , use different mechanisms to control the persistence of chemo - tactic protrusions in GPCR - mediated compared to RTK - mediated chemotaxis ; however , the exact mechanisms remain to be further investigated . Conclusions Leukocytes , in general , employ different strategies to regu - late actin dynamics and adhesions and are more difﬁcult to study than most other motile cells types because of their resistance to such tools as microinjection to target - speciﬁc molecules or molecular biology approaches , until recently . Perhaps this is why the mechanics and signaling pathways of macrophage phagocytosis and motility have not been completely elucidated . Considering that immune functions are so fundamental to the development and survival of higher organisms , there should be far more advanced understanding of basic motility , phagocytosis , and actin - based antigen presentation ( i . e . synapses not discussed in this review ) . These are all actin - based processes with parallel structures , but each with its own peculiarities . A ﬁner understanding could lead to targeted treatment for immune malfunction or to enhancement cellular responses . We hope that research will progress in this ﬁeld so that a subsequent review not so many years from now would be able to paint a far more comprehensive picture of macrophage behaviors . References 1 . Gordon S . Elie Metchnikoff : father of natural immunity . Eur J Immunol 2008 ; 38 : 3257 – 3264 . 2 . Murray PJ , Wynn TA . Protective and pathogenic functions of macrophage subsets . Nat Rev Immunol 2011 ; 11 : 723 – 737 . 3 . Schulz C , et al . A lineage of myeloid cells independent of Myb and hematopoietic stem cells . Science 2012 ; 336 : 86 – 90 . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 236 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups 4 . Friedl P , Weigelin B . Interstitial leukocyte migration and immune function . Nat Immunol 2008 ; 9 : 960 – 969 . 5 . Auffray C , et al . Monitoring of blood vessels and tissues by a population of monocytes with patrolling behavior . Science 2007 ; 317 : 666 – 670 . 6 . V (cid:1) erollet C , Charri (cid:3) ere GM , Labrousse A , Cougoule C , Le Cabec V , Maridonneau - Parini I . Extracellular proteolysis in macrophage migration : losing grip for a breakthrough . Eur J Immunol 2011 ; 41 : 2805 – 2813 . 7 . Aderem A , Underhill DM . Mechanisms of phagocytosis in macrophages . Annu Rev Immunol 1999 ; 17 : 593 – 623 . 8 . May RC , Caron E , Hall A , Machesky LM . Involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in phagocytosis mediated by FcgammaR or CR3 . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 246 – 248 . 9 . Linder S , H € ufner K , Wintergerst U , Aepfelbacher M . Microtubule - dependent formation of podosomal adhesion structures in primary human macrophages . J Cell Sci 2000 ; 113 ( Pt 23 ) : 4165 – 4176 . 10 . Rotty JD , Wu C , Bear JE . New insights into the regulation and cellular functions of the ARP2 / 3 complex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2013 ; 14 : 7 – 12 . 11 . Campellone KG , Webb NJ , Znameroski EA , Welch MD . WHAMM is an Arp2 / 3 complex activator that binds microtubules and functions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 2008 ; 134 : 148 – 161 . 12 . Duleh SN , Welch MD . WASH and the Arp2 / 3 complex regulate endosome shape and trafﬁcking . Cytoskeleton 2010 ; 67 : 193 – 206 . 13 . Zuchero JB , Coutts AS , Quinlan ME , Thangue NBL , Mullins RD . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multifunctional actin nucleation factor . Nat Cell Biol 2009 ; 11 : 451 – 459 . 14 . Rottner K , H € anisch J , Campellone KG . WASH , WHAMM and JMY : regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex and beyond . Trends Cell Biol 2010 ; 20 : 650 – 661 . 15 . Garc (cid:1) ıa E , Jones GE , Machesky LM , Ant (cid:1) on IM . WIP : WASP - interacting proteins at invadopodia and podosomes . Eur J Cell Biol 2012 ; 91 : 869 – 877 . 16 . Zalevsky J , Lempert L , Kranitz H , Mullins RD . Different WASP family proteins stimulate different Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin - nucleating activities . Curr Biol 2001 ; 11 : 1903 – 1913 . 17 . Padrick SB , Rosen MK . Physical mechanisms of signal integration by WASP family proteins . Annu Rev Biochem 2010 ; 79 : 707 – 735 . 18 . Cory GOC , Garg R , Cramer R , Ridley AJ . Phosphorylation of tyrosine 291 enhances the ability of WASp to stimulate actin polymerization and ﬁlopodium formation . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 45115 – 45121 . 19 . Cammer M , Gevrey J - C , Lorenz M , Dovas A , Condeelis J , Cox D . The mechanism of CSF - 1 - induced Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein activation in vivo : a role for phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase and Cdc42 . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 23302 – 23311 . 20 . Torres E , Rosen MK . Contingent phosphorylation / dephosphorylation provides a mechanism of molecular memory in WASP . Mol Cell 2003 ; 11 : 1215 – 1227 . 21 . Kheir WA , Gevrey J - C , Yamaguchi H , Isaac B , Cox D . A WAVE2 - Abi1 complex mediates CSF - 1 - induced F - actin - rich membrane protrusions and migration in macrophages . J Cell Sci 2005 ; 118 : 5369 – 5379 . 22 . Takenawa T , Miki H . WASP and WAVE family proteins : key molecules for rapid rearrangement of cortical actin ﬁlaments and cell movement . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 1801 – 1809 . 23 . Millard TH , Sharp SJ , Machesky LM . Signalling to actin assembly via the WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) - family proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem J 2004 ; 380 : 1 – 17 . 24 . Stradal TEB , Rottner K , Disanza A , Confalonieri S , Innocenti M , Scita G . Regulation of actin dynamics by WASP and WAVE family proteins . Trends Cell Biol 2004 ; 14 : 303 – 311 . 25 . Chen Z , et al . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature 2010 ; 468 : 533 – 538 . 26 . Mendoza MC . Phosphoregulation of the WAVE regulatory complex and signal integration . Semin Cell Dev Biol 2013 ; 24 : 272 – 279 . 27 . Grifﬁn FM Jr . Grifﬁn JA , Silverstein SC . Studies on the mechanism of phagocytosis . II . The interaction of macrophages with anti - immunoglobulin IgG - coated bone marrow - derived lymphocytes . J Exp Med 1976 ; 144 : 788 – 809 . 28 . Jaumouill (cid:1) e V , Grinstein S . Receptor mobility , the cytoskeleton , and particle binding during phagocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2011 ; 23 : 22 – 29 . 29 . Champion JA , Mitragotri S . Role of target geometry in phagocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 4930 – 4934 . 30 . Smith LM , May RC . Mechanisms of microbial escape from phagocyte killing . Biochem Soc Trans 2013 ; 41 : 475 – 490 . 31 . Ravetch JV , Bolland S . IgG Fc receptors . Annu Rev Immunol 2001 ; 19 : 275 – 290 . 32 . Garc (cid:1) ıa - Garc (cid:1) ıa E , Rosales C . Signal transduction during Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis . J Leukoc Biol 2002 ; 72 : 1092 – 1108 . 33 . Strzelecka A , Kwiatkowska K , Sobota A . Tyrosine phosphorylation and Fcgamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis . FEBS Lett 1997 ; 400 : 11 – 14 . 34 . Kaplan G . Differences in the mode of phagocytosis with Fc and C3 receptors in macrophages . Scand J Immunol 1977 ; 6 : 797 – 807 . 35 . Araki N , Hatae T , Furukawa A , Swanson JA . Phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase - independent contractile activities associated with Fcgamma - receptor - mediated phagocytosis and macropinocytosis in macrophages . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 247 – 257 . 36 . Thrasher AJ , Burns SO . WASP : a key immunological multitasker . Nat Rev Immunol 2010 ; 10 : 182 – 192 . 37 . Lorenzi R , Brickell PM , Katz DR , Kinnon C , Thrasher AJ . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is necessary for efﬁcient IgG - mediated phagocytosis . Blood 2000 ; 95 : 2943 – 2946 . 38 . Park H , Cox D . Cdc42 regulates Fc gamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis through the activation and phosphorylation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and neural - WASP . Mol Biol Cell 2009 ; 20 : 4500 – 4508 . 39 . Tsuboi S . Requirement for a complex of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) with WASP interacting protein in podosome formation in macrophages . J Immunol 2007 ; 178 : 2987 – 2995 . 40 . Magenau A , et al . Phagocytosis of IgG - coated polystyrene beads by macrophages induces and requires high membrane order . Trafﬁc 2011 ; 12 : 1730 – 1743 . 41 . Tsuboi S , et al . FBP17 mediates a common molecular step in the formation of podosomes and phagocytic cups in macrophages . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 8548 – 8556 . 42 . Hoppe AD , Swanson JA . Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Rac2 display distinct patterns of activation during phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 3509 – 3519 . 43 . Beemiller P , et al . A Cdc42 activation cycle coordinated by PI 3 - kinase during Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2010 ; 21 : 470 – 480 . 44 . Cox D , Chang P , Zhang Q , Reddy PG , Bokoch GM , Greenberg S . Requirements for both Rac1 and Cdc42 in membrane rufﬂing and phagocytosis in leukocytes . J Exp Med 1997 ; 186 : 1487 – 1494 . 45 . Caron E , Hall A . Identiﬁcation of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 1998 ; 282 : 1717 – 1721 . 46 . Abe K , et al . Vav2 is an activator of Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 10141 – 10149 . 47 . Patel JC , Hall A , Caron E . Vav regulates activation of Rac but not Cdc42 during FcgammaR - mediated phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 1215 – 1226 . 48 . Hall AB , et al . Requirements for Vav guanine nucleotide exchange factors and Rho GTPases in FcgammaR - and complement - mediated phagocytosis . Immunity 2006 ; 24 : 305 – 316 . 49 . Tzircotis G , Braga VMM , Caron E . RhoG is required for both Fc c R - and CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 2011 ; 124 : 2897 – 2902 . 50 . Yamauchi A , et al . Rac2 - deﬁcient murine macrophages have selective defects in superoxide production and phagocytosis of opsonized particles . J Immunol 2004 ; 173 : 5971 – 5979 . 51 . Botelho RJ , et al . Localized biphasic changes in phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate at sites of phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 151 : 1353 – 1368 . 52 . Coppolino MG , et al . Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase Ialpha impairs localized actin remodeling and suppresses phagocytosis . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 43849 – 43857 . 53 . Santarius M , Lee CH , Anderson RA . Supervised membrane swimming : small G - protein lifeguards regulate PIPK signalling and monitor intracellular PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 pools . Biochem J 2006 ; 398 : 1 – 13 . 54 . Coppolino MG , et al . Evidence for a molecular complex consisting of Fyb / SLAP , SLP - 76 , Nck , © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 237 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups VASP and WASP that links the actin cytoskeleton to Fcgamma receptor signalling during phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 4307 – 4318 . 55 . Herant M , Heinrich V , Dembo M . Mechanics of neutrophil phagocytosis : experiments and quantitative models . J Cell Sci 2006 ; 119 : 1903 – 1913 . 56 . Renkawitz J , Sixt M . Mechanisms of force generation and force transmission during interstitial leukocyte migration . EMBO Rep 2010 ; 11 : 744 – 750 . 57 . Olazabal IM , Caron E , May RC , Schilling K , Knecht DA , Machesky LM . Rho - kinase and myosin - II control phagocytic cup formation during CR , but not FcgammaR , phagocytosis . Curr Biol 2002 ; 12 : 1413 – 1418 . 58 . Hackam DJ , Rotstein OD , Schreiber A , Zhang W , Grinstein S . Rho is required for the initiation of calcium signaling and phagocytosis by Fcgamma receptors in macrophages . J Exp Med 1997 ; 186 : 955 – 966 . 59 . Cox D , Tseng CC , Bjekic G , Greenberg S . A requirement for phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase in pseudopod extension . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 1240 – 1247 . 60 . Lecuit T , Lenne P - F . Cell surface mechanics and the control of cell shape , tissue patterns and morphogenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 633 – 644 . 61 . Herant M , Heinrich V , Dembo M . Mechanics of neutrophil phagocytosis : behavior of the cortical tension . J Cell Sci 2005 ; 118 : 1789 – 1797 . 62 . Marion S , et al . The NF - j B signaling protein Bcl10 regulates actin dynamics by controlling AP1 and OCRL - bearing vesicles . Dev Cell 2012 ; 23 : 954 – 967 . 63 . Niedergang F , Colucci - Guyon E , Dubois T , Raposo G , Chavrier P . ADP ribosylation factor 6 is activated and controls membrane delivery during phagocytosis in macrophages . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 161 : 1143 – 1150 . 64 . Zhang Q , Cox D , Tseng CC , Donaldson JG , Greenberg S . A requirement for ARF6 in Fcgamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 19977 – 19981 . 65 . Scott CC , et al . Phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate hydrolysis directs actin remodeling during phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 169 : 139 – 149 . 66 . Araki N , Johnson MT , Swanson JA . A role for phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in the completion of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis by macrophages . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 135 : 1249 – 1260 . 67 . Cox D , et al . Myosin X is a downstream effector of PI ( 3 ) K during phagocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 469 – 477 . 68 . Diakonova M , Bokoch G , Swanson JA . Dynamics of cytoskeletal proteins during Fcgamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 402 – 411 . 69 . Swanson JA , Johnson MT , Beningo K , Post P , Mooseker M , Araki N . A contractile activity that closes phagosomes in macrophages . J Cell Sci 1999 ; 112 ( Pt 3 ) : 307 – 316 . 70 . Allen LA , Aderem A . Molecular deﬁnition of distinct cytoskeletal structures involved in complement - and Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . J Exp Med 1996 ; 184 : 627 – 637 . 71 . Cox D , Dale BM , Kashiwada M , Helgason CD , Greenberg S . A regulatory role for Src homology 2 domain - containing inositol 5 ′ - phosphatase ( SHIP ) in phagocytosis mediated by Fc gamma receptors and complement receptor 3 ( alpha ( M ) beta ( 2 ) ; CD11b / CD18 ) . J Exp Med 2001 ; 193 : 61 – 71 . 72 . Patel PC , Harrison RE . Membrane rufﬂes capture C3bi - opsonized particles in activated macrophages . Mol Biol Cell 2008 ; 19 : 4628 – 4639 . 73 . Colucci - Guyon E , Niedergang F , Wallar BJ , Peng J , Alberts AS , Chavrier P . A role for mammalian diaphanous - related formins in complement receptor ( CR3 ) - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . Curr Biol 2005 ; 15 : 2007 – 2012 . 74 . Kim J - G , et al . Ras - related GTPases Rap1 and RhoA collectively induce the phagocytosis of serum - opsonized zymosan particles in macrophages . J Biol Chem 2012 ; 287 : 5145 – 5155 . 75 . Lewkowicz E , Herit F , Le Clainche C , Bourdoncle P , Perez F , Niedergang F . The microtubule - binding protein CLIP - 170 coordinates mDia1 and actin reorganization during CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 183 : 1287 – 1298 . 76 . Zaoui K , Honor (cid:1) e S , Isnardon D , Braguer D , Badache A . Memo - RhoA - mDia1 signaling controls microtubules , the actin network , and adhesion site formation in migrating cells . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 183 : 401 – 408 . 77 . Iijima M , Huang YE , Devreotes P . Temporal and spatial regulation of chemotaxis . Dev Cell 2002 ; 3 : 469 – 478 . 78 . Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 1996 ; 84 : 359 – 369 . 79 . Janetopoulos C , Firtel RA . Directional sensing during chemotaxis . FEBS Lett 2008 ; 582 : 2075 – 2085 . 80 . Allen WE , Zicha D , Ridley AJ , Jones GE . A role for Cdc42 in macrophage chemotaxis . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 141 : 1147 – 1157 . 81 . Fukata M , Nakagawa M , Kaibuchi K . Roles of Rho - family GTPases in cell polarisation and directional migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2003 ; 15 : 590 – 597 . 82 . Van Haastert PJM . Chemotaxis : insights from the extending pseudopod . J Cell Sci 2010 ; 123 : 3031 – 3037 . 83 . Petrie RJ , Doyle AD , Yamada KM . Random versus directionally persistent cell migration . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 ; 10 : 538 – 549 . 84 . Ridley AJ . Life at the leading edge . Cell 2011 ; 145 : 1012 – 1022 . 85 . Chhabra ES , Higgs HN . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat Cell Biol 2007 ; 9 : 1110 – 1121 . 86 . Goley ED , Welch MD . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 ; 7 : 713 – 726 . 87 . Insall RH , Machesky LM . Actin dynamics at the leading edge : from simple machinery to complex networks . Dev Cell 2009 ; 17 : 310 – 322 . 88 . Suraneni P , Rubinstein B , Unruh JR , Durnin M , Hanein D , Li R . The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional ﬁbroblast cell migration . J Cell Biol 2012 ; 197 : 239 – 251 . 89 . Pixley FJ . Macrophage migration and its regulation by CSF - 1 . Int J Cell Biol 2012 ; 2012 : 501962 . 90 . Sasaki Y , Ohsawa K , Kanazawa H , Kohsaka S , Imai Y . Iba1 is an actin - cross - linking protein in macrophages / microglia . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001 ; 286 : 292 – 297 . 91 . Kinne RW , Br € auer R , Stuhlm € uller B , Palombo - Kinne E , Burmester GR . Macrophages in rheumatoid arthritis . Arthritis Res 2000 ; 2 : 189 – 202 . 92 . Tabas I . Macrophage death and defective inﬂammation resolution in atherosclerosis . Nat Rev Immunol 2010 ; 10 : 36 – 46 . 93 . Condeelis J , Pollard JW . Macrophages : obligate partners for tumor cell migration , invasion , and metastasis . Cell 2006 ; 124 : 263 – 266 . 94 . Mouchemore KA , Pixley FJ . CSF - 1 signaling in macrophages : pleiotrophy through phosphotyrosine - based signaling pathways . Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 2012 ; 49 : 49 – 61 . 95 . Sengupta A , Liu WK , Yeung YG , Yeung DC , Frackelton AR Jr , Stanley ER . Identiﬁcation and subcellular localization of proteins that are rapidly phosphorylated in tyrosine in response to colony - stimulating factor 1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988 ; 85 : 8062 – 8066 . 96 . Joos H , Trouliaris S , Helftenbein G , Niemann H , Tamura T . Tyrosine phosphorylation of the juxtamembrane domain of the v - Fms oncogene product is required for its association with a 55 - kDa protein . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 24476 – 24481 . 97 . Wilhelmsen K , Burkhalter S , van der Geer P . C - Cbl binds the CSF - 1 receptor at tyrosine 973 , a novel phosphorylation site in the receptor’s carboxy - terminus . Oncogene 2002 ; 21 : 1079 – 1089 . 98 . Pixley FJ , Stanley ER . CSF - 1 regulation of the wandering macrophage : complexity in action . Trends Cell Biol 2004 ; 14 : 628 – 638 . 99 . Yeung YG , Wang Y , EinsteinDB , Lee PS , Stanley ER . Colony - stimulating factor - 1stimulates the formation of multimericcytosoliccomplexes ofsignaling proteinsandcytoskeletalcomponentsin macrophages . J BiolChem1998 ; 273 : 17128 – 17137 . 100 . Munugalavadla V , Borneo J , Ingram DA , Kapur R . p85alpha subunit of class IA PI - 3 kinase is crucial for macrophage growth and migration . Blood 2005 ; 106 : 103 – 109 . 101 . Vedham V , Phee H , Coggeshall KM . Vav activation and function as a rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor in macrophage colony - stimulating factor - induced macrophage chemotaxis . Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 25 : 4211 – 4220 . 102 . Vanhaesebroeck B , et al . Distinct PI ( 3 ) Ks mediate mitogenic signalling and cell migration in macrophages . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 69 – 71 . 103 . Papakonstanti EA , Ridley AJ , Vanhaesebroeck B . The p110delta isoform of PI 3 - kinase negatively controls RhoA and PTEN . EMBO J 2007 ; 26 : 3050 – 3061 . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 238 Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups 104 . Mouchemore KA , Sampaio NG , Murrey MW , Stanley ER , Lannutti BJ , Pixley FJ . Speciﬁc inhibition of PI3K p110 d inhibits CSF - 1 - induced macrophage spreading and invasive capacity . FEBS J 2013 ; doi : 10 . 1111 / febs . 12316 . 105 . Sampaio NG , et al . Phosphorylation of CSF - 1R Y721 mediates its association with PI3K to regulate macrophage motility and enhancement of tumor cell invasion . J Cell Sci 2011 ; 124 : 2021 – 2031 . 106 . Allen WE , Jones GE , Pollard JW , Ridley AJ . Rho , Rac and Cdc42 regulate actin organization and cell adhesion in macrophages . J Cell Sci 1997 ; 110 ( Pt 6 ) : 707 – 720 . 107 . Zicha D , et al . Chemotaxis of macrophages is abolished in the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Br J Haematol 1998 ; 101 : 659 – 665 . 108 . Badolato R , et al . Monocytes from Wiskott - Aldrich patients display reduced chemotaxis and lack of cell polarization in response to monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 and formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenylalanine . J Immunol 1998 ; 161 : 1026 – 1033 . 109 . Ishihara D , Dovas A , Park H , Isaac BM , Cox D . The chemotactic defect in wiskott - Aldrich syndrome macrophages is due to the reduced persistence of directional protrusions . PLoS ONE 2012 ; 7 : e30033 . 110 . Dovas A , Gevrey J - C , Grossi A , Park H , Abou - Kheir W , Cox D . Regulation of podosome dynamics by WASp phosphorylation : implication in matrix degradation and chemotaxis in macrophages . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 : 3873 – 3882 . 111 . Abou - Kheir W , Isaac B , Yamaguchi H , Cox D . Membrane targeting of WAVE2 is not sufﬁcient for WAVE2 - dependent actin polymerization : a role for IRSp53 in mediating the interaction between Rac and WAVE2 . J Cell Sci 2008 ; 121 : 379 – 390 . 112 . Parent CA , Devreotes PN . A cell’s sense of direction . Science 1999 ; 284 : 765 – 770 . 113 . DeMali KA , Burridge K . Coupling membrane protrusion and cell adhesion . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 2389 – 2397 . 114 . Borm B , Requardt RP , Herzog V , Kirfel G . Membrane rufﬂes in cell migration : indicators of inefﬁcient lamellipodia adhesion and compartments of actin ﬁlament reorganization . Exp Cell Res 2005 ; 302 : 83 – 95 . 115 . Pixley FJ , Lee PS , Condeelis JS , Stanley ER . Protein tyrosine phosphatase phi regulates paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation and mediates colony - stimulating factor 1 - induced morphological changes in macrophages . Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 21 : 1795 – 1809 . 116 . Linder S , Aepfelbacher M . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of invasive cells . Trends Cell Biol 2003 ; 13 : 376 – 385 . 117 . Owen KA , et al . Regulation of lamellipodial persistence , adhesion turnover , and motility in macrophages by focal adhesion kinase . J Cell Biol 2007 ; 179 : 1275 – 1287 . 118 . Block MR , et al . Podosome - type adhesions and focal adhesions , so alike yet so different . Eur J Cell Biol 2008 ; 87 : 491 – 506 . 119 . Dovas A , Cox D . Signaling networks regulating leukocyte podosome dynamics and function . Cell Signal 2011 ; 23 : 1225 – 1234 . 120 . Wheeler AP , Smith SD , Ridley AJ . CSF - 1 and PI 3 - kinase regulate podosome distribution and assembly in macrophages . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2006 ; 63 : 132 – 140 . 121 . Monypenny J , et al . Role of WASP in cell polarity and podosome dynamics of myeloid cells . Eur J Cell Biol 2011 ; 90 : 198 – 204 . 122 . Dehring DAK , et al . Hematopoietic lineage cell - speciﬁc protein 1 functions in concert with the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome array organization and chemotaxis in dendritic cells . J Immunol 2011 ; 186 : 4805 – 4818 . 123 . Srinivasan S , et al . Rac and Cdc42 play distinct roles in regulating PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 and polarity during neutrophil chemotaxis . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 160 : 375 – 385 . 124 . Huttenlocher A , Ginsberg MH , Horwitz AF . Modulation of cell migration by integrin - mediated cytoskeletal linkages and ligand - binding afﬁnity . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 134 : 1551 – 1562 . 125 . Palecek SP , Loftus JC , Ginsberg MH , Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . Integrin - ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum adhesiveness . Nature 1997 ; 385 : 537 – 540 . 126 . Wheeler AP , Ridley AJ . RhoB affects macrophage adhesion , integrin expression and migration . Exp Cell Res 2007 ; 313 : 3505 – 3516 . 127 . Sellers JR . Myosins : a diverse superfamily . Biochim Biophys Acta 2000 ; 1496 : 3 – 22 . 128 . Giannone G , et al . Lamellipodial actin mechanically links myosin activity with adhesion - site formation . Cell 2007 ; 128 : 561 – 575 . 129 . Lim JI , Sabouri - Ghomi M , Machacek M , Waterman CM , Danuser G . Protrusion and actin assembly are coupled to the organization of lamellar contractile structures . Exp Cell Res 2010 ; 316 : 2027 – 2041 . 130 . Wilson CA , et al . Myosin II contributes to cell - scale actin network treadmilling through network disassembly . Nature 2010 ; 465 : 373 – 377 . 131 . Li Z - H , Dulyaninova NG , House RP , Almo SC , Bresnick AR . S100A4 regulates macrophage chemotaxis . Mol Biol Cell 2010 ; 21 : 2598 – 2610 . 132 . Swaney KF , Huang C - H , Devreotes PN . Eukaryotic chemotaxis : a network of signaling pathways controls motility , directional sensing , and polarity . Annu Rev Biophys 2010 ; 39 : 265 – 289 . 133 . Gambardella L , Vermeren S . Molecular players in neutrophil chemotaxis – focus on PI3K and small GTPases . J Leukoc Biol 2013 ; doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 1112564 . 134 . Baruzzi A , Caveggion E , Berton G . Regulation of phagocyte migration and recruitment by Src - family kinases . Cell Mol Life Sci 2008 ; 65 : 2175 – 2190 . 135 . Curnock AP , Logan MK , Ward SG . Chemokine signalling : pivoting around multiple phosphoinositide 3 - kinases . Immunology 2002 ; 105 : 125 – 136 . 136 . Gevrey J - C , Isaac BM , Cox D . Syk is required for monocyte / macrophage chemotaxis to CX3CL1 ( Fractalkine ) . J Immunol 2005 ; 175 : 3737 – 3745 . 137 . Park H , Cox D . Syk regulates multiple signaling pathways leading to CX3CL1 chemotaxis in macrophages . J Biol Chem 2011 ; 286 : 14762 – 14769 . 138 . Di Marzio P , Dai WW , Franchin G , Chan AY , Symons M , Sherry B . Role of Rho family GTPases in CCR1 - and CCR5 - induced actin reorganization in macrophages . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005 ; 331 : 909 – 916 . 139 . Weiss - Haljiti C , et al . Involvement of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase gamma , Rac , and PAK signaling in chemokine - induced macrophage migration . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 43273 – 43284 . 140 . Bouma G , Burns SO , Thrasher AJ . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome : immunodeﬁciency resulting from defective cell migration and impaired immunostimulatory activation . Immunobiology 2009 ; 214 : 778 – 790 . 141 . Zhang H , et al . Impaired integrin - dependent function in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein - deﬁcient murine and human neutrophils . Immunity 2006 ; 25 : 285 – 295 . 142 . Kumar S , et al . Cdc42 regulates neutrophil migration via crosstalk between WASp , CD11b , and microtubules . Blood 2012 ; 120 : 3563 – 3574 . 143 . Wilson AK , Gorgas G , Claypool WD , de Lanerolle P . An increase or a decrease in myosin II phosphorylation inhibits macrophage motility . J Cell Biol 1991 ; 114 : 277 – 283 . 144 . Si J , Ge Y , Zhuang S , Gong R . Inhibiting nonmuscle myosin II impedes inﬂammatory inﬁltration and ameliorates progressive renal disease . Lab Invest 2010 ; 90 : 448 – 458 . 145 . Nakayama M , et al . Rho - kinase and myosin II activities are required for cell type and environment speciﬁc migration . Genes Cells 2005 ; 10 : 107 – 117 . 146 . Hanley PJ , et al . Motorized RhoGAP myosin IXb ( Myo9b ) controls cell shape and motility . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 ; 107 : 12145 – 12150 . © 2013 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 256 / 2013 239 Rougerie et al (cid:1) Production of M Φ lamellipodia and phagocytic cups