Beyond physics : A case for far transfer Benjamin Robert Forsyth Received : 10 November 2009 / Accepted : 13 September 2011 / Published online : 25 September 2011 (cid:2) Springer Science + Business Media B . V . 2011 Abstract This is a case study of a physics undergraduate who claimed that he ‘‘uses physics to understand other subjects . ’’ This statement suggested that this student could describe issues concerning the transfer of learning and especially instances of far transfer . Detailed instances of far transfer have been difﬁcult to replicate in lab settings . Therefore , three interviews were designed to investigate this student’s claims about using physics to understand other subjects as a means to better understand far transfer processes . Transfer in this case study is deﬁned as the personal construction of relations of similarity . Further - more , I operationalize this deﬁnition of transfer via 12 aspects of transfer derived from the work of several contemporary researchers who study the transfer of learning . As part of this case study I also investigate the subject’s motivation for engaging in far transfer . Directions for future research are discussed which includes the need to study the role of personal epistemology in far transfer as well as a larger investigation of students who transfer broadly across school subjects . Keywords Transfer of learning (cid:2) Far transfer (cid:2) Physics (cid:2) Philosophy (cid:2) Epistemology (cid:2) Motivation Introduction This case study attempts to address issues surrounding the transfer of learning . 1 It is about an undergraduate physics student named Bill ( a pseudonym ) who wanted to change majors This research was conducted in fulﬁllment of the practicum requirement for the author’s doctoral program . B . R . Forsyth ( & ) Department of Educational Psychology and Foundations , University of Northern Iowa , Cedar Falls , IA 50614 - 0607 , USA e - mail : benjamin . forsyth @ uni . edu 1 In this paper , transfer is deﬁned as the personal construction of relations of similarity across activities ( Lobato 2003 ) . The deﬁnition will be discussed later in greater detail . 123 Instr Sci ( 2012 ) 40 : 515 – 535 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11251 - 011 - 9188 - z away from physics , but was reluctant to do so because he claimed that physics helped him understand many other subjects like history , music , German , philosophy and the social sciences . Although many of the examples that Bill explained during our discussions were connected in some way to physics , the focus of this study is less about subject matter and more about describing distant ( far ) transfer as it happens outside of carefully controlled experiments . Studies of transfer where individuals learn in one context and apply their learning to another context have often shown that humans have difﬁculty in this task when the two contexts are extremely disparate ( see Detterman 1993 a particularly crushing analysis ) . Therefore , when Bill claims that physics helps him understand subjects like history and social studies better , it deserves to be looked into . What , if anything , is Bill really trans - ferring ? Is physics content helping Bill to understand other subjects any better ? What process does he use when he transfers between physics and other subjects ? What motivates him to look for these similarities across topics ? This case study intends to contribute toward clarifying these issues about the transfer of learning that have concerned educa - tional researchers for many years . A brief review of transfer Transfer has played a central role in educational psychology since before the ﬁeld was even considered a formal subject . Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) explain that one reason transfer has remained so important is because of its foundational role in assessments of learning . These assessments often measure whether learning remains permanent and whether it can be applied to novel contexts . Therefore , a sufﬁcient understanding of transfer is required to appropriately interpret these assessments . Despite its importance , researchers are not in general agreement about how transfer works , how often it occurs or how to improve it . This lack of agreement is based in part on the difﬁculty in capturing transfer experimentally . In the words of Schoenfeld ( 1999 ) : Transfer is ubiquitous . We couldn’t survive if we weren’t able to adapt what we know to circumstances that differ , at least in some degree , from the circum - stances in which we learned it . Yet transfer is mysteriously absent from the psychological laboratory ; it seems to vanish when experimenters try to pin it down ( p . 7 ) . Researchers who are critical of transfer would whole - heartedly agree with the last portion of Schoenfeld’s statement ; that studies of transfer typically show low rates of transfer . Furthermore , this lack of results has led some researchers to downplay the ubiquity , importance and / or necessity of transfer ( Hammer et al . 2005 ; Perkins and Grotzer 1997 ) . However , they often assume that the rarity of observed transfer implies its use - lessness which requires an assumption that research on transfer is deﬁnitive in its analysis and that little is left to study on the topic . Considering the conﬂicting data from every - day versus experimental observations , past research on transfer seems neither deﬁnitive nor closed . Several new theories about transfer ( Barnett and Ceci 2002 ; Lobato 2003 ; Schwartz et al . 2005 ) have been published over the last decade which attempt to address theoretical and methodological deﬁciencies of previous transfer research . Short descriptions of these researchers’ work follow below . 516 B . R . Forsyth 123 Barnett and Ceci Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) propose a taxonomy of transfer that organizes past research and directs future studies . The taxonomy decomposes instances of transfer into nine dimen - sions . The ﬁrst three—labeled ( a ) learned skill , ( b ) performance change , and ( c ) memory demands—are called content dimensions which describe what is being transferred . The ﬁrst dimension ( learned skill ) varies from a learning a speciﬁc procedure to learning general representations or principles . The second content dimension ( performance change ) builds off of the ﬁrst dimension by recognizing that learned skills can be in measured in multiple ways . For example , a researcher who studies students’ long division ( a learned skill ) may measure transfer of this skill based on performance changes in speed , accuracy , or approach , or a combination of all three . Finally , the third content dimension accounts for ways that transfer can be more or less difﬁcult due to changes in the memory demands of the task . For example , completing a long division problem with help from a book or ‘‘cheat sheet’’ has less memory demands than performing the same task without these scaffolds and transfer success will likely vary as these memory demands change . The last six dimensions—labeled ( a ) knowledge domain , ( b ) physical context , ( c ) temporal context , ( d ) functional context , ( e ) social context , and ( f ) modality—are contextual dimensions of transfer that describe ‘‘when and where learning is transferred from and to’’ ( Barnett and Ceci 2002 , p . 623 ) . The authors explain that transfer difﬁculty depends on how similar or different the target and base of a transfer problem is along each dimension . Contextual dimensions with a high degree of similarity across the target and base are labeled as ‘‘near transfer’’ whereas dimensions with a high degree of difference across the target and base are labeled as ‘‘far transfer . ’’ For example , Barnett and Ceci label a transfer problem in biology involving a mouse and rat as a case of near transfer along the dimension of knowledge domain whereas a problem involving science and art is labeled as far transfer . Although transfer is often dichotomized into categories of near and far transfer , Barnett and Ceci prefer to view each contextual dimension as lying along a near - far transfer continuum . This means that some amount of subjectivity remains within each proposed contextual dimension . For example , in the knowledge domain , two researchers might disagree about whether transfer from science to history is more distant than science to economics . Nevertheless , the strength of Barnett and Ceci’s taxonomy is that transfer distance is measured across multiple dimensions . Previous research allowed for transfer to only be classiﬁed as either completely near or completely far whereas Barnett and Ceci’s taxonomy allows researchers to explain across multiple contexts how distant a particular instance transfer is . Bransford and Schwartz Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) and Schwartz et al . ( 2005 ) posit that the types of tasks used by past researchers of transfer is one reason that poor , or at least mixed , transfer results occur . They call these transfer tasks ‘‘sequestered problem solving’’ ( SPS ) tasks . SPS tasks consist of one - time tests that are isolated from any external sources of knowledge ( Fortus 2002 ) . In these tasks , researchers discourage participants to seek solutions to the problem beyond the materials or information they are given . One example of the SPS technique comes from Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) . The researchers in this study asked participants to solve a well structured medical problem based on a speciﬁc military analogy . Participants’ performance was strictly based on their use of the military analogy to solve the medical Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 517 123 problem . Therefore , answers that did not use the military analogy were not under the same amount of scrutiny . Consequently , less consideration was given toward the usefulness of other possible solutions . Bransford , Schwartz and colleagues are not necessarily saying that SPS tasks are inherently bad or that they should never be used . Rather , they argue that SPS tasks are usually too narrow to indicate transfer . They suggest that tests of transfer should look to see how a participant seeks out extra information to solve a new problem . They call this method for studying transfer the preparation for learning ( PFL ) approach . The PFL approach is based on the idea that people not only use knowledge in a procedural and conceptual way , but also in a way to gain more knowledge ( Broudy 1977 ) . Lobato Lobato ( 2003 ) developed a theoretical framework for studying transfer that reacts against normative expert - oriented transfer studies that focus primarily on what participants ‘‘should’’ transfer rather than what they do transfer . She calls her framework actor - oriented transfer wherein transfer is deﬁned as ‘‘the personal construction of relations of similarity’’ ( 2003 , p . 20 ) . Lobato’s actor - oriented perspective is useful because it allows transfer to be analyzed even when what is transferred is considered ‘‘incorrect . ’’ For Lobato , what matters is that the one engaging in transfer ( the actor ) sees some amount of similarity across learning experiences . By widening what counts as transfer there is less chance of missing moments where initial learning extends across contexts . It also allows researchers to investigate ways to correct transferred misconceptions as a result of misguided or poorly constructed relations of similarity . Deﬁnition of transfer This case study adopts Lobato’s ( 2003 ) deﬁnition of transfer which states that transfer is the personal construction of relations of similarity . However , I have adopted this deﬁnition of transfer based on how well it synthesizes key ideas across all three perspectives reviewed in this paper . First , it reﬂects a preference for measuring transfer based on personal constructions of similarity even when these constructions are in opposition to what theoretically should be transferred ; an idea espoused by Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) as well as Lobato ( 2003 ) . Similarly , it assumes that these relations of similarity need to be given equal consideration when they are analyzed because a ‘‘wrong’’ relation is still an instance of transfer . Furthermore , the deﬁnition is broad enough that instances of transfer can be analyzed according to the content and context dimensions of Barnett and Ceci’s ( 2002 ) transfer taxonomy . Two extra dimensions of transfer Deﬁning transfer as a synthesis across three perspectives suggests two more ‘‘dimen - sions’’ of transfer that should be added to Barnett and Ceci’s ( 2002 ) taxonomy . I call these dimensions value , and intentionality of transfer . I discuss these dimensions below . 518 B . R . Forsyth 123 Value Often in transfer research , only positively valued transfer is considered ( i . e . , when a learning experience is deemed helpful to a learner’s overall growth in understanding ) . However , consistent with Lobato’s ( 2003 ) actor oriented perspective and Bransford and Schwartz’ ( 1999 ) PFL approach , this case study evaluated instances of transfer even if its value was negative or trivial . Intentionality The level in which transfer is active or passive is referred to as intentionality in this paper and each of the three sets of researchers previously reviewed discuss this topic . Lobato’s ( 2003 ) deﬁnition of transfer implies that transfer can be either active or passive and that it is a dynamic process as opposed to a static application . Bransford and colleagues ( Bransford et al . 1999 ; Bransford and Schwartz 1999 ) also suggest that the most interesting kind of transfer is the kind that is active and dynamic . Furthermore , Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) deﬁne active transfer as transfer that is conscious . However , they are relatively silent regarding passive transfer . Although all three groups of researchers seem to be in agreement that active transfer is preferred over passive transfer Pugh and Bergin ( 2006 ) suggest in their review of moti - vational inﬂuences on transfer that the role of intentionality in transfer is in need of greater conceptual clarity . To illustrate this need they provide an example of researchers’ over - simpliﬁcation of intentionality in Salomon and Perkins’ ( 1989 ) description of high - road transfer , a kind of transfer equated with the process of ‘‘consciously formulated abstrac - tions’’ ( p . 118 ) . At ﬁrst glance high - road transfer seems to equate with ‘‘active transfer . ’’ However , Salomon and Perkins break up their description of high - road transfer into two types ; a passive form called forward reaching transfer and an active form called backward reaching transfer . In forward reaching transfer ‘‘a principle is so well learned in the ﬁrst place … that it simply suggests itself appropriately on late occasions’’ ( pp . 118 – 119 ) . Backward reaching transfer , on the other hand , involves , ‘‘the deliberate formulation of an abstraction’’ ( p . 119 ) . Therefore , not all meaningful ‘‘high - road’’ transfer is necessarily active transfer and neither is passive transfer necessarily a lesser form of transfer as might be supposed . Twelve aspects of transfer Based on Barnett and Ceci’s ( 2002 ) taxonomy , Lobato’s ( 2003 ) actor oriented transfer perspective and Bransford and Schwartz’ ( 1999 ) PFL perspective , I identify 12 aspects of transfer that operationalize the deﬁnition of transfer as the personal construction of rela - tions of similarity in this case study ( see Table 1 ) . The ﬁrst three aspects ( Learned Skill , Performance Change and Memory Demands ) come directly from the content portion of Barnett and Ceci’s taxonomy of transfer . The next six ( Knowledge Domain , Physical Context , Temporal Context , Functional Context , Social Context and Modality ) come from the context portion of Barnett and Ceci’s taxonomy . Value and Intentionality come from Lobato ( 2003 ) and Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) , as well as ideas put forward by Pugh and Bergin ( 2006 ) and Engle ( 2006 ) . The ﬁnal aspect ( Relations of Similarity ) comes directly from Lobato’s deﬁnition that transfer is the personal construction of relations of similarity . These ‘‘relations’’ should be capable of being graphically mapped and analyzed Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 519 123 similar to the structural maps used by analogical reasoning theorists like Gentner ( 1983 ) , Holyoak and Thagard ( 1989 ) , and Markman ( 1997 ) . Research questions This study intended to observe what , how and why a student ( Bill ) transfers between physics and other subjects . This was formally stated as a set of three questions : 1 . Based on the deﬁnition that transfer is the personal construction of relations of similarity , what particular instances of transfer does Bill identify between physics and other school related subjects ? 2 . How does Bill transfer between physics and other subjects based on a deﬁnition of transfer operationalized by 12 aspects of transfer ? 3 . Why does Bill engage in transfer between physics and other subjects ? Answering these questions via a case study will to add to researchers’ understanding of transfer in several ways . First , it attempts to describe a form of far transfer ( within the knowledge domain , at least ) that borders on creativity ( Hakel and Halpern 2005 ) . There is less descriptive research on this type of transfer compared to more quantitative studies like Reed et al . ( 1974 ) , Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) , or Brown and Kane ( 1988 ) . Of the two transfer studies that seem most similar to this study , one ( Pugh 2004 ) covers the transfer of physics , but focuses on the motivation behind transfer . The other ( Wagner 2006 ) deals with transfer within one subject ( statistics ) rather than across school subjects as is described here . Method At the time I met him Bill was an undergraduate sophomore physics major . I met him via a friend working in the career services ofﬁce . Bill wanted advice about possibly switching majors . However , he was hesitant to do so because , in his words , ‘‘learning physics helps me to better understand so many other subjects . ’’ My friend referred Bill to me because he thought that Bill could beneﬁt from hearing about my own jump from physics as an Table 1 Twelve aspects of transfer The ﬁrst nine aspects of transfer used in this study originate from Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) . The last three aspects are derived principally from the work of Lobato ( 2003 ) and Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) Learned skill Performance change Memory demands Knowledge domain Physical context Temporal context Functional context Social context Modality Value Intentionality Relations of similarity 520 B . R . Forsyth 123 undergraduate to educational psychology in graduate school . When Bill contacted me I told him that I wanted to speak with him not only about switching majors , but to also explore his claims about using physics to understand other subjects . With his consent , we proceeded to meet . Design Rationale for a single case design Before meeting with Bill I needed to make a decision about whether or not I would seek out multiple participants to design a multiple - case study about far transfer or to keep the study as a single - case design . In his book Case Study Research , Yin ( 2009 ) suggests ﬁve appropriate rationales for conducting a single - case study . Two of these rationales are that the identiﬁed case represents an extreme or revelatory example . As discussed earlier , far transfer as a phenomenon represents the extreme case of transfer in general meaning that opportunities to study it are less frequent . Furthermore , past researchers’ attempts at studying far transfer , as noted by Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) and Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) , have only been mildly successful . Therefore , the opportunity to investigate Bill’s claims of far transfer as a single - case design is justiﬁed considering researchers’ past difﬁculties with observing far transfer . Protocol analysis Bill and I met three times over a period of 2 months . The design of these three interviews were guided by protocol analysis ( Ericsson and Simon 1993 ) . Within protocol analysis are two types of approaches . The ﬁrst , called a ‘‘concurrent protocol , ’’ is used when a subject engages in a task and concurrently provides a verbal report of the process . Assuming that the tenets of protocol analysis are followed , the verbal report from a concurrent protocol should provide an accurate reﬂection of processes within the subject’s short term memory . The second approach , called a retrospective protocol , occurs when a subject performs a task and then retrospectively reports to the researcher their memory of the task . Retro - spective protocols are also capable of providing researchers with accurate traces of a subject’s information processing , but the results can be even more susceptible to impair - ment if the design is not carefully crafted . Bill was asked to perform a concurrent protocol task in the second interview by verbally reporting to me his process of ﬁlling out a concept map . However , the rest of the information I obtained from Bill in the three interviews was based on a retrospective protocol design . Because of this , I adhered to the following recommendations made by Ericsson and Simon when designing the interviews . First , Bill was given explicit instruction to recall as accurately as possible , to take his time when answering , and to give as much information as he could even if he thought the information was small or unimportant . Second , if Bill started to give quick responses to my questions I encouraged him to take more time with his answer and to give more detail . Lastly , when eliciting memories as opposed to inferences , I tried to make my questions as speciﬁc as possible since Ericsson and Simon suggest that recall increases signiﬁcantly under these circumstances . Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 521 123 Procedure First interview The goal of the ﬁrst interview was to encourage Bill to give as much detail as possible about how he connected physics to other subjects . Therefore , he was initially prompted to recount to me what he meant about using physics to understand other subjects when he spoke with his career advisor . From that point on , he was asked open - ended questions to help him elaborate on the topic . I used statements and questions like : ‘‘Tell me more about that , ’’ or , ‘‘What do you mean when you say … ’’ and , ‘‘Keep telling me about … ’’ to steer Bill toward talking about making connections between physics and other subjects and away from less relevant topics . The purpose of using these broad questions also helped me avoid explicitly inserting my own thoughts about how and when transfer works out of the interview . Second interview In the second interview I focused on a speciﬁc instance of transfer described by Bill in the ﬁrst interview about the relationship between a pre - Socratic philospher’s concept of ‘‘ﬂow’’ and several basic principles in quantum mechanics ( I describe this instance of transfer in greater detail in the ‘‘Results’’ section ) . I focused upon this instance of transfer because it showed the most promise of portraying all 12 aspects of transfer . The second interview was held 3 weeks after the ﬁrst interview . During the second interview , we discussed the 12 aspects of Bill’s philosophy / physics transfer in the following order . 1 . Temporal Context 2 . Physical Context 3 . Functional Context 4 . Social Context 5 . Modality 6 . Memory Demands 7 . Intentionality 8 . Knowledge Domain 9 . Value 10 . Learned Skill 11 . Performance Change 12 . Relations of Similarity Relations of similarity To help me understand the Relations of Similarity aspect of transfer , I asked Bill to make a concept map describing how features from his philosophy portion of transfer was similar to features of his physics portion of transfer . In keeping with concurrent protocol guidelines I asked Bill to verbalize his process has he ﬁlled the concept map out . I also instructed him to use the concept map to describe as many relations of similarity as possible and to take as much time as he needed . Third interview The third interview occurred 1 month after the second interview and its main purpose was to explore at a more general level why Bill transfers across knowledge domains . Consistent 522 B . R . Forsyth 123 with the hour glass design of this study , the scope of information obtained during this interview was intentionally broad and open ended . I opened the interview by asking him the question : ‘‘Do you think the way you make connections between subjects is the same or different from other people ? ’’ He was then given latitude to answer the question however he felt was appropriate . The rest of the interview centered on questions generated by the content of the previous interviews . Triangulating the data In order for single - case designs to possess construct validity it is vital that they incorporate multiple converging sources of evidence ( Yin 2009 ) . This present study is no exception . Patton ( 2002 ) recommends that this process of converging evidence can occur via data triangulation , investigator triangulation , theoretical triangulation , and methodological tri - angulation . In this study I achieved data triangulation by asking Bill to engage in both concurrent and retrospective protocols through the interview process . To achieve inves - tigator triangulation I received input from both a physicist and philosopher regarding Bill’s statements about those two knowledge domains . Theory triangulation was achieved by subjecting Bill’s claims to Lobato’s ( 2003 ) actor - oriented transfer , Barnett and Ceci’s ( 2002 ) taxonomy for far transfer and Bransford and Schwartz’s ( 1999 ) PFL approach . Finally , I have attempted to achieve methodological triangulation by conducting both a top - down and bottom - up analysis of Bill’s claims . I report these analyses in the following ‘‘Results’’ section . Results I transcribed each interview and then analyzed them ﬁrst according to a top down analysis based on the 12 aspects of transfer and then via a bottom up analysis which focused on addressing the third research question ( i . e . , why Bill engages in transfer ) . I ﬁrst provide short descriptions of what Bill said in each of the interviews followed by a report of the top down and bottom up analyses . Description of the interviews Interview one I hoped that Bill would be able to describe in detail at least one to three instances of what he meant by ‘‘using physics to understand many topics . ’’ He exceeded my expectations by describing six examples . His ﬁrst example regarded a connection between free will and Newtonian mechanics which is a fairly well known argument often referred to by physi - cists as ‘‘Laplace’s demon . ’’ In this argument the deterministic nature of Newtonian mechanics is extrapolated to mean that if one knew all the exact forces and positions upon every object in the universe ( along with the power to analyze all these data ) then this person would know the unalterable fate of the universe as well all who live in the universe . After describing Laplace’s demon , Bill then explained how the process of studying physics was like studying German . He explained that physics could be seen as a new language and that much of the computational homework in physics was like practicing Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 523 123 grammar . Bill also admitted that his description of this relationship between physics and German was his least developed out of the six instances he described . Next , Bill described a ‘‘thesis statement’’ that he developed in an Introduction to Phi - losophy course that linked two ideas of a pre - Socratic philosopher named Heraclitus with several principles in quantum mechanics . The ideas mentioned by Bill about Heraclitus had to do with the philosopher’s concept of ﬂow and his use of a river metaphor . In particular , Bill mentioned Heraclitus’ saying that ‘‘all things ﬂow’’ and that ‘‘you cannot step in the same river twice . ’’ Bill felt that physicists would likely agree with Heraclitus’ statements because ‘‘quantum theory [ is ] more inclined to agree that all is moving and tumultuous rather than orderly and stagnant … like Newtonian mechanics . ’’ Bill’s expla - nation of how Heraclitus’ concept of ﬂow related to quantum mechanics was fairly broken at times and he seemed to recognize this inadequacy because he frequently apologized for his description . Nevertheless , he managed to explain that quantum mechanical principles like wave - particle duality , Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle , the probabilistic nature of reality , and matter - energy uniﬁcation related to Heraclitean concepts like constant change and process reality . After explaining his link between Heraclitus and Quantum mechanics , Bill described his opinion that the movement from Newtonian to Quantum mechanics in the ﬁeld of physics is similar to the shift in the social sciences from positivist to post - modernist thinking . Bill’s comparison followed a fairly superﬁcial analogy regarding the fact that both Quantum mechanics and post - modernism were major paradigms shifts from Newtonian mechanics and positivism , respectively . Although he successfully identiﬁed the similarities between the two paradigm shifts he oversimpliﬁed the process of replacement of one academic paradigm over another . For example , although quantum mechanics is seen as the dominant paradigm in physics , Newtonian mechanics still remains useful in the sub - atomic realm . Furthermore , in the social science comparison , positivism still maintains a place in the social sciences despite a contemporary shift toward post - modernism . In neither the physics nor social science case has the newer academic paradigm rendered the previous paradigm completely irrelevant . 2 Next , Bill explained that he often thought about how scientists and mathematicians often describe what they feel is ‘‘beautiful’’ in terms similar to the way musicians describe beauty . That is , that many musicians , similar to mathematicians and scientists seek aes - thetic properties in their work that possess the ability to combine simplicity with ‘‘a sense of high order … structure . ’’ The last connection that Bill described in the ﬁrst interview had to do with the idea that human cognition can be modeled like a complex physics problem . Although Bill seemed very enthusiastic about this topic he was fairly inarticulate when asked to delineate how the modeling process across mind and matter shared commonalities . He said that reading Douglas Hofstadter’s book Go¨del , Escher , Bach ( 1999 ) inﬂuenced his thoughts about this topic and that before reading this book he saw the mechanics of the mind and the mechanics of the physical world as two separate universes ; each with their own set of rules . 2 Bill’s transfer between the physical and social sciences falls in line with Sokal and Bricmont’s ( 1998 ) accusation that social scientists’ too often over - generalize ideas in the physical sciences which they see as a gross misuse of these concepts . Regardless , if Sokal and Bricmont are correct in their assumption that social scientists are incorrectly using ideas generated in the hard sciences , their book provides an excellent example of human’s ability to engage in far transfer as does Bill’s present example . 524 B . R . Forsyth 123 Interview two In this interview I focused on just one of the six examples discussed in the ﬁrst interview , which concerned Bill’s connection between quantum physics and Heraclitus’ concept of ﬂow . I investigated all 12 aspects of transfer in connection with this example . However , some aspects were discussed in greater detail than others . In order to investigate the ‘‘Relations of Similarity’’ aspect , Bill ﬁlled out a concept map . I provide a more thorough discussion about the results of this activity in the section providing the top down analysis . Interview three Very little of the third interview was useful in regards to learning about the 12 aspects of transfer , but it was nonetheless helpful in exploring why Bill constructs relations of sim - ilarity in the way that he does , which was the original focus of the third interview . A theme in Bill’s reasoning during this interview centered on a professed epistemology that all knowledge , no matter which academic discipline it originates in , is highly connected . This interview was also used to gain greater insight about the non - isomorphic concept map that Bill created in the second interview . Top down analysis : The 12 aspects of transfer Table 2 provides a synopsis of the claims that I make describing the kind of transfer that Bill is engaged in based on the 12 aspects of transfer . Despite the unevenness of evidence of each aspect , I based all claims on the responses that Bill gave me from the interviews . I discuss them below in the same order as they appear in the table . Learned skill Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) characterize ‘‘learned skill’’ as a description of how general or speciﬁc the content is that transfers and Bill’s responses often appeared to reﬂect transfer that was fairly general in nature . To investigate this aspect of transfer , I asked Bill what he thought changed in his mind as a result of making a connection between quantum mechanics and Heraclitus’ concept of ﬂow . He responded , ‘‘I think that I have a better picture , I guess … The more ways you can think about it or picture it , the better picture you get of what exactly it is . ’’ Bill’s explanation of a gaining a ‘‘better picture’’ connotes a change in mental repre - sentation , but this representation appears to be at a very high level of abstraction ( between entire academic disciplines and all encompassing world views ) . In fact , unless encouraged to do otherwise , most of his initial inclinations were to describe learned skills at fairly abstract levels . Performance change Bill was asked what he thought he could do better as a result of transferring between physics and philosophy . He responded that thinking across disciplines gave him a ‘‘better way to think about [ the content ] . ’’ This response could be interpreted to mean that Bill views transfer as a means of improving the accuracy of his ideas . However , in other statements , Bill seemed more concerned with gathering new ways of thinking about ideas than being correct about them . For example , in the second interview Bill suggested that Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 525 123 transfer between physics and philosophy had more of an effect on the topics he chose to focus on rather than how he performed speciﬁc tasks : Philosophy could only help me with doing physics in that doing philosophy might change how I’m approaching what I want to look at . Like , it might inﬂuence what area of physics I’m looking at , but I don’t think it would affect the practice … As Bill recognized more connections between physics and philosophy he said that he focused his philosophy studies more toward metaphysics and ontology and less on ethics because he ‘‘didn’t see as much connections [ between physics and ethics ] . ’’ However , Bill gave no speciﬁc matching example describing how his study of philosophy affected the kinds of topics he focused on in physics . Memory demands Due in part to the nature of the study Bill mostly described transfer that required recall and recognition rather than simple execution as described by Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) . He did , however , discuss the inﬂuence of ‘‘simple execution processes’’ such as rote learning toward his ability to transfer . When asked in the ﬁrst interview to describe how his introductory German class related to learning physics , Bill admitted that he did not actually Table 2 A description of Bill’s patterns of transfer based on the 12 aspects of transfer Aspect of transfer Claim Learned skill Representations and principles are the primary skills that Bill describes he is learning Performancechange Most descriptions of transfer involve changes in accuracy Memory demands Both recall and recognition are involved in Bill’s descriptions of transfer Knowledge domain Bill transfers between both near and far knowledge domains Physical context Bill thinks about topics for transfer both in - and outside of school . Bill describes in the interviews instances of both near and far transfer across the physical context , but it is most often near transfer because the physical context changes very little Temporal context Descriptions of transfer events span from eighth grade to the present . Most descriptions of transfer in the interviews are recent events Functionalcontext Bill’s reasons for transfer are almost always academic in origin Social context Both near and far transfer cases across a social context are discussed in the interviews . Often the original identiﬁcation of a relation involved in transfer is generated in a classroom or study group but the relation matures while Bill is alone or in a non - academic group of friends Modality Bill describes transferring from a reading in a book to an oral explanation intended for a class . Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) classify this type of transfer to lie near the middle of the near / far transfer continuum Value Content described by Bill is ‘‘correct’’ according to a consulted physicist and philosopher , but the methods for thinking about the ideas are done in a novice manner Intentionality Bill claims both active and passive transfer at different times . Instances of transfer appear more active as the difference in knowledge domains across the target and base increase Relations of similarity Relations appear non - isomorphic 526 B . R . Forsyth 123 ﬁnd too many connections across the two topics except for a fairly superﬁcial association that learning vocabulary and grammar in German was similar to learning the symbols and basic concepts in physics . His reasoning , however , about why he could ﬁnd so few con - nections between the two subjects was attributable to his German class’ focus on rote learning : … [ I ] n German I haven’t been that stimulated … That’s the class where I don’t really think too hard . It’s harder to make connections because I’m not thinking at the level that I do in other classes … [ W ] hen I go into German , it’s more of a kind of automatic sort of remembering and recalling and spitting back the information that I have learned before . In this quote Bill suggests that more than one level of learning can occur and that the deeper level of learning is required to transfer across knowledge domains . Later , he explained that his connections between quantum mechanics and Heraclitus’ river fragment would not have been possible if he were attempting to learn in his philosophy class at a rote learning level . Bill’s comments seem to suggest that greater memory demands ( at least greater than learning for simple execution ) foster more distant transfer . Knowledge domain Over the course of three interviews Bill discussed transfer from physics to philosophy , German , music , psychology and sociology . He also mentioned having conversations with his girlfriend about transferring ( i . e . , constructing relations of similarity ) between literature and philosophy and between music and mathematics . All of these instances qualify as far transfer based on knowledge domain . Physical context Transfer according to the physical context refers to the change in one’s surroundings from the target to the base . For Bill , most of his initial learning occurred in the classroom and the subsequent transfer also occurred in a classroom . Therefore , most of the instances of transfer that he described would qualify as near transfer according to physical context . However , Bill claimed to do a lot of subsequent thinking about the examples he described in the interviews outside of the classroom . This suggests that for Bill transfer was often generated in the classroom , but matured elsewhere . Temporal context Classical transfer tasks are generally well deﬁned with a set amount of time required for solving transfer problems . However , assessing the temporal context for Bill’s examples is more complex due to the number of learning events that span across multiple time periods . For example , when asked to describe his thesis statement regarding the use of quantum mechanics principles to interpret Heraclitus’ river fragment Bill referred to a physics idea that he had initially learned in eighth grade about combining space and time into space – time . On the other hand , Bill had only known about Heraclitus for several weeks before developing his thesis . This means that from the time he ﬁrst learned about space – time in eighth grade to transferring this idea toward his understanding of Heraclitus , Bill’s period of transfer occurred over a span of 5 – 6 years . Alternatively , I could rate Bill’s period of Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 527 123 transfer at a period of several weeks based on the fact that he had only received 3 weeks of instruction in philosophy before transferring between physics and philosophy . Functional context Functionally , Bill was often academic about what he transferred , but he did not always do it for a grade in a class . Bill’s process of thinking about how quantum mechanics related to ideas in Heraclitus’ river fragment is an excellent example of this . In the ﬁrst interview Bill started to tell me about how his philosophy class had assignments to write thesis statements : We were talking about Heraclitus … who was a pre - Socratic philosopher who’s most famous fragment had a lot about how all things ﬂow … [ and ] about a river where if you’re standing in the river it’s not the same river at any given time you are standing in it … I had this thesis statement that I was arguing that Heraclitus’ view that all things are a process is superior because … quantum theory would be more inclined to agree that all is moving and tumultuous rather than so orderly and stagnant . It was my ﬁrst connection that I had come up with on my own . Bill was required by his philosophy course to think about and make thesis statements , but he also appears to claim a kind of ownership in the idea ( albeit very vague ) even before his philosophy course required him to think about them . He appears to be very purposeful in seeking out these ‘‘connections . ’’ Social context To investigate social context , I asked Bill where he usually was when ‘‘a lot of growth’’ happened in developing connections between distant topics . He said that many ideas he had were generated in classroom discussion , but that the development , or maturation , of those ideas often developed while reading or thinking to himself : I found that being in the presence of others was more conducive to good thought . Every once in a while I’d kind of get something just sitting and reading at home , but a lot of the real breakthroughs would happen in class … When I’m discovering new things or actually coming up with new ideas , it would be when I was just alone with the book , like reading the [ river ] fragments … Although Bill claims to get ‘‘breakthroughs’’ more often in a class setting , he also claims that insightful ideas are often already in his mind , only less formed . Therefore some evidence suggests that Bill engages in both near and far transfer across the social context . Modality Bill provided little information regarding transfer modality , or format , beyond what he already discussed while talking about the functional and social aspects of his transfer . Modality changes that he did mention were ﬁrst reading about topic and then discussing the topic in a class . In Barnett and Ceci’s ( 2002 ) description of modality they classify Bill’s description ( i . e . , book learning to an oral exam ) to lie somewhere along the middle of the near / far transfer continuum . In other words , transfer between reading in a book and then 528 B . R . Forsyth 123 discussing the reading in a class is more distant than near transfer but it is not the most extreme example of far transfer . Value To test the value of Bill’s transfer I had him explain what he understood about Heraclitus and his river fragment , as well as his understanding of quantum mechanics , and then to tell me where he saw the similarity between the two . This allowed me to check if what he learned in both subjects was ‘‘correct’’ and if what he transferred taught him something new that was ‘‘correct . ’’ Bill’s explanation on Heraclitus was shorter than the response he gave regarding quantum mechanics . As an informed outsider to both disciplines Bill’s descriptions appeared accurate at the surface level . However , in order to obtain a more thorough evaluation of the value of Bill’s transfer I provided two experts in the ﬁelds of physics and philosophy with copies of Bill’s statement and asked them to assess its accuracy according to their respective knowledge domains . Physics value To check Bill’s descriptions of ideas from quantum mechanics I asked an Assistant Professor of Physics to look over Bill’s statement . The physicist’s assessment was that Bill’s descriptions were accurate . However , the physicist also felt that Bill thought about physics in a ‘‘novice way’’ due to the fact that he did not use mathematics to describe his physics . For this physicist , quantum mechanical descriptions cannot be accurately described without mathematics . Philosophy value Bill said that when he tried to describe his connection between quantum mechanics and Heraclitus’ philosophy to his instructor , she questioned him on the validity of some of his statements . Bill could not remember the speciﬁc details about the problems with his thesis statements , but he said that this instructor felt that his argument ‘‘was not in the form that it needed to be . ’’ Therefore , when I consulted with a Professor of Philosophy about Bill’s philosophical statements I asked him to assess both the form and content . Similar to the criticism of the physicist , the philosopher explained to me that Bill’s philosophical reasoning revealed novice tendencies . He said that although the content about Heraclitus was accurate , Bill’s ‘‘mode of reasoning’’ could have been logically stronger . Intentionality In his descriptions about how he generally transfers , Bill talked often about times when ‘‘connections would just pop in [ his ] head’’ and other times where he would have to work at it . I interpreted his comments to mean that Bill engages in both passive and active transfer , or , in the terminology of Salomon and Perkins ( 1989 ) , both forward reaching and backward reaching transfer . Furthermore , his comments indicated a potential relationship between his level of intentionality based on the relative amount of similarity in the two knowledge domains he was transferring between . I make this interpretation based on when he said that he had to ‘‘work harder , ’’ or in other words actively transfer , ‘‘when the two subjects were further apart , like in physics and philosophy , than when they are closer together , [ as in the case of ] transferring between physics and chemistry . ’’ Even when Bill described passive transfer ( when connections just popped in his head ) , he was adamant about characterizing it as ‘‘not a surprise . ’’ In other words , he does not Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 529 123 think that it is strange for new connections to present themselves in his mind because he feels that all knowledge domains are inherently connected in some way . It is possible that the amount of passive transfer Bill engages in is higher because of his epistemological belief that all knowledge domains possess a high degree of integration . Relations of similarity As part of the second interview Bill ﬁlled out a concept map so that I could have a graphic record to accompany his verbal record of the similarities he saw between quantum mechanics and Heraclitus’ concept of ﬂow . The more connections he could graphically represent were initially meant to support my conﬁdence that what he called ‘‘making connections’’ was a legitimate type of transfer rather than a collection of trivial associa - tions . The concept map was useful in this regard and it increased my conﬁdence that Bill was engaged in a legitimate form of transfer . However , the mappings that Bill produced were often homomorphic ( i . e . , mappings of one item to many items ) rather than isomorphic ( i . e . , one - to - one mappings ) . For example Bill linked the concept of ‘‘constant change’’ under the topic ‘‘Heraclitus’ Flow’’ to three different concepts under the topic ‘‘Quantum Mechanics’’ labeled , ‘‘matter - energy is always moving’’ , ‘‘wave - particle duality’’ , and ‘‘uncertainty principle . ’’ According to established analogical reasoning models Bill’s homomorphisms are problematic ( Gentner 1983 ; Holyoak and Thagard 1989 ; Markman 1997 ) . However , Krawczyk et al . ( 2005 ) assert that what may appear to be homomorphic mappings could actually just be multiple one - to - one correspondences . Furthermore , Markman ( 1997 ) reports that when creating concept maps for the purpose of establishing relations of similarity ( like the one that Bill ﬁlled out ) , people sometimes appear to violate the one - to - one constraint , but when they are asked to make inferences from the concept map they hardly ever break the constraint . Unfortunately , I never asked Bill to make inferences from his concept map . However , he did discuss his conﬁdence about the accuracy of the concept map . He said he felt that the mappings he made were not abso - lutely correct . Rather , he was willing to change how he related the two ideas if his understanding were to change . Therefore , Bill’s diagramming exercise appears to have been a work in progress and perhaps this is one reason that the one - to - one constraint seemed so relaxed . Bottom up analysis : Bill’s epistemology and interest Bill feels that all academic disciplines can be ‘‘boil [ ed ] down to one basic underlying principle of ‘the all . ’’’ His personal epistemology is that all parts of knowledge are con - nected and that the more general an idea is , the more easily it should connect to other points of knowledge . Another part of his epistemology is that the only barrier mankind has to ﬁnding these connections is a ‘‘computational’’ one . He feels that the mind’s limited capacity is the reason that we do not see more connections between disparate ideas , but that if we had the mental processing power , we could ﬁnd similarity everywhere . The validity of Bill’s ideas are certainly up for debate , but they seem to do an adequate job of explaining why he transfers so much between different academic subjects . Bill does not necessarily believe that all ideas are equally generalizable and he tends to avoid situations where he gets caught up in the ‘‘nitty – gritty’’ of the disciplines . This is the reason he gives for both being attracted to physics as well as ultimately being turned off by it . He likes physics for the fact that it attempts to create one grand unifying theory , but that the actual practice of it becomes , too ‘‘particular’’ : 530 B . R . Forsyth 123 I went into physics not looking to be a practical physicist . I wanted physics to be an end in itself … Not to sound [ like a ] stereotypically frustrated math student or any - thing , but having to learn [ the math ] just didn’t seem , it just wasn’t the glamorous big question . I asked Bill why he thought he held such an integrative perspective about the nature of the universe . He described several factors he thought were involved including the way he was raised and because he paid more attention in school . However , he also mentioned in each interview details about a series of books that he read on his own time before coming to college . These books were The Elegant Universe ( Greene 1999 ) , A Brief History of Time by Hawking ( 1988 ) , and Hofstadter’s ( 1999 ) Go¨del , Escher Bach . All of these books resonate strongly with the organicistic , inclusive , and integrative views that Bill seems to hold about the nature of knowledge and the power of physics when it comes to describing nature on a broad scale . Although Bill feels that all disciplines of knowledge are only artiﬁcially fragmented he also feels that mankind may never be able to put them all together into one whole . I asked him why he then consistently attempts to ﬁnd connections between them . The following conversation was very insightful into the personal struggle he has with his own episte - mology . The ‘I’ stands for me the interviewer and the ‘B’ stands for Bill : B : I guess deep down I probably do believe that there is a nice smooth explainable connection between everything but often I think that being a single entity within as part of the very thing that we’re trying to understand may make it impossible to understand it … I do go in and out . Like , sometimes I’ll be really curious into certain topics and thinking about a lot of things and then sometimes my brain will get a little bit ﬂustered and then decide to just stick with one thing for a little while so I can coast for a little while and maybe I’ll relax for a little while and maybe read a few books and start thinking about it again … It brings purpose , kind of , even if it might be futile or imagined or anything like that … I : So , why do you think some people don’t ﬁnd this kind of stuff to be fun ? B : … I don’t really know why exactly , but I think that everyone tends to get those thoughts , but maybe some people just brush it off … I’m deﬁnitely a person of phases and I like to dabble really heavily into something for a short amount of time and then go to the next thing and … in the end I keep coming back … World hypotheses and personal epistemology Bill’s comments about preferring ‘‘universals over particulars’’ or viewing all knowledge as converging toward one underlying principle or feeling uncomfortable with the analytical nature of physics homework may all allude to one personal epistemology organized at a high order . Epistemology at this level is often referred to as a ‘‘worldview , ’’ and , according to Koltko - Rivera ( 2004 ) in his review of research on worldviews in psychological litera - ture , there have been many kinds of worldviews proposed . It is beyond the scope of this paper to compare Bill’s epistemic statements to all of the proposed worldviews that are available to researchers . However , a potentially useful set of worldviews for interpreting Bill’s collection of personal epistemologies could be via Pepper’s ( 1942 ) World Hypotheses . In his book Pepper describes four different highly organized systems of thought for interpreting events in the world ( hence their appellation as ‘‘world’’ hypotheses ) . Of these Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 531 123 four world hypotheses , Bill’s personal epistemology seems to ﬁt best with Pepper’s worldview called ‘‘organicism . ’’ In organicism preferential treatment is given to knowl - edge that is integrative rather than dispersive . Causality is described as a series of internal purposes whereas linear descriptions of cause and effect are downplayed . Furthermore , holistic ( i . e . , synthetic ) explanations are the primary means of describing the world whereas reductionistic ( i . e . , analytic ) explanations maintain a secondary role . If Bill holds an organicistic worldview , his desire to transfer across seemingly disparate knowledge domains can be explained via an epistemological preference to integrate knowledge rather than compartmentalize it . A preference for organicism may also explain why he feels so much conﬂict with remaining a physics major . Although Bill’s episte - mology is compatible with some goals of physics ( e . g . , achieving a grand unifying theory of forces ) it is often incompatible with the highly reductionistic methods for achieving these goals . My interviews with Bill suggest that the role of epistemology at the worldview level on transfer needs further investigation . Intercontextuality and transfer In a paper outlining a situative theory of transfer , Engle ( 2006 ) suggests that transfer is more likely to occur when an individual sees two contexts as linked together . She calls this state of linked contexts ‘‘intercontextuality . ’’ Furthermore , she calls the efforts of teachers and students to formally create intercontextuality ‘‘framing . ’’ In her article , Engle proposes two ways that teachers and students can frame their learning and transfer contexts so that intercontextuality will occur . The ﬁrst is via time and the second is via participation . Bill provides some evidence that suggests he knows how to effectively frame his learning and transfer according to time and participation whereas the students around him have not learned to do so . Evidence for framing time to promote intercontextuality A student can create intercon - textuality between a learning and transfer context by recognizing that what they are currently learning is both related to what they have learned in the past and also has the potential to prepare them for future learning ( cf . Bransford and Schwartz 1999 ) . Bill showed several times in his interviews that he relaxes the constraints of his learning so that they are framed as ‘‘ongoing activities rather than as temporally bounded events’’ ( Engle 2006 , p . 457 ) . For example , Bill explained to me at the beginning of our ﬁrst interview that he felt that learning physics ‘‘was a base for everything else [ he ] could learn . ’’ This statement can be interpreted to mean that Bill framed his physics learning as a preparation for future learning . To further illustrate this point he later explained to me how his thinking about philosophy was affected by his past physics learning and that his current learning in philosophy simultaneously expanded his past understanding of physics : [ L ] ately I’ve been getting more of an enthusiasm for philosophy and … I have had this idea in my mind that philosophy was a little bit silly without physics , but at the same time I thought that physics couldn’t really mean that much to us without philosophy . From this example it appears that Bill frames his learning experiences as temporally connected events . Furthermore , considering Bill’s ability to transfer across these contexts , Engle’s theory regarding the inﬂuence of appropriately framing time for fostering transfer seems supported . 532 B . R . Forsyth 123 Evidence for framing participation to promote intercontextuality Engle also recommends that framing how students view their participation in their own learning can be done in such a way that intercontextuality and transfer are promoted . This is done by helping students to see themselves as authors in an ongoing intellectual conversation rather than as passive recipients of others’ knowledge and this idea seems to ﬁt well with Lobato’s ( 2003 ) actor - oriented transfer perspective . According to Engle , students who frame their learning as an author rather than as a passive recipient of knowledge will be more willing to share and revise their ideas with audiences that go beyond the student – teacher relationship . Furthermore , the more ownership that students take in the ideas they create the more likely they will want to transfer them to new contexts . Throughout our interviews together , Bill seemed very comfortable with framing his participation in learning as an author who was willing to both comment on and revise his current understanding . In fact he often reminded me , without cueing him , that the thoughts he had about all the different subjects we talked about were still being worked out in his mind . He tried to explain that his current ideas were useful only insofar as they could be reevaluated according to some new learning to help him gain a deeper understanding . Also , the fact that Bill was willing to share his current ideas with me through a series of interviews despite his claim that they were ‘‘incomplete’’ shows his willingness to engage in generative discussions beyond the student – teacher relationship . In short , Bill’s partici - pation in his own learning and his apparent inclination to transfer his ideas across contexts aligns well with Engle’s ideas regarding the role of intercontextuality as a mechanism for transfer . Discussion Bill engages in a type of transfer that he believes improves the accuracy of his repre - sentation of knowledge . It is based on an epistemology that all knowledge can be organized holistically . He can explain examples of transfer that involves disparate knowledge domains , and he engages in this transfer at home and in school . However , the content of what he transfers remains fairly academic regardless of where he is . He is also capable of transferring ideas that span across long periods of time . He shows evidence of using groups of people to help him generate topics that can be transferred , but his ideas often mature during personal reﬂection . Much of what he transfers is accurate although perhaps not extremely deep . Lastly , he is willing to create relations between what he transfers that do not appear isomorphic . Scientiﬁc and educational contributions This study approaches transfer based on ideas from scholars like Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) , Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) , and Lobato ( 2003 ) . These theories attempt to approach transfer from a more situated and educationally relevant perspective rather than the SPS studies conducted in the previous generation of cognitive research on transfer . This study is also particularly unique to the transfer literature because it attempts to describe instances of far transfer . Far transfer has been an elusive realm in the study of transfer because it occurs less frequently and is harder to identify . Therefore producing it in a controlled setting has often proven to be difﬁcult . Because of this difﬁculty , it seemed appropriate to conduct a case study that could give a much more qualitative description of far transfer at an indi - vidual level . Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 533 123 This study contributes to a research tradition of improving transfer between in - school and out - of - school learning . Pugh ( 2004 ) presents a comparison between two seventh grade science students who get equally good grades , but one uses the ideas at home whereas the other does not . Pugh’s study describes the value of the type of transfer that Bill is engaged in . Bill actively transfers what he learns in school to out - of - school settings which frames how he looks at the world in general . Understanding how students like Bill and the student in Pugh’s research transfer what they learn is a topic that should be of great interest to educators and researchers . Steps for future research The role of personal epistemology in far transfer is a topic that needs future research . Furthermore , the connections between motivation and transfer also need to remain a focus of research . If personal epistemology and motivation are to be used as factors to describe how certain students engage in far transfer , they will need to be separated out and more clearly deﬁned . Other researchers have already begun investigating these relationships ( Pepper 1942 ; Pugh and Bergin 2006 ; Schommer - Aikins et al . 2003 ; Spiro et al . 1996 ) and future research should try to build from their foundation . Future research on far transfer should also look at students with primary interests in subjects beyond physics . Bill seemed to put the discipline of physics in a special position amongst knowledge domains , but he also suggested many other academic disciplines could possess the same qualities for a student that had different interests : … [ L ] ately I’ve been looking at social and economic ways to see things . I’ve been seeing the way things are in that view and I can see that if you were into that , you could see it as the dominating way to see everything . References Barnett , S . M . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . When and where do we apply what we learn ? A taxonomy for far transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 128 ( 4 ) , 612 – 637 . Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . R . ( 1999 ) . How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school . Washington , DC : National Academy . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple impli - cations . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of research in education ( Vol . 24 , pp . 61 – 100 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Broudy , H . S . ( 1977 ) . Types of knowledge and purposes of education . In R . C . Anderson , R . J . Spiro , & W . E . Montague ( Eds . ) , Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge ( pp . 1 – 17 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : Learning to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 493 – 523 . Detterman , D . K . ( 1993 ) . The case for prosecution : Transfer as an epiphenomenon . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing Company . Engle , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Framing interactions to foster generative learning : A situative explanation of transfer in a community of learners classroom . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 15 ( 4 ) , 451 – 498 . Ericsson , K . A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1993 ) . Protocol analysis : Verbal reports as data ( revised ed . ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fortus , D . ( 2002 ) . A review of the transfer literature ( pp . 1 – 38 ) . Ann Arbor , MI : University of Michigan . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science Society , 7 , 155 – 170 . 534 B . R . Forsyth 123 Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Greene , B . ( 1999 ) . The elegant universe : superstrings , hidden dimensions , and the quest for the ultimate theory . New York : WW Norton . Hakel , M . D . , & Halpern , D . F . ( 2005 ) . How far can transfer go ? In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 357 – 370 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age Publishing . Hammer , D . , Elby , A . , Scherr , R . E . , & Redish , E . F . ( 2005 ) . Resources , framing , and transfer . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning : Research and perspectives [ working title ] . Greenwich , CT : Information Age Publishing . Hawking , S . ( 1988 ) . A brief history of time . From the big bang to black holes . Toronto : Bantam Books . Hofstadter , D . ( 1999 ) . Go ¨ del , Escher , Bach : An eternal golden braid . New York : Basic Books . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science Society , 13 , 295 – 355 . Koltko - Rivera , M . E . ( 2004 ) . The psychology of worldviews . Review of General Psychology , 8 ( 1 ) , 3 – 58 . Krawczyk , D . , Holyoak , K . , & Hummel , J . ( 2005 ) . The one - to - one constraint in analogical mapping and inference . Cognitive Science Society , 29 , 797 – 806 . Lobato , J . ( 2003 ) . How design experiments can inform a rethinking of transfer and vice versa . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 1 ) , 17 – 20 . Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Constraints on analogical inference . Cognitive Science Society , 21 , 373 – 418 . Patton , M . Q . ( 2002 ) . Qualitative research and evaluation methods ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Pepper , S . C . ( 1942 ) . World hypotheses : A study in evidence . Berkeley : University of California Press . Perkins , D . , & Grotzer , T . A . ( 1997 ) . Teaching intelligence . American Psychologist , 52 , 1125 – 1133 . Pugh , K . J . ( 2004 ) . Newton’s laws beyond the classroom walls . Science & Education , 88 , 182 – 196 . Pugh , K . J . , & Bergin , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Motivational inﬂuences on transfer . Educational Psychologist , 41 ( 3 ) , 147 – 160 . Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . Salomon , G . , & Perkins , D . ( 1989 ) . Rocky roads to transfer : Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected phe - nomenon . Educational Psychologist , 24 ( 2 ) , 113 – 142 . Schoenfeld , A . ( 1999 ) . Looking toward the 21st century : Challenges of educational theory and practice . Educational Researcher , 28 ( 7 ) , 4 – 14 . Schommer - Aikins , M . , Duell , O . , & Barker , S . ( 2003 ) . Epistemological beliefs across domains using Biglan’s Classiﬁcation of Academic Disciplines . Research in Higher Education , 44 ( 3 ) , 347 – 366 . Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . D . , & Sears , D . ( 2005 ) . Efﬁciency and innovation in transfer . In J . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 1 – 51 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age Publishing . Sokal , A . , & Bricmont , J . ( 1998 ) . Fashionable nonsense : Postmodern intellectuals’ abuse of science . New York : Picador . Spiro , R . J . , Feltovich , P . , & Coulson , R . ( 1996 ) . Two epistemic world - views : Preﬁgurative schemas and learning in complex domains . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 10 , S51 – S61 . Wagner , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Transfer in pieces . Cognition & Instruction , 24 ( 1 ) , 1 – 71 . Yin , R . K . ( 2009 ) . Case study research : Design and methods ( 4th ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Beyond physics : A case for far transfer 535 123