Immunity Article CD44 Mediates Successful Interstitial Navigation by Killer T Cells and Enables Efﬁcient Antitumor Immunity Paulus Mrass , 1 Ichiko Kinjyo , 2 Lai Guan Ng , 1 , 3 Steven L . Reiner , 2 Ellen Pure´ , 1 , 4 and Wolfgang Weninger 1 , 3 , 5 , * 1 The Wistar Institute , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA 2 Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA 3 The Centenary Institute for Cancer Medicine and Cell Biology , Newtown , NSW 2042 , Australia 4 Ludwig Institute of Cancer Research , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA 5 Discipline of Dermatology , University of Sydney , Camperdown NSW 2050 , Australia * Correspondence : w . weninger @ centenary . org . au DOI 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2008 . 10 . 015 SUMMARY Although T lymphocytes are constitutively nonadher - ent cells , they undergo facultative polarity during migration and upon interaction with cells presenting cognate antigen , suggesting that cell polarity might be critical for target cell destruction . Using two - pho - ton imaging of tumor - inﬁltrating T lymphocytes , we found that CD44 , a receptor for extracellular matrix proteins and glycosaminoglycans , was crucial for in - terstitial T cell navigation and , consequently , efﬁcient tumor cell screening . CD44 functioned as a critical regulator of intratumoral movement by stabilizing cell polarity in migrating T cells , but not during target cell interactions . Stable anterior - posterior asymme - try was maintained by CD44 independently of its extracellular domain . Instead , migratory polarity de - pended on the recruitment of ezrin , radixin , moesin ( ERM ) proteins by the intracellular domain of CD44 to the posterior cellular protrusion . Our results for - mally demonstrate that CD44 - dependent T lympho - cyte locomotion within target sites represents an essential immunologic checkpoint that determines the potency of T cell effector functions . INTRODUCTION A key function of the immune system is to protect the organism against transformed tumor cells . Cytotoxic killer T lymphocytes ( CTLs ) are a crucial cell type in this context because they are ca - pable of directly destroying malignant cells . This function of CTLs depends critically on their capability to seek and recognize can - cer and / or tumor - associated stromal cells that may be located anywhere in the body ( Mrass and Weninger , 2006 ) . Thus , CTLs must migrate from the blood stream into organs , ﬁnd their way through the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) - rich interstitial space , and ﬁnally interact physically with target cells . Recognition of peptide - MHC ( pMHC ) complexes by the T cell receptor ( TCR ) then leads to the release of cytotoxic mediators and cytokines , ultimately resulting in the death of their targets . Several core activities of T lymphocytes , such as locomotion through tissue stroma and cell - to - cell interactions , are associ - ated with facultative polarity ( Krummel and Macara , 2006 ; San - chez - Madrid and del Pozo , 1999 ) . Thus , the shape of a crawling T cell is characterized by the formation of a ﬂattened lamellipo - dium at the leading edge and a small , handle - like protrusion at the rear , the uropod . Chemotactic receptors are enriched at the leading edge , where they may sense chemokine gradients within tissues . In contrast , adhesion molecules , such as CD43 , CD44 , and intercellular adhesion molecules ( ICAMs ) , localize to the uropod of motile T cells . After receiving a migratory stop signal delivered by TCR - pMHC interaction , T lymphocytes change to a more rounded morphology . Nevertheless , certain molecules , such as the TCR , coordinately segregate to the T cell - target cell interface to form the immunologic synapse ( IS ) , whereas others , such as CD43 , move to the distal pole of the cell ( Dustin , 2008 ; Shaw , 2005 ) . In naive T cells , the IS is thought to regulate cellular activation and fate determination , whereas in effector CTLs it is involved in the directed secretion of cytotoxic mediators ( Chang etal . , 2007 ; StinchcombeandGrifﬁths , 2003 ) . Tlymphocyteloco - motion and target cell interactions have been extensively studied in cell culture and have revealed common and distinct regulatory cues in the mediation of asymmetry during these activities . For example , PSD - 95 / Discs - large / ZO - 1 ( PDZ ) - containing proteins , including the Par3 , Crumbs , and Scribble complex , have been implicated in coordinating surface - molecule distribution in uropod - containing T lymphocytes and during IS formation ( Ludford - Menting et al . , 2005 ) . In contrast , MyH9 , a nonmuscle myosin heavy chain , is required for migration of T cells in vitro , but dispensable for synapse formation in vitro ( Jacobelli et al . , 2004 ) . However , little is known about the molecular regulation of facultative polarity and the consequences of its disruption in T lymphocytes within a physiologic environment . For gaining mechanistic insight into T lymphocyte function in vivo , observation of cells by microscopic means is of great advantage , because this allows direct characterization of mole - cules involved in interactions with cellular and extracellular components of their speciﬁc microenvironment . The need for intravital imaging at high resolution has recently been met by the availability of two - photon microscopy , which has enabled the deﬁnition of the basic migratory patterns of lymphocytes in lymphoid and inﬂammatory tissues ( Bousso and Robey , 2004 ; Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 971 Cahalan and Parker , 2008 ; Germain et al . , 2006 ; Halin et al . , 2005 ; Ng et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , it has been shown that , in the ab - sence of cognate antigen , naive and effector T cells in secondary lymphoid and peripheral organs , respectively , are very actively migrating and reveal a polarized shape . Upon antigen encounter , both cell types undergo stable interactions with target cells , such as dendritic cells or tumor cells . Although the molecular cues regulating locomotion of T lymphocytes have been studied in great detail in vitro , it is not yet known how these cells navigate through their respective microenvironments in vivo . We have previously shown that tumor - inﬁltrating T lympho - cytes ( TILs ) were in close contact with ECM ﬁbers ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) , thereby suggesting theinvolvement ofadhesion receptors in this process . Among these molecules is CD44 , a cell - surface glycoprotein , which is subject to extensive alternative splicing ( reviewed in [ Ponta et al . , 2003 ; Pure and Cuff , 2001 ] ) . The extra - cellular domain of CD44 can interact with ECM components , including hyaluronic acid ( HA ) , ﬁbronectin , laminin , collagen , and osteopontin . CD44 has been implicated in the interactions of freshly activated T cells with blood vessel endothelium ( DeGrendele et al . , 1997 ) . However , it is unclear whether CD44 is involved in T cell migration outside the vascular system . In addition to the roles of CD44 in T lymphocyte trafﬁcking , the intracellular domain of CD44 contains a number of binding motifs for a variety of signaling molecules implicated in cell - shape regu - lation . For example , members of the ezrin , radixin , moesin ( ERM ) family interact with CD44 ( Turley et al . , 2002 ) . In an activated ( phosphorylated ) state , these molecules act as crosslinkers of the cortical actin ﬁlament and cell - surface receptors ( Bretscher et al . , 2002 ) . On the basis of the above - described activities of CD44 and its sequestered localization to the uropod of migrating T lympho - cytes ( Sanchez - Madrid and del Pozo , 1999 ) , we speculated that this molecule might be involved in the regulation of killer T lymphocyte function in vivo . In order to test this hypothesis , we exploited our recently developed two - photon imaging model of intact tumors ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) . Our experiments showed that CD44 regulates the navigation of TILs because of the polar - ity - promoting function of its cytoplasmic domain . Together , our study provided evidence that facultative polarity mediated by CD44 is a key regulator of killer T cell migration and navigation , and that even moderate disturbances in the ability to seek out transformed cells have profound effects on the capacity to ultimately reject tumors . RESULTS CD44 Is Dispensable for the Differentiation and Trafﬁcking of CTLs In order to assess the role of CD44 in TIL function , we made use of transgenic OT - I mice , whose TCR recognizes ovalbumin pep - tide 257 - 264 , crossed to CD44 - deﬁcient ( Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) animals . We ﬁrst determined whether CD44 deﬁciency changed the func - tional properties of CD8 + T cells after antigen priming in vitro . As expected , antigen - activated OT - I cells , but not OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells , showed high and sustained expression of CD44 ( Fig - ure S1A , available online ) . Other phenotypic characteristics of effector CTLs , such as the expression of L - selectin , CD69 , and CD25 , the production of cytokines , and the expression of perforin and granzyme B , as well as cell proliferation , were not affected by CD44 deﬁciency ( Figures S1B – S1E and data not shown ) . Also , OT - I and OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs induced speciﬁc lysis of E . G7 - OVA target cells in vitro with similar efﬁciency ( Figure S1F ) . In ad - dition , CD44 was not required for motility of naive T cells in intact lymph nodes or on in vitro substrata ( Figure S2 ) . Previous studies have shown that T cells transiently upregu - late HA - binding activity after stimulation ( DeGrendele et al . , 1997 ; Lesley et al . , 1994 ) . Using ﬂow cytometry , we conﬁrmed that cognate peptide activation induced HA - binding activity of OT - I but not OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells ( Figure S3A ) . However , HA binding was lost in fully differentiated CTLs at day 8 of culture ( Figure S3A ) . Similarly , tumor - and spleen - inﬁltrating CTLs iso - lated ex vivo did not reveal HA - binding capability ( Figure S3B ) . As a positive control , CTLs were preincubated with mAb IRAWB14 , which induces HA - binding capacity of CD44 ( Lesley et al . , 1993 ) . At all time points , this treatment led to HA binding of OT - I , but not OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs ( Figures S3A and S3B ) . To further exclude the possibility that HA present in culture media masked binding of exogenously added HA in terminally differen - tiated CTLs , we incubated the cells with biotinylated HA - binding protein ( HABP ) . AKR cells transfected with full - length CD44 served as a positive control ( Figures S4A and S4B ) . Freshly stimulated , but not fully differentiated , OT - I cells bound HABP in a CD44 - dependent manner ( Figures S4C – S4E ) . This sug - gested that CD44 is in an inactive conformation on the surface of fully differentiated CTLs . Consistently , adoptively transferred OT - I and OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs from day 8 cultures homed to a similar extent into spleen and tumors ( Figures S5A – S5C ) . CD44 Promotes Effective Navigation of TILs through the Intact Tumor Microenvironment The fact that CD44 appeared to be dispensable for effector CTL generation in vitro as well as their accumulation in tumors allowed us to further dissect its function in killer T cell behavior in vivo . We employed our recently developed tumor - imaging model , which enables tracking of ﬂuorescently tagged TILs in intact tumors ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) . When we compared the migra - tory activity of adoptively transferred OT - I or OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs that inﬁltrated EL4 tumors that lack expression of cognate OVA protein , we noted a migratory defect of CD44 - deﬁcient cells , as evidenced by a reduction of their mean migratory velocity ( V mean : OT - I , 7 . 5 m m min (cid:2) 1 ; OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , 4 . 9 m m min (cid:2) 1 ; Figures 1A – 1C , Movie S1 ) . To obtain a more qualitative understanding of the motility de - fect in the absence of CD44 , we plotted the migration tracks of individual cells corresponding to their V means and conﬁnement ratios ( deﬁned as the total length of a track divided by the dis - tance between the starting and the end points of a track ) . Subdi - vision of this migration plot yielded four quadrants with distinct migratory properties ( Figure 1D ) . Quadrant 1 contains cells with low V mean and conﬁnement ratio ( ‘‘low motility’’ cells ) . Quad - rant 2 contains cells with low V mean and high conﬁnement ratio , corresponding to cells that actively translocate only during certain periods during the observation while also showing substantial periods of immobility ( ‘‘nonsustained motility’’ ) . In quadrant 3 , cells exhibit high V mean and high conﬁnement ratios , which is representative of cells with robust migration with only Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration 972 Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . minimal stop periods ( ‘‘sustained motility’’ ) . Cells in quadrant 4 show , for most of the observation period , active directional mi - gration . However , at some point , they change direction followed by directional migration toward the site of origin , as reﬂected by a high velocity and low conﬁnement ratio . CD44 - deﬁcient CTLs contained an enhanced number of cells in quadrants 1 and 2 , but reduced numbers in quadrant 3 and to a lesser degree quadrant 4 ( Figure 1E ) . These results show that CD44 is required for robust migration , which translates into a larger tissue volume that is screened by wild - type as compared to Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs . Wehavepreviously foundthatTILsmigraterandomlywithintu - mors ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) . To determine whether CD44 deﬁciency changed this behavior , we analyzed square root of time versus displacement plots ( Cahalan et al . , 2002 ) of cells in quadrant 3 and found that these exhibited random migratory directionality ( Figure 1F ) . This indicates that , regardless of their CD44 status , CTLs , at the population level , do not appear to move along Figure 1 . CD44 Regulates the Navigation of Killer T Cells through the Tumor Microenvironment ( A – F ) C57BL / 6 mice were injected subcutaneously with EL4 cells ( 10 6 ) not expressing cognate antigen for OT - I T cells . After the tumors became palpable , CTLs ( 2 3 10 7 ) at day 8 of stimulation generated from OT - IxDPE GFP or OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) xDPE GFP mice were adoptively transferred through the tail vein . Three days later , the tumors ( n = 14 ) were explanted and subjected to two - photon microscopy . T cells were tracked and analyzed . ( A and B ) Representative tracks of migrating T cells ( 8 0 45 00 ) are shown . ( C ) The distribution of the mean velocity of individual tracks is plotted . Arrows indicate the median velocity . ( D ) Individual tracks of migrating cells were plotted according to their conﬁnement ratio and mean velocity . Quadrants were set to distinguish four populations of cells . Symbols rep - resent tracks of individual cells . ( E ) The distribution of the individual tracks within the four quadrants shown in ( D ) is depicted . ( F ) A square root of time versus displacement plot was calculated from the tracks in quadrant 3 . ( G – I ) Asin ( C ) – ( E ) exceptthatmicewereinjectedwithE . G7 - OVAtumors ( n = 3 ) insteadofEL4tumorcellsandthattwo - photonimagingwascarriedout4daysafter adoptive transfer . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 973 apparent , long - range chemokine gradients within the tumor microenvironment . We next investigated the inﬂuence of cognate antigen on the migration of OT - I and OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) TILs . We have previously shown that recognition of cognate antigen within target tissue interferes transiently with migration , resulting from physical inter - actions with antigen - bearing tumor cells . However , to sustain motility for prolonged periods after adoptive transfer , exposure of T cells to cognate antigen within the tumor tissue is necessary Figure 2 . Direct Regulation of TIL Motility by CD44 ( A – D ) E . G7 - OVA tumor - bearing mice ( as in Fig - ure 1 ) were coinjected intravenously with 1 . 5 3 10 7 ECFP - OT - I and EYFP - OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs . Tumors ( n = 5 ) were explanted on day 4 after adoptive transfer . Two - photon imaging of ECFP + and YFP + cells and cell - tracking analysis was carried as in Figure 1 . ( E – H ) OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs transduced with ECFP alone or CD44 - IRES - GFP ( 1 . 5 3 10 7 cells each ) were adoptively transferred into EL4 tumor - bear - ing mice . Tumors ( n = 2 ) were explanted on day 3 after adoptive transfer . Two - photon imaging of ECFP + and GFP + cells and cell - tracking analysis were carried out as in Figure 1 . ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) . Given that TCR sig - naling has a promigratory effect , it was conceivable that signaling via the TCR might overcome the migratory defect of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T cells . However , analysis of the motility of CTLs in E . G7 - OVA tumors on day 4 after adoptive transfer revealed a similar migratory defect of OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells to that found in EL4 tumors ( Figures 1G – 1I ) , demonstrating that the migratory defect could not be rescued by TCR signaling . Because it could be argued that CD44 wild - type and Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells localize to different regions within tumors , and that this resulted in their migratory differ - ences , we performed cotransfer experi - ments with differentially tagged cells expressing enhanced yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( EYFP ) or enhanced cyan ﬂuores - cent protein ( ECFP ) . This allowed the simultaneous tracking of OT - I and OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells in identical tumor subregions ( Figure 2A , Movie S2 ) . Con - sistently , we found that under these conditions Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells showed signiﬁ - cantly reduced V means and migratory characteristics similar to what we ob - served after single transfer of individual cell populations ( Figures 2B – 2D ) , indicat - ing that the reduced motility of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells is not due to accumulation in differ - ent areas of the tumor . To demonstrate that the migratory defect of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells was indeed due to the absence of CD44 and not to other functional differences of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells , we reintroduced full - length CD44 into Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T cells prior to adoptive transfer . In comparison to control - transduced CTLs , CD44 - reconstituted cells showed enhanced motility after homing into identical regions in EL4 tumors ( Figures 2E – 2H , Movie S3 ) . Collectively , we show that CD44 is a direct regulator of the motility of killer T lymphocytes within target tissues . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration 974 Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . CD44 Regulates the Polarity of Migrating CTLs To dissect the molecular basis of the promigratory effect of CD44 in effector CTLs , we further analyzed the migratory characteris - Figure 3 . CD44 Promotes Polarity of Effec - tor CTLs In Vitro and In Vivo ( A – C ) CTLs generated from OT - I or OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) miceatday8ofculturewereplacedontopofacol - lagen gel . With phase - contrast microscopy , time - lapse sequences of the migratory behavior of the cellsweregenerated . Frameswerecapturedevery 30 s for a period of 10 . 5 min . This was followed by tracking anddata analysisasinFigure 1 . Notethat becauseofthefastermigration velocitiesofTcells invitro , gates in ( B ) were set differentlyfor the cell - culture experiments as compared to in vivo ( n = 4 independent experiments ) . ( D ) T cell adhesion assay on 96 - well plates un - coated or coated with collagen or ﬁbronectin . Shown is the mean percentage of the adhering cells ( ± the standard error of the mean [ SEM ] ; n = 32wells for each condition in fourindependent experiments ) . ( E – G ) CTLs cultured on plastic dishes were imaged with phase - contrast microscopy . Cells werecategorizedandquantiﬁedaccordingtotheir cell shape . Bars represent mean percentages ( ± SEM ; n = 3 independent experiments ) . ( H – J ) Phase - contrast microscopy was used to generate time - lapse sequences of CTLs cultured on plastic dishes . The number of switches be - tween round and extended shape was quantiﬁed ( OT - I : n = 81 cells ; OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) : n = 103 cells ) . Indicated are the means ( ± SEM ) of the percent - ages of switch frequencies within individual time lapse - sequences ( [ J ] , n = 15 image sequences from three independent experiments ) . Signiﬁ - cance was tested with two - way ANOVA . ( K ) The experiment was carried out as in Figure 1 . Snapshots of time - lapse videos generated in Fig - ure1weretaken , andthepercentageofGFP + cells containinguropodswasdetermined . Eachsymbol represents the value obtained in an individual region ( four independent experiments . The lines indicate means and SEM ) . tics of wild - type and Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T cells in an in vitro system . CTLs were placed either on top of a collagen gel ( Figures 3A – 3C , Movie S4 ) or on immobilized ﬁbronectin ( not shown ) . Wild - type cells migrated ef - fectivelyonbothsubstrateswithamedian V mean of 11 and 9 . 9 m m min (cid:2) 1 , respec - tively . In contrast , Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) lymphocytes showed signiﬁcantly reduced V means ( collagen : 9 m m min (cid:2) 1 , p < 0 . 0001 ; ﬁbro - nectin : 8 . 5 m m min (cid:2) 1 , p < 0 . 0001 ) . We also found an increased proportion of OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells within quadrants 1 and 2 and decreased numbers in quad - rant 3 when V means were plotted against the conﬁnement ratio ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . In order to test whether the migratory defect of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells was due to altered adhesion , we used static adhesion assays . CD44 deﬁciency did not affect binding to uncoated dishes or ﬁbronectin ( Figure 3D ) . Immobilized type Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 975 I collagen did not support adhesion of either CD44 - expressing or - deﬁcient CTLs , but rather seemed to block residual binding to plastic ( Figure 3D ) . Together , although not as pronounced as in vivo , Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells were impaired in their migration in vitro , and this was independent of adhesion to the substrate . An alternative explanation for the effects of CD44 could be that it regulates cellular polarity . In fact , CD44 enhances anterior - posterior asymmetry in neutrophils in response to chemokines in vitro ( Alstergren et al . , 2004 ) . To address this possibility , we performed cell - shape analysis of CTLs . We classiﬁed CTLs on thebasisofthreecellularshapes : round , extended withauropod , and extended without a uropod ( Figure 3E ) . Comparison of the frequency of round versus extended shapes revealed similar values in both groups , suggesting that Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells retain their capacity to break radial symmetry ( Figure 3F ) . However , Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells showed signiﬁcantly reduced efﬁciency to form uropods ( Figure 3G ) , indicating that CD44 may promote migra - tion by supporting cellular polarity . On the basis of the ﬁnding that Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells exhibited dimin - ished uropod formation , but that nevertheless most of these cells wereactivelymigrating ( atreducedspeed anddisplacement ) , we speculated that the lack of CD44 might impair sustenance of a polarized shape . To test this possibility , we developed a shape - changeassaytomeasuretherobustnessofasustainedpolarized phenotype of CTLs . Thus , we counted the frequency of switches between a nonpolarized ( round ) and polarized ( extended ) shape on cells cultured in plastic dishes . Round wild - type cells that developed an extended shape usually retained their shape throughout the observation period , corresponding to a switch rate of 1 ( Figures 3H – 3J , Movie S5A ) . In contrast , round knockout cells that extended their shape frequently switched back to a round shape , a cycle that was often repeated multiple times . Thus , there was a signiﬁcant increase in Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells with switch rates equal to or greater than 2 ( Figure 3J , Movie S5B ) . In order to conﬁrm that a similar phenomenon was happening in vivo , we determined the number of wild - type and Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) OT - I T cells exhibiting uropods within EL4 tumors . Consistent with the in vitro results , we observed a signiﬁcant decrease in uropod - containing cells within the Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) population ( Fig - ure 3K ) . Together , these data indicate that the lack of CD44 leads to an impaired capacity of CTLs to sustain mature polarization in the front - rear axis . The Intracellular Domain Regulates Membrane Localization and Promigratory Effects of CD44 The results described so far suggested that the promigratory function of CD44 is due to a polarity - sustaining activity that occurs in the absence of ligand ( HA ) binding . To test whether this deﬁciency could be rescued by CD44 , we transduced Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs with the full - length molecule . CD44 expression levels in transduced cells were similar to that of wild - type OT - I cells transduced with green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - encoding control retrovirus ( Figure S6 ) . When placed on top of a collagen gel , CD44 - transduced cells showed enhanced motility when compared with nontransduced ( GFP (cid:2) ) Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells or cells transduced with a vector that confers GFP but not CD44 expres - sion ( Figures 4A – 4C ) . To determine the functional domains important for promoting migration , we transduced Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs with mutant CD44 , CD44 D ECD , containing a truncated extracellular domain of only 19 amino acids , which lacks the HA - binding link domain and is therefore principally deﬁcient in its receptor function ( Peach et al . , 1993 ) ( Figure 4D ) . A second group of cells was transduced with CD44 D ICD containing a truncated cytoplasmic domain of only seven cytoplasmic amino acids , thereby lacking any func - tional adaptor domains ( Figure 4D ) . A third group was trans - duced with full - length CD44 as a control ( Figure 4D ) . Expression of CD44 D ECD had a promigratory effect similar to that of wild - type CD44 ( p > 0 . 05 ; Figure 4E ) . In contrast , cells expressing CD44 D ICD showed reduced motility versus full - length CD44 - and CD44 D ECD - transduced cells ( p < 0 . 001 ) , but equal motility as nontransduced cells or cells transduced with GFP - only vectors ( p > 0 . 05 , Figure 4E ) . To assess whether these effects might be due to changes in the subcellular organization of CD44 molecules , we generated retroviruses conferring expression of GFP - tagged CD44 proteins ( Figure 4D ) . CD44 - GFP proteins showed similar surface expres - sion levels and promigratory function as the nontagged corre - lates ( Figure 4F and Figure S7 ) . As described previously , full - length CD44 was enriched at the uropod of polarized T cells ( Sanchez - Madrid and del Pozo , 1999 ) ( Figure 4G , red arrow - heads ) . Consistent with the migration analysis , the extracellular domain ( ECD ) was dispensable to achieve this positioning ( Fig - ure 4G ) . In contrast , deﬁciency of the intracellular domain ( ICD ) led to a redistribution of CD44 with punctate , cytoplasmic stain - ing pattern in addition to some surface staining ( Figure 4G ) . Together , these data provide evidence that the intracellular , but not the extracellular , domain is important for the promigratory activity of CD44 in effector CTL . The Promigratory Effect of the ICD Is Mediated by pERM Recruitment to the Plasma Membrane The ICD of CD44 contains an ERM binding domain . Phosphory - latedERM ( pERM ) haspreviouslybeenshowntopromotecellpo - larityandmigrationbyitscapacitytolinktheactincytoskeletonto the membrane , and to assemble a membrane - targeted multimo - lecular signaling complex ( Bretscher et al . , 2002 ) . To address whether ERM members were involved in the effects of CD44 on mediating CTLs polarity and migration , we determined the sub - cellular localization of pERM in wild - type and Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) OT - I cells by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Sixty - ﬁve percent of wild - typecellsrevealedaccumulation ofsurface - localized pERM ( Fig - ure 5A ) . In polarized cells , pERM showed a predilection to the uropod , correlating with the expression pattern of CD44 ( Fig - ure5A , redarrow ) . Incontrast , Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cellsshowedasigniﬁcant reduction in the capacity to induce localized accumulation of pERM ( Figure 5A ) . To further assess whether pERM interaction was responsible for CD44 recruitment to the uropod , we generated a deletion mu - tant , CD44 D ERM - GFP , that speciﬁcally lacked the ERM - binding domain ( Yonemura et al . , 1998 ) . Flow cytometry revealed that surface expression of CD44 D ERM - GFP was similar to that of full - length CD44 - GFP ( Figure 5B ) . Using ﬂuorescence micros - copy , we determined that CD44 D ERM - GFP was strongly en - riched at the membrane . However , in contrast to the asymmetric distribution of CD44 - GFP in polarized cells , CD44 D ERM - GFP was distributed evenly on the membrane of OT - I cells ( compare Figures 5C and 5D ) . Thus , the ERM - binding domain appears Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration 976 Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . dispensablefortherecruitmentofCD44totheplasmamembrane but plays a function in enriching CD44 to particular subregions . We then generated time - lapse movies of in vitro - cultured CTLs expressing CD44 - GFP or CD44 D ERM - GFP . Strikingly , CD44 - GFP accumulated at discrete membrane locations preceding the formation of a uropod ( Movies S6A and S6C ) . This was fol - lowed by forward translocation of the cell body ( Movies S6A and S6C ) . In contrast , CD44 D ERM - GFP failed to accumulate Figure 4 . The Intracellular Domain of CD44 Promotes T Lymphocyte Migration In Vitro ( A – C ) CTLs generated from OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice were transduced with a retrovirus conferring expression of GFP and CD44 ( MigR1 - CD44 ) or GFP only ( MigR1 ) . Time - lapse sequences of CTLs migrating on a collagen gel were captured simultaneously with phase - contrast and ﬂuorescence microscopy to track GFP + ( transduced ) and GFP (cid:2) ( nontransduced ) CTLs . Data analysis was carried out as in Figure 1 ( n = 2 independent experiments ) . ( D ) Schematic representation of the different forms of CD44 used in the experiments . ( E ) CTLsgeneratedfromOT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) miceweretransducedwithretrovirusconferringcoexpressionofGFPandtheCD44variantssymbolizedin ( D ) . Migratory velocities were determined [ MigR1 - CD44 ( GFP + ) : n = 100 tracks ; MigR1 - CD44 D ICD ( GFP + ) : n = 106 tracks ; MigR1 - CD44 D ECD ( GFP + ) : n = 119 tracks ; MigR1 - CD44 ( GFP - ) : n = 62 tracks ; MigR1 - CD44 D ICD ( GFP (cid:2) ) : n = 62 tracks ; MigR1 - CD44 D ECD ( GFP (cid:2) ) : n = 60 tracks ; data generated from two independent experiments ] . ( F and G ) CTLs generated from OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice were transduced with FGM - retrovirus conferring expression of the CD44 - GFP variants symbolized in ( D ) . ( F ) CD44 expression on GFP + cells was analyzed by ﬂow cytometry . ( G ) Representative GFP + T cells in the individual groups were captured with ﬂuorescence microscopy . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 977 stably at speciﬁc sublocations , resulting in frequent unstable shape changes of the cells with little to no forward propulsion ( Movies S6B and S6D ) . Consequently , CD44 D ERM - GFP - ex - pressing cells migrated signiﬁcantly slower than those express - ing full - length CD44 or CD44 D ECD - GFP ( p < 0 . 001 ) , but similarly to cells expressing CD44 D ICD - GFP or GFP alone ( p > 0 . 05 ) ( Figures 5E – 5G ) . These data suggest that pERM recruitment to the ICD of CD44 stabilizes cell polarity , which in turn supports migration . CD44 Is Critical for Target Cell Screening Efﬁciency of TILs Having deﬁned the migratory defect of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) effector CTLs both in vitro and in vivo , it was important to determine the role of CD44 in interactions with target cells , one of the hallmark ac - tivities of cytotoxic T cells . One possibility was that the reduced interstitial migration of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T cells leads to a reduced capac - ity to screen the tissue for the presence of target cells . To test this hypothesis , we measured the frequency of tumor cell contacts Figure 5 . Recruitment of ERM Is Required for the Promigratory Effect of CD44 in Killer T Lymphocytes ( A ) CTLs were permeabilized and stained with mAb against pERM and analyzed by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . The percentage of cells with polarized localization of pERM was determined . Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated with the Chi - Square test . ( B – G ) CTLs generated from OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice were transduced with a retrovirus conferring expression of the indicated CD44 - GFP constructs . ( B ) CD44 expression on GFP + cells was analyzed by ﬂow cytometry . ( C and D ) Representative snapshots of in vitro - cultured CTLs transduced with CD44 - GFP or CD44 D ERM - GFP are shown . ( E – G ) The motility of CTLs transduced with the indicated retroviral constructs on collagen gels was analyzed as in Figure 1 ( n = 2 independent experiments ) . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration 978 Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . by individual CTLs that engaged in short - term ( < 10 min ) interac - tions . We found that wild - type T cells detaching from a tumor cell after a short - term interaction typically succeeded in reinitiating interstitial migration , followed by subsequent interactions with several additional tumor cells ( 4 . 1 ± 0 . 2 interactions during the observation period of 30 min ; Figures 6A and 6B ) . In contrast , after terminating a short - term interaction , CD44 - deﬁcient cells exhibited cell shape changes that failed to translate into effective forward propulsion , leading to signiﬁcantly reduced subsequent tumor cell encounters ( 1 . 5 ± 0 . 2 interactions ; p < 0 . 0001 ; Figures 6A and 6B ) . The reduced capacity to screen for target cells was also reﬂected by prolonged time periods that noninteracting Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells required for establishing contacts with tumor cells ( Figure 6C ) . This defect led to a pronounced increase in Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) TILs that failed to bind to any tumor cells during a 30 min obser - vation period ( Figure 6D ) . These results provide direct evidence that the target cell screening efﬁciency is decreased in Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T cells . CD44 Is Dispensable for the Quality of T Lymphocyte Interactions with Target Cells In Vivo We next determined the quality of cellular interactions once they were established by TILs . Previous evidence supports the importance of polarization in cellular interactions of CTLs . For example , interference with the polarity network in CTLs has profound effects not only on migration , but also on IS formation following TCR signals in CTLs in vitro ( Ludford - Menting et al . , 2005 ) , attesting to similar regulatory cues of these processes . We adoptively transferred graded numbers ( 2 3 10 6 , 5 3 10 6 , 2 3 10 7 ) of OT - I T cells into mice harboring E . G7 - OVA - ECFP tu - mors ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) , and analyzed cellular interactions at different time points . Similar to what we found with OT - I CTLs ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) , Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) OT - I cells underwent both transient and long - term interactions within E . G7 - OVA tumors ( Figures 6E and 6F , Movie S7 ) . Strikingly , the duration of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cell inter - actions was indistinguishable from their wild - type counterparts ( Figure 6F , Movie S7 ) , indicating that CD44 is not involved in physical contacts of TILs . These results further suggest that facultative polarity in migrating and interacting T cells are molec - ularly distinct processes . Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs Are Impaired in Their Tumor - Rejecting Activities Together , our results show that Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) lymphocytes exhibit a speciﬁc defect in interstitial migration and screening for target cells , but that they are still capable of recognizing target cells . This may not be so relevant during the early phase of tumor re - jection , when the tumor bed is densely packed with tumor cells ( Figure S8A ) , and CTLs do not have to migrate over prolonged distances in order to ﬁnd a target . However , at later stages ( beginning on day 4 after adoptive transfer ) tumor cells become less dense because of apoptosis ( Figures S8B and S8C ) . At this stage , TIL migration may be essential to detect and destroy tar - get cells . In addition , at high T cell frequency within tumors , the consequence of a migratory defect may not be as apparent as when T cells are present at low densities , because the likelihood of tumor cell encounters would be higher in the former scenario . In order to test this prediction , we measured the growth of tumors in mice bearing E . G7 - OVA tumors that received graded doses of wild - type or Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) antigen - speciﬁc OT - I CTLs . Irre - spective of their CD44 status , CTLs initially induced regression of growing tumors . This effect was more pronounced when higher numbers of CTLs were transferred ( Figure 7A ) . Strikingly , begin - ning 4 days after CTL transfer , the efﬁcacy of CD44 - deﬁcient CTLs to induce tumor shrinkage was reduced ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . Particularly at lower T cell numbers , this led to an acceler - ated reoccurrence of tumors in the Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) group ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . The percentage of large tumors ( > 100 mm 3 ) was signif - icantly higher in mice receiving knockout CTLs ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . Together , this resulted in increased mortality of the mice in the Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTL group ( Figure 7E ) . In order to exclude the possibility that the failure of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T lymphocytes to permanently reject tumors was due to a differ - ence in survival as compared to wild - type cells , we determined the number of cells accumulating in EL4 tumors and the spleen in a time course ( Figure 7F and data not shown ) . These experi - ments showed that Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T cells persisted to the same extent as their wild - type counterparts for at least 9 days after adoptive transfer . In addition , we counted wild - type OT - I cells in three individual E . G7 - OVA tumors that were not rejected . We found that there were identical numbers of wild - type and Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs in these tumors ( data not shown ) . In summary , these results indicate that CD44 is an important determinant of the tumor - rejecting capability of TILs , most likely relating to the promigratory effects of this molecule . DISCUSSION Cellular polarity is a hallmark of two main activities of killer T lymphocytes , locomotion through tissue stroma and physical interactionswithtargetcells . Theresultsinthepresentpaperpro - vide insight into the molecular basis of polarity formation in CTLs directly within the intact tumor microenvironment . We found that interference with sustained polarity resulting from CD44 deﬁ - ciency decreases the capability of these cells to migrate through the effector site , but does not impact the stability of interactions with target cells . Thus , our study demonstrates that facultative polarity established during migration and cellular interactions are molecularly distinct processes . In addition , we show that the ﬁne tuning of killer T cell navigation through the interstitial space is essential for efﬁcient screening for tumor cells , which in turn leads to efﬁcient tumor cell surveillance . The capability to rapidly migrate to any site in the body is a deﬁning feature of T cells , which ensures that they detect and destroy target cells . Several distinct migratory checkpoints reg - ulate the appropriate targeting of T cells into peripheral tissues . In the initial step , T lymphocytes enter organs from the blood stream , which is achieved by a cascade of speciﬁc molecular interactions with the vascular endothelium culminating in ﬁrm lymphocyte adhesion ( reviewed in [ Springer , 1994 ] ) . In the sec - ond step , adherent T cells transmigrate through the vascular wall , eventually reaching the interstitial space of target organs . Finally , after entering the tissue stroma , T cells crawl through the extracellular matrix , thus presumably facilitating the screen - ing for cells presenting cognate antigen on their surface . The mo - lecular and biophysical cues underlying the ﬁrst two steps have been studied in great detail both in vitro and in vivo . Our data clearly demonstrate that interstitial effector T cell migration is Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 979 Figure 6 . CD44 Modulates Target Cell Screening Efﬁcacy but Is Not Involved in Physical Interactions between Killer T Lymphocytes and Tumor Cells C57BL / 6micewereinjectedsubcutaneouslyintotheﬂankwithE . G7 - OVA - ECFPtumorcells ( 10 6 ) . After9days , 2 3 10 6 , 5 3 10 6 , or2 3 10 7 CTLsgeneratedfrom OT - IxDPE GFP or OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) xDPE GFP splenocytes were adoptively transferred . Two , three , and four days later , the tumors were explanted and subjected to two - photonmicroscopy . ( Day2 : WT , n = 3tumors ; Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , n = 3tumors . Day3 : WT , n = 4tumors ; Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , n = 5tumors . Day4 : WT , n = 5tumors ; Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , n = 3 tumors for each T cell group . ) Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration 980 Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . an additional checkpoint whose tight regulation is important for the effectiveness of the immune response . Our study shows that CD44 regulates T cell locomotion through the tumor stroma , but not trafﬁcking of CTLs to tumors . Although it has been known for a long time that CD44 expression is strongly induced in T cells by TCR signals , its precise role in T cell function has remained incompletely understood . Previous studies have found that CD44 is involved in homing of T lympo - cytes to sites of inﬂammation , probably via mediating interaction ofblood - borneTcellswiththeendothelialwall ( DeGrendeleetal . , 1997 ) . Nevertheless , in our experiments , CTLs homed effectively into subcutaneous tumors , irrespective of their CD44 status . In their original study , DeGrendele et al . ( 1997 ) used short - term in vivo - activated CD4 + T cells with high HA - binding activity for their homing experiments . Consistent with previous data assess - ing HA binding to T cells during immune responses ( Lesley et al . , 1994 ) , we found that terminally differentiated CTLs showed high CD44 expression but no HA - binding capacity . Therefore , it appears that CD44 may have an early , transient function in the homing process of T cells into peripheral sites , whereas at later time points it is dispensable for T cell trafﬁcking . To better understand T cell activities in the extravascular space , we made use of time - lapse two - photon microscopy . Recently , this technology has been used to unravel the cellular dynamics and anatomical context of T cell migration in intact tissues . Thus , it has been shown that , in the absence of cognate antigen , naive T cells in peripheral lymph nodes migrate very actively and in random directions , a process partially dependent on chemokine signals ( Miller et al . , 2002 ; Worbs et al . , 2007 ) . Al - though naive T cells appear to use the ﬁbroblastic reticular cell network as a migratory guidance cue ( Bajenoff et al . , 2006 ) , the molecules mediating these interactions are unknown . In contrast to lymph node , tumors do not contain an organized ﬁbroblastic reticular cell ( FRC ) network . Nevertheless , the ECM at these sites is rich in HA and collagen ﬁbers ( Condeelis and Segall , 2003 ; Knudson , 1996 ; Ricciardelli and Rodgers , 2006 ; Zalatnai , 2006 ) , and our previous observation that migrating TILs underwent inti - mate interactions with ECM ﬁbers ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) suggested that these structures may serve similar purposes for CTLs as the FRC network does for naive T cells . It has been proposed that leukocytes undergo only transient or no ﬁrm adhesion with the substrate both in three - dimensional ( 3D ) models in vitro and in tissues in vivo . Thus , it has been suggested that lymphocytes extend cell protrusions into tissue pockets to generate mechanical traction ( Schor et al . , 1983 ) . This process has been dubbed ‘‘biophysical migration’’ and may explain why leukocytes migrate more than 100 fold faster than epithelial or mesenchymal cells ( Friedl et al . , 2001 ) . Recent evi - dence has shown that leukocyte migration in 3D collagen gels is completely independent of integrins , but rather relies on the force generated by actin network expansion ( Lammermann et al . , 2008 ) . Our data extend this notion because they suggest that the ECD of CD44 is dispensable for migration of activated T cells in vitro , whereas the ICD is sufﬁcient to restore normal mi - gration in Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells . This indicates that the effect of CD44 in CTLs may be independent of ligand binding in situ , which is further substantiated by the inactive , i . e . , HA nonbinding , state of the molecule on TILs isolated from tumors . Although Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs showed normal adhesive function towardECMcomponentsinvitro , theyweredeﬁcientinformation of a mature polarized cell shape , evidenced by the reduced pres - ence of uropods in migrating cells both in vitro and in vivo . In contrast to molecules such as Scribble , CD44 does not appear to be required for the initiation of polarity , i . e . , symmetry breaking ( Ludford - Menting et al . , 2005 ) . Rather , it seems to function as a polarity stabilizer , shown by shape - change assays of migrating CTL . In contrast to the requirement of CD44 in the regulation of polarity during migration , Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs interacted with tumor cells similarly to wild - type T lymphocytes . This is consistent with the observation that , morphologically , interacting wild - type ( and Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) TILs did not reveal clearly formed uropods , but were usually of round shape . Therefore , we propose that the main function of CD44 in T lymphocytes within the interstitial space is the organization of cell shape during active migration . At the molecular level , upon ligand binding , the cyoplasmic do - main of CD44 has been shown to recruit a number of molecules , includingERMfamilymembers , ankyrin , smallRhoGTPases , and tyrosine kinases , thereby transducing signals from the cell sur - face to the cytoskeleton ( Bretscher et al . , 2002 ; Ponta et al . , 2003 ; Turley et al . , 2002 ) . Several of these pathways have been proposed to mediate the promigratory effects of CD44 . In vitro experiments have indicated the involvement of ERM molecules in the regulation of directional migration of ﬁbroblasts and mela - noma cells after exposure to chemokines ( Legg et al . , 2002 ) . However , despite mapping ofthe ERM - binding domain toashort amino acid stretch at the intracellular domain of CD44 , and the ( A ) Snapshots from time - lapse sequences from mice that received 2 3 10 6 CTLs are shown . CTLs ( green ) are indicated with green arrowheads . Individual tumor cellsare labeled withnumberstoidentify themthroughout theobservation period . The timeisindicated inmin : sintheupper - leftcorner ofeachpanel . Tracksare indicated by white lines . ( B ) Tumor regions from mice that received 2 3 10 6 CTLs were analyzed for the frequency of cellular interactions . Only CTLs that could be tracked for 30 min , engaged in at least one short - term interaction ( < 10 min ) with a tumor cell , and did not show any long - term interactions were included . The number of tumor cells that were targeted by these cells was counted . Bars represent means ± SEM . The data were generated from three independent experiments ( WT : n = 10 CTLs ; Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) : n = 13 ) . ( C ) Theareasanalyzed in ( B ) were also analyzed for the time required for TILsto establish contactswith tumorcells . TILs that were notincontactwithtumor cells were tracked until they made contact with a tumor cell . The elapsed time period was measured and plotted . Line indicates the mean . ( D ) Theareasanalyzedin ( B ) wereusedtodeterminethenumberofTILsthatsucceededinestablishingcontactswithtumorcells . TILswereobservedfora30min time period . Cells that achieved contacts with at least 1 tumor cell were designated ‘‘interacting’’ cells ; cells that failed to achieve contacts with any tumor cells were designated ‘‘noninteracting’’ cells . Shown is the number of interacting and noninteracting T cells . ( E ) A representativelong - term interaction between an OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) T cell ( green ) and an E . G7 - OVA - ECFP tumor cell ( blue ) is shown . The time is indicated inthe upper - left corner of each panel ( min : s ) . ( F ) The duration of interactions between E . G7 - OVA - ECFP tumor cells and CD44 - expressing or Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs was measured ( 2 3 10 7 : OT - I , n = 46 interactions ; OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , n = 69 interactions . 5 3 10 6 : OT - I , n = 41 interactions ; OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , n = 52interactions . 2 3 10 6 : OT - I , n = 47 interactions ; OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , n = 60 interactions ) . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 981 Figure 7 . CD44 Enhances the Potency of the Effector Immune Response C57BL / 6 mice were injected subcutaneously with E . G7 - OVA cells ( 10 6 ) . After 9 – 10 days , 2 3 10 7 ( A ) or 2 3 10 6 ( B – E ) CTLs generated from OT - IxDPE GFP or OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) xDPE GFP mice were adoptively transferred into tumor - bearing mice . In ( A ) , n = 58 tumors for each T cell group ; in ( B ) – ( E ) n = 30 and 28 tumors for OT - I and OT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs , respectively . ( A and B ) The mean tumor volume ( ± SEM ) was calculated for each group . ( C ) Theproportionofmicewithtumorslargerthan100mm 3 afteradoptivetransferisdepicted . Chi - squaretestwasusedforeachtimepointtodeterminewhether the proportions of rejected tumors in each group were different ( * * , p < 0 . 005 ; * , p < 0 . 05 ; $ , p > 0 . 1 ) . ( D ) The mean volume ( ± SEM ) of tumors with a size larger than 100 mm 3 ( day 10 ) was determined . Repeated - measures two - way ANOVA was carried out to determine whether interaction occurs between the two curves ( n = 6 and 11 tumors for wild - type and Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs , respectively ) . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration 982 Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . description of a point mutation within this domain that interferes with chemotaxis in a dominant - negative manner , the precise function of the ERM - binding domain in the effects of CD44 on T cell behavior has been unknown ( Legg et al . , 2002 ; Ponta et al . , 2003 ) . Our results provide genetic evidence that recruit - ment of pERM to the CD44 ICD is required for the promigratory effect of CD44 in CTLs . CD44 promotes enrichment of pERM at the membrane , and reciprocally , interaction with pERM is re - quired for CD44 to become polarized at the membrane . It is likely that after recruitment to the membrane , pERM crosslinks the actin cytoskeleton , leading to the localized enrichment of the CD44 - pERM complex . Our data are consistent with a recent studyinathymomacelllineshowingthatapERMsupportspolar - ity by the assembly of a molecular complex supporting ‘‘posteri - ority’’ ( Lee et al . , 2004 ) . The fact that Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs exhibit a speciﬁc defect in intersti - tial migration , whereas all other investigated properties , includ - ing homing , cytotoxicity , and cytokine production , remain fully functional , suggests that migration is indeed an integral part of the function of CTLs . Nevertheless , it is worthwhile to note that at very early time points , where the tumor tissue is still packed with target cells ( i . e . , up to day 3 after adoptive transfer ) , the effects of Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) CTLs were comparable to wild - type cells . Thus , initially , rejection of tumors was induced to a similar extent . In contrast , beginning on day 4 after adoptive transfer , Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells showed a substantial decrease in their antitumor effect . Under these conditions , the density of target cells is reduced , and a large fraction of the tumor volume comprises inﬂammatory cells and dead tumor cells . We speculate that optimal interstitial migration is required at the later phase of tumor rejection , which is based on the sufﬁcient detection of target cells within the tu - mor bed . Hence , if CTL locomotion is disturbed at this time point , residual tumor cells have the chance to escape immunosurveil - lance resulting in early reoccurrence of overt cancer . Together , these results indicate an early and late phase in tumor destruc - tion , deﬁned by the migratory properties of effector T cells and regulated by CD44 . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Mice Mouse strains included DPE GFP mice , inwhich GFP is expressed by all T cells , TCR - transgenic OT - I mice , and OT - IxDPE GFP mice ( Mempel et al . , 2006 ; Mrass et al . , 2006 ) . Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice , crossed to the C57BL / 6 background for more than 10 generations , were bred with OT - I or OT - IxDPE GFP strains . C57BL / 6 wild - type mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories . All experimental protocols including animals were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of The Wistar Institute . Cell Lines The thymoma EL4 line and its OVA - expressing derivative ( E . G7 - OVA ) were purchasedfrom theAmericanType CultureCollection . Forsome experiments , ECFP - expressing EL4 and E . G7 - OVA cell lines were used ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) . AKR T lymphoma cells , which do not express CD44 , and a stably transfected CD44 variant ( AKR - CD44 ) were employed as controls for hyaluronic acid binding assays ( Lesley et al . , 1992 ) . Reagents Antibodies directed against the following antigens were used : CD8 , CD44 , CD25 , CD69 , L - selectin , interferon - g , TNF - a , and IL - 2 ( BD Biosciences ) ; per - forin ( clone eBioMAK - D ; eBioscience ) ; and granzyme B ( Caltag / Invitrogen ) . A phospho - ERM - speciﬁc antibody was purchased from Cell Signaling ( # 3141 ) . IRAWB14 is a mAb that induces hyaluronic acid binding activity of CD44 ( Lesley et al . , 1992 ) . CD44 - blocking antibody was generated from hybridoma KM81 ( American Type Culture Collection , TIB - 241 ) . Rooster - comb - derived hyaluronic acid , bovine - plasma - derived ﬁbronectin and rat - tail - derived type I collagen were purchased from Sigma . Bovine - tendon - derived collagen was kindlyprovided byM . Herlyn , TheWistarInstitute . Hyaluronicacidwaslabeled withﬂuoresceinisothiocyanate ( CichyandPure , 2004 ) . Biotinylatedhyaluronic acid binding protein was purchased from Associates of Cape Cod . R - phyco - erythrin ( PE ) - conjugated streptavidin was purchased from Dako . Collagenase D and DNase I were purchased from Roche . Phorbol - myristate - acetate and ionomycin were purchased from Sigma . SIINFEKL peptide was purchased from Alpha Diagnostic International . Cytotoxicity Assay The cytotoxic activity of CTLs was determined with the CyToxiLux assay as recommended by the manufacturer ( OncoImmunin ) . In brief , tumor cells ( EL4 or E . G7 - OVA ) were ﬂuorescently labeled with a red dye , followed by co - incubation of CTLs and tumor cells in the presence of a ﬂuorogenic caspase substrate that shows enhanced green ﬂuorescence after caspase - mediated cleavage . Flow Cytometry Excised tumors were cut into small pieces and incubated in HBSS containing 10 mg ml (cid:2) 1 collagenase D and 1 mg ml (cid:2) 1 DNase I . The digested tissue was transferred through a cell strainer to generate a single - cell suspension . Spleens were passed through a cell strainer , followed by lysis in ACK lysing buffer ( Invitrogen ) . The resulting single - cell suspensions were stained in PBS with 1 % fetal bovine serum with the appropriate antibodies followed by analysis with a FACSCalibur ﬂow cytometer ( Becton Dickinson ) . Data were analyzed with FlowJo software ( Tree Star ) . Adoptive Transfer of CTLs into Tumor - Bearing Mice C57BL / 6 mice are injected subcutaneously with 10 6 EL4 , E . G7 - OVA , or E . G7 - OVA - ECFP tumor cells into both ﬂanks . Eight to ten days after tumor cell injection , CTLs ( 2 3 10 7 unless indicated otherwise ) at day 8 of culture were adoptively transferred by tail - vein injection . Analysis of Tumor Growth Theexperimentalendpointwasdeﬁnedwhentumorvolumeexceeded10 % of body weight of mice . For calculation of tumor volumes , the longest and short - est diameter of tumors was measured . The volume was calculated according to the following formula : ( longest diameter ) 3 ( shortest diameter ) 2 3 p / 6 . Fluorescence Microscopy For analysis of GFP , culturedcells were directly analyzed inT75 culture dishes at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . Images and time - lapse videos were captured on an in - verted microscope ( Nikon TE300 ) . For detection of pERM by immunoﬂuores - cence microscopy , cells were transferred into 6 - well plates and incubated for 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . The cells were ﬁxed immediately after removal from the incubator directly on the culture dish with trichloroacetic acid . T Cell Shape - Change Assay Cultured CTLs ( day 8 after peptide stimulation ) were resuspended in fresh IL - 2 - supplementedmediaandaddedinto uncoated 6 - wellplates . Phase - con - trast microscopy was used to generate time - lapse sequences . Individual frameswerecapturedfor10 0 30 00 every30s . Anextendedmorphologythatper - sisted for at least two frames , followed by a round morphology that persisted ( E ) Survivalcurvesoftumor - bearingmicethatweretreatedwithOT - IxDPE GFP orOT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) xDPE GFP Tcells ( n = 15and14mice , respectively ) weredetermined . ( F ) C56BL / 6 mice were injected subcutaneously with EL4 tumor cells ( 10 6 ) . At the indicated time points , single - cell suspensions of the tumors were generated , andthenumbersofOT - IandOT - Ix Cd44 (cid:2) / (cid:2) TILsweredeterminedbyﬂowcytometry ( day3 : n = 16and14tumors , respectively ; day6 : n = 20tumorseach ; day9 : n = 4 tumors each ) . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 983 for at least two frames , and vice versa , was deﬁned as one switch between polarizedandnonpolarizedstates . Onlycellsthatshowedaroundmorphology for at least two frames were included in this analysis . Two - Photon Microscopy of Tumors and Imaging Analysis Tumortissuepreparationwascarriedoutasdescribedpreviously ( Mrassetal . , 2006 ) . In brief , tumors were explanted and placed in an imaging chamber . Superfusion with prewarmed and oxygenated medium was carried out throughout the experiment to maintain tissue viability . Two - photon micros - copyandimaginganalysiswascarriedoutonaPrairieTechnologyUltimaSys - tem equipped with a 40 3 ( NA 0 . 8 ) water - immersion objective in combination withadiode - pumped , widebandmode - locked Ti : Sapphirefemtosecond laser ( Coherent Chameleon ) . Tissues were exposed to laser light at a wavelength of 900nm . Appropriate ﬁltersetswereused tospeciﬁcallydetect light emitted as a result of second harmonic generation or by the excited ﬂuorophores . 3D im - age stacks were transformed into movies with Volocity software ( Improvision ) . Meanmigrationvelocities , cellular displacement , and conﬁnement ratios ( total length of track divided by distance between starting and end point ) , as well as turning angles and instantaneous velocity , were calculated as described ( Mrass et al . , 2006 ) . In Vitro T Cell Migration Assay Acollagensuspension ( 1mgml (cid:2) 1 ) wasdiluted1 : 5inPBSand0 . 2 % bovinese - rum albumin . One hundred microliters of this solution was placed in 96 - well platesandsolidiﬁedfor2to16hratroomtemperature . Alternatively , ﬁbronectin ( 10 m g ml (cid:2) 1 ) was used to coat plates . OT - I effector T cells ( 10 5 ) in prewarmed media ( 100 m l ) supplemented with IL - 2 ( 20 ng ml (cid:2) 1 ) were added . After the cells settled , they were imaged with ﬂuorescence and phase - contrast microscopy ( Nikon TE300 microscope ) to capture and distinguish cells with and without ﬂuorescent tag . Time - lapsesequences of 10 0 30 00 duration withone frame cap - turedevery30sweregenerated . Tcellmotility parameters wereanalyzed with Volocity software and calculated as described for intact tissues . T Cell Adhesion Assay The adhesion assay was carried out as described recently ( Fukunaga - Kalabis etal . , 2006 ) . Inbrief , 96 - wellplateswerecoatedwithﬁbronectin ( 10 m gml (cid:2) 1 ) or collagen ( 30 m g ml (cid:2) 1 ) . Cells were added as described for the in vitro migration assay . After settling ofthe cells , thewellswere rinsed gentlywithPBS , and the supernatant was removed by vacuum suction . The remaining cells were incu - bated in ﬁxation solution ( 10 % ethanol , 0 . 2 % crystal violet ) . After washing , the dyeretainedbyadherentcellswasreleasedbyincubationinalysisbuffer ( 0 . 1M NaH 2 PO 4 , pH4 . 5 ) . Theturbidityofthesupernatantwasdeterminedwithaplate reader set to 570 nm ( Model 550 , BioRad ) . The adhesion percentage was calculatedbyinterpolation , ﬁttingthemeasuredvaluetoalinearfunctionwhere 0 % corresponds to the value that obtained for empty wells and 100 % corre - sponds the value obtained in wells where the washing step was omitted . Statistical Methods Unless indicated otherwise , Mann Whitney test was used for comparisons of two groups . Kruskal - Wallis followed by Bonferroni test was used for compari - sonsofmorethantwogroups . Thechi - squaretestwasusedforthecomparison of categorical data . KS normality test and D’Agostino & Pearson omnibus nor - mality test were employed when using assays that require normal distribution . A difference was considered signiﬁcant if p < 0 . 05 . The error bars in all charts represent standard errors of the mean . SUPPLEMENTAL DATA Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures , nine ﬁg - ures , and seven movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . immunity . com / supplemental / S1074 - 7613 ( 08 ) 00513 - X . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank M . Fukunaga - Kalabis and A . Iparraguirre - Wolf for helpful discussion and E . J . Wherry and M . Herlyn ( all at the Wistar Institute ) for providing re - agents . S . L . R . and E . P . were supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health . W . W . was supported by National Health and Medical Research Council grant 512265 and a Life Sciences Award from the New South Wales government . P . M . is the recipient of a Cancer Research Institute fellowship . Received : July 20 , 2008 Revised : October 2 , 2008 Accepted : October 10 , 2008 Published online : December 18 , 2008 REFERENCES Alstergren , P . , Zhu , B . , Glogauer , M . , Mak , T . W . , Ellen , R . P . , and Sodek , J . ( 2004 ) . Polarization and directed migration of murine neutrophils is dependent on cell surface expression of CD44 . Cell . Immunol . 231 , 146 – 157 . Bajenoff , M . , Egen , J . G . , Koo , L . Y . , Laugier , J . P . , Brau , F . , Glaichenhaus , N . , and Germain , R . N . ( 2006 ) . Stromal cell networks regulate lymphocyte entry , migration , and territoriality in lymph nodes . Immunity 25 , 989 – 1001 . Bousso , P . , and Robey , E . A . ( 2004 ) . Dynamic behavior of T cells and thymo - cytes in lymphoid organs as revealed by two - photon microscopy . Immunity 21 , 349 – 355 . Bretscher , A . , Edwards , K . , and Fehon , R . G . ( 2002 ) . ERM proteins and merlin : Integrators at the cell cortex . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 586 – 599 . Cahalan , M . D . , and Parker , I . ( 2008 ) . Choreography ofcell motility and interac - tion dynamics imaged by two - photon microscopy in lymphoid organs . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 26 , 585 – 626 . Cahalan , M . D . , Parker , I . , Wei , S . H . , andMiller , M . J . ( 2002 ) . Two - photon tissue imaging : Seeing the immune system in a fresh light . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 2 , 872 – 880 . Chang , J . T . , Palanivel , V . R . , Kinjyo , I . , Schambach , F . , Intlekofer , A . M . , Bane - rjee , A . , Longworth , S . A . , Vinup , K . E . , Mrass , P . , Oliaro , J . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Asym - metric T lymphocyte division in the initiation of adaptive immune responses . Science 315 , 1687 – 1691 . Cichy , J . , and Pure , E . ( 2004 ) . Cytokines regulate the afﬁnity of soluble CD44 for hyaluronan . FEBS Lett . 556 , 69 – 74 . Condeelis , J . , and Segall , J . E . ( 2003 ) . Intravital imaging of cell movement in tumours . Nat . Rev . Cancer 3 , 921 – 930 . DeGrendele , H . C . , Estess , P . , and Siegelman , M . H . ( 1997 ) . Requirement for CD44 in activated T cell extravasation into an inﬂammatory site . Science 278 , 672 – 675 . Dustin , M . L . ( 2008 ) . T - cell activation through immunological synapses and kinapses . Immunol . Rev . 221 , 77 – 89 . Friedl , P . , Borgmann , S . , and Brocker , E . B . ( 2001 ) . Amoeboid leukocytecrawl - ing through extracellular matrix : Lessons from the Dictyostelium paradigm of cell movement . J . Leukoc . Biol . 70 , 491 – 509 . Fukunaga - Kalabis , M . , Martinez , G . , Liu , Z . J . , Kalabis , J . , Mrass , P . , Weninger , W . , Firth , S . M . , Planque , N . , Perbal , B . , and Herlyn , M . ( 2006 ) . CCN3 controls 3D spatial localization of melanocytes in the human skin through DDR1 . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 563 – 569 . Germain , R . N . , Miller , M . J . , Dustin , M . L . , and Nussenzweig , M . C . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic imaging of the immune system : Progress , pitfalls and promise . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 6 , 497 – 507 . Halin , C . , Rodrigo Mora , J . , Sumen , C . , and von Andrian , U . H . ( 2005 ) . In vivo imaging of lymphocyte trafﬁcking . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 581 – 603 . Jacobelli , J . , Andres , P . G . , Boisvert , J . , and Krummel , M . F . ( 2004 ) . New views oftheimmunologicalsynapse : Variationsinassemblyandfunction . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 16 , 345 – 352 . Knudson , W . ( 1996 ) . Tumor - associated hyaluronan . Providing an extracellular matrix that facilitates invasion . Am . J . Pathol . 148 , 1721 – 1726 . Krummel , M . F . , and Macara , I . ( 2006 ) . Maintenance and modulation of T cell polarity . Nat . Immunol . 7 , 1143 – 1149 . Lammermann , T . , Bader , B . L . , Monkley , S . J . , Worbs , T . , Wedlich - Soldner , R . , Hirsch , K . , Keller , M . , Forster , R . , Critchley , D . R . , Fassler , R . , and Sixt , M . ( 2008 ) . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 , 51 – 55 . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration 984 Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Lee , J . H . , Katakai , T . , Hara , T . , Gonda , H . , Sugai , M . , and Shimizu , A . ( 2004 ) . Roles of p - ERM and Rho - ROCK signaling in lymphocyte polarity and uropod formation . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 327 – 337 . Legg , J . W . , Lewis , C . A . , Parsons , M . , Ng , T . , and Isacke , C . M . ( 2002 ) . A novel PKC - regulated mechanism controls CD44 ezrin association and directional cell motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 399 – 407 . Lesley , J . , He , Q . , Miyake , K . , Hamann , A . , Hyman , R . , and Kincade , P . W . ( 1992 ) . Requirements for hyaluronic acid binding by CD44 : A role for the cyto - plasmic domain and activation by antibody . J . Exp . Med . 175 , 257 – 266 . Lesley , J . , Kincade , P . W . , and Hyman , R . ( 1993 ) . Antibody - induced activation of the hyaluronan receptor function of CD44 requires multivalent binding by antibody . Eur . J . Immunol . 23 , 1902 – 1909 . Lesley , J . , Howes , N . , Perschl , A . , and Hyman , R . ( 1994 ) . Hyaluronan binding function of CD44 is transiently activated on T cells during an in vivo immune response . J . Exp . Med . 180 , 383 – 387 . Ludford - Menting , M . J . , Oliaro , J . , Sacirbegovic , F . , Cheah , E . T . , Pedersen , N . , Thomas , S . J . , Pasam , A . , Iazzolino , R . , Dow , L . E . , Waterhouse , N . J . , et al . ( 2005 ) . AnetworkofPDZ - containingproteinsregulatesTcellpolarityandmor - phology during migrationand immunological synapse formation . Immunity 22 , 737 – 748 . Mempel , T . R . , Pittet , M . J . , Khazaie , K . , Weninger , W . , Weissleder , R . , von Boehmer , H . , and von Andrian , U . H . ( 2006 ) . Regulatory T cells reversibly sup - presscytotoxicTcellfunctionindependentofeffectordifferentiation . Immunity 25 , 129 – 141 . Miller , M . J . , Wei , S . H . , Parker , I . , and Cahalan , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Two - photonimag - ing of lymphocyte motility and antigen response in intact lymph node . Science 296 , 1869 – 1873 . Mrass , P . , and Weninger , W . ( 2006 ) . Immune cell migration as a means to control immune privilege : Lessons from the CNS and tumors . Immunol . Rev . 213 , 195 – 212 . Mrass , P . , Takano , H . , Ng , L . G . , Daxini , S . , Lasaro , M . O . , Iparraguirre , A . , Cavanagh , L . L . , von Andrian , U . H . , Ertl , H . C . , Haydon , P . G . , and Weninger , W . ( 2006 ) . Random migration precedes stable target cell interactions of tumor - inﬁltrating T cells . J . Exp . Med . 203 , 2749 – 2761 . Ng , L . G . , Mrass , P . , Kinjyo , I . , Reiner , S . L . , andWeninger , W . ( 2008 ) . Two - pho - tonimagingofeffectorT - cellbehavior : Lessonsfromatumormodel . Immunol . Rev . 221 , 147 – 162 . Peach , R . J . , Hollenbaugh , D . , Stamenkovic , I . , andAruffo , A . ( 1993 ) . Identiﬁca - tion of hyaluronic acidbindingsites intheextracellulardomain of CD44 . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 257 – 264 . Ponta , H . , Sherman , L . , and Herrlich , P . A . ( 2003 ) . CD44 : From adhesion molecules to signalling regulators . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 33 – 45 . Pure , E . , and Cuff , C . A . ( 2001 ) . A crucial role for CD44 in inﬂammation . Trends Mol . Med . 7 , 213 – 221 . Ricciardelli , C . , and Rodgers , R . J . ( 2006 ) . Extracellular matrix of ovarian tumors . Semin . Reprod . Med . 24 , 270 – 282 . Sanchez - Madrid , F . , and del Pozo , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Leukocyte polarization in cell migration and immune interactions . EMBO J . 18 , 501 – 511 . Schor , S . L . , Allen , T . D . , and Winn , B . ( 1983 ) . Lymphocyte migration into three - dimensional collagen matrices : A quantitative study . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 1089 – 1096 . Shaw , A . S . ( 2005 ) . T - cell activation and immunologic synapse . Immunol . Res . 32 , 247 – 252 . Springer , T . A . ( 1994 ) . Trafﬁc signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leuko - cyte emigration : The multistep paradigm . Cell 76 , 301 – 314 . Stinchcombe , J . C . , and Grifﬁths , G . M . ( 2003 ) . The role of the secretory immu - nological synapse in killing by CD8 + CTL . Semin . Immunol . 15 , 301 – 305 . Turley , E . A . , Noble , P . W . , andBourguignon , L . Y . ( 2002 ) . Signalingpropertiesof hyaluronan receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 4589 – 4592 . Worbs , T . , Mempel , T . R . , Bolter , J . , von Andrian , U . H . , and Forster , R . ( 2007 ) . CCR7ligandsstimulatetheintranodalmotility ofTlymphocytes invivo . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 489 – 495 . Yonemura , S . , Hirao , M . , Doi , Y . , Takahashi , N . , Kondo , T . , Tsukita , S . , and Tsukita , S . ( 1998 ) . Ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins bind to a positively charged amino acid cluster in the juxta - membrane cytoplasmic domain of CD44 , CD43 , and ICAM - 2 . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 885 – 895 . Zalatnai , A . ( 2006 ) . Molecular aspects of stromal - parenchymal interactions in malignant neoplasms . Curr . Mol . Med . 6 , 685 – 693 . Immunity Intratumoral T Cell Migration Immunity 29 , 971 – 985 , December 19 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 985