City , University of London Institutional Repository Citation : Maiden , N . ORCID : 0000 - 0001 - 6233 - 8320 , Zachos , K . ORCID : 0000 - 0003 - 1977 - 7090 , Brown , A . , Nyre , L . , Holm , N . , Tonheim , A . , Hesseling , C . , Wagemans , A . and Apstolou , D . ( 2019 ) . Evaluating the Use of Digital Creativity Support by Journalists in Newsrooms . Paper presented at the ACM Creativity and Cognition Conference 2019 , 23 - 26 June 2019 , San Diego , USA . This is the accepted version of the paper . This version of the publication may differ from the final published version . Permanent repository link : http : / / openaccess . city . ac . uk / 22041 / Link to published version : Copyright and reuse : City Research Online aims to make research outputs of City , University of London available to a wider audience . Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author ( s ) and / or copyright holders . URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and linked to . City Research Online : http : / / openaccess . city . ac . uk / publications @ city . ac . uk City Research Online Evaluating the Use of Digital Creativity Support by Jou r - nalists in Newsrooms Neil Maiden , Konstantinos Zachos , Amanda Brown City , University of London 106 Bunhill Row , London EC1Y 8TZ UK N . A . M . Maiden @ city . ac . uk Lars Nyre , Bald - er Holm , Ale - ksander Nygård Tonheim University of Bergen , P . O . Box 7800 5020 Bergen Norway , Lars . Nyre @ uib . n o Claus Hesseling Interlink Acade - my , Blücherstrasse 11 , 22767 Hamburg , Germany , claus . hesseling @ i nterlink . academy Andrea Wage - mans Andrea Wagemans University of Groningen , P . O . Box 716 9700AS Groningen The Netherlands , j . m . wagemans @ r Dimitris Apos - tolou Institute Commu - nication and Computer Sys - tems , 15780 Zo - grafou , Greece DApost @ mail . ntu a . gr ABSTRACT This paper reports the evaluation of a new digital support tool designed to increase journalist creativity and productiv - ity in newsrooms . After outlining the tool’s principles , in - teractive features and architecture , the paper reports the installation and use of the tool over 2 months by 12 journal - ists in the newsrooms of 3 newspapers . Results from this evaluation revealed that tool use was associated with pub - lished news articles rated as more novel but not more valu - able than published articles written by the same journalists without the tool . However , tool use did not increase jour - nalist productivity . The evaluation results were used to in - form future changes to the digital creativity support tool . Author Keywords Journalism ; creativity ; digital support ; evaluation ; news - rooms CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Interaction Design ; Empir - ical studies in interaction design THE CRISIS IN JOURNALISM A free press is needed to ensure that citizens of democracies have access to the information needed to hold governments to account . Communicating this information is a key part of democratic decision - making , to increase the likelihood of transparency and decisions consistent with people’s sense of justice . In the tripartite system of modern democracies , a free press is sometimes called the fourth estate , alongside the legislature , executive and judiciary [ 6 ] . Discovering angles , such as personal stories , with which to communicate information effectively can enhance democratic decision - making , as recent Brexit stories about elected local politi - cians being denied UK citizenship demonstrate . However , the digitalization of news production and con - sumption has led many news businesses to become uncom - petitive [ 13 ] . Reduced incomes from newspaper sales and the failure of news businesses to transform and operate more competitively [ 39 ] , due in part to some journalists rejecting changes to newsroom practices that conflict with their professional values and / or disrupt their autonomy and work [ 15 ] , have resulted in fewer employed journalists . As a consequence , journalists who continue to work in these businesses often have less time to research , investigate and write articles . To manage , they often use subsets of familiar information sources to create articles [ 27 ] – subsets that can reduce the number , diversity and creativity of angles used to communicate information . Different forms of digital tool to support journalists to dis - cover and examine information from multiple sources have been developed . Some support journalist creativity , albeit indirectly . For example , the Story Discovery Engine used artificial intelligence algorithms to support investigative reporting [ 8 ] , and Tell Me More mined the web for similar stories reported by different sources and extracted text that offered new information in the form of quotes , actors and figures [ 21 ] . Other tools were developed to support journal - ist productivity , for example by automating parts of the reporting process [ 10 ] and analysing the increasing amounts of available open and big data with data visualization tech - niques [ 17 ] . However , these tools were not adopted in newsrooms . Instead , to seek to improve journalist creativity and productivity , news businesses have set - up in - house media labs and created start - up incubators and accelerators to connect with new technologies [ 12 , 33 ] . In response , this paper reports the evaluation of a more di - rect form of digital creativity support for journalists to dis - cover novel and useful angles on new stories when working in newsrooms . To support the productive discovery of these new angles , the digital support was designed to integrate into journalists’ existing work tools and processes , and to support journalists quickly to discover dissimilar ideas in different search spaces . To investigate whether this more direct digital creativity support would be effective in news - rooms , an evaluation of the support’s use in 3 local news - rooms was undertaken , to determine if its use by journalists was associated with the development of more novel and useful articles . However , newsrooms continue to be difficult environments in which to introduce digital innovations . Factors shown to impede the uptake of digital innovations include decreased newsroom autonomy , a newsroom work culture that is closed to innovation , lack of management support for jour - nalist training and setting up the conditions for successful uptake , the irrelevance of the new technologies , and the absence of innovative individuals ( e . g . [ 42 ] ) . Consequently our research also investigated whether these factors influ - enced the adoption and use of the digital creativity support . RELATED WORK IN DIGITAL CREATIVITY SUPPORT Unlike in journalism , digital creativity support tools have been implemented for professionals in other creative indus - tries such as the performing arts , music , and film and televi - sion ( e . g . [ 1 ] ) . Examples of the digital support include Sto - ryCrate , a collaborative editing tool developed to drive us - ers’ creative workflows within a location - based television production environment [ 5 ] and Trigger Shift , which appro - priated information technologies into performance art in theatre [ 18 ] . Bespoke digital creativity support tools have also been developed to support early collaborative design tasks ( e . g . [ 4 , 11 , 20 , 37 ] ) . Studies have also investigated how existing technologies such as social media platforms af - forded collaborative creativity in creative domains [ 14 , 24 ] . By contrast , as the introduction revealed , few digital tools to support the creativity of journalists had been developed , even though journalism is one of the creative industries . Therefore , selected principles and algorithms from these existing tools were used to develop the new tool to support journalist creativity . Most evaluations of digital creativity support tools that have been reported are controlled studies of short periods of use ( e . g . [ 4 , 40 ] ) . Although valuable , these studies reveal little about the impact of the longer - term uptake and use of such tools . The design of such tools also requires findings from longer - term evaluations related to learning , uptake , integra - tion into their existing work tools , and fit with work cul - tures . THE INJECT TOOL INJECT is a digital tool that was designed to support jour - nalists to discover creative angles on new news articles , and to discover these angles more productively than with exist - ing digital tools . It was built to support human - centred crea - tive cognition [ 23 ] , a process in which idea generation about new angles took place concurrently with information search . To support a journalist to discover new angles more productively , INJECT automatically retrieved news infor - mation with creative strategies that codified the expertise of experienced journalists [ 29 ] . And to increase a journalist’s creativity capabilities , INJECT presented the retrieved in - formation with interactive creative guidance to support the journalist to generate new angles on news articles . The de - signed - for outcome was new articles that were more crea - tive , i . e . both novel and valuable [ 28 ] because of the inclu - sion of validated information new to the journalist , generat - ed more quickly and hence productively than before . To ensure INJECT’s usability and effectiveness , journalists were included throughout its development process . Journal - ists were interviewed to discover problems , requirements and constraints . Paper - based then digital wireframes of the tool were developed and presented to professional journal - ists . New releases of the working INJECT software were tested for their usability and impact , first with journalism students who had no direct relationship to the authors , then with professional journalists working in magazines , region - al newspapers and as freelancers . Further releases of INJECT were then deployed for prototype use in news - rooms . During some of these deployments , journalists used a bespoke digital platform to report software bugs and new requirements . More details are reported in [ 29 , 31 ] . As reported in [ 31 ] , INJECT was implemented as a perma - nent sidebar on the right side of the text editor , based on the Google Docs Add - on sidebar feature . To work within the sidebar constraint ( a fixed width of 300px ) , it was imple - mented with features to generate candidate news angle top - ics directly from text already written in the larger editor window , as well as with icons with mouse hover - box de - scriptions to control the sidebar , and mouse hover - boxes to present information quickly in context . As well as the side - bar for Google Docs , INJECT was implemented as a side - bar with the same dimensions for the Wordpress , Adobe InCopy text editors and content management systems that use the TinyMCE text editor . It was also implemented as a separate web application that a journalist could reshape as the sidebar . A new example of the sidebar in a Google Docs text editor window being used to write an article about mass tourism at the Venice carnival is depicted in Figure 1 . To support idea generation about new angle topics on arti - cles , INJECT searched news information using 6 predefined types of angle elicited from experienced journalists . A jour - nalist clicked 1 of 6 icons also shown in Figure 1 to invoke 6 corresponding creative strategies to search for infor - mation about : ( 1 ) quantitative data associated with the new article ; ( 2 ) people associated with the new article ; ( 3 ) events associated with the article’s background ; ( 4 ) comical information associated with the article ; ( 5 ) future conse - quences of the article , and ; ( 6 ) published visualizations of data and information associated with the article . Each of these strategies implemented the codified expertise of expe - rienced journalists [ 29 ] using natural language parsing , word sense disambiguation and query expansion algorithms to search information in over 12million ( and growing ) in - dexed news articles from over 300 news sources written in 6 different European languages . Furthermore , to support journalists to discover new topic angles using more context - specific sources , INJECT also indexed and retrieved news information from available local news archives . Figure 1 . The INJECT sidebar providing creative guidance to a journalist writing an article about the annual Venetian car - nival , for example about the trend for last - chance tourism and / or background of the Piazza San Marco Figure 2 . Examples of INJECT sidebars generated for a news article being written about the Venetian carnival and tourism To present structured information about places , things , peo - ple and organizations that journalists might discover new angles about , INJECT displayed entities extracted automat - ically from retrieved news articles in colored rectangles , as shown in Figure 2 . Moreover , when the journalist placed the cursor over each entity or the article title , INJECT pre - sented a pop - up creative spark generated for that entity or title . Each spark was a codified creativity heuristic designed to encourage the journalist to undertake deliberate creative thinking . Examples of these creativity sparks in the pop - up windows are depicted in the 3 INJECT sidebars in Figure 2 . In response to feedback from journalists who confused the roles of INJECT and Internet search tools such as Google search , some INJECT features were redesigned to minimize similarities . New types of information card presented possi - ble new angles on stories to journalists without reference to individual news items , as shown in the middle sidebar in Figure 2 . Each card displayed 3 entities extracted from re - trieved news stories . Other changes included article word - clouds , the creativity sparks in list form , and automatic ref - erencing of the article . The journalist could also invoke a separate Google web search within INJECT to follow up seamlessly after the discovery of new ideas for angles on news articles with Google searches to retrieve more detailed information to complete the articles . To deliver the described creativity support to journalists , INJECT’s architecture was designed with 3 layers : − A user interaction layer that enabled different interfaces , such as the sidebar plug - in for Google Docs ; − A data layer of an index of , in April 2019 , 12million published news stories discovered using RSS feeds from 300 + news sources . Another 500 , 000 indexed stories were added to the index each month . INJECT’s journal - ist team selected these 300 + sources to represent politi - cal perspectives and reduce the risk of echo chambers . The data layer also included a database of over 50 , 000 political cartoons . In addition , INJECT accessed infor - mation from Wikipedia but did not search it , so it was not part of the data layer ; − An application layer of software services that supported journalists to generate news stories more creatively and productively : 1 ) the creative search service manipulated topic descriptions from the text editor to generate que - ries and implemented the different creative search strat - egies ; 2 ) the news extraction service collected and in - dexed information from the 300 + news sources prior to creative search ; 3 ) the creative sparks service generated creative sparks that were tailored to entities extracted from news information ; 4 ) the concept card service that allowed individual journalists to edit and maintain per - sonalised sets of concept cards , and ; 5 ) the persistence service that provided search session storage and retriev - al capabilities . The news extraction and creative sparks services pre - generated news information content for the sidebar , to reduce the impact of the Add - on’s perfor - mance constraints . For example , the news extraction service collected and in - dexed news information using public RSS feeds to the 300 + news sources and tailored machine learning and natural language processing algorithms . It uploaded this infor - mation from the feeds every 30 minutes and stored it in a PostgreSQL database as metadata , with raw article data text as strings and a URL link to the source . It removed non - news content such as navigation links and adverts . It detect - ed and extracted the people , location organization and event entities . It applied advanced natural language parsing to determine noun and verb phrases . And it uploaded each processed news article into an external Elasticsearch Clus - ter . More details of this and other services are also reported at more length in [ 31 ] . The technical installation of INJECT in any newsroom in - volved 3 activities : ( 1 ) the download and installation of the INJECT sidebar plug - in for each different text editor in use in the newsroom on the desktop computer of each journalist who used INJECT ; ( 2 ) the optional technical adaptations of the sidebar to fit with other desktop tools and the local work practices of the journalists , and ; ( 3 ) optional bespoke soft - ware coding to integrate INJECT with local news infor - mation archives , and the implementation of new queries to retrieve all article information from the archive databases at run - time . EVALUATION OF INJECT IN 3 LOCAL NEWSPAPERS The INJECT tool was deployed in the newsrooms of 3 local newspapers in Norway . The evaluation of this deployment provided first - hand data about the benefits from and barri - ers and constraints to INJECT use . Each of the 3 local newspapers was an established newspaper title in Western Norway , employed less than 40 staff and had print circula - tions of between 6 , 000 and 9 , 000 . Two of the newspapers published 3 print editions per week and the other published 5 , and all 3 also maintained online digital editions . The INJECT tool was installed into the daily work practices of 4 journalists at each of the newspapers for 2 months in the first half of 2018 , for use in the Norwegian and English languages . The newspaper editor at each of the newspapers selected the journalists to use INJECT , based on their work - loads and roles . Each of the journalists was trained onsite to use the INJECT tool but did not receive training in creative thinking techniques . None reported knowledge and / or expe - rience with any structured creative thinking techniques . At the start of the evaluation , the INJECT tool had indexed 2 . 7m English - language articles , which rose to 3 . 2m at the end of the evaluation . At the start of the evaluation , the tool had also indexed 260 , 000 Norwegian - language articles , which rose to 300 , 000 at the end . INJECT also searched the 50 , 000 digital cartoons . Moreover , the journalists requested that INJECT also generated creative guidance specific to their localities using over 100 years of articles printed in the 3 newspapers . After discussion with the third - party organi - zation that maintained this digital archive , the tool also in - dexed 62 , 160 Norwegian - language articles from the ar - chives published between 2015 and 2018 . All 3 newsrooms used the Adobe InCopy text editor , so the InCopy version of the INJECT sidebar was made available . However , a different third - party organisation that was con - tracted by the 3 newsrooms did not integrate it into the edi - tor . Instead , all of the journalists were set up to use the web application version shown in Figure 3 in a separate browser window . Figure 3 . The INJECT web application version providing cre - ative guidance in Norwegian to a journalist writing an article about the Venetian carnival The evaluation investigated whether journalists in the news - rooms produced articles that were : ( RQ1 ) more novel and valuable with support from the INJECT tool , and : ( RQ2 ) written more productively with this support . These qualities of novelty and value mapped to the requirements for news to be surprising and relevant revealed during a review of key qualities of news reported in 2016 [ 32 ] . It also investi - gated whether : ( RQ3 ) factors such as increased newsroom autonomy , a work culture open to innovation , management support to train journalists and set up success conditions and the presence of innovative individuals [ 30 ] influenced the use and the effectiveness of the INJECT tool . The Evaluation Method To investigate RQ1 a sample of articles produced by the journalists with and without INJECT’s support were rated by 7 judges with journalism expertise and / or knowledge of the newspapers’ regions . Three of the 7 judges were domain experts in journalism – associate professors of journalism at higher education institutions . The others were the head of information at a regional institute in business and trade , two local business leaders in tourism , and a retired legal stenog - rapher . All lived in the regions covered by the newspapers . Each judge was assumed to be able to rate 40 articles accu - rately in the available 3 - hour period , so each rated 20 arti - cles that journalists had written with support from INJECT and 20 written without it in the same period 12 months ear - lier . A random number generator algorithm at random . org was used to select the 40 articles , and numbers of articles proportionate with the total number of articles written by each journalist with the support of INJECT were selected . The 40 articles were then randomly ordered in a question - naire using another algorithm at random . org , anonymized and presented with two 1 - 7 scales to capture each judge’s novelty rating and value rating of each article . An example of one of the questions asked in Norwegian on the ques - tionnaire was Kor verdifull er artikkelen for den lokale of - fentlegheita den er skriven for ? meaning how valuable is the article for the local public domain that it is written for ? Novelty and usefulness are oft - used measures to evaluate creative ideas and products ( e . g . [ 28 , 40 ] ) , and human expert judgment has been shown to be an effective source of these novelty and usefulness measures ( e . g . [ 19 ] ) . The journalists also recorded a digital log during the evaluation period to report the forms of support that INJECT provided to write each article . To investigate RQ2 , the journalists used the digital log to estimate the time spent using INJECT’s support . In addi - tion , one researcher visited the 3 newspapers to interview the 12 journalists based on these log entries . Quantitative data about published news articles such as word counts were also investigated , but other direct measures of journal - ist productivity such the numbers of words written per hour were not , due to obvious threats to validity of the data aris - ing from the diverse contexts in which INJECT might be used in newsrooms . And to investigate RQ3 , the researcher who visited the 3 newspapers interviewed the journalists and their editors and newsroom managers at each of the 3 newspapers about en - ablers and barriers to INJECT use . The Evaluation Results INJECT was used in all 3 newsrooms , and no major tech - nical problems were reported . A total of 72 published arti - cles were written with INJECT’s support by 10 of the 12 journalists . In interviews , one of the other 2 journalists re - ported not using INJECT because of a lack of time due to short deadlines and simultaneous tasks , and the other was reported to be out of the office frequently and not available to use INJECT . These interviews also revealed that the 1 journalist from each newspaper involved in the earlier co - design of INJECT wrote the largest number of articles with it , and that the editors in each newspaper trusted these “su - per - user journalists” to encourage INJECT use by the other journalists . By contrast , no newspaper editors used the tool . In interviews the editors report that use of the tool was not part of their roles , and that there was little time for them to learn and use it . The effect of INJECT use on article creativity was investi - gated . Analysis of the articles written with and without its support revealed that the expert ratings of the novelty of articles written with INJECT were significantly higher than of the articles written without it . A Mann - Whitney test re - vealed that the novelty ratings were greater for the articles written with the support of INJECT ( Mdn = 3 ) than without the support ( Mdn = 2 ) , U = 6997 . 5 , p < 0 . 0001 . INJECT use was associated with an increase on the novelty of articles , albeit from low average ratings that indicated that most non - INJECT articles were rated as not very novel . In contrast there was no significant difference in the ratings of the value of articles written with and without INJECT . A Mann - Whitney test revealed that the value ratings were not greater for the articles written with the support of INJECT ( Mdn = 5 ) than without the support of INJECT ( Mdn = 5 ) , U = 9156 , p > 0 . 05 . The average value rating of all of the arti - cles was 4 . 7 out of 7 . The lowest and highest average value - rated articles were 3 . 71 and 5 . 86 , indicating that all of the articles were rated as having at least some value . This result was perhaps unsurprising , given that all of the articles had passed through the newspapers’ editorial process and been published , which indicated value . The journalists recorded digital log entries for 64 of the 72 articles , and these entries revealed that INJECT was used to generate new information for 34 of the 64 articles . They reported uses of INJECT to discover new angles on articles such as ( translated from the original Norwegian ) : “ The idea for the article came from a [ creativity spark ] . I used INJECT to find exciting ideas about how I could approach the case ” . Similarly , the journalists reported that it provided inspiration : “ Got some inspiration for what others wrote about the ‘Utøya 22 July’ film by Poppe ” . The journalists also used INJECT to discover new sources of information : “ INJECT helped me see other things that were written about Ingrid Brandseth ” , background information such as : “ It gave me a new source and a lot of background infor - mation and facts . INJECT actually gave me more stuff than I needed , so the rest will be saved for the next occasion ” , and other articles on the same theme : “ This is an article about UKM . INJECT showed me how other journalists have written about the event earlier ” . Journalists also re - ported that new sections were added to articles : “ Received feedback about the problem based on a few reports in the National Newspapers ( Dagbladet ) on urban issues . Result - ed in a section of my case ” . Overall , the analysis of the log entries revealed that increased article creativity might have been associated with more diverse uses of INJECT than it had been designed for – not just to discover new angles , but also to include new information directly into the article once the angle was established . Moreover , during the inter - views , some journalists agreed that it was difficult to know where inspiration came from : " Ideas can pop up every - where . Was it INJECT , or did I see it on Facebook ? " . In contrast , for 25 of the 64 articles , the log entries revealed that INJECT failed to retrieve information that the journal - ist deemed relevant ( e . g . “ Did not help , did not find what I was looking for ” ) , or only retrieved information already familiar to journalists ( e . g . “ Did not help me . Was looking for inspiration for a new title or angle , but did not think it was anything fitting ” ) . These latter responses highlighted technical challenges associated with retrieving information that is not only relevant but also novel to journalists . Given that the increase in article novelty ratings appeared to be associated with the use of INJECT to write some but not all articles , patterns of INJECT use were investigated . The totals of articles published with INJECT’s support varied by newspaper and by journalist , see Table 1 . In the newspaper that generated the most articles with this support , all 4 jour - nalists published articles . However , in the second newspa - per , 2 of the 4 journalists generated all but 1 published arti - cle , and in the third , all but 2 of the articles published . First newspaper Second newspaper Third newspaper 13 articles 9 articles 7 articles 12 articles 8 articles 4 articles 11 articles 1 article 2 articles 5 articles 0 articles 0 articles Total : 41 articles Total : 18 articles Total : 13 articles Table 1 . Totals of articles written with INJECT support that were published by each of the 4 journalists in turn in each of the 3 newspapers Interview responses revealed possible explanations for the - se variations . The 4 journalists in the first newspaper were all young , new to the newspaper , worked more autono - mously , and were open to using new technologies at work . They also supported each other to use the INJECT tool , and self - organized in the absence of formal structures : “ the leadership could have delegated tasks , and instructed the staff about who should be part of it ” . By contrast , the jour - nalists at the second newspaper were more experienced and varied – a specialist in desk news writing , a photojournalist , and 2 news journalists . During the evaluation the 2 news journalists continued to access and work with municipal documents from regular local sites to inform most of their work . The photojournalist spent less time in the newsroom , and demonstrated the obvious need for journalists to be present in the newsroom to use INJECT . By contrast , the 4 journalists at the third newspaper were also seasoned journalists , each with at least 10 years of journalism experience , and all with established approaches to writing articles . One reported : “ have worked here about the same length of time . The culture that was here when we came in has been upheld and recreated by us” . Willingness to use INJECT was low : " We seem to have certain stub - bornness against using INJECT and other tools like it . We don ' t learn to use new data programs voluntarily , and espe - cially not programs that don ' t work optimally when we start using it " . Moreover , the absence of INJECT use was asso - ciated with lower article novelty . The average expert ratings of the novelty of articles written with and without the tool’s support by the more experienced journalists in the third newspaper was the same , at 3 . 0 , whereas average expert ratings of the articles written by less experienced journalists at the first newspaper rose from 2 . 6 to 4 . 0 . Both an open - ness to change and a willingness to innovate appeared to influence INJECT’s use , and this use was associated with the generation of more novel articles . The journalists used INJECT to write certain types of arti - cle . Almost half ( 34 ) were about social issues and over an - other quarter ( 21 ) about culture issues . In contrast , the jour - nalists wrote few articles with INJECT’s support about politics ( 3 ) , crime ( 2 ) , sports ( 2 ) and economy ( 4 ) , even though the majority of articles written by the journalists during each month were not of these types . During inter - views , the journalists reported that INJECT was more effec - tive for writing research - based journalism such as features , portraits and other long form genres . One said : " For our everyday news we always have too many stories already . But during the magazine meetings we are required to come up with ideas from scratch , and ideally it should be some - thing we haven ' t written about before . So there we really need to be creative , and INJECT can be useful " . Another reported a need for INJECT 4 times a year , to write for each of the 4 magazines for the 4 seasons that required long - form feature stories with the careful building of angles . Moreo - ver , the third newspaper that used INJECT’s support to write the fewest published articles was also the newspaper that published the lowest proportion of feature stories in its editions . Although results revealed that INJECT use was associated with increases in the novelty of articles of certain types , the results revealed little evidence of increases in the productiv - ity of the journalists . Of the expert - rated 40 articles , the 20 written with INJECT contained more words than the 20 without it . An unpaired t - test revealed a significant differ - ence in the numbers of words written to describe an article with the support from INJECT ( Mdn = 652 , SD = 393 ) and without support from INJECT ( Mdn = 414 , SD = 211 ) condi - tions ; t = 2 . 08427 , p < 0 . 05 . However , according to log en - tries , the time that journalists reported to prepare each arti - cle varied from 0 to 200 minutes , and averaged just over 40 minutes , and the time to write each article varied from 5 to 420 minutes , and averaged was just over 85 minutes . The journalists did not perceive these times to be lower than required to prepare and write articles without INJECT sup - port . Neither did the interviews reveal any evidence of increased productivity . Indeed , some journalists reported a neutral or negative sense that use of the INJECT tool was a chore ra - ther than an opportunity . The journalists in the third news - paper reported that they could not become more efficient with tool designed to support their creative thinking : " The way our newspaper is run , INJECT is a tool that increases the time spent writing an article . Maybe we could get better stories if we cultivated just the right functions and drilled all journalists until they used it " . Another said : “ No , be - cause it takes time to use INJECT . It takes away time that we could have spent on writing the story ” . They contrasted INJECT with other types of digital tool such as “ template based news writing " that might make their work more effi - cient . However , the journalist in the second newspaper who did not use INJECT reported that if it had been integrated as the toolbar in the Adobe InCopy text editor , it might have been easier to remember to use . That said , some journalists reported that INJECT both re - placed Atext or other news aggregators and enhanced their access to the newspaper’s own archives . One reported : " I have used INJECT to check if others have written about the same topic , or about something that happens locally now . Although I don ' t necessarily feel creative , I can look at how they wrote or collected information , how they have illus - trated the story , and more . I could also have used the inter - nal archive , but sometimes INJECT gave me good alterna - tives from current news mixed with archive materials " . During the interviews one journalist identified another pos - sible role for INJECT : " Productivity is looking for the right things when you are out on an assignment , and not spend too much time on it . This relates to how well prepared you are " . On a related theme , other journalists reported creative activities that took place outside the newsroom , for exam - ple : " I wrote about drug addiction in Stord , and I hung out for a whole day in a billiard hall just to get on a speaking basis with people , and I remember I thought this was very creative " . These interviews revealed that the journalists reported that INJECT did not support important activities such as preparing for assignments or for creative thinking outside of the newsrooms . As a result of the original user - centred design process , INJECT had been introduced as a desktop tool and provided no specialist support for tasks outside of the newsroom , even though one version of INJECT was a responsive web application usable with mo - bile web browsers . These results revealed that opportunities to use INJECT capabilities outside of newsrooms had been missed . Furthermore , the interviews with the newspaper editors and managers revealed that none used INJECT during the eval - uation . This lack of use might have been perceived as a lack of leadership – a role filled instead the super - user journal - ists . In interviews , the journalists revealed that their use of INJECT led to new skills and competencies . It is possible this made it more difficult for editors to provide the leader - ship , training support and success conditions needed to ex - tend use of INJECT in the 3 newsrooms . The Evaluation Conclusions and Discussion Returning to the research questions , the results revealed that journalists in the newsrooms produced news articles that were : ( RQ1 ) more novel but not more valuable using the support from the INJECT tool , and : ( RQ2 ) not written more productively using this support . The more novel articles were more often feature rather than news articles that jour - nalists had more time to write . Responses during interviews ( RQ3 ) revealed that increased newsroom autonomy , a work culture more open to innovation and the presence of inno - vative journalists were associated with greater INJECT use . By contrast the management support to train journalists and set up success conditions at all 3 newspapers were reported to be lacking . The answer to RQ1 warranted more analysis . Although the articles were not rated as more valuable , all were still pub - lished in the 3 newspapers , which indicated that all had sufficient value for their purpose . One interpretation was that the articles written without the tool’s support also had value but had lower novelty , i . e . the articles were not crea - tive . By contrast , the articles written with the tool’s support had increased novelty but not increased value . Therefore , in a strict sense , these articles were more novel rather than creative , but still had sufficient value to publish . Trade - offs between outcome novelty and value have been reported during creative processes ( e . g . [ 19 ] ) . By contrast , the results from the evaluation revealed that journalists’ uses of the tool increased novelty and maintained value . Furthermore , the content analysis of the log entries provid - ed evidence that journalists used INJECT to discover ideas that were both more similar ( e . g . to add new sections to an existing article ) and dissimilar ( e . g . to discover new angles for an article yet to write ) to their original topics . Whilst discovering more dissimilar ideas is often associated with less productive idea generation [ 35 ] , the exploration of pos - sible similar ideas related to the original topic with the INJECT tool also did not appear to be more productive . Indeed , the increase in article novelty required more time from the journalists to write the articles , in spite of the au - tomated information retrieval algorithms . And the high vol - ume of journalist work needed to publish articles for regular deadlines offered little time to explore the tool . Therefore , further INJECT development appears to be needed to re - duce the tool’s burden on journalists , although the use of INJECT to replace news aggregators and access news ar - chives reveals one possible role – a more productive one - stop tool for accessing news information but for different purposes . The journalists’ uses of INJECT to discover new angles and information content to write feature articles were achieved without any explicit creativity training . Amabile’s compo - nential theory of creativity [ 2 ] argues that a person needs domain knowledge , motivation and creativity skills to gen - erate creative outcomes regularly , so the detected increase in article novelty without explicit training in creativity skills demonstrated INJECT’s potential . This finding was consid - ered important . Not only did the newspapers lack resources to allow journalists to take time off from frontline reporting , but also motivating journalists who had chosen to work in the creative industries to learn new creative skills was chal - lenging . Furthermore , the results revealed that creative thinking skills conflicted with journalist practices estab - lished during training to read newspapers , visit libraries and ask questions to discover new angles on stories – a social process that led to conversations with people rather than individual work with creative thinking techniques and tools . The journalists who were more open to technologies and changes in working practices made greater use of INJECT , and the newsroom most open to innovation used the tool to write the largest number of articles . Other journalists were reluctant to change their work practices in order to adopt and exploit a tool that sought to automate some elements of their professional work , a finding consistent with journalist resistant to change that conflicts with their professional values reported in [ 12 ] and a factor shown to impede digital innovation in newsrooms [ 42 ] . This resistance was more pronounced with more experienced journalists who had established work practices . Of course , threats to the validity of these evaluation results exist . The journalists wrote the articles with INJECT’s sup - port after gaining one extra year of professional experience . And the articles written with INJECT’s support were more recent , and hence new to the experts . Both of these factors might have influenced the ratings for novelty . Furthermore , not all of the experts had expertise in journalism . However , the log entries did provide self - reporting evidence of INJECT use to improve articles . Furthermore , the journal - ists might have chosen to write different types of article with and without INJECT , although an analysis not report - ed in the results revealed no difference between the totals of articles of different types written with and without the tool were found . Nonetheless , the results from the evaluation need careful interpretation . Repeat evaluations of INJECT in other newsrooms are planned . Other Factors Influencing the Evaluation Results In addition , two other factors identified during the research team’s installation and implementation of the tool in the 3 newspapers also appeared to influence the results . The first was important newsroom dependencies on third - party or - ganizations for technical support , which led to the failure to integrate the INJECT sidebar into the text editors used in the newsrooms . Although INJECT was available for the text editor sidebar in use in the local third - party organiza - tion that supported Adobe InCopy did not implement the sidebar in it . Innovations such as INJECT fell outside of the existing contract , and were not prioritized or supported . The technical and contractual dependencies that smaller news organizations have on external ones could be interpreted as an extended form of the increasingly institutionalized and distant relationships between journalists and technologists already observed in smaller Norwegian newspapers [ 22 ] . One consequence was that the technical requirements of the 3 newspapers conflicted with the usability preference ex - pressed by the journalists to work with just one tool . And because these needs were not met , some reported not using the web application version when writing stories . The other factor was the digital formatting of the news ar - chive belonging to the 3 newspapers , which also imposed constraints on the support that INJECT offered to the jour - nalists . Only 3 of the last 100 years of the 3 newspaper’s publications were accessible to index . Earlier print editions of the newspaper had only been scanned and stored as full PDF pages , which did not enable full INJECT indexing of individual articles . This failure of the newspapers to hold all of their archives in formats that enabled cost - effective in - dexing limited INJECT’s access to and use of the archives , and conflicted with the newspapers’ expectations . EVOLVING THE INJECT TOOL AND ITS USE The evaluation revealed that INJECT tool use was associat - ed with an increase in novelty of articles written by journal - ists who used it . In hindsight , this result was perhaps sur - prising given the many barriers to the tool’s uptake and use that were uncovered . Therefore , to increase the likelihood of future successful INJECT uptake and use , new tool fea - tures will be added to encourage journalists to use INJECT to discover content to include in articles . An example of these features is one - click automated referencing of article content . Future versions will also reposition INJECT as a one - stop shop for news information , differentiate between information use to discover new angles on new stories and add to existing stories based on one of these angles . Local news archives will be used more to support this second role . The web application version of INJECT will be extended with new sidebar features such as topic extraction from text editor content . Other features that are planned include au - tomated reminders to journalists to use INJECT during cer - tain tasks , and new algorithms to generate candidate angles on future stories before journalists start to write them , based on news event schedules published by media businesses and calendars of local events . The responsive web application version will also be extended to support mobile work out - side of newsrooms . Furthermore , some journalists reported using the INJECT tool to prepare angles and questions for offsite interviews , so the new version will be extended with an interactive feature with which to generate questions with which to support preparation for interviews based on varia - tions of the INJECT creativity sparks . WIDER IMPLICATIONS FOR DIGITAL CREATVITY SUPPORT IN JOURNALISM The reported research demonstrated how a new digital crea - tivity tool supported journalists to discover new angles and content which to write feature articles . Articles written with the support were rated as more novel than other articles written without the support . The tool also has the potential to be a one - stop shop for news information . However , the tool’s support for writing feature articles ex - posed its lack of support for hard news articles . News re - porting is the main purpose of most news organizations . INJECT’s lack of support for it revealed that , in its current form , the tool contributed little to overcoming the journal - ism crisis resulting from digitalization of news production [ 13 , 39 ] . One implication is that supporting journalists to think creatively and discover new angles will require more intervention into the work of journalists , to demonstrate that use of creativity tools can maintain their work autonomy and need not disrupt their professional values [ 15 ] . Indeed , the results revealed that the use of INJECT some - times decreased journalist productivity . The evaluated de - sign did not provide journalists with the simultaneous crea - tivity and productivity gains obtained by professional users in domains such as manufacturing [ 30 ] . Unlike INJECT , this other tool automatically generated new creative content that the users could adapt more quickly than generate and write themselves . Therefore , one more ambitious direction is to integrate INJECT’s digital support into tools for tem - plate news writing which frame the numbers and locations of fixed paragraphs with word lengths , to generate new con - tent of the required length and form that journalists can adapt rather than write themselves . However , although sim - ilar to automating parts of the reporting process [ 10 ] , such interventions are likely to be resisted by journalists [ 42 ] , and raise legitimate concerns about journalist deskilling and barriers to autonomous working [ 32 ] . The evaluation also identified new opportunities to enhance journalist skills . Digital innovations often require journal - ists to acquire new skills . Data journalists , for example , are now expected to have programming , data analysis and visu - alization skills [ 7 ] . During training to use the INJECT tool , few of the journalists reported knowledge and / or experience with any structured creative thinking techniques , even though they worked in the creative industries [ 9 ] . Creative thinking skills are essential to produce creative outputs reg - ularly [ 2 ] . If journalists will require these skills to write novel articles based on new angles as part of their regular work , then journalist education and training might need to change . Super - user journalists as creativity facilitators in newsrooms open to innovation can support more creative thinking . Other forms of tool can support this creative facil - itation , for example to connect less and more experienced colleagues for creative work [ 26 ] and support collaborative idea generation [ 3 ] , especially in specialist areas such as science journalism [ 41 ] . Indeed , journalism can be framed using creativity theories . It is the search for and critical analysis of information [ 34 ] , so information processing theories of creativity that de - scribe it as systematic search for information leading to the idea generation ( e . g . [ 36 ] ) can be used to describe journal - ism search and analysis activities , and uncover opportuni - ties for creativity support . Other theories that describe crea - tive processes as social ones , in which people collect , relate , generate and donate knowledge in repositories [ 38 ] can inform new uses of collaborative creativity based on news archives in newsrooms . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The research reported in this paper is supported by the EU funded H2020 723328 INJECT innovation action . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Sara F . Alaou , Thecia Schlphorst , Shannon Cuykendall , Kristin Carlson , Karen Studd and Karen Bradley . 2015 . Strategies for Embodied Design : The Value and Challenges of Observing Movement . In Proceedings of the ACM Con - ference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’15 ) , 121 - 130 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757238 [ 2 ] Teresa M . Amabile and Michael G . Pratt . 2016 . The Dynam - ic Componential Model of Creativity and Innovation in Or - ganizations : Making Progress , Making Meaning . Research in Organizational Behavior 36 : 157 – 183 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . riob . 2016 . 10 . 001 [ 3 ] Salvatore Andolina , Khalil Klouche , Diogo Cabral , Tuukka Ruotsalo and Giulio Jacucci . 2015 . Inspiration Wall : Sup - porting Idea Generation Through Automatic Information Exploration . Proceedings of 10 th ACM Conference on Crea - tivity and Cognition , ACM Press , 103 - 106 . doi 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757252 [ 4 ] Savatore Andolina , Hendrik Schneider , Joel Chan , Khalil Klouche , Giulio , Jaccuci and Steven Dow . 2017 . Crowd - board : Augmenting In - Person Idea Generation with Real - Time Crowds . Proceedings 11th ACM Creativity and Cogni - tion , ACM Press , 106 - 118 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3059454 . 3059477 [ 5 ] Tom Bartindale , Elizabeth Valentine , Maxine Glancy , David Kirk , Peter Wright and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Facilitating TV Production Using StoryCrate . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’13 ) , 193 - 202 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466628 [ 6 ] Hilary Bok . 2003 , Baron de Montesquieu , Charles - Louis de Secondat . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . [ 7 ] Peter Bradshaw and Liisa Rohumaa . 2013 . The Online Jour - nalism Handbook : Skills to Survive and Thrive in the Digital Age . Routledge , Abingdon Oxford . [ 8 ] Meredith Broussard . 2015 . Artificial Intelligence for Inves - tigative Reporting . Digital Journalism 3 ( 6 ) ; 814 – 831 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 21670811 . 2014 . 985497 [ 9 ] Lynette Sheridan Burns and Benjamin J . Matthews . 2017 . “Post - Industrial” Journalism as a Creative Industry . Interna - tional Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering 11 ( 6 ) : 1575 - 1583 . [ 10 ] Matt Carlson . 2015 . The robotic reporter : Automated jour - nalism and the redefinition of labor , compositional forms , and journalistic authority . Digital journalism 3 ( 3 ) : 416 - 431 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 21670811 . 2014 . 976412 [ 11 ] Joel Chan , Pao Siangiulue , Denisa McDonald , Ruixue Liu , Reza Moradinezhad , Safa Aman , Erin Solovey , Krzysztof Gajos and Steven Dow . 2017 . Semantically Far Inspirations Considered Harmful ? Accounting for Cognitive States in Collaborative Ideation . Proceedings 11th ACM Creativity & Cognition , ACM Press , 93 - 105 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3059454 . 3059455 [ 12 ] Sádaba Charo , and Ramón Salaverría . 2016 . La innovación y los cibermedios : los Labs En C . Sádaba , JA García Aviles y MP Martínez - Costa ( Eds . ) , Innovación y desarrollo de los cibermedios en Españ a : 41 - 47 . doi : 10 . 3145 / epi . 2015 . jul . 06 [ 13 ] Andrew Currah . 2009 . What’s Happening To Our News ? Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism , Oxford . [ 14 ] David Díez , Sara Tena , Rosa Romero - Gomez , Paloma Díaz and Ignacio Aedo . 2014 . Sharing your View : A Distributed User Interface Approach for Reviewing Emergency Plans . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies ( 72 : 1 ) . 126 - 139 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2013 . 04 . 008 [ 15 ] Brian Ekdale , Jane B Singer , Melissa Tully and Shawn Harmsen . 2015 . Making Change : Diffusion of Technologi - cal , Relational , and Cultural Innovation in the Newsroom . Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly 92 , 4 : 938 - 958 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1077699015596337 [ 16 ] Andrew Garbett , Rob Comber , Paul Egglestone , Maxine Glancy and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . Finding " real people " : trust and diversity in the interface between professional and citizen journalists , In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 14 ) , 3015 - 3024 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557114 [ 17 ] Astrid Gynnild . 2014 . Journalism innovation leads to inno - vation journalism : The impact of computational exploration on changing mindsets . Journalism 15 , 6 : 713 – 730 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1464884913486393 [ 18 ] Michaela Honauer and Eva Hornecker . 2015 . Challenges for Creating and Staging Interactive Costumes for the Theatre Stage . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’15 ) , 13 - 22 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757242 [ 19 ] Bianca Hollis and Neil Maiden . 2013 . Extending Agile Pro - cesses with Creativity Techniques . IEEE Software 30 ( 5 ) ; 78 - 84 . doi : 10 . 1109 / MS . 2012 . 171 [ 20 ] Gaoping Huang and Alexander Quinn . 2017 . BlueSky : Crowd - Powered Uniform Sampling of Idea Spaces . Pro - ceedings 11th ACM Creativity and Cognition . ACM Press . 119 - 130 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3059454 . 3059481 [ 21 ] Francesco Iacobelli , Larry Birnbaum , and Kristian J Ham - mond . 2010 . Tell me more , not just " more of the same " . In Proceeding Intelligence User Interfaces ( IUI ) ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press : 81 - 90 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1719970 . 1719982 [ 22 ] Joakim Karlsen and Eirik Stavelin . 2014 . Computational Journalism in Norwegian Newsrooms . Journalism Practice 8 ( 1 ) ; 34 - 48 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 17512786 . 2013 . 813190 [ 23 ] Andruid Kerne , Eunyee Koh , Steven M . Smith , Andrew Webb and Blake Dworaczyk . 2008 . combinFormation : Mixed - Initiative Composition of Image and Text Surrogates Promotes Information Discovery . ACM Transactions on In - formation Systems 27 , 1 : 1 - 45 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1416950 . 1416955 [ 24 ] Soo Hee Lee , Marios Samdanis and Sofia Gkiousou . 2014 . Hybridizing Food Cultures in Computer - Mediated Environ - ments : Creativity and Improvisation in Greek Food Blogs . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 72 ( 2 ) . 224 - 238 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2013 . 08 . 007 [ 25 ] Raymond Liaw , Ari Zilnik , Mark Baldwin and Stephanie Butler S . 2013 . Maater : crowdsourcing to improve online journalism . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 13 ) , 2549 - 2554 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468828 [ 26 ] Daniel R . Lewis , Emily Harburg , Elizabeth Gerber and Mat - thew Easterday . 2015 . Building Support Tools to Connect Novice Designers to Professional Coaches . Proceedings of 10 th ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition , ACM Press , 43 - 52 . doi 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757248 [ 27 ] Marcel Machill and Markus Beiler . 2009 . The Importance of the Internet for Journalist Research . Journalism Studies 10 ( 2 ) , 178 - 203 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 14616700802337768 [ 28 ] Mary - Lou Maher and Douglas Fisher . 2011 . Using AI to Evaluate Creative Designs . In Proceedings 2nd Internation - al Conference on Design Creativity Volume 1 : 45 - 54 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 10 - 3521 - 0 _ 51 [ 29 ] Neil Maiden , Konstantinos Zachos , James Lockerbie , George Brock and Christopher Traver . 2016 . Developing and Evaluating Digital Creativity Support in Google Docs for Journalists . In Proceedings of the 30 th International Brit - ish Human Computer Interaction Conference ( HCI’16 ) , Ar - ticle No . 23 . doi : 10 . 14236 / ewic / HCI2016 . 23 [ 30 ] Neil Maiden , Konstantinos Zachos , James Lockerbie , Sergio Levis , Kasia Camargo , Shaun Hoddy , Gianluca Allemandi . 2017 . Evaluating Digital Creativity Support To Improve Health - and - Safety in a Manufacturing Plant . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 17 ) , 7005 - 7014 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025712 [ 31 ] Neil Maiden , George Brock , Konstantinos Zachos , Amanda Brown , Lars Nyre , Dimitris Apostolou and Jeremy Evans . 2018 , Making the News : Digital Creativity Support for Journalists . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 18 ) , Paper No 475 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174049 [ 32 ] Tony Harcup and Deidre O’Neill . 2017 . What is news ? News values revisited ( again ) . Journalism Studies 18 ( 12 ) . 1470 - 1488 . doi : 0 . 1080 / 1461670X . 2016 . 1150193 [ 33 ] Mills , J . and Andrea Wagemans . 2018 . Building laborato - ries , innovating the future : How journalism is catalyzing its future processes , products and people through media labs . Proceedings of ISMI2018 , Oslo August 2018 . [ 34 ] Brian McNair . 1998 . The Sociology of Journalism . London : Arnold . [ 35 ] Bernard A . Nijstad and Wolfgang Stroebe . 2006 . How the group affects the mind : a cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and Social Psychology Review 10 ( 3 ) . 186 – 213 . [ 36 ] Paul Plsek , 1997 . Creativity , Innovation and Quality . ASQ Quality Press , Wisconsin [ 37 ] Holger Schnädelbach , Xu Sun , Genovefa Kefalidou , Tim Coughlan , Rupert Meese , James Norris and Derek Mcauley . 2016 . Creativity Greenhouse : At - a - Distance Collaboration and Competition over Research Funding . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies ( 87 ) . 1 - 19 . doi 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2015 . 10 . 006 [ 38 ] Ben Schneiderman . 2007 . Creativity Support Tools – Accel - erating Discovery and Innovation , Communications of the ACM December 2007 , 20 - 29 . doi 10 . 1145 / 1323688 . 1323689 [ 39 ] Sharing Liberally . Retrieved December 28 , 2017 , from http : / / bostonreview . net / BR35 . 4 / morozov . php [ 40 ] Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Krzsztof Z . Gajos and Stephen P . Dow . 2015 . Providing Timely Examples Improves the Quantity and Quality of Generated Ideas . Proceedings of 10 th ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition , ACM Press , 83 - 92 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757230 [ 41 ] C . Estelle Smith , XinyiWang , Raghav Pavan Karumur and Haiyi Zhu . 2018 . [ Un ] breaking News : Design Opportunities for Enhancing Collaboration in Scientific Media Production , In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 18 ) , Paper No 381 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173955 [ 42 ] Steen Steensen . 2009 . What ' s stopping them ? Towards a grounded theory of innovation in online journalism . Jour - nalism studies 10 ( 6 ) : 821 - 836 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 1461670090297508