What is a robot ? An artistic approach to understand children’s imaginaries about robots Laura Malinverni Design and Visual Arts Department , University of Barcelona Barcelona , Spain malinverni . laura @ gmail . com Cristina Valero CosiCosa Association , Barcelona , Spain crisvalero . cvh @ gmail . com ABSTRACT The article describes an ideographic study conducted with 10 to 11 years old students to investigate their perceptions , ideas and imaginaries about robots . Its objective is to use this understanding to expand the ways of thinking the pedagogy of educational robotics . The study employed an art - based research approach and focused on involving students in the process of producing a fictional audiovisual narrative about robots . We analyzed their creative process and the resulting video through a multimodal approach . This analysis allowed identifying the different imaginaries , discourses and ideas that the participants have around the concept of " robot " . These axes are used as cornerstones to begin a reflexive process to problematize and enable new perspectives to the pedagogy of educational robotics . Author Keywords Educational robotics , robots , imaginaries , art - based research , qualitative analysis , pedagogy CSS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Empirical studies in HCI INTRODUCTION Educational Robotics ( ER ) has become each time more relevant in the educational experiences of children and young people . This trend led to a growing number of studies investigating either the educational impact of robotics , as well as resources and strategies to engage children in it [ 6 , 12 , 13 ] . Within this latter line , some researchers stressed the need for diverging approaches , capable of providing diversified entry paths into ER and make it appealing to a broader population [ 3 , 50 ] . Building on this concern , our study forms part of a larger research project , whose ultimate goal is to enable different perspectives from which to look at ER . As a first step to address this challenge , however , we did not focus on proposing new strategies , methods or tools . Instead , we gave a step back to investigate children’s views about robots in order to shape projects that can build a dialogue with their imaginaries . Starting from this perspective , we adopted a child - centered research approach [ 24 ] to investigate children’s perceptions , ideas and imaginaries about robots . Specifically , following the model of Art - based research [ 30 ] , we carried out an ideographic study , where we involved 10 to 11 years old students in the production of an audiovisual narrative about robots . To describe this research , the article is structured in three main parts . In the first part , we will quickly overview dominant and emergent models in ER for children and teenagers . Subsequently , we will present our perspective to child - centered research and a review of studies on children’s attitudes and perceptions towards robots . In the second part , we will describe the study , detailing its methodological approach and its results . These findings will be finally discussed and used as cornerstones to reflect on the pedagogy of robotics and to begin delineating questions and paths for a future research agenda in ER . TOWARD MULTIPLE PATHWAYS INTO EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS In the last decades , ER , understood as “ the use of robotics kits , programming software and computer as hands - on learning tools ” [ 27 ] , has gained increasing weight in formal and non - formal education [ 3 ] . As Anwar et al . [ 6 ] pointed out , nowadays , most schools , after - school initiatives , summer camps , makerspaces , and museums have integrated educational robots into their programs . This tendency is creating a new educational landscape that requires research efforts for better understanding the limits , potentials and controversies of these tools . Following this need , an increasing number of studies investigated the impact of ER on academic and social skills of young learners [ 6 ] . This knowledge is well summarized in the systematic reviews proposed by Benitti [ 13 ] , Bascou et al . [ 12 ] and Anwar et al . [ 6 ] . Benitti’s review [ 13 ] explores the educational potential of robotics in schools and points out Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . IDC ' 20 , June 21 – 24 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7981 - 6 / 20 / 06 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392063 . 3394415 that most research in this area addresses the learning of STEM ( Science , Technology , Engineering , Mathematics ) or the development of skills such as teamwork and problem - solving . Bascou et al . [ 12 ] and Anwar et al . [ 6 ] widen the scope of this analysis . Besides reviewing research aimed at enhancing students’ interest and understanding of STEM - related concepts , they also include a revision of literature that addresses strategies to diversify the approaches used to teach robotics . This latter research line responds to the criticisms about the lack of epistemological pluralism in computing and the resulting exclusivity of the field [ 57 ] . As Alimisis [ 2 ] and Rusk [ 50 ] pointed out , often , the way in which robotics is introduced in educational settings is unnecessarily narrow . As a consequence , children with diverse cultures , interests and learning styles may end up disengaged from the task and uninterested in the domain . Hence , as Rusk [ 50 ] suggests , it is necessary to propose other approaches and entry paths into robotics to make children understand that doing robotics does not only means to make cars go faster but involves a much wider range of creative possibilities . Building on these premises , several researchers explored strategies and tools to offer new perspectives to ER and broaden its audience and target groups . Meaningful examples of this research can be found in the works of [ 21 , 38 , 45 , 47 , 50 , 51 , 56 ] . Rusk et al . [ 50 ] , for instance , suggest four strategies for engaging a broader range of learners in robotics : projects focused on themes instead than on challenges ; projects combining art and engineering ; projects encouraging storytelling ; organizing exhibitions , rather than competitions . Embracing these suggestions , Lammer et al . [ 38 ] proposed a pedagogical structure to approach ER from a holistic and non - task deterministic perspective . Specifically , they engaged children in the creative process of designing robots that respond to real world problems and to their own interests . On the other hand , several projects explore the possibilities of merging arts and robotics . For instance , Sullivan & Bers [ 56 ] combine robotics , music , dance and culture in the project ‘‘Dances from Around the World’’ with preschool children . Similarly , Cavallo et al . [ 21 ] with the project RoBallet , work with children to combine dance and robotics . Qi et al . [ 47 ] , instead , combine circuitry , paper - craft and painting to explore the diversity of materials for robotics . Oliveira [ 45 ] and Alessandri & Paciaroni [ 1 ] , instead , combine storytelling and robotics . Specifically , they propose children to use robots to create or reproduce fictional narratives . Finally , from a slightly different viewpoint , Searle et al . [ 51 ] and Kafai et al . [ 34 ] explore different strategies and materials to help a diversified population of youth to get involved in computational projects . Searle et al . [ 51 ] combine the analysis of students’ perceptions about computation with a bricoleur - friendly approach to computing using e - textile . Similarly , Kafai et al . [ 34 ] also use e - textile and propose the concept of ethnocomputing to increase access and participation of indigenous communities in computer science . These projects and proposals , by integrating robotics “with other forms of social , cultural and creativity based motivations ” [ 12 ] offer broader and refreshing perspectives to ER . They , hence enable different entry paths into robotics and new viewpoints from which to look at its use in educational activities . This quest is particularly relevant for our study since our goal is enabling different perspectives to think and teach robotics for children . To this end , we propose to adopt a child - centered approach aimed at understanding children’s views about robots in order to shape projects that can build a dialogue with their imaginaries . A CHILD - CENTERED APPROACH TO RESEARCH EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS The notion of child - centeredness in research started to take hold during the ‘80 and ’90 by recognizing children as active participants , capable of communicating information about their own lives and , thus , providing competent voices and valid sources of data [ 24 ] . As a research approach , it tries to move away from the dominant adult - centric perspective on child experiences to , instead , focus on children’s own ways of experiencing and making meaning [ 23 ] . As a methodological approach , it emphasizes on children’s concerns and ideas as experienced by the young and seeks for appropriate research methods to dialogue with children . This approach has become a well - established tenant in IDC community . Under the claim that children are the experts in their own experience [ 26 ] , a broad range of initiatives explored strategies to listen to children’s voices in research and involve them either as co - designers [ 26 , 28 , 48 ] , co - researchers [ 53 ] or as design protagonists [ 31 ] . Within the field of ER , the idea of child - centered took different shapes . On one hand , projects based on constructivist [ 4 ] or on constructionism [ 2 ] adopt an educational perspective to child - centeredness [ 22 ] , i . e . they stress the child’s ability to construct knowledge and focus on children’s needs and interests . This viewpoint materializes itself in involving children in creating projects that personally meaningful for them since they arise and are driven by their interests and curiosity [ 54 ] . Similarly , projects such as the ones described by Searle et al . [ 51 ] and Kafai et al . [ 34 ] bring further this idea and shape their projects around well - structured research on participants’ culture and interests . On the other hand , some projects [ 5 , 36 ] adopt a design perspective to child - centeredness and involve children as co - designers in designing robots or programmable construction kits through participatory design approaches . Within this context , our study builds on a research perspective to child - centeredness , i . e . we focus on investigate with children their understanding and ways of making meaning about robots in order to get insights for enabling different perspectives to ER . CHILDREN’S PERCEPTIONS AND IMAGINARIES ABOUT ROBOTS Due to the growing interest in robotics , an increasing number of studies investigated how people perceive robots to draw guidelines for designing robots that operate in everyday life . Examples of these studies can be found in the works of Dautenhahn et al . [ 25 ] , Kato et al . [ 35 ] , Bartneck et al . [ 11 ] , Nomura et al . [ 44 ] , which analyze the perceptions and attitudes of the adult population towards robots . Their studies mainly aim at guiding the design of social robots and their results show that participants have a positive perception of robots [ 25 ] and the absence of attitudinal differences between different countries [ 11 , 35 ] . In a similar way , different studies explored children’s attitudes and opinions towards robotics and robots [ 9 , 14 , 16 , 20 , 40 , 46 , 60 ] . Specifically , the studies presented by Bumby et al . [ 20 ] and Beran et al . [ 14 ] analyze children’s attitudes towards robots from a general point of view . Instead , Bartlett et al . [ 9 ] , Woods et al . [ 60 ] and Blancas et al . [ 16 ] focus on investigating the impact of different physical , morphological and functional characteristics of robot design ( e . g . , anthropomorphism ) on the attitudes of infants towards them . Liu [ 40 ] , instead , investigates the perceptions of adolescents towards learning robotics . Finally , Precel et al . [ 46 ] analyze children’s stances toward robots in the process of building them . In order to address these objectives , these studies use different methodological approaches . Liu [ 40 ] and Woods et al . [ 60 ] use multiple response questionnaires . Beran et al . [ 14 ] employ interviews with open - ended questions . Bartlett et al . [ 9 ] adopt an approach based on behavior’s observation and combine the analysis of participants’ interactions with a robot and interviews . Blancas et al . [ 16 ] combine the use of drawings with questionnaires . Bumby et al . [ 20 ] , instead , asks infants to make drawings and small narrative descriptions of robots . Finally , Precel et al . [ 46 ] analyze the language employed by children while programming robots’ behaviors . From a general perspective , the results of these studies report positive attitudes of young people towards robots and toward the learning of robotics [ 40 ] . Within this , it is interesting to underline findings related to the physical and functional characteristics of robots and how these determine different types of conceptualizations about their capabilities and functions . In particular , as reported by Woods et al . [ 60 ] and by Bartlett et al . [ 9 ] , children tend to attribute abilities to feel emotions , understand humans and have feelings to robots that have humanoid or animal characteristics . On the contrary , robots that look like machines are perceived as incapable of having emotions and understanding humans . In this context , it is particularly relevant to mention the results derived from the observational studies [ 14 ] and from the creation of representations by infants . On the one hand , as described by Beran et al . [ 14 ] the children who interacted with the robot in their study , reported a vision of the robot as " alive " and capable of having a series of abilities such as thinking , feeling and acting . This tendency towards anthropomorphizing robots and projecting on them human’s characteristics and abilities are also reflected in the studies reported by Bumby et al . [ 20 ] and Blancas et al . [ 16 ] . In the first two cases , the researchers report that the children’s drawings tended to anthropomorphize the robots , combining the use of human characteristics with geometric elements . At the same time , especially boys tended to represent robots with weapons equipment . This gender - related variable is also analyzed by Bumby et al . [ 20 ] and by Blancas et al . [ 16 ] . Bumby et al . [ 20 ] report that the participants mainly represented robots with male connotations . Blancas et al . [ 16 ] , instead , describe how the represented robots did not have gendered characteristics . However , the authors stress that girls tended to give more weight in their drawings to clothing while boys to war - related aspects . These studies delineate a certain coherence in the imaginaries of young people around robots . At the same time , the partial uniformity of the employed methods and techniques , suggest the possibility of using other methodological approaches in order to further deepen these imaginaries and make visible other nuances of meaning . Finally , it is relevant to note that most of these studies focus on understanding youth imaginaries in order to design social robots that interact with children . However , of these studies apply this knowledge to the field of ER . THE STUDY In order to deepen on the children’s perceptions and imaginaries around robots , we carried out an ideographic study with a small group of 8 primary school students . The study aimed at better understanding children’s imaginaries about robots in order to derive insights to enable different perspectives to ER . Specifically , the study aimed at answering the following research questions : What are the participants’ imaginaries about what a robot looks like , what it does and what it can do ? How do children characterize robots’ abilities and roles ? How can this analysis inform the design of new pedagogical strategies in the field of educational robotics ? The methodological approach To carry out this study , we applied a methodological model informed by Art - Based research [ 30 ] , Reggio - Emilia’s approach for documenting learning processes [ 58 ] and multimodal analysis [ 32 , 37 ] . Specifically , these frameworks informed the process of involving children in the creation of a fictional audiovisual narrative about robots and in the data collection and analysis of their productions and creative processes . Art - based research informed the design of the workshop and the strategies to elicit children’s understanding about robots . The Reggio - Emilia’s approach for documenting learning processes [ 58 ] informed the strategies for data collection . Finally , multimodal analysis [ 32 , 37 ] was employed to analyze the collected data . The workshop : An Art - Based Research approach The study was carried out through the realization of a workshop with primary school children . The workshop had a twofold objective . On one hand , its primary goal is to investigate the children’s perceptions around robots . On the other , it aims at involving students in the realization of an audiovisual narrative about robots . The workshop was informed by concepts derived from Art - Based Research ( ABR ) [ 8 , 30 ] . ABR is a qualitative approach characterized by the use of artistic techniques as approaches to find other ways of viewing and understanding the meaning of a phenomenon [ 30 ] . In the context of our study , this approach offered both an epistemological standpoint as well as a methodological instrument . From an epistemological perspective , we framed our research following the idea of Barone and Eisner [ 8 ] who considered that ABR’s goal is not a quest for certainty but , instead , an enhancement of perspectives . It provided us with a conceptual framework that allowed exploring different ways of producing knowledge , hence accessing nuances of meanings that may not be visible through other types of research [ 8 ] . Furthermore , from a methodological perspective , we considered art - based techniques as particularly suitable to work with children since they facilitate children’s engagement and allow placing their voices at the centre of the research process [ 7 ] . These concepts , applied to our research , motivated us in using audiovisual production with children as a tool to explore different ways of producing knowledge , hence accessing nuances of meanings that may not be visible through other types of research . Following these ideas , in the workshop , we employed different artistic techniques to grasp different nuances of children’s understandings around robots and to guide them in the production of the audiovisual narrative . Specifically , we used the following techniques : drawing robotic characters , writing a collaborative story , performing an improvisation of the story , building elements of the stage and the characters , writing a literary script and recording the final video . The workshop was carried out in a Primary school located in Barcelona ( Spain ) . The school covers the stages of Infant and Primary education . Due to the social and economic characteristics of the neighborhood in which it is located , the school is considered as a high complexity school 1 . The workshop had a duration of 12 sessions . Each session lasted 1 hour , was carried out in extracurricular hours and counted 1 High complexity schools are identified by the local government as schools with the following features : low level of instruction of parents or guardians ; significant number of parents or guardians of students receiving minimum income salary ; high percentage of unemployed parents or guardians ; high with the participation of eight 10 - 11 years old students ( 6 girls ; 2 boys ) . The different sessions were structured as reported in Table 1 . Participants voluntarily signed up for the workshop based on a call previously made at the school in collaboration with the parents’ association and the management team . Both parents and children agreed to participate in the study by signing an informed consent . In all the sessions , the first author was the only facilitator and researcher . The facilitator has a background in Art & Design , Art Therapy , and HCI . She is experienced in carrying out workshops with children , as well as , in teaching audiovisual production ( both with children and with university students ) . Content 1 Introduction and definition of robotic characters : In this session , we introduced the project to the children by explaining them that we will co - create a fictional narrative about robots and that we were interested in understanding their ideas about robots . Subsequently , children were invited to create a drawing and short description of a robot on a sheet . 2 Collaborative story : In this session , the participants were instructed to develop a story with all the characters created in the previous session . Participants carried out their work autonomously on a shared table under the supervision of the facilitator . 3 - 4 Introduction to Mbot robots : In these sessions , children were introduced to the Mbot robot and key concepts of programming . Specifically , we introduced children to the concepts of sequence , iteration , sensors and actuators . Subsequently , children carried out three short exercises aimed at controlling the lighting effects of the Mbot , programming sound effects and controlling its displacements using the computer keyboard . 5 Improvisation and pre - production : In this session , children improvised their story using the characters as puppets . Subsequently , they were accompanied in defining a calendar of the different tasks to be performed and assigning these tasks to different members of the team . 6 - 7 Construction of the characters and of the elements of the stage : In these sessions , the participants build the three - dimensional models of the characters and the elements of the stage with recycling materials . 8 - 9 Writing of the literary script : In the first session , the facilitator introduced some key ideas about writing literary scripts . Successively , the participants were invited to write the script . percentage of students with special educational needs , and high percentage of newcomers . Participants performed their work autonomously under the supervision of the facilitator . 10 - 12 Video recording : In these sessions , the participants recorded the video . Children used a tablet for the recording , following the scenes detailed in the script . In each scene , a different participant was in charge of recording . After each recording , a first viewing was made to decide whether to repeat the shooting or not . Final scenes were selected with the participants for editing . The facilitator edited the final video due to lack of time . Table 1 . Summary of the workshop sessions Data collection : The Reggio Emilia’s technique The method used for data collection focused on two aspects : the documentation of children’s creative processes and the documentation of children’s productions . To document children’s creative process , we based our approach on Reggio Emilia’s technique to document learning processes . This technique considers pedagogical documentation as “traces” of learning that the teacher carries out to research the movement of children’s understanding [ 58 ] . To this end , it employs multiple languages and tools ( e . g . writing , pictures , etc . ) to collect pieces of evidence of the unfolding processes . Following this model , during each session , the first author was taking pictures of relevant moments . Subsequently , just after each session , she was taking notes on a diary , briefly describing the unfolding of the session and documenting the behavior of the children . The notes were later transcribed and complemented with related reflections and associated pictures . These notes were finally shared and discussed with the other researcher involved in the project to offer a context and a better understanding for the analysis of the participants ' productions and creative processes . Finally , children’s productions were also documented through pictures after the ending of the session . This approach provided us with tools to document their productions and creative processes in a way that was not intrusive for the children nor disruptive for the unfolding of the workshop . Data analysis : A multimodal approach Data analysis was informed by a multimodal approach [ 32 , 37 , 42 , 43 ] . Multimodality is an interdisciplinary approach , derived from socio - semiotics and aimed at analyzing communication and situated interaction from a perspective that goes beyond the limit of verbal language and encompasses the different resources that people use to construct meaning [ 32 ] . At a methodological level , multimodal analysis provides “concepts , methods and a framework for the collection and analysis of visual , aural , embodied and spatial aspects of interaction and environments” [ 32 ] . It , hence offered us a legitimizing model to encompass , analyze and understand the different resources that children use to construct meaning . For the purpose of our research , we followed the models proposed by Van Mechelen et al . [ 43 ] and Malinverni et al . [ 42 ] , i . e . we adopted a multimodal perspective to analyze the children’s productions and derive the possible values , concepts and ideas embedded in them . In particular , we focused on analyzing the following productions : the drawings of the robots and their descriptions , the collaborative story , the prototypes of the robots and the final video . These productions were analyzed by paying particular attention to : ( 1 ) the development of robotic characters through different media and ( 2 ) the narrative structure . This analysis was based on two main concepts derived from multimodal analysis : ( 1 ) the notion of motivated sign [ 37 ] and ( 2 ) the concept of transmodal translation [ 42 ] . The notion of motivated sign proposes the idea that , when someone produces a sign , this person is projecting their individual interests in the world through their choices among the available resources [ 37 ] . As a consequence , the constitution of a sign reveals the interests of the sign - maker [ 37 ] . This idea has direct implications in the context of our study since it suggests that the analysis of the tangible and intangible resources ( e . g . materials , cultural references , etc . ) used by children can reveal their interests , values and imaginaries about robots . The concept of transmodal translation [ 42 ] consider that the process of translating the same idea into different modes ( e . g . drawing , writing , video , etc . ) allows making visible different nuances and layers of meaning around that idea . This concept , in our study , is applied as an analytical lens to follow the development of certain ideas throughout the creative process of the children ( e . g . moving from drawing the character to build a prototype of it and to use it as a puppet in the realization of the video ) . RESULTS A total of 6 students participated in the first session of the workshop ( 3 boys , 3 girls ) . In this first session , the facilitator gave a general introduction about the idea of collaboratively creating an audiovisual narrative about robots . Children showed enthusiasm and interest in the idea . Subsequently , following the instructions of the facilitator , the children began to design their own robots and create a short description of each of them . In the first session , a total of 6 characters were created : “Swift the spider” , “TX . 0” , “Paula” , “Chicbot” , “the Vodoo Witch” and “the Police Robot No . 19” ( Figure 1 ) . In the second session , two more students joined the workshop and all children started to work together to create a collaborative story with their robots as characters ( Table 2 ) . Successively , the characters were used as models for the realization of three - dimensional prototypes for the video in sessions 6 and 7 ( Figure 2 ) . All the created characters were modelled using craft materials , except for the Police Robot No . 19 since the child who created it did not assisted to these sessions . Finally , the children wrote a literary script and shoot the video . Figure 1 . The drawings ( from left to right ) : Swift the spider , TX . 0 , Paula , Chicbot , the Vodoo Witch and the Police Robot The collaborative story Paula lives happily with her family in their planet . TX . 0 with his army invades the planet and they take Paula to jail in Spain separating her from her family . Paula wants to return to her planet . In jail , she meets Chicbot , who comes from the future to help her . Chicbot tells Paula that she has to look for the Vodoo Witch to get help . Chicbot and Paula manage to escape from prison and to find the witch . The witch has a pot where she sees that the only way to defeat TX . 0 is to find Swift the spider . Then , with the Chicbot’s teletransportation machine they go where Swift the spider is , but he is sleeping . The witch makes a potion that wakes up the Spider . The Spider trains everyone to fight against the army of TX . O . The robots manage to defeat the army . The Spider explodes on top of TX . 0 and the war is over and they take Paula back to her planet . Table 2 . The collaborative story A transmodal analysis of children’s imaginaries Some relevant observations emerge from the analysis of the robots’ drawings and their descriptions . First , except in the case of the spider Swift , all the drawings have humanoid characteristics . In particular , five of them have classic facial features ( eyes , mouth ) and four of them have a clearly humanoid skeleton ( legs , arms , head and trunk ) . Only the robot Paula has a mixed configuration ( machinic body and humanoid facial features ) . This tendency towards anthropomorphizing robots is contrasted with their materiality . In the descriptions that accompany the drawings , all the characters are made of metal ( eventually combined with other materials ) . This tendency to use materiality as an agent for constructing the meaning of the robot was also maintained in sessions 7 and 8 where , in almost all cases , the three - dimensional prototypes included the use of silver paper to attribute the metallic / machinic aspect . These characteristics are indicative of the construction of an imaginary about “what a robot is like” linked to the mixing and co - presence of humanoid and machinic elements , in which , both the forms , as well as the materials , cover a central role in the process of constructing meaning about robotic identities . Similarly , it is interesting to observe how in five of the six cases , the drawings or descriptions of the robots are linked to imaginaries related to fighting , defence , use of weapons and violence . For example , Swift the spider forms part of the army and has a number of characteristics to defend and attack in case of war ( e . g . hidden camera , guns , acid shoots , etc . ) . Similarly , the Police Robot No . 19 has a special arm for firing lava and the Voodoo Witch has a set of powers and abilities to defend against enemies . Finally , Chicbot , although is designed to help humanity , it is currently used only for military purposes , Instead , TX . 0 aims at killing everybody and dominating the world . This trend is indicative of the features that build the children ' s imaginaries about “what a robot does and what it can do” and what is its role within the social context . On the other hand , it is interesting to observe how all students chose to draw a robot whose gender corresponds to their own gender ( i . e . boys draw male robots and girls female robots ) . This characteristic indicates a possible projective intention in the realization of the drawings ( i . e . drawing something that “has to do with me” ) . This is particularly evident , for example , in the description of Paula where the girl explains that " Paula is a 10 - years old girl like me " . This attribution of gendered traits to robots introduces the relevance of gender perspective in the representations Figure 2 . The 3d models of the characters : Swift the spider , TX . 0 , Paula , the Vodoo Witch , Chicbot presented and in the pedagogy of robotics . In particular , it is interesting to observe how boys and girls used different visual and cultural references in the representations of their robots . These differences do not only materialize in the initial ideation of the characters but also throughout the different sessions . For example , when choosing the materials for the creation of three - dimensional prototypes , the boys worked mainly with cardboard and silver paper . The girls , instead , combined silver paper , textile materials and organic materials ( e . g . hair ) . At the same time , both , in the initial descriptions , as well as in the story and in the video , the girls’ characters tended to be inserted in a minimally social and affective context , e . g . Paula has parents , the Voodoo Witch has a friend , and Chicbot has a dog . On the other hand , " male " robots do not have any kind of relation to a social - emotional context . These characteristics are reflected in the roles that different characters assume in the story . The story ( Table 2 ) follows a relatively linear structure and employs different classic narrative functions : the departure of the protagonist , the encounter with the assistant , the facing of trials and trips , the fight and punishment of the antagonist . At the same time , the characters assume traditional roles of fairy tales : TX . 0 has the role of the one - dimensional villain , whose objectives and nature are intrinsically evil ; Paula covers the role of the princess in trouble who " has to be saved " ; the Witch , Chicbot and the Spider assume the roles of the helpers who , through their abilities and powers , help Paula and save the world ; the Police Robot , finally , covers a secondary role appearing only in a scene of the video where Chicbot and Paula challenge the guard to escape from jail ( Figure 3 ) . In this distribution , it is interesting to observe how the children replicated classic gender stereotypes both in the assignation of the different roles ( e . g . the male villain , the princess in trouble ) as well as in the features attributed to the helpers . While Chicbot and the Witch act as helpers thanks to their knowledge ( i . e . Chicbot knows the future and the Witch can make potions ) , the Spider trains the team for the fight . Figure 3 . A screenshot of the video with Chicbot and Paula escaping from the guard These differences in the treatment of male and female characters are also reinforced in the dialogues of the literary script and the video . Specifically , the “female” robots have a much more humanized presence through a greater number of dialogues aimed at emphasizing their personal and emotional situations . For instance , the Witch explains that she always hated TX . 0 since the first time she saw him . Similarly , Paula speaks about “tears of true sadness” for missing her family . Male characters , instead , do not explicitly speak about their feelings and emotions . However , although the emotional and sentimental part appears more in female characters , it is interesting to observe that , both in the story and especially in the video , all robots are provided with their own will , agency and capacity to have desires , feelings and emotions . For example , TX . 0 wants to conquer the world ; Paula suffers for the separation from her parents , cries and finally rejoices at the moment of the reunion ; Chicbot , the Witch , and the Spider are characterized by their ability to plan and organize , but also show agency and emotions . These features , again , indicate a strongly humanized characterization of the robots . DISCUSSION The realization of an audiovisual narrative made visible different nuances of the children’s imaginaries about robots . In particular , with respect to related research , our art - based approach allows identifying additional layers of meaning related to the following thematic areas : ( 1 ) The relevance of anthropomorphization and the role of materials in constructing meaning about “what is a robot and what it can do” ; ( 2 ) The role of gender representations in robotics and their effects on the reproduction of stereotypes ; ( 3 ) The normalization of the relationship between robots and violence . These themes , in addition to being a reflex of the complex network of socio - cultural references around robots , also allow establishing some initial bases to trace reflections and questions to enable novel perspectives to ER . To use these themes as cornerstones to begin a reflexive process we will first discuss our findings and subsequently , delineate questions and paths for future research . The relevance of anthropomorphization and the role of materials in constructing meaning about “what is a robot and what it can do” Consistently with studies on attitudes towards robots [ 14 , 16 , 20 , 60 ] , also in our study , we identified a tendency towards anthropomorphizing robots both in their physical appearance , as well as in their abilities . Almost all participants draw robots with humanoid features and all of them featured robots with characteristics and abilities that are typically human ( e . g . having their own will , having feelings , etc . ) . Some children , eventually , also added some special " super - powers " to these features . Nonetheless , unlike previous studies , our approach made visible two relevant aspects : ( 1 ) a projective tendency in the creation of robots or , in other words , representing robots that have “something to do with me” and , ( 2 ) the role of the relationship between form and materials in the process of building the robotic identities . In many cases , the participants choose to draw and describe robots that " have something to do with them , " i . e . whose gender corresponds to their own gender or that have capacities and characteristics shared with their creator ( e . g . being “a 10 - years old girl like me” ) . At the same time , both in the descriptions of the characters and in the prototypes , the children mixed “machine - like” materials ( e . g . metal , silver foil ) and organic materials ( fabrics , hair ) . These trends open interesting pathways to explore in ER . On one hand , this anthropocentric model of understanding can offer a fertile ground to discuss with children the limits of our anthropocentric way of seeing the world and , hence , exploring notions around post - humanistic perspectives [ 17 ] . In other words , robotics may be used as boundary objects to open complex philosophical debates with children around the anthropocentric worldview that we hold and its implications for the planet . For instance , possible projects may find creative ways to explore questions such as : “Why do we think in robots using humans as referents ? ” “Why do we think in intelligence and artificial intelligence in relation to humans’ skills ? ” “What if we explore other perspectives the look at robots and intelligence ? ” etc . Projects exploring these issues can attract a broader and more diversified kind of children to ER . At the same time , they can offer meaningful opportunities to involve children’s in critically reflect on robotics and other intelligent technologies . On the other hand , following a diametrically opposite direction , we can find interesting possibilities in using the “robots as avatars” in projects linked to self - knowledge , personal transformation and emotional disclosure , e . g . use robots to speak about oneself . Some examples of research that partially address this concept can be found in works related to social robots . For instance , Bethel et al . [ 15 ] and Wood et al . [ 59 ] explored children’s disclosure in interviews on personal aspects ( e . g . bullying [ 15 ] ) when interviewed by robots instead than by humans . Nonetheless , in the context of ER , up to our knowledge , this opportunity has not been fully explored yet . Relevant possibilities may be found in involving children in creating robots that represents themselves , their family , their school , etc . Finally , also additional creative possibilities can be found in the experimentation with different materials . Interesting perspectives in this area can be found both in the use of soft robotics as well as in kits that enable integrating a wider range of material into interactive projects ( e . g . Lilypad [ 19 ] Makey - makey [ 52 ] ) . The role of gender representations in robotics and their effects on the reproduction of stereotypes Unlike studies based on surveys and interviews [ 40 , 60 ] , our approach made visible some relevant nuances in the relation between gender and robotics . All the participants represented their characters with gender attributes both in their definition , as well as in the use of the materials , in their roles in the story , and in their acting in the video . These representations , in some cases , reiterated classical gender stereotypes . In other cases , they highlighted the interest for working with different referents and imaginaries between boys and girls . These observations suggest the need for offering resources to critically question gender representations in robotics and make visible the role of robotics as a breeding ground for biased imaginaries . As Riek & Howard [ 49 ] pointed out , the lack of diversity in robot morphology and behavior - particularly regarding gender and ethnicity - requires both critical and ethical questions as well as new ways of designing . For instance , most female robots ( e . g . gynoids / fembots ) and AI interfaces ( e . g . Alexa , Siri ) can reinforce problematic gender hierarchies [ 29 ] . Similarly , most masculine robots reiterate a stereotypical view of masculinity ( e . g . strong , musculate , etc . ) . Hence , tools and proposals to help children in reflecting , questioning and subverting current gender stereotypes in robotics are needed . These needs open new paths for research on gender and ER , which move beyond the effort to make STEM appealing for girls but aim at questioning and subverting robotics as a way to reproduce gendered stereotypes . The normalization of the relationship between robots and violence Our study confirmed the tendency towards associating the image of robots with topics related to violence , war and fight . This trend is indicative to understand the features that children attribute to what a robot does , what it can do and what is its role in society . Furthermore , it points out relevant considerations to be taken into account in the pedagogy of robotics . On one hand , this tendency stresses the weight of media culture in shaping children’s representations about robots . As Bruckenberger et al . [ 18 ] points out the expectation of naïve users toward robots are influenced by media representations . Specifically , as our study highlights , children’s understandings mainly build on previous experiences with fictional robots instead than on representations of “everyday” robots ( e . g . industrial robots , vacuum cleaner , etc . ) . This tendency requires for critical questioning the role of media in educating children about what robots can do and the kind of narrative that are reinforced or missed in this context [ 10 ] . On the other hand , the normalization of the relation between violence and robots opens important questions about the relationship between violence , robotics and ethics in children ' s imaginaries . This tendency asks for a critical perspective to the pedagogy of robotics . From a broad perspective , possible approaches can build on the impact of media to propose other views of robotics . Similarly , the pedagogy of robotics can explore strategies to find other ways of building cultural references about robots . On one hand , interesting possibilities can be found in involving children in critically analyzing their robotics cultural references ( e . g . how do they learnt to see robots in this way and why ) . On the other hand , educators can explore the potential of science fiction and design fictions [ 33 , 39 ] to offer strategies to build other imaginaries about robots . A bird - eye view to our findings Our research allowed digging into the stereotypical images that children have about robots and unveiling themes and topics that are worth of researchers ' attention . Even if we agree with Rusk [ 50 ] and consider that robotics go far beyond the stereotypical images of robots , we consider that research on those imaginaries can open complementary paths to look at ER . In particular , we consider that the identified themes ask for a research commitment for exploring possibilities of ER projects that go beyond the focus on STEM disciplines . Most ER projects aim at promoting interest and learning of STEM - related concepts . This focus is worth , valuable and important . Nonetheless , as our findings suggest , ER also carries a set of ethical and social concerns that tend to be neglected in mainstream educational practices . This panorama outlines the need for spaces and resources to promote an ethical and critical approach to robotics both for those who design it and for those who use it . This need is particularly relevant in the educational context since , the children that tomorrow will design or use technology , in many cases , will have to make extremely complex ethical decisions about the systems that surround them . As a consequence , further research should explore strategies and resources to promote an ethical and critical sensitivity in the use , design and development of robots . This implies fostering a critical look at the controversial ethical issues linked to robotics and promote the construction of new imaginaries about robots , capable of going beyond the normalization of certain stereotypes . In other words , research in this field should address questions such as : How can we work on complex ethical issues linked to robotics with young people ? How can we make these topics interesting , accessible and relevant for them ? Possible inputs for this research can be found in Maguth’s proposal [ 41 ] to integrate social studies into STEM - focused curricula or in exploring concerns arising from roboethics research [ 49 , 55 , 61 ] We consider that this approach can eventually help a diversified population of learners in getting engaged with robotics . Furthermore , we also consider that is necessary to devote additional research to critically analyze how robotics is currently taught in school and extracurricular activities , in order to understand the inertias that hinder a change in the employed pedagogical models and , thus , tracing new possible paths . Within this line , we suggest that ethnographical studies of ER programs are needed to build a more encompassing view of the phenomena . Limitations and future work The study constitutes a first step towards deepening in youth imaginaries about robots to rethink the pedagogy of robotics . The study was carried out with a small number of participants and a more extensive approach would be necessary to extend the results and discover additional nuances . At the same time , in future works , some limitations related to the ways in which the data were collected should be addressed . Specifically , we believe that a greater effort should be devoted to collecting infants ' views on the resulting experience , materials and projects . To this end , it could be interesting to explore the possibilities of involving children in the documentation process or in using different elicitation techniques . Finally , although the study allowed identifying some relevant themes to explore for innovating the pedagogy of robotics , extensive research is necessary to take advantage of them . CONCLUSIONS The article describes an ideographic study conducted with eight 10 to 11 years old students . The study aimed at investigating the participants’ imaginaries about how robots are , what they do and what are their roles in society . To this end , we used an art - based research approach and focused on involving children in the production of an audiovisual narrative about robots . The process of making the video has been analyzed according to a multimodal approach . Our findings , on the one hand , showed that our methodological approach allowed making visible some nuances of meaning around the children ' s imaginaries about robots that were not accessible in studies based on other approaches . At the same time , the results allowed identifying a series of key themes : ( 1 ) The relevance of anthropomorphization and the role of materials in constructing meaning about “what is a robot and what it can do” ; ( 2 ) The role of gender representations in robotics and their effects on the reproduction of stereotypes and ( 3 ) The normalization of the relationship between robots and violence . We used these themes as an initial basis to weave questions aimed at opening paths to explore innovative strategies to transform the pedagogy of robotics . In particular , we pointed out the need for strategies and resources to promote an ethical and critical sensitivity in ER . In conclusion , although the limited sample of the study does not allow generalizations about the results obtained , we consider that both the methodological approach adopted , as well as the results obtained , contribute in taking a first step in investigating and thinking from another perspective the practices that are currently employed to teach robotics . FUNDINGS This research has been possible thanks to the support of Fundación Cotec . At the same time , we thank the Drassanes school for their collaboration . SELECTION AND PARTICIPATION OF CHILDREN Participants voluntarily signed up for the workshop based on a call previously made at the school in collaboration with the parents’ association and the management team . Both parents and children agreed to participate in the study by signing an informed consent . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Alessandri , G . and Paciaroni , M . 2012 . Educational robotics : Robotics from fantasy medium to medium for fantasy . Journal of E - Learning and Knowledge Society . 8 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 71 – 78 . [ 2 ] Alimisis , A . D . and Kynigos , C . 2009 . Constructionism and robotics in education . Teacher education on robotic - enhanced constructivist pedagogical methods . 11 – 26 . [ 3 ] Alimisis , D . 2013 . Educational robotics : Open questions and new challenges . Themes in Science & Technology Education . 6 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 63 – 71 . [ 4 ] Alimisis , D . 2012 . Robotics in Education & Education in Robotics : Shifting Focus from Technology to Pedagogy . Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Robotics in Education ( 2012 ) , 7 – 14 . [ 5 ] Alves - Oliveira , P . et al . 2017 . Yolo , a robot for creativity : A co - design study with children . IDC 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( 2017 ) , 423 – 429 . [ 6 ] Anwar , S . and Bascou , N . A . 2019 . A Systematic Review of Studies on Educational Robotics . Journal of Pre - College Engineering Education Research ( J - PEER ) . 9 , 2 ( 2019 ) . [ 7 ] Barker , J . and Weller , S . 2003 . Is it fun ? ” developing children centred research methods . International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy . 23 , 1 ( 2003 ) , 33 – 58 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 01443330310790435 ) . [ 8 ] Barone , T . and Eisner , E . 1997 . Arts - based educational research . Complementary methods for research in education . 75 – 115 . [ 9 ] Bartlett , B . et al . 2004 . Dogs or Robots - Why do Children See Them as Robotic Pets Rather Than Canine Machines ? BT - Fifth Australasian User Interface Conference ( AUIC2004 ) . Conferences in Research and Practice in Information Technology , ( 2004 ) , 7 – 14 . [ 10 ] Bartneck , C . 2004 . From Fiction to Science - - A Cultural Reflection on Social Robots . Robotics ( 2004 ) , 1 – 4 . [ 11 ] Bartneck , C . et al . 2007 . The influence of people’s culture and prior experiences with Aibo on their attitude towards robots . AI and Society . 21 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 217 – 230 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00146 - 006 - 0052 - 7 . [ 12 ] Bascou , N . A . and Menekse , M . 2016 . Robotics in K - 12 formal and informal learning environments : A review of literature . ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition , Conference Proceedings ( 2016 ) . [ 13 ] Benitti , F . B . V . 2012 . Exploring the educational potential of robotics in schools : A systematic review . Computers and Education . 58 , 3 ( 2012 ) , 978 – 988 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2011 . 10 . 00 6 . [ 14 ] Beran , T . N . and Ramirez - Serrano , A . 2011 . Can Children Have a Relationship with a Robot ? Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences , Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg . 49 – 56 . [ 15 ] Bethel , C . L . et al . 2016 . Using robots to interview children about bullying : Lessons learned from an exploratory study . 25th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , RO - MAN 2016 . November 2017 ( 2016 ) , 712 – 717 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ROMAN . 2016 . 774519 7 . [ 16 ] Blancas , M . et al . 2017 . Analyzing children’s expectations from robotic companions in educational settings . 2017 IEEE - RAS 17th International Conference on Humanoid Robotics ( Humanoids ) ( Nov . 2017 ) , 749 – 755 . [ 17 ] Braidotti , R . 2015 . Lo Posthumano . Editorial Gedisa . [ 18 ] Bruckenberger , U . et al . 2013 . The Good , The Bad , The Weird : Audience Evaluation of a “Real” Robot in Relation to Science Fiction and Mass Media . International Conference on Social Robotics ( 2013 ) , 301 – 310 . [ 19 ] Buechley , L . et al . 2008 . The LilyPad Arduino . 423 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357123 . [ 20 ] Bumby , K . and Dautenhahn , K . 1999 . Investigating children’s attitudes towards robots : A case study . Proc . CT99 , The Third International Cognitive Technology Conference . ( 1999 ) , 391 – 410 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2478 / v10051 - 010 - 0007 - 0 . [ 21 ] Cavallo , D . et al . 2004 . ’RoBallet : Exploring Learning through Expression in the Arts through Constructing in a Technologically Immersive Environment . \ rInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences . March 2014 ( 2004 ) , 105 – 112 . [ 22 ] Chung , S . and Walsh , D . 2000 . Unpacking child - centredness : A history of meanings . Journal of curriculum studies . 32 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 215 – 234 . [ 23 ] Clark , A . 2005 . Listening to and involving young children : A review of research and practice . Early Child Development and Care . 175 , 6 ( 2005 ) , 489 – 505 . [ 24 ] Clark , C . D . 2011 . In A Younger Voice : Doing Child - Centered Qualitative Research . Oxford University Press . [ 25 ] Dautenhahn , K . et al . 2005 . What is a Robot Companion – Friend , Assistant or Butler ? 2005 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems ( 2005 ) , 291 – 299 . [ 26 ] Druin , A . 2002 . The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology . Behaviour and information technology . 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 27 ] Eguchi , A . 2017 . Learner - Centered Approach with Educational Robotics . Handbook of Research on Learner - Centered Pedagogy in Teacher Education and Professional Development . IGI Global . 350 – 372 . [ 28 ] Frauenberger , C . et al . 2012 . Challenges , opportunities and future perspectives in including children with disabilities in the design of interactive technology . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’12 . ( 2012 ) , 367 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307171 . [ 29 ] Hannon , C . 2016 . Gender and status in voice user interfaces . interactions . 23 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 34 – 37 . [ 30 ] Hernandez , F . 2008 . La investigación basada en las artes . Propuestas para repensar la investigación en educación . Education Siglo XXI . 26 , ( 2008 ) , 85 – 118 . [ 31 ] Iversen , O . S . et al . 2017 . Child as Protagonist : Expanding the Role of Children in Participatory Design . Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( 2017 ) , 27 – 37 . [ 32 ] Jewitt , C . 2013 . Multimodal methods for researching digital technologies . The SAGE handbook of digital technology research . S . Price and C . Jewitt , eds . SAGE Publications Ltd . 250 – 265 . [ 33 ] Johnson , B . D . 2014 . Brain machines . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing . 18 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 811 – 817 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 013 - 0681 - z . [ 34 ] Kafai , Y . B . et al . 2014 . Ethnocomputing with electronic textiles : Culturally responsive open design to broaden participation in computing in American Indian youth and communities . SIGCSE 2014 - Proceedings of the 45th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education ( 2014 ) , 241 – 246 . [ 35 ] Kato , K . et al . 2005 . A cross - cultural study on attitudes towards robots . HCII ’05 : Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . ( 2005 ) , 1981 – 1983 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / sb5000725 . [ 36 ] Kazemitabaar , M . et al . 2015 . MakerShoe : Towards a wearable e - textile construction kit to support creativity , playful making , and self - expression . Proceedings of IDC 2015 : The 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . i ( 2015 ) , 449 – 452 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771883 . [ 37 ] Kress , G . 2010 . Multimodality . A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication . Routledge . [ 38 ] Lammer , L . et al . 2015 . The 5 - Step Plan : A Holistic Approach to Investigate Children’s Ideas on Future Robotic Products . ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . 02 - 05 - March - 2015 , ( 2015 ) , 69 – 70 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2701973 . 2702005 . [ 39 ] Lindley , J . and Coulton , P . 2015 . Back to the future : 10 years of design fiction . ACM International Conference Proceeding Series ( 2015 ) , 210 – 211 . [ 40 ] Liu , E . Z . F . 2010 . Early adolescents’ perceptions of educational robots and learning of robotics . British Journal of Educational Technology . 41 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 44 – 47 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8535 . 2009 . 00944 . x . [ 41 ] Maguth , B . M . . 2012 . In defense of the social studies : social studies programs in STEM education . Social Studies Research & Practice . 7 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 65 – 90 . [ 42 ] Malinverni , L . et al . 2016 . Towards methods for evaluating and communicating participatory design : A multimodal approach . International Journal of Human Computer Studies . 94 , ( 2016 ) , 53 – 63 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2016 . 03 . 004 . [ 43 ] Van Mechelen , M . et al . 2017 . The GLID method : Moving from design features to underlying values in co - design . International Journal of Human Computer Studies . 97 , ( 2017 ) , 116 – 128 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2016 . 09 . 005 . [ 44 ] Nomura , T . et al . 2006 . Measurement of negative attitudes toward robots . Interaction Studies . 7 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 437 – 454 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1075 / is . 7 . 3 . 14nom . [ 45 ] Oliveira , D . et al . 2012 . Uma proposta de ensino - aprendizagem de programação utilizando robótica educativa e storytelling . In II Congresso Internacional TIC de Educação , Lisboa ( p . 10 ) [ 46 ] Precel , K . and Mioduser , D . The effect of constructing a robot’s behavior on young children’s conceptions of behaving artifacts and on their Theory of Mind ( ToM ) and Theory of Artificial Mind ( ToAM ) . Children Youth , Environments Journal . 1 – 47 . [ 47 ] Qi , J . et al . 2015 . Crafting technology with circuit stickers . Proceedings of IDC 2015 : The 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( 2015 ) , 438 – 441 . [ 48 ] Read , J . et al . 2014 . Giving ideas an equal chance : Inclusion and representation in participatory design with children . Proceedings of the 2014 conference on … ( 2014 ) , 105 – 114 . [ 49 ] Riek , L . D . and Howard , D . 2014 . A Code of Ethics for the Human - Robot Interaction Profession . We Robot Conference . ( 2014 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 50 ] Rusk , N . et al . 2008 . New pathways into robotics : Strategies for broadening participation . Journal of Science Education and Technology 17 , 59 - 69 . [ 51 ] Searle , K . A . and Kafai , Y . B . 2015 . Boys’ needlework : understanding gendered and indigenous perspectives on computing and crafting with electronic textiles . Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual International Conference on International Computing Education Research ( 2015 ) , 31 – 39 . [ 52 ] Silver , J . et al . 2012 . Makey Makey : Improvising Tangible and Nature - Based User Interfaces Beginner’s Mind Collective . Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’12 ) . ( 2012 ) , 367 – 370 . [ 53 ] Spiel , K . et al . 2017 . Participatory Evaluation with Autistic Children . Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 ( New York , New York , USA , 2017 ) , 5755 – 5766 . [ 54 ] Stager , G . 2005 . Papertian Constructionism and the Design of Productive Contexts for Learning . EuroLogo X . [ 55 ] Sullins , J . P . 2015 . Applied Professional Ethics for the Reluctant Roboticist . The Emerging Policy and Ethics of Human - Robot Interaction Workshop . ( 2015 ) . [ 56 ] Sullivan , A . and Bers , M . U . 2018 . Dancing robots : integrating art , music , and robotics in Singapore’s early childhood centers . International Journal of Technology and Design Education . 28 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 325 – 346 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10798 - 017 - 9397 - 0 . [ 57 ] Turkle , S . and Papert , S . Epistemological Pluralism : Styles and Voices within the Computer Culture . [ 58 ] Wien , C . A . et al . 2011 . Learning to Document in Reggio - inspired Education . Early Childhood Research & Practice . 13 , 2 ( 2011 ) . [ 59 ] Wood , L . J . et al . 2013 . Robot - Mediated Interviews - How Effective Is a Humanoid Robot as a Tool for Interviewing Young Children ? PLoS ONE . 8 , 3 ( 2013 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0059448 . [ 60 ] Woods , S . 2006 . Exploring the design space of robots : Children’s perspectives . Interacting with Computers . 18 , 6 ( 2006 ) , 1390 – 1418 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2006 . 05 . 001 . [ 61 ] Zawieska , K . 2020 . Roboethics as a Research Puzzle . 2019 14th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) . 731726 ( 2020 ) , 612 – 613 .