January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 | communications of thE acm 87 Doi : 10 . 1145 / 1435417 . 1435439 abstract This article describes mechanisms for asynchronous collab - oration in the context of information visualization , recasting visualizations as not just analytic tools , but social spaces . We contribute the design and implementation of sense . us , a Web site supporting asynchronous collaboration across a variety of visualization types . The site supports view sharing , discussion , graphical annotation , and social navigation and includes novel interaction elements . We report the results of user studies of the system , observing emergent patterns of social data analysis , including cycles of observation and hypothesis , and the complementary roles of social naviga - tion and data - driven exploration . 1 . intRoDuction Visual representations of information often lead to new insights by enabling viewers to see data in context , observe patterns , and make comparisons . In this way , visualizations leverage the human visual system to improve our ability to process large amounts of data . Card et al . 6 describe how visualization supports the process of sensemaking , in which information is collected , organized , and analyzed to form new knowledge and inform further action . They emphasize the ways visualization exploits an individual’s visual percep - tion to facilitate cognition . In practice , however , sensemaking is often also a social process . People may disagree on how to interpret the data and may contribute contextual knowledge that deepens understanding . As participants build consensus or make decisions they learn from their peers . Furthermore , some data sets are so large that thorough exploration by a single person is unlikely . This suggests that to fully support sen - semaking , visualizations should also support social inter - action . In this spirit , a recent report 23 names the design of collaborative visualization tools as a grand challenge for visualization research . These considerations are not just hypothetical . For example , the manager of a business group in our company described to us how quarterly reports are disseminated within his organization via e - mail . Heated discussion takes place around charts and graphs as the group debates the causes of sales trends and considers possible future actions . However , writing about particular trends or views is difficult , involving awkward references to attached spreadsheets from the e - mail text . Furthermore , the discus - sion is scattered and disconnected from the visualizations , making it difficult for newcomers to catch up or others to review and summarize the discussion thus far . According to the manager of the group , the analysis process could ben - efit from a system for sharing , annotating , and discussing the visualized data . Similar scenarios appear in other domains . Moreover , experiences with deployments of visualizations hint at ways that social phenomena already occur around visual - izations . Wattenberg and Kriss 27 describe the response to NameVoyager , an online visualization of historical baby name trends . Playful yet often surprisingly deep analysis appeared on numerous blogs as participants discussed their insights and hypotheses . Observing the use of a physical installation of the Vizster social network visualization , Heer 18 noted that groups of users , spurred by storytelling of shared memories , spent more time exploring and asked deeper analysis questions than individuals . Similarly , Viégas et al . 24 found that users of the PostHistory e - mail archive visualiza - tion immediately wanted to share views with friends and family and engage in storytelling . While suggestive , these observations provide only a cir - cumstantial understanding of the social aspects of asyn - chronous analysis around visualizations . In the case of the NameVoyager and PostHistory , the findings were essentially accidental . Vizster was designed for playful interaction , but in a synchronous and less analytic context . It would there - fore be valuable to replicate these findings to deepen our understanding of this type of interaction . Furthermore , if social interaction is an important accom - paniment to data visualization , it is natural to look for ways to support and encourage it . To address both these goals , we designed and implemented a Web site , sense . us , aimed at group exploration of demographic data . The site provides a suite of interactive visualizations and facilitates collabora - tion through view bookmarking , doubly linked discussions , graphical annotation , saved bookmark trails , and social navigation through comment listings and user profiles . We then conducted user studies to observe closely how people engage in social data analysis . The studies also allowed us to evaluate the new design elements in the site and suggest directions for future work . Voyagers and Voyeurs : Supporting Asynchronous Collaborative Visualization By Jeffrey Heer , Fernanda B . Viégas , and Martin Wattenberg A previous version of this paper was published in the Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , April 2007 . 88 communications of thE acm | January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 research highlights 2 . PRioR WoRK Collaboration has been well studied in contexts that are not directly related to information visualization . The study of how computer systems can enable collaboration is referred to as computer - supported cooperative work , or CSCW . Because collaboration occurs in a variety of situations , CSCW schol - ars often use a “time - space” matrix 21 to outline the concep - tual landscape . The time dimension represents whether or not participants interact at the same time ( synchronously or asynchronously ) —for example , instant messaging is a largely synchronous communication medium , while e - mail is asynchronous . The space dimension describes whether users are collocated or geographically distributed . Most work on collaborative visualization has been done in the context of synchronous scenarios : users interact - ing at the same time to analyze scientific results or discuss the state of a battlefield . Collocated collaboration usually involves shared displays , including wall - sized , table - top , or virtual reality displays ( e . g . , Dietz , 14 General Dynamics 16 ) . Systems supporting remote collaboration have primar - ily focused on synchronous interaction , 1 , 4 such as shared virtual workspaces 8 and augmented reality systems that enable multiple users to interact concurrently with visual - ized data . 3 , 9 In addition , the availability of public displays has prompted researchers to experiment with asynchro - nous , collocated visualization ( same place , different time ) , for example , in the form of ambient displays that share activity information about collocated users . 7 In this article , we focus on remote asynchronous collaboration—the kind of collaboration that is most com - mon over the Web . One reason for our interest is that parti - tioning work across both time and space holds the potential of greater scalability in group - oriented analysis . For exam - ple , one decision - making study found that asynchronous collaboration resulted in higher - quality outcomes—broader discussions , more complete reports , and longer solutions— than face - to - face collaboration . 2 However , as noted by Viégas and Wattenberg , 25 little research attention has been dedicated to asynchronous collaboration around interac - tive visualization . Instead , users often rely on static imag - ery when communicating about these interactive systems . Images of the visualization are transferred as printouts or screenshots , or included in word - processing or presenta - tion documents . A few commercial visualization systems introduced prior to our work provide asynchronous collaboration features . Online mapping systems ( e . g . , Google Maps ) provide book - marks ( URLs ) that users can send to others to share views . The visualization company Spotfire provides DecisionSite Posters , a Web - based system that allows a user to post an interactive visualization view that other users can explore and comment on . The Posters apply only to a subset of Spotfire’s full functionality and do not allow graphical anno - tations , limiting their adoption . 25 One common feature of these systems is application bookmarks : URLs or URL - like objects that point back into a particular state of the application , for example , a location and zoom level in the case of Google Maps . This pattern is not surprising ; for users to collaborate , they must be able to share what they are seeing to establish a common ground for conversation . 12 One of the primary uses of bookmarks is in discussion forums surrounding a visualization . Some systems use what we term independent discussion , where conversations are decoupled from the visualization . For example , Google Earth provides threaded discussion forums with messages that include bookmarks into the visualized globe . In such systems there are unidirectional links from the discussion to the visualization , but no way to discover related com - ments while navigating the visualization itself . Another stream of related work comes from wholly or partly visual annotation systems , such as the regional annotations in sites such as Flickr . com and Wikimapia . org and in Churchill et al . ’s anchored conversations . 10 Such systems enable embedded discussion that places conversa - tional markers directly within a visualization or document . Discussion of a specific item may be accessed through a linked annotation shown within the visualization . These systems may be seen as the converse of independent dis - cussions , allowing unidirectional links from an artifact to commentary . In this article , we extend the past work with a comprehen - sive design for asynchronous collaboration around interac - tive data visualizations , addressing issues of view sharing , discussion , graphical annotation , and social navigation . 3 . thE DEsiGn of sEnsE . us To explore the possibilities for asynchronous collabora - tive visualization , we designed and implemented sense . us , a prototype Web application for social visual data analysis . The site provides a suite of visualizations of United States census data over the last 150 years ( see Figures 1 and 2 ) and was designed for use by a general audience . We built sense . us to put our design hypotheses into a concrete form which we could then deploy and use to study collaborative data exploration . The primary interface for sense . us is shown in Figure 1 . In the left panel is a Java applet containing a visualiza - tion . The right panel provides a discussion area , display - ing commentary associated with the current visualization view , and a graphical bookmark trail , providing access to views bookmarked by the user . With a straightforward bookmarking mechanism , sense . us supports collabora - tion with features described in detail below : doubly linked discussions , graphical annotations , saved bookmark trails , and social navigation via comment listings and user activity profiles . 3 . 1 . View sharing When collaborating around visualizations , participants must be able to see the same visual environment in order to ground 12 each others’ actions and comments . To this aim , the sense . us site provides a mechanism for bookmark - ing views . The system makes application bookmarking transparent by tying it to conventional Web bookmark - ing . The browser’s location bar always displays a URL that links to the current state of the visualization , defined by the settings of filtering , navigation , and visual encoding January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 | communications of thE acm 89 figure 1 : the sense . us collaborative visualization system . ( a ) an interactive visualization applet , with a graphical annotation for the currently selected comment . the visualization is a stacked time - series visualization of the u . s . labor force , broken down by gender . here the percentage of the work force in military jobs is shown . ( b ) a set of graphical annotation tools . ( c ) a bookmark trail of saved views . ( d ) text - entry field for adding comments . Bookmarks can be dragged onto the text field to add a link to that view in the comment . ( e ) threaded comments attached to the current view . ( f ) uRl for the current state of the application . the uRl is updated automatically as the visualization state changes . figure 2 : sample visualizations from sense . us . ( a ) interactive state map . the image shows the male / female ratio of the states in 2005 . ( b ) stacked time series of immigration data , showing the birthplace of u . s . residents over the last 150 years . the image shows the number of u . s . residents born in European countries . ( c ) Population pyramid , showing population variation across gender and age groups . additional variables are encoded using stacked , colored bands . the image visualizes school attendance in 2000 ; an annotation highlights the prevalence of adult education . parameters . As the visualization view changes , the URL updates to reflect the current state ( Figure 1f ) , simplify - ing the process of sharing a view through e - mail , blogs , or instant messaging by enabling users to cut - and - paste a link to the current view at any time . To conform to user expectations , the browser’s back and forward buttons are tied to the visualization state , allowing easy navigation to previously seen views . 90 communications of thE acm | January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 research highlights 3 . 2 . Doubly linked discussion To situate conversation around the visualization , we created a technique called doubly linked discussion . The method begins with an “independent” discussion interface in which users can attach comments to particular states ( or views ) of a visualization . Comments are shown on the right side of the Web page and grouped into linear discussion threads ( Figure 1e ) . Each comment shows the thread topic , com - ment text , the author’s full name , and the time at which the comment was authored . Clicking on a comment takes the visualization to a bookmarked state representing the view seen by the comment’s author . Users can add comments either by starting a new thread or posting a reply to an existing thread . When a “New Comment” or “Reply” link is clicked , a text editor appears at the site where the comment will be inserted and the graphi - cal annotation tools ( discussed next ) become active . Upon submission , the comment text and any annotations are sent to the server and the comment listing is updated . The interface described above is based on links from the commentary into the visualization . Our system also provides links in the other direction : from the visualization into the discussion . As a user changes parameters and views in the visualization , they may serendipitously happen upon a view that another person has already commented on . When this occurs , the relevant comments will automatically appear in the right - hand pane . Our intuition was that this “doubly linked” discussion interface , which combines aspects of independent and embedded discussion , would facilitate grounding and enable the visualization itself to become a social place . 3 . 3 . Pointing via graphical annotation In real - time collocated collaboration , participants com - monly use both speech and gesture , particularly point - ing , 11 , 20 to refer to objects and direct conversation . For asynchronous collaboration , graphical annotations can play a similar communicative role . We hypothesized that graphical annotations would be important both for point - ing behavior and playful commentary . To add a pictorial element to a comment or point to a feature of interest , authors can use drawing tools ( Figure 1b ) to annotate the commented view . These tools allow free - form ink , lines , arrows , shapes , and text to be drawn over the visualization view . The tools are similar to presentation tools such as Microsoft PowerPoint and are intended to leverage users’ familiarity with such systems . Comments with annotations are indicated by the pres - ence of a small shape logo to the left of the author’s name in the comment listing ( see Figure 1e ) . When the mouse hov - ers over an annotated comment , the comment region high - lights in yellow and a hand cursor appears . Subsequently clicking the region causes the annotation to be shown and the highlighting to darken and become permanent . Clicking the comment again ( or clicking a different comment ) will remove the current annotation and highlighting . We refer to this approach as geometric annotation , which operates like an “acetate layer” over the visualization , in con - trast to data - aware annotations directly associated with the underlying data . We chose to implement a free - form annota - tion mechanism so that we could first study pointing behav - iors in an unconstrained medium . Aside from the freedom of expression it affords , geometric annotation also has a technical advantage : it allows reuse of the identical annota - tion system across visualizations , easing implementation and preserving a consistent user experience . 3 . 4 . collecting and linking views In data analysis it is common to make comparisons between different ways of looking at data . Furthermore , storytelling has been suggested to play an important role in social usage of visualizations , as discussed by Viégas et al . 24 Drawing comparisons and telling stories both require the ability to embed multiple view bookmarks into a single comment . To support such multiview comments and narratives , we created a “bookmark trail” widget . The bookmark trail func - tions something like a shopping cart : as a user navigates through the site , he or she can click a special “Add View” link to add the current view to a graphical list of bookmarks ( Figure 1c ) . Bookmarks from any number of visualizations can be added to a trail . A trail may be named and saved , mak - ing it accessible to others . The bookmark trail widget also functions as a short - term storage mechanism when making a comment that includes links to multiple views . Dragging a thumbnail from the bookmark trail and dropping it onto the text area create a hyperlink to the bookmarked view ; users can then directly edit or delete the link text within the text editor . When the mouse hovers over the link text , a tooltip thumbnail of the linked view is shown . 3 . 5 . awareness and social navigation Social navigation 15 leverages usage history to provide addi - tional navigation options within an information space . Our initial system supports social navigation through comment listings and user profile pages that display recent activity . Comment listings provide a searchable and sortable col - lection of all comments made within the system , and can be filtered to focus on a single visualization ( see Figure 3 ) . Comment listing pages include the text and a thumbnail image of the visualization state for each comment . Hovering over the thumbnail yields a tooltip with a larger image . Clicking a comment link takes the user to the state of the visualization where the comment was made , displaying any annotations included with the comment . The author’s name links to the author’s profile page , which includes their five most recent comment threads and five most recently saved bookmark trails . The view also notes the number of comments made on a thread since the user’s last comment , allowing users to monitor the activity of discussions to which they contribute . Although more elaborate social navigation mechanisms are possible , we wanted to observe system usage with just these basic options . We were particularly interested in observing the potential interplay between data - driven exploration and social navigation . By allowing discussions to be retrieved unobtrusively while a user explores the data , January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 | communications of thE acm 91 potentially relevant conversation can be introduced into the exploration process . Meanwhile , comment listings and indi - cations of recent posts may help users find views of interest , making social activity a catalyst for data exploration . 3 . 6 . unobtrusive collaboration Finally , while designing sense . us we also wished to follow a common CSCW design guideline : collaborative features should not impede individual usage . 17 Hence we did not litter views with prior annotations or commentary . Rather , commentary on a visualization is retrieved and displayed unobtrusively on the right side of the screen and graphical annotations are displayed “on demand” by the user . 4 . imPlEmEntation notEs While many aspects of sense . us rely on well - known tech - niques , this section provides implementation details for the more complex features : application bookmarking , doubly linked discussions , and graphical annotations . 4 . 1 . application bookmarking Bookmarks of visualization state are implemented as a set of name – value pairs of visualization parameters , listed using standard URL query syntax . Normally , changing the brows - er’s URL will force a reload of the page to prevent security attacks . Because a reload would cause a disruptive restart of the visualization applet , the bookmark URL encodes the query string as a page anchor—using the URL ‘ # ’ delim - iter instead of the standard ‘ ? ’ delimiter—so that the URL updates in place . Furthermore , updated URLs are put into the browser’s history stack , so that the browser’s back and forward buttons have their usual behavior . When a visualiza - tion URL is updated due to use of the back or forward but - tons or manual typing , scripts send the updated URL to the figure 3 : the sense . us comment listing page . comment listings display all commentary on visualizations and provide links to the commented visualization views . applet , which is parsed and used to update the current visu - alization state . 4 . 2 . Doubly linked discussions The bookmarking mechanisms alone are not sufficient to support doubly linked discussions . To see the challenge in linking from a view state back to all comments on that view , consider the visualization in Figure 1 . When a user types “military” into the top search box , they see all jobs whose titles begin with the string “military . ” On the other hand , if they type only “mili , ” they see all titles beginning with “mili”—but this turns out to be the identical set of jobs . These different parameter settings result in different URLs , and yet provide exactly the same visualization view . More generally , parameter settings may not have a one - to - one mapping to visualization states . To attach discussions to views we therefore need an indexing mechanism which identifies visualization states that are equivalent despite having different parametric representations . We solve this indexing problem by distinguishing between two types of parameters : filter parameters and view parameters . Filter parameters determine which data elements are visible in the display . Rather than index filter parameters directly , we instead index the filtered state of the application by noting which items are currently visible , thereby capturing the case when different filter param - eters give rise to the same filtered state . View parameters , on the other hand , adjust visual mappings , such as select - ing a normalized or absolute axis scale . Our current system indexes the view parameters directly . The bookmarking mechanism implements this two - part index by comput - ing a probabilistically unique hash value based on both the filtered state and view parameters . These hash values are used as keys for retrieving the comments for the current visualization state . 4 . 3 . annotation The graphical annotations take the form of vector graph - ics drawn above the visualization . When a new comment is submitted , the browser requests the current annotation ( if any ) from the visualization applet . The annotation is saved to an XML format , which is then compressed using gzip and encoded in a base 64 string representation before being passed to the browser . When comments are later retrieved from the server , the encoded annotations are stored in the browser as JavaScript variables . When the user requests that an annotation be displayed , the encoded annotations are passed to the applet , decoded , and drawn . 5 . EValuation To gain a preliminary understanding of asynchronous col - laboration practices around visualizations , we ran explor - atory user studies of the sense . us system . The studies had two specific goals : first , to better understand emergent usage patterns in social data analysis ; second , to learn how well the various features of the sense . us system supported this analysis . We ran the studies in two different parts : a pair of controlled lab studies and a 3 - week live deployment on the IBM corporate intranet . To analyze the data , we employed 92 communications of thE acm | January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 research highlights a mixed - methods analysis approach combining qualitative and quantitative observations . 5 . 1 . lab study We first ran a pilot study with 6 subjects ( 2 females , 4 males ) , all of whom were members of our immediate research team . Comments from the pilot were visible in a subsequent 12 subject ( 3 females , 9 males ) study , with subjects drawn from our greater research lab . Subjects were at least peripherally familiar with each other and many were coworkers . Ages ranged from the early - twenties to mid - fifties and educa - tion varied from the undergraduate to the doctoral level , spanning backgrounds in computer science , design , social science , and psychology . Concerned that our lab’s focus in collaborative software might bias results , we replicated the lab study in a university environment with additional 12 subjects ( 5 females , 7 males ) . Subject variation in age , edu - cation , and social familiarity remained similar . Subjects conducted a 25 min usage session of the sense . us system . A single visualization was available in the study : a stacked time series of the U . S . labor force over time , divided by gender ( Figure 1 ) . Users could navigate the visu - alization by typing in text queries ( matched to job title pre - fixes ) , filtering by gender , and setting the axis scale , either to total people count or percentage values . This data set was chosen for several reasons . First , job choice is a topic that most of our users should have no dif - ficulty relating to . Second , like many other real - world data sets , there are data collection issues , including missing data and unclear or antiquated labels . Third , we suspected the data would be an interesting boundary case for annotations , as for many visualization views , text seemed sufficient when referencing spikes or valleys in the data . After a brief tutorial of system features , participants were instructed to use the system however they liked—no specific tasks were given . However , users were told that if they felt at a loss for action , they could browse the data for trends they found interesting and share their findings . An observer was present taking notes and a think - aloud protocol was used . User actions were also logged by the software . Subjects were run in sequential order , such that later participants could view the contributions of previous subjects but not vice versa . The system was seeded with five comments , each with an observation of a particular data trend . After the study , subjects completed a short exit question - naire about their experiences . Participants were asked to rate on a 5 - point Likert scale to what degree ( 1 ) they enjoyed using the system , ( 2 ) they learned something interesting , ( 3 ) others’ comments were helpful in exploring the data , and if they found annotations useful for ( 4 ) making their own com - ments , or ( 5 ) understanding others’ comments . Subjects were also asked free response questions about what they liked , disliked , and would change about the system . 5 . 2 . live deployment We also conducted a live deployment of the system on the IBM corporate intranet for 3 weeks . Any employee could log in to the system using their existing intranet account . Eight visualizations were available in the system , among them were the visualizations of Figures 1 and 2 and a scatterplot of demographic metrics ( see Figure 4 ) . We also introduced two visualizations specific to the company : stacked time series of keyword tagging activity and individual user activity on dogear , an internal social bookmarking service . The site was publicized through an e - mail newsletter , an intranet article , and individual e - mails . 5 . 3 . findings In the rest of this section , we report observations from these studies , organized by commentary , graphical annotations , navigation patterns , and use of doubly linked discussion . As variation in content and tone differed little across studies , the discussion incorporates data aggregated from each . The data analyzed were drawn from 12 . 5 h of qualitative observa - tion and from usage logs including 258 comments : 41 from the pilot , 85 from the first study , 60 from the second , and 72 from the deployment . 5 . 4 . comments We first wanted to learn how comments were being used to conduct social data analysis—was there a recognizable structure to the discussions ? To find out , we performed a formal content analysis on the collected comments . Each paper author independently devised a coding rubric based upon a reading of the comments . We then compared our separate rubrics to synthesize a final rubric that each author used to independently code the comments . The final coding rubric categorized comments as including zero or more of the following : observations , questions , hypotheses , links or references to other views , usage tips , socializing or joking , affirmations of other comments , to - dos for future actions , and tests of system functionality . We also coded whether or not comments made reference to data naming or collection issues , or to concerns about the Web site or visualization design . The coded results were compared using Cohen’s figure 4 : scatterplot of u . s . states showing median household income ( x - axis ) vs . retail sales per capita ( y - axis ) . new hampshire and Delaware have the highest retail sales . January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 | communications of thE acm 93 kappa statistic . The lowest pairwise kappa value was 0 . 74 , indicating a satisfactory inter - rater reliability . Most commentary on sense . us involved data analysis . A typical comment made note of an observed trend or outlier , often coupled with questions , explanatory hypotheses , or both . A typical reply involved discussing hypotheses or answering questions . The results of coding the comments are shown in Figure 5 . In total , 80 . 6 % of comments involved an observation of visualized data , 35 . 5 % provided an explanatory hypothesis , and 38 . 1 % included a question about the data or a hypothesis . Most questions and hypotheses accompanied an observa - tion ( 91 . 6 % and 92 . 2 % , respectively ) and half the hypotheses were either phrased as or accompanied by a question ( 49 . 0 % ) . For example , participants in both lab studies discovered a large drop in bartenders around the 1930s and posted comments attributing the drop to alcohol prohibition . In the live deployment , one user commented on a scatterplot view , asking why New Hampshire has such a high level of retail sales per capita ( Figure 4 ) . Another user noted that New Hampshire does not have sales tax , and neither does Delaware , the second highest in retail sales . In this fashion , discussion regularly involved the introduction of contextual information not present in the visualization . For instance , Figure 1 includes a timeline of events that was iteratively constructed by multiple users , while the graph of teachers in Figure 6 notes the introduction of compulsory education . One instance of social data analysis occurred around a rise , fall , and slight resurgence in the percentage of dentists in the labor force . The first comment ( one of the five seed comments ) noted the trends and asked what was happen - ing . One subject responded in a separate thread , “Maybe this has to do with fluoridation ? But there’s a bump . . . but kids got spoiled and had a lot of candy ? ? ” To this another subject responded “As preventative dentistry has become more effec - tive , dentists have continued to look for ways to continue working ( e . g . , most people see the dentist twice a year now v . once a year just a few decades ago ) . ” Perhaps the most telling comment , however , included a link to a different view , showing both dentists and dental technicians . As dentists had declined in percentage , technicians had grown substantially , indicating specialization within the field . To this , another user asked “I wonder if school has become too expensive for people to think about dentistry , or at least their own practice when they can go to technical school for less ? ” Visual data analysis , historical knowledge , and personal anecdote all played a role in the sensemaking process , explicating various factors shaping the data . Another role of comments was to aid data interpreta - tion , especially in cases of unclear meaning or anomalies in data collection . Overall , 15 . 7 % of comments referenced data naming , categorization , or collection issues . One promi - nent occupation was labeled “Operative , ” a general cate - gory consisting largely of skilled labor . This term had little meaning to subjects , one of whom asked “what the hell is an operative ? ” Others responded to reinforce the question or to suggest an explanation , e . g . , “I bet they mean factory worker . ” Another subject agreed , noting that the years of the rise and fall of operatives seemed consistent with factory workers . Other examples include views missing data for a single year ( 1940 was a common culprit ) , leading users to comment on the probable case of missing data . Some users were less interested in specific views than in recurring patterns . One user was interested in exploring careers that were historically male - dominated , but have seen increasing numbers of females in the last half - century . The user systematically explored the data , saving views in a bookmark trail later shared in a comment named “Women’s Rise . ” Similarly , a more mathematically minded participant was interested in patterns of job fluctuations , creating a trail showcasing recurring distributions . Another searched for jobs that had been usurped by technology , such as bank tellers and telephone operators . In each of these cases , the result was a tour or story winding through multiple views . Overall , 14 . 2 % of comments referenced an additional view , either implicitly in the text or explicitly through drag - and - drop bookmark links . Although 22 of the 24 lab study subjects ( 87 . 5 % ) saved at least one view to the bookmark trail , only 14 ( 58 . 3 % ) created one or more drag - and - drop bookmark links . The amount of view linking varied by user , ranging from 0 to 19 links with an average of 2 . 17 . Comments served other purposes as well . A number were simple tests of system functionality ( 5 . 6 % ) , often deleted by Testing TipsTo - do Affirmation 0 % 1 . 5 % 2 . 6 % 4 . 1 % 5 . 6 % 9 . 0 % 9 . 0 % 14 . 2 % 15 . 7 % 35 . 5 % 38 . 1 % 80 . 6 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % System Design Socializing LinkingData Integrity Observation HypothesisQuestion figure 5 : content analysis categorization of sense . us comments . categories are not mutually exclusive . figure 6 : Visualization of the number of teachers . annotations indicate the start of compulsory education and the rise of teachers in the post - World War ii era . 94 communications of thE acm | January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 research highlights the user . Some included tips for using the system ( 4 . 1 % ) , not - ing how to take advantage of specific features . Overall , 9 . 0 % of comments referenced the site design , either in the form of usage tips or feature requests . A few comments included to - dos for future work ( 2 . 6 % ) , such as later adding a link to a relevant wikipedia article . Others served solely as affirma - tions to another comment ( 1 . 5 % ) . For example , people stat - ing “I agree with that” to support a hypothesis . In many cases , study participants would note out loud “that is interesting ! ” without posting a comment to the system . Finally , some comments were social in nature ( 9 . 0 % ) . Most pointed out trends in the data , but did so in a joking manner . One user built a view comparing female lawyers and bartenders , writing “Women at the bar and behind the bar . ” In the pilot study , one of our lab members annotated a drop in stock brokers after 1930 with a picture of a person’s trajectory off a skyscraper ( Figure 7 ) . This elicited smiles and laughter from subjects in the subsequent study , one of whom replied with an affirmation simply saying “Whoa ! ” We also analyzed the structural aspect of comments . Excluding comments from the pilot study , deleted test comments , and those written by the paper authors , 195 comments were collected . Of those , 140 ( 71 . 8 % ) started new discussion threads while 55 ( 28 . 2 % ) were replies to exist - ing threads . The average thread length was 1 . 35 comments ( SD 0 . 82 ) , with a maximum of 5 comments . In some cases , discussion spanned multiple threads . 5 . 5 . Graphical annotation Next , we wanted to understand how graphical annotations were used and to what degree they contributed to social data analysis . Of the 195 nonpilot , nondeleted comments , 68 ( 35 . 9 % ) included annotations . The vast majority ( 88 . 6 % ) of annotations involved pointing to items or trends of interest . The others ( 11 . 4 % ) involved more playful expression , such as drawn smiley faces and the visual commentary of Figure 7 . Across these annotations , a total of 179 “shapes” were drawn , with the options being free - form ink , lines , arrows , rectangles , ovals , and text . Arrows were the most popular shape ( 25 . 1 % of shapes ) , and were used to point to items as well as to situate information provided by text captions ( 24 . 6 % ) . Ovals ( 17 . 9 % ) were primarily used to enclose regions of interest . Free - form ink drawn with the pencil tool ( 16 . 2 % ) was used for pointing , enclosing irregularly shaped regions , and free - form drawing . Of the rest , lines made up 14 . 5 % of all shapes and rectangles only 1 . 7 % ( Figure 8 ) . A few users , particularly those with experience in graphic design , noted that graphical annotations were their favorite feature . Other users noted that the annotations were often unnecessary for comments where text could describe the trend ( s ) of interest . A few of these users added annotations to such views anyway , saying the annotations were “surprisingly satisfying , ” enabling “personal expression . ” Exit survey results somewhat reflected these views , as users ranked annotations more useful for writing their own comments ( M = 3 . 5 / 5 . 0 , SD = 0 . 85 ) than understanding others’ comments ( M = 3 . 2 / 5 . 0 , SD = 0 . 90 ) . This difference , however , did not reach statistical significance ( t ( 23 ) = −1 . 67 , p < 0 . 108 , two - tailed ) . 5 . 6 . Visitation and navigation Our next questions concerned how users navigated the visual - izations . Most users began exploring the data directly , starting from the default overview and drilling down . A few imme - diately went to the comments listing to see what others had done . Many participants searched for their own occupations and those of friends and family . Other strategies included browsing for items of interest found in the overview ( “Wow , look how the poor farmers died out” ) and formulating queries based on an over - arching interest , such as gender balance . Looking to the usage logs , navigation by interaction with the visualization or attached commentary was by far the most common navigation technique , accounting for 70 . 5 % of state views . The second most popular was the back and forward buttons at 17 . 5 % , validating our integration of the visualization with browser history mechanisms . Following a link from the comment listings accounted for 8 . 7 % of all views , while the final 3 . 3 % were due to clicking a bookmark in the bookmark trail ( Figure 9 ) . figure 7 : annotated view of stock brokers . the attached comment reads “Great depression ‘killed’ a lot of brokers . ” figure 8 : usage of sense . us graphical annotation tools . Arrows TextOvals Pencil LinesRectangles 0 % 5 % 10 % 15 % 20 % 25 % 1 . 7 % 14 . 5 % 16 . 2 % 17 . 9 % 24 . 6 % 25 . 1 % figure 9 : usage of sense . us navigation mechanisms . Visualization Back / Forward Comment Listings Bookmark Trail 0 % 10 % 20 % 30 % 40 % 50 % 60 % 70 % 80 % 3 . 3 % 8 . 7 % 17 . 5 % 70 . 5 % January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 | communications of thE acm 95 At some point , every subject explored the comment list - ings . Some felt they would find interesting views more quickly . Remarks to this effect included “I bet others have found even more interesting things” and “You get to stand on the shoulders of others . ” Other subjects were interested in specific people they knew or discovering what other people had investigated . Said one participant , “I feel like a data voy - eur . I really like seeing what other people were searching for . ” Switching between data - driven exploration and social navi - gation was common . Views discovered via comment listings often sparked new interests and catalyzed more data - driven exploration . After some exploration , participants routinely returned to the listings for more inspiration . In the survey , the question “Did you find other people’s comments use - ful for exploring the data ? ” received the highest marks ( M = 4 . 46 / 5 . 0 , SD = 0 . 63 ) . 5 . 7 . Doubly linked discussions We also wanted to investigate participant reaction to the doubly linked model of comments . All users understood the model readily and no problems were reported when users wanted to comment on a specific view . The model became more problematic when users wanted to comment on mul - tiple views . In this case , the user had to choose one view as primary , comment on that , and then reference the other views , either indirectly in the text or by creating a link from the bookmark trail . Some users expressed the opinion that creating links was a workable solution , while others wanted to be able to simultaneously compare multiple views for purposes of both analysis and commentary . One important aspect of doubly linked discussions is the problem of deter - mining identical views , despite potentially differing visual - ization parameters . In this respect , we found our indexing scheme improved the odds of discovering existing commen - tary while navigating the visualization . Across both lab stud - ies , 28 . 2 % of all unique visits to a visualization state were to a view that had been reached through two or more differing parameter settings . Without the view indexing , there would be a much higher potential for “cross talk , ” where users post comments concerning similar observations on related views , unaware of each other . Nonetheless , cross talk was observed in a total of six cases , typically when both normalized and absolute axis scales led to similar views . In two cases , par - ticipants added linking comments that bridged the related discussions . 5 . 8 . user experience Overall , users found using sense . us both enjoyable and infor - mative . In the exit survey , the question “Did you enjoy using the system ? ” received a mean rating of 4 . 0 / 5 . 0 ( SD = 0 . 52 ) . The question “Did you learn something interesting using the system ? ” received a mean rating of 4 . 2 / 5 . 0 ( SD = 0 . 65 ) . Users also provided usability remarks and suggested addi - tional collaboration features . The next section addresses a number of these requests ( Figure 10 ) . 6 . Discussion The usage we observed echoed some of the earlier findings about social data analysis . 27 In particular , we saw cascading conversation threads in which users asked questions , stated hypotheses , and proposed explanations , all in a social con - text . A significant number of comments were playful or joking , as were a few graphical annotations . It has been hypothesized that one of the spurs to social data analysis is a situation in which each user brought a unique perspective to bear . 27 In the case of job data , this unique perspective was the set of professions of friends and family of the user . We did indeed see people exploring in this fashion , covering a broad set of the data . On the other hand , we observed a somewhat more busi - nesslike tone to analysis than was seen previously . This was likely in part due to the corporate and laboratory settings of use . The presence of an observer in the lab studies undoubt - edly also influenced results , though many users reported they had fun conducting social data analysis . Further research is clearly needed to understand the broad principles of analytical behavior in the context of visualizations . Since the original publication of this article , some of that research has occurred . In the next sections , as we describe research directions suggested by reactions to sense . us , we also provide brief notes on how recent work has shed light on issues of collaboration around visualizations . 6 . 1 . mechanisms for social data analysis The doubly linked discussion model was probably the most effective and well - liked novel feature of sense . us . If there was any frustration with this feature , it was that users had to navigate to a precise location to see related comments . This shortcoming , coupled with the high rate of within - applet navigation ( Figure 9 ) , raises an intriguing question for future research : would it be helpful to embed social navigation cues in the visualization or interface widgets themselves ? For example , a dynamic query widget used to filter the visualization might include visual cues of how many people have visited or commented on the views reachable using the widget , providing information scent by which the user can purposefully navigate toward either popular or unpopular views . Such widgets could aid the discovery of interesting trends that simply had not yet been seen . In our context , one might imagine a slider—controlling a view parameter— with marks indicating the presence of comments at specific parameter values . Similar techniques can be devised for other interface widgets . A recent system for such “scented widgets” 28 provides evidence that such cues can result in increased revisitation to popular views while also directing users’ attention to under - explored data regions . figure 10 : Results of poststudy survey . mean values are shown , error bars indicate standard deviation . 1 Enjoyed using system 2 Learned interesting things 3 Other’s comments useful 4 Own annotations useful 5 Other’s annotations useful 0 1 2 3 4 5 96 communications of thE acm | January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 research highlights A second approach , suggested by many users , would be to show commentary related , though not directly attached to , the current view . Requested features include show - ing comments from other views that contain links to the current view ( “trackbacks” ) , and related commentary on “nearby” or “similar” views . The latter could help allevi - ate cross talk . Along these lines , there are appealing pos - sibilities for generalizing the notion of view indexing , for example , suggesting conversations on views deemed semantically similar to the current view . This would require an index of visualization state providing not just equality comparisons , but distance measures . Such a retrieval model might be used to provide additional ben - efits , such as general searchability and data - aware auto - complete mechanisms . Users have also suggested using visitation data or explicit ratings of “interestingness” to suggest views of potential interest . Others suggested supporting keyword tagging of comments 22 and mining usage data . For exam - ple , both manual and automated tagging of questions or other action items could be used to help direct collabora - tive effort . The scope of comment visibility is a larger issue that affects all discussion models . What happens when the amount of discussion becomes untenably large , or users don’t want their activity exposed to everyone ? The ability to form groups and limit comment visibility to group mem - bers is one means requested by users to support privacy and make discussion - following both more relevant and tractable . Although individual usage varied substantially , most lab study users ( 87 . 5 % ) did use the bookmark trails , which proved essential for comments that included multiple views . Multiple users remarked on the usefulness of the bookmark trails and wanted to more easily share trails as first class objects . At times , users were frustrated when following multiple links in a comment , as the original comment would disappear when a new view was loaded , requiring use of the back button to perform “hub - and - spoke” browsing . In response , users suggested adding a dedicated “presentation” mode to facilitate tours and storytelling . Finally , the graphical annotations saw significant usage , despite mixed reactions from users . Though they were used for pointing , many users did not find them necessary for dis - ambiguation . We expect that the value of annotations varies significantly depending on the type of visualization being referenced . Regardless , annotations were used regularly for pointing and sometimes for socializing . If the free - form annotations prove helpful , a second chal - lenge would be to extend them to cover dynamic or evolving data sets . The decoupled nature of geometric annotations can prove problematic when the underlying data changes . Similar problems have been investigated in the context of document annotation . 5 More recent work 19 has explored “data - aware” annotations that translate user selections into declarative queries over the underlying data , allowing annotations to be applied to time - varying data and different visual encodings . 6 . 2 . communities and data Since the original sense . us experiment , there have been several new examples of systems that support conversation around data . Web sites such as Swivel . com have provided social - network - style platforms for conversation around data , along with basic charting capabilities . Tableau Software launched its Tableau Server product , which ( much like Spotfire’s DecisionSite Posters ) allows users to collabo - rate asynchronously around intranet - based visualizations . Little has been published about usage of these systems , however . One new system where results have been reported is the Many Eyes Web site . 26 In contrast to sense . us , or tools like Tableau or Spotfire , Many Eyes is freely available on the pub - lic internet and allows users to upload their own data . Unlike data - oriented sites like Swivel , Many Eyes lets users apply more than a dozen interactive visualization techniques . They may then have discussions around visualizations , though annotation capabilities are more basic than in sense . us . The experiences on the site 26 lend support to the idea that visu - alization can catalyze discussion . While these discussions can be analytical , they also can be purely social , partisan , or game - like . In addition , the move from a closed setting to the public internet has made clear that these discussions can be highly distributed , 13 with a significant proportion of collabo - ration occurring ( via hyperlinks ) off the site . Designing for this type of multisite conversation suggests a whole new set of challenges . 7 . conclusion In this article , we investigated mechanisms supporting asynchronous collaboration around interactive information visualization , seeking to more tightly tie the perceptual and cognitive benefits of visualization to social processes of sen - semaking . To do so , we implemented a collaborative data visualization site , sense . us . We then observed usage of the site in order to better understand the social dynamics sur - rounding collective use of visualizations as well as the effi - cacy of the particular features . The features of the site—doubly linked discussions , bookmark trails , geometric annotations , and comment listings—were all exploited by users . The doubly linked discussions successfully enabled users to fluidly transfer attention between visualization and commentary and we suggested ways to further improve this type of discussion . Bookmark trails and geometric annotations were also well used , enabling tours through multiple views and pointing to items of interest , respectively . Finally , users played the roles of both voyager and voyeur , alternating between data - driven exploration directly within the visualization and social navi - gation through comment listings and user profiles to dis - cover new views of interest . Overall , we believe these results show the value of focus - ing on the social aspects of visual analysis . Our user stud - ies indicate that combining conversation and visual data analysis can help people explore a data set both broadly and deeply . From a design perspective , there lies a promising opportunity for exploring new widgets and modes of inter - action aimed at enhancing collaboration . January 2009 | Vol . 52 | no . 1 | communications of thE acm 97 acknowledgments We thank Jesse Kriss , Frank van Ham , Doug Fritz , Kate Hollenbach , Steve Whittaker , David Millen , and Maneesh Agrawala for insightful discussions . We also would like to thank all the study participants and users of our system . References 1 . anupam , V . , bajaj , c . l . , schikore , D . , and shikore , m . representations in distributed cognitive tasks . IEEE Computer 27 , 7 ( 1994 ) , 37 – 43 . 2 . benbunan - fich , r . , hiltz , s . r . , and turoff , m . a comparative content analysis of face - to - face vs . asynchronous group decision making . Decision Support Systems 34 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 457 – 469 . 3 . benko , h . , ishak , e . w . , and feiner , s . collaborative mixed reality visualization of an archaeological excavation . in IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality ( ISMAR 2004 ) ( arlington , Va , 2004 ) , 132 – 140 . 4 . brodlie , K . w . , Duce , D . a . , gallop , J . r . , walton , J . P . r . b . , and wood , J . D . Distributed and collaborative visualization . Computer Graphics Forum 23 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 223 – 251 . 5 . brush , a . , bargeron , D . , gupta , a . , and cadiz , J . robust annotation positioning in digital documents . in Proceedings of ACM Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 2001 ) , 2001 . 6 . card , s . K . , mackinlay , J . D . , and shneiderman , b . Readings in Information Visualization : Using Vision to Think . morgan - Kaufmann , 1999 . 7 . carter , s . , mankoff , J . , and goddi , P . building connections among loosely coupled groups : hebb’s rule at work . Journal of Computer - Supported Cooperative Work 13 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 305 – 327 . 8 . chuah , m . c . and roth , s . f . Visualizing common ground . in Proceedings of the Conference on Information Visualization ( IV ) ( los alamitos , usa , 2003 ) , ieee computer society , 365 – 372 . 9 . chui , y . - P . and heng , P . - a . enhancing view consistency in collaborative medical visualization systems using predictive - based attitude estimation . in First IEEE International Workshop on Medical Imaging and Augmented Reality ( MIAR’01 ) ( hong Kong , china ) , 2001 . 10 . churchill , e . f . , trevor , J . , bly , s . , nelson , l . , and cubranic , D . anchored conversations : chatting in the context of a document . in ACM CHI 2000 , 2000 . 11 . clark , h . h . Pointing and placing . in Pointing . Where Language , Culture , and Cognition Meet . s . Kita , ed . erlbaum , 2003 , 243 – 268 . 12 . clark , h . h . and brennan , s . e . grounding in communication . in Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition ( 1991 ) , american Psychological association , 127 – 149 . 13 . Danis , c . m . , Viégas , f . b . , wattenberg , m . , and Kriss , J . your place or mine ? Visualization as a community component . in Proceedings of ACM Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 2008 ) , 2008 . 14 . Dietz , P . h . and leigh , D . l . Diamondtouch : a multi - user touch technology . in Proceedings of ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , 2001 , 219 – 226 . 15 . Dourish , P . and chalmers , m . running out of space : models of information navigation . in Human Computer Interaction ( HCI’94 ) , 1994 . 16 . Dynamics , g . command post of the future . website . accessed : november , 2007 . 17 . grudin , J . groupware and social dynamics : eight challenges for developers . Communications of the ACM 37 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 92 – 105 . 18 . heer , J . socializing visualization . in ACM CHI 2006 Workshop on Social Visualization , 2006 . 19 . heer , J . , agrawala , m . , and willett , w . generalized selection via interactive query relaxation . in ACM CHI 2008 , 959 – 969 . 20 . hill , w . c . and hollan , J . D . Deixis and the future of visualization excellence . in Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ( 1991 ) , 314 – 319 . 21 . Johansen , r . Groupware : Computer Support for Business Teams . the free Press , new york , 1988 . 22 . millen , D . r . , feinberg , J . , and Keer , b . Dogear : social bookmarking in the enterprise . in Proceedings of ACM CHI 2006 , 111 – 120 . 23 . thomas , J . and cook , K . Illuminating the Path : The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics . ieee computer society , 2005 . 24 . Viégas , f . b . , danah boyd , nguyen , D . h . , Potter , J . , and Donath , J . Digital artifacts for remembering and storytelling : Posthistory and social network fragments . in Proceedings of Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICCSS ) ( 2004 ) , 105 – 111 . 25 . Viégas , f . b . and wattenberg , m . communication - minded visualization : a call to action . IBM Systems Journal 45 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 801 – 812 . 26 . Viégas , f . b . , wattenberg , m . , van ham , f . , Kriss , J . , and mcKeon , m . many eyes : a site for visualization at internet scale . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12 , 5 ( nov . / Dec . 2007 ) , 1121 – 1128 . 27 . wattenberg , m . and Kriss , J . Designing for social data analysis . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12 , 4 ( July – august 2006 ) , 549 – 557 . 28 . willett , w . , heer , J . , and agrawala , m . scented widgets : improving navigation cues with embedded visualizations . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13 , 6 ( nov . / Dec . 2007 ) , 1129 – 1136 . Jeffrey Heer ( jheer @ stanford . edu ) , computer science Department , stanford university , stanford , ca . Fernanda B . Viégas ( viegasf @ us . ibm . com ) , Visual communication lab ibm t . J . watson research center , cambridge , ma . Martin Wattenberg ( mwatten @ us . ibm . com ) , Visual communication lab , ibm t . J . watson research center , cambridge , ma . © acm 0001 - 0782 / 09 / 0001 $ 5 . 00 ◆ ACM Professional Members can enjoy the convenience of making a single payment for their entire tenure as an ACM Member , and also be protected from future price increases by taking advantage of ACM ' s Lifetime Membership option . ◆ ACM Lifetime Membership dues may be tax deductible under certain circumstances , so becoming a Lifetime Member can have additional advantages if you act before the end of 2008 . ( Please consult with your tax advisor . ) ◆ Lifetime Members receive a certiﬁcate of recognition suitable for framing , and enjoy all of the beneﬁts of ACM Professional Membership . Learn more and apply at : http : / / www . acm . org / life Take Advantage of ACM’s Lifetime Membership Plan ! CACM lifetime mem half page ad : Layout 1 9 / 4 / 08 4 : 04 PM Page 1