The extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is fundamental to the form and function of soft connective tissues . Cells within these tissues establish the ECM during development , maintain it in health , remodel it during adaptations and repair it in response to disease and injury 1 . At the same time , the ECM influences many cellular functions , including migration , growth , differentiation and even sur - vival 2 . This reciprocal relationship was recognized over 30 years ago and has remained a central concept in cell biology 3 . Importantly , cell – ECM inter actions are not only influenced by the chemical composition and structural organization of the ECM , but also its mechanical proper - ties . Thus , cells must sense and regulate ECM mechanics to promote mechanical homeostasis — that is , to maintai n tissue - level structural integrity and functionality . Mechanical loads acting on a tissue are perceived by resident cells as stimuli that are transmitted through , or exerted on , constituents of the ECM , ECM receptors and intracellular structures . Therefore , mechanical homeo - stasis involves ECM constituents such as : collagens and elastin , which support and transmit mechanical loads ; transmembrane receptors for these constituents , primarily integrins , which connect extracellular and intra cellular structures , plus their associated integrin linker proteins ( such as talin and vinculin ) , which connect integrins to the cytoskeleton ; and actin filaments , non - muscle myosi n and associated proteins , which constitute the cyto skeleton and transmit mechanical loads or signals within the cell ( FIG . 1 ) . Much has been learnt since the mid - 1970s about how cells sense and regulate the mechanical properties of the ECM 4 , 5 , but the motivation for studying the ECM has generally been to gain insights into developmental processes , disease progression or wound healing 6 , 7 . By contrast , in this Review we consider how mechanical loads on transmembrane complexes and cytoskeletal structures are fundamental to the cell – ECM inter actions that govern mechanical homeostasis in health . The cen - tral idea is that health requires that cells first sense the mechanics of the ECM and then regulate it to maintain the desired properties ; loss of these complementary homeostatic processes leads to fibrosis , mechanical failure or other pathologies . To this end , here we focus on integrative mechanosensing and mechanoregulation of the ECM across different length and time scales to understand mechanical homeostasis of the ECM . Key players in mechanical homeostasis To understand mechanical homeostasis , it is important to first introduce the key players involved in this process — the ECM , effectors and sensors . The substrate . Although the ECM comprises over 300 proteins , 200 glycoproteins and 30 proteoglycan s ( PGs ) 8 , its mechanical properties often depend largely on three constituents : elastic fibres , fibrillar collagens , glyco saminoglycans ( GAGs ) and the related PGs . Elastic fibres consist of a core of elastin and a surround - ing sheath of microfibrils , including the glyco proteins fibrillin and fibulin . These fibres endow tissues with extensibility ( elastic fibres can extend up to 150 % with - out failure ) and resilience ( the ability to recoil upon unloading ) ; they are also the most bio logically , chemi - cally and thermally stable constituents of the ECM 9 , 10 . 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Yale University . 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering , Yale University . 3 Department of Cell Biology , Yale University . 4 Department of Medicine , Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut , 06520 USA . Correspondence to M . A . S . e - mail : martin . schwartz @ yale . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3896 Published online 22 October 2014 Homeostasis An active promotion of equilibrium by biological systems . Homeostasis is a process , not a state . It requires both a sensor and an effector mechanism . Integrins Heterodimeric transmembrane protein complexes that are fundamental to mechanically linking the extracellular matrix to the cytoskeleton , and particularly to actin filaments . Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis Jay D . Humphrey 1 , Eric R . Dufresne 2 , 3 and Martin A . Schwartz 1 , 3 , 4 Abstract | Soft connective tissues at steady state are dynamic ; resident cells continually read environmental cues and respond to them to promote homeostasis , including maintenance of the mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) that are fundamental to cellular and tissue health . The mechanosensing process involves assessment of the mechanics of the ECM by the cells through integrins and the actomyosin cytoskeleton , and is followed by a mechanoregulation process , which includes the deposition , rearrangement or removal of the ECM to maintain overall form and function . Progress towards understanding the molecular , cellular and tissue - level effects that promote mechanical homeostasis has helped to identify key questions for future research . R E V I E W S 802 | DECEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology ECM Integrins Fibroblast Nucleus ECM α β Integrin Signallingmolecules Linkerproteins MAPK RHO Signallingpathways Forcegeneration Cell membrane Actin Myosin II Filamin Integrin linker proteins Intracellular proteins , such as talin , filamin , α ‑actinin , PINCH , parvin , vinculin and paxillin , that provide vital links between the cytosolic domain of integrins and the cytoskeleton . Williams syndrome A genetic disorder resulting from the deletion of multiple genes on chromosome 7 , including the gene encoding elastin , that results in cardiovascular disease and neurodevelopmental problems . Elastic fibres are deposited and organized before adulthood and have long half - lives ( for example , 50 to 70 years in human arteries 9 ) . They thereby provide a ‘mechanical memory’ in that they are pre - stressed ( that is , have baseline stress ) owing to somatic growth and recoil when unloaded from their homeostatic state . Because functional elastic fibres cannot be organized in adulthood , any mechanical damage or proteolytic degradation that they undergo results in irreversible changes in tissue form and function . Two prime exam - ples are ageing - induced stiffening of elastic arteries and the wrinkling of skin , both of which arise in part from the loss of elastic fibre integrity via normal degrada - tion kinetics or mechanical fatigue . Mutations in the genes for elastin or elastin - associated glyco proteins are responsible for Williams syndrome and Marfan syndrom e , among others 10 . Collagen is the most abundant protein in the human body : it exists in over 25 types , the most common being fibrillar types I and III . In contrast to elastic fibres , col - lagen fibres endow connective tissues with its material stiffness ( how much stress is required to deform the tissue when it is strained ) and strength ( the maximum stress applies to a tissue that will lead to its failure ) ( BOX 1 ) . They also have relatively short half - lives ( BOX 2 ) and thus are not subject to mechanical fatigue . Rather , their remodelling ( which involves their reorientation or crosslinking ) or turnover ( their rate of synthesis and degradation ) under stress is crucial to connective tissue homeostasis . Collagen fibres are built hierarchi - cally , from molecules ( ~ 300 nm long and 1 . 5 nm in diameter ) to fibrils ( 20 – 100 nm in diameter ) to fibres ( 0 . 5 – 20 μm in diameter ) ; cells must therefore sense and regulate collagen across these different length scales . The cell - mediated fibrillogenesis of type I collagen is aided through its association with other constituents of the ECM , including fibronectin , type V collagen and the PG biglycan . Mutations in the genes for colla - gen I and III are responsible for osteogenesis imperfecta and Ehlers – Danlos syndrome , among other condi - tions , and mutations in constituents associated with c ollagen I and III lead to similar structural defects 11 . Like elastic fibres , the contributions of collagen fibres to the overall structural integrity of tissues depends on fibre density , orientation , undulation , crosslinking , pre - stress and interactions with other ECM components . Interestingly , given their different times of deposition and pre - stresses , elastic fibres influence the stiffness of collagen fibres by affecting their undulation in vivo 12 . As a result , loss of elastic fibre integrity affects overall tissue mechanics in at least two important ways . GAGs are high - molecular - weight molecules con - sisting of repeating disaccharide units ; they are highly negatively charged owing to the attached sulphat e and carboxyl groups . PGs are GAGs attached to a protein core . GAGs and PGs perform multiple functions , including sequestering growth factors . In addition , they are extensively hydrated and thereby contrib - ute to the compressive stiffness of connective tissues . Maintenance of the mechanical properties of the ECM depends on the continual synthesis , incorpo - ration and degradation of these and other structural constituent s 1 , 13 , 14 , which interact in complex and not yet fully understood ways . The effectors . Fibroblasts are the primary cells that build and maintain the ECM in most soft connective tissues ( FIG . 1 ) . They can secrete the elastin , different types of collagens , glycoproteins and GAGs that consti - tute a specific tissue , and they coordinate their synthetic and mechanical machinery to organize the constituents that give rise to the overall structural organization , and thus mechanical properties , of the tissues . They can also secrete proteases , most notably members of the matrix metalloproteinase family , which degrade the various structural constituents 15 . Fibroblasts can differentiate into myofibroblasts when stimulated by transforming growth factor - β ( TGFβ ) under conditions Figure 1 | Key components in mechanical homeostasis of soft connective tissue . Schematic depicting a fibroblast embedded in the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) consisting primarily of collagen , fibronectin and glycosaminoglycans , with an expanded view showing cell – ECM interactions and associated intracellular structures . In particular , cells interact mechanically with the ECM via heterodimeric transmembrane receptors called integrins , which in turn interact with intracellular signalling molecules ( including focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) and SRC ) and physically connect to cytoskeletal actin via a host of linker proteins ( including talin , vinculin , filamin , α - actinin and the complex involving integrin - linked protein kinase ( ILK ) , PINCH and parvin ) . Key signalling pathways associated with integrin activation include the RHO – RHO - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) and mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathways . The mechanostimulation of cells is complemented in most situations by chemical stimulation through soluble ligands ( not shown ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | DECEMBER 2014 | 803 F O C U S O N t h e e x t r a C e l l U l a r m at r i x © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Marfan syndrome A genetic disorder that affects connective tissues throughout the body , particularly in the heart , blood vessels , bones , joints and eyes . The affected extracellular matrix glycoprotein is fibrillin 1 . of high tensile stress , which increases both their ability to synthesize ECM components and their contractile capacity 14 , 16 . The increase in contractile capacity is due , in part , to the incorporation of smooth muscle α - actin within the cytoskeletal stress fibres and an increase in the clustering of integrins at focal adhesions . This pheno type is often associated with fibrotic pathologies or aberrant wound healing and is not discussed further here . Although many other cell types , including macro - phages , contribute either directly or indirectly to the mechanical homeostasis in connective tissues , in this Review we focus on mechanotransduction in fibroblasts . The sensors . The main cellular components that medi - ate the sensing and regulation of ECM mechanics are integrins , which bind ECM proteins , the associated cytoskeletal and signalling proteins of focal adhesions , and the actomyosin cytoskeleton ( FIG . 1 ) . A second set of important players are the signalling components that regulate the assembly of these structures ; these are primarily RHO - family small GTPases and their down - stream effectors , such as RHO - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) and myosin light chain kinases . In principal , every component in the mechanical linkage between the ECM and the actin cytoskeleton that bears force is a potential mechanotransducer 17 , although some compo - nents likely transmit force without mechanotransduc - tion ( that is , without converting force into meaningful biochemical signals ) . Integrin linker proteins , which include talin and vinculin , the complex involving i ntegrin - linked protein kinase ( ILK ) , PINCH ( also known as LIMS1 ) and parvin , as well as filamin and α - actinin , provide vital links between integrins and actin 17 ( FIG . 1 ) . Inhibiting or changing these compo - nents leads to altered sensing of stiffness or stress and strain through the ECM . As discussed in detail below , mechanosensing is thought to be mediated by force - induced changes in protein conformations or the kinetics of assembly and disassembly of protein complexes . A critical concept rel - evant to all mechanosensing through integrin - mediated adhesions is that baseline stress , or pre - stress , from endogenous contractility tunes the responses of a cell to external forces 18 . Thus , tension from endogenous acto - myosin on these linkages modulates their sub sequent responses to externally applied forces . This aspect greatly complicates efforts to unravel mechanosensory pathways , as inhibitors can have indirect effects by alter - ing cytoskeletal organization and / or decreasing pre - stress . This facet needs to be taken into account when interpreting many experimental results . Mechanobiological phenomena in tissue Mechanobiology refers both to how biological systems sense and respond to mechanical signals and how they exert force and control the mechanical properties of their surroundings . Mechanobiological effects span the full range of biological organization , from molecules to cells to organisms , but here we focus on the tissue level , where the ECM plays a central part . Whereas ECM was once thought to serve only a structural role ( maintain - ing tissue form under mechanical loads and providing a physical support system for cell adhesion and migra - tion ) , we now know that it also serves an important instructional role ( providing biochemical and bio - mechanical cues that influence a range of cell activities , including migration , adhesion , phenotypic modulation and survival ) . An understanding of the mechanobiology of tissues thus requires us to understand the direct link between molecular mechanisms and tissue - level phe - nomena . It is challenging , however , to reconcile detailed descriptions of molecular mechanisms with coarse - grained mechanical quantities , including stress , strain and stiffness . These quantities ( BOX 1 ) , which cannot be Box 1 | Terms useful in mechanics and mechanobiology Understanding mechanical homeostasis requires an appreciation of cell - and tissue - level mechanics . To this end , it is important to note some basic terminology and definitions . Stress A measure of ‘force intensity’ , given as force per ( oriented ) area and typically reported in units of one newton per square metre ( N / m 2 ) , which is called a pascal ( Pa ) . Note that 1 nN / μ m 2 = 1 kPa ( where nN indicates a nano - newton and μ m indicates a micron , with 1 nN = 10 −9 N and 1 μ m = 10 −6 m ) , which shows equivalence between units used in molecular and cell - or tissue - level studies . Strain A normalized measure of deformation that indicates changes in lengths or angles within a material , typically induced by applied stresses . Strain is dimensionless and sometimes represented as a percent change . Material stiffness A measure of resistance to deformation ; that is , how stress changes in response to strain . The inverse of stiffness is compliance , a measure of how strain changes in response to stress . An ideal material with an infinite material stiffness is said to be rigid . Structural stiffness In contrast to material stiffness , structural stiffness is a measure that combines the effects of material stiffness and geometry . For example , a thin - walled tube composed of a stiff material can have the same structural stiffness as a thick - walled tube composed of a compliant material . Material stiffness seems to be conserved in arteries while structural stiffness changes with varying pressure . Strength A measure of resistance to material damage or failure ; it reflects maximal values of stress that can be tolerated before failure . The terms hard and soft reflect a resistance to penetration or being scratched and thus particular aspects of strength . Elastic This term describes a mechanical behaviour that does not dissipate energy ; thus , the material returns to its original geometry when unloaded . Inelastic behaviours include viscous behaviour ( fluids ) , plastic behaviour ( an irreversible shear - induced deformation common in ductile metals ) and damage , which includes fatigue ( loss of strength due to repeated mechanical loading ) . Viscoelastic refers to combined fluid - like and solid - like behaviour . Viscoelastic responses are often elastic ( that is , energy preserving ) on short timescales but viscous ( that is , energy dissipative ) when force is maintained over longer times . Silly putty is an excellent example of a material that exhibits viscoelasticity , as are cytoskeletal networks . These mechanical behaviours are often quantified via relationships between stress and strain , or their rates , which necessitates the determination of values of specific material parameters . Young’s modulus ( also known as the tensile modulus or elastic modulus ) is such a parameter for materials exhibiting a linear stress – strain behaviour under small deformations ; the material stiffness is the same in these materials independent of the stress or strain . Nonlinear behaviours , which are characteristic of soft connective tissues and the cytoskeleton , require different material parameters for their description . Finally , note that an exponential stress – strain behaviour results in a linear relationship between stiffness and stress . Hence , an increased pre - stress supports an increased initial stiffness , which in turn often affects the cell phenotype . R E V I E W S 804 | DECEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Osteogenesis imperfecta A genetic disorder that presents as eight types , having mild to lethal consequences . It results primarily from mutations that affect collagen type I and leads to brittle bones , among other effects . Ehlers – Danlos syndrome A group of six heritable disorders caused by different defects in the synthesis of collagen , all of which exhibit joint laxity , fragile skin and easy bruising . Mechanotransduction Conversion of mechanical stimuli into biochemical information by cells . Actomyosin Combination of thin ( actin ) and thick ( myosin ) cytoskeletal filaments that enable forceful contractions powered by ATP . Inclusion of smooth muscle α ‑actin into actomyosin structures based on non‑muscle myosin results in stress fibres that contract more forcefully . sensed directly at a molecular scale 19 , are nevertheless regulated to maintain homeostatic values 13 , 20 and are fundamental descriptors of tissue - level form and func - tion . For example , interstitial arterial cells ( smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts ) establish a preferred ECM stiffness during development and then tend to maintain this value over a lifetime , at least in the absence of dis - ease or injury 21 . Thus , arterial wall stiffness is similar within a single species despite many genetic variations or alterations in blood pressure 22 , and across multiple species ( indeed , from lobsters to whales ) despite large variations in ECM composition , blood pressure and body size 23 . Similar observations have been made for diverse connective tissues , including tendons , skin and the heart 24 , 25 . To promote mechanical homeostasis in health , cells must use negative feedback mechanisms that sense changes within the ECM and restore values back to normal ( FIG . 2 ) . For example , under normal conditions , acute increases in stiffness should activate mechanisms that render the ECM more compliant , whereas acute decreases in stiffness should trigger pathways that result in ECM stiffening . Diverse pathologies seem to result from either a loss of negative feedback 26 – 29 or a switch to positive feedback mechanisms ( FIG . 2 ) . For example , acute increases in stress and strain can result in continued ECM stiffening , often referred to as fibrosi s . Given the fundamental role of integrins in both sensing and mechanically regulating the ECM , it is not surprising that recent anti - fibrotic therapeutic strategies target integrins 30 , 31 . Notwithstanding the importance of understanding failed mechanisms in disease , our focus is on the normal mechanisms that ensure proper form and function of soft connective tissues ( FIG . 3 ) . Cellular regulation of ECM Cells establish the ECM during development and subse - quently determine its composition , structure and mechan - ical properties , a process that is regulated by mechanics . Mechanical stress within the ECM . Soft connective tis - sues exhibit a nonlinear relationship between stress and strain that is approximately exponential . An interesting property of this relationship is that stiffness relates linearly to stress 32 ; as a result , the cellular control of ECM stress is equivalent to controlling ECM stiffness . Considerable understanding of the regulation of ECM stress has come from studying tissue equivalents , often collagen or fibrin gels seeded with fibroblasts . For example , when seeded within initially stress - free but mechanically constrained collagen gels , fibroblasts adhere to the ECM and con - tract , which develops tensile stresses that within hours become established as part of the steady state 33 ; this pro - cess is known as tensional homeostasis 7 . Of particular note , if this endogenous stress is externally increased or decreased , the cells return the stress to its original level . Because the ECM stiffens proportionally with stress , tensional homeostasis represents one method to regu - late ECM stiffness . It is important to note that a residual ECM tension remains when the actomyosin machinery of the cell is disrupted in these stressed gels 34 , which sug - gests that the cells lock in part of the stresses ( or strains ) , perhap s by crosslinking the remodelled ECM . Regardless of the precise mechanisms , tensional home - ostasis seems to establish a favourable mechanical environ - ment for cell function . Interestingly , the measured levels of endogenous stress in tissue equivalents ( ~ 3 – 5 kPa ) 35 , 36 are comparable to the levels of stress that have been measured at focal adhesions ( ~ 3 – 5 . 5 kPa ) 37 , 38 . This observed con - sistency in established levels of stress across spatial scales for different matrices and cells ( including non - contractile smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts ) suggests that there is a ‘homeostatic target’ value of interstitial stress , not unlike the well - known target value of wall shear stress for endothelial cells in large arteries ( which is ~ 1 . 5 Pa in humans ) 39 . Mechanical homeostasis is thus achieved in the short - term through negative feedback characterized by ECM reorganization and crosslinking , and in the long - term by balancing ECM degradation and the deposition of constituents under the appropriate pre - stress . ECM turnover . All constituents of the ECM have finite half - lives ( BOX 2 ) and most are renewed through prote - olysis and synthesis , the notable exception being elastin . However , this turnover is difficult to study in vivo and is poorly recapitulated in vitro . Fortunately , computational models have provided some insights into the roles of ECM turnover in mechanical homeostasis in native tissues under physiological conditions . These models suggest that mechanical homeostasis in soft connective tissue depends primarily on four key factors 40 : the rates of ECM produc - tion , the rates of ECM removal , the mechanical properties of the ECM constituents and the degree of pre - stress that is built into these constituents when deposited . It is well known that the rates of ECM synthesis cor - relate positively with altered mechanical loading 13 , 41 , Box 2 | Loading rates affect extracellular matrix composition All soft connective tissues are subject to mechanical loading , including the ever - present effects of gravity on earth ; however , the rate of loading differs considerably across tissues and species . In humans , for example , heart rates of 60 to 70 beats per minute ( bpm ) subject heart tissue and arteries to high loading rates , respiratory rates of 12 to 20 breaths per minute subject lung tissue to intermediate loading rates , and most skin is subject to nearly static loading . Skeletal muscle and tendons can experience high loading rates during vigorous exercise , but low loading rates during rest . The half - life of fibrillar collagen has been reported to differ by ~ 5 - fold between arteries ( ~ 22 days ) and skin ( ~ 95 days ) in middle - aged to older humans ; related values are ~ 20 days for the heart , ~ 25 days for skeletal muscle , ~ 27 days for lungs and ~ 52 days for tendons and ligaments 147 . Interestingly , these findings suggest that the half - life of collagen may be less in tissues subjected to higher loading rates , consistent with the general expectation that replacement should be more frequent in tissues subjected to more demanding mechanical environments . Somewhat related , the ratio of elastic to collagen fibres also tends to correlate with loading rates in arteries . For example , this ratio in carotid arteries ( those found in the neck ) decreases from mice ( heart rate of ~ 600 bpm ) to rats ( ~ 300 bpm ) , rabbits ( ~ 230 bpm ) , dogs ( ~ 90 bpm ) and humans ( ~ 60 bpm ) , with the in vivo axial pre - stretch of the carotid artery similarly decreasing from mouse to human 148 . Interestingly , arterial elastic fibres emerged during evolution with the appearance of closed circulatory systems that are subjected to pulsatile loading and thus are found exclusively in vertebrates . However , a detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which cells sense and regulate extracellular matrix in quasi - static versus dynamic mechanical environments remain largely unknown . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | DECEMBER 2014 | 805 F O C U S O N t h e e x t r a C e l l U l a r m at r i x © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Increased loading or stiﬀness Externallyapplied loads DeformedECM Altered ECM gene expression Survival and proliferation Stiﬀ ECM Internallygenerated loads Homeostasis Fibrosis • Stabilized adhesions • Activated RHO – ROCK • Actomyosin contraction Positivefeedback Negativefeedback Fibropositors Membrane‑associated structures in embryonic cells that aid in the organized deposition of collagen within the extracellular space . They depend on actomyosin activity . as do the rates of protease synthesis ; that is , increasing mechanical loading tends to increase both the cellular production and removal of structural constituents 42 , 43 , as would be required for a process governed by negative feedback . Indeed , the mechanical state of the ECM can also influence the rate of its degradation by proteases , with increased stress tending to be protective 44 , which would also contribute to reducing stress via the reten - tion of ECM . It is intuitive that the structural integrity of a tissue depends on the mechanical properties of its constituents 32 . Recall , for example , that competent elas - tic fibres endow a tissue with resilience whereas collagen fibres contribute primarily to the stiffness and strength . Here , therefore , we emphasize an often ignored aspect of mechanical homeostasis in soft connective tissues — that newly deposited matrix must be incorporated within extant ( that is , pre - existing ) ECM under stress to ensure tissue maintenance over long periods of nearly constant loading ( FIG . 3 ) . Computational models suggest that tissue form and function can be maintained only if the struc - tural constituents that are degraded are replaced with new constituents that have the same properties , including the same level of pre - stress - induced stiffness 45 , 46 . Growing experimental evidence supports this concept of the mechanoregulation of ECM stress and hence stiff - ness , indicating that cells control the synthesis of new ECM constituents and ‘ensure’ that they have the same mechanical properties as those that have been degraded . Although collagen fibrils can self - assemble in vitro purely through thermodynamic mechanisms , their assembly and proper organization is regulated in vivo by many additional binding partners 47 , including fibronectin and biglycan , produced by the cell . For example , fibrillogen - esis of collagen I and III by both fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells seems to require fibronectin and integrins 48 , 49 ; fibronectin may serve as a scaffold on which the collagen molecules are deposited or on which the cells can act , and the requirement for integrins implies that cells must actively organize the secreted molecules . Indeed , fibro - blasts seem to organize collagen fibres via active repeti - tive cycles of cellular protrusion into the ECM , binding to the ECM , contracting to draw in the ECM , and then releasing the ECM . RHO and myosin II have crucial roles in these processes 49 – 51 : the RHO effector ROCK is impor - tant in sustaining myosin II activation , which , together with complementary actin polymerizatio n , allows cells to forcefully act on the ECM . In addition to controlling the synthesis of new ECM constituents , cells seem to establish residual tension , as seen in vitro in collagen gels 16 , 34 . This enables cells to coordinate the organization of both new and pre - existin g ECM such that they do not have to actively maintain the tension that they build into the matrix . The incorporation of this tension is likely accomplished via the crosslinking of pre - stressed ECM constituents , a process that may be mechanically regulated as well 52 . In summary , cells often actively organize the ECM through their integrins , with the actomyosin machinery allowing them to pull or push on fibres that can subsequently be entrenched to establish a new mechanical state 52 . Perhaps the most direct evidence that cells themselves pre - stress the ECM is that actomyosin activity is required for fibronectin to be assembled into fibrils 53 . In particular , soluble , folded fibronectin secreted into the extracellular space binds to α5β1 integrins and is then unfolded via actin - mediated contractility to expose otherwise cryp - tic binding sites that promote the assembly of multiple fibronectin molecules into fibrils 54 . As noted above , appropriately unfolded ( pre - stressed ) fibronectin aids in collagen fibrillogenesis , which is a major contributor to the material stiffness of most soft tissues . An interesting example occurs during embryonic development , when fibroblasts use special extensions of the cell membrane termed fibropositors , which are powered by actomyosin activity , to guide the deposition of pre - stressed collagen fibres 55 . These membrane structures allow the cell to orient collagen ( within these directed channels ) as it is incorporated within the extant ECM . However , regard - less of whether it occurs during development or in a mature organism , cell - mediated collagen fibrillogenesis involves a remarkable , multistep sequence that results in the assembly of an organized ECM . Perhaps guided by the pre - stressed fibronectin , fibroblasts use targeted integrins ( for example , α2β1 integrin ) to pull on and orient colla - gen I fibrils as they assemble into fibres 47 , 55 . This process also involves accessory proteins such as collagen V as well as those that modulate overall fibre diameter , including the PG decorin . Similar processes of pre - stressing seem to be involved in the formation of elastic fibres from the secreted , sol - uble elastin that first aggregates on the cell surface 56 . Associated proteins and glycoproteins , such as the fibulin s and fibrillins , similarly participate in the co ordinated assembly of elastic fibres that confer structural stiffness as well as resilience to the tissue 57 . Again , cells seem to regu - late this process via appropriate integrins ( for example , α5β1 and αvβ3 integrins ) 58 , which allow them to hold onto and control the fibres mechanically . Figure 2 | Feedback control loops regulate extracellular matrix structure and function . Flow chart of the effects of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) stiffness or increased mechanical loading ( external or internal ) on the cellular responses that lead to either a homeostatic regulation of ECM properties ( negative feedback loop , left ) or fibrotic conditions ( positive feedback loop , right ) . In both cases , stabilized focal adhesions of greater number or size and increased actomyosin contractility , often via the RHO – RHO - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) pathway , play central parts . The precise molecular mechanisms responsible for these feedback loops remain unknown , particularly for the negative feedback that is required , by definition , for homeostasis . R E V I E W S 806 | DECEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Native applied force Increasedapplied force Homeostasis Homeostaticresponse Fibroticresponse Anoikis Normalloading Unloading ECM Extant ECM UnstressedECM Stressed ECM Overloading + – a c d b Constant force ECM influences on cells Once established , the ECM provides the cells with impor - tant biomechanical and biochemical cues that guide their behaviour . How ECM stiffness influences cells . Fibroblasts are highly sensitive to mechanical stimuli and the mechanical prop - erties of their matrix 59 , a characteristic that they share with many other cell types , including smooth muscle and epithelial cells . For example , cells spread more and develop larger focal adhesions and actin stress fibres on stiff than compliant matrices 60 . They also exert higher tractions on stiff surfaces , whereas they downregulate myosin - dependent contractility on more compliant ones 61 . Cell migration speed shows a biphasic dependenc e on stiffness , being maximal at intermediate levels 62 , 63 ; however , when cells encounter an interface between materials of different stiffness , they migrate preferentially to the stiff surface 64 . In addition , ECM stiffness regulates cell cycle progres - sion ; in endothelial cells , this occurs through the activa - tion of the small GTPase RAC1 , which leads to induction of the cell cycle regulator cyclin D 65 . ECM stiffness also controls gene expression and cell fate , for example direct - ing the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells towards distinct lineages , the normal mechanical environ ment of which approximates that level of stiffness 66 . For instance , compliant substrates favour differentiation towards neural and adipocyte lineages , which encoun - ter low stiffness in vivo . The YAP and TAZ proteins of the Hippo pathway have recently been implicated in the transcriptional effects of ECM stiffness and cytoskeletal organization 67 , and appear to contribute to the stiffness - dependent regulation of ECM gene expression and cell cycle progression , among other effects . Finally , ECM stiffness can influence the ultimate fate decision : compliant matrices induce apoptosis of anchor - age - dependent cells 61 . This phenomenon may relate to the more general requirement for ECM attachment in cell survival 68 , 69 ( FIG . 3 ) , most likely because integrin signalling pathways , such as focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) signalling , are suppressed on compliant ECM . Similar effects may be important in wound healing , with low ECM stiffness promoting myofibroblast apoptosis once tissue repair is complete and cell - induced tension has decreased . In this context , failed apoptosis is linked both to scarring and scleroderma , the latter being a lethal disease that is characterize d by connective tissue stiffening 70 . Interestingly , the level of stiffness at which the ECM can influence the cell phenotype depends on the cell type . Fibroblasts and endothelial cells increase their spreading and the assembly of their cytoskeleton into actin stress fibres and focal adhesions at ~ 3 kPa , whereas neutro - phil spreading is not sensitive to substrate stiffness that is down to 2 Pa 71 , and pre - osteocytes re - organize their cytoskeleton and show increase spreading at ~ 60 kPa 72 . Other factors also influence cell spreading in response to stiffness : cell – cell adhesions allow spreading on more compliant substrates 71 , as does the incorporation of the GAG hyaluronan within the ECM 73 . Inhibiting myosin II reverses the effects of stiffness on fibroblasts , such that decreasing ECM stiffness increases rather than decreases cell spreading and proliferation 74 . A siRNA screen identi - fied a number of genes within protein kinase pathways that altered the sensing of stiffness by fibroblasts , identi - fying components that , when depleted , allowed spread - ing and elongation on compliant ECM 75 . Stiffness sensing thus represents a tuneable cellular response , and not a simple mechanical effect . How force on the ECM influences cells . Cells also respond to mechanical loads imposed on their ECM or adhe - sive substrate . These loads induce ECM strains , and associated stresses , which promote the assembly of the cytoskeleton into actin stress fibres and focal adhesions 76 and drive a range of signalling cascades 77 . One key path - way involves the translocation of MKL ( also called Mal or myocardin family ) transcription factors to the nucleus , which bind to elements on the genes encoding cytoskel - etal and adhesion proteins to induce their expression 78 . Conversely , matrix metalloproteinase genes are induced in dermal fibroblasts when ECM stress , and therefore tension , is decreased through ECM unloading or with actomyosin inhibitors 79 . These in vitro studie s also showed that the expression of the ECM protein tenascin C is influenced by changes in tension 59 , 80 ; its transcription increased in response to tension , consist - ent with its expression in vivo at sites of high tension 81 . In vitro , tenascin C reduces cellular interactions with Figure 3 | Cell – extracellular matrix interactions in health and disease . Schematic of a normal cell and its mechanical interaction with extant extracellular matrix ( ECM ) that is stressed or strained due to native applied forces ( top row , centre ) . Shown , too , is both a cell ensuring homeostatic maintenance of ECM under constant forces , despite the continual degradation of stressed ECM ( a ) and homeostatic ECM remodelling in response to increased applied forces ( that is , overloading ; b ) . By contrast , loss of signalling via compromised ECM can lead to a special form of apoptosis called anoikis ( c ) , and pathological signalling in response to overloading can lead to a fibrotic response ( d ) . Note , in particular , that homeostasis ultimately requires the balanced production and removal of constituents , with the new constituents having the same mechanical properties as the old . These properties include stiffness , orientation and pre - stress . A homeostatic response occurs via a negative feedback mechanism ( indicated by the – sign ) , whereas a fibrotic response occurs via a positive feedback mechanism ( indicated by the + sign ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | DECEMBER 2014 | 807 F O C U S O N t h e e x t r a C e l l U l a r m at r i x © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved other ECM proteins , such as fibronectin , decreases RHO activity and reduces the contraction of collagen gels by the cells 82 . These results might suggest that tenascin C is a component of the negative feedback loop that pro - motes mechanical homeostasis under conditions of high stress . However , its deletion in mice reduces fibrosis 83 – 85 , implying a role in the positive feedback loop , although this might be due to roles in downregulating inflamma - tion . Clearly , the role of tenascin C in stress responses is not fully understood . Responses of the actin cytoskeleton to loads . The actin cytoskeleton underlies many cellular responses to ECM loading , and its response is highly sensitive to the associated magnitude , direction and timescale of load - ing . Gels of F - actin with crosslinking proteins exhibit visco elasticity ( BOX 1 ) , initially showing strain stiffen - ing ( that is , stiffness increases with extension ) and then passive stress relaxation after longer periods of time 86 , 87 . Consequently , over short periods of times , cells can resist deformation as a strain - stiffening material but also relax via visco elastic mechanisms 88 . Cells also respond to cyclic loading by actively remodelling and reorienting their cytoskeleton , and , over longer periods of time , may adapt to accommodate ECM deformations and actively relax the stress further towards the original ( pre - loading ) values 89 . For a given cell - type , the extent of cytoskeletal realignment can depend on the frequency and magnitude of the applied load 90 , although no realignment occurs on highly compliant substrates 91 . Responses to stretch also involve RHO GTPases , which are activated by stretch and affect subsequent cytoskeletal responses 92 , 93 . The pre dominant model is that in response to ECM loading ( stretch or other deformations ) , the actin cytoskeleton undergoes initial passive rearrangements that activate signalling pathways , which in turn mediate subsequent active responses . These phenomena , however , are only partially understood . A complete understanding will require integrating physical models of cytoskeletal mechanics 94 – 96 with the signalling pathways and active responses that govern cytoskeletal remodelling . Additional cellular cues from the ECM . Although our focus is on mechanotransduction and ECM homeosta - sis , the ECM also provides myriad signals to resident cells that complement mechanical cues . A prime example of this is the effect of functional elastic fibres , consist - ing of elastin and elastin - associated glycoproteins , on smooth muscle cells within arteries . Experiments with mice that lack or are haploinsufficient for elastin showed that competent elastic fibres promote vascular smooth muscle cells to transition from the migratory , synthetic phenotype that exists during embryonic development to a mature , quiescent , contractile phenotype 97 , 98 . Conversely , damage to or degradation of elastic fibres promotes a shift towards the synthetic and migratory phenotype , which likely contributes to different arterial pathologies 28 , 97 . Integrin signalling is also determined by the organiza - tion and composition of the ECM , not just its physica l properties . For example , the proliferation of smooth muscle cells is inhibited by collagen that is assembled into fibrils but promoted by non - fibrillar or degraded collagen under conditions when mechanical proper - ties are unchanged 99 . These effects occur in part because different integrins , which transduce distinct signals 100 , bind preferen tially to different forms of collagen 101 . The organization of the ECM , which could govern the spatial arrangement of integrins and hence their downstream sig - nals , could also be important . In vitro studies have shown that the spatial organization of integrin ligands can criti - cally regulate cellular responses 102 , 103 . Although this is an attractive hypothesis , evidence for such effects with ECM in vivo is lacking . Limitations of these studies . Although important advances have been made using simplified in vitro model systems , it is important to recognize their limitations . Much has been learned about cell mechanics and mechanobiology from plating cells onto coverslips coated with a thin layer of a gel such as acrylamide , which can vary in material stiffnes s by changing its crosslinking density or in structural stiff - ness by changing its thickness . However , the material stiffness of the gel is not a fully independent variable , as differences in crosslinking density can also alter ECM pro - tein anchoring and substrate porosity 104 . Furthermore , the materials used for these substrates typically show a linear mechanical response over a wide range of strains , rather than the strongly nonlinear ( strain - stiffenin g ) behaviour that is typical of native ECM 32 , 105 . The geometry of these substrates can also influence their physical properties . In vivo , ECM proteins are organ - ized into linear fibres with structures spanning many length scales , which is poorly modelled by ECM proteins uniformly deposited onto experimental substrates . Last , when a cell pulls on a compliant substrate attached to a rigid surface , the resulting deformations are strongly local - ized , decaying exponentially with distance from the point of application of the force ; the range of the deformations is approximately the thickness of the substrate 67 . By contrast , when a cell contracts on or within a three - dimensional matrix , the induced deformations are relatively long - ranged and roughly according to the inverse - square of the distance from the cell 95 . Furthermore , the organization of the ECM into stiff fibres allows mechanical information to be conveyed further . Simply stated , tension applied at one end of a fibre can propagate over its entire length , provided that it is not crosslinked to other filaments . Alternatively , long - range propagation can be viewed as a consequence of the nonlinear rheological properties of the ECM 106 , 107 . Molecular aspects of mechanotransduction Although major questions remain , a good deal has been learnt about the molecular mechanisms by which i ntegrin - mediated adhesions sense the properties of , and the forces transmitted through , the ECM . How tension regulates focal adhesions . Integrin - mediated adhesions often strengthen or stabilize under force 108 , 109 . Forces acting across ECM – integrin – cytoskeleta l linkages are thought to initiate signals by unfolding protein domains and changing binding affinities . R E V I E W S 808 | DECEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved α β Integrin Stiﬀ matrix Cell membrane F - actin ﬂow Linker proteins G - actin Myosin II F - actin ﬂow Immobileintegrins Integrinmotion Deformed matrix Compliant matrix Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a b Pull Pull Push Push Cell front Cell rear Catch bond A small fraction of molecular bonds that strengthen under force . Most molecular bonds , covalent or non‑covalent , increase their off rates under tension , exhibiting so‑called ‘slip bond’ behaviour , with the bond weakening under force . In the case of catch bonds , off rates decrease under tension ( within a certain range ) , thus strengthening under force . The ECM component fibronectin was the first protein for which this was shown ; forces expose binding sites in fibronectin that promote its self - assembly into fibrils upon stretching 110 . FRET ( Förster resonance energy transfer ) reporters reveal that fibronectin unfolds within fibrils in response to actomyosin - dependent forces 53 . Single - molecule experiments also showed that the inte - grin linker proteins talin and filamin undergo domain unfolding upon stretching . Stretching talin enables it to bind vinculin 111 , 112 , which in turn binds actin and rein - forces the link between integrins and actin 113 , 114 . Applying force to filamin within actin gels enhances its ability to bind to integrin peptides , but reduces its binding to the RAC inhibitor FILGAP 115 . This switch may mediate the suppression of RAC activity when cells are stretched 116 . Single - molecule studies also showed that applying 2 – 5 pN forces to an isolated filamin A construct consisting of domains 20 – 21 increases its bindin g to integrin , glyco - protein Ib and migfilin peptides 117 . Studies in live cells using fluorescence - based molecular force sensors revealed tension across filamin 118 , vinculin 113 and talin ( A . Kumar and M . A . S . , unpublished observations ) ; calibrated sensors similarly place the force within the 2 pN to 5 pN range for vinculin and talin . Thus , there is good evidence that the unfolding of protein domains under physiological forces can alter protein interactions or activities and thus the sig - nalling pathways that are importan t in mechanosensing . The integrin – ligand bond exhibits catch bond behav - iour , converting to a long - lived state in response to applied force 119 , 120 . Interestingly , this effect is increased at high loading rates and is enhanced by cyclic force application , which is perhaps indicative of a ‘molecular memory’ . The conformational landscape for integrins is highly complex and could directly mediate these effects , but active sig - nalling through downstream components may contribute to stabilizing integrin adhesions . For example , myosin - dependent tension can recruit vinculin to focal adhesions via FAK and SRC - mediated phosphorylation of paxillin , a known binding partner for vinculin 121 . Vinculin recruited through this pathway could further stabilize adhesions . Finally , actin filaments are stabilized under tension , decreasing both spontaneous depolymerization rates 122 and reducing their sensitivity to severing by cofilin 123 . As actin scaffolds are essential for focal adhesion stability , this effect can also influence the lifetime of focal adhesions 124 . Mechanotransduction and the actin cytoskeleton . Total force transmission increases with ECM stiffness . In one view , this is regulated locally by the interaction of the steadily flowing F - actin with dynamic focal adhe - sions 125 . The essential ideas are captured by the concept of a ‘focal adhesion clutch’ ( FIG . 4 ) . In this model , actin filaments , driven by some combination of pushing from polymerization at the leading edge of the cell and pull - ing from the central myosin II filaments , are thought to flow backwards , towards the rear of the cell , over the immobile , ECM - bound integrins . Linker proteins are driven backwards at intermediate speeds , slowing down the actin flow and transmitting force through a sort of ‘friction’ 126 – 128 . ECM stiffness is thought to affect this system primarily by changing the loading rate of the ECM – integri n – cytoskeleton linkage 129 . On compliant substrates , backwards movement of the actin cytoskel - eton is buffered by the deformation of the ECM , which slows down the loading rate on adhesions ; on stiff sub - strates , the force on a focal adhesion increases faster . Alternatively , recent studies have suggested that the cel - lular response to stiffness resides within the regulatory mechanisms of the cyto skeleton that control the overall level of contractilit y 130 – 132 or the orientation of actin stress fibres 133 , 134 . Integrin specificity in mechanical homeostasis . Different ECM protein – integrin pairs also show distinct mechano - transduction properties and pathways . Integrin αvβ3 requires receptor protein Tyr phosphatase - α ( RPTPα ) to respond to force , as measured by both bead trapping and differential spreading on compliant versus stiff substrates , Figure 4 | Force - mediated regulation of integrin adhesions . Schematic of the ‘focal adhesion clutch’ on stiff ( a ) versus soft ( b ) extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . In all cases , integrins are coupled to F - actin via linker proteins ( for example , talin and vinculin ) . The linker proteins move backwards ( as indicated by the small arrows ) as F - actin also moves backwards , under pushing forces from actin polymerization and / or pulling forces from myosin II activity . This mechanism transfers force from actin to integrins , which pull on the ECM . A stiff ECM ( a ) resists this force so that the bound integrins remain immobile . A compliant matrix ( b ) deforms under this force ( as indicated by the compressed ECM labelled as deformed matrix ) so that the bound integrins can also move backwards . Their movement reduces the net loading rate on all the force - bearing elements , which results in altered cellular responses . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | DECEMBER 2014 | 809 F O C U S O N t h e e x t r a C e l l U l a r m at r i x © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Quasi - static A dynamic process that nevertheless occurs slowly enough that it can be considered as a series of equilibria . whereas β1 integrins are RPTPα - independent 135 , 136 . RPTPα also colocalizes and co - precipitates with αvβ3 , but not β1 . Using a slightly different assay , α5β1 was found to mediate most of the total adhesion of cells to fibronectin - coated beads , as measured by the resistance of these integrins to detachment under force ; however , the cyclic application of force caused a stiffening of the associated cytoskeleton that required αvβ3 binding and was not seen with beads bound through α5β1 ( REF . 137 ) . Measurements of traction force on substrates of increas - ing stiffness showed that adhesion strengthening on fibronectin required αvβ3 ( that is , adhesion was absent when cells bound through α5β1 alone ) 138 . A requirement for αvβ3 as shown in these assays is far from universal , however , as numerous studies report stiffness - dependen t cell spreading and traction force on collagen - coated substrate s , which only bind β1 integrins 62 , 139 . These diverse results can be explained only by a model in which events within focal adhesions trigger signalling pathways that govern cell responses to force . The exact features remain unknown , but we postulate that both total force levels and loading rates alter the dynamics within focal adhesions to influence signalling outputs , which then feed back to control functions such as actin polymerization and force generation , both of which are fundamenta l to ECM sensing and regulation . Conclusions and perspectives Because of the finite lifespans of individual cells and ECM constituents , connective tissues undergo continual turn - over while being exposed to mechanical loads , whether quasi‑static or dynamic . Hence , to maintain overall form and function , resident cells must continually assess the structural integrity of the ECM and maintain , remodel or repair ECM constituents as appropriate . Importantly , the comparative stability of healthy ECM properties over much of a lifetime implies that organization , and thus stiffness , must be under homeostatic control . That is , mechanisms must exist to detect changes and promote homeostasis . This notion is supported by studies show - ing substantial reversal of fibrosis in fatty liver disease after weight loss or pharmacological treatment 140 , 141 . Regression of breast cancer after chemotherapy similarly leads to decreased stiffness of the stromal tissue in some patients ( V . Weaver , personal communication ) . However , stiffen - ing is not always readily reversible . Arteries steadily stiffen with age ; they are currently the target of ‘de - stiffenin g’ therapies , but results to date have been modest 142 . Hypertension exacerbates this process , and pharmaco - logically reducing blood pressure has not been found to reverse stiffness 143 . This tissue - specific effect may be driven by the extreme , repetitive mechanical stresses experienced by arteries and the irreversible loss of elastin , which is essential for vessel wall elasticity and homeostasis . Surprisingly , the nature of the negative feedback loop ( or loops ) required for homeostatic control of stiffness is largely unknown ( FIG . 2 ) . Arachidonic acid metabolites produced by the activity of cyclooxygenase 2 ( COX2 ; also known as prostaglandin G / H synthase 2 ) have been impli - cated in maintaining ECM compliance in arteries 144 and lungs 145 . However , in the arterial study , COX2 expression was regulated by high - density lipoprotein , whereas in the lung study , stiffer substrates decreased COX2 expression and prostaglandin release , which facilitated the increase in contractility . Thus , COX2 - dependent pathways do not seem to participate in the regulatory circuits that mediate homeostasis . What has been identified and extensively studied in vitro is the positive feedback loop that is predicted to lead to fibrosis . Plating cells on or in stiff ECM leads to increased contractility and the formation of actin stress fibres , suppression of collagen - degrading proteases and increased expression of collagen genes 59 , 70 , 146 . Cells also show increased responsiveness to TGFβ , which leads to further collagen synthesis and the suppression of pro - tease activity 13 , 14 . A major question , then , is why has this fibrotic pathway been so easy to study while so little is known about the negative feedback loop for homeostasis . One likely possibility is that in vitro culture , which usu - ally uses serum in the medium , mimics wound healing rather than quiescent , native conditions . The selection in tissue culture of cells that grow well on stiff tissue culture plastic in serum - containing medium may further bias cell phenotype . Several major outstanding questions remain . How do tissues maintain normal ECM organization and tissue stiffness ? What pathways mediate the negative feedback loop that prevents progression toward stiffer ECM and higher cell contractility ? What governs the switch between these two states , the homeostatic one that maintains health versus the fibrotic one that compromises the func - tion of many tissues ? Last , can we devise treatments to break the fibrotic cycle and restore the homeostatic state ? Understanding the regulatory pathways in detail and the factors that govern switching between these states is likely to be the best way forward . 1 . Lu , P . , Takai , K . , Weaver , V . M . & Werb , Z . Extracellular matrix degradation and remodeling in development and disease . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a005058 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Schwartz , M . A . , Schaller , M . D . & Ginsberg , M . H . Integrins : emerging paradigms of signal transduction . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 , 549 – 599 ( 1995 ) . 3 . Bissell , M . J . & Aggeler , J . Dynamic reciprocity : how do extracellular matrix and hormones direct gene expression ? Prog . Clin . Biol . Res . 249 , 251 – 262 ( 1987 ) . 4 . Vogel , V . & Sheetz , M . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 – 275 ( 2006 ) . 5 . Hoffman , B . D . , Grashoff , C . & Schwartz , M . A . Dynamic molecular processes mediate cellular mechanotransduction . Nature 475 , 316 – 323 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Bonnans , C . , Chou , J . & Werb , Z . Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development and diseases . Nature Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3904 ( 2014 ) 7 . Mouw , J . , Ou , G . & Weaver , V . M . Deconstructing extracellular matrix assembly : a multi - scale road map . Nature Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3902 ( 2014 ) . 8 . Hynes , R . O . & Naba , A . Overview of the matrisome— an inventory of extracellular matrix constituents and functions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a004903 ( 2012 ) . 9 . Arribas , S . M . , Hinek , A . & Gonzalez , M . C . Elastic fibres and vascular structure in hypertension . Pharmacol . Ther . 111 , 771 – 791 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Kielty , C . M . Elastic fibres in health and disease . Expert Rev . Mol . Med . 8 , 1 – 23 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Ricard - Blum , S . The collagen family . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a004978 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Ferruzzi , J . , Collins , M . J . , Yeh , A . T . & Humphrey , J . D . Mechanical assessment of elastin integrity in fibrillin - 1 - deficient carotid arteries : implications for Marfan syndrome . Cardiovasc . Res . 92 , 287 – 295 ( 2011 ) . 13 . Leung , D . Y . , Glagov , S . & Mathews , M . B . Cyclic stretching stimulates synthesis of matrix components by arterial smooth muscle cells in vitro . Science 191 , 475 – 477 ( 1976 ) . R E V I E W S 810 | DECEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved The first demonstration that cyclic mechanical loading induced smooth muscle cells to increase their ECM production . 14 . Hinz , B . et al . Recent developments in myofibroblast biology : paradigms for connective tissue remodeling . Am . J . Pathol . 180 , 1340 – 1355 ( 2012 ) . 15 . Nagase , H . , Visse , R . & Murphy , G . Structure and function of matrix metalloproteinases and TIMPs . Cardiovasc . Res . 69 , 562 – 573 ( 2006 ) . 16 . Tomasek , J . J . , Gabbiani , G . , Hinz , B . , Chaponnier , C . & Brown , R . A . Myofibroblasts and mechano - regulation of connective tissue remodelling . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 349 – 363 ( 2002 ) . 17 . Ciobanasu , C . , Faivre , B . & Le Clainche , C . Integrating actin dynamics , mechanotransduction and integrin activation : the multiple functions of actin binding proteins in focal adhesions . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 92 , 339 – 348 ( 2013 ) . 18 . Ingber , D . E . Tensegrity - based mechanosensing from macro to micro . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 97 , 163 – 179 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Humphrey , J . D . Stress , strain , and mechanotransduction in cells . J . Biomech . Eng . 123 , 638 – 641 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . & Wang , Y . L . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 – 1143 ( 2005 ) . 21 . Humphrey , J . D . Vascular adaptation and mechanical homeostasis at tissue , cellular , and sub - cellular levels . Cell Biochem . Biophys . 50 , 53 – 78 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Bersi , M . R . , Ferruzzi , J . , Eberth , J . F . , Gleason , R . L . & Humphrey , J . D . Consistent biomechanical phenotyping of common carotid arteries from seven genetic , pharmacological , and surgical mouse models . Ann . Biomed . Engineer . 42 , 1207 – 1223 ( 2014 ) . 23 . Shadwick , R . E . Mechanical design in arteries . J . Exp . Biol . 202 , 3305 – 3313 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Wang , J . H . & Thampatty , B . P . An introductory review of cell mechanobiology . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 5 , 1 – 16 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Silver , F . H . , Siperko , L . M . & Seehra , G . P . Mechanobiology of force transduction in dermal tissue . Skin Res . Technol . 9 , 3 – 23 ( 2003 ) . 26 . Cook , J . R . et al . Abnormal muscle mechanosignaling triggers cardiomyopathy in mice with Marfan syndrome . J . Clin . Invest . 124 , 1329 – 1339 ( 2014 ) . Clear evidence that an organ - level pathology resulted from abnormal mechanosensing related to a genetic mutation in an ECM protein . 27 . Ganesh , S . K . et al . Clinical and biochemical profiles suggest fibromuscular dysplasia is a systemic disease with altered TGF - β expression and connective tissue features . FASEB J . 28 , 3313 – 3324 ( 2014 ) . 28 . Humphrey , J . D . , Milewicz , D . M . , Tellides , G . & Schwartz , M . A . Cell biology . Dysfunctional mechanosensing in aneurysms . Science 344 , 477 – 479 ( 2014 ) . 29 . Paszek , M . J . et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 ( 2005 ) . 30 . Gerber , E . E . et al . Integrin - modulating therapy prevents fibrosis and autoimmunity in mouse models of scleroderma . Nature 503 , 126 – 130 ( 2013 ) . 31 . Agarwal , S . K . Integrins and cadherins as therapeutic targets in fibrosis . Front . Pharmacol . 5 , 131 ( 2014 ) . 32 . Fung , Y . C . Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues . ( Springer , 1993 ) . 33 . Delvoye , P . , Wiliquet , P . , Leveque , J . L . , Nusgens , B . V . & Lapiere , C . M . Measurement of mechanical forces generated by skin fibroblasts embedded in a three - dimensional collagen gel . J . Invest . Dermatol . 97 , 898 – 902 ( 1991 ) . An early demonstration in vitro that fibroblasts establish steady - state endogenous tension when introduced into an initially stress - free collagen gel . 34 . Marenzana , M . , Wilson - Jones , N . , Mudera , V . & Brown , R . A . The origins and regulation of tissue tension : identification of collagen tension - fixation process in vitro . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 423 – 433 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Kolodney , M . S . & Wysolmerski , R . B . Isometric contraction by fibroblasts and endothelial cells in tissue culture : a quantitative study . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 73 – 82 ( 1992 ) . 36 . Legant , W . R . et al . Measurement of mechanical tractions exerted by cells in three - dimensional matrices . Nature Methods 7 , 969 – 971 ( 2010 ) . 37 . Balaban , N . Q . et al . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 ( 2001 ) . 38 . Tan , J . L . et al . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 1484 – 1489 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Chiu , J . J . & Chien , S . Effects of disturbed flow on vascular endothelium : pathophysiological basis and clinical perspectives . Physiol . Rev . 91 , 327 – 387 ( 2011 ) . 40 . Humphrey , J . D . & Rajagopal , K . R . A constrained mixture model for growth and remodeling of soft tissues . Math . Models Methods Appl . Sci . 12 , 407 – 430 ( 2002 ) . 41 . Li , Q . , Muragaki , Y . , Hatamura , I . , Ueno , H . & Ooshima , A . Stretch - induced collagen synthesis in cultured smooth muscle cells from rabbit aortic media and a possible involvement of angiotensin II and transforming growth factor - β . J . Vasc . Res . 35 , 93 – 103 ( 1998 ) . 42 . O’Callaghan , C . J . & Williams , B . Mechanical strain - induced extracellular matrix production by human vascular smooth muscle cells : role of TGF - β 1 . Hypertension 36 , 319 – 324 ( 2000 ) . 43 . Prajapati , R . T . , Chavally - Mis , B . , Herbage , D . , Eastwood , M . & Brown , R . A . Mechanical loading regulates protease production by fibroblasts in three - dimensional collagen substrates . Wound Repair Regen . 8 , 226 – 237 ( 2000 ) . 44 . Ruberti , J . W . & Hallab , N . J . Strain - controlled enzymatic cleavage of collagen in loaded matrix . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 336 , 483 – 489 ( 2005 ) . 45 . Valentin , A . & Humphrey , J . D . Evaluation of fundamental hypotheses underlying constrained mixture models of arterial growth and remodelling . Philos . Trans . A Math . Phys . Eng . Sci . 367 , 3585 – 3606 ( 2009 ) . 46 . Cyron , C . , Wilson , J . S . & Humphrey , J . D . Mechanobiological stability : a new paradigm to understand the enlargement of aneurysms . J . Roy . Soc . 11 , 20140680 ( 2014 ) . 47 . Kadler , K . E . , Hill , A . & Canty - Laird , E . G . Collagen fibrillogenesis : fibronectin , integrins , and minor collagens as organizers and nucleators . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 495 – 501 ( 2008 ) . 48 . Velling , T . , Risteli , J . , Wennerberg , K . , Mosher , D . F . & Johansson , S . Polymerization of type I and III collagens is dependent on fibronectin and enhanced by integrins α 11 β 1 and α 2 β 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 37377 – 37381 ( 2002 ) . This work showed that cells actively contribute , in vivo , to collagen fibrillogenesis via an integrin - mediated process . 49 . Li , S . , Van Den Diepstraten , C . , D’Souza , S . J . , Chan , B . M . & Pickering , J . G . Vascular smooth muscle cells orchestrate the assembly of type I collagen via α 2 β 1 integrin , RhoA , and fibronectin polymerization . Am . J . Pathol . 163 , 1045 – 1056 ( 2003 ) . 50 . Meshel , A . S . , Wei , Q . , Adelstein , R . S . & Sheetz , M . P . Basic mechanism of three - dimensional collagen fibre transport by fibroblasts . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 157 – 164 ( 2005 ) . 51 . Dahlmann - Noor , A . H . , Martin - Martin , B . , Eastwood , M . , Khaw , P . T . & Bailly , M . Dynamic protrusive cell behaviour generates force and drives early matrix contraction by fibroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 313 , 4158 – 4169 ( 2007 ) . 52 . Huelsz - Prince , G . , Belkin , A . M . , VanBavel , E . & Bakker , E . N . Activation of extracellular transglutaminase 2 by mechanical force in the arterial wall . J . Vasc . Res . 50 , 383 – 395 ( 2013 ) . 53 . Baneyx , G . , Baugh , L . & Vogel , V . Fibronectin extension and unfolding within cell matrix fibrils controlled by cytoskeletal tension . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 5139 – 5143 ( 2002 ) . 54 . Mao , Y . & Schwarzbauer , J . E . Fibronectin fibrillogenesis , a cell - mediated matrix assembly process . Matrix Biol . 24 , 389 – 399 ( 2005 ) . 55 . Canty , E . G . et al . Coalignment of plasma membrane channels and protrusions ( fibripositors ) specifies the parallelism of tendon . J . Cell Biol . 165 , 553 – 563 ( 2004 ) . 56 . Czirok , A . et al . Elastic fiber macro - assembly is a hierarchical , cell motion - mediated process . J . Cell . Physiol . 207 , 97 – 106 ( 2006 ) . 57 . Ramirez , F . & Dietz , H . C . Fibrillin - rich microfibrils : Structural determinants of morphogenetic and homeostatic events . J . Cell . Physiol . 213 , 326 – 330 ( 2007 ) . 58 . Bax , D . V . et al . Cell adhesion to fibrillin - 1 molecules and microfibrils is mediated by α 5 β 1 and α v β 3 integrins . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 34605 – 34616 ( 2003 ) . 59 . Chiquet , M . , Gelman , L . , Lutz , R . & Maier , S . From mechanotransduction to extracellular matrix gene expression in fibroblasts . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1793 , 911 – 920 ( 2009 ) . 60 . Peyton , S . R . & Putnam , A . J . Extracellular matrix rigidity governs smooth muscle cell motility in a biphasic fashion . J . Cell . Physiol . 204 , 198 – 209 ( 2005 ) . 61 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . L . Substrate flexibility regulates growth and apoptosis of normal but not transformed cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , C1345 – 1350 ( 2000 ) . 62 . Pelham , R . J . Jr & Wang , Y . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 ( 1997 ) . 63 . Plotnikov , S . V . , Pasapera , A . M . , Sabass , B . & Waterman , C . M . Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ECM - rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration . Cell 151 , 1513 – 1527 ( 2012 ) . 64 . Lo , C . M . , Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . L . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 , 144 – 152 ( 2000 ) . 65 . Klein , E . A . et al . Cell - cycle control by physiological matrix elasticity and in vivo tissue stiffening . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1511 – 1518 ( 2009 ) . 66 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 ( 2006 ) . 67 . Dupont , S . et al . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 183 ( 2011 ) . 68 . Meredith , J . E . Jr . , Fazeli , B . & Schwartz , M . A . The extracellular matrix as a cell survival factor . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 953 – 961 ( 1993 ) . 69 . Frisch , S . M . & Francis , H . Disruption of epithelial cell - matrix interactions induces apoptosis . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 619 – 626 ( 1994 ) . 70 . Abraham , D . J . , Eckes , B . , Rajkumar , V . & Krieg , T . New developments in fibroblast and myofibroblast biology : implications for fibrosis and scleroderma . Curr . Rheumatol Rep . 9 , 136 – 143 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Yeung , T . et al . Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 60 , 24 – 34 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Kong , H . J . , Polte , T . R . , Alsberg , E . & Mooney , D . J . FRET measurements of cell - traction forces and nano - scale clustering of adhesion ligands varied by substrate stiffness . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 4300 – 4305 ( 2005 ) . 73 . Chopra , A . et al . Augmentation of integrin - mediated mechanotransduction by hyaluronic acid . Biomaterials 35 , 71 – 82 ( 2014 ) . 74 . Mih , J . D . , Marinkovic , A . , Liu , F . , Sharif , A . S . & Tschumperlin , D . J . Matrix stiffness reverses the effect of actomyosin tension on cell proliferation . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 5974 – 5983 ( 2012 ) . 75 . Prager - Khoutorsky , M . et al . Fibroblast polarization is a matrix - rigidity - dependent process controlled by focal adhesion mechanosensing . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 1457 – 1465 ( 2011 ) . This siRNA screen identified genes linked to Tyr kinase signalling that alter cell rigidity sensing , demonstrating that these responses involve active signalling rather than purely mechanical mechanisms . 76 . Yoshigi , M . , Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Yost , H . J . & Beckerle , M . C . Mechanical force mobilizes zyxin from focal adhesions to actin filaments and regulates cytoskeletal reinforcement . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 209 – 215 ( 2005 ) . 77 . Tamada , M . , Sheetz , M . P . & Sawada , Y . Activation of a signaling cascade by cytoskeleton stretch . Dev . Cell 7 , 709 – 718 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Iyer , K . V . , Pulford , S . , Mogilner , A . & Shivashankar , G . V . Mechanical activation of cells induces chromatin remodeling preceding MKL nuclear transport . Biophys . J . 103 , 1416 – 1428 ( 2012 ) . 79 . Lambert , C . A . , Colige , A . C . , Munaut , C . , Lapiere , C . M . & Nusgens , B . V . Distinct pathways in the over - expression of matrix metalloproteinases in human fibroblasts by relaxation of mechanical tension . Matrix Biol . 20 , 397 – 408 ( 2001 ) . 80 . Chiquet - Ehrismann , R . et al . Tenascin - C expression by fibroblasts is elevated in stressed collagen gels . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 2093 – 2101 ( 1994 ) . 81 . Mackie , E . J . , Thesleff , I . & Chiquet - Ehrismann , R . Tenascin is associated with chondrogenic and osteogenic differentiation in vivo and promotes chondrogenesis in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 2569 – 2579 ( 1987 ) . 82 . Chiquet - Ehrismann , R . & Chiquet , M . Tenascins : regulation and putative functions during pathological stress . J . Pathol . 200 , 488 – 499 ( 2003 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | DECEMBER 2014 | 811 F O C U S O N t h e e x t r a C e l l U l a r m at r i x © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 83 . Carey , W . A . , Taylor , G . D . , Dean , W . B . & Bristow , J . D . Tenascin - C deficiency attenuates TGF - ss - mediated fibrosis following murine lung injury . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 299 , L785 – L793 ( 2010 ) . 84 . El - Karef , A . et al . Deficiency of tenascin - C attenuates liver fibrosis in immune - mediated chronic hepatitis in mice . J . Pathol . 211 , 86 – 94 ( 2007 ) . 85 . Nishioka , T . et al . Tenascin - C may aggravate left ventricular remodeling and function after myocardial infarction in mice . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 298 , H1072 – H1078 ( 2010 ) . 86 . Mizuno , D . , Tardin , C . , Schmidt , C . F . & Mackintosh , F . C . Nonequilibrium mechanics of active cytoskeletal networks . Science 315 , 370 – 373 ( 2007 ) . 87 . Wachsstock , D . H . , Schwarz , W . H . & Pollard , T . D . Cross - linker dynamics determine the mechanical properties of actin gels . Biophys . J . 66 , 801 – 809 ( 1994 ) . 88 . Trepat , X . et al . Viscoelasticity of human alveolar epithelial cells subjected to stretch . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 287 , L1025 – L1034 ( 2004 ) . 89 . Webster , K . D . , Ng , W . P . & Fletcher , D . A . Tensional homeostasis in single fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 107 , 146 – 155 ( 2014 ) . 90 . Jungbauer , S . , Gao , H . J . , Spatz , J . P . & Kemkemer , R . Two characteristic regimes in frequency - dependent dynamic reorientation of fibroblasts on cyclically stretched substrates . Biophys . J . 95 , 3470 – 3478 ( 2008 ) . 91 . Faust , U . et al . Cyclic stress at mHz frequencies aligns fibroblasts in direction of zero strain . PLoS ONE 6 , 16 ( 2011 ) . 92 . Gawlak , G . et al . Paxillin mediates stretch - induced Rho signaling and endothelial permeability via assembly of paxillin - p42 / 44MAPK - GEF - H1 complex . FASEB J . 28 , 3249 – 3260 ( 2014 ) . 93 . Verma , S . K . et al . Rac1 and RhoA differentially regulate angiotensinogen gene expression in stretched cardiac fibroblasts . Cardiovasc . Res . 90 , 88 – 96 ( 2011 ) . 94 . De , R . , Zemel , A . & Safran , S . A . Dynamics of cell orientation . Nature Phys . 3 , 655 – 659 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Schwarz , U . S . & Safran , S . A . Physics of adherent cells . Rev . Modern Phys . 85 , 1327 – 1381 ( 2013 ) . 96 . Livne , A . , Bouchbinder , E . & Geiger , B . Cell orientation under cyclic stretching . Nature Comm . 5 , 3938 ( 2014 ) . 97 . Karnik , S . K . et al . A critical role for elastin signaling in vascular morphogenesis and disease . Development 130 , 411 – 423 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Brooke , B . S . , Bayes - Genis , A . & Li , D . Y . New insights into elastin and vascular disease . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 13 , 176 – 181 ( 2003 ) . 99 . Koyama , H . , Raines , E . W . , Bornfeldt , K . E . , Roberts , J . M . & Ross , R . Fibrillar collagen inhibits arterial smooth muscle proliferation through regulation of Cdk2 inhibitors . Cell 87 , 1069 – 1078 ( 1996 ) . 100 . Katsumi , A . , Orr , A . W . , Tzima , E . & Schwartz , M . A . Integrins in mechanotransduction . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 12001 – 12004 ( 2004 ) . 101 . Davis , G . E . Affinity of integrins for damaged extracellular matrix : α v β 3 binds to denatured collagen type I through RGD sites . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 182 , 1025 – 1031 ( 1992 ) . 102 . Altrock , E . , Muth , C . A . , Klein , G . , Spatz , J . P . & Lee - Thedieck , C . The significance of integrin ligand nanopatterning on lipid raft clustering in hematopoietic stem cells . Biomaterials 33 , 3107 – 3118 ( 2012 ) . 103 . Cavalcanti - Adam , E . A . , Aydin , D . , Hirschfeld - Warneken , V . C . & Spatz , J . P . Cell adhesion and response to synthetic nanopatterned environments by steering receptor clustering and spatial location . HFSP J . 2 , 276 – 285 ( 2008 ) . 104 . Trappmann , B . et al . Extracellular - matrix tethering regulates stem - cell fate . Nature Mater . 11 , 642 – 649 ( 2012 ) . 105 . Storm , C . , Pastore , J . J . , MacKintosh , F . C . , Lubensky , T . C . & Janmey , P . A . Nonlinear elasticity in biological gels . Nature 435 , 191 – 194 ( 2005 ) . The origin and implications of strain - dependent stiffness in biological gels . 106 . Sawhney , R . K . & Howard , J . Slow local movements of collagen fibers by fibroblasts drive the rapid global self - organization of collagen gels . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 1083 – 1091 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Winer , J . P . , Oake , S . & Janmey , P . A . Non - linear elasticity of extracellular matrices enables contractile cells to communicate local position and orientation . PLoS ONE 4 , e6382 ( 2009 ) . 108 . Bershadsky , A . D . , Balaban , N . Q . & Geiger , B . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 677 – 695 ( 2003 ) . 109 . Moore , S . W . , Roca - Cusachs , P . & Sheetz , M . P . Stretchy proteins on stretchy substrates : the important elements of integrin - mediated rigidity sensing . Dev . Cell 19 , 194 – 206 ( 2010 ) . 110 . Zhong , C . et al . Rho - mediated contractility exposes a cryptic site in fibronectin and induces fibronectin matrix assembly . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 539 – 551 ( 1998 ) . 111 . del Rio , A . et al . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding . Science 323 , 638 – 641 ( 2009 ) . 112 . Patel , B . et al . The activity of the vinculin binding sites in talin is influenced by the stability of the helical bundles that make up the talin rod . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 7458 – 7467 ( 2006 ) . 113 . Grashoff , C . et al . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 ( 2010 ) . 114 . Dumbauld , D . W . et al . Contractility modulates cell adhesion strengthening through focal adhesion kinase and assembly of vinculin - containing focal adhesions . J . Cell . Physiol . 223 , 746 – 756 ( 2010 ) . 115 . Ehrlicher , A . J . , Nakamura , F . , Hartwig , J . H . , Weitz , D . A . & Stossel , T . P . Mechanical strain in actin networks regulates FilGAP and integrin binding to filamin A . Nature 478 , 260 – 263 ( 2011 ) . Identification of tension - dependent changes in the interactions of filamin with other proteins that may mediate cytoskeletal strengthening and signalling . 116 . Katsumi , A . et al . Effects of cell tension on the small GTPase Rac . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 153 – 164 ( 2002 ) . 117 . Rognoni , L . , Stigler , J . , Pelz , B . , Ylanne , J . & Rief , M . Dynamic force sensing of filamin revealed in single - molecule experiments . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 19679 – 19684 ( 2012 ) . 118 . Meng , F . , Suchyna , T . M . , Lazakovitch , E . , Gronostajski , R . M . & Sachs , F . Real Time , F . R . E . T . Based detection of mechanical stress in cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix proteins . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 4 , 148 – 159 ( 2011 ) . 119 . Chen , W . , Lou , J . , Evans , E . A . & Zhu , C . Observing force - regulated conformational changes and ligand dissociation from a single integrin on cells . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 497 – 512 ( 2012 ) . Single - molecule techniques demonstrated that integrins show force and loading rate - dependent changes in conformation and stability of the integrin – ligand interaction that may underlie mechano transduction by these receptors . 120 . Kong , F . et al . Cyclic mechanical reinforcement of integrin - ligand interactions . Mol . Cell 49 , 1060 – 1068 ( 2013 ) . 121 . Pasapera , A . M . , Schneider , I . C . , Rericha , E . , Schlaepfer , D . D . & Waterman , C . M . Myosin II activity regulates vinculin recruitment to focal adhesions through FAK - mediated paxillin phosphorylation . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 877 – 890 ( 2010 ) . 122 . Lee , C . Y . et al . Actin depolymerization under force is governed by lysine 113 : glutamic acid 195 - mediated catch - slip bonds . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 5022 – 5027 ( 2013 ) . 123 . Hayakawa , K . , Tatsumi , H . & Sokabe , M . Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 721 – 727 ( 2011 ) . 124 . Marshall , T . W . , Aloor , H . L . & Bear , J . E . Coronin 2A regulates a subset of focal - adhesion - turnover events through the cofilin pathway . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3061 – 3069 ( 2009 ) . 125 . Gardel , M . L . et al . Traction stress in focal adhesions correlates biphasically with actin retrograde flow speed . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 999 – 1005 ( 2008 ) . This study described the relationship between traction stress and actin retrograde flow within focal adhesions . 126 . Hu , K . , Ji , L . , Applegate , K . T . , Danuser , G . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science 315 , 111 – 115 ( 2007 ) . 127 . Brown , C . M . et al . Probing the integrin - actin linkage using high - resolution protein velocity mapping . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 5204 – 5214 ( 2006 ) . 128 . Ponti , A . , Machacek , M . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Danuser , G . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 , 1782 – 1786 ( 2004 ) . 129 . Chan , C . E . & Odde , D . J . Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates . Science 322 , 1687 – 1691 ( 2008 ) . 130 . Edwards , C . M . & Schwarz , U . S . Force localization in contracting cell layers . Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 , 5 ( 2011 ) . Theory and experiments linked matrix compliance to loading rate of ECM – integrin – cytoskeletal bonds . 131 . Mertz , A . F . et al . Scaling of traction forces with the size of cohesive cell colonies . Phys . Rev . Lett . 108 , 5 ( 2012 ) . 132 . Marcq , P . , Yoshinaga , N . & Prost , J . Rigidity sensing explained by active matter theory . Biophys . J . 101 , L33 – L35 ( 2011 ) . 133 . Zemel , A . , Rehfeldt , F . , Brown , A . E . X . , Discher , D . E . & Safran , S . A . Optimal matrix rigidity for stress - fibre polarization in stem cells . Nature Phys . 6 , 468 – 473 ( 2010 ) . 134 . Trichet , L . et al . Evidence of a large - scale mechanosensing mechanism for cellular adaptation to substrate stiffness . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 6933 – 6938 ( 2012 ) . A combined experimental and theoretical approach suggested that rigidity sensing may not be localized to focal adhesions . 135 . von Wichert , G . et al . RPTP - α acts as a transducer of mechanical force on α v / β 3 - integrin - cytoskeleton linkages . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 143 – 153 ( 2003 ) . 136 . Jiang , G . , Huang , A . H . , Cai , Y . , Tanase , M . & Sheetz , M . P . Rigidity sensing at the leading edge through α v β 3 integrins and RPTP α . Biophys . J . 90 , 1804 – 1809 ( 2006 ) . 137 . Roca - Cusachs , P . , Gauthier , N . C . , Del Rio , A . & Sheetz , M . P . Clustering of α 5 β 1 integrins determines adhesion strength whereas α v β 3 and talin enable mechanotransduction . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 16245 – 16250 ( 2009 ) . 138 . Schiller , H . B . et al . β 1 - and α v - class integrins cooperate to regulate myosin II during rigidity sensing of fibronectin - based microenvironments . Nature Cell Biol . 15 , 625 – 636 ( 2013 ) . 139 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , Hanks , S . K . & Wang , Y . Focal adhesion kinase is involved in mechanosensing during fibroblast migration . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 11295 – 11300 ( 2001 ) . 140 . Suriawinata , A . & Fiel , M . I . Liver pathology in obesity . Semin . Liver Dis . 24 , 363 – 370 ( 2004 ) . 141 . Yu , J . et al . Peroxisome proliferator - activated receptors gamma reverses hepatic nutritional fibrosis in mice and suppresses activation of hepatic stellate cells in vitro . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 42 , 948 – 957 ( 2010 ) . 142 . Boutouyrie , P . , Beaussier , H . , Achouba , A . , Laurent , S . & EXPLOR trialists . Destiffening effect of valsartan and atenolol : influence of heart rate and blood pressure . J . Hypertens . 32 , 108 – 114 ( 2014 ) . 143 . O’Rourke , M . F . & Hashimoto , J . Mechanical factors in arterial aging : a clinical perspective . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol 50 , 1 – 13 ( 2007 ) . 144 . Kothapalli , D . et al . Apolipoprotein E - mediated cell cycle arrest linked to p27 and the Cox2 - dependent repression of miR221 / 222 . Atherosclerosis 227 , 65 – 71 ( 2013 ) . 145 . Liu , F . et al . Feedback amplification of fibrosis through matrix stiffening and COX - 2 suppression . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 693 – 706 ( 2010 ) . 146 . Grinnell , F . Fibroblast biology in three - dimensional collagen matrices . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 264 – 269 ( 2003 ) . 147 . Gineyts , E . et al . Racemization and isomerization of type I collagen C - telopeptides in human bone and soft tissues : assessment of tissue turnover . Biochem . J . 345 , 481 – 485 ( 2000 ) . 148 . Humphrey , J . D . , Eberth , J . F . , Dye , W . W . & Gleason , R . L . Fundamental role of axial stress in compensatory adaptations by arteries . J . Biomech . 42 , 1 – 8 ( 2009 ) . Acknowledgments Work in the authors’ laboratories was supported , in part , by grants from the US National Institutes of Health ( R01 HL105297 to J . D . H . and PO1 GM98412 to M . A . S . ) , US National Science Foundation ( CMMI - 116142 to J . D . H . ) , Sackler Program at Yale University ( to E . R . D . and J . D . H . ) and the Connecticut Stem Cell Fund grant 12SCA09 ( to E . R . D . ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . R E V I E W S 812 | DECEMBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved