International Education Studies ; Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 ISSN 1913 - 9020 E - ISSN 1913 - 9039 Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 26 Do Computer Science Students Understand Their Programming Task ? —A Case Study of Solving the Josephus Variant Problem Andreas Febrian 1 & Oenardi Lawanto 1 1 Engineering Education Department , College of Engineering , Utah State University , Utah , USA Correspondence : Andreas Febrian , Engineering Education Department , College of Engineering , Utah State University , Utah , USA . E - mail : andreas . febrian @ gmail . com Received : July 18 , 2018 Accepted : September 1 , 2018 Online Published : November 27 , 2018 doi : 10 . 5539 / ies . v11n12p26 URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5539 / ies . v11n12p26 Abstract The ability of students to problem solve begins with interpreting the problem . When they interpret the problem inaccurately , they will likely use ineffective strategies or fail to solve the problem . Studies reported students are often incapable of identifying and articulating the problem goal , requirements / constraints , and expected output . In other words , students lack self - regulation skills , especially related to task understanding . In this study , two male and two female senior computer science students from Utah State University , USA , were recruited as research participants to learn more about their task understanding skills while engage in programming tasks . The participants were asked to answer five programming problems while thinking aloud , and their responses were video - and audio - recorded . This report focuses on one of the problems , which was a variant of the Josephus problem . Three research questions were used to guide the analysis : ( a ) what were the participants’ initial task understanding ; ( b ) how did it change during the problem - solving endeavor ; and ( c ) why did it change . All participants identified the problem goal inaccurately and as a result , selected ineffective problem - solving strategies . The analysis suggested their inaccurate task interpretations were caused by their confidence bias ( i . e . , a systematic cognitive error ) , in which they drew knowledge and strategies from irrelevant experience . Out of four participants , only one was able to defeat the confidence bias and acquired an accurate task understanding ; the influencing factors and possible interventions to overcome confidence bias are discussed . Keywords : programming , task interpretation , task understanding , self - regulated learning , problem - solving , task revision , cognition 1 . Introduction Numerous technologies seamlessly support our daily activities in this digital age . Presently , job automation and technology integrated solutions are becoming more common ( Bui , 2015 ; Hambrusch , Hoffmann , Korb , Haugan , & Hosking , 2009 ; Henderson , 2009 ) , and the demand for competent computer scientists is increasing ( Lacey & Wright , 2009 ) . Unfortunately , many undergraduate students are struggling to adapt to the expectations of computer science ( CS ) education . Various CS departments reported 30 % to 50 % dropout rate of undergraduate students ( AAA Utah State University , 2016 ; Beaubouef & Mason , 2005 ; Howles , 2007 ; Kori et al . , 2015 ) . While many factors may influence students’ decision to leave their major , numerous studies reported the immense challenges in learning computer programming during the first year as the leading dropout reason ( Anderson & Skwarecki , 1989 ; Guzdial et al . , 2015 ; Howles , 2007 ; Kori et al . , 2015 ) . Computer programming plays a critical role in the CS discipline ( Denning , 2003 ) , in that it is believed to be the most effective and efficient way to learn various CS concepts and principles ( Gal - Ezer & Harel , 1998 ; Lye & Koh , 2014 ; Wing , 2006 , 2008 ) . Unfortunately , instructing students to learn programming is challenging . Gal - Ezer & Harel ( 1998 ) argues that some programming concepts are hard to teach and be absorbed by students , such as recursion and that a program is rigid “yet is supposed to deal with many different inputs of varying sizes” ( p . 83 ) . Students also encounter learning impediment due to having incorrect perspectives of the computer ( Ben - Ari , 1998 ; Brennan & Resnick , 2012 ; Lischner , 2001 ) , using inefficient learning strategies ( Whittington , 2004 ) , or facing an undesirable learning environment ( e . g . , lack of human interaction ) ( Ben - Ari , 1998 ) . Consequently , numerous researchers attempted to tackle these issues by developing various computer - based instructional tools and enhancing existing instructional methods ( Adams , 2007 ; Briggs , 2005 ; Gonzalez , 2006 ; Krauss , 2008 ; Lonchamp , 2010 ; Lu , Conley , Klein , & Drive , 2014 ; Resnick et al . , 2009 ; Rum & Ismail , 2017 ; Ruthmann , Heines , Greher , ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 27 Laidler , & Saulters , 2010 ; X . - M . Wang , Hwang , Liang , & Wang , 2017 ; Whittington , 2004 ; Williams , Wiebe , Yang , Ferzli , & Miller , 2010 ) . Students’ learning impediment and high dropout rate can also be caused by their inadequate self - regulation ( SR ) skills . Falkner , Vivian , & Falkner ( 2014 ) reported some students are incapable of considering and addressing the assessment criteria during their problem - solving enterprise . Peng , Wang , & Sampson ( 2017 ) reported students are unable to identify the problem goal and expected output correctly . Although these reports suggest a deficiency in SR strategies , it is still unclear which SR aspect the students lack . Nevertheless , out of various SR aspects ( e . g . , knowledge about self , task interpretation , or planning ) , task interpretation or understanding of the problem is the most critical because it shapes the rest of the problem - solving endeavor ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ) . Thus , students’ self - regulation , especially their task interpretation became the focus of this study . 2 . Literature Review 2 . 1 Self - Regulation and Task Interpretation Self - regulation ( SR ) is defined as a complex , situated , and iterative goal - directed activity ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ; Butler , Schnellert , & MacNeil , 2015 ; Butler & Winne , 1995 ) . All SR activities are intentional , deliberate , and aimed to achieve desired goals ( Butler , Schnellert , & Perry , 2017 ; Zimmerman , 2008 ) . When self - regulating , students are also affected by their emotions and motivations ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ; Zimmerman , Heart , & Mellins , 1989 ) . Students who are competent with using various SR skills tend to be more successful academically ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ; Coutinho , 2007 ) , and to be better engineers ( Lawanto et al . , 2013 ) . Also , students’ SR is influenced by their peers ( Hadwin , Jarvela , & Miller , 2011 ; Rivera - Reyes , Lawanto , & Pate , 2016 ) , in that one student might help other students improve their SR ( i . e . , co - regulation ) or a group of students might develop particular SR strategies ( i . e . , shared - regulation ) . Since 1996 , various researchers , such as Zimmerman , Winne , Hadwin , Pintrich , Butler , and Cartier , have tried to capture the complexity of students’ SR in a single framework ( Santoso , 2013 ) . Butler and Cartier’s model ( BCM ) of SR was chosen for the study presented in this paper because it emphasizes the significance of various contexts in any regulatory activities . Precisely , the BCM imposes that all self - regulation activities are influenced by multiple layers of context ( Butler & Cartier , 2004 , 2005 ; Butler et al . , 2017 ; Cartier & Butler , 2004 ) , such as students’ awareness of themselves ( e . g . , their experience or strengths ) , academic culture , computer science ( CS ) as a discipline , and concepts , standards , and best practices in programming . This contextual characteristic makes BCM flexible because it can be and has been used to describe CS and engineering students’ SR ( Febrian , Lawanto , & Cromwell , 2015 ; Lawanto , 2010 ; Lawanto et al . , 2013 ; Lawanto , Butler , Cartier , Santoso , & Goodridge , 2013 ; Santoso , 2013 ) . The BCM describes three elements of SR including the multiple layers of context , the learning or problem - solving environment , and students’ engagement with the environment ( Butler & Cartier , 2004 , 2005 ; Butler et al . , 2017 ; Cartier & Butler , 2004 ) . The problem - solving environment refers to the given task , available resources and supports , and provided feedback . Students’ engagement with the learning environment refers to their activities of ( 1 ) understanding or interpreting the task , ( 2 ) developing a plan to solve the task , ( 3 ) enacting the plan , ( 4 ) monitoring their progress and problem - solving activities , and ( 5 ) making adjustment as necessary . Adjustments can occur in their task interpretation ( TI ) , plan , or enactment strategies based on their monitoring results . Additionally , the cycle of strategic action taken by a student ( i . e . , TI , planning , enacting , monitoring , and adjusting ) is influenced by emotions and motivations . Butler and Cartier ( 2004 , 2005 ) , Butler et al . ( 2017 ) , and Cartier and Butler ( 2004 ) provide a more detailed discussion of BCM . Butler ( 1998 ) describes students’ TI as their understanding of the given task and the associated processing demand to complete it . However , this definition is too broad to be operationalized . Thus , this study complemented the BCM with Hadwin’s model of TI . Hadwin ( 2006 ) argues students’ understanding of a problem can be categorized as explicit or implicit TI . Explicit TI refers to information that is plainly presented in a task description ( Hadwin , Oshige , Miller , & Wild , 2009 ) , such as the task goal . Implicit TI refers to any extrapolated information from the task description ( Hadwin et al . , 2009 ) , such as relevant concepts , knowledge , and experience . These definitions imply that if the goal needed to be extrapolated from the task description , then it was part of the implicit TI . Likewise , if the task description listed the relevant concepts , then it was part of the explicit TI . In other words , how students get the information ( i . e . , by identifying or extrapolating ) determines how the information is categorized . Task interpretation is the first step in any SR activity ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ) . Thus , any inaccurate explicit or implicit TI may inform students to select and employ ineffective problem - solving approaches ( Butler , 1995 ) . Fortunately , TI changes during the problem - solving enterprise ( Rivera - Reyes , 2015 ; Rivera - Reyes , Lawanto , & ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 28 Pate , 2017 ) , suggesting that even though students may start with inaccurate explicit and implicit TI , they may gain the correct interpretation while solving the task , providing they continuously monitor themselves and are open to necessary adjustments . Isomöttönen & Tirronen ( 2013 ) argues that having relevant knowledge and skills on the given task is necessary for accurate and efficient self - monitoring activities . Further , when students are familiar with the discipline - related knowledge , values , skills , and expertise , they tend to have more accurate TI and be more competent of selecting effective domain - specific strategies ( Butler & Winne , 1995 ; Hadwin et al . , 2009 ) . In other words , SR skills have a positive influence toward students’ problem - solving endeavor ( Lawanto , 2010 ; Lawanto & Johnson , 2009 ; Pintrich , 2002 ) , and insufficient SR may endanger their problem - solving effort ( Schoenfeld , 1983 ) . 2 . 2 Self - Regulation in Computer Programming Developing a computer program requires the ability to translate and model one’s way of thinking , the problem , and the solution in natural language into the selected programming language ( Renumol , Janakiram , & Jayaprakash , 2010 ) . Each programming language has its unique syntax and structures that help students organize their code and focus their attention on solving the problem ( Lee , 2014 ) . Further , students use various cognitive skills to comprehend , design , and interlink various types and levels of abstraction while programming ( Renumol et al . , 2010 ; Wing , 2008 ) . Self - regulation is therefore essential during such complex endeavor . Unfortunately , there is limited literature on this topic in CS education . Alharbi , Henskens , & Hannaford ( 2012 ) reported typical CS students are visual , sensing , reflective , and sequential learners , suggesting that they learn best when exposed to visual representation and facts sequentially . CS students may also prefer to solve problems sequentially and to develop a visual interpretation of the problem . As reflective learners , CS students may frequently monitor and reflect on their learning progress ( Felder & Soloman , n . d . ) . Lye & Koh ( 2014 ) argue that reflections can help students better understand various CS concepts and principles . In other words , most CS students are equipped with some characteristics that could help them be successful in this discipline . Kumar et al . ( 2005 ) reported that using various SR skills enhances students’ performance in programming . Since using discipline - specific strategies during a problem - solving endeavor is more efficient ( Falkner et al . , 2014 ) , it is possible that self - regulated students are more competent in selecting and applying CS discipline - specific strategies , thus enhancing their performance . Bergin , Reilly , & Traynor ( 2005 ) reported that students with high intrinsic motivations and task value ( i . e . , able to appreciate the importance of a given task ) tend to employ various SR strategies more frequently , and possibly perform better in programming , compared to their counterparts . Studies also discussed SR deficiencies of CS students . Havenga ( 2015 ) reported that although students are aware of their fragmented knowledge of , and potential misconceptions on , various object - oriented programming concepts , they tend to jump into solving a given task instead of addressing their fragmented knowledge and confirming the potential misconceptions . This report suggests that some CS students are incapable of self - regulating themselves properly . Falkner et al . , ( 2014 ) reported some CS students are incapable of considering and addressing parts of the assessment criteria during their programming endeavor , suggesting an inadequacy of students’ TI skills . 3 . Research Questions and Design The objective of this qualitative study was to investigate the task understanding skills of four senior CS students solving a variant of the Josephus problem . Three research questions were used to guide this study : ( 1 ) what were the students’ initial explicit and implicit TIs ; ( 2 ) how did their initial TI change during the problem - solving ; and ( 3 ) what were the factors that influenced those changes . Multiple qualitative case study design was used to answer the research questions because of its alignment with the golden standard for conducting SR research ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 , 2018 ; Dinsmore , Alexander , & Loughlin , 2008 ) where the researchers collected multiple , in - depth data of the participants’ ( or cases’ ) SR activities while solving programming problems . This qualitative study consisted of two units of analysis , which were related to object - oriented and algorithm design . Both issues require the participants to work on various levels of abstraction . In this report , the researchers only focus on the algorithm design ; the object - oriented design is discussed elsewhere . 3 . 1 The Participants In selecting the participants , Creswell ( 2012 ) argues that the cases need to represent as much diversity as possible . To establish diversity in this study , two male and two female senior CS students that represented higher - and lower - performance based on GPA were selected . Male and female students were selected based on studies that reported that males and females think , perceive , and self - regulate differently ( Irani , 2004 ; Lawanto , Cromwell , & Febrian , 2016 ; Madigan , Goodfellow , & Stone , 2007 ; Pivkina , Pontelli , Jensen , & Haebe , 2009 ) . Higher and lower ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 29 performing students were selected because a higher GPA might reflect competent self - regulated students and vice versa , lower GPA might reflect incompetent self - regulated students . This interpretation was based on reports by Butler and Cartier ( 2005 ) , Coutinho ( 2007 ) , and Dent and Koenka ( 2016 ) that suggest competent self - regulated students tend to have excellent academic achievements . Two male and two female senior CS students at Utah State University , USA consented to participate in this study . Each of the four participants selected an alias to be used in this study . The higher - performer participants were Jake and Anne with GPAs of 3 . 96 and 3 . 62 on a 4 - point scale , respectively . The lower - performer participants with GPAs of 3 . 10 and 3 . 36 on a 4 - point scale were Rusty and LStew . Although all participants were academically successful , they used relatively diverse problem - solving and self - regulation approaches , as expected in this study . All participants were Caucasian and familiar with imperative and object - oriented programming paradigm . The male participants were also familiar with logic programming . As seniors , they had completed various CS core courses , such as introduction to programming , algorithm and data structure , calculus , discrete mathematics , software engineering , and event - driven programming . Jake , Anne , and LStew were taking the Advanced Algorithms course . Thus , they were equipped with more than the required knowledge to solve the Josephus problem . Further , Jake , Rusty , Anne , and LStew spent around 5800 , 4160 , 2000 , and 2100 hours , respectively , developing their programming skills , suggesting they had ample time to hone their skills . As women , Anne and LStew struggled with the CS stereotype , and a sense of not belonging , especially prior to their senior year . This phenomenon aligns with various reports on women in computer science ( Falkner , Szabo , Michell , Szorenyi , & Thyer , 2015 ; Graham & Latulipe , 2003 ; Irani , 2004 ; Lewis , Anderson , & Yasuhara , 2016 ; Outlay , Platt , & Conroy , 2017 ; Wang , Hejazi Moghadam , & Tiffany - Morales , 2017 ) . Lewis , Anderson , and Yasuhara ( 2016 ) describes this stereotype as “singularly focused on CS , asocial , competitive , and male” ( p . 30 ) . Both Anne and LStew often felt discouraged when comparing themselves with their peers . Anne shared that she frequently considered quitting her study , and was concerned with the impostor syndrome , which made her think : “I know I am not as good as other people think I am , and as soon as they find out how bad I am at programming , then they will realize that I should not be here . ” LStew reminisced how the self - comparison game tended to lower her self - esteem and impacted her programming performance . Fortunately , both of them overcame this challenge in their senior year . Anne said during the interview , “For the last four years , I thought that I am not as smart as you guys [ her peers ] but that was all made up in my head . ” She further explained , “Because there are not as many women [ in CS ] , you do not have as many people to gauge it off … It is harder to know where you really stand with people . ” Each participant completed all the research tasks and received a $ 40 gift card and a personalized SRL report as a token of appreciation . The personalized reports were written with minimum jargon and described each participants’ strengths and weaknesses and some strategies to improve their task interpretation skills . All participants responded positively towards their report . 3 . 2 Data Collection Method Four instruments were used in this study , including the initial TI survey , five programming problems , five problem - space maps , and semi - structured interview questions . All instruments had been pilot - tested and refined accordingly prior to the data collection . The initial TI survey consisted of five open - ended questions assessing the participants’ initial explicit and implicit task understanding , such as their understanding of the task goal and the required steps to solve it . The five programming problems consisted of two practice questions , one object - oriented question ( i . e . , a unit of analysis ) , one break question , and an algorithm design question ( i . e . , another unit of analysis ) . The problem - space maps were used to track the participants’ problem - solving endeavor , such as completed design issues and design changes . This technique was adopted from Johnson ( 2008 ) to enhance the observation quality of the participants’ thought processes . The interview questions were used to confirm the researchers’ observations during the problem - solving enterprise . For example , the researchers asked one participant to explain his justification of switching from using LinkedList to Array to store rebels - related information , and based on that justification , the researchers decided whether a revised TI influenced the design change or not . The semi - structured interview was selected because it enabled the researcher to adjust the interview process to further explore a particular phenomenon of the participants’ self - regulation activities . During the data collection , the participants had to ( 1 ) read the problem out loud ; ( 2 ) complete the initial TI survey ; ( 3 ) answer the problem out loud ; and ( 4 ) answer the interview questions . There was no time limit set for solving the problems . Thinking aloud is commonly accepted as one of the best methods to assess how students think ( Bainbridge & Sanderson , 2005 ) . Unfortunately , this method is not without shortcoming . Chi , De Leeuw , Chiu , & ies . ccsenet . Lavancherresearch . R The partic repeat this problems conferencemotion sen turning off white pape placed in f endeavor , collected f 3 . 3 The Jo The Joseph courses an their last r execution all swords sword kille repeated al be the last position . F to 40 peop There wer rebels give method , an problem w Waugh , 20 produce an possible to had many 3 . 4 Data A The record coding pro implies ev transcriptioand progra example , o Array - or n The result actions of of the res e researcherparticipatin org r ( 1994 ) argue Readers are ad cipants’ primar s procedure for were used to e room that c nsor was some f , which slightl er , two water b front of and be initial TI sur from each part osephus Proble hus problem is nd contests . Jos raid , the rebel was waiting fo s except one an ed the person ll steps until th t man standing Figure 1 presen ple . e at least five i en by a user , re and displaying was at level six , 013 ) . Further , a n artifact , had o answer this p solution variat Analysis Metho ded videos we ocess . The verb very spoken wo on also capture amming conce one of the par new Array equa ting Josephus - BCM . During earchers and a r and an inform ng researcher h es that thinking dvised to consid ry goal was to r each question familiarize th ould reduce d etimes unable ly distracted th bottles , a can eside the partic rvey response icipant . em s one of the fam sephus was a m l group was o or them if captu nd gave it to th on his left ; ( b ) here was only o g . For this stud nts an illustrati Figu issues that nee epresenting the the program , more specific according to Jo d some undefi problem using tions . od ere transcribed batim techniqu ord , including ed and clarified epts by using b rticipants said , al to old Array - related transcr g this process , T Ph . D . candida mation technolo had bachelor a Internation g aloud might der this limitat answer all giv n , and were vi hem with the distractions fro to detect the r he participants . of soda , and t cipants , respec es , interview r mous compute mathematician verpowered an ured , so they c the northmost ) that person p one person stan dy , the particip ion of the expe ure 1 . Expected ded to be cons e rebels in the state each tim cally about crea onassen ( 2000 , ined criteria , w imperative or d to reduce the ue was used d shutters and fa d the participan box brackets , , “So for int C y ; [ writing it do riptions were Table 1 was u ate in engineer ogist ; all exper and master deg nal Education Stu 30 help the parti tion when inter ven programm ideo - and audi procedure . T om curious pa researchers an Each participa two chocolate ctively . Record responses , pro er science puzz who belonged nd trapped by came up with a person . Then passed the swo nding . Using h pants had to sim ected program’ d program inpu sidered to solve program , track me a rebel per ating a product , 2004 , 2010 ) , was a situated r object - oriente eir complexity during the trans false starts , mu nts’ activities ( dash ( “ - ” ) , an C , C less than own ] Array bo then qualitativ sed as a coding ring education rts had experie grees in compu udies icipants better rpreting the fin ming problems o - recorded . Th The data were assersby . Unfo nd the participa ant was provid bars . A came ded videos and oblem - space m zles , and has b d to a rebel gro y the Romans . an outlandish su they did the fo ord to the next his expertise in mulate each st ’s outputs . The ut and output e this problem king the sword rished . Accord t for a specific this problem w d problem , and ed programmin ( Lapadat & L scription to mi ust be written a ( e . g . , writing so nd capitalizing size , C plus p ox C equal to th vely coded by g table . Three n , and one tran ence in impera uter science . Ea V r self - regulate , ndings . correctly . All he first and se collected in ortunately , the ants , which re ded with a pen , era and two vo d audios of the maps , and des been widely us oup against the The rebels k uicidal method ollowing : ( a ) t living person n mathematics , tep and then d e number of reb , including rea d position , sim ding to Bloom purpose ( Gron was a design ta d had multiple ng paradigm , Lindsay , 1999 ) inimize data lo as is ( Tigerfish omething ) , qui g the first lette plus , we set A he old Array . ” y two experts transcriptions nscription was tive program m ach expert cod Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; thus affecting participants h cond program a well - illumin e room’s autom esulted in the l pencil , highlig oice recorders eir problem - so sign artifacts ed in program e Roman Empir knew that a pa d . They threw a the person wit on his left ; an , Josephus aim determine Josep bels was betwe ading the numb mulating the sui m’s Taxonomy nlund , Gronlun ask since it aim e solutions . It and each para ) for the qualit oss . This techn h , n . d . ) . Furthe ick change of i r , respectively Array equal to based on str a were coded by coded by the ming paradigm ed individually 2018 g this ad to ming nated matic lights ghter , were lving were ming re . In ainful away h the nd ( c ) med to phus’ een 3 ber of icidal , this nd , & med to t was digm tative nique r , the issue , y . For new ategic y one same . The y and ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 31 then met to address their differences . During the discussion , the experts also used the recorded videos and other collected data to resolve their disagreements . The experts produced 732 codes with a Kappa score of 1 . 00 for each Josephus - related transcription , suggesting a perfect agreement among coders ( Viera & Garrett , 2005 ) . The initial TI survey responses were used to address the first research question , which was assessing the participants’ initial TI . However , since the participants answered the survey questions in writing , some of their responses lacked details and contexts . Fortunately , the recorded videos / audios of their verbalization could complement the deficiencies of their written responses . Also , the participants’ interview responses were checked in case they forgot to report some of their thought processes when answering the survey . Table 1 . Strategic actions of self - regulation Strategic Action Definition Task interpretation ( TI ) Students’ understanding of a task and the associated processing demand to complete it ( Butler , 1998 ) . Planning strategies ( PS ) Selecting appropriate strategies to complete the task ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ) . Enacting strategies ( ES ) Students’ cognitive activities employed as they engage in their work executing the design tasks , as planned , monitored , and adjusted through metacognitive activity ( Lawanto , Butler , Cartier , Santoso , Goodridge , et al . , 2013 ) . Monitoring ( M ) Students’ activities of self - monitor progress , goals , plans , or strategies ( adjusting approaches to learning ) ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ) . Adjusting ( A ) Students’ activities of adjusting goals , plans , or strategies based on self - perceptions of progress or feedback ( Butler & Cartier , 2005 ) . The second research question , which was about the participants’ initial TI revision , was answered by analyzing the coded - transcriptions and determining any changes in their initial TI . For each identified revision , the researchers traced it back to associated initial interpretation and examined the associated codes along the trace - path . To address the third research question , which was identifying the factors that influenced these changes , all collected data and other analysis results were used . The influencing factors were mostly inferred from the coded - transcription by using the trace - path . Some other influencing factors were discovered in the participants’ interview responses and recorded video of their initial task interpretation survey responses . 4 . Findings As previously discussed , this paper focuses on the results of the Josephus problem , one of the five programming problems provided to the participants , and the discussion is organized by the three research questions . Table 2 shows the participants’ overall performance . As shown in this table , all participants started with an incomplete TI . While LStew failed to submit any solution due to facing challenges during the problem - solving endeavor , the other participants submitted inaccurate solutions . During the problem - solving enterprise , only Rusty was able to change his task understanding and acquire an accurate task interpretation . Table 2 . The participants’ overall performance Performance Aspect Jake Anne Rusty LStew Initial task understanding Incomplete Incomplete Incomplete Incomplete Task interpretation during the problem - solving Intact Intact Changed Intact Final task understanding Incomplete Incomplete Incomplete Incomplete Submitted solution Inaccurate Inaccurate Inaccurate - 4 . 1 Answering Research Question 1 : What Was the Participants’ Initial Explicit and Implicit Task Interpretation ? The explicit aspects of the Josephus problem were related to the goal and provided requirements / constraints . Its implicit aspects were related to relevant programming concepts , extrapolated requirements / constraints , and the participants’ relevant experience and steps to solve it . All four participants had an incomplete initial understanding of the problem goal . LStew’s understanding represents the other participants’ interpretation , in which she thought the goal was “to write pseudocode that figures out what position Josephus should be at , in order to survive . ” This understanding was incomplete because they were not cognizant to print the pseudocode’s state each time a rebel perished . Later , this inaccurate ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 32 understanding led to other wrong interpretations and the section of ineffective approaches . LStew identified the provided requirements / constraints as the pseudocode would “take an input , run through the formula , and return the output . ” The formula referred to a simplified mathematical model of the provided suicidal method . Rusty also had a similar interpretation , saying , “The algorithm must return the correct position . ” Both interpretations suggested the pseudocode did not have to print its states . These understandings were influenced by their incomplete interpretation of the task goal . Encouragingly , LStew also accurately identified “there will never be an input of zero or one because then the problem would not exist . ” Likewise , Rusty was capable of identifying “the chosen number cannot die . ” While Rusty and LStew focused on the provided requirements / constraints , Jake’s and Anne’s interpretation centered on extrapolated information . Since the problem asked for pseudocode , Jake concluded it was unnecessary to think about the speed and memory used by the algorithm . However , he acknowledged the algorithm should be mathematically correct , in that the algorithm should generate the correct output for every given input . As if complementing the others’ interpretations , Anne deduced the number of people is “given with function call . ” Both Jake’s and Anne’s extrapolated requirements / constraints were correct and supported the idea that an incomplete task interpretation of an aspect of a problem might not harm all follow - up task interpretation activities . Related to the relevant programming concepts , all participants understood that having basic programming knowledge was necessary to answer the given problem . Among the participants , Anne did not explicitly mention this qualification although she was aware of it , which suggested two interpretations . First , the nature of the Josephus problem implied the need to have programming skills , and thus it was unnecessary to state it plainly . Second , she was not mindful of her implicit connection between the problem and basic programming knowledge . Unfortunately , the researchers did not confirm either possible interpretation . On the other hand , Rusty specified he especially needed the skills of using “Arrays with conditional operators and if statements . ” Further , Jake and LStew added the necessity to have a competency in “making algorithms out of behaviors . ” Anne even considered “creative problem - solving” skills as part of the needed qualifications . These observed behaviors suggested the participants were competent in identifying relevant programming concepts to solve the Josephus problem . The finding also supported the idea that having an inaccurate explicit TI might not negatively influence the implicit task understanding . Jake , Rusty , Anne , and LStew mentioned solving discrete mathematics course assignments as relevant experience to solve the Josephus problem . Interestingly , Rusty did not mention this course during his initial TI , but he did mention it during the interview . However , Rusty’s previously discussed problem - solving steps were informed by it , indicating he was unconsciously drawing strategies from that experience . On the other hand , Jake , Anne , and LStew shared they had worked on the “math proof of this problem [ but ] with a twist” during the course final examination . Naturally , their problem - solving steps were informed by this experience . All participants’ approaches to solving the problem were relatively similar , in that they needed to ( 1 ) determine a working pattern by simulating the provided suicidal method manually ; ( 2 ) program the solution based on the identified pattern ; and ( 3 ) verify the solution’s accuracy . Although she enacted it , LStew did not mention these steps during her initial TI , which suggested she was aware of her problem - solving approach but failed to report it . Plausibly , she often solved similar problems using a similar strategy and was able to retrieve and select it instantaneously when working on the Josephus problem while also being oblivious about it . Such phenomenon is known as tacit expertise and can be acquired through continuous practices ( Johnson , 2008 ) . Two issues emerged from the participants’ approaches . First , the participants determined they needed to find a pattern . Rusty and LStew further elaborated the pattern for odd and even number of people might be different . However , finding a working pattern was an unnecessary step since they could easily convert the provided algorithm into pseudocode . Second , all participants assumed a working pattern could be identified after simulating some of the possible inputs manually . Consequently , with the exception of Jake , none of the other participants considered looking for alternative approaches during their initial problem - solving steps , which was a worrisome finding . Studies reported students tend to solve a problem intuitively and then analytically ( Abdillah , Nusantara , Subanj , Susanto , & Abadyo , 2016 ; Ball , Ormerod , & Morley , 2004 ; Kahneman , 2003 ) . Further , the learner’s experience influences their self - regulation ( Butler & Cartier , 2004 , 2005 ; Butler et al . , 2015 ; Cartier & Butler , 2004 ) . Thus , it was possible the participants’ discrete mathematics experience significantly influenced their intuition and was reflected in their interpretation of the task goal and problem - solving approach . One of the typical discrete mathematics problems asks students to analyze ( e . g . , find a pattern ) a number sequence and find a simple and succinct formula that could correctly generate the sequence . Plausibly , the participants relied on their experience of ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 33 solving such problems . This analysis suggested drawing from irrelevant experience might harm the participants’ TI . This finding was aligned with Butler’s ( 1995 ) argument that students’ may select ineffective strategies due to their misinterpretation . When being asked about his wrong interpretation of the problem during the interview , Rusty explained he might have had “a little bit of overconfidence in thinking that I understood the problem , ” especially since he had “experience with the problem that I thought was similar but turned out to be very different . ” Similarly , after reading her personalized report , Anne said , “I got excited at the thought that I would have some background in solving that particular problem . ” Although studies reported that overconfidence is a common trait among students ( Mata , Ferreira , & Sherman , 2013 ; Potgieter , Malatje , Gaigher , & Venter , 2010 ) , the term itself is ambiguous . The finding suggested the participants’ inaccurate task understanding was influenced by their decision to draw knowledge and strategies from solving various discrete mathematics problems . Such phenomenon is commonly known as confidence bias , which is defined as “a systematic error of judgment made by individuals when they assess the correctness of their responses to questions relating to intellectual or perceptual problems” ( Pallier et al . , 2002 , p . 258 ) . The participants’ confidence bias was also worsened by the desire to exhibit their skills or abilities . As LStew explained , “I was trying to be smart and look / sound clever and focusing on what strengths I have that make me look smart ( such as pattern recognition ) . ” Aside from having a confidence bias , Rusty , Anne , and LStew assumed that they could find a working pattern after conducting a few manual simulations of the provided suicidal method . They were so confident that they did not make any alternative plans . During the interview , Rusty said , “Well , if they [ educators ] are asking this question , there has got to be a systematic way to approach it ; there has got to be some underlying pattern . ” Rusty’s belief suggested the participants had positive assumptions about the academic environment . In their study of an authentic and impactful problem , Saulnier & Brisson ( 2018 ) reported a similar finding . In their study , students were asked to design a stove to be used in a four - day expedition . Some students did not take this task seriously , and most of them were shocked when they had to use their designed stove during the expedition . Plausibly , students are too used to working with inauthentic problems . McNeill , Douglas , Koro - Ljungberg , Therriault , & Krause’s ( 2016 ) report confirmed this suspicion . They reported students believe “classroom problems are more abstract and less complex because of the need to simplify in order to provide a general understanding in school” ( p . 547 ) . 4 . 2 Answering Research Question 2 : How did their Initial Understanding Change during the Problem - Solving ? This subsection focuses on Rusty’s problem - solving approach because he was the only participant who had a revised TI . Rusty’s approach is simplified as a flowchart in Figure 2 . Unlike a typical flowchart , the first and last activities were assumed as the first and last boxes . Thus , Rusty began solving the problem by simulating the provided suicidal method manually for inputs ( i . e . , number of people ) of 5 to 17 . He made a table to visualize each input and the associated output and tried to generate a working pattern . Unfortunately , it was not as straightforward as Rusty initially thought , and instead found out he skipped simulating the result for input 16 . Rusty then fixed that error and continued determining a pattern . Again , he was unable to find any useful mathematical pattern . Rusty then reread the provided example and noticed a mismatch between that and his simulation steps . Rusty’s verification confirmed nothing alarming , so he unsuccessfully continued trying to identify a pattern . Rusty then considered stopping looking for a pattern and implementing the provided method as it is . However , before doing so , he concluded there was no harm in rereading the problem description . The review supported Rusty’s idea of implementing the method as described . Then , by using his C + + expertise , Rusty developed , verified , and submitted the pseudocode . Unfortunately , his submitted solution was still inaccurate because he did not print out the pseudocode’s states . However , Rusty said during the interview that the description presented “a possible visualization of what it [ the pseudocode ] was doing , ” which suggested he would be able to get a complete task understanding and submit a correct solution given enough time ( e . g . , allowing him to work on this problem for several days ) . While solving the Josephus problem , Rusty was observed engaging in 13 planning strategies , 29 enacting strategies , 131 monitoring activities , and 7 adjustment strategies . Further analysis revealed that out of his 138 observed monitoring and adjusting activities , 12 were related to TI . Theoretically , Rusty’s revised task understandings were captured in these codes . However , since participants might sometimes forget to think aloud , some of their revised TI might be identified as planning or enacting strategies . Fortunately , the follow - up analysis confirmed all Rusty’s observed engagements were aligned either with his initial or revised task TI . Throughout his endeavor , Rusty was observed revising his TI one time . In Figure 2 , this event was presented as the fourth box . Thus , Rusty’s approach suggested he rarely revised his task understanding during the problem - solving enterprise . Plausibly , this behavior was influenced by his familiarity with the problem . ies . ccsenet . Figur 4 . 3 Answe This subse to who ha said : “ [ Reading thoroughlyposition . Y After rerea incorrect t explain the “I kind of h not getting exhausted Rusty’s re problem d engaged in another mo I am skipp Gigerenzethat influe distinguishbias . Howe on their dis them to de programm The resear “That is s assignmenjumped int Rusty’s res programmapproach , org re 2 . Rusty’s a ring Research ection focuses d a revised TI the problem y . [ Reading th Yes , so I was w ading the desc task understand e trigger that e hit a cycle and g something , o all my resourc esponse sugge description . In n TI - related m otivation that d ping over” and r ( 1991 ) argue ence their prob hing “single - ev ever , this argum screte mathem evelop mathem ming , establishi rchers further e omething that nts ] , and I did to it , and then sponse indicat ming assignmen which then hel approach to sol Question 3 : W on Rusty’s end I during the da description ] Y he problem de way overthinkin cription , Rusty ding . The rese encouraged him d I kept looping or there is som ces , best guess sted that the nterestingly , L monitoring act drove Rusty to then conquer e es people deve blem - solving d vent confidenc ment was not a matics course ex matical formula ing a connectio explored this is t I have done not read it ca I realized [ my ted he was awa nts . This awar lped him interp Internation lving the Josep int What Were the deavor when so ata collection . You have to s escription ] You ng it , [ stressed y realized he earchers explor m to reread the g back to that [ p mething obviou ses , and ideas… stagnancy of Stew’s proble tivities , she di think “I am ei ed his confiden elop normative decisions . He ces and relative applicable in t xperience , and as . Further , sinc on with discret ssue during the before with o arefully enough y misinterpreta are of his tende reness was im pret the problem nal Education Stu 34 phus problem ( erpretation ) Factors Influe olving the Jose He was obser simulate each u have to sim d his voice ] wa did not read t red this phenom e problem desc pattern ] , and I us that I am sk …” his problem - s em - solving ent id not change ither not gettin nce bias . e claims , which further argues e frequencies” this study beca in this course , ce many discre te mathematics e interview wi other programm h like I had th ation ] halfway ency to miss e mbued in his co m correctly . Pl udies ( MA - TI : moni enced Those C ephus problem rved changing step . . . Oh my mulate each ste ay overthinking the description menon during cription . Rusty was like , okay kipping over . … solving endeav terprise was a her understan ng something , o h are often ove s that helping ( p . 89 ) may hel ause the partici , most if not all ete mathematic s intuitively or ith Rusty , and h ming assignme he general idea through [ of so essential small onscience and lausibly , such b V itoring and adj Changes ? m since he was t his task under y , gosh , I did ep and then de g it . ” n thoughtfully the interview replied : y , something is … but it was n vor motivated also stagnant , nding . Therefo or there is som ersimplified an people to be m lp in neutralizi ipants’ confide l of their assign cs concepts are r consciously w he responded : ents . I think I a [ of the assig olving the assig details when i d influenced h belief was also Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; usting of task the only partic rstanding once not read that etermine Josep y and generate by asking Rus s wrong , I am e not until I felt him to reread and although ore , there coul mething obvious nd thus mislea more compete ing their confid ence bias was b nments were as e commonly us was reasonable understood it gnments ] , but I gnments ] . ” interpreting va his problem - so o a normative c 2018 ipant e and t part phus’ ed an sty to either I had d the h she ld be s that ding , ent in dence based sking sed in e . t [ the I just rious lving laim , ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 35 which unfortunately was not verified . Nevertheless , this finding suggested Rusty’s understanding of himself , and his awareness and reflection of past failures , helped him conquered his confidence bias . 5 . Conclusion , Implication , and Limitation As a qualitative case study , this research had a limited number of participants . While having four participants is commonly considered unacceptable in quantitative research , it is not the case in the qualitative case study ( Creswell , 2012 ) . A qualitative case study is not designed to produce generalized findings but to collect as much diversity as possible ( Creswell , 2012 ) . In this study , the diversities are related to the senior CS students’ TI while solving a variant of the Josephus problem . The descriptions of the participants and their approach are necessary to allow readers to better interpret and relate to the findings and apply it in their respective contexts . In this study , two male and two female senior CS students at Utah State University were recruited . Three participants had prior exposure to a variant of the Josephus problem during their discrete mathematics course . Interestingly , all participants considered their experience in that course as relevant and drew strategies to solve the problem from it . This confidence bias negatively influenced their initial TI , in that it swayed the participants from having an accurate understanding of the task goal and from selecting an effective problem - solving approach . This confidence bias was also preventing Jake , Anne , and LStew from monitoring and adjusting their task understanding throughout the problem - solving enterprise . Contrarily , Rusty was able to defeat his confidence bias and acquire an accurate understanding of the task . The analysis suggested his awareness of himself and that he sometimes misinterprets the problems , played a crucial part in his success . Considering that all participants had confidence bias suggested it was a common phenomenon in problem - solving . It is possible that one reason for the students’ incompetence to address some of the assessment criteria is because they have a confidence bias . Reflecting on Rusty’s experience , it might be beneficial to design an instruction that can incite students’ confidence bias and then address the issue . The instruction will need to be memorable and encourage students to reflect on their experience . Exposing students to varieties of programming tasks might also useful in enhancing their competency to distinguish different task types . Naturally , follow - up studies are needed to learn more about the nature of confidence bias in programming . Regarding the participants’ diversity , there were no notable differences between male and female participants’ initial TI and problem - solving approaches . However , the researchers found male participants spent twice as much time programming compared to the females . A dissimilarity was also found among the higher - and lower - performers’ TI of the task requirements / constraints . Both higher - performer participants focused their interpretation on the implicit aspect of the task , while the lower - performers focused on the explicit aspect . It was also worth noting that even though all participants inaccurately identify the goal of the problem , not all of their follow - up TI were incorrect . Since this report only focused on the Josephus problem , its findings only captured a small portion of a diverse students’ SR while engaged in programming tasks . Although some findings might be transferable to other programming problem , replication studies are still needed to bring to light the other portion of students’ self - regulations . Further , Maksel & Plucker ( 2014 ) and Benson & Borrego ( 2015 ) argue about the importance of replication studies , such as it can help to verify the accurateness and applicability of educational research findings and interventions in different settings . When conducting a replication study , it is important to focus on verbal responses instead of written to get more elaborate and detailed insight into the participants’ thought processes . Acknowledgments This material is based , in part , upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No . 1148806 . Any opinions , findings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author ( s ) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation . References AAA Utah State University . ( 2016 ) . Summaries by Department . Logan , UT , USA . Abdillah , A . , Nusantara , T . , Subanj , S . , Susanto , H . , & Abadyo , A . ( 2016 ) . The Students Decision Making in Solving Discount Problem . International Education Studies , 9 ( 7 ) , 57 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 5539 / ies . v9n7p57 Adams , J . C . ( 2007 ) . Alice , middle schoolers & the imaginary worlds camps . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 39 ( 1 ) , 307 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1227504 . 1227418 Alharbi , A . , Henskens , F . , & Hannaford , M . ( 2012 ) . Student - Centered Learning Objects to Support the Self - Regulated Learning of Computer Science . Creative Education , 03 ( 06 ) , 773 - 783 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 4236 / ce . 2012 . 326116 ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 36 Anderson , J . R . , & Skwarecki , E . ( 1989 ) . The automated tutoring of introductory computer programming . Communications of the ACM , 29 ( 9 ) , 842 - 849 . Bainbridge , L . , & Sanderson , P . ( 2005 ) . Verbal Protocol Analysis . In J . R . Wilsom & N . Corlett ( Eds . ) , Evaluation of Human Work , 3rd Edition ( 3rd ed . , p . 1048 ) . CRC Press . Retrieved from https : / / books . google . com / books ? id = dSmKYLp82b4C & pgis = 1 Ball , L . J . , Ormerod , T . C . , & Morley , N . J . ( 2004 ) . Spontaneous analogising in engineering design : a comparative analysis of experts and novices . Design Studies , 25 ( 5 ) , 495 - 508 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2004 . 05 . 004 Beaubouef , T . , & Mason , J . ( 2005 ) . Why the high attrition rate for computer science students . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 37 ( 2 ) , 103 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1083431 . 1083474 Ben - Ari , M . ( 1998 ) . Constructivism in Computer Science Education . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 30 ( 1 ) , 257 - 261 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 274790 . 274308 Benson , L . , & Borrego , M . ( 2015 ) . The Role of Replication in Engineering Education Research . Journal of Engineering Education , 104 ( 4 ) , 388 - 392 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jee . 20082 Bergin , S . , Reilly , R . , & Traynor , D . ( 2005 ) . Examining the role of self - regulated learning on introductory programming performance . In First International Workshop on Computing Education Research ( pp . 81 - 86 ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1089786 . 1089794 Brennan , K . , & Resnick , M . ( 2012 ) . New frameworks for studying and assessing the development of computational thinking . … of the 2012 Annual Meeting of … . Retrieved from http : / / scratched . gse . harvard . edu / ct / files / AERA2012 . pdf Briggs , T . ( 2005 ) . Techniques for active learning in CS courses . Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges , 21 ( 2 ) , 156 - 165 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1089053 . 1089075 Bui , Q . ( 2015 ) . Will Your Job Be Done By A Machine ? Retrieved May 25 , 2015 , from http : / / www . npr . org / sections / money / 2015 / 05 / 21 / 408234543 / will - your - job - be - done - by - a - machine Butler , D . L . ( 1995 ) . Promoting Strategic Learning by Postsecondary Students with Learning Disabilities . Journal of Learning Disabilities , 28 ( 3 ) , 170 - 190 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 002221949502800306 Butler , D . L . ( 1998 ) . Metacognition and Learning Disabilities . In B . Y . L . Wong ( Ed . ) , Learning About Learning Disabilities ( 2nd ed . , pp . 277 - 307 ) . Toronto : Academic Press . Butler , D . L . , & Cartier , S . C . ( 2004 ) . Learning in varying activities : An explanatory framework and a new evaluation tool founded on a model of self - regulated learning . In Annual Conference of the Canadian Society for The Study of Education . Toronto , ON . Retrieved from http : / / perso . crifpe . ca / ~ scartier / spip / IMG / pdf / Butler _ and _ Cartier _ 2004 _ . pdf Butler , D . L . , & Cartier , S . C . ( 2005 ) . Multiple Complementary Methods for Understanding Self - Regulated Learning as Situated in Context . In American Educational Research Association , Annual Meeting ( pp . 11 - 15 ) . Butler , D . L . , & Cartier , S . C . ( 2018 ) . Case Studies as a Methodological Framework for Studying and Assessing Self - Regulated Learning . In D . H . Schunk & J . Greene ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Self - Regulation of Learning and Performance ( 2nd ed . , pp . 352 - 369 ) . New York , New York , USA : Routledge . Butler , D . L . , Schnellert , L . , & MacNeil , K . ( 2015 ) . Collaborative inquiry and distributed agency in educational change : A case study of a multi - level community of inquiry . Journal of Educational Change , 16 ( 1 ) , 1 - 26 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10833 - 014 - 9227 - z Butler , D . L . , Schnellert , L . , & Perry , N . E . ( 2017 ) . Developing Self - Regulating Learners . ( C . O’Donnell , Ed . ) . Toronto , ON , Canada : Pearson Education Inc . Butler , D . L . , & Winne , P . H . ( 1995 ) . Feedback and Self - Regulated Learning : A Theoretical Synthesis . Review of Educational Research , 65 ( 3 ) , 245 - 281 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 00346543065003245 Cartier , S . C . , & Butler , D . L . ( 2004 ) . Elaboration and validation of questionnaires and plan for analysis . In Annual Conference of the Canadian Society for The Study of Education . Toronto , ON . Chi , M . T . H . , De Leeuw , N . , Chiu , M . - H . , & Lavancher , C . ( 1994 ) . Eliciting Self - Explanations Improves Understanding . Cognitive Science , 18 ( 3 ) , 439 - 477 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1803 _ 3 Coutinho , S . A . ( 2007 ) . The relationship between goals , metacognition , and academic success . Educate , 7 ( 1 ) , ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 37 39 - 47 . Retrieved from http : / / www . educatejournal . org / index . php / educate / issue / view / 23 Creswell , J . W . ( 2012 ) . Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design : Choosing Among Five Approaches ( 3rd ed . ) . SAGE Publications . Denning , P . J . ( 2003 ) . Computer Science . In A . Ralston , E . D . Reilly , & D . Hemmendinger ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of Computer Science ( 4th ed . , pp . 405 - 419 ) . Chichester , UK : John Wiley and Sons Ltd . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1074266 Dent , A . L . , & Koenka , A . C . ( 2016 ) . The Relation Between Self - Regulated Learning and Academic Achievement Across Childhood and Adolescence : A Meta - Analysis . Educational Psychology Review , 28 ( 3 ) , 425 - 474 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 015 - 9320 - 8 Dinsmore , D . L . , Alexander , P . A . , & Loughlin , S . M . ( 2008 ) . Focusing the conceptual lens on metacognition , self - regulation , and self - regulated learning . Educational Psychology Review , 20 ( 4 ) , 391 - 409 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 008 - 9083 - 6 Falkner , K . , Szabo , C . , Michell , D . , Szorenyi , A . , & Thyer , S . ( 2015 ) . Gender Gap in Academia : Perceptions of Female Computer Science Academics . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education - ITiCSE ‘15 ( pp . 111 - 116 ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2729094 . 2742595 Falkner , K . , Vivian , R . , & Falkner , N . J . G . ( 2014 ) . Identifying computer science self - regulated learning strategies . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Innovation & technology in computer science education - ITiCSE ‘14 ( pp . 291 - 296 ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2591708 . 2591715 Febrian , A . , Lawanto , O . , & Cromwell , M . ( 2015 ) . Advancing Research on Engineering Design using e - Journal . In Frontiers in Education Conference ( FIE ) , 2015 . 32614 2015 . IEEE ( pp . 1 - 5 ) . El Paso , TX : IEEE . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / FIE . 2015 . 7344191 Felder , R . M . , & Soloman , B . A . ( n . d . ) . Learning Styles and Strategies . Retrieved April 25 , 2017 , from http : / / www4 . ncsu . edu / unity / lockers / users / f / felder / public / / ILSdir / styles . htm Gal - Ezer , J . , & Harel , D . ( 1998 ) . What ( else ) should CS educators know ? Communications of the ACM , 41 ( 9 ) , 77 - 84 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 285070 . 285085 Gigerenzer , G . ( 1991 ) . How to Make Cognitive Illusions Disappear : Beyond “Heuristics and Biases . ” European Review of Social Psychology , 2 ( 1 ) , 83 - 115 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14792779143000033 Gonzalez , G . ( 2006 ) . A systematic approach to active and cooperative learning in CS1 and its effects on CS2 . In ACM SIGCSE Bulletin ( Vol . 38 , p . 133 ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124706 . 1121386 Graham , S . , & Latulipe , C . ( 2003 ) . CS girls rock : sparking interest in computer science and debunking the stereotypes . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 35 ( 1 ) , 322 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 792548 . 611998 Gronlund , N . E . , Gronlund , E . N . , & Waugh , C . K . ( 2013 ) . Assessment of Student Achievement . Assessment of Student Achievement ( 10th ed . ) . Pearson . Guzdial , M . , Johnson , R . , Wampler , K . , Kussmaul , C . , Swanson , J . , Humenn , P . , & Lewchuk , M . ( 2015 ) . What’s the best way to teach computer science to beginners ? Communications of the ACM , 58 ( 2 ) , 12 - 13 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2714488 Hadwin , A . ( 2006 ) . Do your students really understand your assignments ? LTC Currents : Optimizing Learning Environments , 11 ( 3 ) , 8 - 9 . Hadwin , A . F . , Jarvela , S . , & Miller , M . ( 2011 ) . Self - regulated , co - regulated , and socially shared regulation of learning . In B . J . Zimmerman & D . H . Schunk ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Self - Regulation of Learning and Performance ( pp . 65 - 84 ) . New York , New York , USA : Routledge . Hadwin , A . F . , Oshige , M . , Miller , M . , & Wild , P . ( 2009 ) . Examining Student and Instructor Task Perceptions in a Complex Engineering Design Task . In The Sixth International Conference on Innovation and Practices in Engineering Design and Engineering Education . Hamilton , ON , Canada : McMaster University . Hambrusch , S . , Hoffmann , C . , Korb , J . T . , Haugan , M . , & Hosking , A . L . ( 2009 ) . A Multidisciplinary Approach Towards Computational Thinking for Science Majors . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 41 ( 1 ) , 183 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1539024 . 1508931 ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 38 Havenga , M . ( 2015 ) . The Role of Metacognitive Skills in Solving Object - Oriented Programming Problems : a Case Study . TD : The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern Africa , 11 ( 1 ) , 133 - 147 . Retrieved from https : / / journals . co . za / content / transd / 11 / 1 / EJC175923 Henderson , P . B . ( 2009 ) . Ubiquitous computational thinking . Computer , 42 ( 10 ) , 100 - 102 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MC . 2009 . 334 Howles , T . ( 2007 ) . Preliminary Results of a Longitudinal Study of Computer Science Student Trends , Behaviors and Preferences . Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges , 22 ( 6 ) , 18 - 27 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1231097 Irani , L . ( 2004 ) . Understanding gender and confidence in CS course culture . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 36 ( 1 ) , 195 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1028174 . 971371 Isomöttönen , V . , & Tirronen , V . ( 2013 ) . Teaching programming by emphasizing self - direction . ACM Transactions on Computing Education , 13 ( 2 ) , 1 - 21 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2483710 . 2483711 Johnson , S . D . ( 2008 ) . Cognitive Analysis of Expert and Novice Troubleshooting Performance . Performance Improvement Quarterly , 1 ( 3 ) , 38 - 54 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1937 - 8327 . 1988 . tb00021 . x Jonassen , D . H . ( 2000 ) . Toward a design theory of problem solving . Educational Technology Research and Development , 48 ( 4 ) , 63 - 85 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02300500 Jonassen , D . H . ( 2004 ) . Learning to Solve Problems : An Instructional Design Guide . ( M . Davis , Ed . ) . John Wiley & Sons . Jonassen , D . H . ( 2010 ) . Learning to solve problems : A handbook for designing problem - solving learning environments . Learning to Solve Problems : A Handbook for Designing Problem - Solving Learning Environments . Routledge . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203847527 Kahneman , D . ( 2003 ) . A Perspective on Judgment and Choice : Mapping Bounded Rationality . American Psychologist , 58 ( 9 ) , 697 - 720 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 58 . 9 . 697 Kori , K . , Pedaste , M . , Tonisson , E . , Palts , T . , Altin , H . , Rantsus , R . , … Ruutmann , T . ( 2015 ) . First - year dropout in ICT studies . In 2015 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference ( EDUCON ) ( pp . 437 - 445 ) . IEEE . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / EDUCON . 2015 . 7096008 Krauss , J . ( 2008 ) . Computer Science - in - a - Box : Unplug Your Curriculum . ( D . Burkhart & C . Stephenson , Eds . ) . Boulder , CO : The National Center for Women & Information Technology . Retrieved from https : / / www . ncwit . org / resources / computer - science - box - unplug - your - curriculum Kumar , V . , Winne , P . , Hadwin , A . , Nesbit , J . , Jamieson - Noel , D . , Calvert , T . , & Samin , B . ( 2005 ) . Effects of self - regulated learning in programming . In Fifth IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies ( ICALT’05 ) ( pp . 383 - 387 ) . IEEE . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICALT . 2005 . 131 Lacey , T . A . , & Wright , B . ( 2009 ) . Monthly Labor Review : Occupational Employment Projections to 2018 . Lapadat , J . C . , & Lindsay , A . C . ( 1999 ) . Transcription in Research and Practice : From Standardization of Technique to Interpretive Positionings . Qualitative Inquiry , 5 ( 1 ) , 64 - 86 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 107780049900500104 Lawanto , O . ( 2010 ) . Students’ metacognition during an engineering design project . Performance Improvement Quarterly , 24 ( 2 ) , 115 - 134 . Lawanto , O . , Butler , D . , Cartier , S . C . , Santoso , H . B . , Goodridge , W . , Lawanto , K . N . , & Clark , D . ( 2013 ) . Pattern of Task Interpretation and Self - Regulated Learning Strategies of High School Students and College Freshmen during an Engineering Design Project . Journal of STEM Education : Innovations and Research , 14 ( 4 ) , 34 - 46 . Lawanto , O . , Butler , D . , Cartier , S . , Santoso , H . B . , & Goodridge , W . ( 2013 ) . Task Interpretation , Cognitive , and Metacognitive Strategies of Higher and Lower Performers in an Engineering Design Project : An Exploratory Study of College Freshmen . International Journal of Engineering Education , 29 ( 2 ) , 459 - 475 . Lawanto , O . , Cromwell , M . , & Febrian , A . ( 2016 ) . Students’ Self - Regulation in Managing Their Capstone Senior Design Projects . In 123rd ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition . New Orleans , LA , USA . Lawanto , O . , & Johnson , S . ( 2009 ) . Student’s cognitive self - appraisal , self - management , and the level of difficulty of an engineering design project : are they related ? In American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference . Austin , TX . ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 39 Lee , K . D . ( 2014 ) . Foundations of Programming Languages . Cham : Springer International Publishing . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 13314 - 0 Lewis , C . M . , Anderson , R . E . , & Yasuhara , K . ( 2016 ) . “I Don’t Code All Day” : Fitting in Computer Science When the Stereotypes Don’t Fit . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research - ICER ‘16 ( pp . 23 - 32 ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2960310 . 2960332 Lischner , R . ( 2001 ) . Explorations : Structured Labs for First - Time Programmers . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 33 ( 1 ) , 154 - 158 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 366413 . 364571 Lonchamp , J . ( 2010 ) . Customizable Computer - based Interaction Analysis for Coaching and SelfRegulation in Synchronous CSCL Systems . Educational Technology & Society , 13 ( 2 ) , 193 - 205 . Lu , B . , Conley , M . , Klein , A . , & Drive , B . J . ( 2014 ) . Teaching True Computer Science Principles To General Students . Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges , 29 ( 5 ) , 233 - 239 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2600623 . 2600668 Lye , S . Y . , & Koh , J . H . L . ( 2014 ) . Review on teaching and learning of computational thinking through programming : What is next for K - 12 ? Computers in Human Behavior , 41 , 51 - 61 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2014 . 09 . 012 Madigan , E . M . , Goodfellow , M . , & Stone , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Gender , perceptions , and reality : technological literacy among first - year students . ACM SIGCSE Bulletin , 39 ( 1 ) , 410 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1227504 . 1227453 Makel , M . C . , & Plucker , J . A . ( 2014 ) . Facts Are More Important Than Novelty . Educational Researcher , 43 ( 6 ) , 304 - 316 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 0013189X14545513 Mata , A . , Ferreira , M . B . , & Sherman , S . J . ( 2013 ) . The metacognitive advantage of deliberative thinkers : A dual - process perspective on overconfidence . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 105 ( 3 ) , 353 - 373 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0033640 McNeill , N . J . , Douglas , E . P . , Koro - Ljungberg , M . , Therriault , D . J . , & Krause , I . ( 2016 ) . Undergraduate Students’ Beliefs about Engineering Problem Solving . Journal of Engineering Education , 105 ( 4 ) , 560 - 584 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jee . 20150 Outlay , C . N . , Platt , A . J . , & Conroy , K . ( 2017 ) . Getting IT Together : A Longitudinal Look at Linking Girls’ Interest in IT Careers to Lessons Taught in Middle School Camps . ACM Transactions on Computing Education , 17 ( 4 ) , 1 - 17 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3068838 Pallier , G . , Wilkinson , R . , Danthiir , V . , Kleitman , S . , Knezevic , G . , Stankov , L . , & Roberts , R . D . ( 2002 ) . The Role of Individual Differences in the Accuracy of Confidence Judgments . The Journal of General Psychology , 129 ( 3 ) , 257 - 299 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00221300209602099 Peng , J . , Wang , M . , & Sampson , D . ( 2017 ) . Visualizing the Complex Process for Deep Learning with an Authentic Programming Project . Educational Technology & Society , 20 ( 4 ) , 275 - 287 . Pintrich , P . R . ( 2002 ) . The role of metacognitive knowledge in learning , teaching , and assessing . Theory into Practice , 41 ( 4 ) , 231 - 236 . Pivkina , I . , Pontelli , E . , Jensen , R . , & Haebe , J . ( 2009 ) . Young Women in Computing : Lessons Learned from an Educational & Outreach Program . In Proceedings of the 40th ACM technical symposium on Computer science education - SIGCSE ‘09 ( Vol . 41 , p . 509 ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1508865 . 1509042 Potgieter , M . , Malatje , E . , Gaigher , E . , & Venter , E . ( 2010 ) . Confidence versus Performance as an Indicator of the Presence of Alternative Conceptions and Inadequate Problem ‐ Solving Skills in Mechanics . International Journal of Science Education , 32 ( 11 ) , 1407 - 1429 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690903100265 Renumol , V . G . , Janakiram , D . , & Jayaprakash , S . ( 2010 ) . Identification of Cognitive Processes of Effective and Ineffective Students During Computer Programming . ACM Transactions on Computing Education , 10 ( 3 ) , 1 - 21 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1821996 . 1821998 Resnick , M . , Silverman , B . , Kafai , Y . , Maloney , J . , Monroy - Hernández , A . , Rusk , N . , … Silver , J . ( 2009 ) . Scratch : Programming for All . Communications of the ACM , 52 ( 11 ) , 60 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1592761 . 1592779 ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 40 Rivera - Reyes , P . ( 2015 ) . Students’ Task Interpretation and Conceptual Understanding in Electronics Laboratory Work ( Doctoral Dissertation ) . Logan , UT : Utah State University . Rivera - Reyes , P . , Lawanto , O . , & Pate , M . L . ( 2016 ) . Understanding Student Coregulation in Task Interpretation during Electronics Laboratory Activities . International Education Studies , 9 ( 7 ) , 1 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 5539 / ies . v9n7p1 Rivera - Reyes , P . , Lawanto , O . , & Pate , M . L . ( 2017 ) . Students’ Task Interpretation and Conceptual Understanding in an Electronics Laboratory . IEEE Transactions on Education , 60 ( 4 ) , 265 - 272 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TE . 2017 . 2689723 Rum , S . N . M . , & Ismail , M . A . ( 2017 ) . Metacognitive Support Accelerates Computer Assisted Learning for Novice Programmers . Educational Technology & Society , 20 ( 3 ) , 170 - 181 . Ruthmann , A . , Heines , J . M . , Greher , G . R . , Laidler , P . , & Saulters , C . ( 2010 ) . Teaching computational thinking through musical live coding in scratch . In Proceedings of the 41st ACM technical symposium on Computer science education - SIGCSE ‘10 ( p . 351 ) . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1734263 . 1734384 Santoso , H . B . ( 2013 ) . Computer Self - Efficacy , Cognitive Actions , and Metacognitive Strategies of High School Students While Engaged in Interactive Learning Modules ( Doctoral Dissertation ) . Logan , UT : Utah State University . Retrieved from http : / / discover . lib . usu . edu / iii / encore / record / C _ _ Rb3243218 _ _ Sharry budi santoso _ _ Orightresult _ _ X4 ? lang = eng & suite = cobalt Saulnier , C . R . , & Brisson , J . G . ( 2018 ) . Design for Use : A Case Study of an Authentically Impactful Design Experience . International Journal of Engineering Education , 34 ( 2B ) , 769 - 779 . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( 1983 ) . Episodes and Executive Decisions in Mathematical Problem Solving . In R . Lesh & M . Landau ( Eds . ) , Acquisition of Mathematics Concepts and Processes ( pp . 345 - 395 ) . New York , New York , USA . Tigerfish . ( n . d . ) . Transcription Style Guide . San Francisco , USA : Tigerfish . Retrieved from http : / / www . tigerfish . com / Transcription Style Guide Rev . 6 . 10 . pdf Viera , A . J . , & Garrett , J . M . ( 2005 ) . Understanding interobserver agreement : the kappa statistic . Family Medicine , 37 ( 5 ) , 360 - 363 . Retrieved from http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 15883903 Wang , J . , Hejazi Moghadam , S . , & Tiffany - Morales , J . ( 2017 ) . Social Perceptions in Computer Science and Implications for Diverse Students . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research - ICER ‘17 ( pp . 47 - 55 ) . Tacoma , Washington , USA : ACM Press . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3105726 . 3106175 Wang , X . - M . , Hwang , G . - J . , Liang , Z . - Y . , & Wang , H . - Y . ( 2017 ) . Enhancing Students’ Computer Programming Performances , Critical Thinking Awareness and Attitudes towards Programming : An Online PeerAssessment Attempt . Educational Technology & Society , 20 ( 4 ) , 58 - 68 . Whittington , K . J . ( 2004 ) . Infusing Active Learning Into Introductory Programming Courses . Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges , 19 ( 5 ) , 249 - 259 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1060081 . 1060111 Williams , L . , Wiebe , E . , Yang , K . , Ferzli , M . , & Miller , C . ( 2010 ) . In Support of Pair Programming in the Introductory Computer Science Course . Computer Science Education , 12 ( 3 ) , 197 - 212 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1076 / csed . 12 . 3 . 197 . 8618 Wing , J . M . ( 2006 ) . Computational Thinking . Communications of the ACM , 49 ( 3 ) , 33 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1118178 . 1118215 Wing , J . M . ( 2008 ) . Computational Thinking and Thinking About Computing . Philosophical Transactions . Series A , Mathematical , Physical , and Engineering Sciences , 366 ( 1881 ) , 3717 - 25 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsta . 2008 . 0118 Zimmerman , B . J . ( 2008 ) . Investigating Self - Regulation and Motivation : Historical Background , Methodological Developments , and Future Prospects . American Educational Research Journal , 45 ( 1 ) , 166 - 183 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 0002831207312909 Zimmerman , B . J . , Heart , N . , & Mellins , R . B . ( 1989 ) . A Social Cognitive View of Self - Regulated Academic Learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 81 ( 3 ) , 329 - 339 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / / 0022 - 0663 . 81 . 3 . 329 ies . ccsenet . org International Education Studies Vol . 11 , No . 12 ; 2018 41 Copyrights Copyright for this article is retained by the author ( s ) , with first publication rights granted to the journal . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .