All higher animals are associated with a diverse micro - bial community that is composed mainly of bacteria but also includes archea , viruses , fungi and protozoa . Microorganisms cover essentially all host mucosal sur - faces , but most reside within the gastrointestinal tract . Studies had traditionally focused on examining the role of the microbiota during human disease , for exam - ple in inflammatory diseases such as colitis . However , in the past decade , the field of microbiota research has exploded , resulting in the publication of a plethora of reports that describe both the individual members of our intestinal microbiota and their wide - ranging impact on host physiology . Thus , the traditional anthropocentric view of the gut microbiota as pathogenic and solely an immunological threat has been substituted with an appreciation of its mainly beneficial influence on human health . The ‘normal’ gut microbiota is dominated by anaer - obic bacteria , which outnumber aerobic and faculta - tive anaerobic bacteria by 100 - to 1 , 000 - fold 1 . In total , the intestinal microbiota consists of approximately 500 – 1 , 000 species that , interestingly , belong to only a few of the known bacterial phyla 2 , 3 . By far the most abundant phyla in the human gut are Firmicutes and Bacteriodetes , but other species present are mem - bers of the phyla Proteobacteria , Verrumicrobia , Actinobacteria , Fusobacteria and Cyanobacteria 2 , 3 . Two gradients of microbial distribution can be found in the gastrointestinal tract . First , microbial density increases both from the proximal to the distal gut ( the stomach contains 10 1 microbial cells per gram of content , the duodenum 10 3 cells per gram , the jejunum 10 4 cells per gram , the ileum 10 7 cells per gram and the colon up to 10 12 cells per gram ) and along the tissue – lumen axis ( with few bacteria adhering to the tissue or mucus but a large number being present in the lumen ) 4 . Second , bacterial diversity increases in the same axes and manner as microbial density 4 . Many bacterial species are present in the lumen , whereas fewer , but well - adapted species , including several proteobacteria and Akkermansia muciniphila , adhere and reside within the mucus layer close to the tissue 5 , 6 . Colonization of the host begins dur - ing birth , and the composition of the microbiota changes throughout host development ( BOX 1 ) . In the adult intestine , a total of about 10 14 bacte - rial cells are present , which is ten times the number of human cells in the body 7 . Their combined genomes ( known as the microbiome ) contain more than 5 mil - lion genes , thus outnumbering the host’s genetic poten - tial by two orders of magnitude 2 , 8 . This large arsenal of gene products provides a diverse range of biochemical and metabolic activities to complement host physiol - ogy . In fact , the metabolic capacity of the gut microbiota equals that of the liver , and the intestinal microbiota can therefore be considered as an additional organ 9 . These bacteria are essential for several aspects of host biology . For example , they facilitate the metabolism of otherwise indigestible polysaccharides and produce essential vita - mins ; they are required for the development and differ - entiation of the host’s intestinal epithelium and immune system ; they confer protection against invasion by opportunistic pathogens 10 ; and they have a key role in maintaining tissue homeostasis . Recent studies have also revealed that the human microbiota influences 1 Wallenberg Laboratory for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research , Sahlgrenska University Hospital , Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine , University of Gothenburg . 2 Sahlgrenska Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research , Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine , University of Gothenburg , SE‑413 45 Gothenburg , Sweden . 3 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research , Section for Metabolic Receptology and Enteroendocrinology , Faculty of Health Sciences , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen DK‑2200 , Denmark . Correspondence to F . B . e‑mail : Fredrik . Backhed @ wlab . gu . se doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2974 Published online 25 February 2013 Microbiota The sum of all microorganisms ( including bacteria , archaea , eukaryotes and viruses ) that reside in and / or on a host or a specified part of a host ( such as the gastrointestinal tract ) . The gut microbiota — masters of host development and physiology Felix Sommer 1 , 2 and Fredrik Bäckhed 1 , 2 , 3 Abstract | Establishing and maintaining beneficial interactions between the host and its associated microbiota are key requirements for host health . Although the gut microbiota has previously been studied in the context of inflammatory diseases , it has recently become clear that this microbial community has a beneficial role during normal homeostasis , modulating the host’s immune system as well as influencing host development and physiology , including organ development and morphogenesis , and host metabolism . The underlying molecular mechanisms of host – microorganism interactions remain largely unknown , but recent studies have begun to identify the key signalling pathways of the cross - species homeostatic regulation between the gut microbiota and its host . REVIEWS NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 227 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Mutualistic Pertaining to a relationship between two organisms : beneficial to both organisms . The term originates from the Latin word mutuus ( lent , borrowed or mutual ) . Superorganism A term that extends the classical biological definition of an organism ( a living system capable of autonomous metabolism and reproduction ) by including the many microorganisms that live in and on that host organism , thus yielding a superior degree of complexity . The term originates from the Latin supra ( above ) and the Greek organon ( organ , instrument , tool ) . Symbiosis Any close physical association between two organisms , usually from different species . This includes mutualism , commensalism and parasitism . The term originates from the Greek words syn ( together ) and bio ( life ) . Pathobionts Normally harmless microorganism that can become pathogens under certain environmental conditions . the development and homeostasis of other host tissues , including the bone 11 . The microbiota also benefits from this mutualistic association , as the mammalian intestine is a nutrient - rich environment that is maintained at a constant tempera - ture . However , it is also a dynamic habitat that undergoes constant and rapid changes in its physiological para - meters owing to variations in , for example , host diet , lifestyle , hygiene or use of antibiotics , all of which affect gut microbial composition ( FIG . 1 ) . Thus , unlike the host genome , the microbiome can change rapidly as a result of modifications in either the composition of the microbial community or individual microbial genomes , resulting in modified transcriptomic , proteomic and metabolic profiles . Accordingly , the establishment and preserva - tion of beneficial interactions between the host and its associated intestinal microbiota are key requirements for health . The dynamic fluctuations in the microbiota com - bined with the vast numbers of bacterial cells and their close proximity to the epithelial tissue represent a mas - sive challenge to host immunity , as microbial growth has to be restricted to ensure a beneficial homeostasis . Furthermore , activation of the host immune system has to be controlled to circumvent the detrimental effects of chronic inflammation , so the interaction of the gut microbiota with the host has to be tightly regu - lated . In this Review , we discuss recent insights into the impact of the normal microbiota on the development and homeostasis of the immune system and other tis - sues and organs , as well as on host physiology . We also highlight recent advances in deciphering the under - lying molecular mechanisms of host – microorganism interactions . Tailoring immune development Immunology was originally based on the concept of ‘self’ versus ‘non - self’ discrimination , with the assump - tion that , because they are non - self , all micro organisms are pathogens and thus the cause of infectious diseases . The realization that we live in a microbially dominated world and in fact benefit greatly from our microbiota has led to a paradigm shift in immunology . Thus , the definition of self in the superorganism theory has been extended to incorporate the constituents of both our own body and our microbiota 12 . It is also now widely accepted that the host’s mucosal immune system is char - acterized by tolerance to microorganisms rather than responsiveness 13 . Furthermore , it has even been specu - lated that the highly sophisticated adaptive immune system of jawed vertebrates evolved to keep control of the mutualistic or beneficial symbiosis with our complex microbial ecosystem 14 . The intestine , one essential organ in which the mucosal immune system operates , has to accomplish two apparently confounding tasks . First , it needs to facilitate nutrient absorption ; thus , the total surface area of the gastrointestinal tract amounts to about 200 m 2 in humans 15 . Second , it needs to be resistant to infection and inhibit microbial translocation across the tissue bar - rier . Bacterial densities in the gut are the highest known in any habitat to date and reach up to 10 12 cells per gram in the lower intestine 16 . This highly dense micro - bial community and the host intestinal epithelial cell ( IEC ) lining are separated by only a few micro metres of mucus in the small intestine and up to several hundred micrometers in the colon , depending on the location 17 . Because of this unique nature of the intestinal tract , its mucosal immune system needs to fulfil several special requirements . It has to be non - responsive to or tolerant towards the huge number of mutualistic micro organisms that reside in the intestinal lumen . At the same time , it is thought that the mucosal immune system has to assure a beneficial microbiota composition by keeping patho - bionts in check , restricting microbial overgrowth and reacting to penetrating microorganisms that breach the intestinal chemical and physical barriers ( such as secreted soluble immunoglobulin A ( IgA ) , antimicrobial peptides ( AMPs ) , the mucus layer and the tightly interconnected IEC lining ) . In turn , the intestinal microbiota has a key role in directing several aspects in the development and regulation of the host’s immune tissues , immune cell populations and immune mediators . Mucus layer properties depend on intestinal bacteria . The intestinal mucus layer covers the epithelial cell lining and functions as a lubricant , facilitating gastro - intestinal transport , and as a protective layer against bacterial invasion , owing to its physical properties 18 . The colonic mucus layer is in fact composed of two layers 17 . Both the inner and outer mucus layers are secreted by goblet cells and are mainly made up of gel - forming highly glyco sylated proteins termed mucins 18 . Mucin 2 ( MUC2 ) is the main mucin in the small and large intestines of both mice and humans 18 . The entire mucus layer represents a selective microbial habitat owing to microbial adhesion via lectins and glycosidases that are expressed by only specific bacteria , and it also serves as nutrient source 19 , 20 . However , bacteria are found only in the outer layer 17 , probably owing to the specific Box 1 | Colonization of the host Human babies are colonized during passage through the birth canal by environmental microorganisms ( for example , from the mother’s vagina or skin ) and during breast feeding by microorganisms present in the milk 137 . Owing to the highly oxidative environment in the gastrointestinal tract of the newborn , primary colonizers are facultative anaerobic bacteria such as proteobacteria , which are thought to adjust the environmental conditions by decreasing the oxygen concentration to allow successive colonization by anaerobic microorganisms such as members of the genus Bacteroides and members of the phyla Actinobacteria and Firmicutes . During the first year of life , the intestinal microbiota composition is simple and fluctuates widely between individuals and over time . Microbial signatures stabilize and start to resemble the ‘adult state’ when the infant reaches 1 – 2 years of age 4 . Interestingly , conflicting evidence has been published concerning the driving force for microbial transmission . In early studies of twins , the faecal microbial compositions in the mother and her children were similar , indicating a mainly maternal transmission 108 , 111 . However , in a more recent and extensive study , the same research group found that the faecal microbiota of children was no more similar to that of their mothers than to that of their biological fathers , and genetically unrelated but co‑habiting mothers and fathers were significantly more microbially similar to one another than to members of different families 138 . This indicates that , as well as genetics and kinship , environmental factors have a considerable effect on the microbial composition of the infant . R E V I E W S 228 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Altered intestinal microbiota Immunodeﬁciency NOD2IL - 10 Hyperimmunity IL - 6 IL - 12 TNF Antibiotics Lifestyle Diet Hygiene Chronic inﬂammation Metabolic dysfunction structure of the mucus layer as a whole , which is formed of interconnected sheets that create pores smaller than a bacterial cell and thus inhibit penetration 21 . Comparisons of germ - free and conventionally raised animals revealed that microorganisms have major effects on mucus thickness and composition ; compared with conventionally raised animals , germ - free animals have fewer goblet cells , a thinner mucus layer and also a higher percentage of neutral mucins in the colon 22 . Stimulation with bacterial products such as lipopolysac - charide ( LPS ) and peptidoglycan is sufficient to estab - lish conventional mucus properties in germ - free mice 23 , but the underlying mechanisms for how the gut micro - biota modulates goblet cells and mucus layer properties remain largely elusive . Notably , Muc2 - deficient mice or those with aberrant mucin glycosylation profiles ( owing to a lack of specific glycosyl transferases ) show bacterial overgrowth and either develop spontaneous colitis or are more suscep - tible to chemical induction of colitis , an effect that can be ameliorated by treatment with antibiotics 23 – 25 . This demonstrates the importance of the mucus layer for homeostasis in the gut and also highlights the recip - rocal interaction between the mucus layer and the gut microbiota . It remains to be clarified whether disease onset in these mouse strains depends on a selectively altered and thus more colitogenic microbiota , on mislocalization of the same microbiota or merely on increased bacterial load . Microorganisms induce the development of lymphoid structures . The lymphatic system consists of a network of lymphatic vessels connecting the primary and second - ary lymphoid organs . The main functions of this sys - tem are the recirculation of interstitial fluid and blood as well as the transport of lymphocytes ( such as B cells and T cells ) ( BOX 2 ) and antigen - presenting cells to lymph nodes . Lymphoid tissue is classified as primary ( thy - mus and bone marrow ) and secondary ( lymph nodes , Peyer’s patches , tonsils , spleen and lymphoid follicles ) . Lymphocytes are generated in primary lymphoid tissues and are then transported to secondary lymphoid tissues , where the mature lymphocytes are exposed to antigens by antigen - presenting cells and are thus activated to initiate an adaptive immune response . The cellular interactions that occur during lymphoid tissue develop - ment and maturation are similar for both primary and secondary lymphoid organs , although the molecular frameworks differ a little ( for details see REF . 26 ) . In addition to host genetics , several environmen - tal factors , including contact with microorganisms , influence both the development and maturation of the immune system . The development of secondary gut - associated lymphoid tissue ( GALT ) , such as Peyer’s Figure 1 | Factors shaping intestinal microbial composition and effects of dysbiosis on host health . The composition of the gut microbiota is influenced by various environmental factors , including the use of antibiotics , lifestyle , diet and hygiene preferences . The host’s genetic disposition also has a role : hyperimmunity ( owing to over - representation of pro - inflammatory mediators such as interleukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) , IL - 12 or tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) ) or immunodeficiency ( owing to mutations in regulatory immune proteins such as NOD2 ( nucleotide - binding oligomerization domain protein 2 ) or IL - 10 ) can influence the gut microbiota composition . In turn , dysbiosis affects levels of immune mediators and induces both chronic inflammation and metabolic dysfunction . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 229 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Somatic hypermutation A programmed process of mutation affecting the variable regions of immunoglobulin genes during affinity maturation of B cell receptors . patches and mesenteric lymph nodes , is initiated pre - natally in the sterile environment of the fetus through induction by lymphoid tissue inducer ( LTi ) cells 27 . Briefly , mesenchymal cells are induced by retinoic acid to produce CXC - chemokine ligand 13 ( CXCL13 ) , which recruits LTi precursor cells and stimulates their cluster - ing , leading to their maturation into LTi cells . These then induce the differentiation of stromal organizer cells to express several cytokines and adhesion molecules that attract further immune cells , causing GALT forma - tion 26 . Maturation of these tissues , including an increase in tissue size and the development of germinal centres ( sites of B cell proliferation , differentiation and somatic hypermutation in lymph nodes ) , depends on postnatal microbial colonization 28 ( FIG . 2 ) . Consequently , Peyer’s patches , mesenteric lymph nodes and splenic white pulp are underdeveloped in germ - free mice 29 . Furthermore , in parallel with microbial coloniza - tion , clusters of LTi - like cells termed cryptopatches form at birth in the connective tissue between intestinal crypts , known as the lamina propria 30 . Cryptopatches recruit B cells and develop into isolated lymphoid fol - licles ( ILFs ) , a type of lymphoid tissue that is structurally similar to Peyer’s patches and serves as an inductive site for intestinal immune reactions 31 , 32 . This process also depends on the gut microbiota , as ILFs fail to develop fully in germ - free mice 33 . ILF formation can be induced by exposing germ - free mice to purified peptidoglycan from Gram - negative bacteria , indicating that this pro - cess is driven solely by a specific microbial pattern 34 . Stromal and epithelial cells recognize the peptido - glycan of resident microorganisms mainly via signalling through the pattern recognition receptor ( PRR ) NOD1 ( nucleotide - binding oligomerization domain contain - ing 1 ) but also partially through another family of PRRs , the Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) . Activation of NOD1 by the gut microbiota causes increased expression of CC - chemokine ligand 20 ( CCL20 ) and presumably also of β - defensin 3 , both of which activate ILF formation by binding to CC - chemokine receptor 6 ( CCR6 ) on LTi cells 34 . The gut microbiota modulates immune cell differentia - tion . In addition to regulating the development of lym - phoid structures , the gut microbiota has been shown to modulate the differentiation of immune cell subsets ( BOX 2 ) and , therefore , maintain homeostatic interactions between the host and the gut microbiota . After birth , LTi - like cells that express nuclear RORγt but lack NKp46 ( in mice ; also known as NCR1 ) or NKp44 ( in humans ; also known as NCR2 ) markers accu - mulate in both the mouse and human GALT and lamina propria 35 – 37 . Interestingly , the RORγt + NKp46 − LTi - like cells can differentiate into RORγt + NKp46 + natural killer ( NK ) - like cells , which differ from regular NK cells ( BOX 2 ) in that they have intermediate expression of NK1 . 1 ( also known as KLRB1C ) and do not produce interleukin - 1β ( IL - 1β ) or kill tumour cells 36 , 37 . This differentiation requires both IL - 23 , which is produced by activated myeloid cells and epithelial or endothelial cells , and the presence of the intestinal microbiota , as germ - free mice have fewer RORγt + NKp46 + NK - like cells than conven - tionally raised mice 37 . These cells produce IL - 22 , which in mice promotes the integrity of the intestinal barrier and reduces bacterial infiltration by inducing epithelial repair via signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( STAT3 ) signalling and the production of antimicrobial proteins 38 . Thus , the normal gut microbiota promotes Box 2 | Lymphocyte subtypes All lymphocytes differentiate and mature in primary lymphoid organs ( the thymus and bone marrow ) . Mature naive lymphocytes migrate to secondary lymphoid tissues , where they become activated by antigen‑presenting cells such as dendritic cells . Gut‑associated secondary lymphoid tissues include Peyer’s patches , mesenteric lymph nodes and lymphoid follicles 139 . Here , we list and describe the lymphocytes that are known to be modulated by the gut microbiota 43 , 140 , 141 . Lymphoid tissue inducer cells ( LTi cells ) . A unique T cell subpopulation that is characterized by the expression of ROR γ t , CD4 and interleukin‑7 receptor‑ α and the absence of CD3 , B220 ( an isoform of CD45 ) and CD11c ( also known as integrin α X ) . Their function is to recruit B cells and T cells and thereby promote the formation of secondary lymphoid tissues . Natural killer cells ( NK cells ) . Lymphocytes that recognize the abnormal antigen signatures of infected or tumour cells , which NK cells kill by lysis or apoptosis . NK cells resemble cytotoxic T cells in function but belong to the innate immune system . They express various NK cell receptors , including NKp46 ( in mice ; NKp44 in humans ) and NKG2D . They can activate B cells and T cells and thereby stimulate an adaptive immune response . Natural killer T cells ( NKT cells ) . These cells have properties of both T cells and NK cells , as they co - express NK cell markers with a T cell receptor . NKT cells mainly recognize lipids and glycolipids presented by antigen - presenting cells via CD1d . Following activation , NKT cells produce pro‑inflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) and interleukin‑17 ( IL‑17 ) . Invariant NKT ( iNKT ) cells are a specific subpopulation expressing an invariant T cell receptor . T helper 1 cells ( T H 1 cells ) . A subset of T H lymphocytes that is characterized by the expression of interferon‑ γ and transforming growth factor‑ β ( TGF β ) . T H 1 cell differentiation is induced by contact with activated macrophages or NK cells . T helper 2 cells ( T H 2 cells ) . A subset of T H lymphocytes that is characterized by the expression of the cytokines IL‑4 , IL‑5 and IL‑13 . T H 2 cell differentiation is induced in response to , for example , allergens and extracellular microorganisms . T helper 17 cells ( T H 17 cells ) . A subset of T H cells that is characterized by the expression of IL‑17 , which stimulates stromal cells to express the pro‑inflammatory cytokines IL‑6 and IL‑8 , thereby attracting neutrophils and promoting inflammation to clear out invading microorganisms . Regulatory T cells ( T Reg cells ) . A T cell subpopulation that is characterized by the expression of CD4 , CD25 and FOXP3 and the production of the anti‑inflammatory cytokines TGF β and IL‑10 . These cells can be subdivided into natural T Reg cells , which differentiate from CD4 + T cells in the thymus , and inducible T Reg cells , which arise from naive T cells in secondary lymphoid tissues . Both cell types function to suppress immune activation and prevent self‑reactivity , thereby reducing the risk of autoimmune disease . Type 1 regulatory T cells ( T R 1 cells ) . These CD4 + CD25 + FOXP3 − T cells are functionally equivalent to the IL‑10‑producing T Reg cells . They respond to microorganisms and regulate intestinal tolerance through the secretion of IL‑10 . B cells Lymphocytes that are activated when the unique B cell receptor binds its specific antigen and that then mediate humoral immunity through the production of antibodies . B cells are also involved in lymphoid tissue organization . R E V I E W S 230 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Mucus Goblet cell PSA SFB Peyer’s patch Immature Peyer’s patch Immature MLN MLN IgA - producing plasma cell T H 17 cell B cell T cell Dendritic cell T Reg cell B . fragilis Intestinal crypt Intestinal epithelial cell ↓ AMP and IgA production ↓ Vessel density Villus ↓ Mucus thickness Altered mucus properties a Germ - free mice b c Blood vessel AMP IgA Microbiota Conventionally raised mice Figure 2 | Microbiota - induced maturation of the gastrointestinal tract . The microbiota promotes substantial changes in gut morphology , including villus architecture , crypt depth , stem cell proliferation , blood vessel density , mucus layer properties and maturation of mucosa - associated lymphoid tissues . a | In germ - free mice , the villi in the distal small intestine are longer and thinner and have a less complex vascular network than the villi of conventionally raised animals . In the absence of bacteria , intestinal crypts are less deep and contain fewer proliferating stem cells . Furthermore , germ - free animals show reduced mucus thickness and altered mucus properties . b | Moreover , very few isolated lymphoid follicles , immature Peyer’s patches and immature mesenteric lymph nodes ( MLNs ) are present under germ - free conditions , and levels of both immunoglobulin A ( IgA ) and antimicrobial peptides ( AMPs ) are lower than in conventionally raised animals . c | In conventionally raised mice , polysaccharide A ( PSA ) of Bacteroides fragilis is known to induce the expansion of CD4 + CD25 + FOXP3 + regulatory T ( T Reg ) cells , which have an anti - inflammatory effect and dampen immune responses . By contrast , segmented filamentous bacteria ( SFB ) have been shown to induce the expansion of T helper 17 ( T H 17 ) cells , which are pro - inflammatory . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 231 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis An animal model of T cell - mediated autoimmune disease in general and in particular of demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system , such as multiple sclerosis . T follicular helper cells A T cell subtype that resides in the B cell follicles of secondary lymphoid organs and expresses the B cell homing receptor CXC - chemokine receptor 5 . These T cells mediate B cell activation and trigger the formation of the germinal centre . intestinal barrier function by modulating mucosal homeostasis , in part by promoting the differentiation of RORγt + NKp46 + NK - like cells . The intestinal microbiota also modulates the abun - dance of invariant NK T cells ( iNKT cells ) , a unique T cell subset that expresses an invariant T cell receptor α - chain . These cells promote inflammation , as follow - ing activation they secrete pro - inflammatory T helper 1 ( T H 1 ) - and T H 2 - type chemokines and cytokines , including interferon - γ , IL - 2 , IL - 4 , IL - 13 , IL - 17A , IL - 21 and tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) 39 , 40 . In contrast to the NK - like cells described above , there are more iNKT cells in the colon of germ - free mice than the colon of conventionally raised mice 41 , which suggests that the gut microbiota promotes homeostasis by decreasing the number of these pro - inflammatory cells . Importantly , a recent study elegantly demonstrated an age dependency of the microbial effects on the iNKT population and revealed that colonization of neonatal but not adult germ - free mice with conventional gut microbiota normalized iNKT cell numbers and pro - tected against oxazolone - induced colitis as well as against ovalbumin - induced allergic lung inflammation 41 . It has become evident that the gut microbiota shapes the T cell landscape not only in the lamina propria but also systemically and therefore modulates the homeo - stasis of the superorganism 42 ( FIG . 2 ) . Intestinal mucosal T cells are important ‘legislators’ of intestinal homeo - stasis because they not only defend against intestinal pathogens , but also promote wound healing , barrier repair and regeneration as they rapidly accumulate at sites of injury and infection 43 . T cells can be assigned to subpopulations that drive either a pro - inflammatory immune response ( T H 1 , T H 2 and T H 17 cells ) or an anti - inflammatory immune response ( CD4 + CD25 + FOXP3 + regulatory T ( T Reg ) cells or CD4 + CD25 + FOXP3 − type 1 regulatory T ( T R 1 ) cells ) , depending on the cytokines that they produce 44 ( BOX 2 ) . The balance between both pro - and anti - inflammatory T cell subpopulations deter - mines the overall immune equilibrium . Interestingly , individual members of the gut micro - biota have been found to drive specific T cell responses ( FIG . 2c ) . The Gram - negative bacterium Bacteroides fragilis elicits an anti - inflammatory response by inducing the differentiation of CD4 + T cells into T Reg cells locally in the intestinal lamina propria but also in the circula - tion 45 . T Reg cells produce IL - 10 and thereby suppress the pro - inflammatory T H 17 response 46 . This skewing event is mediated by polysaccharide A ( PSA ) on the outer mem - brane of the bacterium , which is recognized by TLR2 on CD4 + T cells and activates a signalling cascade involving myeloid differentiation 88 ( MYD88 ) to induce T Reg cell differentiation 45 . Indeed , a mutant strain of B . fragilis lacking PSA fails to initiate differentiation of T Reg cells , whereas purified PSA has the same effect as the wild - type bacterium 29 . Bacteria from the Gram - positive class Clostridia have similar effects on the host immune system . A mixture of 46 Clostridia spp . belonging to clusters IV and XIVa was isolated from mouse faeces , and colonization of germ - free mice with this mixture induced the expansion of T Reg cells in the mucosal lamina propria and thereby increased levels of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL - 10 ( REF . 47 ) . Notably , compared with non - colonized germ - free mice , the Clostridia species - colonized mice were more resistant to chemically induced disruption of the gut epithelium and displayed attenuated levels of antigen - induced serum IgE . Furthermore , a similar T Reg cell response was observed when germ - free mice were colonized with altered Schaedler flora , a cocktail of eight defined bacteria including three Clostridia species 48 . However , the specific species in this community that are functionally responsible and the underlying molecular mechanisms of this effect are so far unknown . In contrast to the bacteria mentioned above , segmented filamentous bacteria ( SFB ) elicit a pro - inflammatory immune response by promoting the dif - ferentiation of T H 17 cells and , to a lesser extent , T H 1 cells 49 , 50 . SFB reside in the small intestine of mice and are in direct contact with epithelial cells , which these bacteria seem to readily invade . Invasion leads to local actin polymerization in the epithelium at the interac - tion site , and this presumably initiates a signalling event that activates the differentiation of T H 17 cells . Notably , mono - association of germ - free mice with SFB is suffi - cient to restore susceptibility to T H 17 cell - mediated arthri - tis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 51 , 52 . So far , however , it is not known whether T H 17 cell differ - entiation is induced by IEC - produced mediators , by direct interaction with antigen - presenting cells in the lamina propria ( dendritic cells or macrophages ) or by bacterially secreted signalling molecules ( for example , metabolites ) 15 . Gut microorganisms tweak the production of immune mediators . It is clear that the gut microbiota regulates the production of cytokines and chemokines to influ - ence the T cell repertoire of the intestine and surround - ing tissue , but there is evidence that these bacteria also modulate the production of other soluble immune mediators ( FIG . 2 ) . IgA is produced by plasma cells ( dif - ferentiated B cells ) in the lamina propria and is trans - cytosed through the intestinal epithelium into the lumen , where it binds microbial antigens and thereby prevents bacterial translocation and infection 53 . The dif - ferentiation of B cells into IgA - producing plasma cells is induced by sensing of gut microbiota - derived flagellin via TLR5 on lamina propria dendritic cells 54 . IgA has a key role in barrier homeostasis , as IgA - deficient mice produce gut microbiota - specific serum IgG antibodies , indicating that there is a breach in the mucosal barrier of these mice and subsequent induction of the systemic immune system 55 . Furthermore , a recent study showed that microbial modulation of IgA homeostasis is in part dependent on the host protein programmed cell death 1 ( PD1 ) , which is expressed by T follicular helper cells in the germinal centre 56 . PD1 - deficient mice harbour an altered IgA repertoire owing to changes in B cell matura - tion , leading to modified IgA specificity . This altered IgA repertoire then shifts the normal gut microbiota com - position by reducing the numbers of bacteria from the genera Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides and increasing the number from the family Enterobacteriaceae 56 . R E V I E W S 232 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Crypts of Lieberkühn Tubular invaginations of the intestinal epithelium around the villi . The crypt base contains Paneth cells , which secrete mainly antimicrobial peptides as well as other immune factors , and continually dividing stem cells that are the source of all intestinal epithelial cells . Xenobiotic metabolism The metabolism of foreign compounds that are neither produced by nor naturally found in the host , such as drugs . Enterochromaffin cells A subtype of enteroendocrine cells in the intestinal or respiratory epithelium . Enterochromaffin cells are the main source of serotonin in the body and are thereby involved in the regulation of intestinal peristalsis and nausea . Desmosome A type of junctional complex that is mainly found in epithelia ( specifically , in the lateral plasma membrane of the epithelial cell ) and mediates cell - to - cell adhesion to allow cells to withstand shearing forces . Tight junctions Junctional complexes that are present only in vertebrates ( the invertebrate equivalents are the septate junctions ) and are located at the transition of the apical and lateral membrane , closely connecting two epithelial cells and thereby making the epithelium impermeable to water and solutes . In addition to IgA , the gut microbiota regulates the production of AMPs . These molecules are produced by IECs as a consequence of their tight contact with a dense and highly diverse microbial community and include defensins , C - type lectins ( such as REG3β and REG3γ ) , ribonucleases ( for example , angiopoietin 4 ( ANG4 ) ) and S100 proteins ( for example , psoriasin ( also known as S100A7 ) ) , which rapidly kill or inactivate microorgan - isms ( see REF . 57 for detailed information ) . Some AMPs , such as α - defensins and β - defensin 1 , are expressed constitutively 58 , whereas others , such as ANG4 and REG3γ , are induced following a microbial encounter 59 , 60 , either via PRR signalling ( through TLRs and NOD - like receptors ( NLRs ) ) or in a PRR - independent manner ( for example , by microbially fermented butyrate ) 61 , 62 . Furthermore , intestinal lymphocyte - derived IL - 17 and IL - 22 , which are bacterially modulated ( see above ) , induce the production of AMPs by IECs and Paneth cells 59 , 63 . Induction of AMPs in epithelial cells is likely to be one important mechanism for preventing breaches of the mucosal barrier and , in particular , protecting the stem cell niche in the crypts of Lieberkühn . Furthermore , AMPs not only help to sustain host – microorganism segregation , but also affect the microbiota composition . Mice that are deficient in MYD88 , NOD2 or matrilysin ( MMP7 ; a protease involved in the regulation of defen - sin activity ) , as well as mice that are transgenic for α - defensin 5 , have an altered microbiota owing to shifted AMP production 64 – 66 . Regulation of host physiology As mentioned above , the microbiome contains > 5 million genes , many of which encode biosynthetic enzymes , pro - teases and glycosidases , thereby greatly expanding the host’s own biochemical and metabolic capability 2 , 3 . The effects of the gut microbiota on host metabolism — for example , through the microbiota metabolizing other - wise indigestible polysaccharides , producing essential vitamins and carrying out xenobiotic metabolism — have long been appreciated 10 . However , the effects on host physiology exceed these purely biochemical properties . In fact , the microbiota also influences a wide range of host processes and characteristics that were thought to depend solely on the genetic programme of the host , including organ development and morphogenesis , cell proliferation , bone mass , adiposity and even behaviour ( FIG . 3 ) . Below , we discuss recent advances in our understanding of the microbial modulation of these physiological properties of the superorganism . Development and morphogenesis . Microorganisms affect not only the development of immune tissues , but also the development and morphogenesis of other organs and body structures in a range of species . For example , the symbiotic interaction between the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster and one of its gut bacteria , Acetobacter pomorum , affects several host physiologi - cal properties , including developmental rate , body size , wing area , metabolism and stem cell activity 67 . Acetic acid produced by the pyrroloquinoline quinone - depend - ent alcohol dehydrogenase of A . pomorum triggers D . melano gaster insulin signalling involving phospho - inositide 3 - kinase and the forkhead transcription factor FOXO by an as - yet - unknown mechanism and thereby tunes the homeostatic programmes in the fly . The squid Euprymna scolopes has developed a close symbiosis with the bacterium Vibrio fischeri , in which the bacterium releases a tetrapeptide peptidoglycan monomer that , together with the lipid A component of LPS , is sufficient to drive the development of a light - emitting ‘organ’ in the squid 68 . Peptidoglycan signalling through a nuclear pep - tidoglycan recogniton protein induces apoptosis , which is an integral part of light organ morphogenesis 69 . This organ camouflages the squid at night , as it resembles a star to predators below ; remarkably , the organ is reas - sembled every night , as the bacteria are expelled every morning 70 . In humans and other mammals , studies have shown that the intestinal microbiota has a considerable effect on the development of the gastrointestinal tract ( FIG . 3 ) . In newborns , the gastrointestinal tract is structurally and functionally immature , and maturation is induced by many factors , one them being the gut microbiota 71 ( BOX 1 ) . Notably , the changes in microbiota composi - tion during weaning in both mice and humans coincide with gut maturation , indicating that specific bacteria in the pre - and post - weaning microbiota have differen - tial effects 72 . The most prominent feature of germ - free animals is a greatly enlarged caecum 73 . Furthermore , the overall intestinal surface area in germ - free mice is reduced compared with that of conventional mice 74 . Germ - free mice are impaired in brush border differ - entiation 75 and have reduced villus thickness 76 owing to reduced cell regeneration 77 and a longer cell cycle time 78 . The number of serotonin - producing enterochromaffin cells is also higher in the gut of germ - free compared with conventional mice 16 , but interestingly , germ - free mice have lower levels of serotonin 79 , and this is thought to correlate with decreased intestinal peristaltic activ - ity and a prolonged gastrointestinal transit time 80 , 81 . Last , microorganisms modulate epithelial permeability in the gastrointestinal tract . For example , in mice the Gram - negative bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron increases the resistance of the gut to injury by inducing the expression of SPRR2A , which is involved in desmo - some maintenance 82 . Moreover , several Lactobacillus strains rigidify tight junctions between epithelial cells , resulting in reduced epithelial permeability 83 . PRR sig - nalling was found to be important in this process , as pep - tidoglycan - induced TLR2 signalling in epithelial cells improves tight junction function and reduces apoptosis rates , thus enhancing barrier integrity and facilitating wound repair after injury 84 , 85 . Interestingly , recent work has shown that , in addition to promoting gastrointestinal tract morphogenesis , the gut microbiota influences the remodelling of the vascu - lar system 76 , 86 ( FIG . 3 ) . Colonization of the gut in germ - free mice causes restructuring of intestinal villi , which shorten and widen to prevent microbial infiltration . This restructuring increases the demand for oxygen in the gut epithelium and leads to increased amounts of sprout - ing endothelial cells and , consequently , angiogenesis 76 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 233 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Intestinal function GALT maturation ↑ Tissue regeneration ↑ Gut motility ↑ Permeability ↓ Metabolism Energy expenditure ↓ Nutrient accessibility ↑ Short - chain fatty acids ↑ Adiposity ↑ Intestinal vessel formation TF glycosylation Thrombin cleavage PAR1 activation TF phosphorylation ANG1 expression Vascularization Bone homeostasis T H 17 cells ↑ TNF in colon and bone ↑ Osteoclastogenesis ↑ Bone mass ↓ Behaviour Synaptic connectivity ↓ Anxiety ↑ Pain perception ↑ This process is associated with increased glycosylation and surface translocation of tissue factor ( TF ) , leading to increased activation of thrombin . In turn , thrombin activates proteinase - activated receptor 1 ( PAR1 ) , which phosphorylates TF and promotes epithelial expression of angiopoietin 1 , a protein that is required for increased vascularization 76 . Tissue and organ homeostasis . Tissue homeostasis requires a balance between cell renewal and death , and thus a tightly regulated cell cycle , which is also modified by microorganisms . For example , in D . melanogaster , infection with the pathogenic bacterium Erwinia caroto­ vora induces stem cell proliferation and epithelial cell renewal 87 . Similarly , TLR signals derived from the gut microbiota are required for regaining tissue homeostasis following injury in the intestine in mice 85 . Importantly , the gut microbiota also has direct effects on tissue homeo stasis , as germ - free mice have reduced epithelial cell turnover in the small intestine owing to reduced IEC proliferation , reduced crypt - to - tip cellular migra - tion and reduced apoptosis 75 , 88 , 89 ( FIG . 3 ) . As the crypt contains proliferative IECs and the villus contains differ - entiated IECs that are in contact with the gut microbiota , these observations suggest that epithelial cells along the crypt – tip axis differ in their responses to microbial contact . Imbalanced cellular homeostasis can result in the development of cancer , and inflammation has a crucial role in cancer initiation and progression 90 . Microorganisms modulate inflammation and thus could influence carcinogenesis 91 . Indeed , an increased bacterial load was detected in colonic biopsies from patients with colorectal cancer or colonic adenomas 92 . In contrast to the decreased microbial diversity that is associated with obesity and inflammatory bowel disease 3 , 93 , microbial diversity is increased in patients with colorectal adeno - mas 94 . In two mouse models of carcinogenesis , germ - free animals were protected from or showed reduced cancer development compared with conventionally raised mice 95 , 96 . Notably , bacteria are also required for the production of secondary bile acids , which have carcinogenic effects 97 . Some microbial species , such as B . fragilis , Streptococcus gallolyticus or Fusobacterium nucleatum , have been associated with cancer develop - ment 98 – 100 . This suggests that certain groups of bacteria promote , whereas others protect against , colon cancer . Therefore , selective manipulation of the gut microbiota might provide new avenues to prevent carcinogenesis 90 . In addition to its effect on immune system and gut homeostasis , the gut microbiota affects homeostasis in other tissues , for example by altering bone mineral den - sity in mice ( FIG . 3 ) . Bone remodelling occurs through the antagonistic activity of bone - forming osteoblasts and bone - resorbing osteoclasts 101 . Bone cells express receptors for serotonin , which , as mentioned above , is reduced in germ - free mice , and serotonin signalling inhibits bone formation 102 , 103 . Furthermore , bone loss is associated with inflammation , and T cells are responsible for bone resorption in autoinflammatory diseases 104 , 105 . T H 17 cells and the pro - inflammatory cytokines TNF and IL - 1β all promote bone resorption by inducing osteo - clastogenesis 105 – 107 . Consistent with this , germ - free mice have been shown to have a higher bone mineral den - sity than conventional mice , highlighting the fact that microbial modulation of T cell function ( see above ) , serotonin levels and cytokine profiles might contribute to microbial modulation of bone homeostasis 11 . Taken together , these findings suggest that the gut microbiota can be considered an environmental factor that might contribute to osteoporosis . Metabolism and adiposity . The microbiome encodes a more versatile metabolome than the host 9 . Although gut microbial composition differs significantly between individuals , a core microbiome can be identified , Figure 3 | Microbial impact on host physiology . The gut microbiota has been shown to affect several aspects of host physiology ; arrows represent either stimulatory or inhibitory effects of the gut microbiota on host physiological processes . The microbiota has been shown to influence intestinal function in the host , promoting gut - associated lymphoid tissue ( GALT ) maturation , tissue regeneration ( in particular of the villi ) and gut motility , and reducing the permeability of epithelial cells lining the gut , thus promoting barrier integrity . Similarly , the gut microbiota influences the morphogenesis of the vascular system surrounding the gut . This is associated with increased glycosylation of tissue factor ( TF ) , which leads to cleavage of thrombin , in turn activating proteinase - activated receptor 1 ( PAR1 ) . This then phosphorylates TF to promote epithelial expression of angiopoietin 1 ( ANG1 ) , which promotes increased vascularization . Changes in the microbiota composition or a complete lack of a gut microbiota has been shown to affect metabolism , behaviour and tissue homeostasis , suggesting that the microbiota also regulates these processes . Specifically , the gut microbiota can influence the host’s nervous system , decreasing synaptic connectivity and promoting anxiety - like behaviour and pain perception . In the case of host metabolism , the gut microbiota has been shown to facilitate energy harvest from the diet , to modulate host metabolism ( for example , by decreasing energy expenditure ) and to promote host adiposity . Finally , the gut microbiota can influence tissue homeostasis , for example decreasing bone mass by promoting the function of osteoclasts ( which cause bone resorption ) and increasing the numbers of pro - inflammatory T helper 17 ( T H 17 ) cells . R E V I E W S 234 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Dysbiosis An imbalance in the structural and / or functional configuration of the microbiota , leading to a disruption of host – microorganism homeostasis . indicating the requirement for stable functional meta - bolic interactions with the host 108 . Studies have sug - gested that there are differences in the gut microbiota composition between obese and non - obese individuals , although results about the gut microbiota composition in obese individuals have been conflicting 109 . Compared with the gut microbiome of non - obese mice , that of obese mice is enriched in genes encoding carbohydrate metabolism enzymes and was demonstrated to have a greater capacity to extract energy from the diet and to generate short - chain fatty acids 110 ( FIG . 3 ) . Moreover , obese humans harbour an altered microbiota with reduced diversity 93 , 108 , 111 , but the functional impact of this reduced diversity on the development of obesity is not yet clear . A recent report demonstrated that the gut microbiome is altered in Chinese individuals with type 2 diabetes 112 . Strikingly , the composition of the gut micro - biota was able to predict type 2 diabetes in a second , smaller cohort . A link between the gut microbiota and metabolism has also been demonstrated in studies using germ - free mice . These mice have reduced adiposity and require a higher caloric intake to achieve the same weight as conventionally raised mice 113 . This has in part been attrib - uted to reduced energy extraction from a carbohydrate - rich diet in germ - free mice 113 . However , these mice are also resistant to diet - induced obesity when fed a fat - and sucrose - rich ‘Western’ diet containing almost no com - plex carbohydrates 114 . Thus , the gut microbiota is likely to directly modulate host metabolism ( FIG . 3 ) . For example , compared with in conventionally raised mice , the small intestine of germ - free mice has a higher expression of angiopoietin - like protein 4 ( ANGPTL4 ; also known as fasting - induced adipose factor ) , which promotes fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle 114 . Furthermore , the gut microbiota might also contribute to increased adi - posity and impaired glucose metabolism by stimulating inflammation and macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue 115 . Indeed , LPS from Gram - negative bacteria promotes hepatic insulin resistance 116 . In addition to obesity , an altered gut microbiome was recently associated with symptomatic atheroscle - rosis 117 . The microbiomes of patients who have had a stroke were shown to have lower levels of carotene - and lycopene - producing enzymes and higher levels of peptidoglycan - producing enzymes than the microbiomes of individuals who have not had a stroke , suggesting that patients who have had a stroke have a more inflam - matory gut milieu . Furthermore , cardiovascular disease in humans is associated with altered microbial metabo - lism of dietary choline 118 . For further details about how host – microorganism interactions can programme host metabolism , readers are referred to a recent review 119 . Effects on the brain and behaviour . Animal behaviour and social context have been shown to shape the microbiota composition in several species , including bumble bees 120 , the squid E . scolopes 121 and chimpanzees 122 . In turn , the impact of the microbiota reaches far outside the gastro - intestinal tract , also affecting behaviour ( FIG . 3 ) . For example , the gut bacterium Lactobacillus plantarum modulates mate choice in D . melanogaster 123 ; larval settle ment of the marine tubeworm Hydroides elegans is regulated by the biofilm bacterium Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea 124 ; and the composition of the human skin microbiota influences attraction for mosquitoes 125 , with potential consequences for disease spread . In mice , the gut microbiota modulates the levels of several signalling molecules , such as brain - derived neuro - trophic factor and noradrenaline , in different areas of the brain 126 . Germ - free mice display an altered stress response , dysregulation of the hypothalamus – pituitary – adrenal gland axis and decreased inflammatory pain perception 127 , 128 . To date , the best studied microbial effects are the effects on anxiety - like behaviour . Dysbiosis , as a result of either pathogenic infection or antibiotic treatment , increases anxiety - like behaviour in conventionally raised mice 129 , 130 , whereas germ - free mice show little anxiety - like behaviour 131 , 132 . The neurological defects in germ - free mice can be resolved only by colonization of neonates , indicating that there is a critical time window in which microbially induced maturation of the nervous system occurs 128 , 131 . Notably , compared with the striatum of conventionally raised mice , the striatum of germ - free mice has higher levels of the synaptic proteins synap - tophysin and PSD95 ( also known as DLG4 ) , which are both involved in synaptogenesis , indicating that the gut microbiota might affect synaptic connectivity 131 , 133 . For further discussion of microbial effects on the development of the nervous system and behaviour , readers are referred to a recent review 134 . Conclusion Research over the past decade has accumulated a large body of evidence linking alterations in the gut microbial composition to several diseases , such as inflammatory bowel disease , asthma , arthritis , obesity and cardiovascu - lar disease . Furthermore , it is now clear that the normal intestinal microbiota also influences numerous physio - logical aspects in the healthy host , including organ mor - phogenesis , immune system and gastrointestinal tract development and maturation , intestinal vascularization , tissue regeneration , carcinogenesis , bone homeostasis , metabolism and behaviour . An important insight that has come from these stud - ies it that the timing of colonization of germ - free mice seems to be crucial if these mice are to recapitulate the phenotypes of conventionally raised mice . Whereas col - onization of adult germ - free mice restores adiposity to normal levels 113 , colonization before weaning is required to normalize behaviour and protect against the iNKT cell accumulation that is associated with asthma and inflam - matory bowel disease 41 , 131 . Such early microbial coloniza - tion might have an epigenetic effect on the host through early - life imprinting , but it remains to be demonstrated how the gut microbiota achieves this . It is possible that in Tlr2 - deficient mice , the altered microbiota contrib - utes to altered DNA methylation patterns in cells of the colonic mucosa 135 . The impact of the gut microbiota as a modulator of methylation in other organs remains to be identified . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 235 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Gnotobiotic Pertaining to an organism : associated with a defined microbiota . For example , laboratory mice can be reared under sterile ( germ - free ) conditions or colonized with a specific collection of microorganisms . From the Greek gnosis ( known or knowledge ) and bios ( life ) , Analyses of biopsy samples obtained from gnoto - biotic mouse models or from mice treated with antibiot - ics have been extensively used to elucidate how the gut microbiota modulates metabolic interactions and gene expression in different tissues . However , further studies are required to expand our currently limited knowledge and to establish how the gut microbiota regulates the functions of distinct cell populations in the gut . It is important to stress that findings obtained from the study of animal models remain to be translated to diagnostic , prophylactic or therapeutic treatments for humans . One potential caveat is that microbiota mem - bers differ not only among host species but also between individual host organisms 136 . For example , the potent immune system - modulating SFB are found only in mice and have not yet been detected in humans . Diet is also one important factor modulating the composition of the gut microbial ecosystem 136 . Thus , variation in dietary habits among humans might contribute to the large inter - individual differences in the relative abundances of given microorganisms . This might constitute a major challenge when developing diagnostic markers based on the gut microbiota . Although comparisons of gnoto - biotic and conventionally raised animals are useful for identifying important physiological functions that are modulated by the gut microbiota , such comparisons cannot be automatically extrapolated to humans , and it remains unclear whether an altered microbiota associ - ated with a disease in humans is causing , contributing to or merely a consequence of the disease state . Immense progress has been made not only in identi - fying , isolating and culturing members of the gut micro - biota , but also in the development of genetic tools , such as whole - genome sequencing , and in the availability of novel genetic models to dissect the interplay between the microbiome , host genetics and host physiology . Combining these tools for further studies in the upcom - ing years will greatly deepen our understanding of the molecular targets in the homeostatic interaction between the gut microbiota and the host , and thereby promises to reveal new ways to treat chronic inflammatory diseases and maintain health . 1 . Clemente , J . C . , Ursell , L . K . , Parfrey , L . W . & Knight , R . The impact of the gut microbiota on human health : an integrative view . Cell 148 , 1258 – 1270 ( 2012 ) . 2 . Human Microbiome Project Consortium . Structure , function and diversity of the healthy human microbiome . Nature 486 , 207 – 214 ( 2012 ) . A detailed catalogue of the human gut microbiome . 3 . Qin , J . et al . A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing . Nature 464 , 59 – 65 ( 2010 ) . The first catalogue of the human microbiome . 4 . Sekirov , I . , Russell , S . L . , Antunes , L . C . & Finlay , B . B . Gut microbiota in health and disease . Physiol . Rev . 90 , 859 – 904 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Sina , C . et al . Extracellular cathepsin K exerts antimicrobial activity and is protective against chronic intestinal inflammation in mice . Gut 22 Mar 2012 ( doi : 10 . 1136 / gutjnl - 2011 - 300076 ) . 6 . Swidsinski , A . , Loening - Baucke , V . , Lochs , H . & Hale , L . P . Spatial organization of bacterial flora in normal and inflamed intestine : a fluorescence in situ hybridization study in mice . World J . Gastroenterol . 11 , 1131 – 1140 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Xu , J . & Gordon , J . I . Honor thy symbionts . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 10452 – 10459 ( 2003 ) . 8 . Human Microbiome Project Consortium . A framework for human microbiome research . Nature 486 , 215 – 221 ( 2012 ) . 9 . Gill , S . R . et al . Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome . Science 312 , 1355 – 1359 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Smith , K . , McCoy , K . D . & Macpherson , A . J . Use of axenic animals in studying the adaptation of mammals to their commensal intestinal microbiota . Semin . Immunol . 19 , 59 – 69 ( 2007 ) . 11 . Sjogren , K . et al . The gut microbiota regulates bone mass in mice . J . Bone Miner . Res . 27 , 1357 – 1367 ( 2012 ) . A study demonstrating that the gut microbiota affects bone mass , possibly by inhibiting osteoclastogenesis through modulation of the T cell profile . 12 . Lederberg , J . Infectious history . Science 288 , 287 – 293 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Arrieta , M . C . & Finlay , B . B . The commensal microbiota drives immune homeostasis . Front . Immunol . 3 , 33 ( 2012 ) . 14 . McFall - Ngai , M . Adaptive immunity : care for the community . Nature 445 , 153 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Hooper , L . V . , Littman , D . R . & Macpherson , A . J . Interactions between the microbiota and the immune system . Science 336 , 1268 – 1273 ( 2012 ) . 16 . O’Hara , A . M . & Shanahan , F . The gut flora as a forgotten organ . EMBO Rep . 7 , 688 – 693 ( 2006 ) . 17 . Johansson , M . E . et al . The inner of the two Muc2 mucin - dependent mucus layers in colon is devoid of bacteria . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 15064 – 15069 ( 2008 ) . An article showing that the inner mucus layer shields the intestinal epithelium from bacterial contact . 18 . Johansson , M . E . , Larsson , J . M . & Hansson , G . C . The two mucus layers of colon are organized by the MUC2 mucin , whereas the outer layer is a legislator of host – microbial interactions . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 ( Suppl . 1 ) , 4659 – 4665 ( 2011 ) . 19 . Juge , N . Microbial adhesins to gastrointestinal mucus . Trends Microbiol . 20 , 30 – 39 ( 2012 ) . 20 . Derrien , M . et al . Mucin - bacterial interactions in the human oral cavity and digestive tract . Gut Microbes 1 , 254 – 268 ( 2010 ) . 21 . Ambort , D . et al . Calcium and pH - dependent packing and release of the gel - forming MUC2 mucin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 5645 – 5650 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Sharma , R . , Schumacher , U . , Ronaasen , V . & Coates , M . Rat intestinal mucosal responses to a microbial flora and different diets . Gut 36 , 209 – 214 ( 1995 ) . 23 . Petersson , J . et al . Importance and regulation of the colonic mucus barrier in a mouse model of colitis . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 300 , G327 – G333 ( 2011 ) . 24 . An , G . et al . Increased susceptibility to colitis and colorectal tumors in mice lacking core 3 - derived O - glycans . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 1417 – 1429 ( 2007 ) . 25 . Fu , J . et al . Loss of intestinal core 1 - derived O - glycans causes spontaneous colitis in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 1657 – 1666 ( 2011 ) . 26 . van de Pavert , S . A . & Mebius , R . E . New insights into the development of lymphoid tissues . Nature Rev . Immunol . 10 , 664 – 674 ( 2010 ) . 27 . Mebius , R . E . Organogenesis of lymphoid tissues . Nature Rev . Immunol . 3 , 292 – 303 ( 2003 ) . 28 . Renz , H . , Brandtzaeg , P . & Hornef , M . The impact of perinatal immune development on mucosal homeostasis and chronic inflammation . Nature Rev . Immunol . 12 , 9 – 23 ( 2012 ) . 29 . Round , J . L . & Mazmanian , S . K . The gut microbiota shapes intestinal immune responses during health and disease . Nature Rev . Immunol . 9 , 313 – 323 ( 2009 ) . 30 . Kanamori , Y . et al . Identification of novel lymphoid tissues in murine intestinal mucosa where clusters of c - kit + IL - 7R + Thy1 + lympho - hemopoietic progenitors develop . J . Exp . Med . 184 , 1449 – 1459 ( 1996 ) . 31 . Eberl , G . Inducible lymphoid tissues in the adult gut : recapitulation of a fetal developmental pathway ? Nature Rev . Immunol . 5 , 413 – 420 ( 2005 ) . 32 . Eberl , G . & Littman , D . R . Thymic origin of intestinal αβ T cells revealed by fate mapping of ROR γ t + cells . Science 305 , 248 – 251 ( 2004 ) . 33 . Hamada , H . et al . Identification of multiple isolated lymphoid follicles on the antimesenteric wall of the mouse small intestine . J . Immunol . 168 , 57 – 64 ( 2002 ) . 34 . Bouskra , D . et al . Lymphoid tissue genesis induced by commensals through NOD1 regulates intestinal homeostasis . Nature 456 , 507 – 510 ( 2008 ) . A study which reveals that microbial induction of ileal lymphoid follicles is mediated via peptidoglycans that are recognized mainly by the intracellular NOD1 receptor . 35 . Cupedo , T . et al . Human fetal lymphoid tissue - inducer cells are interleukin 17 - producing precursors to RORC + CD127 + natural killer - like cells . Nature Immunol . 10 , 66 – 74 ( 2009 ) . 36 . Luci , C . et al . Influence of the transcription factor ROR γ t on the development of NKp46 + cell populations in gut and skin . Nature Immunol . 10 , 75 – 82 ( 2009 ) . 37 . Sanos , S . L . et al . ROR γ t and commensal microflora are required for the differentiation of mucosal interleukin 22 - producing NKp46 + cells . Nature Immunol . 10 , 83 – 91 ( 2009 ) . 38 . Zheng , Y . et al . Interleukin - 22 mediates early host defense against attaching and effacing bacterial pathogens . Nature Med . 14 , 282 – 289 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Cohen , N . R . , Garg , S . & Brenner , M . B . Antigen presentation by CD1 lipids , T cells , and NKT cells in microbial immunity . Adv . Immunol . 102 , 1 – 94 ( 2009 ) . 40 . Van Kaer , L . , Parekh , V . V . & Wu , L . Invariant natural killer T cells : bridging innate and adaptive immunity . Cell Tissue Res . 343 , 43 – 55 ( 2011 ) . 41 . Olszak , T . et al . Microbial exposure during early life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell function . Science 336 , 489 – 493 ( 2012 ) . An elegant study demonstrating that the gut microbiota is required for normal development of iNKT cells in neonates and thereby protects from inflammatory diseases , thus confirming the hygiene hypothesis . 42 . Kieper , W . C . et al . Recent immune status determines the source of antigens that drive homeostatic T cell expansion . J . Immunol . 174 , 3158 – 3163 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Smith , P . M . & Garrett , W . S . The gut microbiota and mucosal T cells . Front . Microbiol . 2 , 111 ( 2011 ) . 44 . Hooper , L . V . & Macpherson , A . J . Immune adaptations that maintain homeostasis with the intestinal microbiota . Nature Rev . Immunol . 10 , 159 – 169 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Round , J . L . et al . The Toll - like receptor 2 pathway establishes colonization by a commensal of the human microbiota . Science 332 , 974 – 977 ( 2011 ) . 46 . Maynard , C . L . et al . Regulatory T cells expressing interleukin 10 develop from Foxp3 + and Foxp 3 - precursor cells in the absence of interleukin 10 . Nature Immunol . 8 , 931 – 941 ( 2007 ) . 47 . Atarashi , K . et al . Induction of colonic regulatory T cells by indigenous Clostridium species . Science 331 , 337 – 341 ( 2011 ) . 48 . Geuking , M . B . et al . Intestinal bacterial colonization induces mutualistic regulatory T cell responses . Immunity 34 , 794 – 806 ( 2011 ) . R E V I E W S 236 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 49 . Gaboriau - Routhiau , V . et al . The key role of segmented filamentous bacteria in the coordinated maturation of gut helper T cell responses . Immunity 31 , 677 – 689 ( 2009 ) . 50 . Ivanov , I . I . et al . Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria . Cell 139 , 485 – 498 ( 2009 ) . 51 . Lee , Y . K . , Menezes , J . S . , Umesaki , Y . & Mazmanian , S . K . Proinflammatory T - cell responses to gut microbiota promote experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 ( Suppl . 1 ) , 4615 – 4622 ( 2011 ) . 52 . Wu , H . J . et al . Gut - residing segmented filamentous bacteria drive autoimmune arthritis via T helper 17 cells . Immunity 32 , 815 – 827 ( 2010 ) . 53 . Macpherson , A . J . & Uhr , T . Induction of protective IgA by intestinal dendritic cells carrying commensal bacteria . Science 303 , 1662 – 1665 ( 2004 ) . 54 . Uematsu , S . et al . Regulation of humoral and cellular gut immunity by lamina propria dendritic cells expressing Toll - like receptor 5 . Nature Immunol . 9 , 769 – 776 ( 2008 ) . 55 . Macpherson , A . J . et al . A primitive T cell - independent mechanism of intestinal mucosal IgA responses to commensal bacteria . Science 288 , 2222 – 2226 ( 2000 ) . 56 . Kawamoto , S . et al . The inhibitory receptor PD - 1 regulates IgA selection and bacterial composition in the gut . Science 336 , 485 – 489 ( 2012 ) . An article which shows that the gut microbiota is required for the development of completely functional IgA - producing cells and thereby maintains microbial homeostasis in the intestine . 57 . Gallo , R . L . & Hooper , L . V . Epithelial antimicrobial defence of the skin and intestine . Nature Rev . Immunol . 12 , 503 – 516 ( 2012 ) . 58 . Putsep , K . et al . Germ - free and colonized mice generate the same products from enteric prodefensins . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 40478 – 40482 ( 2000 ) . 59 . Cash , H . L . , Whitham , C . V . , Behrendt , C . L . & Hooper , L . V . Symbiotic bacteria direct expression of an intestinal bactericidal lectin . Science 313 , 1126 – 1130 ( 2006 ) . 60 . Hooper , L . V . , Stappenbeck , T . S . , Hong , C . V . & Gordon , J . I . Angiogenins : a new class of microbicidal proteins involved in innate immunity . Nature Immunol . 4 , 269 – 273 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Franchi , L . et al . NLRC4 - driven production of IL - 1 β discriminates between pathogenic and commensal bacteria and promotes host intestinal defense . Nature Immunol . 13 , 449 – 456 ( 2012 ) . Work revealing that intestinal phagocytes discriminate commensals from pathogens using the intracellular NLRC4 ( NOD - , LRR - and CARD - containing 4 ) inflammasome and by being hyporesponsive to commensal - derived TLR stimuli . 62 . Schauber , J . et al . Expression of the cathelicidin LL - 37 is modulated by short chain fatty acids in colonocytes : relevance of signalling pathways . Gut 52 , 735 – 741 ( 2003 ) . 63 . Liang , S . C . et al . Interleukin ( IL ) - 22 and IL - 17 are coexpressed by Th17 cells and cooperatively enhance expression of antimicrobial peptides . J . Exp . Med . 203 , 2271 – 2279 ( 2006 ) . 64 . Petnicki - Ocwieja , T . et al . Nod2 is required for the regulation of commensal microbiota in the intestine . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 15813 – 15818 ( 2009 ) . 65 . Salzman , N . H . et al . Enteric defensins are essential regulators of intestinal microbial ecology . Nature Immunol . 11 , 76 – 83 ( 2010 ) . 66 . Vaishnava , S . et al . The antibacterial lectin RegIII γ promotes the spatial segregation of microbiota and host in the intestine . Science 334 , 255 – 258 ( 2011 ) . 67 . Shin , S . C . et al . Drosophila microbiome modulates host developmental and metabolic homeostasis via insulin signaling . Science 334 , 670 – 674 ( 2011 ) . A detailed analysis revealing the molecular pathway of a symbiotic interaction between the fruit fly and one of its gut bacteria ; this interaction is required for a normal developmental rate , body size , wing area and metabolism , as well as for normal stem cell activity . 68 . Koropatnick , T . A . et al . Microbial factor - mediated development in a host - bacterial mutualism . Science 306 , 1186 – 1188 ( 2004 ) . 69 . Troll , J . V . et al . Peptidoglycan induces loss of a nuclear peptidoglycan recognition protein during host tissue development in a beneficial animal – bacterial symbiosis . Cell . Microbiol . 11 , 1114 – 1127 ( 2009 ) . 70 . McFall - Ngai , M . Host - microbe symbiosis : the squid - Vibrio association—a naturally occurring , experimental model of animal / bacterial partnerships . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 635 , 102 – 112 ( 2008 ) . 71 . Wagner , C . L . , Taylor , S . N . & Johnson , D . Host factors in amniotic fluid and breast milk that contribute to gut maturation . Clin . Rev . Allergy Immunol . 34 , 191 – 204 ( 2008 ) . 72 . Reinhardt , C . , Reigstad , C . S . & B ä ckhed , F . Intestinal microbiota during infancy and its implications for obesity . J . Pediatr . Gastroenterol . Nutr . 48 , 249 – 256 ( 2009 ) . 73 . Wostmann , B . S . The germfree animal in nutritional studies . Annu . Rev . Nutr . 1 , 257 – 279 ( 1981 ) . 74 . Gordon , H . A . & Bruckner - Kardoss , E . Effect of normal microbial flora on intestinal surface area . Am . J . Physiol . 201 , 175 – 178 ( 1961 ) . 75 . Abrams , G . D . , Bauer , H . & Sprinz , H . Influence of the normal flora on mucosal morphology and cellular renewal in the ileum . A comparison of germ - free and conventional mice . Lab . Invest . 12 , 355 – 364 ( 1963 ) . 76 . Reinhardt , C . et al . Tissue factor and PAR1 promote microbiota - induced intestinal vascular remodelling . Nature 483 , 627 – 631 ( 2012 ) . An investigation which demonstrates that bacteria promote vessel formation in the intestinal epithelium by modulating tissue factor signalling . 77 . Banasaz , M . , Norin , E . , Holma , R . & Midtvedt , T . Increased enterocyte production in gnotobiotic rats mono - associated with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 68 , 3031 – 3034 ( 2002 ) . 78 . Alam , M . , Midtvedt , T . & Uribe , A . Differential cell kinetics in the ileum and colon of germfree rats . Scand . J . Gastroenterol . 29 , 445 – 451 ( 1994 ) . 79 . Wikoff , W . R . et al . Metabolomics analysis reveals large effects of gut microflora on mammalian blood metabolites . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 3698 – 3703 ( 2009 ) . 80 . Husebye , E . , Hellstrom , P . M . & Midtvedt , T . Intestinal microflora stimulates myoelectric activity of rat small intestine by promoting cyclic initiation and aboral propagation of migrating myoelectric complex . Dig . Dis . Sci . 39 , 946 – 956 ( 1994 ) . 81 . Samuel , B . S . et al . Effects of the gut microbiota on host adiposity are modulated by the short - chain fatty - acid binding G protein - coupled receptor , Gpr41 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 16767 – 16772 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Hooper , L . V . et al . Molecular analysis of commensal host - microbial relationships in the intestine . Science 291 , 881 – 884 ( 2001 ) . 83 . Lutgendorff , F . , Akkermans , L . M . & Soderholm , J . D . The role of microbiota and probiotics in stress - induced gastro - intestinal damage . Curr . Mol . Med . 8 , 282 – 298 ( 2008 ) . 84 . Cario , E . , Gerken , G . & Podolsky , D . K . Toll - like receptor 2 controls mucosal inflammation by regulating epithelial barrier function . Gastroenterology 132 , 1359 – 1374 ( 2007 ) . 85 . Rakoff - Nahoum , S . , Paglino , J . , Eslami - Varzaneh , F . , Edberg , S . & Medzhitov , R . Recognition of commensal microflora by Toll - like receptors is required for intestinal homeostasis . Cell 118 , 229 – 241 ( 2004 ) . 86 . Stappenbeck , T . S . , Hooper , L . V . & Gordon , J . I . Developmental regulation of intestinal angiogenesis by indigenous microbes via Paneth cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 15451 – 15455 ( 2002 ) . 87 . Buchon , N . , Broderick , N . A . , Chakrabarti , S . & Lemaitre , B . Invasive and indigenous microbiota impact intestinal stem cell activity through multiple pathways in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 23 , 2333 – 2344 ( 2009 ) . 88 . Crawford , P . A . & Gordon , J . I . Microbial regulation of intestinal radiosensitivity . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 13254 – 13259 ( 2005 ) . 89 . Savage , D . C . , Siegel , J . E . , Snellen , J . E . & Whitt , D . D . Transit time of epithelial cells in the small intestines of germfree mice and ex - germfree mice associated with indigenous microorganisms . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 42 , 996 – 1001 ( 1981 ) . 90 . Blumberg , R . & Powrie , F . Microbiota , disease , and back to health : a metastable journey . Sci . Transl . Med . 4 , 137rv7 ( 2012 ) . 91 . Hope , M . E . , Hold , G . L . , Kain , R . & El - Omar , E . M . Sporadic colorectal cancer – role of the commensal microbiota . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 244 , 1 – 7 ( 2005 ) . 92 . Swidsinski , A . et al . Association between intraepithelial Escherichia coli and colorectal cancer . Gastroenterology 115 , 281 – 286 ( 1998 ) . 93 . Ley , R . E . et al . Obesity alters gut microbial ecology . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 11070 – 11075 ( 2005 ) . 94 . Sanapareddy , N . et al . Increased rectal microbial richness is associated with the presence of colorectal adenomas in humans . ISME J . 6 , 1858 – 1868 ( 2012 ) . 95 . Uronis , J . M . & Jobin , C . Microbes and colorectal cancer : is there a relationship ? Curr . Oncol . 16 , 22 – 24 ( 2009 ) . 96 . Dove , W . F . et al . Intestinal neoplasia in the Apc Min mouse : independence from the microbial and natural killer ( beige locus ) status . Cancer Res . 57 , 812 – 814 ( 1997 ) . 97 . Breuer , N . & Goebell , H . The role of bile acids in colonic carcinogenesis . Klin . Wochenschr . 63 , 97 – 105 ( 1985 ) . 98 . Toprak , N . U . et al . A possible role of Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin in the aetiology of colorectal cancer . Clin . Microbiol . Infect . 12 , 782 – 786 ( 2006 ) . 99 . Abdulamir , A . S . , Hafidh , R . R . & Abu Bakar , F . The association of Streptococcus bovis / gallolyticus with colorectal tumors : the nature and the underlying mechanisms of its etiological role . J . Exp . Clin . Cancer Res . 30 , 11 ( 2011 ) . 100 . Kostic , A . D . et al . Genomic analysis identifies association of Fusobacterium with colorectal carcinoma . Genome Res . 22 , 292 – 298 ( 2012 ) . 101 . Del Fattore , A . , Teti , A . & Rucci , N . Bone cells and the mechanisms of bone remodelling . Front . Biosci . ( Elite Ed . ) 4 , 2302 – 2321 ( 2012 ) . 102 . Bliziotes , M . et al . Serotonin transporter and receptor expression in osteocytic MLO - Y4 cells . Bone 39 , 1313 – 1321 ( 2006 ) . 103 . Yadav , V . K . et al . Lrp5 controls bone formation by inhibiting serotonin synthesis in the duodenum . Cell 135 , 825 – 837 ( 2008 ) . 104 . Kong , Y . Y . et al . Activated T cells regulate bone loss and joint destruction in adjuvant arthritis through osteoprotegerin ligand . Nature 402 , 304 – 309 ( 1999 ) . 105 . Sato , K . et al . Th17 functions as an osteoclastogenic helper T cell subset that links T cell activation and bone destruction . J . Exp . Med . 203 , 2673 – 2682 ( 2006 ) . 106 . Wei , S . , Kitaura , H . , Zhou , P . , Ross , F . P . & Teitelbaum , S . L . IL - 1 mediates TNF - induced osteoclastogenesis . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 282 – 290 ( 2005 ) . 107 . Zwerina , J . et al . TNF - induced structural joint damage is mediated by IL - 1 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 11742 – 11747 ( 2007 ) . 108 . Turnbaugh , P . J . et al . A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins . Nature 457 , 480 – 484 ( 2009 ) . 109 . Ley , R . E . Obesity and the human microbiome . Curr . Opin . Gastroenterol . 26 , 5 – 11 ( 2010 ) . 110 . Turnbaugh , P . J . et al . An obesity - associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest . Nature 444 , 1027 – 1031 ( 2006 ) . 111 . Ley , R . E . , Turnbaugh , P . J . , Klein , S . & Gordon , J . I . Microbial ecology : human gut microbes associated with obesity . Nature 444 , 1022 – 1023 ( 2006 ) . 112 . Qin , J . et al . A metagenome - wide association study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes . Nature 490 , 55 – 60 ( 2012 ) . A report which reveals that there are alterations in the gut microbiome in Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes , and that these alterations can predict the occurrence of diabetes . 113 . Bäckhed , F . et al . The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 15718 – 15723 ( 2004 ) . The first demonstration that the gut microbiota modulates adiposity . 114 . Bäckhed , F . , Manchester , J . K . , Semenkovich , C . F . & Gordon , J . I . Mechanisms underlying the resistance to diet - induced obesity in germ - free mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 979 – 984 ( 2007 ) . 115 . Caesar , R . et al . Gut - derived lipopolysaccharide augments adipose macrophage accumulation but is not essential for impaired glucose or insulin tolerance in mice . Gut 61 , 1701 – 1707 ( 2012 ) . 116 . Cani , P . D . et al . Metabolic endotoxemia initiates obesity and insulin resistance . Diabetes 56 , 1761 – 1772 ( 2007 ) . 117 . Karlsson , F . H . et al . Symptomatic atherosclerosis is associated with an altered gut metagenome . Nature Commun . 3 , 1245 ( 2012 ) . 118 . Wang , Z . et al . Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease . Nature 472 , 57 – 63 ( 2011 ) . 119 . Tremaroli , V . & Bäckhed , F . Functional interactions between the gut microbiota and host metabolism . Nature 489 , 242 – 249 ( 2012 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 237 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 120 . Koch , H . & Schmid - Hempel , P . Socially transmitted gut microbiota protect bumble bees against an intestinal parasite . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 19288 – 19292 ( 2011 ) . 121 . Boettcher , K . J . , Ruby , E . G . & McFall - Ngai , M . J . Bioluminescence in the symbiotic squid Euprymna scolopes is controlled by a daily biological rhythm . J . Comp . Physiol . A Neuroethol . Sens . Neural Behav . Physiol . 179 , 65 – 73 ( 1996 ) . 122 . Degnan , P . H . et al . Factors associated with the diversification of the gut microbial communities within chimpanzees from Gombe National Park . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 13034 – 13039 ( 2012 ) . 123 . Sharon , G . et al . Commensal bacteria play a role in mating preference of Drosophila melanogaster . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 20051 – 20056 ( 2010 ) . 124 . Huang , Y . , Callahan , S . & Hadfield , M . G . Recruitment in the sea : bacterial genes required for inducing larval settlement in a polychaete worm . Sci . Rep . 2 , 228 ( 2012 ) . 125 . Verhulst , N . O . et al . Composition of human skin microbiota affects attractiveness to malaria mosquitoes . PLoS ONE 6 , e28991 ( 2011 ) . 126 . Forsythe , P . & Kunze , W . A . Voices from within : gut microbes and the CNS . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 70 , 55 – 69 ( 2012 ) . 127 . Amaral , F . A . et al . Commensal microbiota is fundamental for the development of inflammatory pain . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 2193 – 2197 ( 2008 ) . 128 . Sudo , N . et al . Postnatal microbial colonization programs the hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal system for stress response in mice . J . Physiol . 558 , 263 – 275 ( 2004 ) . 129 . Bercik , P . et al . The intestinal microbiota affect central levels of brain - derived neurotropic factor and behavior in mice . Gastroenterology 141 , 599 – 609 ( 2011 ) . 130 . Lyte , M . , Li , W . , Opitz , N . , Gaykema , R . P . & Goehler , L . E . Induction of anxiety - like behavior in mice during the initial stages of infection with the agent of murine colonic hyperplasia Citrobacter rodentium . Physiol . Behav . 89 , 350 – 357 ( 2006 ) . 131 . Heijtz , R . D . et al . Normal gut microbiota modulates brain development and behavior . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 3047 – 3052 ( 2011 ) . The finding that the gut microbiota affects the development of the brain and anxiety - like behaviour . 132 . Neufeld , K . M . , Kang , N . , Bienenstock , J . & Foster , J . A . Reduced anxiety - like behavior and central neurochemical change in germ - free mice . Neurogastroenterol . Motil . 23 , 255 – e119 ( 2011 ) . 133 . Diamond , B . , Huerta , P . T . , Tracey , K . & Volpe , B . T . It takes guts to grow a brain : increasing evidence of the important role of the intestinal microflora in neuro - and immune - modulatory functions during development and adulthood . Bioessays 33 , 588 – 591 ( 2011 ) . 134 . Collins , S . M . , Surette , M . & Bercik , P . The interplay between the intestinal microbiota and the brain . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 10 , 735 – 742 ( 2012 ) . 135 . Kellermayer , R . et al . Colonic mucosal DNA methylation , immune response , and microbiome patterns in Toll - like receptor 2 - knockout mice . FASEB J . 25 , 1449 – 1460 ( 2011 ) . 136 . Ley , R . E . et al . Evolution of mammals and their gut microbes . Science 320 , 1647 – 1651 ( 2008 ) . 137 . Dominguez - Bello , M . G . et al . Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 11971 – 11975 ( 2010 ) . 138 . Yatsunenko , T . et al . Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography . Nature 486 , 222 – 227 ( 2012 ) . An extensive analysis of the gut microbiome of healthy children and adults from three different geographical regions . 139 . Koboziev , I . , Karlsson , F . & Grisham , M . B . Gut - associated lymphoid tissue , T cell trafficking , and chronic intestinal inflammation . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1207 ( Suppl . 1 ) , e86 – e93 ( 2010 ) . 140 . Veenbergen , S . & Samsom , J . N . Maintenance of small intestinal and colonic tolerance by IL - 10 - producing regulatory T cell subsets . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 24 , 269 – 276 ( 2012 ) . 141 . Walker , J . A . , Barlow , J . L . & McKenzie , A . N . Innate lymphoid cells - how did we miss them ? Nature Rev . Immunol . 13 , 75 – 87 ( 2013 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank R . Perkins for editing the manuscript and A . Hallén for contributions to the figures . Work in the Bäckhed laboratory is supported by the Swedish Research Council , the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research , the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation , the Swedish Heart Lung foundation , the Swedish Diabetes Foundation , the European Union - funded project TORNADO ( grant FP7 - KBBE - 222720 ) , Ragnar Söderberg’s Foundation , Torsten Söderberg’s Foundation , the NovoNordisk Foundation , AFA Insurance , IngaBritt and Arne Lundberg’s Foundation and a LUA - ALF grant from the Swedish Västra Götalandsregionen . Competing interests statement The authors declare competing financial interests : see Web version for details . FURTHER INFORMATION Fredrik Bäckhed’s homepage : http : / / www . wlab . gu . se / backhed ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 238 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved