The optimal decisions in franchising under pro ﬁ t uncertainty ☆ Hueimei Liang a , Kuo - Jung Lee b , ⁎ , Jen - Tsung Huang c , Hsien - Wei Lei d a Department of Business Management , National Sun Yat - sen University , 70 , Lienhai Rd . , Kaohsiung 80424 , Taiwan , R . O . C . b Department of Commerce Automation and Management , National Pingtung Institute of Commerce , 51 , Minsheng E . Rd . , Pingtung City 90004 , Taiwan , R . O . C . c Department of Finance , National Sun Yat - sen University , 70 , Lienhai Rd . Kaohsiung 80424 , Taiwan , R . O . C . d Long Bon Development Co . , Ltd . , 36F , 160 - 1 Taichung - Kong Rd . Sec . 1 , Taichung 403 , Taiwan , R . O . C . a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Accepted 24 November 2012 JEL classi ﬁ cation : G11 L14 L22 Keywords : Franchise contract Franchise fee Real options Guaranteed pro ﬁ t This study constructs a real options model to evaluate franchise contracts that take into account a guaranteed pro ﬁ t offered by the franchisor to franchisees under a dynamic environment , as in the contract of 7 - Eleven Convenient Stores in Taiwan . We derive closed - form solutions of contract values for the franchisor and fran - chisee . We also calculate the expected value of the guaranteed pro ﬁ t , which is re ﬂ ected in the franchise fee . Corresponding numerical analysis is then conducted for different scenarios with respect to expected pro ﬁ t , the level of guaranteed pro ﬁ ts , and pro ﬁ t volatilities . These results show that the contract values for both franchisor and franchisees are high if the franchise is lucrative . Higher guaranteed pro ﬁ t increases the value of franchisees while it decreases that of the franchisor , and the in ﬂ uence magnitude grows in a more volatile business environment . However , if the gross pro ﬁ ts are stably high , then guaranteed pro ﬁ t is unlikely exercised and hence has less impact on the contract values of either party . Based on these ﬁ ndings , implica - tions and suggestions are given . © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Franchising in a service industry has grown vigorously in recent decades . Hempelmann ( 2006 ) indicates that more than 40 % of retail turnover are allotted to franchising in the U . S . Aside from the United States , franchising is also a very common business model in many other countries . In Taiwan , for example , franchises can be found in most service industries , including convenience stores , education , health care organizations , and restaurants . According to a survey conducted by Taiwan Chain Stores and Franchise Association ( TCFA ) , 1 the total sales of chain stores hit US $ 53 . 7 billion in 2005 , which accounted for 47 . 49 % of retail and restaurant industry sales . Franchisors grew 30 . 8 % to 1 , 124 , while number of franchisees grew 16 . 3 % to 72 , 847 from 2004 to 2005 . Franchising is a business model , where the franchisor with specialized operating know - how , technologies , and brand authorizes individual franchisees located at different regions to provide services or sell products ( Justis and Judd , 1989 ) . The franchisor may also provide franchisees specialized operating and administration support , like staff training , or accounting and ﬁ nancing support , etc . From the franchisee ' s perspective , a business owner by joining a franchise allows the franchisee to quickly obtain a mature operational model that offers a well - known brand and helps lower marketing and development cost , hence cutting operational risk ( Hoffman and Preble , 1991 ; Stanworth and Curran , 1999 ) . From the franchisor ' s perspective , the enterprise can also grow quickly by increasing economies of scale , market share , and revenue through franchising ( Lafontaine , 1992 ; Love , 1986 ; Shane , 1998 ) . If a franchise works well , it is a win - win situation for both parties . Such a win - win situation may start from the franchise contract , which de ﬁ nes the right and obligation of both franchisor and franchi - see . In general , the franchisee is required to pay to its franchisor a franchise fee , a lump - sum fee , and a royalty fee on a regular basis ( Lafontaine and Shaw , 1999 ) . The franchise fee and royalty fee given by the franchisees most likely re ﬂ ect not only the costs incurred in ful ﬁ lling the franchisor ' s obligation , such as staff training and fran - chisee education , but also the business value of the brand name and the operating know - how offered by the franchisor . The more a fran - chisor provides to its franchisee , the higher a franchisee has to pay ( Vázquez , 2005 ) . From the franchisor ' s viewpoint , fees too high may push away potential franchisees , while fees too low make it harder for the fran - chisor to make a pro ﬁ t . On the other hand , when considering joining the franchise , the franchisee will take into account the reputation of the franchise , operational capabilities , and other rights and obliga - tions , all of which could materialize into a fee structure . However , there lacks a discussion in literature on this subject and thus the Economic Modelling 31 ( 2013 ) 128 – 137 ☆ We gratefully acknowledge ﬁ nancial support for this research from the National Science Council ( NSC96 - 2416 - H - 251 - 015 ; NSC 99 - 2410 - H - 251 - 009 ) . ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 886 8 7238700x6167 ; fax : + 886 8 7210801 . E - mail address : kjlee @ npic . edu . tw ( K . - J . Lee ) . 1 Please refer to the 4 - year Plan of Improving Commercial Services Quality by the Ministry of Economic Affairs Commerce Industrial Services published by Taiwan ' s Ministry of Economic Affairs ( 2007 May ) . 0264 - 9993 / $ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . econmod . 2012 . 11 . 044 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Economic Modelling journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / ecmod amount of references available on the dynamic valuation of a fran - chise contract is very limited . The main purpose of this paper is to propose a dynamic valuation model of fee structures . Since there are many varieties of franchise contracts , in order to simplify the matter and for illustration purposes , we consider the case of 7 - Eleven Convenience Stores ( hereafter , 7 - Eleven ) in Taiwan . It is a leading and successful convenience store franchise in Taiwan , having almost 5000 stores in place for a population of 23 million , and it outnumbers the total of all other convenience store franchises together . In their contracts , a guaranteed pro ﬁ t is offered by the franchise to theirfranchisees , besidesthenormalfranchisefeesandroyalfees . Afran - chisee may receive a guaranteed pro ﬁ t offered by its franchisor when its gross pro ﬁ t is lower than the guaranteed pro ﬁ t . Hence , the guaranteed pro ﬁ t , a protection of minimum pro ﬁ t , is one of the main attractions in the contract . The guaranteed pro ﬁ t can now be regarded as an indicator of the franchisor ' s operating capability and also its business value . The stronger the operating capability is and the greater the franchisor ' s busi - ness reputation , the higher the guaranteed pro ﬁ t is that the franchisor could afford . There is no doubt that a higher guaranteed pro ﬁ t is more appealing to the franchisees . Normally , the franchisor would not offer guaranteed pro ﬁ ts higher than expected pro ﬁ t generated by the franchi - see . Thus , the guaranteed pro ﬁ t level could be related to brand name , education training , marketing , etc . Based on its capabilities , the franchi - sor could ask for a greater franchise fee when higher guaranteed pro ﬁ t is offered . Therefore , the structures of franchise fee , royalty fee , and guaranteed pro ﬁ t are interrelated . However , the royalty fee , a ﬁ xed ratio of gross pro ﬁ t given to the franchise on a regular basis , is not considered here so as to simplify the story . This paper assumes that changeable sales gross pro ﬁ t follows a sto - chastic process , and the value of the franchise varies with gross pro ﬁ t . With the value of the guaranteed pro ﬁ t re ﬂ ected in the franchise fee , the franchise fee can be treated as the sum of the expected value of the guaranteed pro ﬁ t and other related expenses , such as staff training , etc . Now , if we look at the problem from the viewpoint of ﬁ nance , the guaranteed pro ﬁ t is similarto an ( European ) option sold by the franchi - sor to the franchisee . The option is exercised only when the situation is not working in the owner ' s favor ( franchisee ' s , in ourcase ) . The value of such an option could be re ﬂ ected in the franchise fee paid by the fran - chisee when joining the franchise . In other words , the franchisee pays the franchise fee so that it can enjoy the guaranteed pro ﬁ t protection against sales ﬂ uctuation . Therefore , the option value that the franchisee gains via the guaranteed pro ﬁ t can be estimated based on the real op - tions method . The franchisor could be interested in the value of having a new fran - chisee at the same time that the franchisee could be interested in the value of joining the franchise . These values amount to the contract values for the franchisor and the franchisee , respectively , for which the closed forms are derived . Based on the contract values , the guaranteed pro ﬁ tvalueisobtained . Fromtheexpectedvalueoftheguaranteedprof - it , we suggest a reasonable franchise fee . In addition to closed - form so - lutions of these contract values , we further explore these values based on numerical analysis and both parties ' corresponding strategies . We hope this study canshed somelight on thevalues of a franchise contract in a dynamic environment and hence the strategies of both parties . Thispaperisorganizedasfollows . Section2summarizesrelevantre - searchabout franchising and real options and provides a basefor model construction . Section 3 exploits a real options approach to evaluate the contract values for the franchisor either with or without guaranteed pro ﬁ t and then further estimatesthe fair valuesof the guaranteed pro ﬁ t and franchise fee . The follow - up section focuses on the contract value from the prospective of the franchisee , which can be added to the franchisor ' s value to get a franchise store ' s value . Section 5 provides numerical analyses and their results , verifying the model established in prior sections , followed by conclusions and strategic implications in Section 6 . 2 . Literature review Franchising has attracted research attention from diverse disci - plines , including management , law , economics , marketing , and ﬁ nance ( Dant and Kaufmann , 2003 ) . Generally , the topics of franchising litera - ture include ownership issues ( Brickleyj and Dark , 1987 ; Caillaud and Tirole , 2004 ; Caves and Murphy , 1976 ; Rubin , 1978 ) , agency issues ( Barthélemy , 2011 ; Lafontaine , 1992 ; Mathewson and Winter , 1985 ; Vázquez , 2005 ) , the measurement of risk in franchising ( Bhattacharyya and Lafontaine , 1995 ; Martin , 1988 ) , and international franchising ( Fladmoe - Lindquist , 1996 ; Hildy , 2000 ) . As for franchise contracts , most franchise research studies brie ﬂ y mention the rights and obligations in the franchise without detailed investigation of the contracts . Among these works , Mathewson and Winter ( 1985 ) study franchise contracts to obtain economic insight into franchising , and yet there is limited research on the valuation of franchise contracts based on theoretical model constructions . Among these studies , Blair and Kaserman ( 1982 ) apply a 2 - stage model to explore strategies behind industry consolidation and ex - plore the optimized franchise fees included in a franchise contract . 2 Tikoo and Nair ( 1999 ) establish a theoretical model that loosens up the rule of a ﬁ xed franchise fee to illustrate how sales can be maxi - mized , how a franchise fee for the franchisor can rise , and how pro ﬁ t for the franchisee can be increased under a variable franchise fee . Lutz ( 1995 ) investigates the impact of ownership between the franchisor and the franchisee on pro ﬁ t under moral hazards . The author also de - rives the terms of the optimal contract via the construction of a theo - retical model . Shane et al . ( 2006 ) examine the use of strategic actions to attract partners and increase system size in the context of franchis - ing . They ﬁ nd that the size of the franchise is negatively related to the royalty rate and also to the franchise fee . As the system is aging , the negativity to the royalty fee increases while that to the franchise fee decreases . Some studies apply game theory to describe the pro ﬁ t relationship between the franchisor and franchisee . Huang ( 1997 ) utilizes game theory to investigate the cooperative relationship between a franchi - sor and its franchisee in a franchise contract and constructs a model that solves output price , royalty fee , and franchise fee . This study also proves that a good relationship creates higher pro ﬁ t and that risk - aversion for the franchisee is a critical factor in the relationship . Grandner ( 2006 ) explores the franchise fee between a franchisor and a franchisee , and its in ﬂ uence on the negotiation between a union and worker ' s compensation . The Nash equilibrium solves for the optimized value of merchandise price , production volume , fran - chise fee , and worker ' s compensation . The literature uses a few dynamic models to investigate the struc - ture or values of franchise contracts ( Lafontaine and Shaw , 1999 ) . Among them , Mathewson and Winter ( 1985 ) implement a reputation model and Gallini and Lutz ( 1992 ) use a signaling model . Both works imply that franchisors will want to reduce their royalty rate and in - crease their franchise fees over time . Rubin ( 1978 ) expects that fran - chisors will increase their royalty rate once they are established . However , Lafontaine and Shaw ( 1999 ) ﬁ nd empirically that franchi - sors do not systematically change their royalty rate or franchise fees as they become better established . All these works study the changes of fee structures over time . It is important to consider the uncertainty of a versatile business environment when studying optimal fees between the franchisor and franchisees . The above works do not put these factors into con - sideration , and the game theory approach described above cannot deal with the problem easily . Therefore , our paper focuses on the dy - namic value of fee structures as sales gross pro ﬁ ts change over time , 2 Blair and Kaserman ( 1982 ) believe that a franchisee pays a lump - sum entry fee to the franchisor during the 1st stage and pays a franchise fee to the franchisor in the 2nd stage . 129 H . Liang et al . / Economic Modelling 31 ( 2013 ) 128 – 137