A Mailman Analogy : Retaining Student Learning Gains in Alkane Nomenclature Jessica Orvis , Diana Sturges , Shannon Rhodes , Ki - Jana White , Trent W . Maurer , and Shainaz M . Landge * Department of Chemistry , Georgia Southern University , P . O . Box 8064 , Statesboro , Georgia 30460 , United States * S Supporting Information ABSTRACT : Visual analogies play an important role in the teaching and learning of many diverse topics in chemistry . Organic nomenclature is an essential skill needed for student success in organic chemistry ; however , it is a topic most students have di ﬃ culty in mastering . Without a strong foundation of nomenclature , students will struggle to follow more advanced organic chemistry topics . The project described uses the analogy of a mailman , who is new to an area and trying to remember the destinations of his postal route , to teach alkane nomenclature . Once students master the topic of alkane nomenclature , they are ready to take on the task of naming other organic molecules . Application of the Teaching - With - Analogies ( TWA ) model de ﬁ nes a stepwise approach to generate an e ﬀ ective analogy and hence was used in the development of the mailman analogy . An easily understandable picture of a mailman , a route system , and housing along the route provides an analogy capable of developing students ’ understanding of alkane nomenclature in organic chemistry . The assessment of student learning gains was performed in two di ﬀ erent settings ( Analogy versus Nonanalogy Groups ) and it reveals that students who learn nomenclature with the analogy retain their learning gains through the course , whereas students who learn nomenclature without the analogy lose some of their gains as the semester continues . KEYWORDS : Analogies / Transfer , Pedagogy , Alkanes / Cycloalkanes , Nomenclature / Units / Symbols , Organic Chemistry ■ INTRODUCTION Organic chemistry is considered one of the most challenging courses in the college core curriculum , and many students enter organic chemistry courses with preconceived doubts about their ability to be successful . To bridge the gap between prior knowledge and current understanding , visual analogies can be introduced in the early stages of learning organic chemistry . Analogies play a signi ﬁ cant role in scienti ﬁ c teaching and are used as tools for understanding abstract concepts . 1 − 9 An “ analogy ” by de ﬁ nition is a comparison of the similarity of two concepts , the familiar ( analogue ) and the unfamiliar ( target ) . 10 By building connections between familiar and unfamiliar con - cepts , relevant analogies from daily life can help students learn new material and eliminate misconceptions . 10 − 14 Analogies that result in instructional sca ﬀ olding are more e ﬀ ective to promote student learning than simple analogies . 11 Several examples in organic chemistry include the concept of resonance as it relates to visual analogies as diverse as cartoon characters such as Dennis the Menace and Charlie Brown ; bagels ; and Big Dog − Puppy Dog . 1 − 3 The nature of a square knot versus a granny knot is another powerful visual analogy for recognizing diasteromers ; 4 a twig with leaves analogy was used to help recognize the parent chain in naming organic molecules . 5 Retrosynthesis in organic chemistry can be taught using a saute ́ ed summer squash preparation analogy . 6 Nomenclature , 15 , 16 that is , naming organic compounds , is one of the most important topics in organic chemistry . To be successful in organic chemistry , it is essential that the basics of naming molecules is mastered from the very outset . Failure to understand this topic often results in di ﬃ culty in understanding future material covered in the course and impedes the develop - ment of critical thinking skills needed for success in more advanced topics . As such , a mailman analogy , a visual analogy , was implemented to teach the topic of alkane nomenclature . The Teaching - With - Analogies ( TWA ) model can be used to make science more meaningful to learners by promoting and building cognitive relationships between what is already known and what is being learned . 17 , 18 In the TWA model , concepts that are familiar ( analogue ) are used to build understanding of complex material that is less familiar ( target ) to deliver e ﬀ ective Received : July 13 , 2015 Revised : January 22 , 2016 Activity pubs . acs . org / jchemeduc © XXXX American Chemical Society and Division of Chemical Education , Inc . A DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 J . Chem . Educ . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX analogies . 11 In the mailman analogy , students are introduced to organic nomenclature of alkanes and , once comfortable with the analogy , are able to build on that framework to name more complex organic structures such as cycloalkanes , alkenes , and alkynes . ( see Supporting Information . ) Because the rules of organic nomenclature are highly struc - tured , the mailman analogy had to mirror that system . A mailman character , Dan , delivering mail according to de ﬁ ned criteria can be analogous to the rules in alkane nomenclature . ■ HOW THE ANALOGY WORKS To name an organic molecule , three parts are required : the pre ﬁ x , the parent chain and the su ﬃ x . The pre ﬁ x constitutes where and what the substituents are ; the parent chain is the longest chain ; and the su ﬃ x represents the functional groups . The molecule to be named can be considered a subdivision made up of “ lots . ” Some of these lots become roads or routes and others become destinations . In this analogy , the lots are referred to as blocks . Every block ( Figure 1 ) represents a carbon atom in the parent chain or in the substituents . The longest ( parent ) chain becomes the main route that mailman Dan takes and the blocks that are not part of the longest chain become destinations for mail delivery . Background information about mailman Dan is provided in the Supporting Information to keep the analogy simple and straightforward . Rule # 1 : Choosing the Longest Route = Finding the Parent Chain First , Dan has to identify which blocks constitute the main route and which blocks are destinations . In order to best remember mailman Dan ’ s new neighborhood , he chooses the longest available route . Dan follows the longest route because his super - visors have asked all the mail carriers to do so for consistency purposes . A route map with two possible longest routes is shown in Figure 2 . Figure 2A has eight blocks and Figure 2B has seven blocks ; mailman Dan chooses the eight - block route . The route selected by mailman Dan is the longest contiguous path available , whether it is straight ( Figure 3A ) or bent ( Figure 3B ) . Figure 3A and B represents two completely di ﬀ erent “ subdivisions ” ( molecules ) . Rule # 2 : Blocks Not Part of Longest Route Become Destinations = Groups Not Part of the Longest Chain Becomes Substituents Once the longest continuous route with maximum blocks is chosen , all the side blocks that are not on the longest route are converted to destinations ( Figure 4 ) . Information on Destinations = Information on Alkyl Groups The three di ﬀ erent types of destinations ( substituents ) used in this analogy are shown in Figure 5 : a single block is represented by a house ; two blocks are represented by a duplex ; and three blocks are represented by a three - story house . Figure 1 . Everyblockrepresentsacarbonatomforthemoleculetobenamed . Figure 2 . Mailman Dan chooses the longest block route , which is the eight - block route ( A ) and not the seven - block route ( B ) . Figure 3 . Mailman Dan chooses the contiguous path , whether is its straight ( A ) or bent ( B ) . Journal of Chemical Education Activity DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 J . Chem . Educ . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX B Figure 4 . Mailman Dan considers all the remaining blocks as destinations after selecting the longest path . Figure 5 . Illustrating di ﬀ erent types of destinations ( substituents ) corresponding to one , two , and three blocks that are not a part of the main route . Figure 6 . Mailman Dan chooses the route with maximum number of destinations on both sides of his longest route ( A ) rather than one destination ( B ) . Journal of Chemical Education Activity DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 J . Chem . Educ . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX C Rule # 3 : Choosing the Longest Route Based on Destinations = Choosing the Longest Chain Based on Substituents If mailman Dan identi ﬁ es two possible routes equivalent in length , he chooses the route that results in the maximum number of destinations on either side of the route ( Figure 6 ) . Rule # 4 : Determining from Which End to Start the Route = Numbering the Carbon Chain Because mailman Dan ’ s mail bag is heavy , he wants to lighten his load as soon as possible . He starts on the end of the route containing the ﬁ rst destination ; therefore , the route will be numbered starting from the end nearest to the destinations ( Figure 7 ) . Rule # 5 : First Destination at the Same Distance = First Substituent at the Same Distance If the ﬁ rst destination is at the same distance from either end ( i . e , numbered the same way from either direction ) , then he considers the second destination in the path ( Figure 8 ) . In Figure 8A , the destinations are positioned at the second , third , and ﬁ fth blocks , Figure 7 . Mailman Dan starts on the end closest to the ﬁ rst destination ; the chosen route begins from the left end side since the house is positioned at the 2nd block rather than the 3rd . Figure 8 . Mailman Dan chooses the route from the left end since the second destination is positioned closer at the third block in ( A ) rather than at the fourth block in ( B ) . Figure 9 . Mailman Dan uses alphabetical order of the destinations when choosing between otherwise equal routes . D in duplex ( A ) comes before H in house ( B ) . Journal of Chemical Education Activity DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 J . Chem . Educ . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX D whereas , in Figure 8B , the destinations are positioned at the second , fourth , and ﬁ fth blocks . Because mailman Dan wants to lighten his load sooner , Figure 8A is the correct choice of route . Rule # 6 : Destinations at the Same Distance from Either Side = Substituents at the Same Distance from Either Side If the destinations are placed on the same block on either side , then mailman Dan has to make a decision regarding which end to start his route . Because he is trying to remember the destina - tions on his route , he uses alphabetical order to break the tie . In Figure 9 , a house and a duplex are the two choices of destinations for mailman Dan . In Figure 9A , a chosen path has a duplex at the third block and a house at the ﬁ fth block . In Figure 9B , the chosen path has a house at the third block and the duplex at the ﬁ fth block . Mailman Dan makes the choice based on the alphabetical order of the destinations , regardless of the size of the destination . To keep the analogy simple , each destination is assumed to have the same number of occupants . D  duplex comes before H  house alphabetically , so mailman Dan delivers ﬁ rst to the duplex , then to the house . Rule # 7 : Remembering the Destinations on Route = Naming the Compound ( Wrapping Up ) The complete analogy can be illustrated in an example shown in Figure 10 . The longest , most direct path is chosen ; in this case , an eight block route is selected ( A ) , leaving three destinations : two houses and a duplex ( B ) . He sees a house at the second and sixth block and a duplex at the ﬁ fth block . Mailman Dan starts closest to his destinations , so the route is numbered from left to right ; the ﬁ rst destination at the second block is more desirable than the Figure 10 . Worked example shows how to choose the destinations and direction of choice in a stepwise manner for 5 - duplex - 2 , 6 - dihouseeightblockroute . Journal of Chemical Education Activity DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 J . Chem . Educ . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX E ﬁ rst destination at the third block ( C ) . When naming the compound , the destinations come in alphabetical order . The pre ﬁ x di is used to indicate two houses and hence the resulting name is 5 - duplex - 2 , 6 - dihouseeightblockroute ( D ) . A student will see that the house represents the methyl group , the duplex the ethyl group , and the three - story house the propyl group . The alphabetical arrangement of the destinations matches the alphabetical arrangement of the corresponding substituents . Students will already be familiar with the su ﬃ x - ane for alkanes and Greek pre ﬁ xes for the numbers leading to the name : 5 - ethyl - 2 , 6 - dimethyloctane . See Supporting Information for the full comparison for naming 5 - ethyl - 2 , 6 - dimethyloctane using the classic nomenclature rules with the new visual analogy ( Figure 11 ) . ■ ASSESSMENT AND THE STUDENT LEARNING GAINS FROM THE ACTIVITY The assessment of this activity was carried out over two semesters ( fall 2013 and spring 2014 ) with full Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) approval . Two classes taught by the same instructor of Organic Chemistry I were invited to participate in the study . The study group ( analogy group ( AG ) ) learned nomenclature rules using the mailman analogy ; the control group learned nomenclature rules using the regular lecture with power point slides ( nonanalogy group ( NG ) ) . Data in the form of pre - / post - test quiz scores , exam scores and survey results were collected . The participant information , methods , procedure , questions ( pre - / post - test and exams ) , survey , and the results of students ’ perceptions are incorporated in the Supporting Information . The survey was administered to both groups ( AG and NG ) to evaluate student perceptions on the topic of nomenclature . The survey indicated that women reported higher levels of under - standing and engagement in both groups as compared to men . The details about both groups for this study are provided in Supporting Information ( under Student Learning ) . To explore learning gains between pretest and posttest , and Exam one and the Final Exam , the normalized learning gain 19 was computed for each student for each pair of tests . The normalized learning gain ⟨ g ⟩ was computed as ⟨ ⟩ = − − g ( Final Exam Score Exam 1 Item Score ) ( Maximum Item Score of 12 Exam 1 Item Score ) For the pre - / post - test equation , post - test replaced “ Final Exam Item Score , ” pretest replaced “ Exam 1 Item Score , ” and the “ Maximum Item Score ” was changed to six . Normalized learning gain ( NLG ) analyses are important for four reasons : ( a ) they remove from the sample all students who scored 100 % on the pretest or Exam 1 Items ( respectively ) and thus could not demonstrate any additional learning , ( b ) they remove from the sample all students who scored lower on the posttest or Final Exam Items and “ backslid ” in their learning , ( c ) they more accurately estimate improvement over time by controlling for ceiling e ﬀ ects , and ( d ) they are robust even when students guess on multiple choice items . 19 If the NLG is multiplied by 100 % , the results can be interpreted as the percentage of relevant material unknown at pretest or Exam 1 that was learned by post - test or the Final Exam ( respectively ) . From pretest to post - test , students in both groups signi ﬁ cantly improved with no di ﬀ erence in magnitude between them ( details provided in Supporting Information ) , suggesting that both instructional methods are equally e ﬀ ective in promoting short - term learning gains on this topic . However , an independent samples t test revealed a signi ﬁ cant di ﬀ erence in the magnitude of the NLG from Exam 1 to the Final Exam between the groups , t ( 100 ) = − 2 . 22 , p < 0 . 05 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 45 . Those in the NG picked up 56 % of the possible additional points they could earn ; whereas those in the AG picked up 73 % of the possible additional points . The primary reason for this di ﬀ erence was that 32 % of the students in the NG scored lower on the Final Exam than Exam 1 , whereas only 19 % of the students in the AG scored lower on the Final Exam ( Table 1 ) . These results suggest that the lecture method leads to a “ backsliding ” in learning , with many students who had previously demonstrated mastery losing the ability to retain and redemon - strate it . In contrast , the analogy method seems to both promote greater long - term retention among those who learned it when it was ﬁ rst taught and a greater delayed “ aha ” realization among those who hadn ’ t mastered it by Exam 1 . ■ CONCLUSION The mailman analogy provides a novel and methodical approach for teaching the topic of alkane nomenclature , which is considered one of the most signi ﬁ cant and foundational concepts in organic chemistry . The story utilizes a mailman character , Dan , to explain various rules through an elaborate visual analogy . His overall aim is to remember various destinations ( houses and duplexes ) in a new location , so he applies certain rules to remember his neighborhood , which are analogous to the rules used by the students to learn alkane nomenclature in organic chemistry . Students who learned the topic of nomenclature using the analogy were shown to retain their learning gains compared to students in the nonanalogy group . Table 1 . Normalized Learning Gain by Groups TotalSample 100 % on BothExams Lower Score on Final Exam Items Normalized Learning Gain ( NLG ) Groups n n n n M SD Lecture 91 20 29 42 0 . 56 0 . 43 Analogy 97 19 18 60 0 . 73 0 . 34 Figure 11 . Expanded structure ( A ) and carbon backbone structure ( B ) of 5 - ethyl - 2 , 6 - dimethyloctane . Journal of Chemical Education Activity DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 J . Chem . Educ . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX F ■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT * S Supporting Information The Supporting Information is available on the ACS Publications website at DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 . Development of the activity , Comparison between the nomenclature rules and the Mailman analogy , Teaching with Analogies model system , Information on the assess - ment of the activity and the Presentation Slides ( PDF ) The power points slides with the mailman analogy ( PDF ) Survey for Visual Analogy ( PDF ) Survey for Nonanalogy ( PDF ) Pre - test / Post - test / Exam 1 and Final Exam questions on Nomenclature Topic ( PDF ) ■ AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author * E - mail : slandge @ georgiasouthern . edu . Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to Nazim Ali for drawing the initial ﬁ gures of the mailman and houses . The ﬁ nancial support provided by the Department of Chemistry , College O ﬃ ce of Undergraduate Research ( COUR ) , Honors Program at Georgia Southern University , and the Development of Instruction award are gratefully acknowledged . ■ REFERENCES ( 1 ) Silverstein , T . P . The “ Big Dog - Puppy Dog ” Analogy for Resonance . J . Chem . Educ . 1999 , 76 ( 2 ) , 206 − 208 . ( 2 ) Starkey , R . Resonance Analogy Using Cartoon Characters . J . Chem . Educ . 1995 , 72 ( 6 ) , 542 . ( 3 ) Lin , S . Aromatic Bagels : An Edible Resonance Analogy . J . Chem . Educ . 2007 , 84 ( 5 ) , 779 − 780 . ( 4 ) Tavernier , D . The Square Knot and the Granny Knot . An Analogy for Diastereomers . J . Chem . Educ . 1992 , 69 ( 8 ) , 627 − 628 . ( 5 ) Krieger , P . A Visual Analogy Guide to Chemistry , 12th ed . ; Morton Publications : Englewood , CO , 2012 ; pp 137 − 150 . ( 6 ) Levy , I . J . A Restrosynthetic Analogy : Anne ’ s Sauteed Summer Squash . J . Chem . Educ . 1988 , 65 ( 10 ) , 853 . ( 7 ) Wu , C . ; Foos , J . Making Chemistry Fun to Learn . Literacy Inf . Comput . Educ . J . 2010 , 1 ( 1 ) , 3 − 7 . ( 8 ) Spezzini , S . Effects of Visual Analogies on Learner Outcomes : Bridging from the Known to the Unknown . Int . J . Scholarship Teach . Learn . 2010 , 4 ( 2 ) , 1 − 30 . ( 9 ) Corte ́ s - Figueroa , J . E . ; Pe ́ rez , W . I . ; Lo ́ pez , J . R . ; Moore - Russo , D . A . An Analogy Using Pennies and Dimes To Explain Chemical Kinetics Concepts . J . Chem . Educ . 2011 , 88 ( 7 ) , 932 − 936 . ( 10 ) Glynn , S . ; Duit , R . ; Thiele . R . Learning Science in the Schools : Research Reforming Practice ; Routledge : New York , 1995 ; pp 247 − 273 . ( 11 ) Glynn , S . M . Teaching science concepts : Research on analogies that improve learning . In Improving Science and Mathematics Education : Insights for a Global Community , Berlin , D . F . , White , A . L . , Eds . ; International Consortium for Research in Science and Mathematics Education : Columbus , OH , 2003 ; pp 179 − 192 . ( 12 ) Orgill , M . ; Bodner , G . The Role of Analogies in Chemistry Teaching . In Chemists ’ Guide to E ﬀ ective Teaching ; Pienta , N . , Cooper , M . , Greenbowe , T . , Eds . ; Prentice Hall : Upper Saddle River , NJ , 2005 ; pp 90 − 105 . ( 13 ) Orgill , M . ; Bodner , G . What Research Tells Us About Using Analogies To Teach Chemistry . Chem . Educ . Res . Pract . 2004 , 5 ( 1 ) , 15 − 32 . ( 14 ) Zook , K . B . ; Maier , J . M . Systematic Analysis of Variables that Contribute to the Formation of Analogical Misconceptions . J . Educ . Psychol . 1994 , 86 ( 4 ) , 589 − 600 . ( 15 ) IUPAC  International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry . http : / / www . iupac . org / ( accessed Apr 2015 ) . ( 16 ) Smith , J . Organic Chemistry , 4th ed . ; McGraw Hill : New York , 2014 ; pp 121 − 134 . ( 17 ) Glynn , S . M . Making science concepts meaningful to students : Teaching with analogies . In Four Decades of Research in Science Education : From Curriculum Development to Quality Improvement ; Mikelskis - Seifert , S . , Ringelband , U . , Bru ̈ ckmann , M . , Eds . ; Waxman : Mu ̈ nster , Germany , 2008 ; pp 113 − 125 . ( 18 ) Glynn , S . M . Methods and Strategies : Teaching With Analogies . Sci . Child . 2007 , 44 ( 8 ) , 52 − 55 . ( 19 ) Hake , R . R . Interactive Engagement versus Traditional Methods : A Six - Thousand - Student Survey of Mechanics Test Data for Introductory Physics Courses . Am . J . Phys . 1998 , 66 , 64 − 74 . Journal of Chemical Education Activity DOI : 10 . 1021 / acs . jchemed . 5b00551 J . Chem . Educ . XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX G