Invadopodia : specialized tumor cell structures for the focal degradation of the extracellular matrix Roberto Buccione & Giusi Caldieri & Inmaculada Ayala Published online : 21 January 2009 # Springer Science + Business Media , LLC 2009 Abstract Invasive tumor – derived or transformed cells , cultured on a flat extracellular matrix substratum , extend specialized proteolytically active plasma membrane protru - sions . These structures , termed invadopodia , are responsible for the focal degradation of the underlying substrate . Considerable progress has been made in recent years towards understanding the basic molecular components and regulatory circuits and the ultrastructural features of invadopodia . This has generated substantial interest in invadopodia as a paradigm to study the complex inter - actions between the intracellular trafficking , signal trans - duction and cytoskeleton regulation machineries ; hopes are high that they may also represent valid biological targets to help advance the anti – cancer drug discovery process . Current knowledge will be reviewed here with an emphasis on the many open questions in invadopodia biology . Keywords Invadopodia . Cell adhesion . Cell invasion . Extracellular matrix degradation 1 Introduction Cells of multicellular organisms in vitro typically make contact with the extracellular matrix through specialized structures at restricted sites on the plasma membrane where specific adhesion receptors bind extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins and link intracellularly to cytoskeletal components . Such cell - matrix contacts have several functions : 1 ) anchor - age of ECM elements to the cell surface and to the cytoskeleton to support cell adhesion and motility ; 2 ) localization of signal transduction activities to specific sites ; 3 ) pivots for transmission of mechanical force and tension and , as more recently found 4 ) organization of the focal degradation of the ECM . Cell - ECM contacts are thus key structures in the integration of cells with an acellular matrix component in vitro [ 1 , 2 ] . Cell - matrix contacts exist in various types and are currently recognized by a combination of morphological features and molecular composition including matrix ligands and cell surface adhesion receptors . Three broad categories can be recognized depending on their known or hypothesized functions . Mechanically supportive contacts are stable , larger - scale adhesions that enable cells to resist deformation from mechanical forces during normal tissue function . A typical example is the hemidesmosome , in which the matrix - adhesion receptor , an integrin , attaches epithelial or endothelial cells to their underlying basement membrane by linking intracellularly to the non - contractile keratin filament system [ 3 ] . In contractile contacts , smaller areas of the plasma membrane make close contacts with ECM components via adhesive receptors connected to the contrac - tile actomyosin filament system . This enables cells to maintain spreading on a rigid ECM ( typically a culture dish coating with matrix ) or to exert tension on a deformable ECM ( as when using a three - dimensional matrix ) . Well - known examples of such contact structures are the focal and fibrillar adhesions [ 4 , 5 ] . In protrusive contacts , limited extensions of the plasma membrane make contact with ECM . Admittedly this is a very broad category comprising contacts that are very different in shape and purported function ( where known ) : from very localized and of highly defined shape as in the case of filopodia and podosomes , to those that occupy broader regions of the plasma membrane as in the Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10555 - 008 - 9176 - 1 R . Buccione ( * ) : G . Caldieri : I . Ayala Department of Cell Biology and Oncology , Tumor Cell Invasion Laboratory , Consorzio Mario Negri Sud , S . Maria Imbaro , ( Chieti ) 66030 , Italy e - mail : buccione @ negrisud . it case of pseudopodia or lamellipodia and invadopodia , the focus of this review . Similarly to others , protrusive contacts also feature adhesive receptors linked to the actin cytoskel - eton by various types of linker complexes , and , depending on the type of adhesion , are usually associated with rapid membrane remodeling , transient matrix sensing , locomotion and focal degradation of the ECM . It should be mentioned that some matrix contacts , such as hemidesmosomes , are specific to particular differentiated cell types whereas others , such as filopodia , focal adhesions and lamellipodia , occur in many cell types . Furthermore , individ - ual cells can form multiple contact types simultaneously , and at different regions on the cell surface . For example , fibroblasts or leukocytes in connective tissue feature both matrix assembly sites and protrusive contacts [ 6 ] . 2 Definition and general features When invasive tumoral or transformed cells are cultured on a flat ECM substratum , they extend proteolytically active protrusions into the matrix from their ventral surfaces ; these protrusions are termed invadopodia . Invadopodia were initially defined as stable actin - rich protrusions emanating from the ventral surface of invasive tumor or transformed cells , cultured on appropriate ECM substrates such as gelatin , fibronectin , collagen type I , collagen type IV , or laminin [ 7 ] and displaying focalized proteolytic activity towards the substrate [ 8 , 9 ] . Through the combined efforts of the Chen and Mueller laboratories throughout the nineties , this definition was later refined by the identification of a number of molecular components including integrins , factors of the tyrosine kinase signaling machinery , soluble and membrane - bound proteases ( including matrix MMPs ) , and , in retrospect not surprisingly , actin and actin - associated proteins such as cortactin and others [ 10 – 14 ] . Invadopodia are consistently associated with the focal degradation of the ECM in all cell systems where they have been detected and studied , and interfering with invadopodia components leads to direct effects on matrix degradation [ 11 , 15 – 17 ] . All evidence accumulated so far leaves little room to doubt that the specific function performed by invadopodia is the degradation of the extracellular matrix . From an operational point of view , invadopodia can be recognized at the light microscope as roundish actin - rich structures at the ventral surface of cells ( i . e . substrate face ) that 1 ) contain cortactin ( or other actin related proteins , see below ) and / or phosphotyrosine , 2 ) are not confined to the cell periphery , and 3 ) are associated with sites of substrate degradation , [ 18 , 19 ] ; a typical example can be seen in ( Fig . 1 ) . Other features that can be used to identify invadopodia at least in some cell lines , include their localization proximal to the Golgi complex , the central regulator for intracellular trafficking [ 15 ] , and their extend - ed half - life of up to 2 h or more [ 17 , 20 ] as compared to other protrusive adhesions . 3 Structure The description of the ultrastructural features of invadopo - dia is still rather incomplete . In fact , an initial transmission electron microscopy observation on transformed fibroblasts [ 9 ] suggested that they are thin protrusions extending from the plasma membrane into the underlying ECM ; this was later confirmed on a breast cancer - derived cell line [ 10 ] . No further progress was reported for some years until a detailed ultrastructural analysis was performed on the melanoma cell line A375MM , based on a correlative confocal light electron microscopy technique whereby individual areas of Fig . 1 Identification of invadopodia . Double staining of A375MM melanoma cells grown on FITC - conjugated gelatin ( green ) and then fixed and stained with Alexa 546 - phalloidin ( red ) . Invadopodia ( white arrows ) match with underlying areas of degradation ( black arrows ) . A merged image is also shown 138 Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 ECM degradation with matching invadopodia were first identified at the light microscope and the very same analyzed at the electron microscope and reconstructed in three dimensions . In this study [ 15 ] , invadopodia were shown to be originated from profound invaginations of the ventral surface of the plasma membrane . In general , such invaginations averaged 8 µm in width and 2 µm in depth . From within , many surface protrusions originated with diameters ranging from hundreds of nanometers to a few micrometers , and averaging 500 nm in length , which sometimes penetrated into the matrix . These protrusions were consistent with the originally described “ invading ” structures [ 9 ] but seemed to be part of more complex superstructures ( Fig . 2 ) . More recently , electron microsco - py tomography experiments analyzed the connections between invadopodial protrusions and the cell body , showing them to be quite narrow [ 20 ] . A consistent picture arising from these experiments and others ( Caldieri , Giacchetti , Beznoussenko and Buccione , unpublished ) is the polarization and juxtaposition of the Golgi complex , the central secretory pathway processing unit of the cell , towards the invadopodial area ( Fig . 3 ) , suggesting a tight relationship between proteolytic activity and membrane / protein transport ( see below ) . 4 Biogenesis and Molecular components Which are the molecular cues that trigger invadopodia biogenesis ? And through which signaling cascades are these signals transduced to the membrane remodeling machineries ? How is focal degradation of the ECM established at invadopodia and by which proteases ? The following section will attempt to provide a synopsis of the current knowledge in these areas by highlighting those players that are currently better characterized . Remarkably little is known on many aspects , although the field is witnessing a significant acceleration that no doubt will lead to important advances in the near future in these and many other aspects of invadopodia biology . 4 . 1 Initial events at the cell - ECM interface It has become now accepted that the main trigger that initiates invadopodia formation is the engagement of cell surface integrins by substrate components [ 11 , 21 , 22 ] . This was shown first for α 5 β 1 and α 5 β 1 integrins , albeit the specific integrin combination might be cell - type dependent . α 3 β 1 activation was found promote to Src - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP , which in turn affected the actin cytoskeleton , through the Rho family GTPases , thus activating membrane - protrusive and proteolytic activity , leading to invadopodia formation and cell invasion . This initial definition of the signaling pathways triggered by integrin engagement and leading to invadopodia formation is still valid and will delved into later . Besides their role in signaling , integrins may function as docking sites to spatially and temporally confine metal - loprotease activity , so to focalize the degradation process . For example , in Lox melanoma cells , collagen - induced α 3 β 1 association with the serine protease seprase was shown to drive the degradative activity of this gelatinolytic enzyme specifically at the tip of invadopodia [ 23 ] . At the same time α 5 β 1 supports this process at sites of ECM / cell contact , from where specific membrane domains could protrude to originate invadopodia [ 22 ] . In the same cell model , an inhibitory anti - β 1 integrin antibody prevented the association between uPAR and seprase at invadopodia , pointing out that β 1 is fundamental in organizing and targeting the activity of proteases at sites of ECM degradation [ 23 ] . It is also well known that integrins can cooperate with the membrane - type matrix metalloprotease MT1 - MMP to localize and enhance activity through the activation of matrix prometalloproteinase - 2 ( MMP2 ) [ 24 ] . Further , integrins might act at invadopodia by facilitating the clearing of partially degraded extracellular matrix by phagocytosis [ 25 ] . In conclusion these findings define integrins as fundamental organizing centers to deploy the activity of various components at invadopodia . All said and done , research into the roles of integrins in invadopodia biology , given also the potential implications for transla - tional research , has been inexplicably stagnating . Fig . 2 Schematic diagram of the invadopodial area . This is based on correlative light - electron microscopy reconstructions on A375MM melanoma cells ( 15 ) . Invadopodial protrusions originate from profound invaginations of the ventral surface of the plasma membrane ; within the area delimited by the large invagination , large fragments of gelatin can often be seen . Also shown are the spatial relationships with the nucleus and the Golgi complex . Cartoon courtesy of Elena Fontana Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 139 Invadopodia formation can also be triggered / enhanced by activation of the EGF receptor with subsequent activation of the signaling cascade leading to activation of the actin polymerization machinery [ 17 ] . At present a unifying model integrating ECM - and soluble ligand - derived activation is still lacking , furthermore invadopodia formation does not necessarily require EGF receptor activation in many cell models . An intriguing hypothesis has stemmed from the existence of the CSF - 1 / EGF paracrine loop [ 26 ] between carcinoma cells and tumor - associated macrophages whereby the former secrete CSF - 1 and express the EGF receptor , and macrophages secrete EGF and express the CSF - 1 receptor , thus stimulating each other to co - migrate . Hence a possible mechanism through which the tumor - associated macrophages enhance the invasivity of cancer cells could be through the stimulation of invadopodia formation [ 27 ] . 4 . 2 Signaling to the cytoskeleton The characterization of the downstream molecular effectors for the integrin engagement - initiated signaling cascade in invadopodia is still a matter of uncertainty and presents many voids . This , as other areas of invadopodia biology , is also due to the heterogeneity of cell models used in various laboratories and , of course , to the relative youth of the field . Some general conclusions can be drawn , however , in terms of the protein kinases , small G - proteins and signaling activators / effectors implicated in invadopodia biogenesis and function . 4 . 2 . 1 Protein Kinases Invadopodia were originally discovered as specialized surface protrusions enriched in Src [ 9 ] ; high levels of tyrosine phosphorylation were subsequently and specifical - ly associated to such structures [ 12 ] . Cells treated with tyrosine phosphorylation inhibitors failed to form invado - podia and consequently to degrade the ECM ; also , transfection with kinase - active or kinase - inactive Src mutants , respectively increased or decreased the levels of ECM degradation , as compared to wild type Src - expressing cells [ 19 , 28 ] . These findings establish that Src activity is absolutely required for invadopodia formation and to sustain efficient degradation of the ECM . Much more recently , several classes of serine / threonine kinases have been brought into the picture and shown to be implicated in invadopodia biogenesis . PKD is a family of serine / threonine protein kinases expressed in most tissues and implicated in various fundamental functions including exocytic transport , shape regulation , motility and adhesion [ 29 , 30 ] . Interestingly , PKD was the first serine / threonine kinase to be implicated in invadopodia activity when , using invadopodia - enriched subcellular fractions to identify com - ponents of MDA - MB - 231 invadopodia that interact with cortactin , a complex between paxillin and the serine / Fig . 3 Correlative light - electron microscopy of invadopodia . The top panel shows a fluorophore - conjugated phalloidin - stained cell identi - fied by epifluorescence microscopy and then processed for electron microscopy and serially sectioned for observation . The boxed area outlines the invadopodial area magnified in the two serial sections below ( a and b ) showing individual invadopodia ( arrows ) extending from the ventral surface above the ECM degradation . Arrows point to invadopodia observed either in cross - section a or longitudinally b . Arrowheads indicate the Golgi complex oriented towards the invadopodia . Image courtesy of Gala Beznoussenko , Giusi Caldieri and Giada Giacchetti 140 Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 threonine , PKD and cortactin was found [ 10 ] At present , however , the specific role of PKD in invadopodia function remains unexplored . The much - studied extracellular signal - regulated serine / threonine kinases ERK1 / 2 have been recently connected to invadopodia biogenesis [ 31 , 32 ] . The ERKs are part of the large modular network of the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathways that regulate a plethora of physiological processes including cell growth , differentia - tion and apoptosis . The ERKs are activated by diverse stimuli including growth factors acting through receptor tyrosine kinases , cytokines binding to receptors that consequently activate tyrosine kinases or agonists of G protein - coupled receptors [ 33 ] . How and when ERKs contribute to invadopodia formation remains to be clarified , although some reports have implicated the small GTPase ARF6 as an activator [ 31 ] , and the multidomain protein cortactin as a main substrate [ 32 ] . These will be discussed later . The serine / threonine kinases of the PAK family are main downstream effectors of the small Rho family GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 and are involved in the regulation of cell morphogenesis , motility , survival , mitosis and angiogene - sis . The family comprises conventional PAK1 , PAK2 and PAK3 isoenzymes , each containing an autoinhibitory domain and the newly discovered members PAK4 , PAK5 and PAK6 [ 34 – 36 ] . More recently , through the transfection of the autoinhibitory domain of PAK1 , it was found that PAK activity is also required to sustain invadopodia formation and activity [ 32 ] . The involvement of PAK ( s ) still needs to be defined both in terms of regulation and mechanism of action , although , again , cortactin has emerged as a main effector [ 32 ] . 4 . 2 . 2 Small GTPases Of the small molecular weight GTPases of the Ras superfamily , the most studied by far within the context of cell motility , invasion and polarity , belong to the Rho family , namely Rho , Rac and Cdc42 . These proteins cycle between an inactive ( GDP - bound ) and an active ( GTP - bound ) form , where this conversion is tightly controlled by accessory proteins such as the guanine nucleotide - exchange factors ( GEFs ) that increase the ratio of GDP / GTP exchange , and the GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) that promote GTP hydrolysis . Rho - GTPases control many cell functions by interacting with , and stimulating various effector targets , including protein kinases , actin nucleators , and phospholipases and thus affecting fundamental physi - ological processes , such as cell shape , morphology , polar - ization , motility and metastasis formation [ 37 ] through different effects on the actin cytoskeleton : in fibroblasts , Cdc42 controls microspike and filopodia formation and is a master regulator of cell polarity [ 38 – 40 ] , Rac plays a central role in lamellipodia and ruffling , Rho in stress fiber and focal adhesion formation . For example , at the molec - ular level , Rac and Cdc42 both activate Arp2 / 3 through the effectors Sra - 1 and N - WASP , respectively . Rho affects myosin II activity and consequently cell contraction . Both Cdc42 and Rac have been shown to act upstream of invadopodia formation . When Cdc42 is downregulated by RNA interference , or when a constitutively inactive mutant is transfected , invadopodia formation is inhibited in the metastatic MTLn3 rat mammary adenocarcinoma cell line [ 17 ] . Dominant - active mutant of Cdc42 or Rac enhanced dot - like and diffused fibronectin degradation respectively in RPMI17951 melanoma cells [ 41 ] . Con - versely , the expression of a dominant - active mutant of Rho did not affect degradation [ 41 ] . In immunofluorescence studies , we detected transfected Cdc42 but not Rho A or Rac , at invadopodia in A375MM melanoma cells . In addition , expression of dominant positive or negative RhoA and Rac mutants did not affect invadopodia function ( Baldassarre , Ayala and Buccione , unpublished data ) . Indirect support for a role of Rho at invadopodia is supported by the fact that phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP was found to activate the membrane - protrusive activity required for invadopodia formation and cell invasion [ 11 ] . Directly connected to the above is the finding that the interaction of the multi - domain polarity protein IQGAP1 with proteins of the secretion machinery ( to be discussed later ) is triggered by active Cdc42 and RhoA and is essential for matrix degradation [ 42 ] . One surprising void in our knowledge of invadopodia regulation relates to the role of Rho family GTPase accessory proteins . The number of known GEFs is much higher ( about 60 members ) than that of Rho family GTPases themselves [ 43 ] , therefore it can be hypothesized that the different GEFs hold the key in regulating the specificity of downstream signaling from Rho GTPases in diverse cellular functions and cell systems [ 44 ] . There is evidence suggesting that GEFs might be important players in invasion and metastasis as many GEFs were originally identified as oncogenes after transfection of immortalized fibroblast cell lines [ 45 ] . The functional consequence of GEF overexpression is to elevate cellular levels of activated Rho GTPases , hence deregulated GEF expression might lead to aberrant growth , invasiveness and / or metastatic potential . Although how GEFs are regulated is still unknown , they clearly represent powerful candidates as spatial and temporal Rho - GTPase regulators . In spite of this we know nothing about the potential role of GEFs and little about GAPs [ 11 ] in invadopodia biogenesis and function . The ADP - ribosylation factors ( ARFs ) belong to another class of Ras superfamily GTPases . Six mammalians iso - forms are known and classified by sequence homology . Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 141 They too , cycle between inactive ( GDP - bound ) and an active ( GTP - bound ) forms . ARF6 , one of the better characterized of this class , is known to regulate endosome membrane trafficking , regulated exocytosis , and actin remodeling at the cell surface [ 46 ] with direct effects on cell migration [ 47 ] . ARF6 has been shown to localize at invadopodia in MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells [ 48 ] and in LOX melanoma cells [ 31 ] . Furthermore , ECM degradation and Matrigel invasion were blocked upon ARF6 knock - down and expression of GTP - binding defective mutants of ARF6 . The relevance of ARF6 in ECM degradation is thus clear and further supported by the direct correlation between ARF6 expression levels and the invasive phenotype [ 48 ] . The mechanism of action of ARF6 at invadopodia is not completely defined but is clearly dependent on ERK activation , found to be required for ARF6 - dependent invadopodia formation and activity [ 31 ] . 4 . 2 . 3 Effectors There are many potential effector proteins downstream of the signaling cascades regulating invadopodia formation . Rather than providing a list of known and potential players , that can be extracted from a number of reviews [ 49 – 52 ] , a few examples will be discussed with an emphasis on those that appear to be substrates of the protein kinases acting at invadopodia and that have the potential of being key linkers between the signaling apparatus and the molecular machinery driving membrane remodeling . The multi - domain actin - binding protein cortactin is involved in the coordination of cell migration , cytoskeleton remodeling and intracellular protein transport [ 53 – 56 ] . Human cortactin is encoded by the CTTN ( formerly EMS1 ) gene on chromosome region 11q13 which is frequently amplified in breast , head and neck squamous carcinoma and bladder cancers [ 57 , 58 ] . A consequence of the gene amplification is an increase in cortactin protein levels [ 59 ] . Cortactin contains an N - terminal acidic domain containing a conserved DDW motif that binds and weakly activates the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 60 ] . This is followed by a variable number of 37 amino acid repeats depending on the splice variant [ 61 ] , constituting the actin - binding domain of which only the fourth is required for F - actin binding activity , and has been suggested to stabilize the newly created branches between filaments [ 62 , 63 ] . A proline - rich domain ( PRD ) and a C - terminal SH3 domain are adjacent to the actin - binding domain . The latter can bind and directly activate N - WASP [ 64 ] . Cortactin overexpression in vitro , leads to increased motility and invasion [ 56 ] ; in vivo , it enhances the formation of bone metastases from a breast cancer cell line in a mouse model [ 65 ] . It was originally identified as a major substrate of the v - Src oncogene [ 66 ] and later confirmed to be phosphorylated on tyrosine in response to stimuli such as FGF , EGF and integrins , that induce remodeling of the cortical actin cytoskeleton [ 67 , 68 ] . In particular , phosphorylation on tyrosine residues 421 , 466 and 482 in the PRD is required for cell movement [ 69 ] and metastatic dissemination [ 65 ] , possibly by inhibition of F - actin stabilization [ 70 ] . Cortac - tin can also be phosphorylated in vitro on serine residues 405 and 418 in the PRD by the extracellular signal - regulated serine / threonine kinases ERK1 / 2 [ 71 ] . Consistent with its F - actin - binding ability , cortactin primarily localizes in peripheral cell structures such as lamellipodia and membrane ruffles [ 55 , 72 ] . As mentioned above , cortactin was first identified at invadopodia in a complex with paxillin and PKD [ 10 ] and later shown to be indispensable for invadopodia formation [ 73 ] . An intriguing hypothesis stemmed for another study whereby a major role of cortactin at invadopodia could be to regulate the secretion of MMPs coupling dynamic actin assembly to the secretory machinery [ 74 ] . A recent study showed that the multiple phosphorylation events by Src , ERK1 / 2 and PAK ( s ) converge onto cortactin and are fundamental for the control of invadopodia biogenesis and function [ 32 ] . The precise mechanistic consequences of these many regulatory events is unclear , although some insight comes from the finding that in vitro , the ability of cortactin to activate N - WASP is positively regulated by ERK phosphorylation and negative - ly regulated by Src phosphorylation [ 64 ] , thus suggesting a potential on / off switch mechanism . It should also be mentioned that cortactin can also , via its SH3 domain , bind the large GTPase dynamin 2 [ 55 ] , a membrane modifying and actin - regulating protein which is also required for invadopodia formation [ 15 ] ( see below ) and this interaction affects Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin nucleation [ 75 , 76 ] . The novel Src substrate Tks5 , formerly known as FISH , was recently identified at invadopodia of Src - transformed fibroblasts and a series of cancer cell lines [ 77 , 78 ] . Tks5 is a scaffolding protein exhibiting five SH3 and one PX domains , found to be essential for invadopodia formation and function [ 77 , 78 ] . Although further work is required to fully elucidate its role , the emerging interaction protein profile of Tks5 is revealing many potentially crucial aspects of invadopodia biogenesis . For example , Tks5 binds and modulates the actin polymerization regulator N - WASP [ 79 ] and can also interact with members of the disintegrin and metalloproteinase ( ADAM ) family of proteins [ 77 ] and thus regulate protease activity at sites of ECM degradation . More recently , Tks5 has been proposed to contribute to tumor progression in vivo [ 80 ] . Proteins of the dynamin family are large GTPases with common structural features : an N - terminal GTPase domain , a middle domain , a PH domain involved in membrane binding , a GTPase effector domain ( GED ) that stimulates 142 Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 the GTPase activity and participates in self - assembly , and a C - terminal PRD that contains several SH3 - binding sites for dynamin partners [ 81 , 82 ] . Dynamins control a variety of events such as receptor - mediated endocytosis , caveolae internalization , phagocytosis and transport from the Golgi complex to the plasma membrane [ 82 – 84 ] . The ubiquitous member dynamin 2 , participates in the regulation of actin filament organization and subsequently of cell shape via cortactin as mentioned above [ 55 ] , actin comet formation [ 85 , 86 ] and formation of podosomes [ 87 ] . Dynamin 2 was recently shown to colocalize with other invadopodia markers as F - actin , cortactin and phosphotyrosine at invadopodia and found to be required for their formation and function [ 15 , 88 ] . More work is required to clarify the role of dynamin 2 , but a possible novel twist might emerge by analyzing the effects of dynamin phosphorylation by protein kinases in invadopodia formation . In fact , the use of phosphorylation mutants has uncovered a clear regulatory role of src - mediated phosphorylation of dynamin 2 in caveolin - mediated endocytosis [ 89 ] . To conclude this section , it should be mentioned that , not surprisingly , many careful studies have investigated the involvement of many components of the actin - based membrane remodeling machinery in invadpodia biogenesis . These include components of the actin nucleation machin - ery such as the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein N - WASP and the Actin - Related Protein complex Arp 2 / 3 [ 16 , 17 ] , the actin depolymerizing factor ADF / cofilin [ 17 ] and many others [ 49 , 51 , 52 , 90 , 91 ] . 4 . 3 Degradation of the ECM 4 . 3 . 1 Proteases Invadopodia were soon recognized to be proteinase - rich membrane domains through the finding that MMP2 and Seprase ( s urface expr essed prote ase ) , a large gelatin - degrading membrane - protease complex , were enriched at invadopodia and directly correlated with the invasive potential of tumoral cells ( Monsky 1993 , 1994 ) . The urokinase - type plasminogen activator ( uPA ) proteolytic system was also found to have a role at invadopodia [ 23 , 92 ] . The uPA system consists of uPA , its receptor ( uPAR ) and plasminogen ; uPA is secreted as a zymogen whose activation is accelerated by its binding to uPAR . The active uPA catalyzes the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin , which in turn degrades a variety of matrix proteins because of its broad spectrum of substrate specificities [ 93 , 94 ] . Over the years , however , it has clearly emerged that the proteolytic potential of invadopodia is mainly due to members of the matrix metalloprotease ( MMP ) family . More than 25 members have been identified that , as a group , degrade virtually all components of the ECM [ 95 , 96 ] . The MMP family can be broadly divided into the soluble - and the membrane - types . The latter are the minority and are membrane - bound proteins featuring either a single type I transmembrane domain and a short cytoplasmic stretch ( MMP14 , 15 , 16 and 24 or , alterna - tively , MT1 - , MT2 - , MT3 - and MT5 - MMP ) , a glycosphin - golipid anchor ( MMP17 and 25 or MT4 - and MT6 - MMP ) or , as an exception , a type II transmembrane domain ( MMP23 ) . MT1 - MMP plays a pivotal role in a number of physiological and pathological processes via mechanisms which go beyond the degradation of ECM components [ 96 , 97 ] . As has also emerged for protease - mediated cell invasion in general [ 98 , 99 ] , MT1 - MMP can be considered as a master regulator of invadopodia activity in diverse cell models [ 74 , 100 ] . MT1 - MMP docking to invadopodia is required for ECM degradation in melanoma cells , and over - expression [ 100 ] or knock down [ 73 ] of MT1 - MMP correlates with enhanced or depressed invadopodia formation and function , respectively . The currently accepted model for invadopodia formation postulates that invadopodia initiate as a nucleation site by accumulation of actin and cortactin at areas of cell membrane adherence to ECM . This is followed by ongoing increases in the amounts of actin and cortactin along with the appearance and increase in MT1 - MMP . The beginning of matrix degradation defines the formation of mature invadopodia , enriched in actin , cortactin , phosphotyrosine and MT1 - MMP . The dispersal of actin and cortactin results in the formation of MT1 - MMP - enriched late invadopodia capable of continuing focal degradation [ 73 ] . Although the relationship between invadopodia , their protease comple - ment and the ability to degrade the ECM is thus apparently quite straightforward with simple variations on the same theme depending on the cell type , the situation is more complex . Indeed , when invadopodia - forming cells ( e . g . A375MM melanoma , MDA - MB - 231 breast carcinoma , or others ) are cultured on an ECM layer in the presence of a reversible hydroxamate broad - spectrum metalloprotease inhibitor invadopodia do not form and therefore no degradation of the ECM occurs . Upon inhibitor washout , the cells resume the ability to form invadopodia and hence degrade the matrix [ 20 , 32 ] . This suggests that there might be a positive feed - forward loop triggering invadopodia initiation possibly mediated by ECM degradation products . 4 . 3 . 2 Membrane trafficking Metalloproteases are involved in several physiological and pathological processes . How is their activity specifically targeted to invadopodia ? One main issue that remains open with respect to the initiation and formation invadopodia is indeed that of the rapid and precise recruitment of the necessary structural and regulatory components . As above Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 143 mentioned for instance , integrins may function as docking sites to specifically recruit proteases [ 101 , 102 ] . An important role , however , might be played by the secretory pathway as the prolonged and continued degradation of the ECM at invadopodia could require an active transport of protease - delivering carriers from the Golgi area to the designated sites of ECM degradation . It remains unclear , however , how and if this transport is organized , although light is now being shed on this process . Firstly , the Golgi complex is often found close to , and oriented towards , invadopodia ( Fig . 3 . Beznoussenko , Caldieri and Buccione , unpublished ) [ 15 ] . Moreover , progression of ECM degra - dation at invadopodia is efficiently blocked with Brefeldin A ( Baldassarre , Caldieri and Buccione , unpublished ) , an inhibitor of intracellular membrane trafficking [ 103 ] . Furthermore , cortactin has been proposed as a promoter of MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 secretion and MT1 - MMP sorting to sites of ECM degradation at invadopodia [ 74 ] . In a recent study , the vesicle - tethering exocyst complex was shown to be required for matrix proteolysis and invasion of breast carcinoma cells . This occurred through the interaction of the exocyst subunits Sec3 and Sec8 with the polarity protein IQGAP1 suggesting a possible mech - anism regulating exocytosis of MT1 - MMP at invadopodia [ 42 ] . Furthermore , the finding that docking / fusion protein v - SNARE TI - VAMP / VAMP7 is also required to make MT1 - MMP available at sites of degradation [ 104 ] , further increases our understanding of the fusion machinery acting at invadopodia . 5 Open questions There are inevitably many more open questions in invadopodia biology compared to relatively mature areas of research . These questions encompass a number of critical aspects , some of which have not been explored , while others are at their infancy . A central issue will be to understand whether invadopodia are just a paradigm , albeit powerful , to study the tight interrelationships between the signaling , trafficking and cytoskeleton remodeling machin - eries ( which of course is quite important in itself ) , or whether they can be also upgraded to the status of a translational / applicative model to study the invasive pro - cess and / or novel therapeutical approaches . Other areas that need to be developed are related to basic questions , including interaction with the ECM and signaling cascades and whether invadopodia and podosomes are , or not , one and the same . Some issues have been touched upon earlier under the appropriate heading , others will be discussed below . It should also be mentioned that an international open network of laboratories is now being established , the Invadosome Consortium ( www . invadosomes . org ) , to pro - vide a framework for research on cell adhesion and tissue invasion and to promote the exchange of knowledge in this field . 5 . 1 Do invadopodia move ? The idea that the molecular trigger for invadopodia formation implies integrin ( or perhaps other adhesion receptors ) engagement by ECM components is widely accepted . It does however , imply that receptor adhesion to the substrate would limit any lateral movement of nascent invadopodia . This is confirmed by reports showing the long - term stability of invadopodia in time and space over hours [ 20 ] . Albeit logical , such a scenario is contradicted by observations leading to propose that nascent invadopodia are actively motile [ 17 ] unless one implies that their formation can be triggered by soluble ligands ( such as EGF ) , independently of integrin engagement [ 17 , 27 ] . To complicate matters further : do we have sufficient basic criteria to identify a structure as an invadopodium in the absence of observable , underlying areas of ECM degrada - tion ? This would in fact be critical to define a moving object as an invadopodium . Clearly , in terms of components invadopodia are not dramatically different from most cell adhesion structures , especially of the protrusive type . What probably determines their formation and function is a combination of timing , dosage and regulation of the various components of the molecular machineries and it is only the unique combination of form ( at the light and electron microscopy levels ) and function ( measurable degradation of the ECM ) that allows us to clearly distinguish invadopodia from other structures that otherwise , at the optical micros - copy level , might appear similar ( e . g . exocytic carriers close to the plasma membrane , endo - pinosomes , other adhesions , etc . ) . Until we have a specific protein marker ( s ) we must rely on these criteria to unambiguously identify invadopodia . 5 . 2 Podosomes vs . invadopodia Podosomes are highly dynamic , actin - rich adhesion struc - tures of monocyte - derived cells . They are involved in the adhesion to , and movement on , solid substrates , and consist of a densely packed actin core surrounded by a ring of components commonly found in focal adhesion structures [ 50 , 51 , 105 , 106 ] . A picture has now emerged suggesting that podosomes represent physiologically relevant organ - elles that contribute to the linking of the cell membrane to solid surfaces , and may be relevant for tissue invasion and matrix remodeling by controlling focal degradation of ECM and activation of MMPs [ 51 ] . Regulators of podosome formation , maintenance , and turnover include non - receptor tyrosine kinases like src and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , 144 Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 Rho GTPases ( mainly Rac1 , RhoA and Cdc42 ) , a diverse set of actin cytoskeleton modulators , but also the microtu - bule and intermediate filament cytoskeletons . Of note , the role of the latter two is virtually unexplored for invadopo - dia . Recent work has demonstrated that epithelial cells , as well as vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells can also form podosomes , and that they contain the same molecular complement as their monocytic counterparts [ 107 – 109 ] . It is thus evident that molecular , morphological and functional parameters must be applied to distinguish podosomes from invadopodia . A clear , detailed framework has been provided to help make this distinction [ 51 ] , which can be summarized in the following concepts . Podosomes are dynamic , rapidly turning - over ( 2 – 12 min ) , small ( 1× 0 . 4 µm ) , dot - like structures as opposed to the persistent ( up to 3 h ) , larger ( up to 8×5 µm ) , irregularly - shaped invadopodia . The latter are typically formed by cancer - derived cells and are less numerous ( 1 – 10 / cell ) as com - pared to podosomes ( 20 – 100 / cell ) , but more aggressive towards the substrate . 5 . 3 Validation in the real world : Introducing the third dimension Invadopodia are studied using cells on two - dimensional ( 2D ) substrata where they form below the cell body , extending a few micrometers into the ECM scaffold producing punctuate - like small lytic foci . Whether these contacts , which have been exclusively defined in cell culture systems , have related counterparts in 3 - dimensional ( 3D ) either in reconstituted ECM models or in vivo settings ( i . e . within tissues ) is incompletely defined . Thus far , no formal evidence has been obtained determining whether invadopodia have the potential to form clearings in the ECM through which the cell eventually migrates and whether the lytic zones known from 3D invasion at the leading edge [ 110 , 111 ] contain bona fide invadopodia . The identification of lytic protrusions in 3D tissue invasion , comparable to invadopodia , and the establishment of their relevance to invasive migration and ECM remodeling needs to be determined . Ultimately , one would want to know when , where , and with which consequences invadopodia contribute to 3D cell invasion and tissue remodeling . These goals will require sophisticated , state - of - the - art imaging technology including multiphoton - excited fluorescence and second harmonic detection [ 112 ] and are being currently pursued in a few laboratories . 5 . 4 Interaction with the ECM It is becoming increasingly clear that the formation of podosomes depends on the type of support that is used for the experiments , and cells respond to the contact by changing the way podosomes are formed and function [ 113 – 115 ] . Despite their close contact with the ECM substrate , it is still poorly understood whether physical and chemical ECM cues regulate invadopodia formation and function . A recent report has addressed this question by testing the effects of varying levels of physical rigidity and protein concentration on invadopodia formation and found that ECM rigidity directly increases both the number and activity of invadopodia . Furthermore , it was determined that the ECM - rigidity signals lead to the increased degrad - ing activity at invadopodia , via a myosin II - FAK / Cas pathway [ 116 ] . These data also provide an interpretive framework for the reported correlation of tissue density with cancer aggressiveness . Clearly more studies are required to address these important issues and will take advantage of the emerging technologies in artificial culture substrates such as micro - and nano - patterned glass and silicon , elastomeric surfaces and surfaces with varying levels of roughness . It should be born in mind , however , that there exist clear alterations in the spatial arrangement of ECM receptors in 2D cultures , where they are confined to the ventral surface , and in 3D cultures that allow integrin - ECM interactions along the entire cell surface . Differences in culture conditions are sufficient to induce substantial changes in cell shape , the mode of ECM adhesion , and cytoskeletal organiza - tion [ 117 ] . Chemoattractants , mechanical forces , and surface density , distribution , topography , and rigidity of the ECM all modulate cell adhesion and migration in three - dimensional ECM [ 118 ] . Hence , future studies on the role of ECM - derived cues on invadopodia should also consider these issues and include the use of 3D ECM environments , where possible . 5 . 5 Invadopodia as a model for drug discovery Potentially , biological models based on invadopodia for - mation and function provide two possible avenues for exploitation in the drug discovery / testing process . On one side , ECM degradation at invadopodia might be considered an assay to test the effects of potential lead compounds or to screen RNAi and drug libraries . This type of approach , currently in progress in some laboratories including the Authors ’ , has the added advantage of potentially accelerat - ing the biological discovery process . On the other , invadopodia could be considered as actual therapeutic targets for anti - invasion or anti - metastatic therapies , where the leading concept is that disruption of invadopodia should prove beneficial [ 90 ] . The latter approach , however , suffers somewhat for the lack of known invadopodia - specific components , but because invadopodia are not important Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 145 for cell viability , could prove successful in the long run . Clearly , this approach would greatly benefit from the ongoing studies investigating invadopodia - specific compo - nents and targets and from the validation of invadopodia in 3D settings . Acknowledgements Work from the Authors ’ laboratory was sup - ported by grants to RB from the Italian Association for Cancer Research ( AIRC , Milano , Italy ) , the European Commission ( contract LSHC - CT - 2004 - 503049 ) , the Ministero della Salute ( Ricerca finalizzata ( Art . 12 bis D . Lvo 502 / 92 ) and the Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio della Provincia di Teramo . GC was supported by a fellowship from the “ Calogero Musarra ” Foundation . References 1 . Adams , J . C . ( 2001 ) . Cell - matrix contact structures . Cell Mol Life Sci , 58 , 371 – 392 . 2 . Adams , J . C . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of protrusive and contractile cell - matrix contacts . J Cell Sci , 115 , 257 – 265 . 3 . Litjens , S . H . , de Pereda , J . M . , & Sonnenberg , A . ( 2006 ) . Current insights into the formation and breakdown of hemi - desmosomes . Trends in cell biology , 16 , 376 – 383 . 4 . Wehrle - Haller , B . , & Imhof , B . ( 2002 ) . The inner lives of focal adhesions . Trends in cell biology , 12 , 382 – 389 . 5 . Zaidel - Bar , R . , Cohen , M . , Addadi , L . , & Geiger , B . ( 2004 ) . Hierarchical assembly of cell - matrix adhesion complexes . Bio - chemical Society transactions , 32 , 416 – 420 . 6 . Friedl , P . , Entschladen , F . , Conrad , C . , Niggemann , B . , & Zanker , K . S . ( 1998 ) . CD4 + T lymphocytes migrating in three - dimensional collagen lattices lack focal adhesions and utilize beta1 integrin - independent strategies for polarization , interaction with collagen fibers and locomotion . European Journal of Immunology , 28 , 2331 – 2343 . 7 . Kelly , T . , Mueller , S . C . , Yeh , Y . , & Chen , W . T . ( 1994 ) . Invadopodia promote proteolysis of a wide variety of extracel - lular matrix proteins . J Cell Physiol , 158 , 299 – 308 . 8 . Mueller , S . C . , & Chen , W . T . ( 1991 ) . Cellular invasion into matrix beads : localization of beta 1 integrins and fibronectin to the invadopodia . J Cell Sci , 99 , 213 – 225 . 9 . Chen , W . T . ( 1989 ) . Proteolytic activity of specialized surface protrusions formed at rosette contact sites of transformed cells . J Exp Zool , 251 , 167 – 185 . 10 . Bowden , E . T . , Barth , M . , Thomas , D . , Glazer , R . I . , & Mueller , S . C . ( 1999 ) . An invasion - related complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKCmu associates with invadopodia at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Oncogene , 18 , 4440 – 4449 . 11 . Nakahara , H . , Mueller , S . C . , Nomizu , M . , Yamada , Y . , Yeh , Y . , & Chen , W . T . ( 1997 ) . Activation of beta1 integrin signaling stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP and mem - brane - protrusive activities at invadopodia . J Biol Chem , 273 , 9 – 12 . 12 . Mueller , S . C . , Yeh , Y . , & Chen , W . T . ( 1992 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of membrane proteins mediates cellular inva - sion by transformed cells . J Cell Biol , 119 , 1309 – 1325 . 13 . Monsky , W . L . , Lin , C . Y . , Aoyama , A . , Kelly , T . , Akiyama , S . K . , Mueller , S . C . , et al . ( 1994 ) . A potential marker protease of invasiveness , seprase , is localized on invadopodia of human malignant melanoma cells . Cancer research , 54 , 5702 – 5710 . 14 . Chen , W . T . ( 1996 ) . Proteases associated with invadopodia , and their role in degradation of extracellular matrix . EnzymeProtein , 49 , 59 – 71 . 15 . Baldassarre , M . , Pompeo , A . , Beznoussenko , G . , Castaldi , C . , Cortellino , S . , McNiven , M . A . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol Biol Cell , 14 , 1074 – 1084 . 16 . Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . , & Takenawa , T . ( 2002 ) . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed fibroblasts . Cancer research , 62 , 669 – 674 . 17 . Yamaguchi , H . , Lorenz , M . , Kempiak , S . , Sarmiento , C . , Coniglio , S . , Symons , M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin . J Cell Biol , 168 , 441 – 452 . 18 . Ayala , I . , Baldassarre , M . , Caldieri , G . , & Buccione , R . ( 2006 ) . Invadopodia : A guided tour . Eur J Cell Biol , 85 , 159 – 164 . 19 . Bowden , E . T . , Onikoyi , E . , Slack , R . , Myoui , A . , Yoneda , T . , Yamada , K . M . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Co - localization of cortactin and phosphotyrosine identifies active invadopodia in human breast cancer cells . Exp Cell Res , 312 , 1240 – 1253 . 20 . Baldassarre , M . , Ayala , I . , Beznoussenko , G . , Giacchetti , G . , Machesky , L . M . , Luini , A . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Actin dynamics at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Eur J Cell Biol , 85 , 1217 – 1231 . 21 . Nakahara , H . , Nomizu , M . , Akiyama , S . K . , Yamada , Y . , Yeh , Y . , & Chen , W . T . ( 1996 ) . A mechanism for regulation of melanoma invasion . Ligation of alpha6beta1 integrin by laminin G peptides . J Biol Chem , 271 , 27221 – 27224 . 22 . Mueller , S . C . , Ghersi , G . , Akiyama , S . K . , Sang , Q . X . , Howard , L . , Pineiro - Sanchez , M . , et al . ( 1999 ) . A novel protease - docking function of integrin at invadopodia . J Biol Chem , 274 , 24947 – 24952 . 23 . Artym , V . V . , Kindzelskii , A . L . , Chen , W . T . , & Petty , H . R . ( 2002 ) . Molecular proximity of seprase and the urokinase - type plasminogen activator receptor on malignant melanoma cell membranes : dependence on beta1 integrins and the cytoskeleton . Carcinogenesis , 23 , 1593 – 1601 . 24 . Deryugina , E . I . , Ratnikov , B . , Monosov , E . , Postnova , T . I . , DiScipio , R . , Smith , J . W . , et al . ( 2001 ) . MT1 - MMP initiates activation of pro - MMP - 2 and integrin alphavbeta3 promotes maturation of MMP - 2 in breast carcinoma cells . Exp Cell Res , 263 , 209 – 223 . 25 . Coopman , P . J . , Do , M . T . , Thompson , E . W . , & Mueller , S . C . ( 1998 ) . Phagocytosis of cross - linked gelatin matrix by human breast carcinoma cells correlates with their invasive capacity . ClinCancer research , 4 , 507 – 515 . 26 . Wyckoff , J . , Wang , W . , Lin , E . Y . , Wang , Y . , Pixley , F . , Stanley , E . R . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macro - phages is required for tumor cell migration in mammary tumors . Cancer research , 64 , 7022 – 7029 . 27 . Yamaguchi , H . , Pixley , F . , & Condeelis , J . ( 2006 ) . Invadopodia and podosomes in tumor invasion . Eur J Cell Biol , 85 , 213 – 218 . 28 . Hauck , C . R . , Hsia , D . A . , Ilic , D . , & Schlaepfer , D . D . ( 2002 ) . v - Src SH3 - enhanced interaction with focal adhesion kinase at beta 1 integrin - containing invadopodia promotes cell invasion . J Biol Chem , 277 , 12487 – 12490 . 29 . Rykx , A . , De Kimpe , L . , Mikhalap , S . , Vantus , T . , Seufferlein , T . , Vandenheede , J . R . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Protein kinase D : a family affair . FEBS Lett , 546 , 81 – 86 . 30 . Wang , Q . J . ( 2006 ) . PKD at the crossroads of DAG and PKC signaling . Trends Pharmacol Sci , 27 , 317 – 323 . 31 . Tague , S . E . , Muralidharan , V . , & D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2004 ) . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates tumor cell invasion through the activation of the MEK / ERK signaling pathway . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 101 , 9671 – 9676 . 32 . Ayala , I . , Baldassarre , M . , Giacchetti , G . , Caldieri , G . , Tete , S . , Luini , A . et al . ( 2008 ) . Multiple regulatory inputs converge on cortactin to control invadopodia biogenesis and extracellular matrix degradation . J Cell Sci . 146 Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 33 . Kolch , W . ( 2005 ) . Coordinating ERK / MAPK signalling through scaffolds and inhibitors . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 6 , 827 – 837 . 34 . Bokoch , G . M . ( 2003 ) . Biology of the p21 - activated kinases . Annual review of biochemistry , 72 , 743 – 781 . 35 . Kumar , R . , Gururaj , A . E . , & Barnes , C . J . ( 2006 ) . p21 - activated kinases in cancer . Nat Rev Cancer , 6 , 459 – 471 . 36 . Zhao , Z . S . , & Manser , E . ( 2005 ) . PAK and other Rho - associated kinases - effectors with surprisingly diverse mechanisms of regu - lation . Biochem J , 386 , 201 – 214 . 37 . Hall , A . ( 2005 ) . Rho GTPases and the control of cell behaviour . Biochemical Society transactions , 33 , 891 – 895 . 38 . Heasman , S . J . , & Ridley , A . J . ( 2008 ) . Mammalian Rho GTPases : new insights into their functions from in vivo studies . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 9 , 690 – 701 . 39 . Nobes , C . D . , & Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , rac and cdc42 GTPases : regulators of actin structures , cell adhesion and motility . Biochemical Society transactions , 23 , 456 – 459 . 40 . Etienne - Manneville , S . ( 2004 ) . Cdc42 - the centre of polarity . J Cell Sci , 117 , 1291 – 1300 . 41 . Nakahara , H . , Otani , T . , Sasaki , T . , Miura , Y . , Takai , Y . , & Kogo , M . ( 2003 ) . Involvement of Cdc42 and Rac small G proteins in invadopodia formation of RPMI7951 cells . Genes Cells , 8 , 1019 – 1027 . 42 . Sakurai - Yageta , M . , Recchi , C . , Le Dez , G . , Sibarita , J . B . , Daviet , L . , Camonis , J . , et al . ( 2008 ) . The interaction of IQGAP1 with the exocyst complex is required for tumor cell invasion downstream of Cdc42 and RhoA . J Cell Biol , 181 ( 6 ) , 985 – 988 . 43 . Schmidt , A . , & Hall , A . ( 2002 ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho GTPases : turning on the switch . Genes Dev , 16 , 1587 – 1609 . 44 . Zhou , K . , Wang , Y . , Gorski , J . L . , Nomura , N . , Collard , J . , & Bokoch , G . M . ( 1998 ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange factors regulate specificity of downstream signaling from Rac and Cdc42 . J Biol Chem , 273 , 16782 – 16786 . 45 . Olson , M . F . ( 1996 ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for the Rho GTPases : a role in human disease ? Journal of molecular medicine ( Berlin , Germany ) , 74 , 563 – 571 . 46 . Donaldson , J . G . , & Honda , A . ( 2005 ) . Localization and function of ArffamilyGTPases . Biochemical Society transactions , 33 , 639 – 642 . 47 . Palacios , F . , Price , L . , Schweitzer , J . , Collard , J . G . , & D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2001 ) . An essential role for ARF6 - regulated membrane traffic in adherens junction turnover and epithelial cell migration . Embo J , 20 , 4973 – 4986 . 48 . Hashimoto , S . , Onodera , Y . , Hashimoto , A . , Tanaka , M . , Hamaguchi , M . , Yamada , A . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Requirement for Arf6 in breast cancer invasive activities . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 101 , 6647 – 6652 . 49 . Buccione , R . , Orth , J . D . , & McNiven , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 5 , 647 – 657 . 50 . Gimona , M . , Buccione , R . , Courtneidge , S . A . , & Linder , S . ( 2008 ) . Assembly and biological role of podosomes and invadopodia . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 20 ( 2 ) , 235 – 241 . 51 . Linder , S . ( 2007 ) . The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends in cell biology , 17 , 107 – 117 . 52 . Stylli , S . S . , Kaye , A . H . , & Lock , P . ( 2008 ) . Invadopodia : at the cutting edge of tumour invasion . J Clin Neurosci , 15 , 725 – 737 . 53 . Cao , H . , Weller , S . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Huang , B . , Chen , J . L . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin - dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nature cell biology , 7 , 483 – 492 . 54 . Weed , S . A . , & Parsons , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin : coupling membrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene , 20 , 6418 – 6434 . 55 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , & Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J Cell Biol , 151 , 187 – 198 . 56 . Patel , A . S . , Schechter , G . L . , Wasilenko , W . J . , & Somers , K . D . ( 1998 ) . Overexpression of EMS1 / cortactin in NIH3T3 fibro - blasts causes increased cell motility and invasion in vitro . Oncogene , 16 , 3227 – 3232 . 57 . Bringuier , P . P . , Tamimi , Y . , Schuuring , E . , & Schalken , J . ( 1996 ) . Expression of cyclin D1 and EMS1 in bladder tumours ; relationship with chromosome 11q13 amplification . Oncogene , 12 , 1747 – 1753 . 58 . Schuuring , E . ( 1995 ) . The involvement of the chromosome 11q13 region in human malignancies : cyclin D1 and EMS1 are two new candidate oncogenes — a review . Gene , 159 , 83 – 96 . 59 . Hui , R . , Ball , J . R . , Macmillan , R . D . , Kenny , F . S . , Prall , O . W . , Campbell , D . H . , et al . ( 1998 ) . EMS1 gene expression in primary breast cancer : relationship to cyclin D1 and oestrogen receptor expression and patient survival . Oncogene , 17 , 1053 – 1059 . 60 . Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , Fan , Y . , Egile , C . , Li , R . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymer - ization by cortactin . Nature cell biology , 3 , 259 – 266 . 61 . van Rossum , A . G . , de Graaf , J . H . , Schuuring - Scholtes , E . , Kluin , P . M . , Fan , Y . X . , Zhan , X . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Alternative splicing of the actin binding domain of human cortactin affects cell migration . J Biol Chem , 278 , 45672 – 45679 . 62 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr Biol , 11 , 370 – 374 . 63 . Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . L . , & Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 15 , 23 – 30 . 64 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . , & Geha , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Molecular and cellular biology , 24 , 5269 – 5280 . 65 . Li , Y . , Tondravi , M . , Liu , J . , Smith , E . , Haudenschild , C . C . , Kaczmarek , M . , & Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin potentiates bone metastasis of breast cancer cells . Cancer research , 61 , 6906 – 6911 . 66 . Wu , H . , Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . , & Parsons , J . T . ( 1991 ) . Identification and characterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60src substrate . Molecular and cellu - lar biology , 11 , 5113 – 5124 . 67 . Vuori , K . , & Ruoslahti , E . ( 1995 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of p130Cas and cortactin accompanies integrin - mediated cell adhesion to extracellular matrix . J Biol Chem , 270 , 22259 – 22262 . 68 . Zhan , X . , Hu , X . , Hampton , B . , Burgess , W . H . , Friesel , R . , & Maciag , T . ( 1993 ) . Murine cortactin is phosphorylated in response to fibroblast growth factor - 1 on tyrosine residues late in the G1 phase of the BALB / c 3T3 cell cycle . J Biol Chem , 268 , 24427 – 24431 . 69 . Huang , C . , Liu , J . , Haudenschild , C . C . , & Zhan , X . ( 1998 ) . The role of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in the locomotion of endothelial cells . J Biol Chem , 273 , 25770 – 25776 . 70 . Huang , C . , Ni , Y . , Wang , T . , Gao , Y . , Haudenschild , C . C . , & Zhan , X . ( 1997 ) . Down - regulation of the filamentous actin cross - linking activity of cortactin by Src - mediated tyrosine phosphor - ylation . J Biol Chem , 272 , 13911 – 13915 . 71 . Campbell , D . H . , Sutherland , R . L . , & Daly , R . J . ( 1999 ) . Signaling pathways and structural domains required for phos - phorylation of EMS1 / cortactin . Cancer research , 59 , 5376 – 5385 . Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 147 72 . Wu , H . , & Parsons , J . T . ( 1993 ) . Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60src substrate , is a filamentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cortex . J Cell Biol , 120 , 1417 – 1426 . 73 . Artym , V . V . , Zhang , Y . , Seillier - Moiseiwitsch , F . , Yamada , K . M . , & Mueller , S . C . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic interactions of cortactin and membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase at invadopodia : defining the stages of invadopodia formation and function . Cancer research , 66 , 3034 – 3043 . 74 . Clark , E . S . , Whigham , A . S . , Yarbrough , W . G . , & Weaver , A . M . ( 2007 ) . Cortactin is an essential regulator of matrix metal - loproteinase secretion and extracellular matrix degradation in invadopodia . Cancer research , 67 , 4227 – 4235 . 75 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , & McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . A Dynamin - Cortactin - Arp2 / 3 Complex Mediates Actin Reorga - nization in Growth Factor - stimulated Cells . Mol Biol Cell , 14 , 1085 – 1096 . 76 . Schafer , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 14 , 76 – 81 . 77 . Abram , C . L . , Seals , D . F . , Pass , I . , Salinsky , D . , Maurer , L . , Roth , T . M . , & Courtneidge , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The adaptor protein fish associates with members of the ADAMs family and localizes to podosomes of Src - transformed cells . J Biol Chem , 278 , 16844 – 16851 . 78 . Seals , D . F . , Azucena Jr . , E . F . , Pass , I . , Tesfay , L . , Gordon , R . , Woodrow , M . , Resau , J . H . , et al . ( 2005 ) . The adaptor protein Tks5 / Fish is required for podosome formation and function , and for the protease - driven invasion of cancer cells . Cancer Cell , 7 , 155 – 165 . 79 . Oikawa , T . , Itoh , T . , & Takenawa , T . ( 2008 ) . Sequential signals toward podosome formation in NIH - src cells . J Cell Biol , 182 , 157 – 169 . 80 . Blouw , B . , Seals , D . F . , Pass , I . , Diaz , B . , & Courtneidge , S . A . ( 2008 ) . A role for the podosome / invadopodia scaffold protein Tks5 in tumor growth in vivo . Eur J Cell Biol , 87 , 555 – 567 . 81 . Danino , D . , & Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Dynamin family of mechanoenzymes . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 13 , 454 – 460 . 82 . McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . , & Yoon , Y . ( 2000 ) . The dynamin family of mechanoenzymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem Sci , 25 , 115 – 120 . 83 . Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2000 ) . Dynamin and Its Role in Membrane Fission . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol , 16 , 483 – 519 . 84 . Schmid , S . L . , McNiven , M . A . , & De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin and its partners : a progress report . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 10 , 504 – 512 . 85 . Lee , E . , & De Camilli , P . ( 2002 ) . From the Cover : Dynamin at actin tails . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 99 , 161 – 166 . 86 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . , & McNiven , M . A . ( 2002 ) . From the Cover : The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 99 , 167 – 172 . 87 . Ochoa , G . C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , et al . ( 2000 ) . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J Cell Biol , 150 , 377 – 389 . 88 . McNiven , M . A . , Baldassarre , M . , & Buccione , R . ( 2004 ) . The role of dynamin in the assembly and function of podosomes and invadopodia . Front Biosci , 9 , 1944 – 1953 . 89 . Shajahan , A . N . , Timblin , B . K . , Sandoval , R . , Tiruppathi , C . , Malik , A . B . , & Minshall , R . D . ( 2004 ) . Role of Src - induced dynamin - 2 phosphorylation in caveolae - mediated endocytosis in endothelial cells . J Biol Chem , 279 , 20392 – 20400 . 90 . Weaver , A . M . ( 2006 ) . Invadopodia : Specialized Cell Structures for Cancer Invasion . Clin Exp Metastasis , 23 ( 2 ) , 97 – 105 . 91 . Vignjevic , D . , & Montagnac , G . ( 2008 ) . Reorganisation of the dendritic actin network during cancer cell migration and invasion . Semin Cancer Biol , 18 , 12 – 22 . 92 . Kindzelskii , A . L . , Amhadk , I . , Keller , D . , Zhou , M . J . , Haugland , R . P . , Garni - Wagner , B . A . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Pericellular proteolysis by leukocytes and tumor cells on substrates : focal activation and the role of urokinase - type plasminogen activator . Histochem Cell Biol , 121 , 299 – 310 . 93 . Nozaki , S . , Endo , Y . , Nakahara , H . , Yoshizawa , K . , Ohara , T . , & Yamamoto , E . ( 2006 ) . Targeting urokinase - type plasminogen activator and its receptor for cancer therapy . Anticancer Drugs , 17 , 1109 – 1117 . 94 . Dano , K . , Behrendt , N . , Hoyer - Hansen , G . , Johnsen , M . , Lund , L . R . , Ploug , M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Plasminogen activation and cancer . Thromb Haemost , 93 , 676 – 681 . 95 . Egeblad , M . , & Werb , Z . ( 2002 ) . New functions for the matrix metalloproteinases in cancer progression . Nat Rev Cancer , 2 , 161 – 174 . 96 . Seiki , M . ( 2003 ) . Membrane - type 1 matrix metalloproteinase : a key enzyme for tumor invasion . Cancer Lett , 194 , 1 – 11 . 97 . Sounni , N . E . , Janssen , M . , Foidart , J . M . , & Noel , A . ( 2003 ) . Membrane type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase and TIMP - 2 in tumor angiogenesis . Matrix Biol , 22 , 55 – 61 . 98 . Holmbeck , K . , Bianco , P . , Yamada , S . , & Birkedal - Hansen , H . ( 2004 ) . MT1 - MMP : a tethered collagenase . J Cell Physiol , 200 , 11 – 19 . 99 . Seiki , M . , & Yana , I . ( 2003 ) . Roles of pericellular proteolysis by membrane type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase in cancer invasion and angiogenesis . Cancer Sci , 94 , 569 – 574 . 100 . Nakahara , H . , Howard , L . , Thompson , E . W . , Sato , H . , Seiki , M . , Yeh , Y . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Transmembrane / cytoplasmic domain - mediated membrane type 1 - matrix metalloprotease docking to invadopodia is required for cell invasion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA , 94 , 7959 – 7964 . 101 . Galvez , B . G . , Matias - Roman , S . , Yanez - Mo , M . , Sanchez - Madrid , F . , & Arroyo , A . G . ( 2002 ) . ECM regulates MT1 - MMP localization with beta1 or alphavbeta3 integrins at distinct cell compartments modulating its internalization and activity on human endothelial cells . J Cell Biol , 159 , 509 – 521 . 102 . Baciu , P . C . , Suleiman , E . A . , Deryugina , E . I . , & Strongin , A . Y . ( 2003 ) . Membrane type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) processing of pro - alphav integrin regulates cross - talk between alphavbeta3 and alpha2beta1 integrins in breast carcinoma cells . Exp Cell Res , 291 , 167 – 175 . 103 . Fujiwara , T . , Oda , K . , Yokota , S . , Takatsuki , A . , & Ikehara , Y . ( 1988 ) . Brefeldin A causes disassembly of the Golgi complex and accumulation of secretory proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum . J Biol Chem , 263 , 18545 – 18552 . 104 . Steffen , A . , Le Dez , G . , Poincloux , R . , Recchi , C . , Nassoy , P . , Rottner , K . , et al . ( 2008 ) . MT1 - MMP - Dependent Invasion Is Regulated by TI - VAMP / VAMP7 . Curr Biol , 18 , 926 – 931 . 105 . Gimona , M . , & Buccione , R . ( 2006 ) . Adhesions that mediate invasion . Int J Biochem Cell Biol , 38 , 1875 – 1892 . 106 . Linder , S . , & Aepfelbacher , M . ( 2003 ) . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of invasive cells . Trends in cell biology , 13 , 376 – 385 . 107 . Hai , C . M . , Hahne , P . , Harrington , E . O . , & Gimona , M . ( 2002 ) . Conventional protein kinase C mediates phorbol - dibutyrate - induced cytoskeletal remodeling in a7r5 smooth muscle cells . Exp Cell Res , 280 , 64 – 74 . 108 . Osiak , A . E . , Zenner , G . , & Linder , S . ( 2005 ) . Subconfluent endothelial cells form podosomes downstream of cytokine and RhoGTPase signaling . Exp Cell Res , 307 , 342 – 353 . 109 . Spinardi , L . , Rietdorf , J . , Nitsch , L . , Bono , M . , Tacchetti , C . , Way , M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A dynamic podosome - like structure of epithelial cells . Exp Cell Res , 295 , 360 – 374 . 110 . Wolf , K . , Friedl , P . ( 2008 ) . Mapping proteolytic cancer cell - extracellular matrix interfaces . Clin Exp Metastasis . 148 Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 111 . Wolf , K . , Wu , Y . I . , Liu , Y . , Geiger , J . , Tam , E . , Overall , C . , Stack , M . S . , & Friedl , P . ( 2007 ) . Multi - step pericellular proteolysis controls the transition from individual to collective cancer cell invasion . Nature cell biology , 9 , 893 – 904 . 112 . Wolf , K . , & Friedl , P . ( 2005 ) . Functional imaging of pericellular proteolysis in cancer cell invasion . Biochimie , 87 , 315 – 320 . 113 . Jurdic , P . , Saltel , F . , Chabadel , A . , & Destaing , O . ( 2006 ) . Podosome and sealing zone : specificity of the osteoclast model . Eur J Cell Biol , 85 , 195 – 202 . 114 . Burgstaller , G . , & Gimona , M . ( 2005 ) . Podosome - mediated matrix resorption and cell motility in vascular smooth muscle cells . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol , 288 , H3001 – 3005 . 115 . Saltel , F . , Destaing , O . , Bard , F . , Eichert , D . , & Jurdic , P . ( 2004 ) . Apatite - mediated actin dynamics in resorbing osteoclasts . Mol Biol Cell , 15 , 5231 – 5241 . 116 . Alexander , N . R . , Branch , K . M . , Parekh , A . , Clark , E . S . , Iwueke , I . C . , Guelcher , S . A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Extracellular Matrix Rigidity Promotes Invadopodia Activity . Curr Biol , 18 ( 17 ) , 1295 – 1299 . 117 . Beningo , K . A . , Dembo , M . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 2004 ) . Responses of fibroblasts to anchorage of dorsal extracellular matrix receptors . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 101 , 18024 – 18029 . 118 . Li , S . , Guan , J . L . , & Chien , S . ( 2005 ) . Biochemistry and biomechanics of cell motility . Annu Rev Biomed Eng , 7 , 105 – 150 . Cancer Metastasis Rev ( 2009 ) 28 : 137 – 149 149