Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy  The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2003 / 09 / 909 / 10 $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 162 , Number 5 , September 1 , 2003 909 – 918 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200305145 JCB Article 909 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 – depleted cells Alison Motley , Nicholas A . Bright , Matthew N . J . Seaman , and Margaret S . Robinson University of Cambridge , Department of Clinical Biochemistry , Cambridge Institute for Medical Research ( CIMR ) , Cambridge CB2 2XY , UK e have used RNA interference to knock down the AP - 2 (cid:2) 2 subunit and clathrin heavy chain to un - detectable levels in HeLaM cells . Clathrin - coated pits associated with the plasma membrane were still present in the AP - 2 – depleted cells , but they were 12 - fold less abundant than in control cells . No clathrin - coated pits or vesicles could be detected in the clathrin - depleted cells , and post - Golgi membrane compartments were swollen . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin was severely inhibited in both clathrin - and AP - 2 – depleted cells . Endo - W cytosis of EGF , and of an LDL receptor chimera , were also inhibited in the clathrin - depleted cells ; however , both were internalized as efﬁciently in the AP - 2 – depleted cells as in control cells . These results indicate that AP - 2 is not essential for clathrin - coated vesicle formation at the plasma membrane , but that it is one of several endocytic adaptors required for the uptake of certain cargo proteins including the transferrin receptor . Uptake of the EGF and LDL receptors may be facilitated by alternative adaptors . Introduction The AP - 2 adaptor complex has long been assumed to be essential for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . It is a major component of purified clathrin - coated vesicles , second in abundance only to clathrin itself in most coated vesicle prep - arations . It has been shown to have binding sites not only for clathrin , but also for cargo proteins and for phospholipids . The prevailing view is that clathrin - mediated endocytosis is initiated by the recruitment of AP - 2 onto the plasma mem - brane . Once on the plasma membrane , AP - 2 interacts with sorting signals in the cytoplasmic domains of membrane proteins destined to become cargo in the coated vesicle . At the same time , AP - 2 recruits clathrin onto the membrane , where it acts as a scaffold for vesicle budding . Recently , a number of accessory proteins have been identified that also participate in clathrin - mediated endocytosis , all of which bind either directly or indirectly to subunits of the AP - 2 complex . These proteins together form an interconnected network , with AP - 2 believed to be the central component ( for review see Conner and Schmid , 2003a ) . Although most of the available data are consistent with this model , there are a few discrepancies . First , the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has an AP - 2 – related complex , AP - 2R ; however , deleting genes encoding AP - 2R subunits has no apparent effect on clathrin - mediated endocytosis , or indeed , on any other pathway that has been investigated ( Yeung et al . , 1999 ) . A caveat here is that AP - 2R may not be functionally equivalent to AP - 2 in higher cells . Second , some of the accessory proteins that bind to AP - 2 have prop - erties suggesting that they may be adaptors in their own right . Epsin , (cid:3) - arrestin , AP180 / CALM , Hip1 , Dab2 , and ARH have all been shown to bind not only to AP - 2 , but also to PIP 2 and to clathrin , indicating that they may be able to bind to the plasma membrane and to recruit clathrin in an AP - 2 – independent manner ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Ford et al . , 2001 , 2002 ; Mishra et al . , 2001 , 2002a , b ) . There is also some evidence that each of these proteins may interact with a specific type of cargo . For instance , epsin has ubiquitin - interacting motifs that may help to facilitate the internalization of plasma membrane proteins like the EGF receptor , which is ubiquitinated in response to ligand binding . Dab2 and ARH are able to bind NPXY motifs , found in members of the LDL receptor family ( for review see Bonifacino and Traub , 2003 ) . Thus , an alternative view is that AP - 2 may be just one of several endocytic adaptors , and that although it participates in the network of protein – protein interactions and is required for the uptake of certain types of cargo , it is not essential for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . We asked the question , what would happen if AP - 2 were to drop out of the network ? Would clathrin and accessory proteins still be recruited onto the plasma membrane ? What would happen to receptor - mediated endocytosis ? Us - Address correspondence to Margaret S . Robinson , University of Cam - bridge , CIMR , Wellcome Trust / MRC Building , Addenbrooke’s Hospital , Hills Road , Cambridge CB2 2XY , UK . Tel . : 44 - 1223 - 330163 . Fax : 44 - 1223 - 762640 . email : msr12 @ mole . bio . cam . ac . uk Key words : coated vesicles ; adaptors ; RNA interference ; receptor - mediated endocytosis ; internalization signals Abbreviation used in this paper : siRNA , small interfering RNA . on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 910 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 5 , 2003 ing small interfering RNAs ( siRNAs ) , we have been able to knock down the expression of the (cid:2) 2 subunit of the AP - 2 complex to undetectable levels in HeLaM cells . Then , we compared the phenotype of the AP - 2 – depleted cells with that of cells treated with siRNAs directed against clathrin heavy chain . Results Depletion of AP - 2 and clathrin by RNA interference To find the most effective conditions for depleting AP - 2 and clathrin , a number of siRNAs were synthesized , and both single and double transfections were performed . We found that siRNAs (cid:2) 2 - 2 and chc - 2 ( see Materials and methods ) , directed against the AP - 2 (cid:2) 2 subunit and clathrin heavy chain , respectively , produced the most complete disruption , and that in both cases it was best to transfect the cells twice , with a 48 - h interval in between . An siRNA directed against the AP - 2 (cid:4) subunit ( (cid:4) - 2 ) also worked well , but not quite as effectively as (cid:2) 2 - 2 or chc - 2 . Fig . 1 a shows Western blots of equal protein loadings of control and siRNA - treated cells two days after the second transfection . The signals from both (cid:2) 2 and clathrin heavy chain are undetectable after knock - down , whereas a weak signal ( (cid:5) 5 % of control ) could be de - tected in the (cid:4) - 2 – treated cells . Although the (cid:2) 2 and (cid:4) siRNAs only directly affect the ex - pression of the subunit against which they were targeted , Fig . 1 b shows that levels of the other subunit were also re - duced . In contrast , depleting AP - 2 subunits has no effect on the amount of clathrin in the cell , and clathrin depletion does not affect the levels of AP - 2 ( Fig . 1 b ) . We also investi - gated whether depleting (cid:2) 2 affects the proportion of soluble versus membrane - associated (cid:4) , by centrifuging cell homoge - nates at high speed and then probing Western blots of the supernatant and pellet . Fig . 1 c shows that normally , most of the (cid:4) is in the pellet , but depleting (cid:2) 2 causes some of the protein to shift into the supernatant . These results are con - sistent with analyses of the AP - 1 and AP - 3 complexes , which show that deleting any one of the subunits decreases the sta - bility of the remaining subunits , and that the partial com - plexes that form in the absence of a particular subunit are in - active and fail to localize to membranes ( Meyer et al . , 2000 ; Peden et al . , 2002 ) . Both AP - 2 and clathrin depletion were found to slow down the growth of the cells , but we did not see any appar - ent increase in apoptosis ( unpublished data ) , although clath - rin loss has been reported to cause apoptosis in a chicken B cell line ( Wettey et al . , 2002 ) . By phase - contrast micros - copy , the (cid:2) 2 - 2 – treated cells look essentially normal ( com - pare Fig . 1 e with the control cells in Fig . 1 d ) . However , many of the chc - 2 – treated cells were found to be heavily vacuolated , and nearly half of the cells had two or more nu - clei ( Fig . 1 f ) , indicating that cytokinesis is blocked in clath - rin - depleted cells . Interestingly , a similar phenotype has been reported in clathrin - deficient Dictyostelium ( Niswonger and O’Halloran , 1997 ) . Fig . 1 ( g – n ) shows the appearance of the cells by immuno - fluorescence . In g – k , either control cells ( g ) or AP - 2 knock - down cells ( h – k ) were labeled with an antibody against the AP - 2 (cid:4) subunit . After a single transfection , the (cid:4) - adaptin la - beling was found to be very patchy in both (cid:4) - 2 – treated ( h ) and (cid:2) 2 - 2 – treated ( i ) cells ; individual spots were of approxi - mately equal intensity to those in control cells , but much fewer in number and usually occurring in clusters . After two transfections ( j and k ) , membrane - associated labeling was es - sentially undetectable in the (cid:2) 2 - 2 – treated cells , although cy - tosolic labeling of partial complexes containing the (cid:4) subunit could be seen ( k ) . The (cid:4) - 2 knockdown ( j ) was not quite so complete in that some of the cells still had residual spots after the second transfection . Clathrin knockdowns ( l – n ) caused a more uniform loss of signal . After a single transfection ( m ) , the number of clathrin - positive spots per cell was similar to controls ( l ) , but the intensity of the spots was reduced . After two transfections , clathrin labeling was essentially undetect - able ( n ) . In all three cases , virtually 100 % of the cells were af - fected by the end of the full course of treatment . Localization of other proteins in the siRNA - treated cells To find out what happens to other coat proteins in cells where one of them has been depleted , we performed triple labeling on cells treated with both (cid:2) 2 - 2 and chc - 2 siRNAs . For these experiments , we plated out equal numbers of con - trol and siRNA - treated cells onto microscope slides so the two types of cells could be viewed together in the same field , and then labeled the cells with antibodies against (cid:4) - adaptin ( blue ) , clathrin heavy chain ( red ) , and epsin 1 ( green ) . Fig . 2 shows that normally , the three proteins have overlap - ping distributions at the plasma membrane , with additional intracellular structures labeled with the clathrin antibody . Knocking down (cid:2) 2 causes a reduction in the number of epsin spots ( c ) . These spots do not contain any detectable (cid:4) - adaptin , which is now diffuse and cytosolic ( a ) . However , many of the epsin - positive spots in these cells are also positive for clathrin ( b ; insets ) , suggesting that the two proteins are able to co - assem - ble on the plasma membrane even in the absence of AP - 2 . In cells where clathrin had been depleted , AP - 2 labeling was not markedly different from control cells ( d ) . There were still multiple spots associated with the plasma membrane , often occurring in rows . These spots were also positive for epsin ( f ) . However , the epsin labeling was consistently brighter in clath - rin - depleted cells , indicating that more of the protein was as - sociated with the plasma membrane . This was confirmed by Western blotting of cell homogenates centrifuged at high speed ; in control and AP - 2 – depleted cells , epsin partitioned approximately equally between supernatant and pellet , whereas in clathrin - depleted cells , it was found almost exclusively in the pellet ( unpublished data ) . Ultrastructure of the cells To observe the phenotype of AP - 2 – and clathrin - depleted cells at the ultrastructural level , EM was performed . Fig . 3 ( a and b ) shows that control cells contain numerous clathrin - coated pits associated with the plasma membrane , indicated with the large arrowheads . A morphometric analysis ( Fig . 4 ) showed that in these cells , 0 . 6 % of the cell surface is occu - pied by clathrin - coated pits . In the AP - 2 – depleted cells ( c – e ) , clathrin - coated pits were found to be 12 - fold less abundant , occupying only 0 . 05 % of the cell surface . The morphology of the coat appears to be identical in control on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Clathrin - mediated endocytosis without AP - 2 | Motley et al . 911 Figure 1 . Effects of depleting AP - 2 and clathrin heavy chain from HeLaM cells . ( a ) Equal protein loadings of homogenates of either control cells or cells treated with siRNAs directed against clathrin heavy chain , (cid:4) - adaptin , or (cid:2) 2 were subjected to SDS - PAGE , and Western blots were probed with antibodies against the indicated protein . Clathrin heavy chain and the AP - 2 (cid:2) 2 subunit were both undetectable after knockdown , whereas a weak signal ( (cid:5) 5 % of control ) was detected after (cid:4) knockdown . ( b ) Equal protein loadings of homogenates from control and siRNA - treated cells were subjected to SDS - PAGE , and Western blots were cut in four and probed with the indicated antibody . Anti - actin was included as a loading control . As well as affecting its target , the (cid:4) siRNA causes a depletion in (cid:2) 2 , and the (cid:2) 2 siRNA causes a depletion in (cid:4) . ( c ) Homogenates of control and (cid:2) 2 - depleted cells were centrifuged at high speed , and supernatants and pellets were probed with anti - (cid:4) . Knocking down (cid:2) 2 increases the percentage of (cid:4) in the supernatant . ( d – f ) Phase - contrast micrographs of cells treated with a control ( nonfunctional ) siRNA ( d ) , cells treated with (cid:2) 2 siRNA ( e ) , and cells treated with clathrin heavy chain siRNA ( f ) . The (cid:2) 2 siRNA - treated cells look essentially normal . However , many of the clathrin heavy chain siRNA - treated cells are vacuolated , and nearly half are multinucleated . ( g – k ) Control cells ( g ) , cells treated once with (cid:4) ( h ) and (cid:2) 2 ( i ) siRNAs , and cells treated twice with (cid:4) ( j ) and (cid:2) 2 ( k ) siRNAs were labeled with an antibody against the AP - 2 (cid:4) subunit . The labeling becomes patchy after one hit , and after both hits there is little or no label associated with the plasma membrane . ( l – n ) Control cells ( l ) and cells treated once ( m ) or twice ( n ) with a clathrin heavy chain siRNA were labeled with an antibody against clathrin . The signal disappears more uniformly than the AP - 2 signal , again becoming undetectable on membranes after two hits . Bars , 20 (cid:2) m . on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 912 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 5 , 2003 and AP - 2 – depleted cells ; however , the coated pits tend to be smaller in the AP - 2 – depleted cells . In the clathrin - depleted cells , clathrin - coated pits were undetectable , and nearly all of the budding profiles that could be observed at the plasma membrane had the characteristic appearance of caveolae . We also examined intracellular membranes in the control and knockdown cells . Fig . 3 f shows the Golgi region of an AP - 2 – depleted cell , with the Golgi stack indicated ( G ) . A clathrin - coated vesicle ( arrow ) can be seen budding from a membrane on the trans side of the stack , presumably the TGN . Control cells have a similar Golgi morphology ( un - published data ) . However , in clathrin - depleted cells , there is a striking amount of swelling of post - Golgi compartments ( Fig . 3 g ) , presumably because membrane is unable to leave by the clathrin - coated vesicle route . Effects on clathrin - mediated endocytosis : transferrin receptor It has been well documented that AP - 2 is required for the up - take of cargo proteins with YXX (cid:6) - type sorting signals , such as Figure 2 . Immunofluorescence triple labeling of control and siRNA - treated cells plated together . ( a – c and g ) . Cells treated with (cid:2) 2 - 2 and control cells were labeled with mouse anti - (cid:4) - adaptin ( a ; blue in g ) , rabbit anti - clathrin ( b ; red in g ) , and goat anti - epsin 1 ( c ; green in g ) . (cid:4) - Adaptin is cytosolic in the (cid:2) 2 - depleted cells . Clathrin is still membrane - associated ; however , many of these membranes are intracellular . Epsin spots are reduced in number , but are still present in the (cid:2) 2 - depleted cells . Many of these spots are also positive for clathrin . The two boxed - in regions are shown at higher magnification in the bottom right corner of all the panels in a – c . ( d – f and h ) Cells treated with chc - 2 and control cells were labeled with mouse anti - (cid:4) - adaptin ( d ; blue in h ) , rabbit anti - clathrin ( e ; red in h ) , and goat anti - epsin ( f ; green in h ) . Clathrin is undetectable in the siRNA - treated cells . (cid:4) - Adaptin labeling is not markedly different ; however , epsin labeling is brighter in the clathrin - depleted cells . Bars , 20 (cid:2) m . on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Clathrin - mediated endocytosis without AP - 2 | Motley et al . 913 the transferrin receptor . This motif has been shown to bind to hydrophobic pockets in the (cid:2) 2 subunit ( Ohno et al . , 1995 ; Owen and Evans , 1998 ) . Mutating the signal in the transferrin receptor prevents the receptor from entering the cell by clath - rin - mediated endocytosis , causing it to be internalized 5 – 10 times more slowly ( Jing et al . , 1990 ) . Similarly , mutating the (cid:2) 2 subunit so that it can no longer bind the motif , and then overexpressing it in cells so that most of the AP - 2 complexes contain mutant rather than wild - type (cid:2) 2 , also strongly inhib - its uptake of the transferrin receptor ( Nesterov et al . , 1999 ) . Fig . 5 a shows the effects of AP - 2 and clathrin knockdown on transferrin receptor endocytosis . For these experiments , the cells were incubated at 4 (cid:7) C with 125 I - labeled transferrin to allow binding ( but not internalization ) to occur , and then were warmed to 37 (cid:7) C for various lengths of time . At the end of the incubation , the medium was harvested , surface - bound ligand was stripped off at low pH , the cells were solubilized in 1 M NaOH , and the label in all three fractions was quan - tified . The percentage of counts in the NaOH extract ( i . e . , intracellular counts ) is shown in the graph . In control cells , (cid:8) 50 % of the prebound transferrin is internalized within 5 min after warm - up , but after 10 min , the amount of intra - cellular transferrin starts to go down , as it gets recycled back into the medium . Knocking down both AP - 2 and clathrin Figure 3 . Electron micrographs of control and siRNA - treated cells . The cells in these experiments were incubated with an antibody against the transferrin receptor coupled to 8 - nm gold before fixation to monitor the effi - ciency of transferrin receptor endocytosis . ( a and b ) Control cells have abundant clathrin - coated pits ( large arrowheads ) associated with the plasma membrane . Gold particles ( small arrowheads ) can be seen in endosomes . ( c – f ) Cells were treated with (cid:2) 2 - 2 siRNA . These cells still have clathrin - coated pits associated with the plasma membrane , but when the pits were quantified by morphometry in control and AP - 2 – depleted cells , they were found to be 12 - fold less abundant in the AP - 2 – depleted cells . Morpho - logically , the coated pits are similar to those in control cells , but they tend to be smaller . Gold particles ( small arrow - heads ) remain on the cell surface . A clathrin - coated bud or vesicle in the Golgi region ( G ) is indicated with the arrow in f . ( g ) Clathrin - depleted cells have no recognizable clathrin - coated pits or vesicles , either at the plasma membrane or on intracellular membranes , although COP - coated vesicles can still be seen on the cis side of the Golgi stack . In addition , membranes on the trans side of the Golgi stack are swollen . Bar , 500 nm . on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 914 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 5 , 2003 causes a profound inhibition of transferrin uptake . In both cases , the transferrin never accumulates inside the cells , but remains primarily on the cell surface , where it slowly dissoci - ates into the medium . Even after 30 min , (cid:5) 10 % of the transferrin is recovered in the intracellular fraction . Thus , as expected , both AP - 2 and clathrin are required for efficient internalization of the transferrin receptor . EGF receptor The behavior of the EGF receptor was less predictable . This receptor has a YXX (cid:6) consensus sequence in its cytoplasmic tail , which binds to (cid:2) 2 in vitro ( Owen and Evans , 1998 ) , and which acts as an internalization signal when trans - planted onto other proteins ( Chang et al . , 1993 ) . Surpris - ingly , however , mutating this sequence does not change the internalization rate of the receptor ( Nesterov et al . , 1995 ; Sorkin et al . , 1996 ) . In addition , EGF receptor endocytosis was found to proceed normally in cells expressing mutant (cid:2) 2 ( Nesterov et al . , 1999 ) . These observations indicate that the receptor must have another signal ( or signals ) for en - docytosis , and there is increasing evidence that ubiquitin may be that signal ( Haglund et al . , 2003 ) . However , it has not yet been tested whether EGF internalization is really in - dependent of AP - 2 , because the cells expressing mutant (cid:2) 2 still contained normal levels of AP - 2 , which was recruited normally onto the plasma membrane ( Nesterov et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , it is possible that the EGF receptor may bind to an - other part of AP - 2 , and / or that AP - 2 may be necessary for coat assembly . Fig . 5 b shows a similar experiment to the one shown in Fig . 5 a , but using 125 I - labeled EGF as the ligand . In control cells , EGF is internalized slightly more slowly than transfer - rin , but by 10 min , (cid:8) 50 % of the label is intracellular . Figure 4 . Morphometric analysis of the EM data , using 128 images of each condition . For the control cells , 7 , 630 plasma membrane intersections were scored , of which 45 were coated pit intersections ( 0 . 6 % ) . For the (cid:2) 2 - 2 – treated cells , 11 , 361 plasma membrane intersections were scored , of which six were coated pit intersections ( 0 . 05 % ) . For the chc - 2 – treated cells , 7 , 585 plasma membrane inter - sections were scored , of which none were coated pit intersections . Figure 5 . Kinetics of ligand uptake in control and siRNA - treated cells . ( a ) Cells were allowed to bind 125 I - labeled transferrin at 4 (cid:7) C , and were then shifted to 37 (cid:7) C for the indicated length of time , after which the medium was harvested , ligand remaining on the cell surface was released with an acid wash , the cells were solubilized with NaOH , and all three fractions were quantified and expressed as a percentage of total counts / m . The graph shows percentage of total counts recovered in the NaOH extract ( i . e . , internalized transferrin ) . Each point is derived from at least three separate experiments ; the error bars show the SEM . Both (cid:2) 2 - and clathrin - depleted cells are strongly impaired in their ability to internalize transferrin . ( b ) Cells were treated exactly as in a , but using 125 I - labeled EGF . Uptake is strongly inhibited in the clathrin - depleted cells , but it is not significantly different from control in the (cid:2) 2 - depleted cells . ( c ) Cells expressing a chimera consisting of the CD8 extracellular and lumenal domains fused to the LDL receptor cytoplasmic tail were incubated at 4 (cid:7) C with an mAb against CD8 followed by 125 I - labeled protein A , and were then shifted to 37 (cid:7) C and treated as in a and b . Again , uptake is strongly inhibited in the clathrin - depleted cells , but similar to controls in the (cid:2) 2 - depleted cells . Virtually identical results were obtained using (cid:4) - depleted cells , except that the effect on transferrin uptake was not quite so profound , presumably because the knockdown was less complete ( not depicted ) . on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Clathrin - mediated endocytosis without AP - 2 | Motley et al . 915 Knocking down clathrin strongly inhibits the receptor - me - diated endocytosis of EGF . Strikingly , however , knocking down AP - 2 has no significant effect on EGF uptake . The rate of accumulation of intracellular EGF is virtually identi - cal in control and AP - 2 – depleted cells . LDL receptor There is currently some controversy as to how the LDL re - ceptor’s internalization signal actually works . This signal has been reported to bind to several coat components , including the (cid:2) 2 subunit of AP - 2 ( Boll et al . , 2002 ) , clathrin ( Kibbey et al . , 1998 ) , and proteins with phosphotyrosine - binding domains like Dab2 and ARH ( Mishra et al . , 2002a , b ) . Ini - tially , we attempted to monitor receptor internalization us - ing 125 I - labeled LDL , but these experiments were compli - cated by the very rapid dissociation of the ligand from its receptor in HeLa cells ( see Materials and methods ) . There - fore , we stably transfected the cells with a construct consist - ing of the extracellular and transmembrane domains of CD8 fused to the LDL receptor tail , then assayed for internaliza - tion following a similar protocol to the one just mentioned , but with anti - CD8 followed by 125 I - labeled protein A as the ligand . Fig . 5 c shows that in control cells , the LDL receptor chimera is efficiently internalized , and that knocking down clathrin strongly inhibits uptake . However , knocking down AP - 2 again has no effect on the rate of endocytosis of the protein . Thus , out of the three transmembrane proteins that we have analyzed in siRNA - treated HeLa cells , two are inter - nalized in an AP - 2 – independent manner . Discussion In this work , we have knocked down both clathrin heavy chain and the AP - 2 (cid:2) 2 subunit to undetectable levels using siRNAs . Remarkably , we find that clathrin - mediated en - docytosis can still occur in the absence of any detectable AP - 2 at the plasma membrane . Although we cannot rule out the possibility that trace amounts of AP - 2 may contribute to en - docytosis in the siRNA - treated cells , it is clear that AP - 2 is not an essential structural component of the coat , as had al - ways been assumed . A similar conclusion has been reached by Conner and Schmid ( 2003b , in this issue ) , who used a different approach to inactivate AP - 2 , and also found that effects on clathrin - mediated endocytosis were cargo - specific . This means that there must be other proteins in the cell that can fulfill the role that had always been assigned to AP - 2 . These proteins cannot completely replace AP - 2 , because the number of coated pits per cell is reduced by 12 - fold in AP - 2 – depleted cells , and clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the transferrin receptor is abolished . In addition , others have shown that mutations in the AP - 2 (cid:4) subunit in Drosophila cause either embryonic lethality or neurological defects , de - pending on the allele ( Gonzalez - Gaitan and Jackle , 1997 ) . However , we find that both the EGF receptor and the LDL receptor chimera are internalized just as efficiently in AP - 2 – depleted cells as in control cells , presumably by mak - ing use of alternative adaptors . Over the last several years , a number of reports have been published that challenge the view that all cargo proteins are endocytosed by the same molecular mechanism . Marks et al . ( 1996 ) showed that overexpression of constructs with either YXX (cid:6) or dileucine internalization signals causes endoge - nous proteins with the same signal to accumulate on the cell surface , but endogenous proteins with the other signal are still endocytosed normally . They concluded that the two sig - nals were competing for two distinct components of the en - docytic machinery . However , they could not rule out the possibility that both of these components were part of the AP - 2 complex , and indeed , subsequent reports showed that dileucine signals can also bind to AP complexes , most likely through their (cid:3) subunits ( for review see Bonifacino and Traub , 2003 ) . Warren et al . ( 1998 ) used a similar approach to show that the transferrin , EGF , and LDL receptors do not compete with each other for internalization . They sug - gested that although AP - 2 interactions might be necessary for the internalization of some cargo proteins , other cargo proteins could be interacting with other components of the coat . However , until now , it has not been possible to test these ideas by specifically depleting different coat compo - nents from the cell . The approach that we have used in the present paper should be widely applicable for looking at the internalization of other transmembrane proteins , to determine whether or not their endocytosis is dependent on AP - 2 . So far , most functional analyses of the roles of various proteins in clath - rin - mediated endocytosis have made use of dominant - nega - tive mutants ( for review see Conner and Schmid , 2003a ) , but these may lead to indirect effects ( e . g . , overexpressing a truncated version of a particular protein may impede inter - actions involving other components of the coated pit ) . RNA interference is a much cleaner way of testing the function of a protein because it removes the protein instead of altering it and adding it back in excess amounts . The CD8 chimera system may be especially useful , because theoretically , one could transplant the cytoplasmic tail from any type I mem - brane protein , or an artificial tail designed to test a potential internalization signal , onto the CD8 reporter , and then assay for uptake using reagents that are commercially available . Fig . 6 is a schematic diagram summarizing our results and how we interpret them . Normally , clathrin , AP - 2 , and alter - native adaptors all co - assemble at the plasma membrane , bringing cargo with different types of internalization signals into the coated pit . In the absence of AP - 2 , alternative adap - tors are still recruited onto the plasma membrane , where they interact with a subset of the cargo proteins , including the EGF and LDL receptors , and co - assemble with clathrin . These cargo proteins are still efficiently internalized , but cargo proteins like the transferrin receptor , which can only interact with AP - 2 , stay on the cell surface . In addition , be - cause AP - 2 is the major clathrin adaptor at the plasma mem - brane , there is less clathrin recruited onto the membrane and fewer ( and perhaps smaller ) coated pits per cell . In the ab - sence of clathrin , both AP - 2 and alternative adaptors are still recruited onto the plasma membrane , where they interact with each other and most likely with potential cargo pro - teins as well , but there are no morphologically recognizable coated pits , and all of the cargo proteins are internalized much more slowly . Several recent papers provide insights into the identity of these alternative adaptors . In particular , Traub and col - on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 916 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 5 , 2003 leagues have shown that a number of the endocytic accessory proteins , including epsin , Hip1 , Dab2 , and ARH , can bind to plasma membrane lipids and to clathrin , and they have proposed that these proteins may , in fact , be cargo - selective clathrin adaptors ( Mishra et al . , 2001 , 2002a , b ) . However , they hypothesize that the role of these proteins is to “poten - tiate AP - 2 – driven coat formation” ( Mishra et al . , 2002a ) , whereas the present paper suggests that alternative adaptors may , in fact , be just as capable of driving coat formation as AP - 2 . This makes mammalian cells much more similar to yeast in this regard than had previously been suspected . S . cerevisiae can still carry out most of its clathrin - mediated trafficking even when all three of its AP complexes are ab - sent ( Huang et al . , 1999 ; Yeung et al . , 1999 ) , presumably because most of its cargo proteins do not depend on YXX (cid:6) motifs . Ubiquitin appears to be the major endocytic signal in yeast , and there is some evidence that it is recognized by the epsin orthologues Ent1p and Ent2p ( Shih et al . , 2002 ; Aguilar et al . , 2003 ) . Mammalian epsins may play a similar role , capturing ubiquitinated cargo proteins like the acti - vated EGF receptor . ARH and Dab2 are both good candi - dates for cargo - specific adaptors for the LDL receptor , and may be functionally redundant because mutations in either gene alone do not block LDL uptake ( Mishra et al . , 2002b ) . By using RNA interference to deplete these and other candi - date adaptors from cells ( either alone or in combination ) and then monitoring the internalization of different mem - brane proteins , it should be possible to match each of the al - ternative adaptors with its respective cargo . Materials and methods siRNA knockdowns HeLaM cells ( Tiwari et al . , 1987 ) were seeded at a density of 10 6 cells per 9 - cm dish . At least 2 h after seeding the cells , the first transfection was per - formed . For each 9 - cm dish , 50 (cid:2) l OligofectAMINE™ ( Invitrogen ) was added to 100 (cid:2) l Opti - MEM ® I ( Life Technologies ) , and the solution was in - cubated at RT for 5 – 10 min . This was then added to a second solution or 800 (cid:2) l Opti - MEM ® I plus 50 (cid:2) l 20 (cid:2) M siRNA , and the mixture was incu - bated at RT for 15 – 20 min . Next , 4 ml Opti - MEM ® I was added to the siRNA mixture to make a final volume of 5 ml , and this was added to the cells after rinsing them once with Opti - MEM ® I . The transfection mixture was left for 4 h on the cells , after which 5 ml DME containing 20 % FCS without antibiotics was added , and the cells were left in this mixture until they were trypsinized the following day . Two transfections were per - formed , on d 0 and d 2 . The cells were trypsinized 24 h after each transfec - tion and were seeded into two 9 - cm dishes for the second transfection , whereas after the second transfection , they were plated onto coverslips or 35 - mm dishes for uptake assays . For each experiment , an extra 35 - mm dish was used to assay efficiency of knockdown . Two independent siRNAs were used to investigate the effects of knock - down of each target . For AP - 2 , the targets were the (cid:4) and (cid:2) 2 subunits of the complex . The (cid:4) - 2 siRNA target sequence was AAGAGCAUGUG - CACGCUGGCCA and the (cid:2) 2 - 2 target sequence was AAGUGGAUGCCU - UUCGGGUCA ( other sequences , designated (cid:4) - 1 and (cid:2) 2 – 1 , were in - effective ) . The clathrin heavy chain target sequences were AAG - CUGGGAAAACUCUUCAGA ( chc - 1 ) and UAAUCCAAUUCGAAGAC - CAAU ( chc - 2 ) . The control siRNA was a nonfunctional oligo , (cid:2) 2 – 1 , origi - nally designed to knock down the (cid:2) 2 subunit , target sequence AACACAG - CAACCUCUACUUGG . All siRNAs were designed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and were synthesized as Option C siRNAs by Dharmacon , Inc . Immunofluorescence and Western blotting Antibodies used for immunofluorescence included an affinity - purified rabbit polyclonal antiserum directed against clathrin heavy chain ( Simp - son et al . , 1996 ) ; a mouse monoclonal anti - (cid:4) - adaptin , AP . 6 , provided by Frances Brodsky ( University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA ) ; and a commercially available goat anti - epsin 1 ( Santa Cruz Biotech - nology , Inc . ) . Secondary antibodies were all purchased from Molecular Probes , Inc . For Western blotting , (cid:4) and (cid:2) 2 subunits of AP - 2 were de - tected using mouse monoclonal antibodies from Transduction Laborato - ries , clathrin heavy chain was detected using the same rabbit antibody that was used for immunofluorescence , and actin was detected using a rabbit antibody from Sigma - Aldrich . Incubations with the mouse anti - bodies were followed by an incubation with rabbit anti – mouse immuno - globulin ( DakoCytomation ) . The blots were then probed with 125 I - labeled protein A ( Amersham Biosciences ) . EM Cells to be used for EM were first fed with mouse anti - transferrin receptor B3 / 25 conjugated to 8 - nm gold , a gift from Colin Hopkins and Liz Alichin ( Imperial College London , London , UK ) . The cells were incubated with the antibody – gold conjugate for 30 min at 4 (cid:7) C , followed by a 10 - min chase at 37 (cid:7) C . They were then fixed in tissue culture dishes by adding double - strength fixative ( 5 % glutaraldehyde and 4 % PFA in 0 . 2 M sodium cacody - late , pH 7 . 2 , containing 6 mM CaCl 2 ) to an equal volume of tissue culture Figure 6 . Model showing interactions at the plasma membrane in control and siRNA - treated cells . In control cells , AP - 2 and alternative adaptors are both recruited onto the plasma membrane , where they interact with each other and recruit clathrin through interactions mainly involving their flexible linker and appendage domains , whereas their more highly structured domains interact with phos - phoinositides and with cargo . In AP - 2 – depleted cells , only alternative adaptors are recruited onto the plasma membrane , but these can still associate with each other ( e . g . , through EH domain – NPF inter - actions and SH3 domain – proline - rich domain interactions ) , and can still recruit clathrin and bring a subset of cargo proteins into the coated pit . However , without AP - 2 there is less clathrin on the plasma membrane and fewer coated pits per cell , and cargo proteins that only have signals for AP - 2 do not get internalized into coated vesicles . In clathrin - depleted cells , AP - 2 and alternative adaptors are both recruited onto the plasma membrane , where they interact with each other and with cargo , but the membrane does not invagi - nate and there is no selective uptake of cargo . on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Clathrin - mediated endocytosis without AP - 2 | Motley et al . 917 medium for 2 min at 37 (cid:7) C . This solution was aspirated off and replaced by 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde and 2 % PFA in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , containing 3 mM CaCl 2 . The cells were fixed for a further 3 h at RT , washed with 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , and post - fixed with 1 % osmium tetroxide in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , for 1 h . The cells were scraped from the dish and pelleted , and the pellet was washed with 0 . 05 M sodium maleate buffer , pH 5 . 2 , and en bloc stained with 0 . 5 % uranyl acetate in 0 . 05 M sodium maleate buffer . The cell pellets were dehydrated in ethanol , exchanged into 1 , 2 - epoxy propane , and em - bedded in Araldite CY212 epoxy resin ( Agar Scientific ) . 50 - nm ultrathin sections were cut using a diamond knife mounted on an ultramicrotome ( Reichert Ultracut S ; Leica ) , collected onto formvar / carbon - coated EM grids , and stained with uranyl acetate and Reynolds lead citrate ( Reynolds , 1963 ) . The sections were observed in a transmis - sion electron microscope ( model CM 100 ; Philips ) at an operating volt - age of 80 kV . For quantification of the percentage of plasma membrane occupied by coated pits , cell pellets were randomly sectioned and oriented in the elec - tron microscope . Grids were systematically scanned at a magnification of 13 , 500 , and 128 images of each condition were captured using a camera ( Megaview II TEM ; Soft Imaging System ) . A 500 - nm lattice overlay was used to score intersections with the plasma membrane and coated pits ( Weibel , 1979 ; Griffiths , 1993 ) using analySIS ® 3 . 0 image analytical software . Internalization assays Ligand uptake assays were performed on cells seeded onto 35 - mm dishes on the day preceding the experiment . On the day of the experiment , the dishes were placed on ice and were washed briefly with prechilled se - rum - free medium ( SFM ; DME and 20 mM Hepes containing 1 % BSA ) . The cells were then incubated on a rocker for 30 min at 4 (cid:7) C in 0 . 6 ml SFM containing either 125 I - labeled EGF or 125 I - labeled transferrin ( both obtained from PerkinElmer ) at a concentration of 500 nCi / ml . The dishes were washed six times with ice - cold SFM , and the surface counts were collected for the zero time point by incubating the cells for 5 min at 4 (cid:7) C in 0 . 8 ml ice - cold acid wash ( 0 . 2 M acetic acid and 0 . 5 M NaCl ) , fol - lowed by a brief rinse with another 0 . 8 - ml acid wash . The other dishes were incubated with 1 . 5 ml prewarmed medium ( DME containing 10 % FCS ) at 37 (cid:7) C for various times . Endocytosis was stopped by placing the cells on ice , collecting the medium , and rinsing the cells with ice - cold SFM . Label associated with the cell surface was then collected by acid wash , as above . Finally , the intracellular fraction was collected by ex - tracting the cells twice with 0 . 8 ml 1 M NaOH . The radioactivity in the medium , acid wash , and NaOH extract was quantified using a gamma counter ( Nuclear Enterprises ) . We also attempted to follow the fate of 125 I - labeled LDL , but found that (cid:8) 50 % of the prebound ligand dissociated within the first few minutes of warm - up . Therefore , we made use of HeLaM cells expressing a chimera of the extracellular and transmembrane domain of CD8 fused to the tail do - main of the LDL receptor . Human CD8 cDNA in pBlueScript ® was a gift from Gudrun Ihrke ( University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK ; Ihrke et al . , 2001 ) . The cytoplasmic tail of the mouse LDL receptor ( from the arginine residue at position 813 ) was amplified by PCR from an EST ( Clone ID 2581960 ; GenBank / EMBL / DDBJ accession no . gi6519196 ) obtained from the I . M . A . G . E . Consortium , incorporating an AflII site into the 5 (cid:9) end . The resulting fragment was ligated to the AflII site at the end of the transmem - brane domain coding sequence of CD8 , and the chimera was cloned into pIRES2Neo ( CLONTECH Laboratories , Inc . ) . The construct was sequenced to confirm that a correct in - frame fusion had been achieved , and was then transfected into HeLaM cells . Stably transfected cells were selected and maintained in the presence of 500 (cid:2) g / ml G418 ( GIBCO BRL ) . To monitor uptake of the chimera , the cells were treated as above , but incubated with SFM containing 1 : 100 diluted anti - CD8 ( 153 – 020 ; Ancell Corp . ) instead of with a radiolabeled ligand , and the incubation was for 45 min at 4 (cid:7) C instead of for 30 min . The cells were then washed and incu - bated for a further 45 min at 4 (cid:7) C with SFM containing 125 I - labeled protein A ( 1 : 1 , 000 diluted ; Amersham Biosciences ) . The rest of the experiment was performed exactly as above . We thank Mark Marsh ( University College London , London , UK ) for shar - ing unpublished data and reagents and Colin Hopkins and Liz Allchin for the B3 / 25 - gold conjugate . We also thank Paul Lehner ( Cambridge Institute for Medical Research , Cambridge , UK ) for the HeLaM cells , Howard Davidson for the chc - 1 siRNA sequence , Gudrun Ihrke for the CD8 cDNA , and Frances Brodsky for the AP . 6 antibody . We are grateful to Paul Luzio , John Kilmartin , David Owen , and members of the Robinson lab for reading the manuscript and for helpful discussions . This work was supported by grants from the Wellcome Trust ( grant 053316 / Z / 98 to M . S . Robinson ) and the Medical Research Council ( grant G9310915 to M . S . Robinson and J . P . Luzio ) . Submitted : 30 May 2003 Accepted : 24 July 2003 References Aguilar , R . C . , H . A . Watson , and B . Wendland . 2003 . The yeast Epsin Ent1 is re - cruited to membranes through multiple independent interactions . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 10737 – 10743 . Boll , W . , I . Rapoport , C . Brunner , Y . Modis , S . Prehn , and T . Kirchhausen . 2002 . The mu2 subunit of the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 binds to FDNPVY and Ypp (cid:6) sorting signals at distinct sites . Traffic . 3 : 590 – 600 . Bonifacino , J . S . , and L . M . Traub . 2003 . Signals for sorting of transmembrane pro - teins to endosomes and lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Biochem . In press . Chang , C . P . , C . S . Lazar , B . J . Walsh , M . Komuro , J . F . Collawn , L . A . Kuhn , J . A . Tainer , I . S . Trowbridge , M . G . Farquhar , M . G . Rosenfeld , et al . 1993 . Ligand - induced internalization of the epidermal growth factor receptor is mediated by multiple endocytic codes analogous to the tyrosine motif found in constitutively internalized receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 19312 – 19320 . Conner , S . D . , and S . L . Schmid . 2003a . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature . 422 : 37 – 44 . Conner , S . D . , and S . L . Schmid . 2003b . Differential requirements for AP2 in clath - rin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 773 – 779 . Ford , M . G . , B . M . Pearse , M . K . Higgins , Y . Vallis , D . J . Owen , A . Gibson , C . R . Hopkins , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMahon . 2001 . Simultaneous binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation of clathrin lattices on membranes . Science . 291 : 1051 – 1055 . Ford , M . G . , I . G . Mills , B . J . Peter , Y . Vallis , G . J . Praefcke , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMahon . 2002 . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature . 419 : 361 – 366 . Gaidarov , I . , J . G . Krupnick , J . R . Falck , J . L . Benovic , and J . H . Keen . 1999 . Arres - tin function in G protein - coupled receptor endocytosis requires phospho - inositide binding . EMBO J . 18 : 871 – 881 . Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . , and H . Jackle . 1997 . Role of Drosophila alpha - adaptin in pre - synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell . 88 : 767 – 776 . Griffiths , G . 1993 . Fine Structure Immunocytochemistry . Springer - Verlag , Heidelberg , Germany . 459 pp . Haglund , K . , S . Sigismund , S . Polo , I . Szymkiewicz , P . P . Di Fiore , and I . Dikic . 2003 . Multiple monoubiquitination of RTKs is sufficient for their endocy - tosis and degradation . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 : 461 – 466 . Huang , K . M . , K . D’Hondt , H . Riezman , and S . K . Lemmon . 1999 . Clathrin func - tions in the absence of heterotetrameric adaptors and AP180 - related proteins in yeast . EMBO J . 18 : 3897 – 3908 . Ihrke , G . , J . R . Bruns , J . P . Luzio , and O . A . Weisz . 2001 . Competing sorting signals guide endolyn along a novel route to lysosomes in MDCK cells . EMBO J . 20 : 6256 – 6264 . Jing , S . Q . , T . Spencer , K . Miller , C . Hopkins , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1990 . Role of the human transferrin receptor cytoplasmic domain in endocytosis : localiza - tion of a specific signal sequence for internalization . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 283 – 294 . Kibbey , R . G . , J . Rizo , L . M . Gierasch , and R . G . Anderson . 1998 . The LDL recep - tor clustering motif interacts with the clathrin terminal domain in a reverse turn conformation . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 59 – 67 . Marks , M . S . , L . Woodruff , H . Ohno , and J . S . Bonifacino . 1996 . Protein targeting by tyrosine - and di - leucine - based signals : evidence for distinct saturable components . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 341 – 354 . Meyer , C . , D . Zizioli , S . Lausmann , E . L . Eskelinen , J . Hamann , P . Saftig , K . von Figura , and P . Schu . 2000 . mu1A - adaptin - deficient mice : lethality , loss of AP - 1 binding and rerouting of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors . EMBO J . 19 : 2193 – 2203 . Mishra , S . K . , N . R . Agostinelli , T . J . Brett , I . Mizukami , T . S . Ross , and L . M . Traub . 2001 . Clathrin - and AP - 2 - binding sites in HIP1 uncover a general assembly role for endocytic accessory proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 46230 – 46236 . Mishra , S . K . , P . A . Keyel , M . J . Hawryluk , N . R . Agostinelli , S . C . Watkins , and L . M . Traub . 2002a . Disabled - 2 exhibits the properties of a cargo - selective endocytic clathrin adaptor . EMBO J . 21 : 4915 – 4926 . Mishra , S . K . , S . C . Watkins , and L . M . Traub . 2002b . The autosomal recessive hy - percholesterolemia ( ARH ) protein interfaces directly with the clathrin - coat on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 918 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 162 , Number 5 , 2003 machinery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 99 : 16099 – 16104 . Nesterov , A . , H . S . Wiley , and G . N . Gill . 1995 . Ligand - induced endocytosis of epi - dermal growth factor receptors that are defective in binding adaptor pro - teins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 8719 – 8723 . Nesterov , A . , R . E . Carter , T . Sorkina , G . N . Gill , and A . Sorkin . 1999 . Inhibition of the receptor - binding function of clathrin adaptor protein AP - 2 by domi - nant - negative mutant mu2 subunit and its effects on endocytosis . EMBO J . 18 : 2489 – 2499 . Niswonger , M . L . , and T . J . O’Halloran . 1997 . A novel role for clathrin in cytokine - sis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 8575 – 8578 . Ohno , H . , J . Stewart , M . C . Fournier , H . Bosshart , I . Rhee , S . Miyatake , T . Saito , A . Gallusser , T . Kirchhausen , and J . S . Bonifacino . 1995 . Interaction of tyro - sine - based sorting signals with clathrin - associated proteins . Science . 269 : 1872 – 1875 . Owen , D . J . , and P . R . Evans . 1998 . A structural explanation for the recognition of tyrosine - based endocytic signals . Science . 282 : 1327 – 1332 . Peden , A . A . , R . E . Rudge , W . W . Lui , and M . S . Robinson . 2002 . Assembly and function of AP - 3 complexes in cells expressing mutant subunits . J . Cell Biol . 156 : 327 – 336 . Reynolds , E . S . 1963 . The use of lead citrate at high pH as an electron opaque stain in electron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 17 : 208 – 212 . Shih , S . C . , D . J . Katzmann , J . D . Schnell , M . Sutanto , S . D . Emr , and L . Hicke . 2002 . Epsins and Vps27p / Hrs contain ubiquitin - binding domains that function in receptor endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 389 – 393 . Simpson , F . , N . A . Bright , M . A . West , L . S . Newman , R . B . Darnell , and M . S . Rob - inson . 1996 . A novel adaptor - related protein complex . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 749 – 760 . Sorkin , A . , M . Mazzotti , T . Sorkina , L . Scotto , and L . Beguinot . 1996 . Epidermal growth factor receptor interaction with clathrin adaptors is mediated by the Tyr974 - containing internalization motif . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 13377 – 13384 . Tiwari , R . K . , J . Kusari , and G . C . Sen . 1987 . Functional equivalents of interferon - mediated signals needed for induction of an mRNA can be generated by double - stranded RNA and growth factors . EMBO J . 6 : 3373 – 3378 . Warren , R . A . , F . A . Green , P . E . Stenberg , and C . A . Enns . 1998 . Distinct saturable pathways for the endocytosis of different tyrosine motifs . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 17056 – 17063 . Weibel , E . W . 1979 . Stereological Methods . Vol 1 : Practical Methods for Biological Morphometry . Academic Press , London . 415 pp . Wettey , F . R . , S . F . Hawkins , A . Stewart , J . P . Luzio , J . C . Howard , and A . P . Jack - son . 2002 . Controlled elimination of clathrin heavy - chain expression in DT40 lymphocytes . Science . 297 : 1521 – 1525 . Yeung , B . G . , H . L . Phan , and G . S . Payne . 1999 . Adaptor complex - independent clathrin function in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 3643 – 3659 . on M a y 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published September 2 , 2003