This article was downloaded by : [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] On : 30 April 2014 , At : 06 : 07 Publisher : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ( INFORMS ) INFORMS is located in Maryland , USA Organization Science Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design : The Isolation of Subgroups and Organizational Learning Christina Fang , Jeho Lee , Melissa A . Schilling , To cite this article : Christina Fang , Jeho Lee , Melissa A . Schilling , ( 2010 ) Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design : The Isolation of Subgroups and Organizational Learning . Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) : 625 - 642 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1090 . 0468 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used only for the purposes of research , teaching , and / or private study . Commercial use or systematic downloading ( by robots or other automatic processes ) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval . For more information , contact permissions @ informs . org . The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy , completeness , merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , or non - infringement . Descriptions of , or references to , products or publications , or inclusion of an advertisement in this article , neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee , endorsement , or support of claims made of that product , publication , or service . Copyright © 2010 , INFORMS Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research , management science , and analytics . For more information on INFORMS , its publications , membership , or meetings visit http : / / www . informs . org Organization Science Vol . 21 , No . 3 , May – June 2010 , pp . 625 – 642 issn 1047 - 7039 (cid:2) eissn 1526 - 5455 (cid:2) 10 (cid:2) 2103 (cid:2) 0625 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1090 . 0468 ©2010 INFORMS Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design : The Isolation of Subgroups and Organizational Learning Christina Fang Stern School of Business , New York University , New York , New York 10012 , cfang @ stern . nyu . edu Jeho Lee KAIST Business School , Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology , Dongdaemun - gu , Seoul 190 - 102 , Korea , jlee @ business . kaist . ac . kr Melissa A . Schilling Stern School of Business , New York University , New York , New York 10012 , mschilli @ stern . nyu . edu T he classic trade - off between exploration and exploitation in organizational learning has attracted vigorous attention by researchers over the last two decades . Despite this attention , however , the question of how ﬁrms can better maintain the balance of exploration and exploitation remains unresolved . Drawing on a wide range of research on population and organization structure , we argue that an organization divided into semi - isolated subgroups may help strike this balance . We simulate such an organization , systematically varying the interaction pattern between individuals to explore how the degree of subgroup isolation and intergroup connectivity inﬂuences organizational learning . We also test this model with a range of contingency variables highlighted in the management research . We ﬁnd that moderate levels of cross - group linking lead to the highest equilibrium performance by enabling superior ideas to diffuse across groups without reducing organizational diversity too quickly . This ﬁnding is remarkably resilient to a wide range of variance in factors such as problem complexity , environmental dynamism , and personnel turnover . Key words : interpersonal networks ; exploration and exploitation ; organizational learning ; diffusion History : Published online in Articles in Advance October 7 , 2009 . 1 . Introduction In 1991 , James March published a now - seminal paper on organization learning that sparked vigorous interest in the trade - off between exploration and exploitation ( e . g . , Argote and Greve 2007 , Crosson and Bedrow 2003 , Fang and Levinthal 2009 , Fleming 2001 , Gupta et al . 2006 , Jansen et al . 2006 , Kane and Alavi 2007 , Lavie and Rosenkopf 2006 , Lewin et al . 1999 , Miller et al . 2006 , Siggelkow and Rivkin 2006 ) . Most of this line of research has concluded that ﬁrms tend to overemphasize exploita - tion ( the use of known solutions ) at the expense of explo - ration ( the search for new solutions ) because exploitation provides more immediate and certain returns ( Denrell and March 2001 ) . This focus on short - term returns can cause ﬁrms to become trapped in suboptimal solutions , and render them poorly equipped to adapt to a chang - ing environment . Despite the perilous ramiﬁcations of overemphasizing exploitation and the signiﬁcant work that has been done , we still do not understand much about how this potentially maladaptive process can be avoided ( Gupta et al . 2006 ) . Recent research has suggested that managers may be able to use organization structure as a lever for improving the balance between exploration and exploita - tion ( e . g . , Argote et al . 2003 , Benner and Tushman 2003 , Bower and Christensen 1995 , Jacobides 2007 , O’Reilly and Tushman 2004 , Lenox 2002 , Nickerson and Zenger 2002 , Siggelkow and Levinthal 2003 ) . Literature span - ning ﬁelds as diverse as evolutionary biology , small - world networks , “skunkworks” in innovation , and search on complex landscapes have all yielded some clues that dividing the organization into subgroups might help the organization explore a diverse solution space , while still ensuring that the best solutions are promulgated through - out the organization , subsequently achieving better long - term learning performance outcomes . This argument is perhaps best articulated by Wright ( 1932 , 1964 ) , who argued that if a population of a species existed in a sin - gle large community , the species would not be adapt - able . Wright observed that , instead , evolving populations are typically divided into small subgroups that are sufﬁ - ciently isolated from one another to limit mating across subgroups . This isolation permits subgroups to main - tain genetic diversity and to explore more diverse solu - tions in the space of possibilities . At the same time , new genes can propagate throughout the whole system 625 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 626 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS by occasional migrations of organisms from one sub - group to another . In the organization literature , schol - ars have independently made symmetric claims about organization or industry structure ( e . g . , March , 2004 , O’Reilly and Tushman 2004 , Schilling and Phelps 2007 , Siggelkow and Levinthal 2003 , Fleming and Soren - son 2001 ) , emphasizing the beneﬁts of some degree of structural isolation . For example , O’Reilly and Tushman ( 2004 ) argued that for an organization to both encour - age the development of new product lines ( i . e . , explore ) and manage its existing product lines efﬁciently ( i . e . , exploit ) , the organization may need an “ambidextrous” structure whereby separate divisions of the ﬁrm utilize different rules , norms , and incentives . A research and development ( R & D ) division , for instance , may need to be both geographically and culturally distinct from the larger organization to prevent the paradigms of the larger organization from quashing the R & D division’s hetero - dox ideas . On the other hand , management scholars usually do not believe that any one organization structure is univer - sally beneﬁcial . A long and rich history on organization structure , loosely organized under the rubric of “contin - gency theory , ” has argued vigorously that the optimal organization structure is dependent on a host of other factors such as the ﬁrm’s technology and strategy or the dynamism of the environment ( e . g . , Burns and Stalker 1961 , Chandler 1962 , Eisenhardt and Brown 1999 , Galbraith 1973 , Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 , Thompson 1967 ) . Thus , we might expect that the semi - isolated sub - group structure only provides beneﬁts under a particular set of conditions , such as when the organization faces particularly complex problems or when the environment changes rapidly , because either of these conditions might require the ﬁrm to search a more diverse solution space . We thus examine two interrelated research questions here : Does a semi - isolated subgroup structure improve the balance of exploration and exploitation , leading to superior long - term learning performance outcomes ? And , if the semi - isolated subgroup structure is beneﬁ - cial , are its beneﬁts dependent on such factors as the complexity of the problems faced by the organization , the degree of environmental dynamism , or the rate of personnel turnover ? 1 To answer these questions , we use a simulation to compare the learning dynamics of organizations that have varying degrees of subgroup structure , ranging from nearly isolated subgroups of individuals that are only minimally connected to each other , to randomly connected individuals with almost no distinct subgroups . We begin with an organization with nearly isolated sub - groups and then systematically vary the interaction pat - tern by replacing some fraction of the existing links with cross - group links . We ﬁnd that a semi - isolated sub - group structure , with moderate levels of cross - group linking , is associated with the highest equilibrium per - formance whereas either very low or very high levels of cross - group links are associated with lower equilib - rium levels of performance . The intuition is that the semi - isolation of groups fosters the diversity of ideas , thereby enhancing long - run learning outcomes . We next examine whether this ﬁnding holds under varying levels of problem complexity , environmental turbulence , and personnel turnover . Remarkably , the semi - isolated sub - group structure yields the best long - term learning out - come in most conditions—a ﬁnding that both surprised and intrigued us . Our results are thus more consistent with the Wrightian perspective , while not completely ruling out the contingency perspective . The paper is organized as follows . First we review the literature on exploration versus exploitation in organiza - tional learning , and the work that suggests that organi - zation structure may serve as a potential mechanism to balance this trade - off . In so doing , we show the line of reasoning that leads to our two primary research ques - tions . Second , we build a simulation model of organiza - tional learning that parameterizes the degree of subgroup structure and connectivity , and present our initial ﬁnd - ings . Third , we subject this model to a series of tests that attempt to explore whether our ﬁndings are sensi - tive to a range of contingency variables that have been highlighted in the management research . Finally , we dis - cuss the implications of our ﬁndings for management and future research . 2 . Literature Review and Research Questions In the management and complex adaptive systems liter - atures , exploration refers to the search for new , useful adaptations , and exploitation refers to the use and prop - agation of known adaptations ( Holland 1975 , Goldberg 1989 , March 1991 , Mitchell 1996 ) . Although exploita - tion yields more certain and immediate returns , it makes the discovery of truly novel solutions unlikely and can lead to obsolescence in the long run ( Holland 1992 ) . On the other hand , although exploration can enable the dis - covery of profoundly novel solutions , it also typically causes a degradation of performance in the short run because searches for novel solutions usually fail . Hol - land ( 1992 , p . 69 ) generalized such a dilemma as fol - lows : “Deciding to what degree the present should be mortgaged for the future is a classic problem for all sys - tems that adapt and learn . ” 2 . 1 . March’s ( 1991 ) Seminal Work and Learning Myopia In 1991 , March developed a now seminal model of orga - nizational learning that clearly demonstrated the trade - offs between exploration and exploitation . In his model , individuals within the organization are initially endowed D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 627 with diverse sets of beliefs . These individuals interact with an “organizational code” that is meant to repre - sent the organization’s process of socializing members to the organization’s language , beliefs , and practices . The organizational code learns from the best - performing individuals , and individuals , in turn , learn from the code . As a result , the organization’s knowledge improves over time . Individuals that quickly adopt higher - performing ideas from the code are termed “fast learners . ” Such fast learning efﬁciently exploits incremental improvements in the organization’s knowledge , and thereby increases the efﬁciency of organizational learning . However , fast learning also tends to lead to premature convergence on a homogeneous set of ideas or routines , thwart - ing long - run learning and leading the organization to a suboptimal equilibrium . By contrast , “slow learners , ” those individuals who do not quickly adopt the higher - performing ideas from the organizational code , allow the organization to preserve more diversity of individ - ual beliefs , and thus play an important role in enabling the ﬁrm to explore a wider range of possible combina - tions of beliefs . As a result , the presence of slow learners increases the chance of improving the quality of orga - nizational knowledge in the long run . In short , March’s ( 1991 ) model demonstrated in an organizational con - text that although exploitation yields more certain and immediate returns , exploration creates and preserves the requisite variety of knowledge necessary for the organi - zation to sustain its learning in the long term ( Levitt and March 1988 ) . The more immediate returns from exploitation tend to cause organizations ( and many other adaptive systems ) to exhibit a myopic bias whereby exploitation is overem - phasized at the expense of exploration ( Denrell and March 2001 ; Levinthal and March 1981 , 1993 ) . Individ - uals and organizations tend to pursue solutions similar to already - known solutions because bounded rational - ity limits their ability to search all possible domains of knowledge ( Simon 1979 ) and biases them toward more salient areas of their own prior experience ( Cyert and March 1963 , Dosi 1988 , Fleming 2001 , Helfat 1994 , March 1991 , Martin and Mitchell 1998 , Nelson and Winter 1982 , Patel and Pavitt 1997 , Stuart and Podolny 1996 ) . The utilization of existing knowledge , routines , and experience increases the likelihood that solutions will be found quickly and at reasonable costs ( Dosi 1988 , Fleming 2001 , Nelson and Winter 1982 ) . As argued by Levinthal and March ( 1993 , p . 97 ) : “Knowl - edge and the development of capabilities improve imme - diate performance , but they often simultaneously reduce incentives for and competence with new technologies or paradigms . ” As a consequence , adaptive processes can become self - destructive by leading the organization to become trapped in a suboptimal equilibrium . Despite signiﬁcant work on this topic , we still do not understand much about how these self - destructive processes can be avoided . This has led to calls for more work on how managers can help ﬁrms to better maintain the balance between exploration and exploitation ( Gupta et al . 2006 , March 2004 ) . 2 . 2 . Structure as a Solution Recent research has focused on the possibility of using organization structure as a mechanism for managing the balance between exploration and exploitation ( e . g . , Benner and Tushman 2003 ; Bower and Christensen 1995 ; Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004 ; Lenox 2002 ; O’Reilly and Tushman 2004 ; Miller et al . 2006 ; Nickerson and Zenger 2002 ; Siggelkow and Levinthal 2003 , 2005 ; Siggelkow and Rivkin 2005 ; Taylor and Greve 2006 ) . Of particular interest has been the role of decentralization and isolation : By decentralizing the learning process to subunits of the organization and providing barriers to the rapid diffusion of ideas and norms across those subunits , managers may be able to encourage the exploration of a more diverse range of solutions . In support of this argu - ment , a body of research on “skunkworks” has shown that there can be signiﬁcant gains from isolating new product development ( NPD ) teams from the mainstream organization ( Benner and Tushman 2003 , Bower and Christensen 1995 , O’Reilly and Tushman 2004 ) . Sepa - rating the team from the rest of the organization permits it to explore new alternatives , unfettered by the demands and norms of the rest of the organization . For example , when Steve Jobs began to develop the Macintosh design in 1980 , he did not believe the growing corporate envi - ronment at Apple ( which was already churning out Apple II personal computers at a fast clip ) was con - ducive to nurturing the kind of revolutionary change that he envisioned . He thus created a separate division for the Macintosh that would have its own unique culture . He tried to instill a free - spirited entrepreneurial atmo - sphere where individualistic and often eccentric soft - ware developers would ﬂourish . The small group of team members was handpicked , and sheltered from normal corporate commitments and distractions . He encouraged the Macintosh team members to consider themselves renegades , and even hung a pirate’s skull - and - crossbones ﬂag over their building ( Rogers 2003 ) . Notably , however , the skunkworks literature has tended to focus only on the separation of an organizational subunit that has a spe - ciﬁc mandate to innovate , and has particularly empha - sized situations where disruptive technological change is sought . This literature has thus primarily demonstrated how ﬁrms can improve their exploration processes rather than how ﬁrms can better maintain a balance between exploration and exploitation . The latter objective is the focus of a second line of work which simulates an organization’s search for solutions on an NK land - scape ( e . g . , Ethiraj and Levinthal 2004 ; Siggelkow and Levinthal 2003 , 2005 ; Siggelkow and Rivkin 2005 ) . This line of work has examined , among other things , D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 628 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS whether and how the decentralization of decision mak - ing helps ﬁrms to avoid becoming trapped on a sub - optimal local peak . This work has generally found that decentralization can help the organization explore a wider range of the solution space , thereby lessening its probability of prematurely converging on a suboptimal solution . 2 . 3 . Semi - Isolated Subgroups The research on skunkworks and search on complex landscape described above both share a strong resem - blance to a much earlier line of reasoning in evolution - ary theory . Evolutionary biologists have long maintained that the isolation of subpopulations can play a valuable adaptive role . As argued by Wright in 1932 , if a species is characterized by a single large population , it would not be adaptable in the long run . Wright ( 1964 ) noted that most species are divided into numerous small , breeding local populations that are sufﬁciently isolated to per - mit differentiation . He argued that this sort of small , semi - isolated subgroup structure was the most effective architecture for evolution by allowing the species to take advantage of ecological opportunities . Though the work of evolutionary biologists described above pertains to the spread of genes through a popu - lation , these ideas have ready application to the spread of ideas through an organization or other community ( e . g . , Schilling and Phelps 2007 , Fleming and Soren - son 2001 ) . This is aptly illustrated in an example by March ( 2004 ) . March noted that the international com - munity of organization researchers remains geographi - cally fragmented , with linguistic , cultural , and regional boundaries separating relatively autonomous scholarly communities . He argued that such fragmentation serves an adaptive role in facilitating the resistance of deviant ideas to the homogenizing tendencies of dominant schol - arly groups . Fragmentation slows the consolidation of a clear paradigm , and encourages both experimentation and persistence of new ideas . March contends that the parochialism of organizational scholarship helped to pro - tect behavioral ideas about the ﬁrm , for example , from premature sacriﬁce to the hegemony of economic theory ( Augier 2003 , Williamson 2003 ) . Recent work on the inﬂuence of small - world networks on innovation has also yielded some highly symmetric conclusions : When a community of actors ( individuals , ﬁrms , etc . ) are structured into well - deﬁned clusters that are only sparsely connected to each other , this struc - ture can help to create and preserve requisite variety of knowledge in the broader community ( Schilling and Phelps 2007 , Uzzi and Spiro 2005 , Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ) . Densely connected clusters facilitate the local transmission of information by providing multi - ple pathways between actors , ensuring that information introduced into a cluster will quickly reach other actors in the cluster . Dense clustering can make actors more willing and able to exchange information by engender - ing trust , reciprocity norms , and shared identity ( Ahuja 2000 , Coleman 1988 , Dyer and Singh 1998 , Granovetter 1992 ) . In addition to stimulating greater transparency , dense clustering may facilitate intense interaction ( Uzzi 1997 ) , improving the transfer of tacit , embedded knowl - edge ( Hansen 1999 , Zander and Kogut 1995 ) . Thus , clustering enables richer and greater amounts of infor - mation and knowledge to be exchanged and integrated more readily . On the other hand , the sparse connec - tivity between clusters helps to preserve requisite vari - ety . Though the internal cohesion of a cluster can cause much of the information within the cluster to become homogeneous and redundant ( Burt 1992 , Granovetter 1973 ) , clusters will tend to be heterogeneous across a network in the knowledge they possess and produce because of the different initial conditions and causes for each cluster to form . The links that span those clusters allow the best ideas to migrate throughout the larger community , enabling the heterogeneous ideas to be fruitfully recombined . Small - world properties ( high clustering with a few cluster - spanning bridges in an otherwise sparse and decentralized network of actors ) thus appear to offer the “best of both worlds” in infor - mation diffusion and learning : semi - isolated clusters enable the creation and preservation of heterogeneous ideas , while a few external links help the best ideas to diffuse . Integrating the lines of reasoning from evolutionary theory and small - world networks above with the orga - nizational learning arguments of March ( 2004 ) suggests that perhaps dividing an organization into subgroups with some barriers to diffusion between them can help the organization maintain the balance between explo - ration and exploitation . Some amount of isolation of dis - tinct subunits might encourage them to explore diverse solutions , whereas the connections between those sub - units enable superior solutions to eventually be exploited throughout the organization . Thus , our ﬁrst research question is the following : Does the division of an orga - nization into distinct subgroups that are only modestly interconnected lead to superior learning performance outcomes ? 2 . 4 . “One Size Fits All” vs . Contingency Theory The argument that any dimension of organizational structure is universally beneﬁcial stands in stark con - trast to a long line of research termed “contingency theory . ” Dating back to the 1960s , contingency theo - rists posited that the optimal organization structure is dependent on such factors as environmental complex - ity ( Burns and Stalker 1961 , Galbraith 1973 , Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ) , organization size ( Chandler 1962 , Hickson et al . 1969 ) , strategy ( Chandler 1962 , Child 1972 ) , or technology ( Perrow 1967 , Thompson 1967 , Woodward 1965 ) . More recent research has supported D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 629 this perspective by demonstrating that factors such as the nature of organizational knowledge ( Birkinshaw et al . 2002 , Hansen 1999 ) or environmental dynamism ( Eisenhardt and Brown 1999 , Lenox 2002 , Schilling and Steensma 2001 ) inﬂuence the optimal organization struc - ture , though the moniker of “contingency theory” is now often replaced with labels that are more speciﬁc to either the contingent factor or the organizational struc - ture ( e . g . , “modular organizations , ” “dynamic tension , ” “weak ties” ) . Most of the research on contingency the - ory has empirically examined either ( 1 ) what structures ﬁrms tend to exhibit given other internal or external fac - tors , or ( 2 ) performance outcomes in general ( e . g . , sur - vival , proﬁtability ) , given a match between a particular structure and other factors . As such , it is difﬁcult to assess the implications of these studies for exploration and exploitation—after all , in the short term , overem - phasis on exploitation can be beneﬁcial . Recent stud - ies , however , have begun to examine more directly the relationship between organization structure , environmen - tal factors , and the balance of exploration and exploita - tion using simulation or computational methods . For instance , Siggelkow and Levinthal ( 2003 ) ﬁnd that a ﬁrm that temporarily decentralizes its search activities into two subunits and then reintegrates is less likely to become trapped on a suboptimal peak of an NK land - scape than a ﬁrm that remains centralized for all search activities . They also ﬁnd , however , that the exploration enabled by the decentralization can be costly ( sometimes the decentralized ﬁrm is led astray ) , and is more likely to be valuable for ﬁrms that face signiﬁcant environmen - tal change than ﬁrms that are in stable environments . Similarly , Siggelkow and Rivkin ( 2005 ) ﬁnd that the value of decentralization and the optimal amount of inte - gration via a department head is contingent upon both the amount of environmental turbulence and complexity faced by the ﬁrm . Integrating the research described above with the orig - inal ﬁndings by March ( 1991 ) suggests that the rela - tionship between organizational structure and organiza - tional learning may be dependent on factors such as the degree of complexity and dynamism in the ﬁrm’s inter - nal or external environment , or the degree of person - nel turnover . Thus , we are led to our second research question : Do factors such as problem complexity , envi - ronmental turbulence , or personnel turnover determine whether dividing the ﬁrm into semi - isolated subunits has a beneﬁcial effect on learning outcomes ? Note that the arguments described above are incon - sistent . The line of reasoning from evolutionary theory and small - world networks described above imply that a semi - isolated subgroup structure will be universally ben - eﬁcial for improving the balance between exploration and exploitation . The work on contingency theory and research on search in an NK landscape , described in this section , however , suggest that the beneﬁt of a particular organization structure is dependent on a range of other internal or external factors . To systematically explore these issues , we create a simulation of organizational learning that extends March’s ( 1991 ) original work by incorporating interpersonal learning . This model permits us to treat the isolation of subgroups as a tunable param - eter , and thereby systematically explore how the degree of isolation inﬂuences organizational learning outcomes . We also examine whether and how these outcomes vary depending on subgroup size , problem complexity , envi - ronmental dynamism , and personnel turnover . 3 . Model We regard an organization as a complex adaptive sys - tem , where individuals interact with other individuals . In particular , we view individuals as carriers of ideas and knowledge , and organizational learning as a property that emerges from interactions among individuals in the organization . Individuals interact with others , who may inﬂuence them to adopt new ideas and to discard old ideas . This assumption of interpersonal learning makes our paper distinct from March’s ( 1991 ) work , and builds on recent work by Miller et al . ( 2006 ) . 2 We model orga - nizational learning as a process by which individuals within an organization interact to exchange and jointly create knowledge . Our model has three main entities— an external reality , individuals , and an organization : 1 . External reality . Like March ( 1991 ) , we describe reality as having m dimensions , each of which has a value of 1 or − 1 . The probability that any one dimension will have a value of 1 ( or − 1 ) is 0 . 5 ; values are randomly assigned . 2 . Individuals . There are n individuals in an organiza - tion . Each of them holds m beliefs about the correspond - ing elements of reality at each time step . Each belief for an individual has a value of 1 , 0 , or − 1 . A value of 0 means that an individual is not sure of whether 1 or − 1 represents reality . 3 . Organization . As mentioned earlier , our model is different from the March ( 1991 ) model in that an orga - nization is seen as a complex system wherein individ - uals directly interact with one another . A key factor determining the dynamics of such a system is its topol - ogy of interaction patterns between members ( Strogatz 2001 ) . In the past , it was not easy to study such com - plex systems primarily because of the lack of appropriate tools for analyzing their topologies ( Lee et al . 2006 ) . However , recent advances in graph theory—especially a quantum advance in our understanding of networks— have offered tools for studying complex social ( as well as nonsocial ) networks . To examine the role of semi - isolated subgroups , we modify Watts’ ( 1999 ) “connected caveman” model ( 1999 ) , which represents interaction patterns among members of an organization ( see Figure 1 ( a ) ) . 3 In this D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 630 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS Figure 1 Variations on Watts’ ( 1999 ) Connected Caveman Model ( a ) Nearly isolated subgroup structure ( b ) Semi - isolated subgroup structure with randomly rewired links ( c ) Random network : Network structure without subgroup identity Note . The actual models we used had 280 individuals and subgroups of seven individuals each , but for visual clarity , simpliﬁed models are shown here . stylized model , the network consists of highly clustered subgroups that are minimally connected together . Such a network is highly “clustered , ” meaning that the frac - tion of neighboring nodes that are also connected to one another is very high . Within this structure , subgroups ( or “clusters” ) are “nearly isolated” because subgroups have a minimum amount of connectivity to the rest of the network . For instance , in the connected caveman graph depicted in Figure 1 ( a ) , clusters have only two links con - necting them in a serial fashion to one another . To construct different interaction patterns , we rewire each link of this connected caveman network by making random connections between nodes with rewiring proba - bility (cid:2) . 4 When (cid:2) = 0 , the connected caveman structure is preserved . When (cid:2) is nonzero but sufﬁciently small , the high degree of clustering is preserved , but there are a few random connections among subgroups ( as in Fig - ure 1 ( b ) ) . This may be interpreted as “semi - isolation” where subgroups have a moderate amount of connectiv - ity to the network yet remain well deﬁned and separate enough from the rest of the network to have a clear subgroup identity . This semi - isolated subgroup structure reveals two important topological properties of small - world networks : small degrees of separation and high clustering . With only a few random links , or shortcuts , between the subgroups , the average degree of separa - tion between any two nodes drops rapidly whereas the degree of clustering remains high , helping to preserve subgroup identity . When (cid:2) grows large and approaches unity , a network becomes completely random , as shown in Figure 1 ( c ) . Shortcuts are ubiquitous , but the sub - group structure is lost . 5 Note that the two key ingredi - ents of our model , cliquish subgroups and cross - group links ( or bridges ) , are also the basic building blocks of Granovetter’s ( 1973 ) conceptualization of social net - works , which were empirically conﬁrmed by Onnela et al . ( 2007 ) . 3 . 1 . Learning When individuals ﬁrst join an organization , they have idiosyncratic sets of beliefs that are heterogeneous across individuals . However , as these individuals regu - larly interact with their contacts within the ﬁrm , they will compare the performance of their own belief sets to those of their contacts . In our model , learning is a bidirectional process . That is , a link between two indi - viduals indicates that both are sources of learning for each other . Similar to March’s ( 1991 ) original work , individuals can observe the payoff of their overall belief set ( and that of their direct contacts ) , but they can - not directly observe how each element of the belief set contributes to this payoff . If individuals ascertain that others have belief sets that are better performing , they may update their own beliefs to incorporate aspects of the higher - performing belief sets . The process of shar - ing , comparing , interpreting , and updating beliefs helps groups of individuals develop a shared understanding ( Argyris and Schon 1996 , Brown and Duguid 1991 , Crossan et al . 1999 , Daft and Weick 1984 , Huber 1991 , Klimoski and Mohammed 1994 , Larson and Christensen 1993 , Sandelands and Stablein 1987 ) . In this way , the beliefs about reality possessed by individuals within the organization tend to become more homogeneous over time . Though individuals may be able to determine whether other individuals have belief sets that are better perform - ing than their own , they might not be able to deter - mine which aspects of a particular belief set led to bet - ter performance . That is , although an individual may believe that another individual’s belief set is more com - plete or correct than her own , she may not know how it is more correct or complete . This is compounded by the fact that an individual’s better - performing peers may not have identical belief sets . These factors cause an individ - ual to face ambiguity about whether and how to update their own beliefs . To address this , we adopt a major - ity decision rule similar to that used in March’s ( 1991 ) D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 631 study . Individuals look at all of the other individuals with which they interact , and identify those that are better performing than themselves . The focal individual then identiﬁes what the dominant belief ( the majority view ) is on each of m dimensions of the belief sets of these higher - performing peers . She may then decide to update each dimension of her own belief set to this majority view with some probability p learning that reﬂects the pro - clivity or ability of individuals to learn from one another . The majority decision rule helps to simulate a socializa - tion process within the organization whereby an individ - ual’s beliefs are inﬂuenced by the collective beliefs of their peers . This decision rule is also consistent with a large body of research on social decision schemes and has been supported by numerous studies of social deci - sion making ( e . g . , Castore et al . 1971 , Davis et al . 1975 ) . It is particularly likely to be used by groups when it is difﬁcult for individuals to assess which alternative is correct ( Kameda and Davis 1990 ) . 3 . 2 . Payoff Function and Problem Complexity The performance of an individual is evaluated at every time step by a given payoff function . We construct a generalized m / s payoff function where m refers to the dimensionality of the search problem , and s is a single parameter with which the interdependence of the search problem can be tuned . By increasing the value of s , the search problem becomes more interdependent . That is , the performance will not improve unless several beliefs jointly match corresponding parts of reality . For exam - ple , consider a case where s = 5 for a search problem with ﬁve dimensions ( i . e . , m = 5 ) . If the individual iden - tiﬁes the correct belief for each of the ﬁve dimensions of the belief set , her payoff is ﬁve . But , when an individual has four correct beliefs and one incorrect one , her payoff is zero . Thus , if s = m , the search problem is maxi - mally interdependent ; if any single element among the m beliefs is wrong , the payoff for the whole set becomes zero . Alternatively , when s is small , the dimensions of the search problem are more independent . If s = 1 , when an individual has four correct beliefs and one incorrect one , her payoff is four . The bigger the value of s , the more interdependent the search problem is . Note that our m / s payoff function has a generalized form that cap - tures both the linear payoff function ( i . e . , s = 1 ) used by March ( 1991 ) and the needle - in - the - haystack prob - lem ( i . e . , s = m ) used by Hinton and Nowlan ( 1987 ) ( considered one of the toughest search problems ) as spe - cial cases . In our baseline model , we keep s = 5 for a search problem with 100 dimensions ( i . e . , moderately low interdependence ) . The details of this payoff function are described in Appendix A . An organization’s perfor - mance is measured as the average performance across all individuals in the organization . Our m / s payoff function builds directly from March’s ( 1991 ) original model , though it also shares some simi - larities with the NK model . In particular , our parameters m and s are analogous to N and K in the NK model , where N represents the number of decisions and K rep - resents their interdependence for their contributions to the overall payoff ( e . g . , Kauffman 1993 , Levinthal 1997 , Rivkin 2000 ) . The main distinction of our payoff func - tion lies in its computational efﬁciency , especially when one deals with high - dimensional search problems ( i . e . , a high value of N ) with a substantial degree of inter - action ( a high value of K ) . In such a setting , the NK model becomes prohibitively expensive , requiring huge memory and extensive computational time for running a simulation—this problem is known as an “NP hard” problem in computer science . In our model setup , the cost of increasing dimension m and interdependence s is much lower , enabling the simulation to run faster . 4 . Simulation Results We use the model described above to run a series of simulations that examine the impact of interpersonal network structure on organizational - level performance . We ﬁrst explore the impact of organization structure on learning and performance in a baseline model and then examine the inﬂuence of problem complexity , envi - ronmental turbulence , and personnel turnover in an extended model . 4 . 1 . Baseline Model To study how interpersonal network structure affects organizational learning in our baseline model , we ﬁrst consider an extreme type of interpersonal network struc - ture , the “nearly isolated subgroup structure , ” which is illustrated by Figure 1 ( a ) . We then vary the form of subgroup structure by randomly rewiring some of the existing links in this structure with probability (cid:2) . The bigger the value of (cid:2) , the greater the percentage of ran - dom , cross - group links . For example , when (cid:2) = 0 (cid:3) 1 , we have a “semi - isolated subgroup structure” with about 10 % of random , cross - group links on average . When (cid:2) = 1 , subgroup identity disappears because of the ubiq - uity of cross - group links . By examining the learning performance of each of these structures we address the following questions : Does subgroup structure inﬂuence long - run learning outcomes ? Can we improve the bal - ance between exploration and exploitation by varying the degree of subgroup structure within an organization ? 4 . 1 . 1 . Effects of Isolation . In March’s ( 1991 ) model , learning rates for organizational members control the speed of organizational learning . Because our key vari - able of interest is organization structure , we keep the learning rate constant at p learning = 0 (cid:3) 3 for the moment— we relax this assumption later in our sensitivity anal - ysis . All parameters used in the simulations and the simulation steps are speciﬁed in Appendix B . Figure 2 plots the averages , 10th percentile , and 90th percentile of the equilibrium performance of 200 simulation runs for D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 632 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS Figure 2 Organizational Structure and Equilibrium Performance Outcome 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 P e rf o r m a n ce 10th percentile Mean 90th percentile (cid:2) Notes . Each data point here is the average over 200 simulation runs observed at equilibrium points . The organization reaches a long - run equilibrium performance when its performance does not improve anymore . As superior ideas diffuse , there comes a point where the entire organization converges upon a set of beliefs and there are no more superior - performing individuals to learn from . various levels of the structural parameter (cid:2) , which can be roughly interpreted as the fraction of additional cross - group links ( i . e . , beyond those initially used to main - tain the network’s minimal connectivity ) . As shown , the long - run learning performance is lower when (cid:2) = 0 , or when subgroups are nearly isolated . It appears to be highest when subgroups are “semi - isolated” with a small fraction of random cross - group links . The peak performance is associated with (cid:2) ∈ (cid:4) 0 (cid:3) 05 (cid:5) 0 (cid:3) 1 (cid:6) . As (cid:2) approaches 1 , the long - run average outcome of learning tends to decrease . Figure 2 also shows that the vari - ance of observations ( i . e . , the spread between the 10th percentile and 90th percentile lines ) for (cid:2) = 0 covers a much broader range than those of the other distributions . This implies that more extreme behaviors are likely to be observed when (cid:2) = 0 . For example , the probability of observing performance levels of 90 or 30 is nonzero even though the mean is 63 . 6 . This can be interpreted as suggesting that organizational risk will tend to be higher when solutions to problems are pursued only by highly autonomous teams with few mechanisms for cross - team learning . For (cid:2) ≥ 0 (cid:3) 1 , on the other hand , the variance of observations is much smaller and roughly equal across different values of (cid:2) . This means that extreme behaviors are less likely . As seen in Figure 2 , when cross - group linking increases above (cid:2) ≥ 0 (cid:3) 1 , long - run performance tends to decrease . We conjecture that this decrease is driven by the loss of diversity in beliefs in an organization . As the number of cross - group links increases , good ideas spread faster throughout the organization . This may prematurely eliminate deviant ideas , reducing the combinatorial pos - sibilities , and thereby lowering the organization’s likeli - hood of achieving its best possible outcome . To conﬁrm this conjecture , we develop a measure of organizational Figure 3 Diversity of Beliefs Over Time 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 D i ss i m il a r it y Time = 0 = 0 . 1 = 0 . 5 = 1 . 0 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Notes . The ﬁgure shows a typical simulation run . The dissimilarity index indicates how individuals in an organization are different from each other in viewing reality with m dimensions . This index was constructed by making pairwise comparisons of all n individuals across m beliefs . diversity , or what we call a “dissimilarity index . ” To con - struct such a measure , we make pairwise comparisons of all n individuals . There are 12 n(cid:7)n − 1 (cid:8) pairs . For each pair of individuals , there are m beliefs to be compared . Then , we measure dissimilarity in beliefs of all individ - uals in an organization as follows : Dissimilarity = 2 mn(cid:7)n − 1 (cid:8) (cid:7) 1 / 2 (cid:8)n(cid:7)n − 1 (cid:8) (cid:2) i = 1 m (cid:2) j = 1 (cid:9) ij (cid:5) ( 1 ) where (cid:9) ij takes on the value of 1 if two chosen indi - viduals for the i th pair have different beliefs on the j th dimension , and 0 otherwise . Figure 3 shows the degree of dissimilarity of beliefs among organizational mem - bers over time for different levels of (cid:2) . As shown , an organization tends to lose its diversity of beliefs very fast when its interpersonal network is characterized by a large fraction of cross - group links ( e . g . , (cid:2) = 1 ) . In essence , as subgroup identity is lost , dissimilarity among organizational members quickly disappears . In our base - line model without turnover , once organizational diver - sity is lost , there is no way for an organization to pro - mote it . The management of such diversity is thus crucial for improving the organization’s long - run performance . By maintaining diversity among individuals longer , a semi - isolated subgroup structure ( e . g . , (cid:2) = 0 (cid:3) 1 ) achieves higher long - run performance . 6 Figure 3 also helps us understand why long - run per - formance tends to be lower for a nearly isolated net - work ( (cid:2) = 0 ) . As shown , dissimilarity among individuals decays very slowly in this network . Diverse ideas and beliefs among different subgroups are thus well main - tained . Why , then , do we systematically observe the lower performance in this structure ? In our model , learn - ing from other superior individuals is key to improv - ing the organization’s performance . The problem with D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 633 the nearly isolated structure is that diverse ideas can - not be exchanged easily across subgroups because of the limited availability of cross - group channels . In other words , maintaining organizational diversity is not ben - eﬁcial unless the organization’s members can exchange diverse ideas across subgroups to improve their knowl - edge . With very few cross - group links that act as bridges between different subgroups , good ideas cannot be effec - tively shared and exchanged . As such , even if hetero - geneity is preserved , organizations cannot beneﬁt from this diversity if there are too few cross - group links . Would the long - run outcome of organizational learning be worse if subgroups were completely isolated from one another ? In numerical analyses not reported here , we observe that the average learning outcome under this setting is close to zero , indicating that complete isola - tion makes it very hard for an organization to improve its knowledge . In sum , we ﬁnd that subgroup structure , which fos - ters the diversity of ideas or beliefs within an organi - zation , is conducive to learning as long as there is a small fraction of random , cross - group links . Such semi - isolation allows the organization to learn moderately fast with the highest long - run performance outcome , and thus improves the balance between learning speed and long - run performance . 4 . 1 . 2 . Effects of Subgroup Size . Wright’s ( 1932 , 1964 ) arguments about population structure also empha - sized subgroup size : only in small semi - isolated sub - groups could seemingly nonadaptive traits become pre - served . To examine this aspect of Wright’s argument we specify a model parameter z that corresponds to the size of each subgroup . We then vary the size of the subgroups from z = 7 to z = 14 (cid:5) 28 (cid:5) 70 , and 140 , 7 while ﬁxing n . 8 Figure 4 plots the effects of different subgroup sizes on Figure 4 Effect of Subgroup Size on Organizational Performance 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 P e rf o r m a n ce Beta z = 7 z = 28 z = 70 z = 140 Notes . The ﬁgure shows the effects of different subgroup sizes on the long - term learning performance , and z represents the size of a subgroup . Each data point here is the average over 200 repeated simulations . learning . First , we ﬁnd that an increase in the size of sub - groups lowers learning performance across all forms of organizational structure ( i . e . , different (cid:2) s ) . As the size of subgroups grows bigger , divergent beliefs of individual members are more quickly homogenized , lessening the potential for long - run learning . In results not reported here , we also ﬁnd that a completely connected network ( where every individual is directly connected to every other individual ) has a performance of 36 . 7 , which is much lower than those in the sparse networks . Second , we ﬁnd that there is little change to our basic pattern of performance across various levels of (cid:2) . This indicates that the semi - isolated subgroup struc - ture remains the highest - performing structure irrespec - tive of subgroup size . Overall , then , these results are highly consistent with Wright’s ( 1932 , 1964 ) arguments about effective architecture for evolution : dividing the community into subgroups that are both small and semi - isolated increases the long - run adaptive performance of a community . 4 . 1 . 3 . How the Learning Process Unfolds . To bet - ter understand the equilibrium performance results pre - sented above , it is useful to observe the microdynamics of the learning process as it unfolds in our simulations . In our simulated organizations , individuals are initially assigned sets of beliefs that are randomly generated , and thus heterogeneous . They then begin to learn from oth - ers with which they interact as deﬁned by the under - lying interpersonal network . In a clustered organization with well - deﬁned subgroups ( i . e . , low levels of (cid:2) ) , the combination of the clustered structure with a learning mechanism based on majority view tends to lead to the emergence of pockets of relatively homogeneous beliefs ( i . e . , sets of proximate individuals with highly similar belief strings ) . Because most of an individual’s con - tacts are also contacts of each other ( due to the highly clustered structure ) , when the individual identiﬁes those of her contacts that are higher performing than herself , that set of higher - performing peers will be very simi - lar to the set of higher - performing peers that her con - tacts identify . As each individual looks for the major - ity view among these high - performing peers and adopts their beliefs with probability p learning , individuals within a cluster will tend to converge on a common set of beliefs . However , because each cluster is founded with a different group of individuals , each with their own het - erogeneous stock of initial beliefs , the common belief sets that emerge within clusters may be different across clusters . Because the clusters are connected to each other ( at varying degrees , depending on (cid:2) ) , some individ - uals within the cluster have contacts outside of the cluster . As such , they may identify high performers who have a very different set of beliefs from the D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 634 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS sets in their cluster . However , because of the major - ity view rule , the individual will not learn from high - performing “outsiders” until she has a performance that equals or exceeds most of the individuals in her cluster . Only when the number of higher - performing “outsiders” meets or exceeds the number of higher performing indi - viduals in her cluster can the higher - performing “out - siders” become the majority or tied for majority . Once the higher - performing “outsiders” become the major - ity or tied for majority , the individual is able to learn from these higher - performing individuals . Thus , better - performing belief sets can diffuse across clusters , but only when they are not competing with a greater num - ber of within - cluster superior peers . Furthermore , if the belief set possessed by the outsider is very different from the focal individual’s belief set , the recombinatorial pro - cess can potentially yield a belief set that is quite dif - ferent ( and potentially better performing ) than the belief set possessed by either individual prior to learning from one another . The preceding highlights the role that the majority view socialization process plays in the learn - ing dynamics ; without such a socialization process , sub - group structure may have much less effect on perfor - mance . We elaborate on this in Appendix C . 4 . 2 . Extended Model : Testing a Contingency Perspective As discussed previously , the traditional contingency logic argues that the appropriateness of any organiza - tional design is a direct function of environmental con - ditions ( Burns and Stalker 1961 , Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ) . In the previous section , we explore the effect of subgroup structure given a ﬁxed amount of prob - lem complexity and zero environmental turbulence or personnel turnover . We now relax those assumptions to examine whether the dynamics we observed previously change with these contingencies . First , we look at the impact of varying problem complexity by altering both the number of elements ( m ) that must be considered in the organization’s search , and the degree to which those elements are interdependent ( s ) . Second , we examine the impact of environmental change and personnel turnover . 4 . 2 . 1 . Effects of Problem Complexity . In the previ - ous analysis , we kept search problem complexity con - stant by setting parameters m and s to 100 and 5 , respec - tively . However , previous research suggests that problem complexity may be an important contingency variable in organization design . Complex problems with a high degree of interdependency create rugged landscapes with multiple local peaks , and as a result , organizations may become easily stuck ( Levinthal 1997 , Rivkin 2001 ) . In such environments , the organization may beneﬁt from a structure that enables more exploratory search . By contrast , in an environment characterized by simple search problems , it might be the case that most orga - nizational designs perform satisfactorily , or that designs that encourage exploration of diverse solution spaces are unnecessarily costly , resulting in lower performance than designs that encourage efﬁcient exploitation . To test this possible contingency , we next vary parameters m ( m = 40 (cid:5) 70 (cid:5) 100 (cid:5) 130 (cid:5) 160 ) and s ( s = 1 (cid:5) 2 (cid:5) 3 (cid:5) 5 (cid:5) 6 (cid:5) 7 (cid:5) 8 (cid:5) 9 (cid:5) 10 ) jointly . As speciﬁed before , m stands for the number of elements that an organiza - tion should search for , whereas s represents their inter - dependence . In results not reported here , we ﬁnd that the superiority of the semi - isolated subgroup structure holds so long as search problems are moderately difﬁcult ( e . g . , 2 < s < 10 ) , and beyond this range there is little variation in performance outcomes . For example , when s = 1 or 2 , performance heterogeneity across different structures disappears . All types of organizational struc - tures enjoy the same , maximum level of performance ( at around 100 , i . e . , getting all 100 beliefs correct ) . In other words , when a search problem is too easy , any type of structure can do well in learning . When s ≥ 10 , or when a search problem becomes too difﬁcult with substantial interdependence among search elements , per - formance heterogeneity across different structures again disappears . For instance , when s = 10 , an organization needs to get 10 beliefs correct simultaneously to get any positive performance . Even if it is correct on 9 out of 10 dimensions , its performance is still 0 . Not sur - prisingly , all organizations completely fail to learn and their performances hover around 0 . The near - zero per - formance for s ≥ 10 indicates that an organization or a system cannot evolve when search complexity is beyond a certain threshold . 9 Research on complex systems sug - gests that many real - world problems fall into a moderate range of complexity ( Kauffman 1995 , Waldrop 1992 ) . Given this logic , we ﬁx the value of this parameter to ﬁve for the rest of our analysis . Also , we ﬁnd that m does not greatly affect the pattern we observed in Figure 2 . The superiority of a semi - isolated organizational struc - ture is robust to changes in m , as long as the interdepen - dence of search problems is moderate ( i . e . , s = 5 ) . The superiority of the semi - isolated subgroup holds except for very small values of m . In addition , an increase in m seems to make the performance heterogeneity more pronounced because search becomes harder . 4 . 2 . 2 . Effects of Environmental Change and Turn - over . In the previous section , we imposed the assump - tions of no environmental turbulence or personnel turnover . Here , we introduce two modiﬁcations , while keeping the other parameters the same as before ( i . e . , m = 100 , n = 280 , z = 7 , p learning = 0 (cid:3) 3 , and s = 5 ) . First , we allow personnel turnover to take place : each indi - vidual will leave the organization at each time period with probability p turnover . When an individual leaves , her position is ﬁlled by a new member who starts with ran - domly assigned beliefs ( a value for each of m beliefs is drawn randomly from 1 , 0 , or − 1 ) . 10 Second , we let the D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 635 Figure 5 Effect of Turnover in Changing Environment 0 10 20 30 0 200 400 600 800 Time 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 P e rf o r m a n ce With turnover Without turnover Notes . The graph with turnover shows a typical simulation run when 10 % of the elements of reality change their values every 200 periods and when 1 % of the organizational members are replaced by new members in each time period . The graph with - out turnover shows a typical simulation run with the same periodic change of reality but with no membership change . environment change periodically . In particular , we per - turb each of m dimensions of reality ( from 1 to − 1 , or from − 1 to 1 ) with probability p envir at every T period . For example , we set T = 200 and p envir = 0 (cid:3) 1 . That is , in every 200 period , about 10 % of m elements in reality change their values . The value of T is tuned to allow sufﬁcient time for the organizations to learn and adapt to new environment . The implicit assumption is that the timescale for environment change is greater than that for organizational learning . 11 Figure 5 shows a typical run of the simulation with periodic environmental changes with and without turnover , while holding (cid:2) constant at 0 . 1 . As shown , after an environmental shift , the organization suffers an immediate drop in performance . However , with person - nel turnover , the organization is able to recover from the environmental shift and improve its performance . With - out turnover , over time the organization loses its ability to adapt to environmental shifts . Consistent with March Table 1 Mean Performance of Organizations Under Different Rates of Turnover and Environmental Change Rates of turnover Rates of environmental change No Low High Low Medium High ( p turnover = 0 ) ( p turnover = 0 (cid:2) 01 ) ( p turnover = 0 (cid:2) 1 ) ( p envir = 0 (cid:2) 1 ) ( p envir = 0 (cid:2) 4 ) ( p envir = 0 (cid:2) 7 ) Nearly isolated 31 (cid:2) 17 44 (cid:2) 45 23 (cid:2) 32 44 (cid:2) 45 26 (cid:2) 05 23 (cid:2) 41 Semi - isolated 36 (cid:2) 42 61 (cid:2) 49 41 (cid:2) 71 61 (cid:2) 49 38 (cid:2) 13 34 (cid:2) 22 Random 32 (cid:2) 39 54 (cid:2) 47 38 (cid:2) 63 54 (cid:2) 47 32 (cid:2) 11 28 (cid:2) 64 F - value 21 (cid:2) 18 1 (cid:3) 127 (cid:2) 23 4 (cid:3) 187 (cid:2) 54 1 (cid:3) 129 (cid:2) 23 361 (cid:2) 31 257 (cid:2) 55 P - value 0 (cid:2) 001 0 (cid:2) 001 0 (cid:2) 001 0 (cid:2) 001 0 (cid:2) 001 0 (cid:2) 001 Notes . This table reports the levels of organizational performance across three levels of turnover and three different levels of environmental change . For the results where turnover is varied , the value for p envir is ﬁxed at 0 . 1 . For the results where environmental change is varied , p turnover is ﬁxed at 0 . 01 . The results show that the semi - isolated subgroup structure is always the highest performer across different turnover and environmental change conditions , and the performance differences among different structures are statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 (cid:2) 01 . ( 1991 ) , we ﬁnd that turnover serves a functional role by preserving diversity in the organization . To see whether a semi - isolated structure continues to perform better in the open system , we run 100 simula - tion runs for each structure ( (cid:2) = 0 , (cid:2) = 0 (cid:3) 1 , and (cid:2) = 1 ) and vary ( a ) the turnover rate and ( b ) the extent of envi - ronmental change . The details of these simulation exper - iments are shown in Table 1 . We ﬁnd that for each level of turnover rate or environmental change , the learning outcomes are always highest when (cid:2) equals 0 . 1 , sug - gesting that the beneﬁts of the semi - isolated subgroup structure are robust to these contingencies . Furthermore , in results not reported here , we ﬁnd that modest amounts of personnel turnover ( when the turnover rate is 0 . 01 % ) are consistently beneﬁcial across a range of values for subgroup structure or environmental dynamism . This modest amount of turnover helps to inject the organiza - tion with novel ideas and replenish lost diversity neces - sary to adapt to a changing environment . On the other hand , at turnover rates of 0 . 1 or above , learning per - formance drops substantially . This ﬁnding is equivalent to what evolutionary biologists call “error catastrophe” ( e . g . , Kauffman 1995 ) where too high a mutation rate makes the system too disruptive to evolve . 4 . 3 . Sensitivity Analysis First , we vary the size of an organization ( n = 140 , 210 , 350 , and 420 ) and ﬁnd that there is no substan - tive change in our results . Second , we vary the individ - ual learning rate to see if it affected our main ﬁndings . When learning rates are sufﬁciently small ( e . g . , p learning is smaller than 0 . 7 ) , modest amounts of cross - group linking always yield the highest long - run performance . When learning rates are high ( e . g . , p learning = 0 (cid:3) 7 , 0 . 8 , and 0 . 9 ) , however , it becomes harder to trace this pattern because performance heterogeneity among different net - work structures becomes less pronounced . Furthermore , consistent with March ( 1991 ) , we ﬁnd that the average outcomes of learning decrease with these higher values of learning rates . 12 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 636 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 5 . Discussion In this study , we use a series of simulations to exam - ine the inﬂuence of interpersonal network structure on organizational - level learning . We focus our analysis on the extent of isolation of small subgroups by varying the degree of cross - group links . We ﬁnd that modest amounts of cross - group linking ( i . e . , low but nonzero levels ) are associated with higher equilibrium perfor - mance levels . The semi - isolation of subgroups helps to preserve heterogeneity of ideas and beliefs in the orga - nizations , permitting organizations to explore a wider range of ideas and belief sets , while the small number of random cross - group links permits the best - performing ideas and belief sets to diffuse throughout the organiza - tions . Our study also ﬁnds , rather surprisingly , that the semi - isolated subgroup structure achieves superior long - run learning outcomes across a wide range of parame - ter conditions , including contingencies such as varying problem complexity , environmental change , and person - nel turnover . The role of subgroup structure , however , appears to be inﬂuenced by our socialized learning pro - cess ( i . e . , majority decision rule ) . Furthermore , perfor - mance variation across different subgroup structures is only observable for problems of moderate complexity— if problems are too simple , every organization easily achieves the maximum score , and if problems are too difﬁcult , every organization performs poorly . 5 . 1 . Structure as a Mechanism for Balancing Exploration and Exploitation As noted previously , prior research has found that orga - nizations tend to emphasize exploitation at the expense of exploration , and that organization structure may help to attenuate this problem . Our study provides additional insight into this stream of research by demonstrating how subgroup structure inﬂuences learning processes within the organization . In our simulated organizational context , parallel , isolated learning within each sub - group enables exploration , and the preservation of vari - ety of knowledge in an organization . Learning across subgroups enables exploitation by facilitating the rapid diffusion and assimilation of currently superior knowl - edge . Our study thus suggests that a productive balance between exploration and exploitation can be achieved by breaking an organization down into small semiau - tonomous subunits with a small fraction of cross - group links . Our results resonate with a growing body of research on network structure ( Bell and Zaheer 2007 ; Fleming et al . 2007 ; Hansen 1999 , 2002 ; Reagans and McEvily 2003 ; Schilling and Phelps 2007 ; Uzzi 1997 ; Uzzi and Spiro 2005 ; Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ) . Research on social networks argues that dense clustering pro - vides trust and reciprocity norms , while also facilitating intense interaction ( Coleman 1988 , Uzzi 1997 ) . On the other hand , weak ties ( i . e . , those that extend beyond an actor’s group of densely connected afﬁliations ) create advantages for actors by providing access to resources that are different from those found in an actor’s more immediate social network ( Granovetter 1973 , Hansen 1999 ) . Similarly , studies of interﬁrm networks suggest that the redundant connections created by clustering help to increase the information transmission capacity of a network , whereas connections across clusters help to increase the scope of new information that can be accessed . Thus , networks that have both clustering and some amount of random linking between them are valu - able for creativity and innovation ( Schilling and Phelps 2007 ) . Both the social network and interﬁrm network literatures thus emphasize the local transmission advan - tages of clustering and the information scope advan - tages of cross - cluster connections . Our study , however , highlights another key aspect of this dynamic : it is the preservation of diverse ideas within small groups that increases the information scope of the overall net - work . In essence , the subgroups shelter heterodox ideas , enabling them to survive and be reﬁned , rather than quickly extinguished through competition in the larger population . 13 Our central ﬁnding above is also consistent with the literature on technology management . This literature has suggested that it is beneﬁcial to isolate NPD teams , at least temporarily , from each other or from the rest of the organization ( e . g . , Bower and Christensen 1995 ) . Isolat - ing NPD teams and giving them considerable autonomy allows them to pursue new technological possibilities , unfettered from existing organizational paradigms . This is especially important when teams are working on dis - ruptive innovations whose features appear inconsistent with current customer requirements . On the other hand , our results also suggest that teams should not be com - pletely isolated . A modest degree of connection between NPD teams ( or between NPD teams and other divisions of the ﬁrm ) is important to enable the leveraging of ideas across the organization , fostering the identiﬁcation of valuable synergies . Small - world connectivity of this sort can be achieved by creating interteam liaison roles or utilizing practices such as personnel rotation or inter - divisional task forces . 14 5 . 2 . Resolution to Inconsistent Views The evolutionary work by Wright ( 1932 , 1964 ; and oth - ers ) has argued that certain structural designs have selec - tive advantage under a wide range of environmental set - tings . Research on small - world networks has suggested a similar point , arguing that particular network structures have inherent advantages that yield knowledge creation beneﬁts irrespective of many of the ﬁner details of the system or its context . The ubiquity of small - world struc - tures in diverse physical and social systems has provided empirical evidence that strengthens this position ( Watts D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 637 1999 ) . Management research , however , has long empha - sized a contingency perspective that asserts that contex - tual or environmental conditions almost always moderate relationships between organizational design and organi - zational performance . This body of research would tend to resist the notion that any structural dimension would be universally advantageous . Our evidence is more or less consistent with the evolutionary / small - world perspective , while not com - pletely ruling out the claims of the contingency perspec - tive . The semi - isolated subgroup structure achieves supe - rior performance despite a wide range of contingency variations we explore , such as problem complexity , envi - ronmental change , or personnel turnover . The beneﬁts of a semi - isolated structure appear to be remarkably robust when the search problem is of moderate com - plexity ( 2 < s < 10 ) . However , this robustness may be bounded to the “majority decision” rule that we adopted and modiﬁed from March’s ( 1991 ) original study . It appears that this rule plays a pivotal role in the isola - tion and preservation of diverse ideas in different sub - groups . Because the majority of an individual’s con - tacts are within their subgroup , the majority decision rule causes individuals to initially be primarily inﬂu - enced by members of their subgroup . A contact out - side the subgroup only becomes the “majority” when there are no superior peers within the subgroup . Need - less to say , in an environment where an individual’s learning is less inﬂuenced by the collective beliefs of their peers , subgroup structure is likely to matter far less . Although one study clearly cannot provide sufﬁcient evi - dence to assert that one particular structural dimension or archetype is universally beneﬁcial , we believe that this might suggest an important area for future research . We are hopeful that future studies will continue to explore whether the learning beneﬁts of the semi - isolated sub - group structure are bounded to particular contextual settings . 5 . 3 . Methodological Innovations Our work offers a set of methodological innovations for future research . First , we develop a model of organiza - tional learning that departs substantially from the orig - inal March model ( 1991 ) . As we noted before , March ( 1991 ) sidesteps the structural complexity inherent in interactions among organizational members ( i . e . , indi - vidual members are not assumed to learn from each other ) to highlight the dynamical complexity of orga - nizational learning . We tackle the structural complexity of interpersonal learning by building on and modifying Watt’s ( 1999 ) caveman model . By modeling interper - sonal learning via connected caveman networks with a tunable rewiring parameter , we expose an untapped link between evolutionary theory and the burgeoning litera - ture on small - world networks . Our second methodological contribution lies in the development of a generalized m / s payoff function that incorporates some well - known payoff functions ( e . g . , March’s ( 1991 ) linear payoff function ) as special cases . Like the NK model , our payoff function produces the complexity of a search problem that arises not only from the number of elements to search but also from their interdependence . The complexity parameter in our generalized payoff function ( s(cid:8) effectively tunes the level of interdependency ( i . e . , K in the NK model ) . In this sense , our payoff structure is similar to the NK model . Compared to it , however , our payoff function dramatically reduces the computational burden of run - ning a computer simulation . Though NK models have become popular for management simulations , they are not typically used in computer science because the computational burden of an NK model increases expo - nentially with dimensions . Our baseline model stud - ies learning in a high - dimensional problem ( m = 100 ) ; perhaps when computing power renders it feasible , one could replicate this study with an NK model , though we conjecture that the main results would not change much . To conclude , our paper provides an optimistic answer to the challenge of balancing the opposing forces of exploration and exploitation , a key concern in organiza - tional learning , adaptation , and performance . We show that there exists a particular structural design that may help thwart the self - destructive tendencies of adaptive processes in organizations . Although our ﬁnding is more consistent with evolutionary perspectives and the recent literature on small - world networks , we do not believe we have the “ﬁnal word . ” Future research should continue to explore the impact of contextual and contingent vari - ables on structure , and we hope that the work we present here represents an important stepping stone to uncover - ing more nuanced underpinnings between structure and performance . Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Paul Adler , Linda Argote , Jerker Denrell , Michael Katz , James March , Steve Mezias , Nicolaj Siggelkow , and Gordon Walker for helpful comments and sug - gestions . They also thank seminar participants at the Organi - zation Science Winter Conference in 2006 , New York Univer - sity , and the Wharton Mini - Technology Conference in 2007 . This research was supported by National Science Foundation under Grant SES - 0234075 . Authorship is alphabetical and all authors contributed equally . Appendix A . Formal Description of the m / s Generalized Payoff Function Let (cid:10)(cid:7)x(cid:8) denote the payoff function for a bit string x with its dimension m . We assume that (cid:10)(cid:7)x(cid:8) is characterized by a con - tinuum between two polar ends . On one end of the continuum is a linear payoff function L(cid:7)x(cid:8) —this is equivalent to the one D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 638 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS March ( 1991 ) used in his learning model . Let x j denote j th element of the bit string x . Then , the linear payoff function is L(cid:7)x(cid:8) = m (cid:2) j = 1 (cid:11) j (cid:5) ( A1 ) where (cid:11) j = 1 if x j corresponds with reality on that dimension ; (cid:11) j = 0 otherwise . In our formulation , L(cid:7)x(cid:8) is a special case of (cid:10)(cid:7)x(cid:8) . When the payoff function is characterized by ( A1 ) , it is rather easy for an organization to search for higher payoff points because a payoff of each problem is independent from others . Consider the other extreme on the continuum : Hinton and Nowlan’s ( 1987 ) payoff function , which is known as a “needle - in - a - haystack” search problem . Let H(cid:7)x(cid:8) denote this payoff function . There is only one peak in a space of 2 m possibilities . Unlike March’s ( 1991 ) linear search prob - lem , this problem is very hard because the search land - scape provides no cue for guiding evolution to the peak . For instance , suppose m = 10 . For simplicity , suppose that a bit string representing the highest payoff is 1111111111 . There are zero payoffs to even minor deviations from this con - ﬁguration , for example , 1011111111 and 1101111111 . That is , even when the organization is one step away from the peak , there is no clue for the organization to infer where the peak is . Only random trial and error can lead it to the peak . At this level of interdependency , it is extremely hard for organizations to improve their performance—a man - ifestation of the “nonevolvability condition” discussed in Kauffman ( 1993 , 1995 ) . Between the two extreme cases , there is a middle ground , where an m - bit string is partitioned into l independent sub - sets . Within each subset , there are s bits , whose performance is coupled . Note that l = m / s . Formally , we represent our gen - eralized payoff function as (cid:10)(cid:7)x(cid:8) = s (cid:3) s (cid:4) j = 1 (cid:11) j + 2 s (cid:4) j = s + 1 (cid:11) j + ··· + m (cid:4) j = m − s + 1 (cid:11) j (cid:5) (cid:3) ( A2 ) Here , s serves as a tunable parameter that can control the difﬁculty of the search problems , and 1 ≤ s ≤ m . When s = 1 , (cid:10)(cid:7)x(cid:8) = L(cid:7)x(cid:8) . By increasing the value of s , the search problem becomes more interdependent . The bigger the value of s , the more interdependent the search problem . When s = m , the search problem becomes Hinton and Nowlan’s ( 1987 ) payoff function . That is , (cid:10)(cid:7)x(cid:8) = m (cid:4) j = 1 m(cid:11) j = H(cid:7)x(cid:8)(cid:3) ( A3 ) For instance , suppose reality is represented by a string of 11111 11111 , and we set our parameter s to 5 . The payoff to one individual , A , whose beliefs are 11100 11111 is 5 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 0 × 0 + 5 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1 = 5 . The payoff to another individual , B , whose beliefs are 11111 11111 is 5 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1 + 5 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1 = 10 . If we set our parameter s to 10 , A’s payoff will be 0 , whereas B’s will remain at 10 . Thus , the higher the s parameter , the more complex is the problem . The main beneﬁt of this characterization of the m / s pay - off function is that we can control the difﬁculty of a search problem with only a single parameter s . An organization’s per - formance is measured as the average performance across all individuals in the organization . Appendix B . Model Parameters and Steps B . 1 . List of Model Parameters Range of parameter Parameters Remarks values analyzed n Number of individuals in the organization 140 , 210 , 280 , 350 , 420 m Dimensions of beliefs 40 , 70 , 100 , 130 , 160 z Size of a subgroup 7 , 14 , 28 , 70 , and 140 ∗ (cid:4) Rewiring probability Varies from 0 to 1 p learning Probability of individual learning from the majority view 0 . 1 , 0 . 2 , 0 . 3 , (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) , 0 . 8 , 0 . 9 s Degree of complexity 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 10 p turnover Probability of turnover 0 , 0 . 001 , 0 . 005 , 0 . 01 , 0 . 05 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 p envir Probability of change in each element of reality 0 . 1 , 0 . 4 , 0 . 7 T Interval for environment change 200 ∗ Changing the size of a subgroup entails corresponding changes to values of n because the number of individuals in the organization ( i . e . , n ) has to be divisible by the size of a subgroup . B . 2 . Simulation Steps B . 2 . 1 . Preparation Step . All parameter values for the simulation are set up at this stage . There are 280 individuals in each organization ( i . e . , n = 280 ) . The number of dimen - sions in the beliefs is set to 100 ( i . e . , m = 100 ) . Reality is determined by randomly assigning a value of 1 or − 1 for each of 100 dimensions , whereas each dimension of an individual’s belief set is determined by assigning a value randomly drawn from 1 , 0 , or − 1 . Each organization consists of 40 clusters of individuals ( i . e . , each cluster has seven individuals , though we will later explore the effect of varying the size of the cluster ) . This organizational network is implemented by ﬁrst connect - ing each individual to six other individuals in a pattern anal - ogous to the connected caveman pattern in Figure 1 ( a ) . We then rewire these connections according to (cid:2) . For each focal individual , we draw a random number from a uniform dis - tribution (cid:4) 0 (cid:5) 1 (cid:6) . If the random number drawn is smaller than (cid:2) , we eliminate one of the individual’s links and randomly choose another individual outside of the cluster to whom the focal individual will have a new connection . We repeat this for all the existing connections of the focal individual and then repeat for all individuals in the organization . B . 2 . 2 . Period 1 . The simulation procedure evaluates each individual’s performance by comparing her beliefs with the m dimensions of reality . This evaluation is based on the payoff function described previously . Then , superior perform - ers to which the focal individual is directly connected are identiﬁed . When there is no superior performer , the focal indi - vidual keeps all of her previous beliefs . When there are two or D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 639 more superior performers , a majority belief among them will be determined for each of m dimensions . The focal individual adapts to each majority belief with probability p learning . When there are ties ( i . e . , the number of superior performers who believe in − 1 is equal to that of those who believe in 1 ) , the focal individual keeps her existing belief . All the individuals learn simultaneously from one another based on beliefs at the beginning of the period . B . 2 . 3 . Period t . Individuals update their beliefs at period t . The learning process is repeated until no further change in any individual’s beliefs occurs ( i . e . , when equilibrium is obtained ) . Appendix C . Comparison of Majority Decision Rule vs . Tournament Selection Note that because we are interested in modeling organizational learning , we utilized a majority decision rule that simulates the socialization process by which an individual is inﬂuenced by their peers . This is closely analogous to the setup in the origi - nal March ( 1991 ) model . Not surprisingly , subgroup structure matters much less when the model does not incorporate social - ization . If , for example , one employs a “tournament selection” rule ( an individual identiﬁes the best - performing individual to which they are connected and emulates each of their beliefs with probability p learning (cid:8) , subgroup structure has little effect on performance . Such a learning rule outperforms the majority decision rule when (cid:2) is extremely low ( nearly isolated sub - groups ) or very high ( when subgroup structure is lost ) , but underperforms the majority decision rule when subgroups are semi - isolated , as shown in Figure C . 1 . Figure C . 1 Performance Comparison of Majority Decision Rule vs . Tournament Selection 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 P e rf o r m a n ce Tournament selection Majority view (cid:2) Endnotes 1 We use the term “subgroup” throughout the paper to refer to subdivisions of an organization such as product teams or divi - sions . The degree to which these subgroups are distinct and / or isolated from the rest of the organization ( “subgroup struc - ture” ) is an outcome of organizational design . This is a differ - ent conceptualization of subgroup structure from that used in work on team subgroups ( e . g . , Gibson and Vermeulen 2003 ) , in which subgroups refer to the self - organization of individu - als into smaller cohorts within a team based on demographic similarities . 2 In March’s ( 1991 ) model , individuals in an organization do not learn from each other . Instead , there is “mutual learning” between individuals and the organizational code . The learn - ing by and from the organizational code is meant to repre - sent a socialization process whereby an organization social - izes recruits to its language , beliefs , and practices , while the code simultaneously adapts to the beliefs of individual that have superior performance . Our adaptation does not dismiss this socialization process , but rather utilizes recent advances in simulation tools to permit socialization and learning to occur in a manner that we believe is more realistic—through inter - personal interaction . 3 We begin with a connected model as our baseline for two important reasons . First , our intention is to model organi - zational learning , which necessitates that our subgroups be somehow connected under an organizing structure . If they were disconnected , the mapping to an overarching organiza - tion would be lost . Second , the dynamic properties of iso - lated networks differ drastically from connected networks . If groups are isolated from one another , information cannot diffuse between them , rendering the usual subjects of inter - est in diffusion studies ( e . g . , infection rate , path length , etc . ) uninteresting . Thus , from a graph theoretical viewpoint , iso - lated networks are qualitatively quite distinct from connected networks . Our minor modiﬁcation to Watts’ ( 1999 ) caveman model ensures that each individual is initially connected to the same number of direct neighbors . 4 In network studies it is conventional to use random rewiring when there is no ex ante reason to use a prespeciﬁed connec - tion pattern . The use of random rewiring does not assume that interaction patterns within an organization are random ; it only assumes that they are indeterminate . 5 (cid:2) can be interpreted as the fraction of additional cross - group links ( i . e . , beyond those initially used to maintain the net - work’s minimal connectivity ) available in an organizational network . The larger the value of (cid:2) , the more cross - group links there are in the network , and the shorter the degrees of separa - tion among organizational members . In addition , as a result of random rewiring for (cid:2) > 0 , the number of neighboring nodes for each node varies . This variation in the number of links can be approximated by a Poisson distribution . 6 Figure 2 indicates that this ﬁnding is not parameter speciﬁc , but rather that there is a broad interval of (cid:2) over which the long - run outcome is relatively high . We thank James March for bringing this issue to our attention . 7 The group sizes we use for our starting points are based on realistic group sizes used in organizations . Devine et al . ( 1999 ) report that the average size of new product development teams in the United States is 11 members . The Saratoga Institute’s 2001 benchmarking study ( Davison 2003 ) found that the aver - age span of control of supervisors in U . S . companies ranged from four employees per manager ( for information services ) to 16 employees for healthcare organizations . Needless to say , if the subgroup becomes very large ( e . g . , approaches the size of the organization ) , the results approach those that we obtained for a completely connected organization . 8 Given that we keep the number of organizational members constant , note that z could also be interpreted as the aver - age connectivity of the organization . Because of the nature D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 640 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS of connected caveman graph , an increase in the size of sub - groups also increases the average number of links per person . For example , when z = 7 , the average number of connections per person is 6 . When z = 14 , 28 , 70 , and 140 , the average number increases to 13 , 27 , 69 , and 139 , respectively . If we increase the size of the subgroups but constrain the number of links individuals have within them to something less than the size of the subgroup , we end up replicating results we have already produced . If , for example , we permit each individual to have six links and the links are assigned in a cliquish man - ner ( as would be reasonable given what we know about social processes such as homophily , etc . ) , this ends up being struc - turally identical to an organization with 40 subgroups with seven individuals each , with no connectivity or minimal con - nectivity between them depending on how we set up the initial cliques . If we assign the six links within a large subgroup ran - domly , this ends up being structurally nearly identical to an organization with 40 subgroups of seven individuals each with relatively high (cid:2) . 9 This result is reminiscent of the nonevolvability condition , which basically means that systems cannot evolve when search complexity is beyond a certain threshold ( Kauffman 1993 , 1995 ) . Research on complex systems has indicated that many real - world problems are neither too easy nor too hard , and that the degree of interdependence is rather moderate ( Kauffman 1995 , Waldrop 1992 ) . Our ﬁnding is also highly consistent with prior studies in the management area ( Rivkin 2001 , Schoemaker 1990 ) . For instance , using the NK framework , Rivkin ( 2001 ) showed that only in the case of moderate com - plexity does the wedge between innovators and imitators exist . 10 We ﬁnd that turnover is detrimental to long - run perfor - mance in a stable environment , consistent with prior work ( e . g . , Argote et al . 1995 , Denrell et al . 2004 , Ton and Huck - man 2008 ) . 11 We thank Michael Katz for bringing this to our attention . 12 We also implement a version of our program that closely resembles a formal hierarchical organization . We keep the original set up the same ( i . e . , same number of nodes , same number of dimensions , etc . ) , except that we organize sub - groups hierarchically . Instead of having seven subgroups in a ﬂat organization , we organize the subgroups into four levels ( with one subgroup randomly chosen to represent the top man - agement team and two subgroups for each of the lower levels ) . Once this structure is set up , we again rewire existing links probabilistically according to the value of (cid:2) . In results not reported here , we ﬁnd that the general pattern is the same— the highest performance is reached when the probability of rewiring is around 0 . 1 , which corresponds to a semi - isolated subgroup structure . Notably , we do not introduce differential authority or power into our model , which would be an inter - esting area for future research . 13 It is important to note , however , that even though a semi - isolated structure may be optimal , individuals within this struc - ture may see opportunities to create bridging ties that will enhance their personal performances . Incentives in real orga - nizations may not be well aligned . 14 Our results also echo several recent simulation papers that study learning and search using different models ( e . g . , Davis et al . 2009 ) . References Ahuja , G . 2000 . Collaboration networks , structural holes , and inno - vation : A longitudinal study . Admin . Sci . Quart . 45 ( 3 ) 425 – 455 . Argote , L . , H . Greve . 2007 . A behavioral theory of the ﬁrm—40 years and counting : Introduction and impact . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 3 ) 337 – 349 . Argote , L . , B . McEvily , R . Reagans . 2003 . Managing knowledge in organizations : An integrative framework and review of emerging themes . Management Sci . 49 ( 4 ) 571 – 582 . Argote , L . , C . Insko , N . Yovetich , A . Romero . 1995 . Group learning curves : The effects of turnover and task complexity on group performance . J . Appl . Soc . Psych . 25 512 – 529 . Argyris , C . , D . Schon . 1996 . Organizational Learning II : Theory , Method , and Practice . Addison Wesley , Reading , MA . Augier , M . 2003 . The evolution of behavioral economics . Working paper , Stanford University , Stanford , CA . Bell , G . , A . Zaheer . 2007 . Geography , networks , and knowledge ﬂow . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 6 ) 955 – 972 . Benner , M . J . , M . Tushman . 2003 . Exploitation , exploitation , and pro - cess management : The productivity dilemma revisited . Acad . Management Rev . 28 238 – 256 . Birkinshaw , J . , R . Noble , J . Ridderstrale . 2002 . Knowledge as con - tingency variable : Do the characteristics of knowledge predict organization structure ? Organ . Sci . 13 ( 3 ) 274 – 299 . Bower , J . L . , C . M . Christensen . 1995 . Disruptive technologies : Catching the wave . Harvard Bus . Rev . 73 ( 1 ) 43 – 53 . Brown , J . , P . Duguid . 1991 . Organizational learning and communities of practice : Towards a uniﬁed view of working , learning and innovation . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) 40 – 57 . Burns , T . , G . M . Stalker . 1961 . The Management of Innovation . Tavi - stock , London . Burt , R . 1992 . Structural Holes : The Social Structure of Competition . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Castore , C . H . , K . Peterson , T . A . Goodrich . 1971 . Risky shift : Social value or social choice ? An alternative model . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 20 487 – 494 . Chandler , A . 1962 . Strategy and Structure : Chapters in the History of Industrial Enterprise . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Child , J . 1972 . Organization structure , environment and performance : The role of strategic choice . Sociology 6 1 – 22 . Coleman , J . 1988 . Social capital in the creation of human capital . Amer . J . Soc . 94 95 – 120 . Crossan , M . , H . Lane , R . White . 1999 . An organizational learning framework : From intuition to institution . Acad . Management Rev . 24 522 – 537 . Crosson , M . M . , I . Bedrow . 2003 . Organizational learning and strate - gic renewal . Strategic Management J . 24 1087 – 1105 . Cyert , R . M . , J . G . March . 1963 . A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Daft , R . , K . Weick . 1984 . Toward a model of organizations as inter - pretation systems . Acad . Management Rev . 66 70 – 74 . Davis , J . , K . Eisenhardt , C . Bingham . 2009 . Complexity theory , mar - ket dynamism and the strategy of simple rules . Admin . Sci . Quart . Forthcoming . Davis , J . H . , N . L . Kerr , R . S . Atkin , R . Holt , D . Meek . 1975 . The decision processes of 6 - and 12 - person mock juries assigned unanimous and two thirds majority rules . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 32 1 – 14 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS 641 Davison , B . 2003 . Managment span of control : how wide it too wide ? J . Bus . Strategy . 24 ( 4 ) 22 – 29 . Denrell , J . , J . G . March . 2001 . Adaptation as information restriction : The hot stove effect . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 5 ) 523 – 538 . Denrell , J . , C . Fang . , D . Levinthal . 2004 . From T - mazes to labyrinths : Learning from model based feedback . Management Sci . 50 ( 10 ) 1366 – 1378 . Devine , D . J . , L . D . Clayton , J . L . Philips , B . B . Dunford , S . B . Melner . 1999 . Teams in organizations : Prevalence , char - acteristics , and effectiveness . Small Group Res . 30 678 – 711 . Dosi , G . 1988 . Sources , procedures , and microeconomic effects of innovation . J . Econom . Lit . 26 ( 3 ) 1120 – 1171 . Dyer , J . , H . Singh . 1998 . The relational view : Cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage . Acad . Management J . 23 660 – 679 . Eisenhardt , K . M . , S . L . Brown . 1999 . Patching : Restitching business portfolios in dynamic markets . Harvard Bus . Rev . 77 72 – 82 . Ethiraj , S . , D . Levinthal . 2004 . Bounded rationality and the search for organizational architecture : An evolutionary perspective on the design of organizations and their evolvability . Admin . Sci . Quart . 49 404 – 437 . Fang , C . , D . Levinthal . 2009 . Near - term liability of exploitation : Exploration and exploitation in multistage problems . Organ . Sci . 20 ( 3 ) 538 – 551 . Fleming , L . 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management Sci . 47 ( 1 ) 117 – 132 . Fleming , L . , O . Sorenson . 2001 . Technology as a complex adaptive system : Evidence from patent data . Res . Policy 30 1019 – 1039 . Fleming , L . , C . King , A . Juda . 2007 . Small worlds and regional inno - vation . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 6 ) 938 – 954 . Galbraith , J . R . 1973 . Designing Complex Organizations . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Gibson , C . , F . Vermeulen . 2003 . A healthy divide : Subgroups as a stimulus for team learning behavior . Admin . Sci . Quart . 48 202 – 239 . Goldberg , D . E . 1989 . Genetic Algorithms in Search , Optimization and Machine Learning . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Granovetter , M . 1973 . The strength of weak ties . Amer . J . Soc . 78 1360 – 1380 . Granovetter , M . 1992 . Problems of explanation in economic sociol - ogy . N . Nohria , R . Eccles , eds . Networks and Organizations : Structure , Form and Action . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , 25 – 56 . Gupta , A . K . , K . G . Smith , C . E . Shalley . 2006 . The interplay between exploration and exploitation . Acad . Management J . 49 693 – 706 . Hansen , M . T . 1999 . The search - transfer problem : The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across organization subunits . Admin . Sci . Quart . 44 82 – 111 . Hansen , M . T . 2002 . Knowledge networks : Explaining effective knowledge sharing in multiunit companies . Organ . Sci . 13 ( 3 ) 232 – 250 . Helfat , C . 1994 . Evolutionary trajectories in petroleum ﬁrm R & D . Management Sci . 40 ( 12 ) 1720 – 1747 . Hickson , D . , D . S . Pugh , D . Pheysey . 1969 . Operations technology and organization structure : An empirical reappraisal . Admin . Sci . Quart . 14 378 – 398 . Hinton , G . , S . Nowlan . 1987 . How learning can guide evolution . Complex Systems 1 495 – 502 . Holland , J . 1975 . Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems . University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor . Holland , J . 1992 . Genetic algorithms . Scientiﬁc Amer . 267 ( 1 ) 66 – 72 . Huber , G . 1991 . Organizational learning : The contributing processes and the literatures . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) 88 – 115 . Jacobides , M . 2007 . The inherent limits of organizational structure and the unfulﬁlled role of hierarchy : Lessons from a near - war . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 3 ) 455 – 477 . Jansen , J . J . P . , F . A . J . Van Den Bosch , H . W . Volberda . 2006 . Exploratory innovation , exploitative innovation , and perfor - mance : Effects of organizational antecedents and environmental moderators . Management Sci . 52 ( 11 ) 1661 – 1674 . Kameda , T . , J . Davis . 1990 . The function of the reference point in individual and group risk decision making . Organ . Behav . Human Decision Processes 46 55 – 76 . Kane , G . C . , M . Alavi . 2007 . Information technology and organiza - tional learning : An investigation of exploration and exploitation processes . Organ . Sci . 18 ( 5 ) 796 – 812 . Kauffman , S . 1993 . The Origins of Order . Oxford University Press , New York . Kauffman , S . 1995 . At Home in the Universe . Oxford University Press , New York . Klimoski , R . , S . Mohammed . 1994 . Team mental model : Construct or metaphor ? J . Management 20 403 – 437 . Larson , J . R . , C . Christensen . 1993 . Groups as problem - solving units : Toward a new meaning of social cognition . Brit . Psych . Soc . 32 5 – 30 . Lavie , D . , L . Rosenkopf . 2006 . Balancing exploration and exploitation in alliance formation . Acad . Management J . 49 797 – 818 . Lawrence , P . R . , J . W . Lorsch . 1967 . Organization and Environment . Harvard Business School Press , Boston . Lee , E . , J . Lee , J . Lee . 2006 . Reconsideration of the winner - take - all hypothesis : Complex networks and local bias . Management Sci . 52 ( 12 ) 1838 – 1848 . Lenox , M . 2002 . Organizational design , information transfer , and the acquisition of rent - producing resources . Comput . Math . Organ . Theory 8 ( 2 ) 113 – 131 . Levinthal , D . A . 1997 . Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Management Sci . 43 ( 7 ) 934 – 950 . Levinthal , D . , J . G . March . 1981 . A model of adaptive organizational search . J . Econom . Behav . Organ . 2 307 – 333 . Levinthal , D . , J . G . March . 1993 . The myopia of learning . Strategic Management J . 14 95 – 112 . Levitt , B . , J . G . March . 1988 . Organizational learning . Ann . Rev . Soc . 14 319 – 340 . Lewin , A . Y . , C . P . Long , T . N . Carroll . 1999 . The coevolution of new organizational forms . Organ . Sci . 10 ( 5 ) 535 – 550 . March , J . G . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) 71 – 87 . March , J . G . 2004 . Parochialism in the evolution of a research com - munity : The case of organization studies . Management Organ . Rev . 1 15 – 32 . Martin , X . , W . Mitchell . 1998 . The inﬂuence of local search and per - formance heuristics . Res . Policy 26 ( 7 / 8 ) 753 – 772 . Miller , K . D . , M . Zhao , R . J . Calantone . 2006 . Adding interpersonal learning and tacit knowledge to March’s exploration - exploitation model . Acad . Management . J . 49 709 – 722 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Fang , Lee , and Schilling : Balancing Exploration and Exploitation Through Structural Design 642 Organization Science 21 ( 3 ) , pp . 625 – 642 , ©2010 INFORMS Mitchell , M . 1996 . An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Nelson , R . R . , S . G . Winter . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Eco - nomic Change . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Nickerson , J . A . , T . R . Zenger . 2002 . Being efﬁciently ﬁckle : A dynamic theory of organizational choice . Organ . Sci . 13 ( 5 ) 547 – 566 . Onnela , J . P . , J . Saramäki , J . Hyvönen , G . Szabó , D . Lazer , K . Kaski , J . Kertész , A . - L . Barabási . 2007 . Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 7332 – 7336 . O’Reilly , C . A . , M . L . Tushman . 2004 . The ambidextrous organiza - tion . Harvard Bus . Rev . 82 ( 4 ) 74 – 81 . Patel , H . , K . Pavitt . 1997 . The technological competency of the world’s largest ﬁrms : Complex path - dependent , but not much variety . Res . Policy 26 141 – 156 . Perrow , C . 1967 . A framework for the comparative analysis of orga - nizations . Amer . Soc . Rev . 32 194 – 208 . Reagans , R . , B . McEvily . 2003 . Network structure and knowledge transfer : The effects of cohesion and range . Admin . Sci . Quart . 48 240 – 267 . Rivkin , J . 2001 . Reproducing knowledge : Replication without imita - tion at moderate complexity . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 3 ) 274 – 293 . Rivkin , J . W . 2000 . Imitation of complex strategies . Management Sci . 46 ( 6 ) 824 – 844 . Rogers , M . 2003 . It’s the Apple of his eye . Newsweek ( March 1 ) . Sandelands , L . , R . Stablein . 1987 . The concept of organization mind . Res . Soc . Organ . 5 135 – 161 . Schilling , M . A . , C . Phelps . 2007 . Interﬁrm collaboration networks : The impact of large scale network structure on ﬁrm innovation . Management Sci . 53 ( 7 ) 1113 – 1126 . Schilling , M . A . , H . K . Steensma . 2001 . The use of modular organi - zational forms : An industry level analysis . Acad . Management J . 44 ( 6 ) 1149 – 1168 . Schoemaker , P . 1990 . Strategy , complexity , and economic rent . Man - agement Sci . 36 ( 10 ) 1178 – 1192 . Siggelkow , N . , D . Levinthal . 2003 . Temporarily divide to con - quer : Centralized , decentralized , and reintegrated organizational approaches to exploration and adaptation . Organ . Sci . 14 ( 6 ) 650 – 669 . Siggelkow , N . , D . Levinthal . 2005 . Escaping real ( non - benign ) com - petency traps : Linking the dynamics of organizational structure to the dynamics of search . Strategic Organ . 3 85 – 115 . Siggelkow , N . , J . Rivkin . 2005 . Speed and search : Designing organiza - tions for turbulence and complexity . Organ . Sci . 16 ( 2 ) 101 – 122 . Siggelkow , N . , J . Rivkin . 2006 . When exploration backﬁres : Unin - tended consequences of multi - level organizational search . Acad . Management J . 49 779 – 795 . Simon , H . 1979 . Rational decision making in business organizations . Amer . Econom . Rev . 69 ( 4 ) 493 – 513 . Strogatz , S . 2001 . Exploring complex networks . Nature 410 268 – 276 . Stuart T . , J . Podolny . 1996 . Local search and the evolution of techno - logical capabilities . Strategic Management J . 17 21 – 38 . Taylor , A . , H . Greve . 2006 . Superman or the fantastic four ? Knowl - edge combination and experience in innovative teams . Acad . Management J . 49 723 – 740 . Thompson , J . D . 1967 . Organizations in Action . McGraw - Hill , New York . Ton , Z . , R . Huckman . 2008 . Managing the impact of employee turnover on performance : The role of process conformance . Organ . Sci . 19 ( 1 ) 56 – 68 . Uzzi , B . 1997 . Social structure and competition in interﬁrm networks : The paradox of embeddedness . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 35 – 67 . Uzzi , B . , J . Spiro . 2005 . Collaboration and creativity : The small world problem . Amer . J . Soc . 111 447 – 504 . Waldrop , M . 1992 . Complexity : The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos . Simon & Schuster , New York . Watts , D . J . 1999 . Small Worlds : The Dynamics of Networks Between Order and Randomness . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Williamson , O . 2003 . Examining economic organization through the lens of contract . Indust . Corp . Change 12 917 – 942 . Woodward , J . 1965 . Industrial Organization : Theory and Practice . Oxford University Press , London . Wright , S . 1932 . The roles of mutation , inbreeding , crossbreeding and selection in evolution . Proc . VI Internat . Congress Genetics , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY , 356 – 366 . Wright , S . 1964 . Stochastic processes in evolution . J . Gurland , ed . Stochastic Models in Medicine and Biology . University of Wisconsin Press , Madison 199 - 241 . Yayavaram , S . , G . Ahuja . 2008 . Decomposability in knowledge structures and its impact on the usefulness of inventions and knowledge - base malleability . Admin . Sci . Quart . 53 ( 2 ) 333 – 362 . Zander , U . , B . Kogut . 1995 Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities : An empirical test . Organ . Sci . 6 ( 1 ) 76 – 92 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 149 . 145 ] on 30 A p r il 2014 , a t 06 : 07 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .