Informing the Development of Calendar Systems for Domestic Use Andy Crabtree , Terry Hemmings and Torn Rodden The School of Computer Science & IT , The University of Nottingham , Jubilee Campus , Wollaton Road , Nottingham NG8 lBB , UK . { axe , tah , tar } @ es . nott . ae . uk John Mariani Computing Department , Lancaster University , Lancaster LAI 4YR , UK . jam @ eomp . lanes . ae . uk Abstract . This paper contributes to the design of Groupware Calendar Systems ( GCSs ) for use in domestic life . We consider a number of ethnographic studies of calendar use in domestic circumstances to illuminate the design space and inform design reasoning . GCSs have been employed in the workplace for sometime and have been informed by studies of ' calendar work ' . As design moves out of the workplace and into the home , the unique demands of domestic use now need to be considered . Existing insights into calendar work are restricted to the workplace however , and are constrained by analytic taxonomies . In the absence of first - hand knowledge of calendar use in domestic settings , we suspend the use of taxonomies and describe the ' interpretive work ' implicated in calendar work in order to explicate real world practices of calendar use in domestic life . These novel studies draw attention to a corpus of accountable work - practices that impact directly on design . In particular , they emphasize the need for design to consider how the physical and the digital may be merged to support collaboration ' anywhere , anytime ' ; the necessity of devising negotiation protocols supporting computer - mediated communication ; and the development of collaborative access models and interaction techniques to support data sharing . K . Kuutti , EH . Karsten , G . Fitzpatrick , P . Dourish and K . Schmidt ( eds . ) , ECSCW 2003 : Proceedingv oj ' the Ei " hth European Conj ' erence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 14 - 18 September 2003 , Helsinki , Finland , pp . 1 - 20 . © 2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers . 120 The Social Character of Calendars Electronic versions of the mundane calendar are one of the most successful kinds of collaboration technology to be adopted by end - users to date ( Palen and Grudin 2002 ) . Calendars are ubiquitous tools in office work , where it has long been recognised that they play an important role in the coordination of organizational affairs ( Kincaid and Dupont 1985 ) . Calendars are also prominent coordinational devices in the domestic environment - a setting not characterised by the organization of action for purposes ofproduction and efficiency , but an organized setting nonetheless ( Venkatesh 1996 ) . The manufacturers of integrated office systems have included electronic versions of the calendar in almost every system they offer . As the computer moves out of the workplace and into the home we might expect to see the continued development of electronic calendars and other Personal Information Management technologies for home use . This is not simply a matter of technology transfer , however . The home is a distinct environment and it has already been recognised that there is a need for design to be sensitive and responsive to the unique demands of domestic life ( Gaver 2001 ) . The development of calendars supporting office work was initially informed by empirical studies of paper - based calendar use ( Kelly and Chapanis 1982 ) and the same strategy might be usefully employed as design moves into the domestic space . Empirical studies of calendar use in the workplace have identified a wide range of properties implicated in calendar use . In addition to their ubiquity , it is noted that calendars are both personal and social objects , providing a means for individuals to organize their affairs and a visible resource making others aware of the individual ' s schedule . This observation has led to the development of open , restricted , and closed models of calendar use in design , where the availability of personal information may be constrained by users according to the social circumstances of use ( Palen 1999 ) . Recognition that calendars are information - management tools ( Bellotti and Smith 2000 ) complements the observation that calendars are also communication devices that provide for awareness in their visibility ( Ehrlich 1987 ) . To this we may add that the visible character of calendars gives them a mnemonic function in ' marking out ' and so reminding users of important events that they must attend to ( Zerubavel 1981 ) . The various complementary properties of calendars ( information management , communication and mnemonic functions ) coupled with that essential property - time - provides a rationalized representation of the user ' s actual schedule of real time activities ( Lauer 1981 ) . This is not to say that the calendar actually matches the user ' s activities but rather , to draw attention to the planful character of calendars in their real world employment . Calendars are temporal plans of coordinate action situated in social space and may be characterised as temporal maps constructed by users to coordinate events with others . In the in vivo course of their construction , calendars come to assume the character of workspaces