A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Author ( s ) : Ikujiro Nonaka Source : Organization Science , Vol . 5 , No . 1 ( Feb . , 1994 ) , pp . 14 - 37 Published by : INFORMS Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2635068 Accessed : 21 / 12 / 2009 12 : 57 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = informs . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Organization Science . http : / / www . jstor . org A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Ikujiro Nonaka Institute of Business Research , Hitotsubashi University , Kunitachi , Tokyo , Japan I recommend this paper to Organization Science readers because I believe that it has the potential to stimulate the next wave of research on organization learning . It provides a conceptual framework for research on the differences and similarities of learning by individuals , groups , and organizations . Arie Y . Lewin Abstract This paper proposes a paradigm for managing the dynamic aspects of organizational knowledge creating processes . Its central theme is that organizational knowledge is created through a continuous dialogue between tacit and explicit knowledge . The nature of this dialogue is examined and four patterns of interaction involving tacit and explicit knowledge are identified . It is argued that while new knowledge is developed by individuals , organizations play a critical role in articulating and amplifying that knowledge . A theoretical framework is developed which provides an analytical per - spective on the constituent dimensions of knowledge cre - ation . This framework is then applied in two operational models for facilitating the dynamic creation of appropriate organizational knowledge . ( Self - Designing Organization ; Teams ; Knowledge Con - version ; Organizational Innovation ; Management Mod - els ) 1 . Introduction It is widely observed that the society we live in has been gradually turning into a " knowledge society " ( Drucker 1968 ; Bell 1973 ; Toffler 1990 ) . The ever in - creasing importance of knowledge in contemporary society calls for a shift in our thinking concerning innovation in large business organizations - be it tech - nical innovation , product innovation , or strategic or organizational innovation . ' It raises questions about how organizations process knowledge and , more im - portantly , how they create new knowledge . Such a shift in general orientation will involve , among other things , a reconceptualization of the organizational knowledge creation processes . The theory of organization has long been dominated by a paradigm that conceptualizes the organization as a system that ' processes ' information or ' solves ' prob - lems . Central to this paradigm is the assumption that a fundamental task for the organization is how efficiently it can deal with information and decisions in an uncer - tain environment . This paradigm suggests that the so - lution lies in the ' input - process - output ' sequence of hierarchical information processing . Yet a critical prob - lem with this paradigm follows from its passive and static view of the organization . Information processing is viewed as a problem - solving activity which centers on what is given to the organization - without due consid - eration of what is created by it . Any organization that dynamically deals with a changing environment ought not only to process infor - mation efficiently but also create information and knowledge . Analyzing the organization in terms of its design and capability to process information imposed by the environment no doubt constitutes an important approach to interpreting certain aspects of organiza - tional activities . However , it can be argued that the organization ' s interaction with its environment , to - gether with the means by which it creates and dis - tributes information and knowledge , are more impor - tant when it comes to building an active and dynamic understanding of the organization . For example , inno - vation , which is a key form of organizational knowledge creation , cannot be explained sufficiently in terms of information processing or problem solving . Innovation can be better understood as a process in which the organization creates and defines problems and then actively develops new knowledge to solve them . Also , innovation produced by one part of the organization in 1047 - 7039 / 94 / 0501 / 0014 / $ 01 . 25 14 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 Copyright ? 1994 . The Institute of Management Sciences IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation turn creates a stream of related information and knowledge , which might then trigger changes in the organization ' s wider knowledge systems . Such a se - quence of innovation suggests that the organization should be studied from the viewpoint of how it creates information and knowledge , rather than with regard to how it processes these entities . The goal of this paper is to develop the essential elements of a theory of organizational knowledge cre - ation . In the sections which follow , the basic concepts and models of the theory of organizational knowledge creation are presented . Based on this foundation , the dynamics of the organizational knowledge creation process are examined and practical models are ad - vanced for managing the process more effectively . 2 . Basic Concepts and Models of Organizational Knowledge Creation The following subsections explore some basic con - structs of the theory of organizational knowledge cre - ation . They begin by discussing the nature of infor - mation and knowledge and then draw a distinction between " tacit " and " explicit " knowledge . This dis - tinction represents what could be described as the epistemological dimension to organizational knowledge creation . It embraces a continual dialogue between explicit and tacit knowledge which drives the creation of new ideas and concepts . Although ideas are formed in the minds of individu - als , interaction between individuals typically plays a critical role in developing these ideas . That is to say , " communities of interaction " contribute to the ampli - fication and development of new knowledge . While these communities might span departmental or indeed organizational boundaries , the point to note is that they define a further dimension to organizational knowledge creation , which is associated with the extent of social interaction between individuals that share and develop knowledge . This is referred to as the " onto - logical " dimension of knowledge creation . Following a consideration of the two dimensions of knowledge creation , some attention is given to the role of individuals and , more specifically , to their " commit - ment " to the knowledge creating process . This covers aspects of their " intention , " the role of autonomy , and the effects of fluctuations or discontinuities in the organization and its environment . Next , a " spiral " model of knowledge creation is proposed which shows the relationship between the epistemological and ontological dimensions of knowl - edge creation . This spiral illustrates the creation of a new concept in terms of a continual dialogue between tacit and explicit knowledge . As the concept resonates around an expanding community of individuals , it is developed and clarified . Gradually , concepts which are thought to be of value obtain a wider currency and become crystalized . This description of the spiral model is followed by some observations about how to support the practical management of organizational knowledge creation . 2 . 1 . Knowledge and Information Knowledge is a multifaceted concept with multilayered meanings . The history of philosophy since the classical Greek period can be regarded as a never - ending search for the meaning of knowledge . 2 This paper follows traditional epistemology and adopts a definition of knowledge as " justified true belief . " It should be noted , however , that while the arguments of traditional epis - temology focus on " truthfulness " as the essential at - tribute of knowledge , for present purposes it is impor - tant to consider knowledge as a personal " belief , " and emphasize the importance of the " justification " of knowledge . This difference introduces another critical distinction between the view of knowledge of tradi - tional epistemology and that of the theory of knowl - edge creation . While the former naturally emphasizes the absolute , static , and nonhuman nature of knowl - edge , typically expressed in propositional forms in for - mal logic , the latter sees knowledge as a dynamic human process of justifying personal beliefs as part of an aspiration for the " truth . " Although the terms " information " and " knowledge " are often used interchangeably , there is a clear distinc - tion between information and knowledge . According to Machlup ( 1983 ) , information is a flow of messages or meanings which might add to , restructure or change knowledge . Dretske ( 1981 ) offers some useful defini - tions . In his words : Information is that commodity capable of yielding knowledge , and what information a signal carries is what we can learn from it ( Dretske 1981 , p . 44 ) . Knowledge is identified with information - produced ( or sustained ) belief , but the informa - tion a person receives is relative to what he or she already knows about the possibilities at the source ( ibid , p . 86 ) . In short , information is a flow of messages , while knowledge is created and organized by the very flow of information , anchored on the commitment and beliefs of its holder . This understanding emphasizes an essen - tial aspect of knowledge that relates to human action . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 15 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation The importance of knowledge related to action has been recognized in the area of artificial intelligence . For example , Gruber ( 1989 ) addresses the subject of an expert ' s " strategic knowledge " as that which directly guides his action , and attempts to develop the tools to acquire it . Since the 1980s , the development of cogni - tive science has been based on a serious reflection on behavioralist psychology ' s neglect of such traditional questions as , ' Why do human beings act in a certain way ? ' , which was a central issue for so - called " folk psychology " ( Stich 1986 ) . Searle ' s discussion on the " speech act " also points out a close relationship be - tween language and human action in terms of the " intention " and " commitment " of speakers ( Searle 1969 ) . In sum , as a fundamental basis for the theory of organizational creation of knowledge , it can be argued that attention should be focused on the active , subjec - tive nature of knowledge represented by such terms as " belief " and " commitment " that are deeply rooted in the value systems of individuals . The analysis of knowledge and information does not stop at this point . Information is a necessary medium or material for initiating and formalizing knowledge and can be viewed from " syntactic " and " semantic " perspectives . The syntactic aspect of information is illustrated by Shannon ' s analysis of the volume of in - formation which is measured without regard to its meaning or value . A telephone bill , for example , is not calculated on the basis of the content of a conversation but according to the duration of time and the distance involved . Shannon said that the semantic aspects of communication , which center on the meaning of infor - mation , are irrelevant to the engineering problem ( Shannon and Weaver 1949 ) . A genuine theory of information would be a theory about the content of our messages , not a theory about the form in which this content is embodied ( Dretske 1981 ) . In terms of creating knowledge , the semantic aspect of information is more relevant as it focuses on con - veyed meaning . The syntactic aspect does not capture the importance of information in the knowledge cre - ation process . Therefore , any preoccupation with the formal definition will tend to lead to a disproportionate emphasis on the role of information processing , which is insensitive to the creation of organizational knowl - edge out of the chaotic , equivocal state of information . Information , seen from the semantic standpoint , liter - ally means that it contains new meaning . As Bateson ( 1979 , p . 5 ) put it , " information consists of differences that make a difference . " This insight provides a new point of view for interpreting events that make previ - ously invisible connections or ideas obvious or shed light on unexpected connections ( Miyazaki and Ueno 1985 ) . For the purposes of building a theory of knowl - edge creation , it is important to concentrate on the semantic aspects of information . 2 . 2 . Two Dimensions of Knowledge Creation Although a great deal has been written about the importance of knowledge in management , relatively little attention has been paid to how knowledge is created and how the knowledge creation process can be managed . One dimension of this knowledge cre - ation process can be drawn from a distinction between two types of knowledge - " tacit knowledge " and ex - plicit knowledge . " As Michael Polanyi ( 1966 , p . 4 ) put it , " We can know more than we can tell " . 3 Knowledge that can be expressed in words and numbers only represents the tip of the iceberg of the entire body of possible knowledge . Polanyi classified human knowl - edge into two categories . " Explicit " or codified knowl - edge refers to knowledge that is transmittable in for - mal , systematic language . On the other hand , " tacit " knowledge has a personal quality , which makes it hard to formalize and communicate . Tacit knowledge is deeply rooted in action , commitment , and involvement in a specific context . In Polanyi ' s words , it " indwells " in a comprehensive cognizance of the human mind and body . While Polanyi articulates the contents of tacit knowl - edge in a philosophical context , it is also possible to expand his idea in a more practical direction . Tacit knowledge involves both cognitive and technical ele - ments . The cognitive elements center on what John - son - Laird ( 1983 ) called " mental models " in which hu - man beings form working models of the world by creating and manipulating analogies in their minds . These working models include schemata , paradigms , beliefs , and viewpoints that provide " perspectives " that help individuals to perceive and define their world . By contrast , the technical element of tacit knowledge cov - ers concrete know - how , crafts , and skills that apply to specific contexts . It is important to note here that the cognitive element of tacit knowledge refers to an indi - vidual ' s images of reality and visions for the future , that is to say , what is and what ought to be . As will be discussed later , the articulation of tacit perspectives - in a kind of " mobilization " process - is a key factor in the creation of new knowledge . Tacit knowledge is a continuous activity of knowing and embodies what Bateson ( 1973 ) has referred to as an " analogue " quality . In this context , communication between individuals may be seen as an analogue pro - 16 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation cess that aims to share tacit knowledge to build mutual understanding . This understanding involves a kind of " parallel processing " of the complexities of current issues , as the different dimensions of a problem are processed simultaneously . By contrast , explicit knowl - edge is discrete or " digital . " It is captured in records of the past such as libraries , archives , and databases and is assessed on a sequential basis . The Ontological Dimension : The Level of Social Inter - action . At a fundamental level , knowledge is created by individuals . An organization cannot create knowl - edge without individuals . The organization supports creative individuals or provides a context for such individuals to create knowledge . Organizational knowl - edge creation , therefore , should be understood in terms of a process that " organizationally " amplifies the knowledge created by individuals , and crystallizes it as a part of the knowledge network of organization . In this line , it is possible to distinguish several levels of social interaction at which the knowledge created by an individual is transformed and legitimized . In the first instance , an informal community of social interac - tion provides an immediate forum for nuturing the emergent property of knowledge at each level and developing new ideas . Since this informal community might span organizational boundaries - for example , to include suppliers or customers - it is important that the organization is able to integrate appropriate as - pects of emerging knowledge into its strategic develop - ment . Thus , the potential contribution of informal groups to organizational knowledge creation should be related to more formal notions of a hierarchical struc - ture . If this is done effectively , new knowledge associ - ated with more advantageous organizational processes or technologies will be able to gain a broader currency within the organization . In addition to the creation of knowledge within an organization , it is also possible that there will be formal provisions to build knowledge at an interorganizational level . This might occur if informal communities of interaction , that span the link between customers , sup - pliers , distributors , and even competitors , are put on a more formal basis , for example , through the formation of alliances or outsourcing . 2 . 3 . Commitment on the Part of the Knowledge Subject : Intention , Autonomy , and Fluctuation The prime movers in the process of organizational knowledge creation are the individual members of an organization . Individuals are continuously committed to recreating the world in accordance with their own perspectives . As Polanyi noted , " commitment " under - lies human knowledge creating activities . Thus , com - mitment is one of the most important components for promoting the formation of new knowledge within an organization . There are three basic factors that induce individual commitment in an organizational setting : " intention , " and " autonomy , " and a certain level of environmental " fluctuation . " Intention . Intention is concerned with how individ - uals form their approach to the world and try to make sense of their environment . It is not simply a state of mind , but rather what might be called an action - ori - ented concept . Edmund Husserl ( 1968 ) called this atti - tude on the part of the subject " intentionality . " He denied the existence of " consciousness " per se , which was generally assumed by psychologists in 19th century , and argued that consciousness arises when a subject pays attention to an object . In other words , any con - sciousness is a ' consciousness of something . ' It arises , endures , and disappears with a subject ' s commitment to an object . Eigen ( 1971 ) argued , in his evolutionary theory , that evolution involves the process of acquiring environ - mental information for better adaptation . Eigen in - sisted that the degree of meaningfulness of informa - tion , or a value parameter , needs to be introduced to explain this system . Human beings , as organic systems , derive meaning from the environment which is based on their ultimate pursuit of survival ( Shimizu 1978 ) . Man cannot grasp the meaning of information about his environment without some frame of value judg - ment . The meaning of information differs according to what a particular system aims to do ( manifest purpose or problem consciousness ) and the broader environ - ment in which that system exits ( context ) . It is more concerned with the system ' s future aspirations than its current state . Weick ( 1979 ) explains this " self - fulfilling prophecy " of a system as the " enactment " of the environment , which may be a projection of its strong will for self - actualization . While mechanistic informa - tion - processing models treat the mind as a fixed capac - ity device for converting meaningless information into conscious perception , in reality cognition is the activity of knowing and understanding as it occurs in the context of purposeful activity ( Neisser 1976 ) . Intention becomes apparent against this background . Without intention , it would be impossible to judge the value of the information or knowledge perceived or created . " The intentionality of the mind not only creates the possibility of meaning , but also limits its form " ( Searle 1983 , p . 166 ) . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 17 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Autonomy . The principle of autonomy can be ap - plied at the individual , group , and organizational levels - either separately or all together . However , the indi - vidual is a convenient starting point for analysis . Indi - viduals within the organization may have different intentions . Every individual has his or her own person - ality . By allowing people to act autonomously , the organization may increase the possibility of introducing unexpected opportunities of the type that are some - times associated with the so - called " garbage can " metaphor ( Cohen et al . 1972 ) . From the standpoint of creating knowledge , such an organization is more likely to maintain greater flexibility in acquiring , relating , and interpreting information . In a system where the auton - omy of individuals is assured , or where only " minimum critical specification " ( Morgan 1986 ) is intended , it is possible to establish a basis for self - organization . Individual autonomy widens the possibility that indi - viduals will motivate themselves to form new knowl - edge . Self - motivation based on deep emotions , for ex - ample , in the poet ' s creation of new expressions , serves as a driving force for the creation of metaphors . A sense of purpose and autonomy becomes important as an organizational context . Purpose serves as the basis of conceptualization . Autonomy gives individuals free - dom to absorb knowledge . Fluctuation . Even though intention is internal to the individual , knowledge creation at the individual level involves continuous interaction with the external world . In this connection , chaos or discontinuity can generate new patterns of interaction between individu - als and their environment . Individuals recreate their own systems of knowledge to take account of ambigu - ity , redundancy , noise , or randomness generated from the organization and its environment . These fluctua - tions differ from complete disorder and are character - ized by " order without recursiveness " - which repre - sents an order where the pattern is hard to predict in the beginning ( Gleick 1987 ) . Winograd and Flores ( 1986 ) emphasize the role of periodic " breakdowns " in human perception . Break - down refers to the interruption of an individual ' s habit - ual , comfortable ' state - of - being . ' When breakdowns occur , individuals question the value of habits and routine tools , which might lead to a realignment of commitments . Environmental fluctuation often triggers this breakdown . When people face such a breakdown or contradiction , they have an opportunity to recon - sider their fundamental thinking and perspectives . In other words , they begin to question the validity of basic attitudes toward the world . This process necessarily involves deep personal commitment by the individual and is similar in context to Piaget ' s ( 1974 ) observations about the importance of the role of contradiction in the interaction between the subject and its environ - ment in such a way that the subject forms perceptions through behavior . 2 . 4 . Knowledge Conversion and the Spiral of Knowledge It is now possible to bring together the epistemological and ontological dimensions of knowledge creation to form a " spiral " model for the processes involved . This involves identifying four different patterns of interac - tion between tacit and explicit knowledge . These pat - terns represent ways in which existing knowledge can be " converted " into new knowledge . Social interaction between individuals then provides an ontological di - mension to the expansion of knowledge . The idea of " knowledge conversion " may be traced from Anderson ' s ACT model ( Anderson 1983 ) devel - oped in cognitive psychology . In the ACT model , knowledge is divided into " declarative knowledge " ( ac - tual knowledge ) that is expressed in the form of propo - sitions and " procedural knowledge " ( methodological knowledge ) which is used in such activities as remem - bering how to ride a bicycle or play the piano . In the context of the present discussion , the former might approximate to explicit knowledge and the latter to tacit knowledge . Anderson ' s model hypothesizes that declarative knowledge has to be transformed into pro - cedural knowledge in order for cognitive skills to de - velop . This hypothesis is consistent with Ryle ' s classi - fication ( 1949 ) of knowledge into categories of knowing that something " exists " and knowing " how " it oper - ates . Anderson ' s categorization can be regarded as a more sophisticated version of Ryle ' s classification . One limitation of the ACT model is the hypothesis that transformation of knowledge is unidirectional and only involves transformations from declarative to procedu - ral knowledge , while it can be argued that transforma - tion is bidirectional . This may be because the ACT model is more concerned with maturation than with the creation of knowledge . Four Modes of Knowledge Conversion . The assump - tion that knowledge is created through conversion between tacit and explicit knowledge allows us to pos - tulate four different " modes " of knowledge conversion : ( 1 ) from tacit knowledge to tacit knowledge , ( 2 ) from explicit knowledge to explicit knowledge , ( 3 ) from tacit knowledge to explicit knowledge , and ( 4 ) from explicit knowledge to tacit knowledge . 18 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation First , there is a mode of knowledge conversion that enables us to convert tacit knowledge through interac - tion between individuals . One important point to note here is that an individual can acquire tacit knowledge without language . Apprentices work with their mentors and learn craftsmanship not through language but by observation , imitation , and practice . In a business set - ting , on - the - job training ( OJT ) uses the same principle . The key to acquiring tacit knowledge is experience . Without some form of shared experience , it is ex - tremely difficult for people to share each others ' think - ing processes . The mere transfer of information will often make little sense if it is abstracted from embed - ded emotions and nuanced contexts that are associated with shared experiences . This process of creating tacit knowledge through shared experience will be called " socialization . " The second mode of knowledge conversion involves the use of social processes to combine different bodies of explicit knowledge held by individuals . Individuals exchange and combine knowledge through such ex - change mechanisms as meetings and telephone conver - sations . The reconfiguring of existing information through the sorting , adding , recategorizing , and recon - textualizing of explicit knowledge can lead to new knowledge . Modern computer systems provide a graphic example . This process of creating explicit knowledge from explicit knowledge is referred to as " combination . " The third and fourth modes of knowledge conversion relate to patterns of conversion involving both tacit and explicit knowledge . These conversion modes capture the idea that tacit and explicit knowledge are comple - mentary and can expand over time through a process of mutual interaction . This interaction involves two different operations . One is the conversion of tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge , which will be called " externalization . " The other is the conversion of ex - plicit knowledge into tacit knowledge , which bears some similarity to the traditional notion of " learning " and will be referred to here as " internalization . " As will be discussed later , " metaphor " plays an important role in the externalization process , and " action " is deeply re - lated to the internalization process . Figure 1 illustrates the four modes of knowledge conversion . Three of the four types of knowledge conversion - socialization , combination , and internalization , have partial analogs with aspects of organizational theory . For example , socialization is connected with theories of organizational culture , while combination is rooted in information processing and internalization has associa - tions with organizational learning . By contrast , the Figure 1 Modes of the Knowledge Creation Tacit knowledge TO Explicit knowledge knowledge Socialization Externalization From Explicit Intemnalization Combination knowledge concept of externalization is not well developed . The limited analysis that does exist is from the point of view of information creation ( see Nonaka 1987 ) . Theories of organizational learning do not address the critical notion of externalization , and have paid little attention to the importance of socialization even though there has been an accumulation of research on " modeling " behavior in learning psychology . An - other difficulty relates to the concepts of " double - loop learning " ( Argyris and Schon 1978 ) or " unlearning " ( Hedberg 1981 ) , which arises from a strong orientation toward organization development ( OD ) . Since the first integrated theory of organizational learning presented by Argyris and Schon , it has been widely assumed , implicitly or explicitly , that double - loop learning , i . e . , the questioning and reconstruction of existing perspec - tives , interpretation frameworks , or decision premises , can be very difficult for organizations to implement by themselves . In order to overcome this difficulty , they argue that some kind of artificial intervention such as the use of organizational development programs is required . The limitation of this argument is that it assumes implicitly that someone inside or outside an organization knows " objectively " the right time and method for putting double - loop learning into practice . A mechanistic view of the organization lies behind this assumption . Seen from the vantage point of organiza - tional knowledge creation , on the contrary , double - loop learning is not a special , difficult task but a daily activity for the organization . Organizations continu - ously create new knowledge by reconstructing existing perspectives , frameworks , or premises on a day - to - day basis . In other words , double - loop learning ability is " built into " the knowledge creating model , thereby circumventing the need to make unrealistic assump - tions about the existence of a " right " answer . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 19 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Modal Shift and Spiral of Knowledge . While each of the four modes of knowledge conversion can create new knowledge independently , the central theme of the model of organizational knowledge creation pro - posed here hinges on a dynamic interaction between the different modes of knowledge conversion . That is to say , knowledge creation centers on the building of both tacit and explicit knowledge and , more impor - tantly , on the interchange between these two aspects of knowledge through internalization and externalization . A failure to build a dialogue between tacit and explicit knowledge can cause problems . For example , both pure combination and socialization have demerits . A lack of commitment and neglect of the personal meaning of knowledge might mean that pure combina - tion becomes a superficial interpretation of existing knowledge , which has little to do with here - and - now reality . It may also fail to crystallize or embody knowl - edge in a form that is concrete enough to facilitate further knowledge creation in a wider social context . The " sharability " of knowledge created by pure social - ization may be limited and , as a result , difficult to apply in fields beyond the specific context in which it was created . Organizational knowledge creation , as distinct from individual knowledge creation , takes place when all four modes of knowledge creation are " organization - ally " managed to form a continual cycle . This cycle is shaped by a series of shifts between different modes of knowledge conversion . There are various " triggers " that induce these shifts between different modes of knowledge conversion . First , the socialization mode usually starts with the building of a " team " or " field " of interaction . This field facilitates the sharing of mem - bers ' experiences and perspectives . Second , the exter - nalization mode is triggered by successive rounds of meaningful " dialogue . " In this dialogue , the sophisti - cated use of " metaphors " can be used to enable team members to articulate their own perspectives , and thereby reveal hidden tacit knowledge that is otherwise hard to communicate . Concepts formed by teams can be combined with existing data and external knowledge in a search of more concrete and sharable specifica - tions . This combination mode is facilitated by such triggers as " coordination " between team members and other sections of the organization and the " documenta - tion " of existing knowledge . Through an iterative pro - cess of trial and error , concepts are articulated and developed until they emerge in a concrete form . This ' ' experimentation " can trigger internalization through a process of " learning by doing . " Participants in a " field " of action share explicit knowledge that is gradu - Figure 2 Spiral of Organizational Knowledge Creation Epistemologial dimension Extemwalization Explicit Combination know ledge I ' eI . * - - - - - - 1 - - - - - | q ; - ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . . . - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - Ta n t Socializa ntocn a a knowledge . In tetnd alization Ontological Individual Group Organizaeon Inter - organizacion dimension the pracicalbeneitsfthtknwledecetersnKnowledge level t ally translated , through interaction and a process of trial - and - error , into different aspects of tacit knowl - edge . While tacit knowledge held by individuals may lie at the heart of the knowledge creating process , realizing the practical benefits of that knowledge centers on its externalization and amplification through dynamic in - teractions between all four modes of knowledge con - version . Tacit knowledge is thus mobilized through a dynamic " entangling " of the different modes of knowl - edge conversion in a process which will be referred to as a " spiral " model of knowledge creation , illustrated in Figure 2 . The interactions between tacit knowledge and explicit knowledge will tend to become larger in scale and faster in speed as more actors in and around the organization become involved . Thus , organizational knowledge creation can be viewed as an upward spiral process , starting at the individual level moving up to the collective ( group ) level , and then to the organiza - tional level , sometimes reaching out to the interorgani - zational level . 2 . 5 . From Metaphor to Model : Methodology of Knowledge Creation Before concluding this presentation of the basic con - structs of the theory , it is helpful to consider some general principles for facilitating the management of knowledge conversion . One effective method of con - verting tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge is the use of metaphor . As Nisbet ( 1969 , p . 5 ) noted , " ( m ) uch of what Michael Polanyi has called ' tacit knowledge ' is expressible - in so far as it is expressible at all - in metaphor . " " The essence of metaphor is understand - ing and experiencing one kind of thing in terms of another ( Lakoff and Johnson 1980 , p . 5 ) . " Even though 20 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation the metaphor is not in itself a thinking process , it enables us to experience a new behavior by making inferences from the model of another behavior . The use of metaphor is broader than the traditional , lexical definition of the term ( meta = change ; phor = move ) . According to Lakoff and Johnson : " metaphor is perva - sive in everyday life , not just in language but in thought and action . Our ordinary conceptual system , in terms of which we both think and act , is fundamentally metaphorical in nature " ( Lakoff and Johnson 1980 , p . 3 ) . As a method of perception , metaphor depends on imagination and intuitive learning through symbols , rather than on the analysis or synthesis of common attributes shared by associated things . Rosch ( 1973 ) suggested that man describes the world , not in the formal attributes of concepts , but in terms of proto - types . For example , the robin could be seen as a better prototype than the turkey for a small bird . Prototypes provide a mechanism for recognizing the maximum level of information with a minimum of energy . Metaphor is not merely the first step in transforming tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge ; it constitutes an important method of creating a network of concepts which can help to generate knowledge about the future by using existing knowledge . Metaphor may be defined as being ' two contradicting concepts incorporated in one word . ' It is a creative , cognitive process which relates concepts that are far apart in an individual ' s memory . While perception through prototype is in many cases limited to concrete , mundane concepts , metaphor plays an important role in associating ab - stract , imaginary concepts . When two concepts are presented in a metaphor , it is possible not only to think of their similarity , but also to make comparisons that discern the degree of imbalance , contradiction or in - consistency involved in their association . The latter process becomes the basis for creating new meaning . 4 According to Bateson ( 1973 ) metaphors cut across dif - ferent contexts and thus allow imaginative perceptions to combine with literal levels of cognitive activities . This experience , he further argues , will promote the type of " presupposition - negation " learning that is closely related with the formation of new paradigms . Contradictions incorporated in metaphor may be harmonized through the use of analogies . Analogy reduces ambiguity by highlighting the commonness of two different things . Metaphor and analogy are often confused . The association of meanings by metaphor is mostly driven by intuition , and involves images . On the other hand , the association of meanings through anal - ogy is more structural / functional and is carried out through rational thinking . As such , metaphors provide much room for free association ( discontinuity ) . Anal - ogy allows the functional operation of new concepts or systems to be explored by reference to things that are already understood . In this sense , an analogy - that enables us to know the future through the present - assumes an intermediate role in bridging the gap be - tween image and logic . It follows from the preceding discussion that tacit knowledge may be transformed into explicit knowledge by ( 1 ) recognizing contradictions through metaphor , and ( 2 ) resolving them through analogy . Explicit knowl - edge represents a model within which contradictions are resolved and concepts become transferable through consistent and systematic logic . In the business organi - zation , a typical model is the prototype that represents the product concept . The prototype ' s specification is then explicit knowledge . It has been pointed out that metaphor , analogy , and model are all part of the process of scientific discovery . 5 Whether the metaphor - analogy - model sequence is indispensable in all such processes will depend upon the nature of the question under study ; yet in creating new concepts , the model is usually generated from a metaphor . 3 . The Process of Organizational Knowledge Creation The theoretical constructs and models described in ? 2 may now be related to organizational knowledge cre - ation in a corporate organizational setting . This will be approached by assessing the processes that enable indi - vidual knowledge to be enlarged , amplified , and justi - fied within an organization . 3 . 1 . The Enlargement of an Individual ' s Knowledge The prime mover in the process of organizational knowledge creation is the individual . Individuals accu - mulate tacit knowledge through direct " hands - on " ex - perience . The quality of that tacit knowledge is influ - enced by two important factors . One factor is the " variety " of an individual ' s experience . If this experi - ence is limited to routine operations , the amount of tacit knowledge obtained from monotonous and repeti - tive tasks will tend to decrease over time . Routine tasks mitigate against creative thinking and the forma - tion of new knowledge . However , increasing the variety of experience is not sufficient by itself to raise the quality of tacit knowledge . If the individual finds vari - ous experiences to be completely unrelated , there will be little chance that they can be integrated to create a new perspective . What matters is " high quality " expe - ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 21 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation rience which might , on occasion , involve the complete redefinition of the nature of a " job . " A second factor that determines the quality of tacit knowledge is " knowledge of experience . " The essence of " knowledge of experience " is an embodiment of knowledge through a deep personal commitment into bodily experience . Varela et al . ( 1991 ) have pointed out that the embodied nature of human knowledge has long been neglected in Western epistemological tradi - tions that have followed from Descartes . They define embodiment as : " a reflection in which body and mind have been brought together " ( 1991 , p . 27 ) . Yuasa ( 1987 ) describes this " oneness of body - mind " as the free state of minimal distance between movement of the mind and of the body , as for example in the dynamic perfor - mance of a master actor on a stage ( 1987 , p . 28 ) . As Merleau - Ponty ( 1964 ) pointed out , bodily experience plays a critical role in the process of crystallization . Commitment to bodily experience means an inten - tional self - involvement in the object and situation which transcends the subject - object distinction , thereby pro - viding access to " pure experience " ( Nishida 1960 ) . This notion is prevalent in oriental culture . As Yuasa men - tions : One revealing characteristic of the philosophical uniqueness of Eastern thought is presupposed in the philosophical foun - dation of the Eastern theories . To put it simply , true knowl - edge cannot be obtained simply by means of theoretical thinking , but only through " bodily recognition or realization " ( tainin or taitoku ) , that is , through the utilization of one ' s total mind and body . Simply stated , this is to " learn with the body " not the brain . Cultivation is a practice that attempts , so to speak , to achieve true knowledge by means of one ' s total mind and body ( 1987 , pp . 25 - 26 ) . A good case in point is " on - the - spot - ism " in Japanese management . In developing the products and identify - ing the markets , Japanese firms encourage the use of judgement and knowledge formed through interaction with customers - and by personal bodily experience rather than by " objective , " scientific conceptualization . Social interaction between individuals , groups and or - ganizations are fundamental to organizational knowl - edge creation in Japan . Nevertheless , since this ap - proach uses hands - on experience and action , it some - times falls in the category of " experiencism " which neglects the importance of reflection and logical think - ing . It tends to overemphasize action and efficiency at the expense of a search for higher level concepts which have universal application . While the concepts of " high - quality experience " and " knowledge of experience " may be used to raise the quality of tacit knowledge , they have to be counterbal - anced by a further approach to knowledge creation that raises the quality of explicit knowledge . Such an approach may be called a " knowledge of rationality , " which describes a rational ability to reflect on experi - ence . Knowledge of rationality is an explicit - knowl - edge - oriented approach that is dominant in Western culture . It centers on the " combination " mode of knowledge conversion , and is effective in creating digi - tal , discrete declarative knowledge . Knowledge of ra - tionality tends to ignore the importance of commit - ment , and instead centers a reinterpretation of existing explicit knowledge . In order to raise the total quality of an individual ' s knowledge , the enhancement of tacit knowledge has to be subjected to a continual interplay with the evolution of relevant aspects of explicit knowledge . In this con - nection , Schon ( 1983 ) pointed out the importance of " reflection in action , " i . e . , reflecting while experienc - ing . Individual knowledge is enlarged through this in - teraction between experience and rationality , and crystallized into a unique perspective original to an individual . These original perspectives are based on individual belief and value systems , and will be a source of varied interpretations of shared experience with others in the next stage of conceptualization . 3 . 2 . Sharing Tacit Knowledge and Conceptualization As we saw in the previous section , the process of organizational knowledge creation is initiated by the enlargement of an individual ' s knowledge within an organization . The interaction between knowledge of experience and rationality enables individuals to build their own perspectives on the world . Yet these per - spectives remain personal unless they are articulated and amplified through social interaction . One way to implement the management of organizational knowl - edge creation is to create a " field " or " self - organizing team " in which individual members collaborate to cre - ate a new concept . In this connection , it is helpful to draw on the concept of an organization ' s " mental outlook " as artic - ulated in Sandelands and Stablein ' s ( 1987 ) pioneering work on " organizational mind . " While making caveats about the dangers of reification and anthropomor - phism , these authors use the analogy of " mind " to identify the process by which organizations form ideas . Mind is distinct from the brain in the same way that computer software is distinct from hardware . Against this background , intelligence may be seen as the ability to maintain a working similarity between mind and nature . 22 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation The development of ideas associated with organiza - tional mind requires some form of physical substrate ( i . e . hardware ) which Sandelands and Stablein ( 1987 ) argue might be derived from " patterns of behavior traced by people and machines " ( p . 139 ) . Organiza - tional behaviors can convey ideas and , like the firing of neurons in the brain , may trigger other behaviors and so form a trace of activation . In the brain , whether or not one neuron influences another depends on a complex set of factors having primarily to do with physical proximity , availability of pathways , intensity of the electrochemical signal , and whether or not the target neuron is inhibited by other neurons . Similarly , whether one behavior influences another in social organizations depends on a complex of factors primarily concerned with physical access , lines of communication , power , and competition from other behaviors . At an abstract formal level , at least , the politics of the social organization and the physiology of the brain share much in common ( Sandelands and Stablein 1987 , p . 140 ) . It is human activity that creates organizational mind as individuals interact and trigger behavior patterns in others . Managing a self - organizing team involves build - ing an appropriate degree of flexibility into the system which can accommodate a diversity of imaginative thinking in the pursuit of new problems and solutions . Constructing a Field : Building a Self - organizing Team . To bring personal knowledge into a social context within which it can be amplified , it is necessary to have a " field " that provides a place in which individ - ual perspectives are articulated , and conflicts are re - solved in the formation of higher - level concepts . Berger and Luchman ( 1966 ) say that reality in everyday life is socially constructed . Individual behavior ought to be relativized through an interactive process to construct " social reality . " In the business organization , the field for interaction is often provided in the form of an autonomous , self - organizing " team " made of several members coming from a variety of functional departments . It is a critical matter for an organization to decide when and how to establish such a " field " of interaction in which individ - uals can meet and interact . It defines " true " members of knowledge creation and thus clarifies the domain in which perspectives are interacted . The team needs to be established with regard to the principles of self - organization . In Lewin ' s ( 1951 ) devel - opment of the field theory in social psychology , a group is defined as " a dynamic whole based on interdepen - dence rather on similarity . " Some indication of the number of members and the composition of their back - ground can be achieved using the principle of " requi - site variety " ( Ashby 1956 ) . According to our observa - tion of successful project teams in Japanese firms , the appropriate team size may be in the region between 10 and 30 individuals , with an upper limit arising because direct interaction between all the group members tends to decrease as group size increases . Within the team , there . are usually 4 to 5 " core " members who have career histories that include multiple job functions . These core members form focal points in the team and could be seen as the organizational equivalent of the central element in a series of nested Russian dolls . 6 That is to say there is a radial pattern of interaction with other members , with closer links being associated with key individuals . Core members play a critical role in assuring appropriate " redundancy " of information within the cross - functional team . Other attributes of members such as formal position , age , gender , etc . might be determined with regard to Morgan ' s ( 1986 ) four principles of " learning to learn , requisite variety , minimum critical specification , and redundancy of functions . " The span of team activities need not confined to the narrow boundary of the organization . Rather , it is a process that frequently makes extensive use of knowl - edge in environment , especially that of customers and suppliers . As Norman ( 1988 ) argues , the mental out - look of an organization is shaped by a complex pattern of factors within and outside the organization . 7 In some Japanese firms , for example , suppliers of parts and components are sometimes involved in the early stages of the product development . The relationship between manufacturers and suppliers is less hierarchial and arms length than in Western countries . Some other Japanese companies involve customers in the field of new product planning . In both cases , sharing tacit knowledge with suppliers or customers through coexperience and creative dialogue play a critical role in creating relevant knowledge . The significance of links between individuals that span boundaries , both within and outside the organiza - tion , has been highlighted by Brown and Duguid ' s ( 1991 ) revealing insight into the operation of " evolving communities of practice . " These communities reflect the way in which people actually work as opposed to the formal job descriptions or task - related procedures that are specified by the organization . Attempts to solve practical problems often generate links between individuals who can provide useful information . The exchange and development of information within these ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vo1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 23 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation evolving communities facilitate knowledge creation by linking the routine dimensions of day - to - day work to active learning and innovation . Collaboration to ex - change ideas through shared narratives and " war sto - ries " can provide an important platform on which to construct shared understanding out of conflicting and confused data . By contrast with conceptions of groups as bounded entities within an organization , evolving communities of practice are " more fluid and interpenetrative than bounded , often crossing the restrictive boundaries of the organization to incorporate people from outside " ( Brown and Duguid 1991 , p . 49 ) . Moreover , these communities can provide important contributions to visions for future development . Thus these communi - ties represent a key dimension to socialization and its input to the overall knowledge creation process . The self - organizing team triggers organizational knowledge creation through two processes . First , it facilitates the building of mutual trust among mem - bers , and accelerates creation of an implicit perspec - tive shared by members as tacit knowledge . The key factor for this process is sharing experience among members . Second , the shared implicit perspective is conceptualized through continuous dialogue among members . This creative dialogue is realized only when redundancy of information exists within the team . The two processes appear simultaneously or alternatively in the actual process of knowledge creation within a team . Before discussing these two processes further , it is necessary to mention another dimension of the knowl - edge creating process that can be associated with the self - organizing team . Scheflen ( 1982 ) proposed an idea of " interaction rhythms , " in which social interactions were viewed as being both simultaneous and sequen - tial . The management of interaction rhythms among team members , i . e . , that of divergence and conver - gence of various interaction rhythms , plays a critical role in accelerating the knowledge creation process . Within the team , rhythms of different speed are first generated and amplified up to certain point of time and level , and then are given momentum for conver - gence towards a concept . Therefore , the crucial role of the team leader concerns how to balance the rhythm of divergence and convergence in the process of dialogues and shared experience . In sum , the cross - functional team in which experi - ence sharing and continuous dialogue are facilitated by the management of interaction rhythms serves as the basic building block for structuring the organization knowledge creation process . The team is different from a mere group in that it induces self - organizing process of the entire organization through which the knowl - edge at the group level is elevated to the organizational level . Sharing Experience . In order for the self - organizing team to start the process of concept creation , it first needs to build mutual trust among members . As we shall see later , concept creation involves a difficult process of externalization , i . e . , converting tacit knowl - edge ( which by nature is hard to articulate ) into an explicit concept . This challenging task involves re - peated , time - consuming dialogue among members . Mutual trust is an indispensable base for facilitating this type of constructive " collaboration " ( Schrage 1990 ) . A key way to build mutual trust is to share one ' s original experience - the fundamental source of tacit knowledge . Direct understanding of other individuals relies on shared experience that enables team members to " indwell " into others and to grasp their world from " inside . " Shared experience also facilitates the creation of ' common perspectives " which can be shared by team members as a part of their respective bodies of tacit knowledge . The dominant mode of knowledge conver - sion involved here is socialization . Various forms of tacit knowledge that are brought into the field by individual members are converted through coexperi - ence among them to form a common base for under - standing . As was mentioned earlier , tacit knowledge is a dis - tinctly personal concept . Varela et al . ( 1991 ) point out the limitation of the cognitivist view of human experi - ence in comparison with the non - Western philosophi - cal view , and suggest that cognitive experience is " em - bodied action " rather than a mere representation of a world that exists independent of our cognitive system . The mutual conversion of such embodied , tacit knowl - edge is accelerated by synchronizing both body and mind in the face of the same experience . Coexperience with others enables us to transcend the ordinary " I - Thou " distinction , and opens up the world of common understanding , which Scheflen ( 1982 ) called " Field Epistemology . " Condon ( 1976 ) shared this view that communication is a simultaneous and contextual phe - nomenon in which people feel a change occurring , share the same sense of change , and are moved to take action . In other words , communication is like a wave that passes through people ' s bodies and culminates when everyone synchronizes himself with the wave . Thus , the sharing of mental and physical rhythm among participants of a field may serve as the driving force of socialization . 24 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Conceptualization . Once mutual trust and a com - mon implicit perspective have been formed through shared experience , the team needs to articulate the perspective through continuous dialogues . The domi - nant mode of knowledge conversion here is external - ization . Theories of organizational learning have not given much attention to this process . Tacit " field - specific " perspectives are converted into explicit con - cepts that can be shared beyond the boundary of the team . Dialogue directly facilitates this process by acti - vating externalization at individual levels . Dialogue , in the form of face - to - face communication between persons , is a process in which one builds concepts in cooperation with others . It also provides the opportunity for one ' s hypothesis or assumption to be tested . As Markova and Foppa ( 1990 ) argue , social intercourse is one of the most powerful media for verifying one ' s own ideas . As such , dialogue has a congenetic quality , and thus the participants in the dialogue can engage in the mutual codevelopment of ideas . As Graumann ( 1990 ) points out , dialogue in - volves " perspective - setting , perspective - taking , and multiperspectivity of cognition . " According to the the - ory of language action suggested by Austin ( 1962 ) and Searle ( 1969 ) , illocutionary speech does not only in - volve a description of things and facts but the taking of action itself . The expression " language is behavior , " therefore , implies that language is a socially creative activity and accordingly reveals the importance of the connection between language and reality created through dialogue . For these purposes , dialectic is a good way of raising the quality of dialogue . Dialectic allows scope for the articulation and development of personal theories and beliefs . Through the use of contradiction and paradox , dialectic can serve to stimulate creative thinking in the organization . If the creative function of dialectic is to be exploited to the full , it is helpful to pay regard to certain preconditions or " field rules . " First , the dia - logue should not be single - faceted and deterministic but temporary and multifaceted so that there is always room for revision or negation . Second , the participants in the dialogue should be able to express their own ideas freely and candidly . Third , negation for the sake of negation should be discouraged . Constructive criti - cism substantiated by reasoned arguments should be used to build a consensus . Fourth , there should be temporal continuity . Dialectic thinking is a repetitive , spiral process in which affirmation and negation are synthesized to form knowledge . Strict and noncontinu - ous separation of affirmation and negation will only result in logical contradictions and thus hamper the creation of knowledge . Team leaders , therefore , should not discourage the dramatic and volatile dimensions of dialogue . If these conditions are met , dialogue will add much to the potential of the group in knowledge cre - ation . The process of creating a new perspective through interpersonal interaction is assisted by the existence of a degree of redundant information . Making and solving new problems are made possible when its members share information by obtaining extra , redundant infor - mation which enables them to enter another person ' s area and give advice . Instances of " learning by intru - sion " ( Nonaka 1990 ) are particularly widespread in Japanese firms . 8 In the meantime , redundancy of infor - mation also functions to determine the degree to which created perspectives are diffused . It may sound para - doxical ; yet the degree of information redundancy will limit the degree of diffusion . In this sense , information redundancy can serve to regulate the creation of per - spectives . It is now possible to turn to the question of how to conceptualize new perspectives created from shared tacit knowledge . According to Bateson ( 1979 ) , concepts are created through deduction , induction , and abduc - tion . Abduction has a particular importance in the conceptualization process . While deduction and induc - tion are vertically - oriented reasoning processes , abduc - tion is a lateral extension of the reasoning process which centers on the use of metaphors . Deduction and induction are generally used when a thought or image involves the revision of a preexisting concept or the assigning of a new meaning to a concept . When there is no adequate expression of an image it is necessary to use abductive methods to create completely new con - cepts . While analytical methods can be used to gener - ate new concepts via inductive or deductive reasoning , they may not be sufficient to create more meaningful - or radical - concepts . At the early stages of informa - tion creation , it is very useful to pursue creative dia - logues and to share images through the metaphorical process by merging perspectives , i . e . , tacit knowledge . 3 . 3 . Crystallization The knowledge created in an interactive field by mem - bers of a self - organizing team has to be crystallized into some concrete " form " such as a product or a system . The central mode of knowledge conversion at this stage is internalization . Crystallization may then be seen as the process through which various departments within the organization test the reality and applicability of the concept created by the self - organizing team . These internalization processes are facilitated by en - ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 25 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation couraging experimentation . It should be noted that because the instrumental skill , a part of tacit knowl - edge , is exploited in this process , a new process of knowledge creation is triggered by crystallization . While this usually leads to refinement of the concept , some - times the concept itself is abandoned and fundamen - tally recreated . The process of crystallization is a social process which occurs at a collective level . It is realized through what Haken ( 1978 ) called " dynamic cooperative rela - tions " or " synergetics " among various functions and organizational departments . This relationship tends to be achieved most effectively when redundancy of infor - mation creates scope for critical knowledge conversion processes to take place . In an organization where there is redundancy of information , the initiative for action can be taken by the experts who have more infor - mation and knowledge . This characteristic is what McCulloch ( 1965 ) called " the principle of redundancy of potential command . " In this principle , all parts of a system carry the same degree of importance , and each part ' s impact upon the system is determined by the importance of information it contains in each specified context . In sum , each part has the potential of becom - ing the leader of the entire system when there exists redundancy of information . The speed at which Japanese firms develop new products seems to be assisted by information redun - dancy . In the product development process of Japanese firms , different phases of the process are loosely linked , overlapping in part , and the creation and realization of information is carried out flexibly . The loosely linked phases , while simultaneously maintaining mutual inde - pendence , have redundant information that activates their interactive inquiry thereby facilitating cyclical generation and solution of problems ( Imai et al . 1985 ) . This " rugby - style " product development is equipped with the flexible capability of knowledge conversion . Clark and Fujimoto ( 1991 ) showed that Japanese firms take relatively less time for product development than American and European firms . The specific characteristics of the product develop - ment in Japanese firms is its lateral breadth covering the whole organization . In other words it is overlapping and synthetic rather than analytic or linear . In this system , development staff can traverse overlapping phases and , to a certain extent , share each other ' s functions . This is far different from the usual product development process of U . S . firms , which have definite partitions between phases over which a baton is re - layed . In the Japanese " rugby - style " product develop - ment ( Takeuchi and Nonaka 1986 ) , staff involved in one phase also may be in the next phase . Thus , some development staff can be involved in all phases of development . Sometimes this process also involves those outside the organization such as suppliers and customers in order to mobilize and explicit environ - mental knowledge . One problem with this developmental style is the potential risk of confusion if , for example , the design changes or other alterations take place . Participants might have to exert more effort to organize the process due to the lack of strict specifications at each phase and definite boundaries between them . However , these risks are counterbalanced by a tendency to create and realize concepts quickly and flexibly in an integral fashion . In this context , redundant information can play a major role in facilitating the process . 3 . 4 . The Justification and Quality of Knowledge While organizational knowledge creation is a continu - ous process with no ultimate end , an organization needs to converge this process at some point in order to accelerate the sharing of created knowledge beyond the boundary of the organization for further knowledge creation . As knowledge is conventionally defined as " justified true belief , " this convergence needs to be based on the " justification " or truthfulness of con - cepts . Justification is the process of final convergence and screening , which determines the extent to which the knowledge created within the organization is truly worthwhile for the organization and society . In this sense , justification determines the " quality " of the cre - ated knowledge and involves criteria or " standards " for judging truthfulness . What matters here are the evaluation " standards " for judging truthfulness . In the business organizations , the standards generally include cost , profit margin , and the degree to which a product can contribute to the firm ' s development . There are also value premises that transcend factual or pragmatic considerations . These might be opinions about such things as the extent to which the knowledge created is consistent with the organization ' s vision and perceptions relating to adven - ture , romanticism , and aesthetics . The inducements to initiate a convergence of knowledge may be multiple and qualitative rather than simple and quantitative standards such as efficiency , cost , and return on invest - ment ( ROI ) . In knowledge - creating organizations , it is the role of top or middle management to determine the evaluation standard . Determining the turning point from dissipa - tion to convergence in the creation process is a highly strategic task which is influenced by the " aspiration " of 26 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation the leaders of the organization . Justification standards have to be evaluated in terms of their consistency with higher - order value systems . The ability of leaders to maintain continuous self - reflection in a wider perspec - tive is indispensable when it comes to increasing the quality of knowledge created . 3 . 5 . Networking Knowledge The realization of new concepts , described above , rep - resents a visible emergence of the organization ' s knowledge network . During this stage of organizational knowledge creation , the concept that has been created , crystallized and justified in the organization is inte - grated into the organizational knowledge - base which comprises a whole network of organizational knowl - edge . The organizational knowledge base is then reor - ganized through a mutually - inducing process of inter - action between the established organizational vision and the newly - created concept . Speaking in sociological terms , this mutually - induc - ing relationship corresponds to the relationship be - tween a grand concept and a middle - range concept . A middle - range concept is induced from an equivocal knowledge base as a grand concept and then is con - densed into concrete form . The grand concept is not fully understood at the organizational level unless these middle - range concepts are verified on site . This verifi - cation also induces the creation or reconstruction of a grand concept , causing the interactive proliferation of grand concepts presented by top management , and middle - range concepts created by middle management . This interaction , mediated by the concrete form as condensed information , is another dynamic self - organizing activity of knowledge network that continu - ously creates new information and meaning . It should be noted that the process of organizational knowledge creation is a never - ending , circular process that is not confined to the organization but includes many interfaces with the environment . At the same time , the environment is a continual source of stimula - tion to knowledge creation within the organization . For example , Hayek ( 1945 ) pointed out that the essential function of market competition is to discover and mo - bilize knowledge " on - the - spot , " i . e . , the implicit , con - text - specific knowledge held by market participants . In the case of business organizations , one aspect of the relationship between knowledge creation and the environment is illustrated by reactions to the product by customers , competitors , and suppliers . For example , many dimensions of customer needs take the form of tacit knowledge that an individual customer or other market participants cannot articulate by themselves . A Figure 3 Organizational Knowledge Creation Process Enabling Conditions Intention Chaos / Fluctuation Autonomy Redundancy Requisite Variety Conceptualization Enlarging Sharing individuals - - - taclt Justiiation Ntokn knowledge knowledge Crystallization Process of generating infonnation / knowledge in the market product works as a trigger to articulate the tacit knowl - edge . Customers and other market participants give meaning to the product by their bodily actions of . purchasing , adapting , using , or not purchasing . This mobilization of tacit knowledge of customers and mar - ket will be reflected to the organization , and a new process of organizational knowledge creation is again initiated . The total process of organizational knowledge cre - ation is summarized in Figure 3 . Even though the figure is illustrated as a sequential model , the actual process progresses forming multilayered loops . Respec - tive stages can take place simultaneously , or sometimes jump forward or backward . 4 . Managing the Process of Organizational Knowledge Creation : Creative Chaos , Redundancy , and Requisite Variety This section draws on preceding arguments in order to develop a practical perspective on the management of organizational knowledge creation . Its main purpose is to complement the aspects of " individual commitment " to the knowledge creating process ( i . e . , intention , au - tonomy , and fluxuation , discussed in ? 2 . 2 ) with , what could be seen as , " organization - wide " enabling condi - tions that promote a more favorable climate for effec - tive knowledge creation9 ( see Figure 3 ) . An analysis of these enabling conditions - creative chaos , redundancy of information , and requisite variety - is developed be - low , prior to making specific proposals for two manage - ment models : " middle - up - down management " and a " hypertext " organization . The former model relates to ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOl . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 27 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation management style , while the latter centers on organiza - tional design . As was mentioned earlier , environmental fluctuation is one of the three factors that induce individual com - mitment . At an organizational level , environmental fluctuation can generate " creative chaos " which trig - gers the process of organizational knowledge creation . When the organization faces nonrecursiveness that cannot be dealt with by existing knowledge , it might try to create a new order of knowledge by making use of the fluctuation itself . According to the principle of " order out of noise " proposed by von Foerster ( 1984 ) , the self - organizing system can increase its ability to survive by purposefully introducing its own noise . In the context of evolutionary theory , Jantsch ( 1980 ) ar - gues : In contrast to a widely held belief , planning in an evolutionary spirit therefore does not result in the reduction of uncertainty and complexity , but in their increase . Uncertainty increases because the spectrum of options is deliberately widened ; imagination comes into play ( 1980 , p . 267 ) . This represents a circular process in which chaos is perceived in its interaction with cosmos and then be - comes a cosmos , which in turn produces another chaos . Creative chaos is generated naturally when the orga - nization faces a real " crisis " such as rapid decline of performance due to changes in technologies or market needs , or the realization of a significant competitive advantage on the part of a rival firm . It can also be generated intentionally when leaders of an organiza - tion try to evoke a " sense of crisis " among organiza - tional members by proposing challenging goals . This creative chaos increases tension within the organiza - tion and focuses attention on forming and solving new problems . In the information processing paradigm , a problem is simply given and a solution is reached through a process of combining relevant information based on a preset algorithm . But this process ignores the importance of problem setting - defining the prob - lem to be solved . In reality , problems do not present themselves as given but instead have to be constructed from the knowledge available at a certain point in time and context . It should be noted , however , that this process takes place only when organizational members reflect on their actions . Without reflection , the introduction of fluctuation tends to produce " destructive " chaos . As Schon ( 1983 ) observed , " When someone reflects while in action , he becomes a researcher . He is not depen - dent on the categories of established theory and tech - nique , but constructs a new theory of the unique case " ( 1983 , p . 68 ) . The knowledge - creating organization is required to institutionalize this reflection - in - action in its process as well as in its structure to make the chaos truly " creative . " A second principle for managing organizational knowledge creation is redundancy . In business organi - zations , this means the conscious overlapping of com - pany information , business activities , and management responsibilities . To Western managers , the term " re - dundancy , " with its connotations of unnecessary dupli - cation and waste , may sound unappealing . Neverthe - less , redundancy ( Landau 1969 and Nonaka 1990 ) plays a key role , especially in the process of knowledge creation at the level of the organization . Redundant information can be instrumental in speeding up con - cept creation . A concept that was created by an indi - vidual or a group often needs to be shared by other individuals who may need the concept immediately . The redundancy of information refers to the existence of information more than the specific information re - quired immediately by each individual . The sharing of extra information between individuals promotes the sharing of individual tacit knowledge . Since members share overlapping information , they can sense what others are trying to articulate . Especially in the concept development stage , it is critical to articulate images rooted in tracit knowledge . In this situation , individuals can enter each others ' area of operation and can provide advice . This allows people to provide new information from new and different perspectives . In short , redundancy of information brings about " learn - ing by intrusion " into an individual ' s sphere of percep - tion . Redundant information can be an instrumental fac - tor in reducing the impact of managerial hierarchy . That is to say , redundant information provides a vehi - cle for problem generation and knowledge creation which follows procedures that are different from those specified by the " official " organizational structure . This concept of " nonhierarchy " has been described by Hedlund ( 1986 ) as " heterarchy . " The important point to note is that redundancy of information makes the interchange between hierarchy and nonhierarchy more effective in problem solving and knowledge creation . It enables all members of the organization to participate in the process on the basis of consensus and equal preparation . In this sense , redundancy of information is an indispensable element in inducing the " synerget - ics " and to realize the " principle of redundancy of potential command . " Deep , mutual trust between the members of the organization - the creators of knowledge - can be pro - 28 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation moted through information redundancy and , in this way , the organization can control its knowledge cre - ation . If an organization contains enough redundancy of information to deal with as many contingencies as possible , it can generate various combinations of infor - mation flexibly . This redundancy also facilitates inter - action among organizational members and conse - quently makes it easier to transfer tacit knowledge among them . Redundancy can eliminate cheating among organizational members and facilitates estab - lishment of mutual trust . Williamson ( 1975 ) argues convincingly that opportunism tends to appear less frequently in internally organized activities than in market transactions . Close interaction and trust based upon sharing of redundant information minimizes the possibility of cheating . Since " trust is a critical lubri - cant in social systems " ( Arrow 1974 ) , it would be impossible to form " synergetics " needed for knowledge creation without trust . Sharing of extra information also helps individuals to recognize their location in the organization , which in turn increases the sense of control and direction of individual thought and behavior . This state is different from the one in which all members are scattered with no relationship to each other . Redundancy of informa - tion connects individuals and the organization through information , which converges rather than diffuses . There are several ways to build redundancy into the organization . One is to adopt an overlapping approach and internal competition in product development . As was stressed in the section on crystallization , Japanese companies manage product development as an over - lapping , " rugby - style " process where different func - tional divisions work together in a shared division of labor . Some of them also divide the product - develop - ment team into competing groups that develop differ - ent approaches to the same project and then argue over the advantages and disadvantages of their propos - als . Internal rivalry encourages the team to look at a project from a variety of perspectives . Under the guid - ance of a team leader , the team eventually develops a common understanding of the " best " approach . In one sense , such internal competition is wasteful . But when responsibilities are shared , information proliferates , and the organization ' s ability to create and implement concepts is accelerated . Another way to build redundancy into an organiza - tion is through strategic rotation , especially between different areas of technology and between functions such as R & D and marketing . Rotation helps members of an organization understand the business from a multiplicity of perspectives . This makes organizational knowledge more fluid and easier to put into practice . Wide access to company information also helps build redundancy . When information differentials exist , members of an organization can no longer interact on equal terms , which hinders the search for different interpretations of new knowledge . Since redundancy of information increases the amount of information to be processed , it is important to strike a balance between the creation and processing of information . One way of dealing with this issue is to determine the appropriate location of information and knowledge storage within an organization . Ashby ( 1956 ) has suggested the concept of " requisite variety " which refers to the constructing of information process chan - nels that match the information load imposed by the environment . According to the principle of requisite variety , an organization can maximize efficiency by creating within itself the same degree of diversity as the diversity it must process . Following Ashby , requi - site variety may be seen as the third principle of organizing knowledge creating activities . Efficient knowledge creation requires quick inquiry and preprocessing of existing knowledge and informa - tion . Therefore , it is a practical requirement here that everyone is given access to necessary information with the minimum number of steps ( Numangami et al . 1989 ) . For this purpose , ( 1 ) organizational members should know who owns what information , and ( 2 ) they should be related to the least number of colleagues so that they are not loaded with information in the excess of each one ' s cognitive capacity . 4 . 1 . Middle - Up - Down Management : Leadership for Parallel Process In earlier work , a new model of management called " middle - up - down management " was proposed and contrasted with typical " top - down " management or " bottom - up " management ( Nonaka 1988b ) . This mid - dle - up - down management model is suitable for pro - moting the efficient creation of knowledge in business organizations . The model is based on the principle of creative chaos , redundancy , and requisite variety men - tioned above ; much emphasis is placed on the role of top and middle management for knowledge creation , which has been almost neglected in traditional ac - counts of managerial structure . The essence of a traditional bureaucratic machine is top - down information processing using division of la - bor and hierarchy . Top managers create basic manage - rial concepts ( the premises of decision making ) and break them down hierarchically - in terms of objectives ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 29 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation and means - so that they can be implemented by sub - ordinates . Top managers ' concepts become operational conditions for middle managers who then decide how to realize the concepts . Again , middle managers ' deci - sions constitute operational conditions for lower man - agers who implement their decisions . In consequence , the organization as a whole executes a huge amount of work that can never be done by individuals . If we visualize the dyadic relations between top vs . middle managers , the middle vs . lower members , an organization assumes a tree - shaped or pyramidal struc - ture . In this " top - down " model , it is desirable to orga - nize the whole structure in the way it will conform to the above relations . To clearly break down the end - means relations , it is necessary to get rid of any ambi - guity or equivocality in the concepts held by top man - agers . In sum , the concepts anchor on the premise that they only have one meaning . By corollary , the concepts are also strictly functional and pragmatic . An implicit assumption behind this traditional model of organiza - tion is that information and knowledge are processed most efficiently in a tree structure . The division of labor taking place within such a bureaucratic organiza - tion is associated with a hierarchical pattern of infor - mation processing . Moving from the bottom to the top of the organization , information is processed selectively so that people at the peak would get simple , processed information only . Moving in the reverse direction , on the other hand , information is processed and trans - formed from the general to the particular . It is this deductive transformation that enables human beings with limited information processing capacity to deal with a mass of information . It should be noted that information processing by middle and lower members in this model is of minor relevance to knowledge creation . Only top managers are able and allowed to create information . Moreover , information created by these top managers exists for the sole purpose of implementation ; therefore it is a tool rather than a product . On the contrary , in the bottom - up model , those who create information are not top managers , but middle and lower managers . In a typical bottom - up managed company , intracompany entrepreneurs or " intrapreneurs " ( Pinchot 1985 ) are fostered and developed by the system . In reality there are not many larger firms that have bottom - up manage - ment style . In this model , top managers remain sponsors for individual employees who function as in - tracompany entrepreneurs - including knowledge cre - ation . However , this model is also anchored on the critical role of the individual as independent , separate actor as in the top - down model . Unlike the above two models , the middle - up - down model takes all members as important actors who work together horizontally and vertically . A major character - istic of the model regarding knowledge creation is the wide scope of cooperative relationships between top , middle , and lower managers . No one major depart - ment or group of experts has the exclusive responsibil - ity for creating new knowledge . But this is not to say that there is no differentiation among roles and responsibilities in this style of man - agement . In the middle - up - down model , top manage - ment provides " visions for direction " and also the deadline by which the visions should be realized . Mid - dle management translates these visions into middle - range visions , which are to be realized in the fields - the groups . Middle managers create their visions out of those from top and lower managers and materialize then vis - a - vis the two levels . In other words , while top management articulates the dreams of the firm , lower managers look at the reality . The gap between these two forms of perspectives is narrowed by and through middle management . In this sense , it is a leadership style that facilitates the parallel knowledge creation process taking place simultaneously at top , middle , and lower management respectively . Table 1 summarizes the comparison of the three models , top - down , bottom - up , and middle - up - down management , in terms of knowledge creator , resource allocation , structural characteristics , process character - istics , knowledge accumulation , and inherent limita - tion . The roles and tasks of lower , top , and middle managers in the middle - up - down management will now be discussed in detail . Frontline employees and lower managers are im - mersed in the day - to - day details of particular technolo - gies , products , and markets . No one is more expert in the realities of a company ' s business than they are . But , while these employees and lower managers are deluged with highly specific information , they often find it extremely difficult to turn that information into useful knowledge . For one thing , signals from the mar - ketplace can be vague and ambiguous . For another , employees and lower managers can become so caught up in their own narrow perspective , that they lose sight of the broader context . Moveover , even when they try to develop meaningful ideas and insights , it can still be difficult to communicate the importance of that infor - mation to others . People do not just passively receive new knowledge ; they actively interpret it to fit their own situation and perspectives . Thus , what makes sense in one context can change or even lose its meaning when communicated to people in a different context . 30 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Table 1 A Comparison of Three Management Models Top - Down Middle - Up - Down Bottom - Up Agent of top management self - organizing team ( with entrepreneurial individual Knowledge Creation middle managers ( intrapreneur ) as team leaders ) Resource Allocation hierarchically from diverse viewpoints self - organizing principle Pursued Synergy " synergy of money " " synergy of knowledge " " synergy of people " Organization big and powerful hq . team - oriented small hq . staff use manuals affiliated firms self - organizing by intrapreneurs suborganizations Management leaders as commanders leaders as catalysts leaders as sponsors Processes emphasis on create organizational create personal information processing knowledge information chaos not allowed create / amplify chaos / noise premised chaos / noise Accumulated explicit explicit and tacit tacit incarnated in Knowledge computerized / shared in diverse individuals documented forms Weakness high dependency human exhaustion time consuming on top lack of overall difficult to management control of the coordinate organization individuals Source : from Nonaka ( 1 988b ) . The main job of top and middle managers in the model of middle - up - down management is to orient this chaotic situation toward purposeful knowledge creation . These managers do this by providing their subordinates with a conceptual framework that helps them make sense of their own experience . In both top - down management and bottom - up man - agement , a high degree of emphasis is given to charis - matic leadership . By contrast , middle - up - down man - agement views managers as catalysts . In this role as a " catalyst , " top management sets the direction , provides the field of interaction , selects the participants in the field , establishes the guidelines and deadlines for proj - ects , and supports the innovation process . Top management gives voice to a company ' s future by articulating metaphors , symbols , and concepts that orient the knowledge - creating activities of employees . In other words , they give form to " organizational in - tention " that is beyond the personal intention of top management as an individual . This is achieved by ask - ing the questions on behalf of the entire organization : What are we trying to learn ? What do we need to know ? Where should we be going ? Who are we ? If the job of frontline employees and lower managers is to know " what is , " ' then the job of top management is to know " what ought to be . " In other words , the respon - sibility of top management in middle - up - down manage - ment is to articulate the company ' s " conceptual umbrella " : the grand concepts expressed in highly uni - versal and abstract terms identify the common features linking seemingly disparate activities or businesses into a coherent whole . Quinn ( 1992 ) called this conceptual umbrella a " future vision " that gives intellectual mem - bers of organizations some challenges for intellectual growth and develops their capacity for continuous change . Another way in which top management provides employees with a sense of direction is by setting the standards for justifying the value of knowledge that is constantly being developed by the organization ' s mem - bers . As earlier comments on the " justification " of knowledge indicated , deciding which efforts to support and develop is a highly strategic task . In order to facilitate organizational knowledge creation , qualitative ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 31 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation factors such as truthfulness , beauty , or goodness are equal important to such qualitative , economic factors as efficiency , cost or ROI . In addition to the umbrella concepts and qualitative criteria for justification , top management articulates concepts in the form of committed , equivocal visions , which are open - ended and susceptible to a variety of , and even conflicting , interpretations . If a vision is too sharply focused , it becomes more akin to an order or instruction , which will not foster the high degree of personal commitment . A more equivocal vision gives employees and self - organizing teams the freedom and autonomy to set their own goals . The final role of top management in middle - up - down management is to clear away any obstacles and prepare the ground for self - organizing teams headed by middle management . Knowledge creation , in this type of management , takes place intensively at the group level , at which middle managers embody top managers ' visions . Middle man - agers are selected by top management , and therefore staffing is an important strategic consideration . Top managers should be able to provide middle managers with a sense of challenge or crisis and trust them . As we have seen before , teams play a central role in the process of organizational knowledge creation . The main role of middle managers in middle - up - down man - agement is to serve as a team leader who are at the intersection of the vertical and horizontal flows of information in the company . The most important knowledge creating individuals in this model are nei - ther cha : rismatic top managers nor the entrepreneur - like lower managers , but every employee who works in association with middle managers . It is the middle manager that takes a strategic position at which he or she combines strategic , macro , universal information and hands - on , micro , specific information . They work as a bridge between the visionary ideals of the top and the often chaotic reality on the frontline of business . By creating middle - level business and product con - cepts , middle managers mediate between " what is " and " what ought to be . " They even remake reality according to the company ' s vision . In addition , middle management forms the strategic knot that binds the top - down and bottom - up models . As the self - organizing team , headed by middle man - agement moves up and down the organization , much redundancy and fluctuation can be created . As such , the organization with middle - up - down management naturally has a strong driver of self - reorganization . The middle management sometimes plays the role of " change - agent " for the self - revolution of the organiza - tion . In sum , middle managers synthesize the tacit knowl - edge of both frontline employees and top management , make it explicit , and incorporate it into new technolo - gies and products . They are the true " knowledge engi - neers " of the knowledge creating organizations . 4 . 2 . Hypertext Organization : A Design Prototype of a Knowledge Creating Organization Finally , an image can be presented of organizational design that provides a structural base for the process of organizational knowledge creation . Middle - up - down management becomes most efficient if supported by this infrastructure . The central requirement for the design of the knowledge - creating organization is to provide the organization with a strategic ability to acquire , create , exploit , and accumulate new knowl - edge continuously and repeatedly in a circular process . Earlier work has described an image of organizational design equipped with such a dynamic cycle of knowl - edge under the concept of a " hypertext organization , " ( Nonaka et al . 1992 ) . This term is borrowed from a concept of computer software where " hypertext " al - lows users to search large quantities of text , data , and graphics by means of a friendly interface . It links related concepts and areas of knowledge to allow a problem to be viewed from many angles . In many ways , this is analogous to the ability of individuals to relate stories in different ways according to the nature of the audience . The same knowledge might be used but in different formats , making it easier to draw relation - ships between different sets of information . The core feature of the hypertext organization is the ability to switch between the various " contexts " of knowledge creation to accommodate changing require - ments from situations both inside and outside the organization . Within the process of organizational knowledge creation , it is possible to distinguish several " contexts " of knowledge creation such as the acquisi - tion , generation , exploitation , and accumulation of knowledge . Each context has a distinctive way of orga - nizing its knowledge creation activities . Nonhierarchi - cal , or " heterarchical " self - organizing activities of teams are indispensable to generate new knowledge as well as to acquire " deep " knowledge through intensive , focused search . On the other hand , a hierarchical division of labor is more efficient and effective for implementation , exploitation , and accumulation of new knowledge as well as acquisition of various information through extensive , unfocused search . Hypertext organization design first distinguishes the normal routine operation conducted by a hierarchical formal organization from the knowledge creating activ - 32 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation ities carried out by self - organizing teams . But it does not mean that the two activities need to operate sepa - rately and independently . Rather , it stresses the need for the careful design of the two activities which takes account of their distinctive contributions to knowledge creation . The important point to note is that the design of the hierarchy and self - organizing teams should en - able the organization to shift efficiently and effectively between these two forms of knowledge creation . In terms of the theory of organizational knowledge cre - ation , while hierarchical formal organization mainly carries out the task of combination and internalization , self - organizing teams perform the task of socialization and externalization . This also improves the ability of an organization to survive . By establishing the most appro - priate organizational setting for the two activities , an organization can maximize the efficiency of its routine operation , which is determined by bureaucratic princi - ples of division of labor and specialization , and also the effectiveness of its knowledge creation activities . In this type of organization , the knowledge creating activities of self - organizing teams work as a measure which serves to prevent the so - called " reverse function of bureau - cracy " ( Merton 1957 ) . Thus the hypertext organization combines the effi - ciency and stability of a hierarchical bureaucratic orga - nization with the dynamism of the flat , cross - functional task - force organization . Nevertheless , it should be noted that a critical factor for the design of the hyper - text organization lies in the coordination of time , space , and resources to realize the " requisite variety . " Jacques ( 1979 ) pointed out that positions in the hierarchical organization have responsibility of different time - span . This implies that the hierarchical organization is a coordination device for these works of diverse time - span , and generates a " natural frequency " by " orchestrating " various rhythms . As the previous sec - tion indicated , each self - organizing team also creates its own " natural frequency " by synchronizing various rhythms brought into the field by members from di - verse positions in hierarchical organization . The hyper - text organization is an organizational structure that enables orchestration of different rhythms or " natural frequency " generated by various project teams and the hierarchical organization . It coordinates the allocation of time , space , and resource within the organization so as to compose an " organizational " rhythm that makes organizational knowledge creation more effective and efficient . In this sense , the hypertext organization is a structural device to build " requisite variety , " which cannot be secured solely by middle - up - down manage - ment . The image of the hypertext organization is illustrated in Figure 4 . It can be visualized as a multilayered organization comprised of three layers ; knowledge - base , business - system , and project team . At the bottom is the " knowledge - base " layer which embraces tacit knowledge , associated with organizational culture and procedures , as well as explicit knowledge in the form of documents , filing systems , computerized databases , etc . The function of this archival layer may be seen in terms of a " corporate university . " The second layer is the " business - system " layer where normal routine op - eration is carried out by a formal , hierarchical , bureau - cratic organization . The top layer relates to the area where multiple self - organizing project teams create knowledge . These teams are loosely linked to each other and share in the " joint creation of knowledge " using " corporate vision . " Thus the hypertext organiza - tion takes different " forms , " depending on the per - spective from which it is observed . The process of organizational knowledge creation is conceptualized as a dynamic cycle of knowledge and information traversing the three layers . Members of project teams on the top layer are selected from di - verse functions and departments across the business - system layer . Based on the corporate vision presented by top management , they engage in knowledge creating activities interacting with other project teams . Once the task of a team is completed , members move " down " to the knowledge - base layer at the bottom and make an " inventory " of the knowledge acquired and created in the project . After categorizing , documenting , and indexing the new knowledge , they come back to upper business - system layer and engage in routine operation until they are called again for another project . A key design requirement in the hypertext organization is to form such a circular movement of organization mem - bers , who are the fundamental source and subject of organizational knowledge creation . From the vantage point of strategic management , the true " core compe - tence " ( Prahalad and Hamel 1990 ) of the organization , which produces sustainable competitive advantage , lies in its management capability to create relevant organi - zational knowledge ( Nonaka 1989 , 1991 ) . This is a continuous process and the ability to switch swiftly and flexibly between the three layers in the hypertext orga - nization is critical to its success . 5 . Conclusion The theory of organizational knowledge creation pro - posed here has been constructed mainly on the basis of hands - on research and practical experience of Japanese ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 33 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Figure 4 Hypertext Organization - An Interactive Model of Hierarchy and Nonhierarchy . . . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ l . . . . . Project - system layc . Collaboration among project teams to promote . . . . . . . . . knowledge creation x . Teams are loosely - coupled / . . . . . . . . . . . arround organizational vision . . . . Team members form a hyper network across business - systems High accessibility to , . . . . . . . . Ll ; . ; knowledge - base by / A we se e e , , , , , . . individual members / I 11 11 b I 11 11 1 \ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . . . . ' . ' . . . ' . . . . . . . . . . \ E . . . e . . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dynamic knowledge cycle . . . . x continuously creates , iX exploits and accumulates Kno \ wledgeabaselayer organizational knowledge Organizational vision , culture , databases , etc . Source : Nonaka , Konno , Tokuoka , and Kawamura ( 1992 ) . firms . Nevertheless , it should be stressed that the prin - ciples described have a more general application to any organization , either economic or social , private or pub - lic , manufacturing or service , in the coming age despite their field of activities as well as geographical and cultural location . The theory explains how knowledge held by individuals , organizations , and societies can be simultaneously enlarged and enriched through the spi - ral , interactive amplification of tacit and explicit knowl - edge held by individuals , organizations , and societies . The key for this synergetic expansion of knowledge is joint creation of knowledge by individuals and organi - zations . In this sense , the theory of organizational knowledge creation is at the same time a basic theory for building a truly " humanistic " knowledge society beyond the limitations of mere " economic rationality . " Organizations play a critical role in mobilizing tacit knowledge held by individuals and provide the forum for a " spiral of knowledge " creation through socializa - tion , combination , externalization , and internalization . All of these conversion modes interact in a dynamic and continuous " entanglement " to drive the knowl - edge creation process . These modes operate in the context of an organization and , while acknowledging the role of individuals as essential actors in creating new knowledge , the central theme of this paper has been to address the processes involved at an organiza - tional level . By concentrating on the concept of organizational knowledge creation , it has been possible to develop a perspective which goes beyond straightforward notions of " organizational learning . " In the language of the present discussion , learning can be related to " inter - nalization " which is but one of the four modes of conversion required to create new organizational knowledge . Taken by itself , learning has rather limited , static connotations whereas organizational knowledge creation is a more wide - ranging and dynamic concept . Finally , hypertext and middle - up - down management have been offered as practical proposals for imple - menting more effective knowledge creation . As knowl - edge emerges as an ever more important feature of advanced industrial development , it is necessary to pay increased attention to the processes by which it is 34 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation created and the assessment of its quality and value both to the organization and society . Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Arie Y . Lewin , John Seeley Brown , Takaya Kawamura , doctoral student at Hitotsubashi University , and Tim Ray for their insightful comments and assistance . Endnotes I See Lewin and Stephens ( 1992 ) for arguments on challenges to and opportunities for organizational design in the post industrial society . 2 Discussion on epistemology here is based on such classical ac - counts as Plato ' s Theaetetus and Phaedo , Descartes ' s Discourse on Method , Locke ' s An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , Hume ' s An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding , and Kant ' s Critique of Pure Reason . For interpretation of these works , see Hospers ( 1967 ) , Dancy ( 1985 ) , Hallis ( 1985 ) , Moser and Nat ( 1987 ) , and Winograd and Flores ( 1986 ) . 3 See also Polanyi ( 1958 ) and Gelwick ( 1977 ) . 4 Metaphor should not be understood as mere rhetoric or an issue of expression ; it is deeply connected with knowledge creation . For this point , see Black ( 1962 ) and McCormac ( 1985 ) . 5 For comprehensive discussion on metaphor , analogy , and model , see Leatherdale ( 1974 ) and Tsoukas ( 1991 ) . 6 The self - organizing team may be depicted by Maturana and Varela ' s ( 1980 ) concept of an " autopoietic system . " Living organic systems are composed of various organs , which are again composed of numerous cells . Each unit , like an autonomous cell , is self - regulat - ing . Moreover , each unit determines its boundary through self - repro - duction , and is separate from the environment . This self - referential or self - reflecting nature is a quintessential feature of autopoietic systems . 7 Gibson ( 1979 ) suggested an interesting hypothesis that knowledge lies in the environment itself , contrary to the traditional epistemolog - ical view that it exists inside the human brain . According to him , man perceives information ( " affordance " ) which natural objects afford to human cognitive activity , i . e . , according the degree of affordance of the environment . Information on chair , knife , and cliff are revealed when the actions of sitting , cutting , and falling are made , in other words , in the course of interactions between the subject and the object of perception . 8 Jaikumar and Born ( 1986 ) pointed to this as the characteristic of Japanese firms ' production methods . According to them , the produc - tion method for most American firms is clearly defined as the function of the basic manufacturing technology , assigned works , organizational goals , and environment . In this mode of production , then , workers are well aware of their work and thus simply follow the routine procedure . On the other hand , Japanese workers do not get prior knowledge and thus become part of the given work , rather than being separate from the work itself . Therefore , anomaly , or nonrou - tine nature , of the work itself becomes an important opportunity for learning . 9 The development of these concepts are based on a series of theoretical and empirical research studies ( Kagono et al . 1985 , Takeuchi et al . 1986 , and Nonaka 1988a ) . References Anderson , J . R . ( 1983 ) , The Architecture of Cognition , Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Argyris , C . and D . A . Schon ( 1978 ) , Organizational Learning , Read - ing , MA : Addison - Wesley . Arrow , K . J . ( 1974 ) , The Limits of Organization , New York : John Brockman Associates . Ashby , W . R . ( 1956 ) , An Introduction to Cybernetics , London : Cham - pan & Hall . Austin , J . L . ( 1962 ) , How to Do Things with Words , Oxford : Oxford University Press . Bateson , G . ( 1973 ) , Steps to an Ecology of Mind , London : Paladin . ( 1979 ) , Mind and Nature : A Necessary Unity , New York : Ban - tam Books . Bell , D . ( 1973 ) , The Coming of Post - industrial Society : A Venture in Social Forecasting , New York : Basic Books . Berger , P . L . and T . Luchman ( 1966 ) , Social Construction of Reality , New York : Doubleday . Black , M . ( 1962 ) , Models and Metaphors , Ithaca , NY : Cornell Uni - versity Press . Brown , J . S . and P . Duguid ( 1991 ) , " Organizational Learning and Communities of Practice : Towards a Unified View of Working , Learning and Organization , " Organization Science , 2 , 1 , 40 - 57 . Clark , K . B . and T . Fujimoto ( 1991 ) , Product Development Perfor - mance , Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Cohen , M . D . and J . G . March , and J . P . Olsen ( 1972 ) , " A Garbage Can Model of Organizational Choice , " Administrative Science Quarterly , 17 , 1 - 25 . Condon , W . S . ( 1976 ) , " An Analysis of Behavioral Organization , " Sign Language Studies , 13 . Dancy , J . ( 1985 ) , Introduction to Contemporary Epistemology , New York : Basil Blackwell . Dretske , F . ( 1981 ) , Knowledge and the Flow of Information , Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Drucker , P . ( 1968 ) , The Age of Discontinuity : Guidelines to Our Changing Society , New York : Harper & Row . Eigen , M . ( 1971 ) , " Self - Organization of Matter and the Evolution of Biological Macro - Molecules , " Naturwissenshaften , 58 . Gelwick , R . ( 1977 ) , The Way of Discovery : An Introduction to the Thought of Michael Polanyi , Oxford : Oxford University Press . Gibson , J . J . ( 1979 ) , The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception , Boston , MA : Houghton - Mifflin . Gleick , J . ( 1987 ) , Chaos , New York , Viking . Graumann , C . F . ( 1990 ) , " Perspectival Structure and Dynamics in Dialogues , " in I . Markova and K . Foppa , ( Eds . ) , The Dynamics of Dialogue , New York : Harvester Wheatsheaf . Gruber , T . R . ( 1989 ) , The Acquisition of Strategic Knowledge , San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Hallis , M . ( 1985 ) , Invitation to Philosophy , Oxford : Basil Blackwell . Haken , H . ( 1978 ) , Synergetics : Nonequilibrium Phase Transitions and Self - Organization in Physics , Chemistry and Biology , 2nd ed . , Berlin : Springer . Hayek , F . A . ( 1945 ) , " The Use of Knowledge in Society , " American Economic Review , 35 , 4 , 519 - 530 . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 35 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Hedberg , B . L . T . ( 1981 ) , " How Organizations Learn and Unlearn , " in P . C . Nystrom , and W . H . Starbuck , ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Organizational Design , Oxford : Oxford University Press . Hedlund , G . ( 1986 ) , " The Hypermodern MNC - A Heterarchy ? , " Human Resource Management , 25 , 1 . Hospers , J . ( 1967 ) , An Introduction to Philosophical Analysis , 2nd ed . , London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Husserl , E . ( 1968 ) , The Ideas of Phenomenology , Hague : Nijhoff . Imai , K . , I . Nonaka , and H . Takeuchi ( 1985 ) , " Managing the New Product Development Process : How Japanese Companies Learn and Unlearn , " in K . B . Clark , R . H . Hayes and C . Lorenz , ( Eds . ) , The Uneasy Alliance : Managing the Productivity - Technol - ogy Dilemma , Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Jacques , E . ( 1979 ) , " Taking Time Seriously in Evaluating Jobs , " Harvard Business Review , September - October , 124 - 132 . Jaikumar , R . and R . E . Born ( 1986 ) , " The Development of Intelli - gent System for Industrial Use : A Conceptual Framework , " Research on Technological Innovation , Management and Policy , 3 , JAI Press . Jantsch , E . ( 1980 ) , The Self - Organizing Universe , Oxford : Pergamon Press . Johnson - Laird ( 1983 ) , Mental Models , Cambridge : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Kagono , T . , I . Nonaka , K . Sakakibara , and A . Okumura ( 1985 ) , Strategic vs . Evolutionary Management , Amsterdam : North - Hol - land . Lakoff , G . and M . Johnson ( 1980 ) , Metaphors We Live By , Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Landau , M . ( 1969 ) , " Redundancy , Rationality , and the Problem of Duplication and Overlap , " Public Administration Review , 14 , 4 . Leatherdale , W . H . ( 1974 ) , The Role of Analogy , Model and Metaphor in Science , Amsterdam : North - Holland . Lewin , A . Y . and C . V . Stephens ( 1992 ) , " Designing Post - industrial Organization : Theory and Practice , " in G . P , Huber and W . H . Glick ( Eds . ) , Organization Change and Redesign : Ideas and In - sights for Improving Managerial Performance , New York : Oxford University Press . Lewin , K . ( 1951 ) , Field Theory in Social Science , New York : Harper . Machlup , F . ( 1983 ) , " Semantic Quirks in Studies of Information , " in F . Machlup and U . Mansfield ( Eds . ) , The Study of Information , New York : John Wiley . Markova , I . and K . Foppa ( Eds . ) , ( 1990 ) , The Dynamics of Dialogue , New York : Harvester Wheatsheaf . Maturana , H . R . and F . J . Varela ( 1980 ) Autopoiesis and Cognition : The Realization of the Living , Dordrecht , Holland : Reidel . McCormac , E . R . ( 1985 ) , A Cognitive Theory of Metaphor , Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . McCulloch , W . ( 1965 ) , Embodiments of Mind , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Merleau - Ponty , M . ( 1964 ) , The Structure of Behavior , Boston , MA : Beacon Press . Merton , R . K . ( 1957 ) , Social Theory and Social Structure , New York : Free Press . Miyazaki , K . and N . Ueno ( 1985 ) , Shiten ( The View Point ) , Tokyo : Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai ( in Japanese ) . Morgan , G . ( 1986 ) , Images of Organization , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications . Moser , P . K . and A . V . Nat ( 1987 ) , Human Knowledge , Oxford : Oxford University Press . Neisser , U . ( 1976 ) , Cognition and Reality , New York : W . H . Free - man . Nisbet , R . A . ( 1969 ) , Social Change and History : Aspects of the Western Theory of Development , London : Oxford University Press . Nishida , K . ( 1960 ) , A Study of Good ( Zen no kenkyu ) , Tokyo : Printing Bureau , Japanese Government . Nonaka , I . ( 1987 ) , " Managing the Firms as Information Creation Process , " Working Paper , January ( published in J . Meindl ( Ed . ) , ( 1991 ) , Advances in Information Processing in Organizations , 4 , JAI Press . ( 1988a ) , " Creating Organizational Order Out of Chaos : Self - Renewal in Japanese Firms , " California Management Review , 15 , 3 , 57 - 73 . ( 1988b ) , " Toward Middle - Up - Down Management : Accelerat - ing Information Creation , " Sloan Management Review , 29 , 3 , 9 - 18 . ( 1989 ) , " Organizing Innovation as a Knowledge - Creation Pro - cess : A Suggestive Paradigm for Self - Renewing Organization , " Working Paper , University of California at Berkeley , Berkeley , CA , No . OBIR - 41 . ( 1990 ) . " Redundant , Overlapping Organizations : A Japanese Approach to Managing the Innovation Process , " California Management Review , 32 , 3 , 27 - 38 . _ _ ( 1991 ) , " The Knowledge - Creating Company , " Harvard Business Review , November - December , 96 - 104 . _ _ , N . Konno , K . Tokuoka , and T . Kawamura ( 1992 ) , " Hypertext Organization for Accelerating Organizational Knowledge Cre - ation , " Diamond Harvard Business , August - September ( in Japanese ) . Norman , D . A . ( 1977 ) , The Psychology of Everyday Things , New York : Basic Books . Numagami , T . , T . Ohta , and I . Nonaka ( 1989 ) , " Self - Renewal of Corporate Organizations : Equilibrium , Self - Sustaining , and Self - Renewing Models , " Working Paper , University of Califor - nia at Berkeley , Berkeley , CA , No . OBIR - 43 . Piaget , J . ( 1974 ) , Recherches sur la Contradiction , Paris : Presses Universitaires de France . Pinchot , G . III ( 1985 ) , Intrapreneuring , New York : Harper & Row . Polanyi , M . ( 1958 ) , Personal Knowledge , Chicago , IL : The University of Chicago Press . ( 1966 ) , The Tacit Dimension , London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Prahalad , C . K . and G . Hamel ( 1990 ) , " The Core Competition of the Corporation , " Harvard Business Review , May - June , 79 - 91 . Quinn , J . B . ( 1992 ) , Intelligent Enterprise , New York : Free Press . Rosch , E . H . ( 1973 ) , " Natural Categories , " Cognitive Psychology , 4 , 328 - 350 . Ryle , G . ( 1949 ) , The Concept of Mind , London : Huchinson . Sandelands , Lloyd E . and R . E . Stablein ( 1987 ) , " The Concept of Organization Mind , " Research in the Sociology of Organiza - tions , 5 . 36 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 IKUJIRO NONAKA Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation Scheflen , A . E . ( 1982 ) , " Comments on the Significance of Interaction Rhythms , " in M . Davis ( Ed . ) , Interaction Rhythms , New York : Free Press . Sch6n , D . A . ( 1983 ) , The Reflective Practitioner , New York : Basic Books . Schrage , M . ( 1990 ) . Shared Minds : The New Technologies of Collabo - ration , New York : John Brockman . Searle , J . R . ( 1969 ) , Speach Acts : An Essay in the Philosophy of Language , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ( 1983 ) , Intentionality : An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Shannon , C . E . and W . Weaver ( 1949 ) , The Mathematical Theory of Communication , Urbana , IL : University of Illinois Press . Shimizu , H . ( 1978 ) , Seimei o toraenaosu ( Capturing the Nature of Life ) , Tokyo : Chuo koronsha ( in Japanese ) . Stich , S . ( 1986 ) , From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science : The Case Against Belief , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Takeuchi , H . and I . Nonaka ( 1986 ) , " The New New Product Devel - opment Game , " Harvard Business Review , Jan . - Feb . , 137 - 146 . K . Sakakibara , T . Kagono , A . Okumura , and I . Nonaka ( 1986 ) , Kigyo no jiko kakushin ( Corporate Self - renewal ) , Tokyo : Chuo koronsha ( in Japanese ) . Toffler , A . ( 1990 ) , Powershift : Knowledge , Wealth and Violence at the Edge of 21st Century , New York : Bantam Books . Tsoukas , H . ( 1991 ) , " The Missing Link : A Transformation View of Metaphor in Organizational Science , " Academy of Management Review , 16 , 3 , 566 - 585 . Varela , F . J . , E . Thompson , and E . Rosch ( 1991 ) , Embodied Mind : Cognitive Science and Human Experience , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . von Foerster , H . ( 1984 ) , " Principles of Self - organization in a Socio - Managerial Context , " in H . Ulrich and G . J . B . Probst , ( Eds . ) , Self - organization and Management of Social Systems , Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Weick , K . E . ( 1976 ) . The Social Psychology of Organizing , 2nd ed . , Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Williamson , 0 . E . ( 1975 ) , Market and Hierarchies : Antitrust Implica - tions , New York : The Free Press . Winograd , T . and Flores ( 1986 ) , Understanding Computer and Cogni - tion , Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Yuasa , Y . ( 1987 ) , The Body : Toward an Eastern Mind - Body Theory , T . P . Kasulis , ( Ed . ) , translated by S . Nagatomi and T . P . Kasulis , New York : State University of New York Press . Accepted by Arie Y . Lewin ; received December 1992 . This paper has been with the author for 1 revision . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 5 , No . 1 , February 1994 37