Moving Beyond Assistance : Psychological Qualities of Digital Companions Jasmin Niess 1 , Sarah Diefenbach 1 , Axel Platz 2 1 Department of Psychology , LMU Munich , Munich , Germany , jasmin . niess @ psy . lmu . de , sarah . diefenbach @ lmu . de 2 Siemens AG , Munich , Germany , axel . platz @ siemens . com Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . NordiCHI’18 , September 29 – October 3 , 2018 , Oslo , Norway © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6437 - 9 / 18 / 09 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240167 . 3240240 Abstract Digital assistant technologies are becoming increasingly common at home . These technologies also hold high po - tential through supporting individuals at work . However , it remains a challenge for research to understand which psychological features should be embodied by digital as - sistant technologies so that they can become meaningful everyday companions and contribute to user’s wellbeing . In this work , we conducted a focus group , a survey and an expert workshop to investigate user perceptions of digital assistants and explore how interactive technologies can be perceived as companions . We found that the design space of digital companions can be described as a spec - trum between passive and active assistance . Further , users reported that assistant technologies can assume different roles ( e . g . friend , advisor ) connected to the task performed . Our ﬁndings contribute initial insights regarding psychologi - cal qualities of digital companions and highlight a number of important questions for future research . Author Keywords digital companion ; assistive technology ; interaction at - tributes ; psychological needs ; technology as social actor ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m [ Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : Miscellaneous Introduction Digital assistant technologies are already widespread as - sisting people in daily tasks ( e . g . Amazon Alexa 1 ) . Fur - thermore , digital assistants become increasingly popular in the working domain , supporting manual labour ( e . g . , in - dustry robots ) and cognitive tasks , such as in the domain of software development . The latter reﬂects a typical ﬁeld of application for assistant technologies in the era of infor - mation society . As knowledge workers have to deal with an increasing amount of information every day , there is an emerging need to build technologies that reduce informa - tion overload and aid in sensemaking [ 3 ] . Assistant tech - nologies can improve how employees obtain information and thus can contribute to users’ efﬁciency and wellbeing . This way , systems can become cooperative partners [ 4 ] that interact with the human knowledge worker to deal with the increasing complexity in organizational and administrative regards ( e . g . constant availability [ 6 ] ) . However , to enfold its full potential and support users in the best way possible , such technology needs to be designed in a way that users are open to engage with it and integrate it into their daily work routine . In other words , a critical question is how tech - nology can go beyond assistance and be perceived as a trustworthy ( digital ) companion . As already discussed in the nineties , when stepping into the role of a social actor [ 7 ] , technology evokes particu - lar psychological reactions and expectations in its users . These ﬁndings can also be relevant in the ﬁeld of assistant technologies . In order to successfully transform an interac - tive assistant into a technology that people can perceive as a supportive companion , technical functionalities need to be augmented . The assistant should embody certain psy - chological qualities ( e . g . use a particular " communication style " [ 1 ] ) . Consequently , building a profound understanding 1 alexa . amazon . com of the subtleties of companion technologies from a psycho - logical perspective emerges as a challenge for HCI . We aim to ﬁll this gap by conducting an inquiry with a focus on the following questions : What are the central characteris - tics , which allow people to consider technology or artifacts as a " companion " ? What are the psychological qualities involved in designing digital assistant technologies to trans - form them into true digital companions ? What are the dif - ferences in needs and expectations of digital companions between different applications areas ? Aiming for a broader perspective on the required psychological qualities of digi - tal companions , we present initial insights from the speciﬁc domain of software architecture with more general inquiries into user needs and expectations of technology or artifacts as companions . More speciﬁcally , we investigate ( 1 ) user perceptions of digital assistant technologies and ( 2 ) critical prerequisites of interactive technologies to become digital companions . We conducted a focus group with software – architects to explore a speciﬁc application area of assis - tant technology , the work environment , in more depth . We also conducted an online survey and an expert workshop to explore the psychological beneﬁts and features of future digital companions in general . This paper contributes the following : ( 1 ) empirical results on current and future roles of digital assistant technologies from a variety of data sources : a focus group , an online survey and an expert workshop and ( 2 ) preliminary insights about the requirements and constraints involved in designing digital companions . Figure 1 : Focus group participants using the needs inventory . Method Our work explores how users relate to companions in dif - ferent contexts , i . e . work and private life . To that end we combined three methodological approaches : a focus group , an online survey and an expert workshop . In order to get as much insight as possible the term ’companion’ was not ex - plained in more detail . Instead we invited the participants to freely express what they associated with the term . We did however specify that we ask about objects as companions and if our questions are about digital , non - digital or both types of companions . Focus Group With the aim of inquiring about the views on companions in work settings , we conducted a focus group ( 2 hours ) with n = 6 software architects in a big corporation ( 4 male , 2 female , work experience 1 – 14 years ) . We chose software architects , because they were a good representation of a user in a knowledge - based economy . Furthermore , an in - creasing number of people are going to pursue this profes - sion in the future . The focus group started with a general reﬂection on ( digital and non - digital ) objects that could be companions in everyday life . Psychological functions and related needs were discussed ( see Figure 1 ) with the help of the needs card set 2 . With the aim to gain in - depth in - sights in current practices and attitudes towards objects as companions we did not restrict the reﬂection task to digi - tal or non - digital companions . Afterwards , the discussion focused on speciﬁc requirements and expectations from a digital companion in the participants’ professional context , i . e . , software architecture . Besides appropriate functions to be supported by the companion , a point of discussion was also the appropriate form of interaction and communication between the user and the companion . Participants demon - strated their individual views and ideas by building collages of drawings and photos . Online Survey In order to explore the perception of companions among users , we conducted an online survey with n = 156 ( 117 male , 39 female , M age = 24 . 28 , SD age = 6 . 17 ) . In the sur - 2 adapted from https : / / hassenzahl . wordpress . com / experience - design - tools / vey , we asked about typical features of a good companion ( digital and non - digital ) . Further , we queried users if they had already had companions and what shape the compan - ions assumed . We explored various roles of companions , what needs they could have fulﬁlled and potential ways for companions to interact and communicate with the user . We decided to inquire digital and non - digital companions in order to gain as much insight as possible regarding the vari - ety of perceptions towards objects as companions . Answers were collected over two weeks in August 2017 and the sur - vey took an average of 15 minutes . Participants were re - cruited via mailing lists and social media platforms . As an incentive , participants were able to take part in a rafﬂe for Amazon vouchers ( 1 × e 50 , 2 × e 20 , 5 × e 10 ) . Expert Workshop In addition , we conducted an expert workshop with experts from software development , psychology and design n = 4 ( 3 female , 1 male ) . The participants were active in research and practice and held a Master’s Degree or higher ( 1 MSc , 3 PhD ) . The workshop participants explored and analysed how users could interact with digital companions at home and at a workplace . Based on the preliminary results from the online study , we explored interaction patterns for vari - ous roles of digital companions . Further , connections be - tween interaction patterns and experiential qualities were explored and discussed using the interaction vocabulary by Diefenbach et al . [ 2 ] . The interaction vocabulary is a set of qualities to describe interactions . The attributes are de - scriptive , non - judgmental and abstract ( e . g . gentle – power - ful ) . The vocabulary can be used to inspire potential ways to design interactions and as a means to support system - atic discussions about how interactions feel . Findings Figure 2 : The psychological needs potentially addressed by a companion , rated on a 5 - point Likert scale . A central ﬁnding was the identiﬁcation of two basic types of companions — active and passive . The examples of digital and non - digital companions in everyday life provided by the participants of the focus group and the online survey ( e . g . notebook , pen , smartphone , laptop ) covered a wide vari - ety of products . However , independent of the product cat - egory , the way participants of the focus group talked about that product and their relation to it was affected by whether the product played a more active role , actively initiating a ‘conversation with its user’ , or a more passive role , wait - ing to be ‘called for assistance’ . The former , for example , could be a calendar app that actively reminded its users of appointments and tasks that need to be accomplished . While the users believed their companions had their best interest at heart , the active companion could also be per - ceived as annoying . An example of a passive companion described by one participant of the focus group was a ( non digital ) notebook . As a reliable companion , the notebook was always there to record all the things that ‘would take too much space in her head’ , and produced the information when requested . Focus group participants also assigned different character traits to passive and active companions . An active companion was typically characterized as inno - vative , dominant , proactive and independent . Some partic - ipants also reported a feeling of being under surveillance and having limited autonomy . For example , one participant explained that When I make a mistake , he corrects me imme - diately and this [ correction ] is obligatory . A passive companion , in contrast , was characterized as caring , empathetic , cautious and subdominant , only acting on explicit request . This is , for example , reﬂected in the following statement of a participant of the focus group . He gives me the space I need , but , as soon as I need him , he is there . We asked what kind of companion ( active or passive ) par - ticipants would prefer in general and in different contexts . There was no general preference for one of the two com - panion types , 52 % of the participants chose passive . How - ever , the speciﬁc questions for both leisure and work / study contexts revealed a slight preference for the active compan - ion ( leisure : 58 % ; work / study : 58 % ) . In sum , the survey ﬁndings imply that both companion types , active and pas - sive , are relevant for assistant technologies ( Figure 3 ) . Psychological beneﬁts of companions Both focus group discussion and online survey revealed competence , security and autonomy as most important psy - chological needs fulﬁlled by companions ( Figure 2 ) In the online study , the perceived need fulﬁllment was assessed with the needs questionnaire [ 5 ] on a ﬁve - point scale . Fo - cus group participants discussed the dominance of needs in the context of their companions with the help of a needs card set , representing different psychological needs by pic - tures and associated feelings and statements . While need fulﬁllment of stimulation , relatedness , and popularity was only apparent in single participants’ statements , compe - tence , autonomy , and security were unanimously mentioned by all participants . For example , relating to autonomy , one participant described his laptop as a ‘universal weapon’ , providing support in a variety of situations , another referred to her smartphone helping her ‘ﬁnd her way’ . Figure 3 : User preference for active or passive companions depending on different contexts . Companion roles Moreover , beyond the active – passive distinction , the focus group and online survey also revealed a variety of possi - ble roles and associated character traits behind the broad image of a companion . For example , a ( digital ) compan - ion may take the role of a friend , an advisor , a teacher , or a coach . Each of these roles comes with different expec - tations towards the product , and , in the case of interactive products , also different requirements of interaction qualities . We explored such patterns of interaction qualities related to different companion roles with the help of the interaction vocabulary [ 2 ] . As a result of the expert workshop , Figure 4 shows the speciﬁed ideal interaction proﬁles for two dif - ferent companion roles , friend and advisor . For example , the requirement of instant interaction for the companion as advisor ( Figure 4 ) reﬂects the expectation that an advisor should provide instant feedback . Moreover , instant interac - tion was perceived as an expression of deﬁnite advice , as expected from a good advisor . The need for clear advice was also related to powerful interaction ; the need for step - wise interaction was explained in parallel to a structured dialogue . In a similar manner , each interaction attribute was related to a particular character trait or role . Compared to this , seeing the companion as a friend , brought up differ - ent expectations of interaction attributes . For example , a more gentle and ﬂuent interaction was seen as appropriate . In sum , companions that assume different roles were thus connected with different interaction proﬁles and the way the companion is experienced can be shaped through a delib - erate design of interaction attributes . Figure 4 : Interaction proﬁles for two companion roles — friend and advisor . Discussion and Future Work Our preliminary results reveal several interesting starting points for the deliberate design of digital companion tech - nologies such as the active – passive distinction or interac - tion qualities as a way to shape a desired companion role and character . But these questions need to take the spe - ciﬁc context into account . While in the working domain , a companion might shall take on the role of an advisor , for a technology used in one’s free time , other requirements may arise . Thus , the question of context and resulting require - ments is also a central one in the ﬁeld of companion tech - nologies . The conscious decision for a ﬁt between context and role of the companion comes with the consideration of speciﬁc interaction qualities , such as the way the technol - ogy communicates with the user [ 1 ] , interaction patterns [ 2 ] and the difference between active and passive companion qualities . Moreover , we see parallels to other HCI concepts . For example , the active - passive qualities of interactive tech - nologies relates to the work of Weiser et al . seminal work on reactive and proactive systems , which operate in the periphery [ 8 ] . In future work , we aim to study relevance and adequacy of various digital companion roles in speciﬁc contexts . There - fore , we will also explore possible ways to operationalise different contexts . We strive to explore the connection be - tween roles of digital companions and speciﬁc interaction qualities . Furthermore , we plan to conduct a study in a spe - ciﬁc context of use , looking closely at software development practice . We aim to do in - depth user research in order to get a profound understanding of the daily work routine of the participants and the accompanying chances and chal - lenges of their work . We plan to develop prototypes of digi - tal companions that assume different roles . We will explore how these different companion roles are perceived in this speciﬁc work context . We hope to determine psychological qualities of companions connected to their speciﬁc roles and investigate the companion’s inﬂuence on the work at - mosphere and efﬁciency . Conclusion In this paper , we explored the psychological qualities of artefacts and technologies that may become users’ com - panions . We explored differences in perceptions of assis - tant technologies in work and private contexts and psycho - logical factors for designing digital companions . To this end , we conducted a focus group , an online survey and an ex - pert workshop . Our initial results show that companion ob - jects are already present in a variety of domains , including leisure activities and the work environment . This suggests a string potential for developing companion technologies that embody desirable psychological qualities for both do - mestic and work settings . We found that companions can assume different roles and the preferred role may depend on the context of use . There were two types of companions ( active and passive ) , which are a continuum rather than a dichotomous variable . However , the results also revealed the complexity of the user experience of companion tech - nologies . Users reported that merely providing assistance did not necessarily form a desirable digital companion . Our work constitutes a ﬁrst attempt at envisioning future com - panion technologies . We hope that our initial insights will inspire further research into how digital assistant technolo - gies can become meaningful everyday companions and contribute to user’s wellbeing . Acknowledgements We thank Eva Lenz , Daniel Ullrich , Marietta Herzog and Kim Borrmann for their valuable contributions to this work . REFERENCES 1 . Robbert Jan Beun , Siska Fitrianie , Fiemke Grifﬁoen - Both , Sandor Spruit , Corine Horsch , Jaap Lancee , and Willem - Paul Brinkman . 2017 . Talk and Tools : the best of both worlds in mobile user interfaces for E - coaching . Pers . Ubiquit . Comput . 21 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 661 – 674 . 2 . Sarah Diefenbach , Eva Lenz , and Marc Hassenzahl . 2013 . An Interaction Vocabulary . Describing the How of Interaction . . In CHI EA ’13 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 607 – 612 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468463 3 . Nitesh Goyal and Susan R . Fussell . 2016 . Effects of Sensemaking Translucence on Distributed Collaborative Analysis . In CSCW ’16 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 288 – 302 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820071 4 . Jonathan Grudin . 2017 . From Tool to Partner : The Evolution of Human - Computer Interaction . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics 10 , 1 ( 2017 ) , i – 183 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2200 / S00745ED1V01Y201612HCI035 5 . Marc Hassenzahl , Annika Wiklund - Engblom , Anette Bengs , Susanne Hägglund , and Sarah Diefenbach . 2015 . Experience - Oriented and Product - Oriented Evaluation : Psychological Need Fulﬁllment , Positive Affect , and Product Perception . IJHCI 31 , 8 ( 2015 ) , 530 – 544 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2015 . 1064664 6 . Melissa Mazmanian and Ingrid Erickson . 2014 . The Product of Availability : Understanding the Economic Underpinnings of Constant Connectivity . In CHI ’14 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 763 – 772 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557381 7 . Clifford Nass , Jonathan Steuer , and Ellen R . Tauber . 1994 . Computers Are Social Actors . In CHI ’94 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 72 – 78 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 191666 . 191703 8 . Mark Weiser and John Seely Brown . 1997 . The coming age of calm technology . In Beyond calculation . Springer , 75 – 85 .