Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) International Journal of Technology and Design Education ( 2021 ) 31 : 771 – 795 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10798 - 020 - 09573 - 2 1 3 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between intuition and reasoning Betül Orbey 1 · G . Pelin Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 Accepted : 27 February 2020 / Published online : 12 March 2020 © Springer Nature B . V . 2020 Abstract Among many perspectives in discussions of design , this study re - asserts the relation between intuition and reasoning . The aim is to comprehend the role of intuition and rea - soning in the design process . In order to do this , retrospective self - reports of the first year , rule - based architectural design studio students were utilized . Based on these reports , stu - dents’ design activities were analyzed both quantitatively and qualitatively . A mapping technique provided by Graph Commons , for data visualization , was further used . The results suggest that a rule - based design approach requires management of both rationale and intuition ; and , those students who are better in charge of managing their rationale and intuition tend to receive higher grades . Keywords Architectural design · Design education · Design behavior · Reasoning · Intuition Introduction There have been different schools prevalent in design education . Under the influence of fine arts , until the very beginning of the twentieth century , design education followed intui - tionism in design process , and architecture was considered more like a branch of art rather than a discipline . In this view , the subjectivity of intuition had been welcome and con - sidered as the sole way to design . Industrialized production techniques made a shift from this perspective to a new one . This is a ‘scientific design’ process in which we witness a significant change from pre - industrial , craft - oriented design to a modern and industrialized design based on scientific knowledge utilizing a mix of both intuitive and non - intuitive design methods ( Cross 2001 ) . Prussia implemented a different way of knowledge , which is known as Bauhaus ( Çelik - Alexander 2018 ) , founded at the beginning of the twentieth century . Çelik - Alex - ander ( 2018 ) proposes that this understanding is a trans - disciplinary discipline that sur - passes all others . With the rise of modernist thought , a significant step away from the * Betül Orbey betul . orbey @ gmail . com 1 Department of Architecture , Faculty of Fine Arts and Design , Doğuş University , Acıbadem , Zeamet Sokak , 34722 İstanbul , Turkey 772 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 mystical intuitionism of the previous century could be achieved ( Mennan 2008 ) . Intuition lost its validity and credibility against logical positivism in modern thinking where rational thought raised over anything . In this thought , design has become a rational act as a result of an increased curricular emphasis on the mathematical and scientific foundations . 1 Moreo - ver , Cross ( 2001 : pp 49 – 55 ) defines ‘design science’ as an explicitly organized , rational , and wholly systematic approach to design . Rather than being completely rationalist or intuitionist , a mid - way approach emerges by the end of the twentieth century , stemming primarily from the emergence of complex - ity sciences and extensive use of computers in the design process . As Mennan ( 2008 : pp 171 – 183 ) argues , complexity sciences offer an intriguing synthesis between positivist and phenomenological approaches , much in the same way as Gestalt theory , a significant aspect of modernist Bauhaus School , positioned itself at the crossroads of logical positiv - ism and phenomenology . This view neither fully accepts nor denies rationalist and mod - ernist approaches . This is parallel to what Cross ( 2001 : pp 4 – 55 ) defines as ‘Design as a Discipline’ ; design studied on its own terms , within its own rigorous culture . Among a variety of perspectives in discussions of design , this study re - asserts the con - nection that exists primarily between intuition and reasoning and is a scholar attempt to understand the design process . The primary aim is to comprehend the role of intuition and reasoning in the design process . In order to do this , questionnaires were distributed to first - year architecture students . By analyzing students’ retrospective descriptions of their design processes , design activity categories emerged . Following that , Graph Commons ( © Alter - lab LLC . All rights reserved ) were used to map these design activities . The paper proceeds as follows : Second section summarises background research about perspectives on design . Third section describes the first year design studio at Doğuş Uni - versity and the tasks given during the semester . Fourth section presents an empirical out - line of the study . In conclusion , fifth section presents the results of the empirical study and discusses the findings . Background Changing perspectives on design Design is ‘a process that involves a series of actions to turn the present situation into some - thing more preferable’ ( Simon 1981 : p 129 ) . Among the synonyms are concepts such as organizing , calculating , framing , planning , preparing , and producing strategies . According to Friedman ( 2003 : pp 507 – 522 ) , most design definitions have three features in common : 1 . Design is a process . 2 . This process is goal - oriented . 3 . The purpose of design is solving problems , meeting needs , improving situations , or creating something new or useful . 1 . A similar discussion was also carried out for engineering disciplines , and according to Felder ( 2004 ) , the paradigm shift from practice to science was substantially complete in most engineering schools by the early 1970s . 773 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 This definition reflects the perspective of Design Methods Movement through which design process was modified and moved away from conventions , experience , and intuition of the intuitive design thinking , in order to become more scientific ( Goldschmidt 2014 ) . In this experimental science of design , design has become a logical process controlled by rules and prescribed ( Goldschmidt 2014 ) . Supporting this argument , some architects argue that architecture is related to function , rules , and regulations , which enables logical think - ing in the core of the design process ( Badke - Schaub et al . 2014 ) . However , design epistemology can be tactile , and as Çelik - Alexander ( 2018 : p 57 ) argues not only knowledge depending on propositions ( Wissen ) , but also hands - on learning ( kinesthetic knowledge ) could alone be a science of its own . Hence , arguments of Design Methods movement to use prescriptive methods may be diverting design process from its natural course ( Goldschmidt 2014 ) . Similarly , Dorst ( 2006 : pp 521 – 532 ) 2 accepts the sig - nificance of rational problem - solving paradigm in design thinking . Intuition is a significant aspect of judgment and decision making in many domains and , limitations of intuitive design can be acknowledged to fuel creativity ( Badke - Schaub et al . 2014 ) . Furthermore , intuition leads the designer to be more critical of his / her work ( Badke - Schaub et al . 2014 ) . While intuition gains relevancy again , some scholars argued that for novice designers , intuition could be a dangerous tool as they lack experience ( Badke - Schaub et al . 2014 ; Goldschmidt 2014 ) . Students and novice designers almost randomly generate proposals but not efficient strategies ( Dorst 2011 : pp 521 – 532 ) . Successful use of intuition in design process is possible by doing more and more design activity . Intuition and reasoning in design process Two contrasting views build their arguments depending on two concepts : intuition and rea - soning , which appear as antonyms in many domains . 3 Merriam Webster defines intuition as “the power or faculty of attaining to direct knowledge or cognition without evident rational thought and inference” . While on the other hand , reasoning is “the drawing of inferences or conclusions through the use of reason , the power of comprehending , inferring , or thinking especially in orderly rational ways ( 1 ) ; the proper exercise of the mind ( 2 ) ; the sum of the intellectual powers ( 3 ) ” . In such a framework , one may assume that intuition and reasoning are almost opposites of each other that will never work together . However , design as a creative activity has some peculiarities such that intuition and reasoning find their relative places in the design process , proving that they may— in fact , must - operate together to solve design problems . Supporting this argument , Scholl ( 1997 : p 457 ) argues that the human mind is modular ; hence , particular logical rules may be used in some reasoning mechanisms but not in others . In other words , he states that in a mutual relationship , specific cognitive reasoning mechanisms may operate rationally , while others 2 Within problem - solving discussions , Dorst ( 2011 ) pays significant attention to Dreyfus ( 2002 ) and Such - man ( 1987 ) ’s ’design as situated problems’ and Hatchuel ( 2002 ) ’s ’extended rationality’ in problem - solving discussions . Dorst ( 2006 ) further accepts the significance of rational problem - solving paradigm in design thinking , while criticizing it as the designer influences the very nature of the problem by making interpreta - tions in the design process . What Dorst calls as ’interpretation , ’ finds its place as ’intuition’ in this study . 3 It is safer to say that a design process facilitates abductive reasoning in which reasoning may be utilized in a number of ways in accompany with intuition . The intention in working with a rule - based design studio was to narrow down the forms in which reasoning may come in and focus distinguishing the moments when reasoning and intuition step in . 774 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 not . This duality can help understand the design process : some phases of the process may require rational thought while others do not , and still , they can operate mutually in a rea - soning process . Related to reasoning process , another shift takes place suggesting that rather than inductive ( used for discovery ) or deductive ( used for justification ) reasoning of scientific research , creative activities are , in fact , convenient for abductive reasoning ( Claxton 2000 ) where designers end up with their best predictions depending on their incomplete observa - tions . Claxton ( 2000 : p 32 ) additionally denotes that in surprise full nature of design activ - ity , intuition becomes a part of the reasoning process . Dorst ( 2011 : pp 521 – 532 ) further argues that abduction reasoning divides into 2 ; Abduction 1 refers to closed systems while Abduction 2 represents open and complex problems , like design . Kroll and Koskela ( 2015 ) re - interpret this definition as a two - step abductive process that invents a design object , which is a form , with a mode of use and a mode of action to satisfy the desired function . This final reconciliation of the initially contrasting approaches have resulted in a para - digm shift . 4 The use of computational tools has accelerated this change to a broader extent . The primary aim beneath this was not replacing human designer ; instead , designer and computer have become partners in the design process working collaboratively ( Gold - schmidt 2014 ) . It is relevant to note that the Gestalt Theory of the Bauhaus school did not die away in this new paradigm ; hence its insights were adapted by designers as Neo - Gestalt ( Goldschmidt 2014 and Robertson et al . 1986 ) . Accordingly , perspectives on design think - ing can be summarised as follows ( Table 1 ) . Table 1 also implicitly reflects that design is something between ‘art , science , and tech - nology’ , and the relative positions of these domains differ in three perspectives . Since the beginning of the nineteenth century , art lost its significance while technology gained impe - tus in the domain of design , yet three of them had some part in all of the understandings . 5 Design moves in design problems Despite the differences in the above perspectives , design is generally accepted as a process and mostly a problem - solving domain . For a general problem , there can be a problem space and a solution space ( Reitman et al . 1964 ; Simon 1973 and Goldschmidt 2014 ) , which may be appropriate for single solution problems . For design problems , there can be numerous successful solutions . 6 Different models were proposed to analyze design process . For instance , Asimow ( 1962 ) argued that design process is a linear model like a flowchart of analysis - synthesis - evaluation ( ASE ) . This view then advanced into spiral models in which iterative actions made possible in ASE ; and , the designer moves to a specific issue from an abstract one ( Goldschmidt 2014 ) . Later on , Schön ( 1983 ) , in his book The Reflective Practitioner , pro - posed that the design process evolves by reflective cycles of the designer . Schön and Wig - gins ( 1992 : pp 135 – 156 ) suggest that a design process evolves through a see - move - see 5 See also Fidelli ( 2006 ) , where the study demonstrates three historical embodiments of the archetype . 6 . This particular feature of design may be better reflected if the French originated word ‘problematique’ is used instead of ’problem’ , referring to the ambiguity in design . 4 A more detailed discussion on complexity sciences , and effects on design are not made here , as the empirical study of this paper relies on a design studio where analog tools , but not computers ( Özkar 2005 ) , are used . 775 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 T a b l e 1 P e r s p ec ti v e s on d e s i gn t h i nk i ng a S ee S a y e r ( 1985 ) f o r f u r t h e r d i s c u ss i on on s o c i a l r e l a ti on s a nd s p a ti a l s t r u c t u r e s P e r i o d D o m i n a n t und e r s t a nd i ng o f d e s i gn R ea s on i ng D e s i gn c ogn iti on P e r s p ec ti v e s on d e s i gn t h i nk i ng i n a h i s t o r i ca l p e r s p ec ti v e T h e b e g i nn i ng o f t h e t w e n ti e t h ce n t u r y I n t u iti on S ub j ec ti v e e v a l u a ti on s A r t P r ac ti c e / a pp r e n ti ce s h i p i s i m po r t a n t L ea r n i ng fr o m p ee r s M i d - t w e n ti e t h ce n t u r y R a ti on a l i s m C a n b e i ndu c ti v e o r d e du c ti v e S c i e n t i fi c t hough t acce p t e d a s t h e c o r e G r a nd t h e o r y und e r s t a nd i ng / n ece s - s a r y r e l a ti on s N o / li m it e d r o l e f o r ac t o r s a nd s p ace C l o s e d s y s t e m s ( v a li d m o s tl y f o r n a t u r a l s c i e n ce s w h e r e s a m e c on - d iti on s ca n b e s u s t a i n e d a ny ti m e ) E n d o f t h e t w e n ti e t h ce n t u r y C o m p l e x it y s c i e n ce s P a r a m e t r i c d e s i gn s A bdu c ti v e T ec hn o l ogy D e s i gn p r ob l e m s a r e m u lti - d i m e n - s i on a l , h a s it s r i go r ou s c u lt u r e C on ti ng e n t r e l a ti on s a r e i m po r t a n t ( n e it h e r n ece ss a r y no r i m po ss i b l e ) i n s o c i a l s c i e n ce s O p e n s y s t e m s ( ca p ac it y o f t h e p e op l e ca n c h a ng e t h e c ond iti on s ) , v a li d m o s tl y f o r s o c i a l s c i e n ce s P e op l e ca n l ea r n i n t h e p r o ce ss a 776 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 cycle in which the designer makes a new design move as a result of visual feedback , which is viewed as the ‘intelligence’ that guides intuitive behavior ( Ball and Christensen 2019 ) . However , it is hard to find sources focusing on the dialogue between rationale and intui - tion . Most significant works interested in design behavior analyze the design process at micro - level ( Goldschmidt 2014 ; Dorst 2011 ) based on specific codes . However , this study intends to identify the presence of both by explicitly referring to a rule - based setting where it is possible to observe if the designer acts upon rationale ( rule - based ) or intuition ( non - rule based ) . Therefore , it is the aim of this study to initiate a systematic understanding of design from a cognitive perspective by coding the use of design moves initiated during the design process . The focus is on investigating how information is manipulated by reasoning , inter - twined with intuition to come up with a design solution because ; as it is contested in Claus and colleagues’ work ( 2019 ) , analysis of design activity provides potential to enhance the understanding of design activity and be integrated into support tools and methods for future research . First‑year design studio at Doğuş University Studio statement There are a variety of design schools with different curricula reflecting their character : some schools of architecture follow “art and design pedagogy , ” whereas others position themselves within an engineering spectrum ( Yagou 2007 ) . Doğuş University follows a mid - way approach where intuition comes forward as a way of stimulating creativity , while on the other hand , each one of the exercises requires the development of “formal algo - rithms” 7 as a tribute to rationalist aspects of design . ‘Formal algorithm’ is a concept devel - oped to refer to a step - by - step procedure for solving a design problem without the use of computers which requires to have both verbal and visual instructions , in such a way that a third person can draw ( 2D ) or build ( 3D ) the associated designs without the help of the designer . The first - year Design Studio in the Department of Architecture introduces students to fundamental concepts about architectural thinking and the design process . Therefore , first - year introductory studio plays an essential role in design education , as also suggested with survey results conducted by Boucharenc ( 2006 ) . This studio course adopts ‘learning by doing’ approach , which indicates a tactile environment for first - year students . Desk critics facilitate a ‘learning from peers’ process . The studio adopts a rule - based approach . As novice designers , first - year students need orientation in the very beginning . They are not familiar with design tools to work with in order to generate design ideas . They do not have already - formed design habits yet . Stu - dents’ search limits may further be defined by the set of tools introduced by the instructors or the design problem itself . In the absence of such limits , students may find themselves in an undefined situation . The exercises conducted ask the students to come up with their own design rules found through their individual geometrical explorations . Therefore , this process necessitates the 7 For a detailed discussion , see Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu & Orbey ( 2017 ) . 777 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 development of firstly , a low - level order , which is referred to as syntax . Secondly , a high - level order which is referred to as semantics in the curriculum . 8 Derived from linguistics , the former indicates the formal features of the units of design like ‘ size and color ’ , while the latter denotes relationships between the units of design like ‘ how do they interact within the design composition ? ’ . Students are expected to utilize intuition explicitly by evaluating the outcome of the design rules and required to go through a reflective phase mentioned in Schön’s seminal work in 1983 . Hence , students should comply with both the level of rules that they have designed ; but not become slaves of them in the design process . In this context , Schön’s see - move - see approach helps students to realize that while going back and forth in the process Fig . 1 Student 1’s projects of task 1 Fig . 2 Student 1’s projects of task 2 8 . These conceptualizations were formerly used in the Design Studio at Middle East Technical Univer - sity in the 1990s . 778 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 of design , rules might and should be re - designed when their intuition tells them that the outcome is not quite in line with the design problem ( Figs . 1 , 2 , 3 ) . The final task The final exercise asks the students to extract units from their previous designs . It asks them to use these units in order to design a living unit that contains individual living spaces on the surface of Mars in the year 2200 ( Fig . 4 ) . The total volume of the construction is restricted to 3 meters on each side . The design is expected to present a spatial hierarchy consisting of private space , semi - private space , and common space . As in previous exer - cises , the students are not allowed to use glue . Instead , they are asked to work with notches and design joints . Each work is supposed to progress with designed algorithm and shape rules , documented with formal algorithm diagrams . The work is expected to be solely based on geometry and rules that bring different forms together . Therefore , the students are not asked to consider environmental or functional aspects of the units . The grades were given by two instructors and four independent guest design instructors / academicians . The grades are the average of all the scores given by the jurors . The grades were based on elaborate use of geometry and rules , the hierarchy of spaces , expression of Fig . 3 Exemplary steps in forming type Fig . 4 Student 2’s project of task 3 779 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 rules , design , and overall adequacy . The students were expected to oscillate between the design of the rules and their geometric construction . They were also expected to go back and revise their design rule if they needed . Higher scores were assigned to those who were consistent in pursuing design rules while allowing for a variety of spatial qualities includ - ing but not limited to private , semi - private , and common space to emerge ( Fig . 5 ) . Data and methodology As mentioned in the Introduction Section , this study assumes intuition and reasoning as significant aspects of a design process and , therefore , argues that an intellectual analysis is required to reveal their positions . In this context , first - year students’ design habits and their tendencies towards intuition and reasoning in the design process are evaluated with content analysis . Fig . 5 Student 3 , 4 and 5 projects of final submission 780 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 A content analysis utilizes quantitative analysis and qualitative comparisons of reflective self - reports are employed for this aim . An online questionnaire was used to obtain reflec - tive self - reports of the design process the students have experienced . The questionnaire included nine open questions , all descriptive in nature . In order to ensure adequate time for answers , students filled in the questionnaires online . As all the students were included in the survey study , the representativeness of the data is argued to be sufficient . Regarding the data and the method , “validity and reliability” are considered together as trustworthiness 9 in this study , as this is a qualitative work in nature . In order to increase the trustworthiness of the study , triangulation 10 has been used and an inter - rater reliability test , which revealed a 0 . 778 of Cohen’s Kappa ( Cohen 1968 ) , was conducted . Content analysis was conducted to identify a central theme and related categories . By mapping technique that adopts clustering method , centrality measure , and in - degree cen - trality measure , data visualization was done to explicitly illustrate the relational analysis . Finally , a comparison was made between design approaches of students who received higher grades and lower grades for this course . Aim of the study This study was conducted during first - year design studios at Doğuş University , where it has been a natural teaching environment of researchers and an opportunity to bring teach - ing and research together . The participants of the study were the students who were placed in Doğuş University by a common exam taken nationwide where after students have listed their preferences according to their ranking . Therefore , although the students may vary in cultural background , they are a group with similar levels of rigor and academic achieve - ments during high school . All of the participants were enrolled in this foundation course , where design exercises conducted to foster rule - based design thinking . The primary research question was , how do first - year design students manage their design process when intuitive and reasoning tendencies are considered ? This study intends to investigate / code the presence of both reasoning and intuition by explicitly referring to a rule - based setting where it is possible to observe if the designer acts upon rationale ( rule - based ) or intuition ( non - rule based ) . This study also sought to make the students’ design moves explicit and identify common design approaches , if any . In doing so , positions of high grade and low - grade students are compared for the sake of a clear interpretation . 9 Qualitative research uses a naturalistic approach that seeks to understand phenomena in context - specific settings , such as " real - world setting [ where ] the researcher does not attempt to manipulate the phenomenon of interest " ( Patton 2002 : p 39 ) . Although reliability and validity are treated separately in quantitative stud - ies , these terms are not viewed separately in qualitative research . Instead , terminology that encompasses both , such as credibility , transferability , and trustworthiness is used . ”The concepts of reliability and validity are viewed differently by qualitative researchers who strongly consider these concepts defined in quantita - tive terms as inadequate . In other words , these terms , as defined in quantitative terms , may not apply to the qualitative research paradigm . The question of replicability in the results does not concern them ( Glesne and Peshkin 1992 ) , but precision ( Winter 2000 ) , credibility , and transferability ( Hoepfl 1997 ) provide the lenses of evaluating the findings of a qualitative research . In this context , the two research approaches or perspectives are essentially different paradigms ( Kuhn 1970 ) . 10 Four types of triangulation identified by Denzin ( 1978 ) are data triangulation , methodological trian - gulation , investigator triangulation , and theory triangulation . In this study , several attempts were made to increase the trustworthiness : two instructors investigated the data independently as a part of investigator triangulation . Both quantitative ( descriptive statistics ) and qualitative ( content analysis ) were carried out in order to achieve methodological triangulation . 781 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 Furthermore , finally , whether a rule - based design setting successfully serves for the benefit of the first - year architectural design studio was among the questions this study investigates . At the end of the semester , an online questionnaire was used to capture the design pro - cess of students by reflective self - reports . In the questionnaire , the students were asked to answer the following question : “ Looking back at your final project , evaluate your work in terms of your initial ideas , mid solutions , and final design . What did you try to achieve in each step , and what did not work out for you ? ” . This question aims to facilitate the student to talk about his / her design process , how he / she proceeded from the beginning of the exer - cise to the end , and enable them to reflect their metacognitive states ( Kurt and Kurt 2016 ) . The reports were paired with the final grades the students earned . To make a clear inter - pretation of the data , responses of students who earned higher grades and lower grades were carried to the next levels of the study . When the responses were analyzed , four categories of design activities emerged . Fur - ther quantitative analysis was conducted in order to map a model of each group of students’ design approach and make a comparative outcome possible . Data collection A total of 87 students attended the course and received grades . The questionnaire was dis - tributed to 87 students . A total of 73 students responded ( % 84 response rate ) , and within these responses , this study compares the self - reports of students who received grades below 45 % and above 85 % . Eight of the responses are ruled out for they provided irrelevant answers to the question , not reporting their own design process but advising on how it should be : …the targeted study is supposed to be discussed a lot on the sketch . The units need to be chosen . One needs to follow the instructions given with the task . Geometric shapes should be taken advantage of while designing the Shell . Examples that will influence the student should be shown every week . ( Student A was not included in this study ) The number of students with a final grade above 85 % after reducing omitted responses is 15 . These students will be referred to as higher grade students hereafter . The number of students whose final grade is below 45 % after reducing omitted responses is 11 , and they will be referred to as lower grade students hereafter . These 26 responses consisting of high grade and low - grade students’ reports were carried to the analysis phase . Tools of analysis The data collected is analyzed in several phases . To begin with , a Preliminary Frequency Distribution Analysis is conducted . Next , in Phase 1 , content analysis is pursued . In Phase 2 , descriptive and comparative analysis of the content is established . Last , in Phase 3 , a relational analysis using mapping technique is conducted , and the results are discussed in comparison . Preliminary frequency distribution analysis aims to give a general sense of the data col - lected consisting of statistical information about the reflective self - reports such as the num - ber of statements , words , and design activity categories that have emerged as a result of content analysis . Thus , it aims to start initial comparisons between higher grade and lower grade students . The following sections will reveal details for Phase 1 , 2 , and 3 ( Table 2 ) . 782 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 T a b l e 2 T oo l s o f a n a l y s i s I npu t M e t hod O u t pu t A n a l y s i s ph a s e R e fl ec ti v e s e l f - r e po r t s P r e li m i n a r y fr e qu e n c y d i s t r i - bu ti on a n a l y s i s N : 26 D e s c r i p ti v e a n a l y s i s o f r a w d a t a P r e li m i n a r y a n a l y s i s ( “ A i m o f t h e s t udy ” s ec ti on ) C on t e n t a n a l y s i s N : 26 T h e m e a nd ca t e go r i e s A n a l y s i s ph a s e 1 ( “ D a t a c o ll ec ti on ” s ec ti on ) D e s c r i p ti v e a n a l y s i s o f ca t e go r i e s A n a l y s i s ph a s e 2 ( “ T oo l s o f a n a l y s i s ” s ec ti on ) C o m p a r a ti v e a n a l y s i s o f ca t e go r i e s S e qu e n ti a l o r d e r o f ca t e g o r i e s R e l a ti on a l a n a l y s i s N : 26 C o m p a r a ti v e m a pp i ng o f d e s i gn ac ti v iti e s A n a l y s i s ph a s e 3 ( “ R e l a ti on a l a n a l y s i s : m a pp i ng ” s ec ti on ) 783 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 Content analysis : reflective self reports Content analysis is “a research method for interpretation of text and data through the sys - tematic classification process of coding and identifying themes or patterns” ( Hsieh and Shannon 2005 ) . There are three coding methods for content analysis . Several researchers have named these categories using a variety of terminology . Concept - driven ( Schreier 2012 ) , directed or deductive coding ( Hsieh and Shannon 2005 ) , is based on a pre - determined approach or model . On the other hand , data - driven ( Schreier 2012 ) , conventional content analysis , or inductive coding ( Hsieh and Shannon 2005 ) is based on emerging of categories without any pre - conceptions of the researcher and with the analysis of the text . A third strategy , summative content analysis ( Hsieh , and Shannon 2005 ) , which uses both inductive and deductive methods , forms its themes by deductive coding and allows categories to emerge by inductive coding . This study adopts content analysis in order to extract insightful information about first - year design students’ design processes during rule - based design setting , using their reflective self - reports of the design process . Therefore , it not only identifies and quantifies specific words , but it also interprets the content ( Holsti 1969 ) . This strategy focuses on dis - covering the underlying meanings in the content ( Babbie 1992 ) . The theme , design activity , is pre - defined by the concept - driven strategy ( also referred to as directed analysis or deductive coding ) as a way to capture the design process experi - enced by 87 students taking the class over the course of 6 weeks . With intense readings of the reports , categories emerged by the data - driven strategy ( also referred to as conventional content analysis or inductive coding ) . And further analysis is conducted to discover under - lying relations using mapping technique . Content analysis is preferred for it allows exploration of meaning and patterns underly - ing texts ( Patton 2002 ) and helps a meta - cognitive state ( Kurt and Kurt 2016 ) to be acti - vated , providing the researchers with raw information ready to be analyzed which is other - wise hidden or surpassed by actions during the design phase . Content analysis has helped in identifying the actions the first - year students were tackling with , and how intensely they were exploiting the categories related to the theme , design activity . Further analysis , explained in the following section , dealing with relations between design activity catego - ries are conducted to provide models of design approaches adopted by higher grade and lower grade students . Relational analysis : mapping Relational analysis uses mapping and aims to explore the findings of content analysis at a higher level and visualize the data in order to provide a better understanding of the rela - tions between categories established . The map draws a model of the content , making a comparison between categories based on their semantic relations visible . The result is a model of semantics provided by the meta - cognitive level of the students , and the represen - tation method is a network ( Acun 2005 ) . In order to do this , the sequential order of the identified design activity categories were studied . Design activity categories were mapped proportionally to the intensity of relations found , using Graph Commons ( © Alterlab LLC . All rights reserved ) . The map allows for making inter - relations between design activities categories explicit 784 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 as it “applies network analysis to discover patterns , central actors , indirect relations , organic clusters that are otherwise hidden” ( Graph Commons , n . d . ) . The map helps to interpret the nature of the design process taking place using clustering method and centrality measures where ( Fig . 6 ) , clustering provides the “organic groups” existing in a network ; and centrality measure provides “the most important ( influential ) actors in the network” ( Reading and Analyzing Network Maps , n . d . ) . Last , the map also helps to make explicit the number of in - coming relations ( Ana - lyzing the NPM dependency network , n . d . ) identifying which node has become dependent upon the most during rule - based design experience of first - year students , by taking in - degree centrality measure . As a result of content analysis , there are four categories of design activity , evalua - tion , sketching , rulemaking , model making ; and , each category is counted for appear - ance . Relational mapping builds upon this count and takes the sequence of appearance into account as well . Thus , it relates each action category to the ones that appear prior ( int p ) and after ( int a ) , yielding a value that resembles the strength of interaction ( int ) between the design activity categories . For instance , how strongly sketching interacts ( int ) with evaluation is calculated by summing up two values of interactions as vectorial units using , int = int p + int a to come up with the compound vector representing the final weight of the relation . The sum of all interacting design activities , the compound process , is presented in Fig . 7 below . This map represents centrality clustering . It identifies the central actor of the network . The lineweights are proportional to the interaction value found between every two category ; and , the values calculated are also noted next to the lines connecting the categories . Maps that use in - degree centrality measures are also constructed . These maps account for the directionality of design activity categories . In - degree centrality meas - ure identifies which node has become dependent upon the most by showing how they are fed from other categories . In order to do this , the category that occurs after ( int a ) each design activity is mapped ( Fig . 8 ) . Also , in these maps , the weight of the lines are proportional to the intensity of inter - action . Additionally , these maps not only show which categories have become more critical during the design process but also visualize the traffic among the categories . Fig . 6 Cluster ( left ) and centrality ( right ) . Re - produced from https : / / blog . graph commo ns . com / analy zing - netwo rk - maps / by the author 785 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 Results This section intends to present the quantitative data obtained by content analysis and provide the results of relational analysis . It yields an understanding of different design approaches by comparison of results . In order to achieve this , first , a descriptive analysis of raw data introduces the data in brief and initiates a preliminary comparison with general statistics related to it . Second , a content analysis procedure is revealed , and the emerg - ing categories are introduced . Third , quantitative values and qualitative aspects of these categories are compared based on high grade and low - grade student profiles . Fourth , how these categories relate to each other is analyzed based on a sequential order of appearance . The results of this analysis are vectorial network representations of two distinct design approaches and a comparative discussion . Descriptive analysis of raw data Frequency distribution of the results provides us with general statistics related to higher grade and lower grade student profiles . It summarizes the raw data with an average count of words and statements made by each group . Fig . 7 Centrality clustering for compound design process map . Created by the authors under Creative Commons 4 . 0 Interna - tional License Fig . 8 In - degree centrality maps : high - grade students ( left ) versus low - grade students ( right ) . Created by the authors under Creative Commons 4 . 0 International License 786 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 The results show that lower grade students had less to declare . They spent 25 . 9 words on average while explaining their design process . On the other hand , higher grade students spent 68 . 06 words while explaining their design process . Similar results in terms of statements were observed . Lower - grade students marked 3 . 0 statements on average and , higher grade students marked 7 . 8 statements on average when explaining their design process’ ( Fig . 9 ) . Apart from how much the students revealed , a qualitative lens looks for the clues that reveal the character of each design process . For instance , lower grade students present an equal distribution of mentions each design activity category . They tend not to give insight into the process . Instead , they quickly mention the whereabouts of their actions during design . A lower grade Student B , for instance , stated that : First , I tried to sketch what is in my mind . Then I started forming my design . This statement is too general to give clues about the design process of himself / herself . However , higher grade students reveal details on their design process , such as intentions , draw - backs , and re - does . Thus , they spend both double the number of words and state - ments compared to those students with lower grades , and ; they provide a simple form of the design scheme which they followed . Student C , as a high - grade student denoted that : At first , I tried to design units that repeat with different joints . When I modeled my idea , I realized that the model did not have an algorithm . Then I decided to change my units . I formed another design idea in my mind . Then I paid attention to bring units together using an algorithm this time . I completed a 1 : 10 model . Then changed its joints with new angular ones . This way , I could provide both space and variety . After some point , I completed my technical drawings . When I realized that it did not meet my design criteria , I re - calculated joint angles and constructed a new model . Then I completed my final drawings . The quotes above are provided to exemplify how students from each student profile have reported their design process in general . For a deeper understanding of reports , content analysis is conducted , and the results are provided in the following section . Theme and categories Reflective self - reports provided by students have been subject to content analysis . The researchers have adopted the third approach mentioned by Schreier ( 2012 ) and pre - defined the theme as design activity , using a concept - driven strategy . The texts were analyzed by implications of design activities . The texts were divided into segments where segments may come in forms of meaningful phrases , units , or sentences , revealing information about Fig . 9 Statement and word count comparison 787 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 what the student is experiencing during the design phase . Each segment was analyzed and grouped according to the semantics of the design activity it contained . In the end , four cat - egories have emerged : sketching , evaluating , model making , and rulemaking . Some exam - ples to each design activity category are presented in the table below ( Table 3 ) . As it is summarized in the table above , ‘Sketching’ category involves putting marks on paper with an image of the design outcome in mind . ‘Evaluation’ category refers to those segments which reveal a sense of consideration and assessment . ‘Rulemaking’ category involves segments that refer to the construction or application of design rules . Finally , the ‘Model making’ category simply refers to those segments consisting of information with regard to students acting on the physical model . Each category has been counted for appearance , and the result is explained in the following sections . Descriptive and comparative analysis of categories This section quantifies the design activity categories identified as a result of content analy - sis ( Table 3 ) . Next , it compares how each student profile scored in each design activity category and signals distinct design approaches . A total of 117 statements by higher grade students were recorded . Among these , the most mentioned design activity categories were evaluation and rulemaking , 39 and 40 times , respectively . Next , model making was stated 25 times . And last , sketching was stated 12 times . In the case of lower grade students , 27 statements were recorded . The most frequently visited design activity categories were evaluation and model making , eight times each . Sketching activity was mentioned six times , and rulemaking was stated five times . Overall , evaluation was the most noted phase ( Table 4 ) . Looking from a quantitative perspective , one can see that both lower grade students and higher grade students resorted evaluation ( 36 % in low grade and 34 % in high - grade students ) very often . However , each design process still showed distinct characteristics due to how evaluation couples with other design activities : model making or rulemaking . Although either group of students resorted evaluation the most , % 16 of lower grade stu - dents resorted rulemaking where , % 34 of higher grade students resorted it , reaching 2 . 1 times higher frequency ( Fig . 10 ) . In contrast , results show that lower grade students invested 1 . 4 times higher effort in model making and , 0 . 5 times higher effort in sketching when compared to higher grade students ( Fig . 11 ) . The data shows that lower grade students have spent an unrequited effort in the absence of rulemaking . They have chosen a more intuitive design approach that evolves on the go . In contrast , those who adopted a rule - based approach arrived at more satisfactory results . The following section will take a step further to make the distinct characteristics of both design process’ visible . Comparative mapping of design activities The results above provide an initial understanding of how each group of students experienced distinct design processes . This section seeks further explanation on how design activity categories relate to each other and shape the design process . The results are mapped with Graph Commons for visualizing the interaction using centrality 788 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 T a b l e 3 E m e r g e n ce o f c a t e go r i e s i n c on t e n t a n a l y s i s S k e t c h i ng E v a l u a ti on R u l e m a k i ng M od e l m a k i ng I p r odu ce d s k e t c h e s t o w a r d s t h e d e s i gn o f t h e e nv e l op e a nd t h e un it s … … I f ace d t h e f ac t t h a t m y s p ace s w e r e no t w e ll d e fi n e d … I d ec i d e d t o c on s t r u c t t h e c l o s e d a r e w it h s m a ll s qu a r e un it s a nd t o c on s t r u c t t h e op e n a nd s e m i - op e n p l ace s w it h b i g s qu a r e un it s . I m od e l e d t h r ee m odu l e s … F i r s t , I d i d l o t s o f s k e t c h e s … M y fi r s t c on s i d e r a ti on w a s ho w t o e s t a b - li s h s p ace h i e r a r c hy … … i ca l c u l a t e d t h e a ng l e s o f t h e j o i n t s … I m a d e a m od e l a t a s ca l e o f 1 : 10 … F i r s t , I d e fi n e d m y un it s w it h s k e t c h e s … M y n e x t p r ob l e m w a s ho w t o p r ov i d e v a r i a ti on i n s p ace … I u s e d ce r t a i n a ng l e s t o c r ea t e no t c h e s i n o r d e r t o d e s i gn i n c li n e d p a r t s … F i r s t , I c on s t r u c t e d t h e e dg e on m y m od e l … … I t hough t o f t h e w ho l e i n o r d e r t o d e fi n e it s p a r t s t h r ough s k e t c h e s … … w h e n I c on s t r u c t e d it , I r ea li ze d t h a t it d i d f a il t o s t a nd on it s o w n . F i r s t , I e s t a b li s h e d a n e dg e a nd c on - s t r u c t e d t h e vo l u m e by pu lli ng a nd pu s h i ng t h e e dg e s up w a r d s o r do w n - w a r d s … I p a ss e d on t o p r odu c i ng m y un it s … … du r i ng t h e fi r s t ph a s e , I d e fi n e d a fr ac - t a l by s k e t c h i ng … … I r ea li ze d t h a t I w a s p r o cee d i ng w it h - ou t u s i ng a ny a l go r it h m s … I f o ll o w e d a n a l go r it h m t o c o m e up w it h t h e un it s … … no t c h e s a r e c u t … 789 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 clustering method and in - degree centrality measure for high - grade students and low grade students separately . Design approach of high‑grade students High - grade students’ design processes are first mapped by taking centrality measure s to identify the most important ( influential ) actors in the network into account . In this map , the most active links take place between rulemaking and model making ( 1 . 59 ) and ; rulemaking and evaluation ( 1 . 561 ) . According to this model , rulemaking was cen - tral among high - grade students ( Fig . 12 ) . On the other hand , a different category comes forward when in - degree central - ity map is constructed . This map suggests that model making activity is found to be dependent upon the most ( Fig . 13 ) . This result is no surprise because the design prob - lem states that the design outcome should be represented with a physical model . So , it is also essential to look at the secondary activity category that yields model making . Therefore , rulemaking category is worth investigating . This observation helps us to realize that higher grade students based their designs on reason by pairing rulemaking with model making . However , the intensity of lines feeding evaluation should not be neglected too . The map suggests that rulemaking acts as a bridge between evaluation and model making . Thus , the analysis suggests that in addition to constructing and applying design rules , students also reflected on physical outcomes and turned back on to revise their rules with many do - overs , causing the heavy line weights on the map . Table 4 Design activity occurrences and weights Sketching Evaluation Rule making Model making Total Higher grade 12 39 40 25 116 10 % 34 % 34 % 21 % 100 % Lower grade 6 13 6 11 36 16 % 36 % 16 % 30 % 100 % Fig . 10 Comparing rule making activity Fig . 11 Comparing sketching and model making activity 790 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 Design approach of low‑grade student reports Low - grade students’ design processes are also first mapped by taking centrality meas - ure s to identify the most important ( influential ) actors in the network into account . Cen - trality measure shows that the design activities of lower grade students cluster around evaluation ( Fig . 14 ) . Also , the most robust relation exists between model making and evaluation ( 1 . 49 ) . Next is marked between rulemaking and model making ( 0 . 94 ) as well as evaluation and sketching ( 0 . 9 ) . The equivalency of secondary relations shows that these students did not follow a prominent path that supports the active link between evaluation and model making ( 1 . 49 ) . Instead , they got sidetracked by sketching , evident in the active link between sketching and evaluation ( 0 . 9 ) that competes with the one Fig . 12 Centrality clustering of high - grade students’ design process . Created by the authors under Creative Commons 4 . 0 International License Fig . 13 In - degree centrality clustering of high - grade students’ design process . Created by the authors under Creative Commons 4 . 0 International License 791 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 between model making and rulemaking ( 0 . 94 ) . In sum , it is suggested that lower grade students weighted more in intuition and less in reason . The in - degree centrality measure also suggests a cluster of evaluation for lower grade students ( Fig . 15 ) . It shows that the lower grade students worked towards evaluation , which is a fictive target . It is a consequence that signifies these students got lost during the design process . It suggests that most of their design activities triggered evaluation in order to solve upcoming obstacles . Discussion Content analysis has provided categories that are related to design activity theme found in the students’ reports . These categories have emerged as evaluation , rulemaking , model making , and sketching . Following that , relational analysis that uses a mapping tool pro - vided by Graph Commons has helped to understand further and visualize the relations between these categories . The results provide us with two distinct design approaches ( Fig . 16 ) to the task given : see - move - see for lower grade students and see - rule - see for higher grade students . The results of the mapping guide us to identify the process for lower grade students with a see - move - see cycle . Although they were able to define anticipated design terms in class , they had failed to behave correspondingly ; and adopted an intuitive manner constructed by moves and evaluation , rather than the expected design of rules . They worked towards the Fig . 14 Centrality clustering of low - grade students’ design process . Created by the authors under Creative Commons 4 . 0 International License Fig . 15 In - degree centrality clustering of high - grade students’ design process . Created by the authors under Creative Commons 4 . 0 International License 792 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 artifact rather than the system composed of design rules . They were inclined to move first , based on intuition ; hence , resort evaluation in order to figure out upcoming problems . They tend to build their model and evaluate it ; then , they continue to act on the model and fur - ther evaluate it consequently . Their experience of cyclic design consists of two legs : model making ( moving ) and evaluation ( seeing ) . On the other hand , higher grade students experience a cycle with three legs : rulemak - ing , model making , and evaluation . They incorporate rulemaking alongside model making and evaluation , with rulemaking being the center of the traffic . The third leg , rulemaking , deliberately brings reasoning as a distinct step , which is otherwise hidden in the design process . Students who adopted this approach were more aware and in charge of their design process . They did not choose one or the other among intuition and reasoning . They took their time to plan ahead , reason , and suggest a way of proceeding by the design rules . They evaluated the results of their rules by utilizing intuition , still blended with pieces of reason - ing that are not possible to quantify with the methods in hand . The maps have shown that there are two distinct design approaches for two groups of students who have received grades at the opposite ends of the class grade distribution . This is not to say that there are only two design approaches . However , the commonalities and differences presented in this study are essential in drawing out lessons about first - year stu - dio behavior . Conclusion Intuition and reasoning is a natural alloy that triggers and follows one another ipso facto . However , each design process is unique and this inherent cycle is unseen to the naked eye . Thus , it is hard to break apart into its constituents and see how each weights and shapes the design process . The reason for coming forth with a rule based design studio is to bring for - ward reasoning , which otherwise blends with intuition and becomes intangible , and , break down the alloy to study its constituents individually . Thus , this study has made a distinction between reasoning and intuition . It has taken both , as constant elements that occur at different magnitutes during every design process . In order to gain a better understanding of the mechanism , a rule based design approach has Fig . 16 See - rule - see design process’ of high grade ( left ) and see - move - see design process’ low - grade stu - dents ( right ) . Created by the authors under Creative Commons 4 . 0 International License 793 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 been adopted . This approach elevates and requires the students to deliberately manage their rationale . Based on this rationale , this study sought to answer several questions . The first ques - tion looked for clues regarding how first - year design students manage their design process when intuitive and reasoning tendencies are considered . This study has made a distinction between reasoning and intuitive tendencies of first - year design students . It drew out com - mon approaches towards reasoning and intuitive behavior based on reports of students who belong to opposite ends of the class grade distribution . The results showed that the students who were able to manage both intuition and rea - son - those who were better in charge of their design rules , evaluation , and review - have received higher grades , and their retrospective descriptions of design processes’ were sup - portive of their design and grades . They were found in a cycle defined as a see - rule - see design approach . Students involved in this approach primarily experienced rulemaking cat - egory . Map visualizations also have shown that rulemaking is also highly associated with evaluation and model making categories . Thus , high - grade students’ design approach can be defined with reasoning being the driving force of the design process ; and , evaluation as its intuitive equivalence . On the other hand , those students who received lower grades were the ones who failed to manage intuition and reasoning . They followed a see - move - see design approach where evaluation category was primarily experienced , but , rulemaking category was neglected . Further , the results have not shown a significant secondary tendency towards neither sketching nor model making category . The intense use of evaluation with no significant supporting category and avoidance of rulemaking signifies an intuitive approach to design where reasoning was disregarded . Thus , the second issue this study aimed to investigate whether common design approaches existed among first - year design students has been affirmed . The study has shown that there are , in fact , different approaches in design process with differing attitudes towards intuition and reasoning , as seen in higher grade and lower grade students’ cases . Last , whether a rule - based design setting successfully serves for the benefit of the first - year architectural design studio was among the questions this study investigated . Depart - ing from the findings , it is gratifying to state that design rule - based approach has success - fully served for the benefit of the architectural design studio . Rule - based design has elevated the tendency to work with design rules , adopt an under - standing of action and reaction ( rule - see - rule ) , and raised awareness to work with a design strategy ( rulemaking ) for first - year architectural design students . It has required the stu - dents to manage their rationale deliberately while using intuition in decision stages . Hence , the study has shown that rule - based design studio is a thriving setting for stu - dents to experience managing intuition and reasoning simultaneously . There were several limitations to this study . One of them was that the students were asked to report their design process afterward . The retrospective approach , therefore , may have affected , such as not reporting what is , instead , what should have been . Another lim - itation was the participants’ novice perception and expressions of design process . Some students may have been limited by their inexperience in expression ; thus , they have not revealed as much . For future studies , it would be supporting to investigate if this attitude of ‘using both intuition and rationale in design process’ continues in the following Architectural Design studios , as the nature of the design problems would differ having both concrete and abstract dimensions . Another issue to be raised could be a comparative study carried out with the same students in a retrospective perspective as test and re - test method is highly reputated in 794 B . Orbey , G . P . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu 1 3 qualitative research . Finally , separate investigations of 2D and 3D exercises could enhance our understanding as in that case , ‘model making’ and ‘sketching’ would probably have different effects in 2D and 3D design exercises . Acknowledgements We would like to thank to all students enrolled in MİMA 101 Design Studio at Doğuş University in 2016 – 2017 Fall Term . Two other instructors of the course , namely Handan Ergiydiren Doğan and Bora Özkuş , deserve special thanks for their cooperation and valued input when structuring the course outline . Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . References Acun , F . ( 2005 ) . Muhteva Analizi Metodu ve Cumhuriyet Tarihi Araştırmalarında Kullanımı . Hacettepe Üniversitesi Edebiyat Fakültesi Dergisi , 22 ( 1 ) , 27 – 50 . Arıkan , B . ( 2014 ) . Graph commons : Reading & analyzing network maps . Retrieved March 5 , 2020 , from https : / / blog . graph commo ns . com / analy zing - netwo rk - maps / . Arıkan , B . ( 2016 ) . Graph commons : Analyzing the NPM dependency network . Retrieved March 5 , 2020 , from https : / / blog . graph commo ns . com / analy zing - the - npm - depen dency - netwo rk / . Arıkan , B . , Üstün , Z . , & Kızılay , A . ( 2019 ) . Graph Commons . Retrieved March 5 , 2020 , from https : / / graph commo ns . com / featu res . Asimow , M . ( 1962 ) . Introduction to design . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . Babbie , E . R . ( 1992 ) . The practice of social research . Belmont : Wadsworth Pub . Co . Badke - Schaub , P . , Eris , O . , Chakrabarti , A . , & Lucienne , B . T . M . ( 2014 ) . A theoretical approach to intui - tion in design : does design methodology need to account for unconscious processes . An anthology of theories and models of design : Philosophy , approaches and empirical explorations ( pp . 353 – 371 ) . London : Springer . Ball , Linden J . , & Christensen , Bo T . ( 2019 ) . Advancing an understanding of design cognition and design metacognition . Design Studies , 65 , 35 – 59 . Boucharenc , C . G . ( 2006 ) . Research on basic design education : An international survey . International Jour - nal of Technology and Design Education , 16 ( 1 ) , 1 – 30 . Çelik Alexander , Z . ( 2018 ) . Tasarım Okulu İçin Yenilenmiş Bir Epistemolojik İddia Üzerine . In V . Sacchetti ( Ed . ) , Design as a way of learning : Readings in as schools of schools . İstanbul : IKSV . Claus , L . C . P . , Bo , T . C . , & Saeema , A . K . ( 2019 ) . Empirically analysing design reasoning patterns : Abduc - tive - deductive reasoning patterns dominate design idea generation . Design Studies , 60 , 39 – 70 . Claxton , G . ( 2000 ) . The anatomy of intuition . In T . Atkinson & G . Claxton ( Eds . ) , The intuitive practi - tioner : On the value of not always knowing what one is doing ( pp . 32 – 52 ) . Philadelphia , PA : Open University Press . Cohen , J . ( 1968 ) . Multiple regression as a general data - analytic system . Psychological Bulletin , 70 ( 6 , Pt . 1 ) , 426 – 443 . Cross , N . ( 2001 ) . Designerly ways of knowing : Design discipline versus design science . Design Issues , 17 ( 3 ) , 49 – 55 . Denzin , N . ( 1978 ) . Sociological methods : A sourcebook . NY : McGraw Hill . Dorst , K . ( 2006 ) . Design problems and design paradoxes . Design Issues , 22 ( 3 ) , 4 – 17 . Dorst , K . ( 2011 ) . The core of “design thinking” and its application . Design Studies , 32 , 521 – 532 . Dreyfus , H . L . ( 2002 ) . Intelligence without representation : Merleau - Ponty’s critique of mental representa - tion . Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences , 1 , 367 – 383 . Felder , R . M . ( 2004 ) . Changing times and paradigms . Chemical Engineering Education , 38 ( 1 ) , 32 – 33 . Fidelli , A . ( 2006 ) . Rethinking design education for the 21st century : Theoretical . Methodological and Ethi - cal Discussion . Design Issues , 17 ( 1 ) , 5 – 17 . Friedman , K . ( 2003 ) . Theory construction in design research : Criteria : Approaches and methods . Design Studies , 24 , 507 – 522 . Glesne , C . , & Peshkin , P . ( 1992 ) . Becoming qualitative researches : An introduction . New York , NY : Longman . 795 Design process re‑visited in the first year design studio : between… 1 3 Goldschmidt , G . ( 2014 ) . Linkography unfolding the design process . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . Hatchuel , A . ( 2002 ) . Towards design theory and expandable rationality : The unfinished program of Herbert Simon . Journal of Management and Governance , 5 , 3 – 4 . Hoepfl , M . C . ( 1997 ) . Choosing qualitative research : A primer for technology education researchers . Jour - nal of Technology Education , 9 ( 1 ) , 47 – 63 . Holsti , O . ( 1969 ) . Content analysis for the social sciences and humanities . Boston : Addison - Wesley Pub . Co . Hsieh , H . F . , & Shannon , S . E . ( 2005 ) . Three approaches to qualitative content analysis . Qualitative Health Research , 15 ( 9 ) , 1277 – 1288 . Kroll , E . , & Koskela , L . ( 2015 ) . On abduction in design . In J . S . Gero ( Ed . ) , Design computing and cogni - tion ( pp . 327 – 344 ) . London : Springer . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1970 ) . The structure of scientific revolutions ( 2nd ed . ) . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Kurt , M . , & Kurt , S . ( 2016 ) . Improving design understandings and skills through enhanced metacognition : Reflective design journals . The International Journal of Art & Design Education , 36 ( 2 ) , 226 – 238 . Mennan , Z . ( 2008 ) . The question of non - standard form . METU JFA , 25 ( 2 ) , 171 – 183 . Özkar , M . ( 2005 ) . Lesson 1 in Design computing does not have to be with computers : Basic design exer - cises , exercises in visual computing . In G . D . - S . José Pinto Duarte , Zita Sampaio ( Ed . ) , Education and research in computer - aided architectural design in Europe ( eCAADe ) 23 digital design : The quest for new paradigms ( pp . 311 – 318 ) . Lisbon . Patton , M . Q . ( 2002 ) . Qualitative research & evaluation methods ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks : Sage Publica - tions Inc . Reitman , W . R . , Shelly , M . , & Bryan , G . ( 1964 ) . Heuristic decision procedures , open constraints , and the structure of ill - defined problems . In M . W . Shelly & G . L . Bryan ( Eds . ) , Human judgments and opti - mality . New York : Wiley . Robertson , L . C . ( 1986 ) . From Gestalt to New - Gestalt . In T . Knapp & L . C . Robertson ( Eds . ) , Approaches to cognition : Contrasts and controversies . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Sarıoğlu Erdoğdu , G . P . & Orbey , B . ( 2017 ) Formal algorithms in a rule - based basic design studio . Paper presented at 3rd international conference on new trends in architecture and interior design , in Helsinki , 28 – 30 April 2017 . Sayer , A . ( 1985 ) . The difference that space makes . In D . Gregory & J . Urry ( Eds . ) , Social relations and spa - tial structures . London : Macmillan . Scholl , B . J . ( 1997 ) . Reasoning , rationality and architectural resolution . Philosophical Psychology , 10 ( 4 ) , 451 – 470 . Schön , D . A . ( 1983 ) . The reflective practitioner : How professionals think in action . New York : Basic Books . Schön , D . A . , & Wiggins , G . ( 1992 ) . Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing . Design Studies , 13 ( 2 ) , 135 – 156 . Schreier , M . ( 2012 ) . Qualitative content analysis in practice . London : Sage Publications . Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . The structure of ill - structured problems . Artificial Intelligence , 4 ( 1 ) , 181 – 201 . Simon , H . A . ( 1981 ) . The sciences of the artificial . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Suchman , L . A . ( 1987 ) . Plans and situated actions . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Winter , G . ( 2000 ) . A comparative discussion of the notion of validity in qualitative and quantitative research . The Qualitative Report , 4 ( 3 & 4 ) , 1 – 14 . Yagou , A . ( 2007 ) . Designophy . Retrieved March 5 , 2020 , from http : / / www . desig nophy . com / desig npedi a / desig n - term - 10000 00000 - desig n - pedag ogy . htm . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .