Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy  The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2003 / 02 / 409 / 13 $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 160 , Number 3 , February 3 , 2003 409 – 421 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200210174 JCB Article 409 Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network Tatyana M . Svitkina , 1 Elena A . Bulanova , 2 Oleg Y . Chaga , 1 Danijela M . Vignjevic , 1 Shin - ichiro Kojima , 1 Jury M . Vasiliev , 2 and Gary G . Borisy 1 1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University Medical School , Chicago , Illinois 60611 2 Institute of Mechanisms of Carcinogenesis , Cancer Research Center of Russian Federation , 115478 Moscow , Russia ﬁlopodium protrudes by elongation of bundled actin ﬁlaments in its core . However , the mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation remains unknown . Using live - cell imaging with GFP - tagged proteins and correlative electron microscopy , we performed a kinetic - structural analysis of ﬁlopodial initiation in B16F1 melanoma cells . Filopodial bundles arose not by a speciﬁc nucleation event , but by reorganization of the lamellipodial dendritic network analogous to fusion of established ﬁlopodia but occurring at the level of individual ﬁlaments . Subsets of independently nucleated lamellipodial ﬁlaments elongated and gradually associated with each other at their barbed ends , leading to formation of cone - shaped structures that A we term (cid:2) - precursors . An early marker of initiation was the gradual coalescence of GFP - vasodilator - stimulated phos - phoprotein ( GFP - VASP ) ﬂuorescence at the leading edge into discrete foci . The GFP - VASP foci were associated with (cid:2) - precursors , whereas Arp2 / 3 was not . Subsequent recruit - ment of fascin to the clustered barbed ends of (cid:2) - precursors initiated ﬁlament bundling and completed formation of the nascent ﬁlopodium . We propose a convergent elongation model of ﬁlopodia initiation , stipulating that ﬁlaments within the lamellipodial dendritic network acquire privi - leged status by binding a set of molecules ( including VASP ) to their barbed ends , which protect them from capping and mediate association of barbed ends with each other . Introduction The crawling movement of a cell involves protrusion of its leading edge coordinated with translocation of its cell body . Protrusion is driven by polymerization of actin within two organelles , lamellipodia and filopodia , which have strikingly different designs of the actin polymerization machinery and are regulated by different signaling pathways ( Hall , 1998 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999b ) . In lamellipodia , which are broad , flat protrusions , actin filaments form a branched network ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999a ) . The current model for lamelli - podial dynamics ( Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ; Pollard et al . , 2000 ) suggests that treadmilling of the branched actin filament array consists of repeated cycles of dendritic nucleation , elongation , capping , and depolymerization of filaments . Dendritic nucleation is mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , which is activated by members of WASP family ( Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) . During a period of elongation after nucleation , the filament pushes the membrane . When a filament elongates beyond the efficient length for pushing , its growth is thought to be terminated by capping protein ( Cooper and Schafer , 2000 ) . Depolymerization is assisted by proteins of the ADF / cofilin family ( Bamburg , 1999 ) . Other proteins play supporting roles in this process . Profilin targets filament elongation to barbed ends ( Carlier and Pantaloni , 1997 ) , enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( Ena / VASP ) * family proteins protect elongating barbed ends from capping ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) , cortactin stabilizes branches ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) , and filamin A ( Flanagan et al . , 2001 ) and (cid:3) - actinin stabilize and consolidate the whole network . In filopodia , which are thin cellular processes , actin filaments are long , parallel , and organized into tight bundles ( Small , 1988 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ; Small et al . , 2002 ) . Other cellular structures , such as microspikes and retraction fibers , bear similarities to filopodia and may be related to them . Microspikes are parallel actin bundles within the lamellipo - dium . Retraction fibers are long , thin cellular processes that remain attached to the substratum after cell withdrawal . Address correspondence to Tatyana M . Svitkina , Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University Medical School , 303 E . Chicago Ave . , Ward 8 - 063 , Chicago , IL 60611 . Tel . : ( 312 ) 503 - 2854 Fax : ( 312 ) 501 - 7912 . E - mail : t - svitkina @ northwestern . edu Key words : actin ; Arp2 / 3 ; VASP ; fascin ; lamellipodia * Abbreviations used in this paper : EM , electron microscopy ; Ena / VASP , enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 410 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 3 , 2003 They also contain a parallel bundle of actin filaments ( Small , 1988 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ; Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . Filopodial protrusion is thought to occur by a filament treadmilling mechanism , which was originally proposed for both filopodia and lamellipodia ( Small , 1994 ) . According to this model , all actin filaments within a bundle elongate at their barbed ends and release subunits from their pointed ends . Existing experimental data support this model of filopodial elongation . Structurally , actin filaments in filopo - dia are long and unbranched ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999a ) , suggesting that assembly occurs by elongation , not by branched nucleation . Dynamic observations ( Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ) revealed that labeled actin incorpo - rated at the filopodial tips , moved backward , and dissipated at the rear ( as predicted by a treadmilling mechanism ) , and that actin turnover in filopodia was slow ; consistent with the idea of long filaments adding or losing subunits only at their ends . A frequent event in filopodial behavior is their fusion , which frequently occurs as elongating oblique bundles col - lide and subsequently grow as a single unit ( Katoh et al . , 1999b ; Small et al . , 2002 ) . A set of molecules essential for filopodial protrusion has not been explicitly determined . However , some proteins are enriched in filopodia , suggesting that they play important roles . One of them is a cross - linking protein ( fascin ) that mediates filament bundling ( Bartles , 2000 ; Kureishy et al . , 2002 ) . Many different proteins are enriched at filopodial tips ( Small et al . , 2002 ) , including Ena / VASP proteins ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) , N - WASP and CR16 ( Ho et al . , 2001 ) , myosin X ( Berg and Cheney , 2002 ) , talin ( DePasquale and Izzard , 1991 ) , syndapin I ( Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ) , Abl interactor proteins ( Stradal et al . , 2001 ) , and Vav ( Kranewitter et al . , 2001 ) . Roles for these proteins remain largely unknown with the exception of Ena / VASP proteins . In lamellipodia , GFP - VASP forms a thin line along the extreme leading edge ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) , and in filopodia it appears as a bright dot at filopodial tips ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . Ena / VASP proteins bind barbed ends of actin fila - ments and protect them from capping at the leading edge of lamellipodia , which results in formation of longer filaments within the lamellipodial dendritic network ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . These data suggest that Ena / VASP proteins that are enriched at filopodial tips may mediate continuous elonga - tion of filopodial actin filaments . The major gap in our understanding of filopodia behavior is the mechanism of their initiation . The filament treadmill - ing model refers to the steady state of an established or - ganelle , but does not explain how it arose in the first place . A small GTPase , Cdc42 , is a well - known signaling molecule inducing filopodia in cells ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . One of its downstream effectors , N - WASP , is an ubiquitous activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 , 2000 ) , which significantly facilitates Cdc42 - induced filopodial formation ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) , suggesting that the Arp2 / 3 complex may be involved in filopodial pro - trusion . This suggestion has been supported experimentally by perturbing Arp2 / 3 function in permeabilized platelets with an inhibitory antibody ( Li et al . , 2002 ) , and in HeLa cells by expressing VCA domain of N - WASP ( Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ) . Because the Arp2 / 3 complex is absent from established filopodia ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999a ) , we hypothesized that it plays a role during filopodia initiation . One possibility for how the Arp2 / 3 complex induces filopo - dial bundles is that it forms a “nucleation center” which starts a bundle and subsequently dissociates . Another possi - bility is that the normal dendritic array produced by Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation is rearranged into parallel bundles . In this work , we investigated the mechanism of filopodia initia - tion in B16F1 mouse melanoma cells and found that filopo - dial bundles were initiated by reorganization of the dendritic network in a process that involved elongation and conver - gence of subsets of privileged barbed ends . Results Filopodia , microspikes , and retraction fibers Crawling cells elaborate filopodia , microspikes , and retrac - tion fibers in the course of cycles of protrusion and with - drawal . These have been considered as distinct entities , but because of their structural similarities , we investigated whether they were truly distinct or interconvertible . Deter - mining whether they were functionally related was impor - tant to define the scope of our study . We followed the kinetics of peripheral actin bundles by phase contrast or fluorescence microscopy in untransfected or GFP - actin – expressing cells , respectively . We observed many examples of transition between filopodia , microspikes , and retraction fibers ( Fig . 1 ) . The predominant order of transitions was from microspike to filopodium to retraction fiber . Transitions in the opposite direction were also ob - served . For each type of structure , the filament bundle was able to protrude , suggesting that the actin polymerizing ma - chinery was functional in each morphological state . The protrusive activity of the surrounding lamellipodium seemed to be an important factor determining the transitions be - tween these organelles . Depending on whether the lamelli - podium advanced as fast as or slower than an actin bundle elongated , the bundle appeared as a microspike or a filopo - dium . If the lamellipodium withdrew while the actin bundle remained stable or elongated , the bundle appeared as a re - traction fiber . Increased net protrusion of an actin bundle also contributed to the transition from microspikes to filopodia , especially after fusion of two microspikes . Thus , filopodia , microspikes , and retraction fibers are interconvert - ible organelles , which may transform one into another be - cause of a disparity in the protrusion velocity of the bundles themselves and of the surrounding lamellipodium . There - fore , in this paper , we will consider these types of peripheral actin bundles together and will refer to them collectively as “filopodia , ” because this is the most commonly used term . Kinetics of filopodia initiation To approach the central question of the mechanism of filopodia initiation , we first investigated the kinetics of spontaneous filopodia initiation using GFP - tagged struc - tural proteins . If filopodia were initiated by an Arp2 / 3 - con - taining nucleation center , one would expect a nascent filopodium to arise from a distinct fluorescent dot of actin or Arp2 / 3 complex , whereas the rearrangement model pre - Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Mechanism of filopodia initiation | Svitkina et al . 411 dicts a gradual condensation of actin fluorescence into a filopodial bundle . Filopodia in GFP - actin – expressing cells displayed a broad range of lengths and fluorescence intensities . Histories of large filopodia revealed that they were formed by fusion of smaller filopodia , which in turn were the result of fusion at an even finer scale ( Fig . 2 A ) . Events of true filopodia initiation were recognized as the appearance of thin , faint nascent filopodia contained within the lamellipodial network . In most cases ( 81 % , n (cid:4) 124 ) , they arose from fishtail - shaped actin densi - ties within the lamellipodium ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . These densi - ties , which we will call (cid:2) - precursors because of their shape , were just slightly brighter than the surrounding lamellipo - dium at their vertices , but gradually diffused into a lamelli - podial network at their bases ( Fig . 2 D ) . Although hardly distinguishable from the rest of the lamellipodial network , (cid:2) - precursors could be consistently recognized , after contrast enhancement , by tracing back in time the sequences of newly formed filopodia . In the remaining cases of filopodial initia - tion ( 19 % ) , (cid:2) - precursors were not visible , possibly because of insufficient temporal resolution or contrast . Nascent filopodia subsequently fused with each other ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) or with other filopodia , and thus increased in size . Fusion produced (cid:2) - configurations of filopodial bundles reminiscent of the shape of (cid:2) - precursors , but with more distinct individual branches . Over time , these (cid:2) - shaped bundles treadmilled backward at the root of the fused filopodium ( Fig . 2 C ) until they disappeared in the course of depolymerization . The ob - served actin kinetics appears more consistent with the idea of network reorganization as a mechanism of filopodia initiation . The Arp2 / 3 complex is predicted to be enriched in the hy - pothetical filopodial nucleation center . Therefore , we per - formed kinetic analysis of GFP - Arp3 – expressing cells ( Fig . 3 A ) . Because filopodial bundles were invisible in GFP - Arp3 images , we acquired phase contrast images at the beginning and at the end of the sequence to detect nascent filopodia ini - tiated during the sequence . Filopodia were observed to ap - pear by phase microscopy and GFP - Arp3 was present throughout the lamellipodium , but no increase in GFP - Arp3 intensity was detected to spatially and temporally correlate with filopodial initiation . The essentially uniform distribu - tion of the GFP - Arp3 signal does not support the hypothesis of an Arp2 / 3 - based nucleation center for filopodial initiation . To obtain insight into the actual mechanism of filopodia initiation , we next analyzed the kinetics of proteins enriched in filopodia , i . e . , fascin and VASP . In GFP - fascin – expressing cells , a majority of nascent filopodia ( 66 % , n (cid:4) 207 ) first appeared as a bright dot or short rod on a dark background ( Fig . 3 , B and C ) . In other cases ( 34 % ) , a bright dot of GFP - fascin rather suddenly appeared at the tip of a very faint (cid:2) - shaped density in lamellipodia ( Fig . 3 C , inset in 16 s frame ) . Both kinds of nascent fascin dots subsequently elon - gated to form a filopodium . Fusion of mature fascin - con - taining filopodia was also frequently seen ( Fig . 3 C ) . Because fascin is present in lamellipodia , albeit at much lower con - centration than in filopodia , the faint (cid:2) - shaped fascin densi - ties might correspond to (cid:2) - precursors , suggesting that in the course of filopodia initiation , fascin initially appears at the tips of the (cid:2) - precursors ( see next section ) . In GFP - VASP se - quences , we followed the formation of brighter dots corre - Figure 1 . Interconversion between microspikes , filopodia , and retraction fibers . Time - lapse sequences of untransfected ( A , phase contrast ) or GFP - actin expressing ( B and C , fluorescence ) cells . Time in seconds . ( A ) Lamellipodium containing several microspikes ( triple arrow and arrowhead in first frame ) retracts leaving microspikes in the form of retraction fibers ( 240 s ) , some of which continue to protrude ( 240 – 400 s , arrow ) . At (cid:2) 400 s , lamellipodium resumes protrusion and absorbs retraction fibers , some of which disappear , one becoming a filopodium ( 560 s , arrow ) , and another becoming a microspike ( 560 s , arrowhead ) . ( B ) Transition of a microspike ( 0 and 20 s ) to filopodium ( 20 – 60 s ) to retraction fiber ( 60 – 140 s ) . Actin bundle displayed continuous elongation , whereas surrounding lamellipodium initially kept up with the bundle ( 0 – 20 s ) , paused ( 40 s ) , and then withdrew ( 60 – 140 s ) . ( C ) Transition of microspike ( 0 – 30 s ) to filopodium ( 45 – 75 s ) and back to microspike ( 90 – 105 s ) as a result of uncoordinated protrusive behavior of the bundle and the lamellipodium . Bars , 2 (cid:5) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 412 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 3 , 2003 Figure 2 . Actin kinetics during filopodia initiation . ( A – C ) Time - lapse sequences of GFP - actin – expressing B16F1 cells . Time in seconds ; individual features marked by arrows and arrowheads . Nascent filopodia are marked starting from the frame preceding the appearance of the recognizable precursor . ( A ) Three established filopodia ( 0 s , arrowheads ) fuse with each other ( 0 – 60 s ) . Two (cid:2) - precursors ( arrows ) appear ( 20 s ) , and fuse with each other ( 40 s ) , forming a nascent filopodium that subsequently ( 60 s ) joins the fusing older filopodia . ( B ) Several nascent filopodia form from (cid:2) - precursors that appear within lamellipodium . ( C ) Two (cid:2) - precursors existing at 0 s ( arrows ) fuse with each other ( 12 s ) , producing a nascent filopodium with a (cid:2) - shaped root . The fusion point treadmills backward while the filopodium protrudes forward . ( D ) Gallery of (cid:2) - precursors . First four examples represent enlarged and enhanced (cid:2) - precursors from A ( 20 s ) , B ( 8 s ) , B ( 24 s ) , and C ( 0 s ) , respectively . Remaining examples are from other sequences . Bars , 2 (cid:5) m . Figure 3 . Kinetics of marker proteins during filopodia initiation . Time - lapse sequences of GFP - Arp3 ( A ) , GFP - fascin ( B and C ) , or GFP - VASP ( D – F ) . ( A ) Two flanking phase contrast frames ( 0 and 164 s ) demonstrate formation of a new filopodium during the sequence . Positions of preexisting ( arrow ) and nascent ( arrowhead ) filopodia are indicated . No focal enrichment of Arp3 was seen during formation of the nascent filopodium . ( B and C ) Most nascent filopodia arise from bright GFP - fascin dots without obvious (cid:2) - precursors . In some cases , a bright dot localizes to the tip of a faint (cid:2) - shaped density , as in the inset in 16 s frame in C , which shows the region indicated by arrowhead in this frame after enlargement and adjustment of contrast to reveal weak fluorescence . Filopodia fusion occurs in C ( arrows ) . ( D – F ) Bright GFP - VASP dots corresponding to nascent filopodia arise by gradual coalescence of the initially even line of leading - edge fluorescence . Brackets indicate regions of brighter GFP - VASP fluorescence that shrink into dots over time . In F , two smaller dots ( 24 s ) are formed during coalescence of the shrinking region , which subsequently fuse with each other ( 32 s ) and with the adjacent preexisting dot ( 40 s ) . Bars , 2 (cid:5) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Mechanism of filopodia initiation | Svitkina et al . 413 sponding to filopodial tips among the weaker fluorescence of the lamellipodial edge . The major pathway for filopodia ini - tiation ( Fig . 3 , D – F ) was a gradual coalescence of VASP to ultimately produce a bright dot . The first sign detected was a slight elevation of GFP - VASP fluorescence intensity within a small domain ( 2 – 4 (cid:5) m ) along the leading edge . Then , this region gradually shrank into a dot concurrently increasing its intensity . In some cases , the condensing region became dis - continuous during shrinkage ( Fig . 3 F ) , suggesting interme - diate formation of smaller filopodia . Because Ena / VASP pro - teins bind barbed ends and protect them from capping ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) , these data suggest that elongating barbed ends from the lamellipodial network gradually segregate into a small region , which becomes a filopodial tip . Protein composition of (cid:2) - precursors Our kinetic analysis identified (cid:2) - precursors as intermediates in filopodial initiation . Next , we examined whether molecu - lar markers that discriminate between lamellipodia and filopodia are present in (cid:2) - precursors ( Fig . 4 ) . Expression of GFP - actin or staining with labeled phalloidin was used to vi - sualize actin . Putative (cid:2) - precursors were identified in the ac - tin channel based on their characteristic shape , and slightly increased actin density . Immunostaining or expression of GFP - tagged proteins was used to localize the second protein . Fascin and VASP were used as filopodial markers . In GFP - fascin – expressing cells , putative (cid:2) - precursors either did not contain significant amount of fascin ( Fig . 4 A , ar - rows ; also see Fig . 6 ) , or they had fascin enriched only at the tip ( Fig . 4 A , arrowheads ) , suggesting that fascin was re - cruited to the tips of the preformed (cid:2) - precursors . In GFP - VASP – expressing cells ( Fig . 4 B ) , VASP fluorescence at the leading edge became less uniform after extraction , perhaps revealing more strongly associated protein . The brightest VASP dots corresponded to established filopodia . The ma - jority of (cid:2) - precursors contained a distinct VASP dot at their vertex ( Fig . 4 B , arrowheads ) . Weak VASP dots were also ev - ident without recognizable (cid:2) - precursors ( Fig . 4 B , arrows ) . These may represent fluctuations in density of actin filament barbed ends within the lamellipodium or (cid:2) - precursors not detected in the actin channel . As lamellipodial markers , we used Arp2 / 3 complex , cort - actin , and capping protein . Previously , we have shown that Arp2 / 3 complex is excluded from filopodial bundles ( Svit - kina and Borisy , 1999a ) . Here , we report that cortactin and capping protein are also excluded from filopodia ( Fig . 4 , D and E ) . In (cid:2) - precursors , these proteins were partially de - pleted , especially close to the vertex , but not completely ab - sent ( Fig . 4 , C – E ) , suggesting that gradual depletion of lamellipodial proteins occurs during formation of (cid:2) - precur - sors and filopodia initiation . No enrichment of Arp2 / 3 com - plex was detected at filopodial roots . We also investigated the ability of (cid:3) - actinin to discrimi - nate between filopodia and lamellipodia . Previously , (cid:3) - acti - nin has been shown to localize to lamellipodia ( Langanger et al . , 1984 ) , but its localization in filopodia is unclear . GFP - tagged (cid:3) - actinin associated with both lamellipodia and filopodia ( Fig . 4 F ) , but appeared in these organelles with delay and , consequently , localized to the base of the fast - pro - truding lamellipodia and filopodia . Thus , (cid:3) - actinin is a late marker for actin bundling in filopodia and is apparently not involved in filopodia initiation . Together , the molecular marker analysis suggests that (cid:2) - precursors represent a transitional structure displaying en - richment of filopodial markers and partial depletion of lamellipodial proteins . Dual - channel correlation of actin dis - tribution with that of filopodial markers suggested that VASP accumulation occurred early in the process of forma - tion of (cid:2) - precursors , and that fascin appeared at the tips of established (cid:2) - precursors . Figure 4 . Localization of filopodial and lamellipodial markers in (cid:2) - precursors . Left column ; actin revealed by Texas Red - phalloidin ( A , B , and F ) or by GFP - actin expression ( C – E ) . Central column ; actin - binding proteins ( as indicated ) revealed by expression of GFP - fusion proteins ( A , B , and F ) or by immunostaining ( C – E ) . Right column ; merged images . (cid:2) - precursors are indicated by arrowheads . ( A ) Fascin is strongly enriched in established filopodia and localizes to the distal section of some (cid:2) - precursors ( wide arrowheads ) , but not others ( narrow arrowheads ) . ( B ) VASP forms bright dots at the tips of filopodia and (cid:2) - precursors . Additional dots can be seen along the leading edge ( arrows ) , which apparently do not correspond to (cid:2) - precursors . ( C – E ) Lamellipodial markers , Arp2 / 3 complex ( C ) , cortactin ( D ) , and capping protein ( E ) , are excluded from filopodia and are partially depleted from (cid:2) - precursors . ( F ) (cid:3) - Actinin localizes to proximal parts of lamellipodia and filopodia . Bars , 2 (cid:5) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 414 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 3 , 2003 Structure of (cid:2) - precursors Light microscopic analysis suggested a gradual reorganiza - tion of the lamellipodial network into bundles through in - termediate formation of (cid:2) - precursors . This hypothesis was analyzed using a higher resolution technique ; platinum rep - lica electron microscopy ( EM ) . Treadmilling behavior of filopodia has a remarkable consequence in that the history of the actin array is imprinted in its structure ( Katoh et al . , 1999a ) , so that moving from the leading edge in a proximal direction in space is analogous to traveling back in time . To understand the mechanism of filopodia initiation , we first focused on the analysis of filopodial roots . In this work , we were most interested in analyzing young filopodia , which are usually thin and short according to our kinetic study . The majority of apparently young filopodial bundles were splayed apart at their roots into smaller bundles or individual filaments ( Fig . 5 ) , suggesting that the bundles were formed by convergence of the composing elements . Filopodial roots consisting of two or more smaller bundles are consistent with an event of filopodial fusion in the recent history of that filopodium ( Fig . 5 B ) . More importantly , we observed many examples of filopodial bundles whose roots suggested the convergence of individual filaments originating from distant places in the surrounding lamellipodial network and entering the bundle at different levels . In some cases , it was possible to track filaments back from the bundle toward their origin as a branch on another filament in the surrounding network ( Fig . 5 C ) . These findings suggest that filaments comprising filopodial bundles were asynchronously recruited from the dendritic network . Remarkably , filaments entering filopodial bundles were long compared with the branched network near the leading edge ( Fig . 5 , inset in A ) . Older filopodia , which could be recognized by their length and thickness , ei - ther had their actin bundles rooted deeply in the cytoplasm , which impeded visualization , or had tapered ( not splayed ) roots . This is consistent with depolymerization from the pointed ends of the composing filaments causing progressive elimination of the original splayed roots . Splayed filopodial roots apparently corresponded to aged (cid:2) - precursors that treadmilled backward during filopodium growth . To identify (cid:2) - precursors at a stage when they had not yet produced a filopodium , we performed correlative light microscopy and EM ( Fig . 6 ) . Putative (cid:2) - precursors were identified in cells by fluorescence microscopy and relo - calized after EM processing of the same cells . For these ex - periments , we used cells expressing GFP - fascin , which al - lowed us to compare parts of the (cid:2) - precursor containing and not containing fascin . (cid:2) - precursors lacking fascin clearly displayed features of dendritic organization , such as short filaments , branching filaments , and numerous free filament ends ( Fig . 6 ) . Also , consistent with the idea of the transitional character of (cid:2) - precursors , we found many rather long filaments within (cid:2) - precursors , whereas long filaments were not frequent in the dendritic network outside (cid:2) - precursors ( Fig . 6 , A and C ) . These long filaments apparently became enriched during transition of (cid:2) - precursors into splayed filopodial roots , per - haps because of faster depolymerization of short filaments . The actin array in fascin - positive parts ( Fig . 6 B ) had a clearly bundled organization with densely packed filaments . The more proximal parts of actin bundles were not signifi - cantly enriched in fascin and displayed long , loosely aligned filaments ( Fig . 6 B ) , suggesting that fascin - mediated bun - dling was delayed compared with accumulation of long fila - ments in the forming bundle . Thus , structural analysis of (cid:2) - precursors and filopodial roots demonstrated enrichment of long filaments in these structures that apparently occurred before fascin - mediated bundling . Structural organization of filopodia with known history Because not every (cid:2) - precursor produced a filopodium in ki - netic studies , we performed correlative EM for cells with known history . For this purpose , we acquired time - lapse se - quences of GFP - actin – expressing cells . After extraction and fixation , we prepared those cells for EM and analyzed filopo - dia formed in the course of the sequence ( Fig . 7 ) . Fig . 7 A il - lustrates the correlation between the last live image of one such cell , the image of the lysed cell , and the EM image of the same cell taken at low magnification comparable with that of light microscopy . During the 19 - s interval between the last live image and the image of the lysed cell , the lamel - lipodium protruded (cid:2) 0 . 9 (cid:5) m , which is evident in the su - Figure 5 . Filopodial filaments originate from the surrounding dendritic network . Platinum replica EM . ( A ) Filopodium contains a tight bundle of actin filaments that splays apart at its root and becomes an integral part of the surrounding network . Filaments in the roots are long compared with the branching network of the adjacent lamellipodium ( inset ) . ( B ) Recently fused filopodium consists of two sub - bundles , each of which has a splayed root ; the boxed region at the root of the right sub - bundle is enlarged in C and shows many branches ( encircled ) at which filopodial filaments originate . Rough background outside the cell edge is due to laminin coating of the glass coverslip . Bars , 0 . 2 (cid:5) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Mechanism of filopodia initiation | Svitkina et al . 415 perimposed image . The subsequent processing for EM did not introduce significant distortions into the structure of the lamellipodium because extracted light and low power EM images could be almost perfectly overlapped . Coincidence of light and EM features could also be seen at higher magnifi - cation , where brighter areas in fluorescence corresponded to denser actin arrays in EM ( Fig . 7 B ) . Several filopodia were spontaneously formed during the total period of 35 s of this sequence . Fig . 7 C illustrates the history of three nascent filopodia of different age , which are color coded in yellow , blue , and green for convenience of description . The filopodium marked with a yellow arrow was the oldest one . This filopodium was formed in the course of fusion of two faint , converging linear densities ex - isting at the beginning of the sequence . A bright spot of ac - tin fluorescence , which appeared in the filopodium shaft in the second frame , allows one to recognize treadmilling and retrograde flow in this filopodium . The filopodium marked with the blue arrow was not visible in the first frame ; at 4 s , it appeared as a (cid:2) - precursor , which at 8 s could be seen near the edge , and which produced a faint filopodium by 12 s . The filopodium marked with the green arrow is the youngest one . It was formed from a (cid:2) - precursor first visible at 12 s . Tips of all three filopodia converged by the end of the sequence , suggesting that they began fusing at the mo - ment of extraction . The detailed structural organization of the region con - taining all three filopodia is shown in Fig . 7 D . The root of the “yellow” filopodium consisted of two thin , fusing bun - dles corresponding to two converging lines in the first frame of the sequence . Each of these sub - bundles , when followed backward , splayed into individual filaments origi - nating from the surrounding dendritic network ( not de - picted ) . The (cid:2) - precursor of the “blue” filopodium that Figure 6 . Actin filament organization in (cid:2) - precursors . Correlative fluorescence and EM of the same cell . First row ; fluorescence microscopy of the leading edge showing Texas Red - phalloidin labeled actin ( left ) , GFP - fascin ( middle ) , and merged image ( right ) . White dots in the merged image mark putative (cid:2) - precursors , and the arrowhead indicates a filopodium , which have been analyzed by EM . Second row ; EM of the same region ( right ) overlaid with fluorescence images of actin in red ( left ) and fascin in green ( middle ) . Boxed regions ( a – c ) are enlarged in the bottom panels , labeled respectively . Red outlines in enlarged panels denote areas of increased actin density in the fluorescence image that represent putative (cid:2) - precursors or filopodia . (cid:2) - precursors contain relatively long filaments , some of which are highlighted in cyan in A and C , along with short branching filaments highlighted in magenta ; adjacent lamellipodium ( C ) contains mostly short branching filaments highlighted in magenta . Yellow outline denotes region enriched in fascin in the established filopodium . This region contains tightly bundled filaments . Bar , 0 . 2 (cid:5) m . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 416 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 3 , 2003 treadmilled backward during the sequence was identified with the splayed root of the blue filopodium in the EM im - age , indicating that splayed roots of filopodia indeed repre - sent former (cid:2) - precursors . Like in other EM images , fila - ments were collected into the bundle of the blue filopodium from the wide surrounding area ( Fig . 7 D ) . In fluorescence images ( Fig . 7 C ) , the splayed root became in - visible already in 12 s frame , probably because of low fluo - rescence intensity . The root of the youngest “green” filopo - dium displayed many features of the dendritic organization of (cid:2) - precursors . It had relatively high network density , many short filaments , frequent branching , and numerous free barbed ends ( Fig . 7 , inset 2 in D ) . Some filaments orig - inating as a branch on another filament could be seen to enter the bundle of the green filopodium . These data sup - port the idea that (cid:2) - precursors initially represent a part of Figure 7 . Structural organization of filopodia with known history . Correlative live imaging and EM . ( A ) Overview of the cell lamellipodium at different stages of sample processing . GFP - actin fluorescence images taken just before ( live , 16 s ) and immediately after ( lysed , 35 s ) cell lysis were merged ( live (cid:6) lysed ) in green and red channels , respectively ; cell advance during the 19 s between images appears as red strip at the leading edge . Low magnification EM image of the same region ( EM ) is overlaid with actin fluorescence image of the lysed cell ( EM (cid:6) actin ) . ( B ) Boxed region in A is enlarged in B to show correlation between light and EM in more detail . Brighter areas in fluorescence image correspond to denser actin arrays in EM . ( C ) Detailed history of the boxed region in A . Time in seconds . The 35 s frame is taken from the lysed cell . Arrows of different color indicate position of individual nascent filopodia . ( D ) Enlarged EM of the boxed region in B showing the structure of nascent filopodia , whose history is presented in C ; individual nascent filopodia are outlined in colors corresponding to colors of arrows in C . Some filaments converging into the bundle of the “blue” filopodium are highlighted in shades of blue . Boxes 1 and 2 are further enlarged in corresponding insets and show organization of the filopodial tip ( 1 ) and of the root of “green” filopodium ( 2 ) ; branching filaments are highlighted in green in the inset ( 2 ) . See detail in text . Bars , 2 (cid:5) m ( A ) and 0 . 2 (cid:5) m ( D ) . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Mechanism of filopodia initiation | Svitkina et al . 417 the dendritic network , but lose short filaments with age . An interesting feature of the green filopodium was that it was barely recognizable in the EM image because its filaments , although long , were not well - aligned , suggesting that fila - ment cross - linking is not an early event during filopodial formation , in agreement with delayed recruitment of fascin to (cid:2) - precursors . In contrast to delayed bundling , the filament barbed ends at filopodial tips were in register , suggesting they were interacting with each other , even though they supposedly encountered each other just a few seconds before extraction . A substantial amount of granular material was associated with the tip of the fused filopodium ( Fig . 7 , inset 1 in D ) . The presence of tip - associated material may play an important role in filopodial formation , and we therefore investigated it in more detail . Filopodial tip complex In EM images , many filopodial tips were associated with a distinct structure , which had a rough granular surface and variable shape and size ( Fig . 8 A ) . To test whether this tip complex was involved in physical association of filopodial barbed ends with each other , we incubated lysed cells over - night in phalloidin - containing buffer . Phalloidin prevented depolymerization of actin filaments during incubation , whereas dissociation of other proteins was allowed . We monitored dissociation of fascin or VASP using cells express - ing GFP - fusion proteins . Although lysis removed soluble and weakly bound proteins , lysed cells initially retained most of filopodia - associated fascin and VASP . However , fascin was completely gone after incubation , whereas VASP re - mained ( Fig . 8 B ) . EM of incubated cells revealed that filopodial bundles became loose , consistent with the loss of fascin , but the tip complexes were mostly preserved , consis - tent with retention of VASP , and filament barbed ends re - mained associated with each other and with the filopodial tip complex ( Fig . 8 C ) . These results suggest that the tip complex physically links barbed ends in filopodia indepen - dently of fascin . Occasionally , the tip complex detached par - tially or completely during incubation . In such cases , re - leased filopodial filaments completely splayed apart . The next question we addressed was the origin of the tip complex . Because filopodia formation seemed to occur by gradual convergence of filaments from the dendritic net - work , we wondered whether smaller tip complexes existed in lamellipodia . Careful examination of the leading edge of lamellipodia indeed revealed junctions between barbed ends of two or more lamellipodial filaments ( Fig . 8 D ) . Occasion - ally , additional material could be seen at the junction points , which may correspond to the tip complex of established filopodia . Association between filament - barbed ends was re - tained even after overnight incubation in the phalloidin - containing buffer ( Fig . 8 D ) . Discussion Our kinetic and structural investigation of filopodial initia - tion in B16F1 melanoma cells demonstrated that filopodial bundles were formed by gradual reorganization of the lamel - lipodial dendritic network in a process that involved elonga - tion of a subset of lamellipodial filaments , self - segregation of these filaments into filopodial precursors , and initiation of bundling at the tips of the precursors ( Fig . 9 ) . We propose that the mechanism of filopodia initiation is analogous to filopodial fusion , but that it begins at the level of individual filaments and gradually propagates to the fusion of thick bundles . We now discuss this hypothesis in detail . Figure 8 . Filopodial tip complex . ( A ) Structure of tip complex in three filopodia seen by replica EM . Lower magnification , left ; higher magnification , right . ( B ) Incubation of lysed cells in buffer causes dissociation of fascin ( top ) but not VASP ( bottom ) from filopodia . Phase contrast and GFP fluorescence images of cells transiently expressing indicated fusion proteins were taken immediately after cell lysis ( “before incubation” phase images are not depicted ) and after overnight incubation in phalloidin - containing buffer ( “after incubation” ) . Acquisition and processing of fluorescence images was identical for each pair . ( C ) Filopodial bundle and tip complex after overnight incubation of the lysed cell in phalloidin - containing buffer . Replica EM . Filopodial tip complex keeps barbed ends of filopodial filaments together , whereas filaments within the bundle become loose . ( D ) Junctions between barbed ends of lamellipodial filaments ( arrows ) immediately after lysis or after incubation in buffer like in B or C ( “after incubation” ) . Bars : 0 . 1 (cid:5) m ( A , C , and D ) , and 2 (cid:5) m ( B ) . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 418 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 3 , 2003 Dendritic network as a source of filopodial filaments Arp2 / 3 complex has been suspected to play a role in filopo - dia initiation , but paradoxically , is not present in filopodial bundles . Our data do not support the idea of filopodial bun - dles arising from a nucleation center , but indicate that Arp2 / 3 complex produces a normal dendritic array which then be - comes rearranged into parallel bundles through intermediate formation of (cid:2) - precursors . Considering the ability to fuse displayed by filopodial bundles of all sizes , one can deduce that fusion may also occur below the resolution limit of the light microscope . Fusion of submicroscopic bundles or indi - vidual filaments may represent a mechanism of formation of (cid:2) - precursors and explain their (cid:2) - shape . The structure of (cid:2) - precursors and filopodial roots was consistent with this idea , and showed that filaments composing bundles were collected from the surrounding area in an asynchronous manner , suggesting that Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin filament nu - cleation provides a source of filaments to be rearranged into a bundle by gradual fusion . Formation of long filaments as a prerequisite of filopodia initiation The major difference between actin filament arrays in filopo - dia and lamellipodia is that filopodial filaments elongate con - tinuously , reaching lengths of many micrometers , whereas lamellipodial filaments become capped after a brief period of elongation , and consequently , are relatively short ( (cid:2) 100 nm ) . Extensive elongation of filopodial filaments would seem to require a way to antagonize or protect against capping ac - tivity in the cytoplasm . A mechanism for protection is likely to involve proteins of the Ena / VASP family because these proteins are enriched at filopodial tips ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) , they antagonize the terminating activity of capping protein in vitro , and their depletion from or tar - geting to the membrane leads to shorter or longer filaments , respectively ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Our data support an idea that distributed filaments with prebound Ena / VASP proteins are gradually brought together to form a filopodium . The kinet - ics of GFP - VASP demonstrated a correlation between coales - cence of VASP and filopodia initiation . At present , it is not clear whether VASP remains associated with the same barbed end for a long time or frequently switches its protégé . The persistence of VASP at the leading edge and filopodial tips af - ter overnight incubation in buffer is evidence that at least some actin filaments can remain tightly associated with VASP . However , in a living cell , the association of VASP with barbed ends may be subject to regulation that affects the degree of protection it confers against capping . On the assumption that GFP - VASP reports on the behav - ior of the population of privileged barbed ends , the gradual coalescence of VASP to the tips of (cid:2) - precursors reflects the gradual segregation of longer filaments into (cid:2) - precursors . Consistent with this coalescence process , actin arrays within (cid:2) - precursors were enriched in long filaments and depleted in the lamellipodial markers , Arp2 / 3 complex , cortactin , and capping protein . Long filaments became more clearly visible when (cid:2) - precursors treadmilled away from the leading edge and became filopodial roots . Long filaments in lamellipodia have been also observed by other EM techniques ( Small , 1988 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ; Resch et al . , 2002 ) , al - though no distinction has been made between (cid:2) - precursors and other parts of lamellipodia . Other studies have indicated that Ena / VASP family mem - bers contribute to the formation of filopodia , but the mech - anism of their involvement has not been elucidated . In Dictyostelium , the VASP family homologue ( DdVASP ) is es - sential for filopodia formation ( Han et al . , 2002 ) . Induction Figure 9 . Convergent elongation model for filopodia initiation . ( 1 ) Lamellipodial network is formed by Arp2 / 3 - mediated dendritic nucleation . Elongation of some barbed ends in the network is terminated by capping protein , but other barbed ends acquire a privileged status by binding a complex of molecules ( tip complex ) that allows them to elongate continuously . Ena / VASP proteins are likely members of the tip complex mediating protection from capping . ( 2 ) Privileged barbed ends drift laterally during elongation and collide with each other . Tip complex mediates clustering of privileged barbed ends upon collision . ( 3 ) Converged filaments with linked barbed ends continue to elongate together . Other laterally drifting barbed ends encounter and join the initial cluster of tip complexes . Multiple collisions of barbed ends during elongation lead to gradual clustering of their barbed ends , multimerization of associated tip complexes , and convergence of filaments . ( 4 ) The multimeric filopodial tip complex initiates filament cross - linking by recruiting and / or activating fascin , which allows the bundling process to keep up with the elongation and guarantee efficient pushing . ( 5 ) In the nascent filopodium , the filopodial tip complex retains its functions of promoting coordinated filament elongation and bundling , as well as fusion with other filopodia . Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Mechanism of filopodia initiation | Svitkina et al . 419 of filopodia by Irs53 involved recruitment of a member of the Ena / VASP family , Mena ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ) . Our data suggest that the mechanism of action of Ena / VASP proteins is through the formation of privileged filaments that can elongate persistently . Clustering of barbed ends as a mechanism of segregation of filopodial filaments The persistent elongation of filaments by itself would not re - sult in their local accumulation unless they were able to asso - ciate with each other . Consistent with this idea , we found structural interaction between filament barbed ends that was mediated by the filopodial tip complex in a fascin - indepen - dent manner . This result suggests that bundling and barbed - end interaction are mediated by different molecules . In addi - tion , we detected formation of junctions between filament barbed ends at the extreme leading edge . Similar to filopo - dial tips , these junctions were stable even after overnight in - cubation in buffer and were frequently associated with addi - tional material . The filopodial tip complexes described here may be similar to the material associated with distal filament ends in filopodia and lamellipodia of fibroblasts ( Small et al . , 1982 ) and neuronal growth cones ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . Interaction between barbed ends appears to be re - sponsible for the (cid:2) - configuration of actin arrays at different scales from junctions between individual filaments to (cid:2) - pre - cursors to fusing bundles . Privileged barbed ends seem to combine the ability for continuous elongation with multimerization potential . The cross - linking molecules mediating junction formation be - tween barbed ends remain unclear , but they are likely to be components of the filopodial tip complex . The molecular composition of the filopodial tip complex remains to be es - tablished . However , proteins previously found to localize specifically to filopodial tips ( see Introduction ) , including Ena / VASP proteins , are predicted to be members of this complex . One possibility is that Ena / VASP proteins , which mediate protection of barbed ends from capping , may also work as barbed end “glue” because of their ability to oligo - merize ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ) . In support of this idea , a domain mediating oligomerization of Mena has been shown to be required for full function of Mena in cell motility ( Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) . Another possibility is that additional ( yet unidentified ) molecules within the filopodial tip com - plex mediate interaction between barbed ends . These possi - bilities are not mutually exclusive , and the hypothetical barbed end linking molecules may act indirectly through Ena / VASP proteins , which would have the benefit of ren - dering the anti - capping and clustering capabilities to the same subset of filaments . The combination of continuous elongation and self - asso - ciation properties of privileged barbed ends allows one to ex - plain how the privileged filaments in the dendritic network become gradually self - segregated during filopodia initiation . The lamellipodial filaments , on average , have a diagonal ori - entation of about (cid:7) 35 degrees with respect to the leading edge ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . During elongation , the barbed ends of diagonally oriented filaments drift laterally along the edge , which increases chances of their collision . Such lateral drift of lamellipodial filaments was proposed to mediate formation of filopodia due to activity of bundling proteins ( Small et al . , 1982 , 1998 ) . We propose that the cross - linking molecules at the barbed ends of colliding privi - leged filaments cause them to associate with each other and travel together . Multiple collisions lead to clustering of barbed ends of filaments and multimerization of individual barbed - end – associated molecular complexes , producing a filopodial tip complex . Filament bundling as a mechanism of stabilization Individual long actin filaments are not efficient at pushing . Because of their low persistence length , they bend rather than push . Filament cross - linking along the length is thought to be a solution for this problem ( Mogilner and Os - ter , 1996 ) . The existing evidence suggests that fascin is the major actin cross - linking protein in filopodia ( Bartles , 2000 ; Kureishy et al . , 2002 ) that is required for filopodia mainte - nance . In support of this idea , we found that fascin enrich - ment in actin arrays correlated with tight bundling of actin filaments , and fascin dissociation from filopodial bundles re - sulted in filament unbundling . To allow for efficient push - ing , cross - linking of growing filaments is predicted to occur soon in the course of actin polymerization so that the effec - tive length of the filament after the last cross - link remains short . Indeed , fascin is enriched in the distal section of filopodia ( Cohan et al . , 2001 , and this paper ) suggesting that its association with the growing actin bundles occurs in par - allel with actin assembly . In contrast , association of (cid:3) - actinin with fast - protruding filopodia and lamellipodia is detected toward their rear , indicating that the role of (cid:3) - actinin is not to provide the pushing efficiency to growing filaments . Fascin recruitment during filopodia initiation was not the earliest event . Instead , GFP - fascin rather abruptly appeared at the vertex of a preformed (cid:2) - precursor . We suggest that recruitment and / or activation of fascin to tips of (cid:2) - precur - sors cross - links the long filaments accumulated there , thus completing the initiation of filopodial bundle formation . Convergent elongation mechanism of filopodium initiation Based on our findings , we propose a convergent elongation model for filopodial initiation ( Fig . 9 ) , which stipulates that filopodia are formed by reorganization of the dendritic net - work formed in an Arp2 / 3 - dependent manner . The key as - sumption of this model is that some filaments within the lamellipodial dendritic network acquire privileged status by binding a set of molecules to their barbed ends , which protect them from capping , and mediate association of barbed ends with each other on collision . Ena / VASP proteins are likely candidates for the role of protection from capping . The glue molecule remains to be established . Multiple collisions of privileged filaments during elongation lead to gradual cluster - ing of their barbed ends and multimerization of associated barbed - end complexes . A set of privileged filaments originat - ing from distant sites of the dendritic network and converg - ing to the same spot forms a (cid:2) - precursor , and aggregated barbed - end complexes form the tip complex of the future filopodium . The filopodial tip complex initiates filament cross - linking by recruiting and / or activating fascin , which al - lows the bundling process to keep up with elongation and Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 420 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 160 , Number 3 , 2003 guarantee efficient pushing . Initiated filopodia elongate and attain steady - state by the filament treadmilling mechanism . The filopodial tip complex remains associated with the grow - ing tip , allowing for continuous elongation of filopodial fila - ments and mediating filopodia fusion on collision . Initiation of filopodial bundles within the lamellipodial network necessarily leads to their birth in the form of mi - crospikes . They die either during ruffling or in the form of retraction fibers , when a cell decides to move in a different direction . In between , the microspikes may at some point elongate faster than lamellipodial advance to form a conven - tional filopodium . Additional evidence for the relatedness of these structures comes from the fact that Cdc42 induces cell retraction and formation of retraction fibers along with for - mation of genuine filopodia ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ) . Conse - quently , the three morphological types of peripheral actin bundle , microspikes , filopodia , and retraction fibers , may be considered as transient states of the same core structure dif - fering primarily in their relationship to the membrane and in the state of their cycle . Also , they may differ in protein com - position and dynamics . Filopodia and retraction fibers are predicted to contain actin – membrane linkers , like ERM pro - teins , which are unnecessary for microspikes . The remote po - sition of barbed ends in filopodia and retraction fibers may require a myosin motor , for example , myosin X ( Berg and Cheney , 2002 ) , to deliver building components to the tip . The pathway of filopodia initiation established in this pa - per has a remarkable similarity to the mechanism of forma - tion of filopodial - like bundles in vitro ( unpublished data ) . In that work , we found that beads coated with Arp2 / 3 - acti - vating proteins induced formation of radial actin bundles when capping activity in cytoplasmic extracts was de - creased . In vitro bundles displayed many filopodial charac - teristics ; they had uniform polarity , grew at the barbed end , were enriched in fascin , and lacked Arp2 / 3 complex , cap - ping protein , and (cid:3) - actinin . As in the present paper , indi - vidual filaments in bundles in vitro originated from the dendritic network near the bead , and a decreased rate of capping in the extracts allowed them to elongate and be bundled by fascin . A tightly packed parallel actin bundle , which is a hallmark of filopodia , can also be found in other organelles across tis - sues and organisms ( Bartles , 2000 ; DeRosier and Tilney , 2000 ) . Our findings that filopodia in B16F1 cells during normal locomotion were formed by reorganization of the dendritic network raises the possibility of a similar pathway for initiation of other parallel bundles , but does not exclude other mechanisms of bundle formation in other cells types or under other circumstances . For example , proteins of the formin family have recently been shown to nucleate actin fil - aments in vitro ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ; Sagot et al . , 2002b ) and induce actin cables in yeast in vivo in the absence of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Evangelista et al . , 2002 ; Sagot et al . , 2002a ) . Thus , it remains an open question whether Arp2 / 3 - or formin - dependent mechanisms operate in other cases , and whether they are exclusive or can cooperate . In conclusion , we investigated the pathway of filopodia initiation in B16F1 cells and formulated the convergent elongation model for filopodia formation . Although many assumptions of this model remain to be tested , it provides a conceptual framework for further studies aimed at explicitly identifying participating molecules and their precise roles . Materials and methods Cells and reagents Mouse melanoma B16F1 cell line stably expressing EGFP - (cid:8) - actin , as well as untransfected B16F1 cells , were provided by Dr . C . Ballestrem ( Weiz - mann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel ) and were cultured as described previously ( Ballestrem et al . , 1998 ) . For experiments , cells were plated onto coverslips coated with 10 – 25 (cid:5) g / ml laminin ( Invitrogen ) and blocked with 0 . 1 (cid:5) g / ml heat - inactivated BSA . For live imaging , cells were trans - ferred from DME into L - 15 medium at least 2 h before observation . EGFP - VASP – expressing construct was obtained from Drs . J . Bear and F . Gertler ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA ) . EGFP - fas - cin ( Adams and Schwartz , 2000 ) was provided by Dr . J . Adams ( Cleveland Clinic Foundation , Cleveland , OH ) . EGFP - (cid:3) - actinin ( Edlund et al . , 2001 ) was obtained from Dr . C . Otey ( University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC ) . For transient protein expression , cells were transfected with Fu - GENE™ 6 ( Roche ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation . The following primary antibodies were used for immunostaining : affin - ity - purified rabbit antibody to ARPC5 subunit of Arp2 / 3 ( unpublished data ) , capping protein antibody ( Schafer et al . , 1994 ; provided by Dr . D . A . Schafer , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA ) , and mouse monoclo - nal cortactin antibody , clone 4F11 ( Upstate Biotechnology ) . Secondary TRITC - conjugated antibodies were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Microscopy Light microscopy was performed using an inverted microscope ( Eclipse or Diaphot 300 ; Nikon ) equipped with a Plan 100 (cid:9) , 1 . 3 NA objective and a back - illuminated cooled CCD camera ( model CH250 ; Roper Scientific ) or a slow - scan cooled CCD camera ( model CH350 ; Photometrics ) , respec - tively , driven by MetaMorph ® imaging software ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) . FITC filter set was used for GFP - fusion protein observations , and Cy3 and Texas Red filter sets were used for rhodamine and Texas Red imaging , re - spectively . For live imaging , cells were kept on the microscope stage at 36 – 37 (cid:10) C during observation . Immunostaining was performed after cell extraction for 3 – 10 min with 1 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer ( 100 mM Pipes , pH 6 . 9 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM EGTA ) , containing 4 % polyethylene glycol , mol wt 40 , 000 ( SERVA ) , and 2 (cid:5) M phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , followed by fixation with 0 . 2 % glut - araldehyde and quenching with NaBH 4 . For phalloidin staining , 0 . 033 (cid:5) M Texas Red phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Inc . ) was added to the extraction solution instead of unlabeled phalloidin . GFP - fascin – expressing cells were stained with Texas Red phalloidin after fixation of unextracted cells , fol - lowed by permeabilization with 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS . For determination of protein dissociation from the cytoskeletons , GFP - fascin or GFP - VASP cells were grown on locator coverslips , extracted as for immunostaining , and images of cells expressing fusion proteins were acquired within 20 min after extraction . Then cells were washed twice with PEM containing 2 (cid:5) M phalloidin and left in this buffer overnight at RT . After incubation , another set of images of the same cells was acquired . Platinum replica EM and correlative light EM were performed as described previously ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1998 ) . We thank Drs . C . Ballestrem , J . Bear , F . Gertler , J . Adams , C . Otey , and D . A . Schafer for gifts of reagents and Dr . M . Mejillano , Dr . A . Biyasheva , and I . Maly for critical reading of the manuscript . Supported by NIH Grants GM 62431 and IU 54 GM 63126 to G . G . Borisy . Submitted : 31 October 2002 Revised : 23 December 2002 Accepted : 23 December 2002 References Adams , J . C . , and M . A . Schwartz . 2000 . Stimulation of fascin spikes by thrombo - spondin - 1 is mediated by the GTPases Rac and Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 807 – 822 . Bachmann , C . , L . Fischer , U . Walter , and M . Reinhard . 1999 . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 23549 – 23557 . Ballestrem , C . , B . Wehrle - Haller , and B . A . Imhof . 1998 . Actin dynamics in living Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy Mechanism of filopodia initiation | Svitkina et al . 421 mammalian cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 : 1649 – 1658 . Bamburg , J . R . 1999 . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential regulators of ac - tin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 : 185 – 230 . Bartles , J . R . 2000 . Parallel actin bundles and their multiple actin - bundling pro - teins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 72 – 78 . Bear , J . E . , T . M . Svitkina , M . Krause , D . A . Schafer , J . J . Loureiro , G . A . Strasser , I . V . Maly , O . Y . Chaga , J . A . Cooper , G . G . Borisy , and F . B . Gertler . 2002 . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regu - lates fibroblast motility . Cell . 109 : 509 – 521 . Berg , J . S . , and R . E . Cheney . 2002 . Myosin - X is an unconventional myosin that undergoes intrafilopodial motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 246 – 250 . Borisy , G . G . , and T . M . Svitkina . 2000 . Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 104 – 112 . Carlier , M . F . , and D . Pantaloni . 1997 . Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . J . Mol . Biol . 269 : 459 – 467 . Cohan , C . S . , E . A . Welnhofer , L . Zhao , F . Matsumura , and S . Yamashiro . 2001 . Role of the actin bundling protein fascin in growth cone morphogenesis : localiza - tion in filopodia and lamellipodia . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 48 : 109 – 120 . Cooper , J . A . , and D . A . Schafer . 2000 . Control of actin assembly and disassembly at filament ends . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 97 – 103 . DePasquale , J . A . , and C . S . Izzard . 1991 . Accumulation of talin in nodes at the edge of the lamellipodium and separate incorporation into adhesion plaques at focal contacts in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 1351 – 1359 . DeRosier , D . J . , and L . G . Tilney . 2000 . F - actin bundles are derivatives of microvilli : What does this tell us about how bundles might form ? J . Cell Biol . 148 : 1 – 6 . Edlund , M . , M . A . Lotano , and C . A . Otey . 2001 . Dynamics of alpha - actinin in fo - cal adhesions and stress fibers visualized with alpha - actinin - green fluorescent protein . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 48 : 190 – 200 . Evangelista , M . , D . Pruyne , D . C . Amberg , C . Boone , and A . Bretscher . 2002 . Formins direct Arp2 / 3 - independent actin filament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 32 – 41 . Flanagan , L . A . , J . Chou , H . Falet , R . Neujahr , J . H . Hartwig , and T . P . Stossel . 2001 . Filamin A , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and the morphology and function of cortical actin filaments in human melanoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 511 – 517 . Hall , A . 1998 . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science . 279 : 509 – 514 . Han , Y . H . , C . Y . Chung , D . Wessels , S . Stephens , M . A . Titus , D . R . Soll , and R . A . Firtel . 2002 . Requirement of a vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein fam - ily member for cell adhesion , the formation of filopodia , and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 49877 – 49887 . Higgs , H . N . , and T . D . Pollard . 2001 . Regulation of actin filament network forma - tion through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 : 649 – 676 . Ho , H . Y . , R . Rohatgi , L . Ma , and M . W . Kirschner . 2001 . CR16 forms a complex with N - WASP in brain and is a novel member of a conserved proline - rich actin - binding protein family . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 11306 – 11311 . Katoh , K . , K . Hammar , P . J . Smith , and R . Oldenbourg . 1999a . Arrangement of radial actin bundles in the growth cone of Aplysia bag cell neurons shows the immediate past history of filopodial behavior . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 7928 – 7931 . Katoh , K . , K . Hammar , P . J . Smith , and R . Oldenbourg . 1999b . Birefringence im - aging directly reveals architectural dynamics of filamentous actin in living growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 197 – 210 . Kozma , R . , S . Ahmed , A . Best , and L . Lim . 1995 . The Ras - related protein Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral actin microspikes and filopodia in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 : 1942 – 1952 . Kranewitter , W . J . , C . Danninger , and M . Gimona . 2001 . GEF at work : Vav in protruding filopodia . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 49 : 154 – 160 . Krugmann , S . , I . Jordens , K . Gevaert , M . Driessens , J . Vandekerckhove , and A . Hall . 2001 . Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1645 – 1655 . Kureishy , N . , V . Sapountzi , S . Prag , N . Anilkumar , and J . C . Adams . 2002 . Fas - cins , and their roles in cell structure and function . Bioessays . 24 : 350 – 361 . Langanger , G . , J . de Mey , M . Moeremans , G . Daneels , M . de Brabander , and J . V . Small . 1984 . Ultrastructural localization of alpha - actinin and filamin in cultured cells with the immunogold staining ( IGS ) method . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 1324 – 1334 . Lanier , L . M . , M . A . Gates , W . Witke , A . S . Menzies , A . M . Wehman , J . D . Macklis , D . Kwiatkowski , P . Soriano , and F . B . Gertler . 1999 . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron . 22 : 313 – 325 . Lewis , A . K . , and P . C . Bridgman . 1992 . Nerve growth cone lamellipodia contain two populations of actin filaments that differ in organization and polarity . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1219 – 1243 . Li , Z . , E . S . Kim , and E . L . Bearer . 2002 . Arp2 / 3 complex is required for actin poly - merization during platelet shape change . Blood . 99 : 4466 – 4474 . Loureiro , J . J . , D . A . Rubinson , J . E . Bear , G . A . Baltus , A . V . Kwiatkowski , and F . B . Gertler . 2002 . Critical roles of phosphorylation and actin binding motifs , but not the central proline - rich region , for Ena / vasodilator - stimulated phos - phoprotein ( VASP ) function during cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 : 2533 – 2546 . Mallavarapu , A . , and T . Mitchison . 1999 . Regulated actin cytoskeleton assembly at filopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 1097 – 1106 . Maly , I . V . , and G . G . Borisy . 2001 . Self - organization of a propulsive actin network as an evolutionary process . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 11324 – 11329 . Miki , H . , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , and T . Takenawa . 1998 . Induction of filopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Na - ture . 391 : 93 – 96 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 1996 . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 : 3030 – 3045 . Nobes , C . D . , and A . Hall . 1995 . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assem - bly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell . 81 : 53 – 62 . Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins . 2000 . Molecular mechanisms con - trolling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Bio - mol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 576 . Pruyne , D . , M . Evangelista , C . Yang , E . Bi , S . Zigmond , A . Bretscher , and C . Boone . 2002 . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science . 297 : 612 – 615 . Qualmann , B . , and R . B . Kelly . 2000 . Syndapin isoforms participate in receptor - mediated endocytosis and actin organization . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 1047 – 1062 . Resch , G . P . , K . N . Goldie , A . Krebs , A . Hoenger , and J . V . Small . 2002 . Visualisa - tion of the actin cytoskeleton by cryo - electron microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 115 : 1877 – 1882 . Rohatgi , R . , L . Ma , H . Miki , M . Lopez , T . Kirchhausen , T . Takenawa , and M . W . Kirschner . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 com - plex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell . 97 : 221 – 231 . Rohatgi , R . , H . Y . Ho , and M . W . Kirschner . 2000 . Mechanism of N - WASP activa - tion by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1299 – 1310 . Rottner , K . , B . Behrendt , J . V . Small , and J . Wehland . 1999 . VASP dynamics dur - ing lamellipodia protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 321 – 322 . Sagot , I . , S . K . Klee , and D . Pellman . 2002a . Yeast formins regulate cell polarity by controlling the assembly of actin cables . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 42 – 50 . Sagot , I . , A . A . Rodal , J . Moseley , B . L . Goode , and D . Pellman . 2002b . An actin nu - cleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and profilin . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 626 – 631 . Schafer , D . A . , Y . O . Korshunova , T . A . Schroer , and J . A . Cooper . 1994 . Differen - tial localization and sequence analysis of capping protein beta - subunit iso - forms of vertebrates . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 453 – 465 . Small , J . V . 1994 . Lamellipodia architecture : actin filament turnover and the lateral flow of actin filaments during motility . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 : 157 – 163 . Small , J . V . 1988 . The actin cytoskeleton . Electron Microsc . Rev . 1 : 155 – 174 . Small , J . V . , G . Rinnerthaler , and H . Hinssen . 1982 . Organization of actin mesh - works in cultured cells : the leading edge . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 46 : 599 – 611 . Small , J . V . , K . Rottner , I . Kaverina , and K . I . Anderson . 1998 . Assembling an actin cytoskeleton for cell attachment and movement . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1404 : 271 – 281 . Small , J . V . , T . Stradal , E . Vignal , and K . Rottner . 2002 . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 : 112 – 120 . Stradal , T . , K . D . Courtney , K . Rottner , P . Hahne , J . V . Small , and A . M . Pender - gast . 2001 . The Abl interactor proteins localize to sites of actin polymeriza - tion at the tips of lamellipodia and filopodia . Curr . Biol . 11 : 891 – 895 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1998 . Correlative light and electron microscopy of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 : 570 – 592 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1999a . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymeriz - ing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1009 – 1026 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1999b . Progress in protrusion : the tell - tale scar . Trends Biochem . Sci . 24 : 432 – 436 . Svitkina , T . M . , A . B . Verkhovsky , K . M . McQuade , and G . G . Borisy . 1997 . Analy - sis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 397 – 415 . Weaver , A . M . , A . V . Karginov , A . W . Kinley , S . A . Weed , Y . Li , J . T . Parsons , and J . A . Cooper . 2001 . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 : 370 – 374 .