CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Figure 1 : Users ﬁrst utilize the individual screen ( top ) to independently construct their preferred sequence , and then the collaborative screen ( bottom ) through which they reach a consensus with their group . Author Keywords Consensus ; Visual awareness ; Group work ; Decision - making CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → User interface design ; Col - laborative content creation ; Information visualization ; Consensus Building in Collaborative Sequencing with Visual Awareness Tae Soo Kim Jeongyeon Kim KAIST KAIST Daejeon , South Korea Daejeon , South Korea kimts96 @ kaist . ac . kr imurs34 @ kaist . ac . kr Sungsoo ( Ray ) Hong Juho Kim New York University KAIST New York , USA Daejeon , South Korea rayhong @ nyu . edu juhokim @ kaist . ac . kr Nitesh Goyal Cornell University Ithaca , USA ngoyal @ cs . cornell . edu Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CHI ’20 Extended Abstracts , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA . © 2020 Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6819 - 3 / 20 / 04 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3382922 Abstract Collaborative Sequencing ( CoSeq ) is the process by which a group selects and arranges a set of items into a particular order . CoSeq is ubiquitous , occurring across diverse situa - tions like trip planning or course scheduling . Although indi - cating preferences , communicating , and consensus building in CoSeq can be overwhelming for groups , little research has aimed at effectively supporting this process . To under - stand the design space of CoSeq , we ran a formative study to observe how participants utilize visualizations to strate - gically reduce their cognitive burden . We derived a novel design to enable sequence comparison using visualizations and evaluated its effect through a study . We found that at - titudinal measures for the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the consensus building process were signiﬁcantly improved with our design . Introduction Collaborative Sequencing ( CoSeq ) is a type of group decision - making task where a group must decide on a sequence . It is a commonly occurring task across casual and formal domains , like travel itinerary planning [ 18 ] and curriculum planning [ 25 ] . In several CoSeq scenarios , members of a group are collectively responsible for and affected by the resulting outcome—e . g . a group of tourists deciding on an itinerary and following it during their travel . In these situa - tions , it is desirable to build consensus regarding the se - LBW050 , Page 1 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA List of nodes and edges Lists all nodes and edges included in any of the sequences , with the group awareness visualization by Hong et al . [ 14 ] . Merged graph Visualizes the sequences into one merged graph , based on the technique by Andrews et al . [ 3 ] . Adjacency matrix Adjacency matrices have been demonstrated to be effective for the comparison of graphs [ 2 ] . Sequences are a subset of graphs . Visualized edit distance Visualizes the minimum number of modiﬁcations needed to change a sequence into another through the edit distance , a common method used to compare graphs [ 10 ] and trees [ 4 ] . Table 1 : The visualization wireframes were designed by applying previous work to support sequence comparison . quence among the group members [ 6 ] so that the entire group feels greater satisfaction towards the process [ 12 ] and the outcome [ 23 ] . Consensus building can be challenging in CoSeq due to the distinct qualities of this type of task . For the group to prop - erly assess their agreement with a sequence , they need to evaluate and discuss each decision involved in creating the sequence—speciﬁcally , which items to include and the particular order between them . Additionally , to adequately evaluate each of these decisions , members must have a comprehensive understanding of possible alternatives and implications of adding or deleting these alternatives . Several systems have been previously designed to tackle the challenge of assessing multiple decisions and their re - spective alternatives in sequencing tasks . Among these , recommender systems that leverage large - scale data [ 7 , 8 , 15 , 21 , 24 , 18 , 9 ] and crowdsourcing systems that har - ness human computation [ 26 , 20 ] have been common ap - proaches to provide users with item selection and ordering recommendations . While these systems were able to sup - port users’ sequencing processes , they only address the sequencing tasks of individuals . Thus , they are unable to support the expression of opinions by members in a group and the identiﬁcation of conﬂicts within these opinions . These processes are fundamental to consensus building . However , for all members of a group to express their opin - ions and for others to be aware of these opinions , a signiﬁ - cant amount of time and effort is necessary [ 6 ] . Due to this challenge , several tools have been designed to facilitate this process and , in turn , support consensus building [ 1 , 19 , 27 , 14 , 13 ] . Although these systems were effective at increas - ing awareness of others’ opinions and facilitating the iden - tiﬁcation of conﬂicts , all of them were designed to support tasks that have a single ﬁnal decision . For example , Hong et al . [ 14 ] allowed groups to collaborate in the process of ﬁl - tering through location candidates to facilitate the selection of one location for an event , and ConsensUs [ 16 ] visualized conﬂicts in opinion to support the process of selecting one candidate to admit to an engineering school . In these sys - tems , the user manually speciﬁes their preferences across various criteria . Due to multiple decisions involved in collab - oratively constructing a sequence , applying this approach would result in iteratively specifying and comparing prefer - ences for each decision independently . This is unsuitable because of excessive time and effort . An additional challenge of consensus building in CoSeq is the detrimental inﬂuence that early knowledge of mem - bers’ preferences can have on other members’ preferences and the ﬁnal outcome . As such , previous work has shown that it is preferable for members to initially form their prefer - ences and opinions independently [ 17 , 22 ] . However , this requires additional effort from group members prior to the consensus building process to independently identify and document their preferences prior to fuller collaboration and then socialize these preferences optimally . To address these three challenges—developing prefer - ences independently , facilitating the awareness of prefer - ences socially , and enabling conﬂict identiﬁcation in a mul - tiple decision - making scenario like CoSeq—we propose a process based on the model introduced by Briggs et al . [ 5 ] . Our process involves three stages . First , each group mem - ber individually constructs their preferred sequence . This allows members to independently explore alternatives and form their preferences . Second , the group compares the individually constructed sequences to identify similarities and differences . By comparing their sequences , members gain awareness of other members’ preferences with respect to their own , and can identify conﬂicts by focusing on the LBW050 , Page 2 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Figure 2 : In the sequence space , each location added is represented in the sequence space by a rectangle with the location’s name ( center ) and a unique icon ( left ) to facilitate its recognition . Arrows between nodes show the ordering of them in the sequence and this ordering can be altered by drag - and - drop . Figure 3 : In the map , the user can see locations added to the sequence , represented as markers with the location’s unique icon , and lines connecting the markers of locations that are adjacent to each other in the sequence . sequence differences . Third , the group then iteratively re - solves the identiﬁed conﬂicts through discussion to reach consensus on a ﬁnal sequence . To better understand how this process performs in real life , we conducted a formative study that identiﬁed three pri - mary user needs when comparing sequences in a group travel planning task . Based on these needs , we designed a research prototype , TWINE , which provides visual sup - port to satisfy these needs , and allows users to compare sequences and reach a consensus ( see Fig . 1 ) . Through a within - subjects controlled user study of 45 participants , we evaluated the effect of this visual support in the consensus building process of groups . We found evidence that this vi - sual support can increase the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the process . In short , the primary contribution of this work is to identify three design goals for a novel research prototype for CoSeq tasks through a literature survey and a formative study , and to evaluate its effects on the consensus building process in a group itinerary planning task . Formative Study Allowing members of a group to individually construct their desired sequence allows them to establish their prefer - ences . Then , an effective design for the visual comparison of multiple sequences should facilitate the identiﬁcation of similar or conﬂicting opinions within the group and support the consensus building process . However , designing such a visualization is challenging due to the difﬁculty in compar - ing three or more sequences , in contrast to the comparison of only two [ 11 ] . To understand the effective design for the comparison of multiple sequences , we conducted a forma - tive study . In the study , four participants were presented with wireframes of four different visualizations ( see Table 1 ) . These participants were undergraduate / graduate students with previous experiences in group travel planning . They were each tasked to compare the itineraries constructed previously by three ﬁctitious travellers using any of the four wireframes and construct a sequence that would lead to the greatest total satisfaction from these three travellers . Us - ing a think - aloud protocol , participants were encouraged to verbalize their thoughts and reasoning throughout the task . Through open coding , three high - level design goals were derived from the study . Below , “nodes” refer to loca - tions included in an itinerary and “edges” refer to locations adjacent to another in the itinerary . G1 : Provide an overview of similarities and a detailed view of differences . All four participants followed a pro - cess in which they ﬁrst identiﬁed all nodes and edges that were shared by two or more itineraries . For this purpose , they utilized the adjacency matrix and the list of nodes and edges which provided overviews of similarities . After iden - tifying similarities , they relied on more detailed views , like the visualized edit distance , to identify conﬂicts within these similarities ( e . g . a node included in all the sequences but with different connected edges in each ) . G2 : Support the comparison of the ordering of nodes by both their edges and their relative positions in the sequences . With respect to ordering , participants utilized both the adjacency matrix and the list of nodes and edges to compare the sequences with respects to edges . Addi - tionally , several participants utilized the visualized edit dis - tance to compare the relative positions of nodes . By looking at the visualization of node move operations , participants recognized whether a speciﬁc node was more common at the beginning , middle , or end of the three given sequences . G3 : Support interactions for the resolution of conﬂicts during the identiﬁcation of conﬂicts . When identifying LBW050 , Page 3 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Figure 5 : The user can see information of each available location on the list , add a location to their sequence by clicking on a location entry , and remove them from their sequence by clicking on the entry again . Figure 6 : Collaborative screen of the baseline version of our prototype which only juxtaposes the group members’ sequences , without providing the visual sequence comparison . Figure 4 : In the collaborative screen , the user can see their group members’ sequences , with the nodes encoded in the unique color assigned to each member ; compare sequences with the visual sequence comparison ; and discuss with their group through the simple chat interface . conﬂicts , participants expressed a need to understand how the conﬂicts could be resolved . Speciﬁcally , they wanted to explore the effects certain modiﬁcations to a sequence would have to the congruity between that sequence and the others . However , none of the four visualizations effectively afforded for this type of exploration . To summarize , while existing visualizations like adjacency matrix and edit distances could be useful for comparison , visualizing effects of potential modiﬁcations to resolve con - ﬂicts was harder to perform using existing work . TWINE : A Prototype Implementation To afford these three goals together , we created TWINE , a Web - based CoSeq prototype designed for travel itinerary planning . TWINE embeds the proposed process of indi - vidual to collaborative sequencing . Additionally , it provides a visual sequence comparison technique , designed with the design goals derived from our formative study , to sup - port the identiﬁcation of similarities and conﬂicts in opinion during the collaborative phase . The system consists of an individual screen and a collaborative screen . Individual Screen In this screen ( shown at the top of Fig . 1 ) , the user con - structs their preferred sequence or travel itinerary . The in - dividual screen includes three components : a list of loca - tions , a sequence space , and a map . The user can browse through the available locations in the list ( see Fig . 5 ) and add them to their sequence . Added locations are shown in LBW050 , Page 4 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Study Setup Task . First , individually construct their preferred sequence . Then , compare sequences in their group and discuss to reach a consensus . Conditions . Groups performed the task twice with different conditions ; the order was counterbalanced . ( a ) Control condition : a baseline version of our prototype ( see Fig . 6 ) . ( b ) TWINE condition : a version with the visual sequence comparison . Dataset . For fair comparison , two US cities , similar in terms of area and population , were chosen : Portland & Denver . For each , a dataset of 20 locations was prepared . All participants reported to have never visited or lived in either city . Participants . 15 groups of 3 friends from a local university were recruited using online forums ( age M = 22 . 0 , SD = 1 . 81 , 37 males and 8 females ) and were compensated $ 20 . 00 for a 90 - minute dispersed synchronous task . Table 2 : Details on study setup . the sequence space ( see Fig . 2 ) and the map ( see Fig . 3 ) . Once satisﬁed with their sequence , the user can proceed by submitting their sequence . Collaborative Screen After all members have submitted their sequences , the group proceeds to the collaborative screen ( shown in Fig . 4 ) . In this screen , the user can see their members’ sequences and modify their own sequence . Modiﬁcations are displayed in real - time to their group members . The group reaches a consensus once all of the members’ sequences have been modiﬁed to be the same . To facilitate comparison of the sequences , our visual sequence comparison technique is embedded to the sequence space in this screen . Visual Sequence Comparison Our visual sequence comparison interface consists of three main components : visual awareness of shared nodes , or - dering details on hover , and list of missing nodes . Visual Awareness of Shared Nodes : The user is provided with visual awareness on which of their group members also selected a node that is included in the user’s sequence ( G1 ) . Other group members are represented as a stub to the right of each node , encoded in the respective member’s assigned color if that member also included that node in their sequence ( Fig . 4 ( a ) ) . Otherwise , the stub is colored gray . If a node was selected only by the user , the node is colored gray to emphasize a signiﬁcant difference ( G1 ) . Ordering Details on Hover : By hovering on a node in their sequence , the user can evaluate similarities and differences for a node’s relative position and edges . For relative posi - tion , hovering on a node highlights that node in the other members’ sequences ( Fig . 4 ( b - 1 ) ) . This shows if a node is positioned closer to the start , middle , or end of a members’ sequence ( G2 ) . For edges , hovering on a node displays to its right , information ( Fig . 4 ( b - 2 ) ) about which member has different adjacent nodes and what those nodes are ( G1 , G2 ) . It also informs the user of which actions should be taken to match other members’ edges ( G3 ) . List of Missing Nodes : The list of missing nodes dis - plays nodes selected by other members but not by the user ( Fig . 4 ( c ) ) . The list of missing nodes also supports visual awareness of shared nodes using colored stubs belonging to other members ( G1 ) . The user can easily include any of these nodes in their own sequence by clicking the plus button next to each of these nodes ( G3 ) . Evaluation To evaluate the effects of TWINE , we conducted a within - subjects study . For details on the study conditions and par - ticipants , see Table 2 . Through a survey and a NASA - TLX questionnaire , we investigated the effect with respect to two metrics : efﬁciency ( time and effort needed to reach a consensus ) , and effectiveness ( satisfaction towards the pro - cess and outcome ) . Overall , most participants expressed a preference for the TWINE condition ( see Fig . 7 ) and our ﬁndings indicate that this was due to the effect of the visual support on the efﬁciency and effectiveness . With regards to efﬁciency , our study results showed ev - idence that visual support may decrease the amount of effort needed for consensus building ( see “Perceived Efﬁ - ciency” and “Aggregated NASA - TLX” in Fig . 8 ) . Our survey responses indicate that this higher efﬁciency was due to the visual support facilitating the identiﬁcation of sequence sim - ilarities and differences , which participants interpreted as similarities and differences in opinion . For example , G7P2 responded that agreement in opinions could quickly be identiﬁed : “It was easy to see , at a glance , all the locations that I shared with my group and this helped LBW050 , Page 5 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Figure 7 : 38 participants stated that they preferred the TWINE condition , 6 had no preference , and 1 preferred the Control condition . Figure 8 : Wilcoxon signed - rank tests of the survey responses showed that , in the TWINE condition , participants’ perceived efﬁciency was signiﬁcantly higher ( z = 28 . 0 , p < . 000 ) and cognitive workload , calculated through NASA - TLX , was signiﬁcantly lower ( z = 327 , p < . 05 ) . Perceived effectiveness ( z = 20 . 0 , p < . 000 ) was also signiﬁcantly higher in the TWINE condition . me save time in ﬁnding agreements in opinion . ” Addition - ally , G8P2 mentioned that the color encoding of nodes led them to change their opinions : “The locations that only I se - lected were colored grey . This helped me to quickly reduce my differences in opinion . ” By highlighting major points of agreement and disagreement , the visual support allowed group members to focus on the main conﬂicts hindering consensus and to easily understand how to adjust their opinions to resolve these . Additionally , our results suggest that visualizing signiﬁcant agreements or disagreements can also increase the satis - faction towards the process and outcome ( see “Perceived Effectiveness” in Fig . 8 ) . This can be attributed to the visual support’s inﬂuence on the structure of the groups’ discus - sions , which was noted by many participants . Most participants described a similar discussion structure in which they ﬁrst decided to ﬁx the nodes shared by all the members and then discussed including the remain - ing nodes : “We tried to include all the locations that all our members selected . Then , we discussed to decide on whether to include those locations that were only selected by one or two members . ( G10P3 ) ” By ﬁxing nodes shared by all , groups could ensure equal base satisfaction towards the ﬁnal outcome . Discussing all nodes selected by at least one member allowed each member to express all of their opinions with respect to selecting a new node . Granting opportunities for the expression of opinions or concerns is essential for effective consensus [ 6 ] . Therefore , the discus - sion structure encouraged by the visual support could have resulted in a more satisfactory process and outcome . Conclusion Our study allowed us to gain evidence on the beneﬁt of the visual sequence comparison on the consensus building process in a CoSeq task . By facilitating sequence com - parison , the visual support allowed groups to reduce their perceived efforts by focusing on the conﬂicts in opinion that were mainly impeding consensus . Additionally , it encour - aged a discussion structure , which was perceived to be effective , through which the level of satisfaction shared by group members could be maximized . We acknowledge a couple of limitations to our work . To control for group dynamics , we conducted our study with groups of three friends . However , the consensus building process depends signiﬁcantly on the type of the group ( e . g . strangers , co - workers , or family members ) and its size . Ad - ditionally , as our study was designed as a controlled lab experiment to control for understanding the effects of visual support , it may not replicate real world situations ( e . g . asyn - chronous and remote settings ) . Lastly , as our study focused on travel planning , these ﬁndings may not be generalizable to all types of CoSeq tasks . In this work , based on previous literature and a formative study , we show that user goals including visual sequence comparison and conﬂict identiﬁcation for a CoSeq task of travel planning can not be met with existing visualizations , and a novel design that provides such support can lead to gains in perceived effectiveness and efﬁciency . With the ﬁndings from this study and consequent future studies , a more comprehensive understanding of the design space for CoSeq can be developed . Acknowledgements This work was supported by Institute of Information & Com - munications Technology Planning & Evaluation ( IITP ) grant funded by the Korea government ( MSIT ) ( No . 2016 - 0 - 00564 , Development of Intelligent Interaction Technology Based on Context Awareness and Human Intention Understanding ) . LBW050 , Page 6 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA REFERENCES [ 1 ] Sergio Alonso , Enrique Herrera - Viedma , Francisco Javier Cabrerizo , Francisco Chiclana , and Francisco Herrera . 2007 . Visualizing consensus in group decision making situations . In 2007 IEEE International Fuzzy Systems Conference . IEEE , 1 – 6 . [ 2 ] Basak Alper , Benjamin Bach , Nathalie Henry Riche , Tobias Isenberg , and Jean - Daniel Fekete . 2013 . Weighted graph comparison techniques for brain connectivity analysis . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 483 – 492 . [ 3 ] Keith Andrews , Martin Wohlfahrt , and Gerhard Wurzinger . 2009 . Visual graph comparison . In 2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation . IEEE , 62 – 67 . [ 4 ] Philip Bille . 2005 . A survey on tree edit distance and related problems . Theoretical computer science 337 , 1 - 3 ( 2005 ) , 217 – 239 . [ 5 ] Robert O Briggs , Gwendolyn L Kolfschoten , and Gert - Jan de Vreede . 2005 . Toward a theoretical model of consensus building . AMCIS 2005 Proceedings ( 2005 ) , 12 . [ 6 ] CT Lawrence Butler and Amy Rothstein . 2007 . On conﬂict and consensus : A handbook on formal consensus decisionmaking . Citeseer . [ 7 ] Munmun De Choudhury , Moran Feldman , Sihem Amer - Yahia , Nadav Golbandi , Ronny Lempel , and Cong Yu . 2010 . Automatic construction of travel itineraries using social breadcrumbs . In Proceedings of the 21st ACM conference on Hypertext and hypermedia . ACM , 35 – 44 . [ 8 ] Fan Du , Sana Malik , Georgios Theocharous , and Eunyee Koh . 2018 . Personalizable and interactive sequence recommender system . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , LBW002 . [ 9 ] Fan Du , Catherine Plaisant , Neil Spring , and Ben Shneiderman . 2016 . EventAction : Visual analytics for temporal event sequence recommendation . In 2016 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology ( VAST ) . IEEE , 61 – 70 . [ 10 ] Xinbo Gao , Bing Xiao , Dacheng Tao , and Xuelong Li . 2010 . A survey of graph edit distance . Pattern Analysis and applications 13 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 113 – 129 . [ 11 ] Michael Gleicher . 2017 . Considerations for visualizing comparison . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 24 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 413 – 423 . [ 12 ] Nitesh Goyal and Susan R . Fussell . 2016 . Effects of Sensemaking Translucence on Distributed Collaborative Analysis . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 288 – 302 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820071 [ 13 ] Nitesh Goyal , Gilly Leshed , Dan Cosley , and Susan R . Fussell . 2014 . Effects of Implicit Sharing in Collaborative Analysis . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 129 – 138 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557229 LBW050 , Page 7 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 14 ] Sungsoo Ray Hong , Minhyang Mia Suh , Nathalie Henry Riche , Jooyoung Lee , Juho Kim , and Mark Zachry . 2018 . Collaborative dynamic queries : Supporting distributed small group decision - making . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 66 . [ 15 ] Hsun - Ping Hsieh , Cheng - Te Li , and Shou - De Lin . 2012 . Triprec : recommending trip routes from large scale check - in data . In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web . ACM , 529 – 530 . [ 16 ] Weichen Liu , Sijia Xiao , Jacob T Browne , Ming Yang , and Steven P Dow . 2018 . ConsensUs : Supporting multi - criteria group decisions by visualizing points of disagreement . ACM Transactions on Social Computing 1 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 4 . [ 17 ] Andreas Mojzisch and Stefan Schulz - Hardt . 2010 . Knowing others’ preferences degrades the quality of group decisions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 98 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 794 . [ 18 ] Masato Nomiyama , Toshiki Takeuchi , Hiroyuki Onimaru , Tomohiro Tanikawa , Takuji Narumi , and Michitaka Hirose . 2018 . Xnavi : Travel Planning System Based on Experience Flows . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 2 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 27 . [ 19 ] Babajide Osatuyi , Starr Roxanne Hiltz , and Katia Passerini . 2016 . Seeing is believing ( or at least changing your mind ) : The inﬂuence of visibility and task complexity on preference changes in computer - supported team decision making . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 67 , 9 ( 2016 ) , 2090 – 2104 . [ 20 ] Joseph Raﬁdi . 2013 . Real - time trip planning with the crowd . In CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2743 – 2748 . [ 21 ] Nonnadda Silamai , Narongchai Khamchuen , and Santi Phithakkitnukoon . 2017 . TripRec : trip plan recommendation system that enhances hotel services . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers . ACM , 412 – 420 . [ 22 ] Martin Stettinger , Alexander Felfernig , Gerhard Leitner , and Stefan Reiterer . 2015 . Counteracting anchoring effects in group decision making . In International Conference on User Modeling , Adaptation , and Personalization . Springer , 118 – 130 . [ 23 ] Lawrence E Susskind , Sarah McKearnen , and Jennifer Thomas - Lamar . 1999 . The consensus building handbook : A comprehensive guide to reaching agreement . Sage Publications . [ 24 ] Kendall Taylor , Kwan Hui Lim , and Jeffrey Chan . 2018 . Travel itinerary recommendations with must - see points - of - interest . In Companion Proceedings of the The Web Conference 2018 . International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee , 1198 – 1205 . [ 25 ] Haixia Xu and Libby V Morris . 2007 . Collaborative course development for online courses . Innovative Higher Education 32 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 35 . [ 26 ] Haoqi Zhang , Edith Law , Rob Miller , Krzysztof Gajos , David Parkes , and Eric Horvitz . 2012 . Human computation tasks with global constraints . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 217 – 226 . LBW050 , Page 8 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW050 , Page 9 [ 27 ] Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam , Zane Nicholson , discussions . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM and Brian P Bailey . 2015 . Procid : Bridging consensus Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative building theory with the practice of distributed design Work & Social Computing . ACM , 686 – 699 .