Creating Analogies for Design Problem - Solving : Initial Evaluation of an Engineering Faculty Workshop Rea Lavi School of Engineering Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge , MA , USA ORCID 0000 - 0002 - 0788 - 7236 Deniz Marti School of Engineering and Applied Sciences Harvard University Boston , MA , USA ORCID 0000 - 0001 - 9362 - 0839 Edward Crawley Dept . of Aeronautics and Astronautics Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge , MA , USA crawley @ mit . edu Abstract —We conducted an initial evaluation of a professional development workshop for engineering faculty on the creation of analogies for addressing design problems , which are real - world problems with multiple potential solutions and a non - prescribed path to solution . The ability to create meaningful analogies is of central importance in engineering . A meaningful analogy connects the problem to be solved to a problem which has already been solved based on attributes such as function or purpose which are similar and key to both problems . In our in - person undergraduate engineering education workshop , we taught faculty a method and process for creating meaningful analogies for addressing design problems , a skill which they can then teach their own students . 16 engineering faculty engaged with activities to do with the creation and use of analogies for solving design problems . Initial evaluation of workshop was successful : participants created meaningfulness analogies and gave overall positive feedback on the workshop . Keywords—analogy , creative ideation , design problems , engineering education , undergraduate education I . I NTRODUCTION This paper outlines the initial evaluation of our workshop for engineering faculty who teach undergraduate engineering students . Our workshop focused on creation and use of analogies for creative ideation when tackling design problems . This paper begins with background on design problems , creativity , and analogies . We go on to detail our research objective and research question . Next , we go into a detailed explanation of our workshop , including its methods , activities , and data collection and analysis . We go on to report our findings as they relate to each workshop activity and our research objective . Finally , we discuss our findings , including the evaluation of our workshop , the limitations of our study , and our recommendations for future studies . A . Design Problems and Creativity The term ‘design problem’ has been used broadly to describe real - world problems with multiple potential solutions , which have a non - prescribed path to a solution , and which require the creation of artifacts and creativity for solving them [ 1 ] . While the standard definition of creativity is a topic of ongoing debate , the two most frequently mentioned attributes mentioned in definitions of creativity are novelty and usefulness . Novelty has been described as an idea being rare within a particular group , while usefulness has been defined as effectiveness or valuability [ 2 ] . B . Creating and Using Analogies in Problem - Solving Analogies have played a key historical role in inventions and discoveries [ 3 , 4 ] . The use of analogies for problem - solving in various engineering disciplines is well - documented [ 5 - 7 ] . Furthermore , and highly pertinent for education , research demonstrates that the use of analogies helps improve conceptual learning [ 8 ] . The process of creating an analogy between two entities can be conceived as ( 1 ) identifying similarities ( similar attributes ) between two entities , ( 2 ) abstracting relationships between these entities based on the identified attributes , and ( 3 ) extracting novel categories by mapping these abstracted relationships onto the target entity which we wish to change or explore in some way [ 9 , 10 ] . In the context of analogies in problem - solving , two key terms are target problem ( TP ) and source problem ( SP ) . The TP is the problem to be solved , while the SP is a problem which ( a ) is similar to the TP in substantial respects ( i . e . , analogous ) , ( b ) has already been solved to a satisfactory degree or is simply better understood than the TP , and ( c ) can used as inspiration for solving the TP [ 11 , 12 ] . Indeed , studies in engineering design have shown solutions can be conceived , developed , or adapted based on preexisting solutions from other domains ; The connections made between a TP and a SP can be based on shared attributes , functions , or purposes [ 13 - 15 ] . There are various techniques for creating analogies in engineering design , requiring considerable expertise and time investment and , in some cases , dedicated software [ 13 - 16 ] . This presents potential obstacles for some engineering faculty in using such techniques in their instruction , especially where undergraduate students are concerned . Therefore , there is a need 2023 I EEE W o r l d E n g i n ee r i n g E du c a t i o n C o n f e r e n c e ( E D U N I N E ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 2050 - 3 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / E D U N I N E 5753 1 . 2023 . 10102860 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . for an easily teachable and applicable method for the creation of analogies to design problems , a method that can feasibly be applied by engineering faculty with undergraduate students . C . Research Objective and Research Questions We aimed to conduct an initial evaluation of our professional development workshop for engineering faculty on the topic of creating analogies for solving design problems . II . M ETHOD AND M ATERIALS A . Workshop Design and Method Our workshop was conceived to train faculty in creating analogies for creative ideation when tackling design problems . The design of our workshop took Merrill’s first principles of instruction into consideration [ 17 ] . These principles state that learning is promoted when instruction is ( a ) problem - centered , ( b ) activates existing knowledge , ( c ) includes demonstrations , ( d ) provides opportunities for application , and ( e ) supports integration into the real world . For purposes of this workshop , we developed the Problem , Criterion , Source , Extract , Analogy ( PC - SEA ) method , which provides a structured way for creating analogies when tackling design problems . This method is domain - agnostic , easy to teach , learn , and apply , and requires minimal training . Figure 1 describes the application of the PC - SEA method . a Example . Fig . 1 . The PC - SEA method of creating effective analogies for creative ideation in solving design problems . B . Research Setting and Participants We received approval from MIT COUHES to conduct this study , E - 3829 . Data collection took place in the summer of 2022 during a three - hour in - person workshop at an international conference . The workshop was facilitated by the first author with 16 engineering faculty from different institutions in different continents . The workshop began with the facilitator providing participants with background on design problems , creative ideation , and analogies , followed by a worked example . Next , the facilitator briefed participants about the research study and provided them with a link to an informed consent Google Form ( https : / / www . google . com / forms / about ) , which participants were free to submit as either ‘accept’ or ‘reject’ . All 16 participants agreed to participate in the study . Following informed consent , participants carried out four sequential activities , all using Google Forms . All 16 participants carried out every activity . In - between activities , the instructor facilitated discussion and presented or clarified relevant concepts . C . Data Collection and Analysis We evaluated the success of the workshop based on analogies participants created during Activity 3 and on their feedback about the workshop during Activity 4 . Activities 1 and 2 served as training for activity 3 : while Activity 1 trained participants in the creation and use of analogies , Activity 2 provided them with an opportunity for participants to consider and discuss the components of creativity , i . e . , novelty and usefulness . Activity 1 : Generate creative ideas using analogies . This was a 20 - minute activity in which individual participants were asked to generate an analogy based on a given TP and SP , and then generate a creative idea for solving the TP , based on their analogy . The TP , presented to all the participants , was as follows : “ During the summer in coastal regions of sub - tropical countries , toddlers ' sleep is often disrupted by mosquitos buzzing around their ears and stinging them . Female mosquitoes are drawn to the toddlers by sensing ( 1 ) carbon dioxide emissions from their breath , ( 2 ) color contrast between the toddlers ' skin and clothes on the one hand , and the surrounding environment on the other hand , and ( 3 ) body ' s thermal signature . Existing solutions for this challenge are either cost - ineffective , disrupt the toddlers’ sleep , or pose potential harm to their health ” . Following the presentation of the TP , participants were given two subsequent activities : Activity 1A , in which each participant generated ( typed ) their own SP and an analogy based on this SP , and then generated their own creative idea based on that analogy , followed by Activity 1B , in which each participant generated their own analogy and creative idea based on a SP provided by the instructor—a YouTube video titled How Stripes Make Zebras Invisible To Bugs ! [ 18 ] . This activity was meant as training for Activity 3 . We evaluated it based on ( a ) the number of participants that submitted each activity and ( b ) the fulfilment of instructions for that activity . Activity 2 : Vote for the most creative ideas . This was a 10 - minute individual activity in which participants were asked to vote for the most novel and for the most useful idea , based on the definitions and examples they were given in the introduction . If they wished , participants could have voted for the same idea as the most novel and most useful . To avoid bias toward other participants , all the ideas were anonymized by the instructor before they were made visible to participants . The link to the Problem • Formulate a short problem statement • Ex . a Design a solution for round - the - clock delivery of aid and supplies to city dwellers affected by a severe earthquake Criterion • Identify and select a key usefulness criterion • Ex . Aerial maneuverability Source • Search for and identify a source challenge that achieved satisfactory ( or high ) performance in the selected usefulness criterion • Ex . https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Bat _ flight Extract • Identify excerpt / s connecting the source and target challenges by the selected usefulness criterion • Ex . Not included herein for sake of brevity Analogy • Create a clear description of an analogy based on the identified excerpt • Ex . The bat ' s wings can change form mid - flight , enabling sharp turns and thus aerial manuverability Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . other group’s form output ( Google Sheet ) was made available in each group’s voting form . This activity was meant as training for Activity 3 . We evaluated it based on ( a ) the number of participants that submitted each activity and ( b ) the fulfilment of instructions for that activity . Activity 3 : Create analogies for a student assignment . this was a 40 - minute team activity in which participants were randomly assigned into teams of four and asked to select a TP from a list of three . We provided participants with two SPs ( near - and far - field ) for each TP , with links to corresponding Wikipedia articles . Teams were asked to create two analogies— one for each SP—by following the last two steps of PC - SEA : ‘extract’ and ‘analogy’ ( see Figure 1 ) . We scored each analogy from 0 ( superficial ) to 3 ( meaningful ) , by scoring each of the following criteria as either 0 or 1—does the description of the analogy ( a ) correctly identify a relevant usefulness criterion ? ( b ) Clearly relate the usefulness criterion to the TP ? And ( c ) clearly relate the usefulness criterion to the SP ? Table I shows how we scored two participant - generated analogies for Activity 3 , one created by Team C and the other by Team D . TABLE I . A CTIVITY 3 : S CORING A NALOGIES FOR M EANINGFULNESS Team , TP , and SP Analogy Meaningfulness Criterion : Indication and Score Team C TP B : “Design a solution for round - the - clock delivery of aid and supplies to city dwellers affected by a severe earthquake . ” SP ( far - field ) : https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Bat # Wings _ and _ flight “To detect humans in earthquake areas and … mapping system , the analogy could be made with the bats who have a sonar system” . UC : “detect humans” ( 1 ) TP : “humans in earthquake” ( 1 ) SP : No indication ( 0 ) Sum : 2 Team D TP C : “Design a solution for building a self - sustainable colony on Mars by 2040 . ” SP ( near - field ) : https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Internation al _ Space _ Station “The International Space Station uses multiple self - contained redundant systems to conserve and recycle resources to maximize their use in a scarcity environment” . UC : “conserve and recycle resources to maximize their use” ( 1 ) TP : No indication ( 0 ) SP : “scarcity environment” ( 1 ) Sum : 2 a UC : Usefulness criterion , TP : Target problem , SP : Source problem . Activity 4 : Provide feedback on workshop . this was a 10 - minute individual activity in which participants were asked to provide feedback on the workshop activities as well as their overall opinions of the framework by way of level of agreement with provided statement on a Likert scale . We calculated descriptive statistics : minimum , maximum , and median of scores . III . F INDINGS A . Activity 1 : Generate Creative Ideas Using Analogies Each participant generated one analogy for activity 1A—a total of 16 analogies , and two ideas for activities 1A and 1B—a total of 32 ideas . Every participant took part in this activity and did so according to the provided instructions . B . Activity 2 : Vote for the Most Creative Ideas Each participant voted for the most novel ideas and the most useful idea for activity 1A and for Activity 1B . Some participants voted for the same idea as both most novel and most useful . Every participant took part in this activity and did so according to the provided instructions . C . Activity 3 : Create Analogies for Student Assignments Two teams chose to create analogies for TP A , and the two remaining teams chose TP B and TP C , respectively . Participants created eight analogies in total ( two per team ) . Analogy meaningfulness score for each team was 2 . Table II shows meaningfulness scores for the analogies created by participant teams in Activity 3 . TABLE II . A CTIVITY 3 : M EANINGFULNESS S CORES FOR A NALOGIES Team and TP Meaningfulness Criterion Score Near - field analogy Far - field analogy UC TP SP Sum UC TP SP Sum A ( TP A ) 1 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 B ( TP C ) 1 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 C ( TP B ) 1 1 0 2 1 1 0 2 D ( TP C ) 1 0 1 2 1 0 1 2 a UC : Usefulness criterion , TP : Target problem , SP : Source problem . D . Activity 4 : Provide Feedback on the Workshop Table III summarizes participant feedback about the workshop . TABLE III . A CTIVITY 4 : S UMMARY OF P ARTICIPANT F EEDBACK Statement Agreement Score a ( n = 16 ) Min . Max . Median I understand how to apply the analogical reasoning techniques I practiced during this workshop to engineering design challenges . 3 5 4 I understand how to summarize analogies as part of creating student assignments on creative ideation for engineering design challenges . 2 5 4 I intend to implement something I learned during today ' s workshop with my students . 3 5 5 I would recommend this workshop to another undergraduate educator . 3 5 4 . 5 a Potential scores range from 1 ( I very much disagree with this statement ) to 5 ( I very much agree with this statement ) . IV . D ISCUSSION A . Evaluation of the Workshop While participant teams exhibited a skill for creating meaningful analogies in Activity 3 , no team created a full meaningful analogy ( a score of 3 ) . Especially lacking was the connecting of the TP to the usefulness criterion participants had Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . identified . However , all teams created analogies with a score of 2 , which is more meaningful than superficial . Participant feedback in Activity 4 showed that most participants agreed they had acquired the skill for creating analogies based on source and target design problems . In summary , the evaluation of the workshop is mostly positive—it had achieved its stated aims . B . Creating of Analogies by Participants Interestingly , all the teams were able to fully identify and articulate a usefulness criterion which was relevant to both the TP and SP they selected , while the majority of the teams ( three of four ) failed to clearly connect this criterion to their TP . The fact that the majority of teams ( three of four ) successfully connected the usefulness criterion to the SP , as well as in - class conversations and discussions with the facilitator , gave the facilitator clear indication that participants did understand the connection between the usefulness criterion and the TP ; however , since those teams did not explicitly include this connection in their responses , we cannot report they indeed exhibited comprehension of this connection . It could be that , based on the introduction provided by the facilitator , participants assumed that the connecting of the usefulness criterion with the SP is non - obvious and challenging and therefore should be made explicit in their responses , while the connecting of the usefulness criterion with the TP is obvious and therefore does not need to be explained . In any case , all four teams showed their understanding of analogy creation as the connecting of two entities by similar attributes [ 9 , 10 ] . In line with the guidelines provided to them by the facilitator , the usefulness criteria which teams identified in Activity 3 all related to a desired purpose or function of the solution to the SP [ 13 - 15 ] . C . Limitations and Future Studies As an initial evaluation , our study had some limitations , most of which we plan to overcome or minimize in the next revision and implementation of our workshop . First , the sample for our study was rather small ( N = 16 ) . Future studies would need to include a larger number of participants and teams , to allow for the use of inferential statistics . A limitation for Activities 1 and 3 was that we , the authors , are not experts on the problems included in that activity . We plan to conduct our next study with one or more domain experts , who will help us with selecting and drafting these problems . This would also allow us to assess the usefulness of participants’ ideas in Activity 1 , as usefulness can an indicator of analogy meaningfulness . The written instructions for Activity 3 did not emphasize to participants they should connect the analogy explicitly to both the source and target problems . Clearly , the oral instructions given by the facilitator did not suffice for most teams . In Activity 4 , we did not ask participants to separate the creation of analogies from the use of analogies in creative ideation . In future studies , we will separate out those items . Workshop participants did not engage with the first step of PC - SEA , ‘problem’ . The formulation of TPs is a topic which deserves focus , and perhaps even its own workshop . We plan to add this step to future versions of this workshop as either a talk with a worked example or as a dedicated activity . Finally , future evaluation of our workshop should also include an evaluation of the PC - SEA method itself . This may require us to carry out a study independently of the workshop , where we ask experts to create analogies using this method , and have other experts come up with ideas based on these analogies . Future directions may include implementing this workshop in different samples of faculty from diverse backgrounds and refining the workshop design based on the feedback we receive from faculty . Finally , we will solicit feedback from faculty who incorporate the PC - SEA method in their actual engineering classes . This way , we could further iterate the workshop implementation process , optimizing the PC - SEA method implementation . V . C ONCLUSION In this paper , we evaluate a professional development workshop designed to train engineering faculty in the theoretically motivated PC - SEA method for creating analogies in design problem - solving . Our preliminary results indicate that our professional development workshop helps participants reach its objectives . 16 engineering faculty , working in teams , engaged with several activities where they generated ideas for design challenges . We found all their ideas to be meaningful . Participants also expressed satisfaction with the workshop . The workshop participants were able to conduct and reflect on the activities from students’ point of view because they engage with the activities as if they were students . Our aim with designing the workshop in this way was to have faculty gain a better understanding of potential struggles their students may experience when tackling and learning about design problems and problem - solving . We suggest that such professional development workshops are designed to give faculty the opportunity to observe firsthand the benefits and potential obstacles of any pedagogical method they are considering to implement in their own instruction . The central role of analogies in invention and discovery necessitates the development of analogy creation skills in undergraduate engineering students . Our workshop and method make an initial contribution toward facilitating the ability of faculty to teaching this skill to their students . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . H . Jonassen , “Toward a design theory of problem solving , ” Educational Technology Research and Development , vol . 48 , pp . 63 – 85 , 2000 . [ 2 ] M . A . Runco and G . J . Jaeger , “The standard definition of creativity , ” Creativity Research Journal , vol . 24 , pp . 92 – 96 , 2012 . [ 3 ] K . J . Holyoak , and P . Thagard , “Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought , ” MIT Press , 1996 . [ 4 ] A . Schwering , K . - U . Kühnberger , and B . Kokinov , “Analogies— Integrating cognitive abilities” , Cognitive Systems Research , vol . 10 , pp . 175 – 177 , 2009 . [ 5 ] J . S . Linsey , K . L . Wood , and A . B . Markman , “Modality and representation in analogy , ” Ai Edam , vol . 22 , pp . 85 - 100 , 2008 . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . [ 6 ] E . Çubukcu and Ş . G . Dündar , “Can creativity be taught ? An empirical study on benefits of visual analogy in basic design education , ” A | Z ITU Journal of the Faculty of Architecture , vol . 4 , pp . 67 - 80 , 2007 . [ 7 ] D . W . Dahl and P . Moreau , “The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation , ” Journal of Marketing Research , vol . 39 , pp . 47 - 60 , 2002 . [ 8 ] C . R . Wolfe , V . F . Reyna , and C . Brainerd , “Fuzzy - trace theory , ” Transfer of Learning From a Modern Multidisciplinary Perspective , ” vol . 53 , 2005 . [ 9 ] D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , and B . N . Kokinov , “Introduction : The place of analogy in cognition , ” The Analogical Mind : Perspectives from Cognitive Science , pp . 1 - 19 , 2001 . [ 10 ] N . Bonnardel and E . Marmèche , “Evocation processes by novice and expert designers : Towards stimulating analogical thinking , ” Creativity and Innovation Management , vol . 13 , pp . 176 - 186 , 2004 . [ 11 ] K . J . Holyoak and R . G . Morrison , “The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning , ” vol . 137 , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2005 . [ 12 ] U . Goswami , “The development of reasoning by analogy , ” In The Development of Thinking and Reasoning , pp . 61 - 82 , Psychology Press , 2013 . [ 13 ] R . Keller , C . M . Eckert , and P . J . Clarkson , “Using an engineering change methodology to support conceptual design , ” Journal of Engineering Design , vol . 20 , pp . 571 - 587 , 2009 . [ 14 ] K . Fu , J . Murphy , M . Yang , K . Otto , D . Jensen , and K . Wood , “Design - by - analogy : Experimental evaluation of a functional analogy search methodology for concept generation improvement , ” Research in Engineering Design , vol . 26 , pp . 77 - 95 , 2015 . [ 15 ] S . Keshwani and A . h Chakrabarti , “Towards automatic classification of description of analogies into SAPPhIRE constructs , ” 6 th International Conference on Research into Design , pp . 643 - 655 , 2017 . [ 16 ] D . P . Moreno , L . T . Blessing , M . C . Yang , A . A . Hernández , and K . L . Wood , “Overcoming design fixation : Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings , ” AI EDAM , vol . 30 , pp . 185 - 199 , 2016 . [ 17 ] M . D . Merrill , “First principles of instruction , ” Educational Technology Research and Development , vol . 50 , pp . 43 - 59 , 2002 . [ 18 ] Seeker . How Stripes Make Zebras Invisible To Bugs ! . ( Apr . 3 , 2014 ) . Accessed : Nov . 25 , 2022 . [ Online Video ] . Available : https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = cLkbLBAjoPw Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .