Implicit Feedback for Inferring User Preference : A Bibliography Diane Kelly SCILS , Rutgers University New Brunswick , NJ 08901 USA diane @ scils . rutgers . edu Jaime Teevan CSAIL , Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge , MA 02138 USA teevan @ csail . mit . edu 1 Introduction Relevance feedback has a history in information retrieval that dates back well over thirty years ( c . f . [ SL96 ] ) . Relevance feedback is typically used for query expansion during short - term modeling of a user’s immediate information need and for user profiling during long - term modeling of a user’s persistent interests and preferences . Traditional relevance feedback methods require that users explicitly give feedback by , for example , specifying keywords , selecting and marking documents , or answering questions about their interests . Such relevance feedback methods force users to engage in additional activities beyond their normal searching behavior . Since the cost to the user is high and the benefits are not always apparent , it can be difficult to collect the necessary data and the effectiveness of explicit techniques can be limited . In this paper we consider the use of implicit feedback techniques for query expansion and user profiling in information retrieval tasks . These techniques unobtrusively obtain information about users by watching their natural interactions with the system . Some of the user behaviors that have been most extensively investigated as sources of implicit feedback include reading time , saving , printing and selecting . The primary advantage to using implicit techniques is that such techniques remove the cost to the user of providing feedback . Implicit measures are generally thought to be less accurate than explicit measures [ Nic97 ] , but as large quantities of implicit data can be gathered at no extra cost to the user , they are attractive alternatives . Moreover , implicit measures can be combined with explicit ratings to obtain a more accurate representation of user interests . Implicit feedback techniques have been used to retrieve , filter and recommend a variety of items : hyperlinks , Web documents , academic and professional journal articles , email messages , Internet news articles , movies , books , television programs , jobs and stocks . There is a growing body of literature on implicit feedback techniques for information retrieval tasks , and the purpose of this article is to provide a brief overview of this work . Our intention is not to be exhaustive , but rather to be selective , in that we present key papers that cover a range of approaches . We begin by presenting and extending a classification of behaviors for implicit feedback that was previously presented by Oard and Kim [ OK01 ] , and classifying the selected papers accordingly . A preponderance of the existing work clusters into one area of this classification , and we further examine those papers . We then provide a brief overview of several key papers , and conclude with a discussion of future research directions suggested by our analysis . 2 Classification of Implicit Feedback Techniques Implicit feedback techniques take advantage of user behavior to understand user interests and preferences . Oard and Kim [ OK01 ] classified observable feedback behaviors according to two axes , Behavior Category and Minimum Scope . The Behavior Category ( Examine , Retain , Reference and Annotate ) , refers to the underlying purpose of the observed behavior . Minimum Scope ( Segment , Object and Class ) , refers to the smallest possible scope of the item being acted upon . This classification scheme is displayed , with example behaviors , in Table 1 . Minimum Scope Segment Object Class Examine View Listen Scroll Find Query Select Browse Retain Print Bookmark Save Delete Purchase Email Subscribe Reference Copy - and - paste Quote Forward Reply Link Cite Annotate Mark up Rate Publish Organize Create Type Edit Author Table 1 : Classification of behaviors that can be used for implicit feedback from Oard and Kim [ OK01 ] . Our additions have been highlighted . Based on our examination of the literature , we added a fifth Behavior Category , “Create” , to Oard and Kim’s [ OK01 ] original four . The “Create” behavior category describes those behaviors the user engages in when creating original information . An example of a “Create” behavior is the writing of a paper . We also added some additional commonly investigated observable behaviors , and they have been highlighted . Like Oard and Kim [ OK01 ] , we make no claim that this table of behaviors is exhaustive . Rather , we suggest that Table 1 be viewed as a sample of the possible behaviors that users might exhibit . It should be noted that Table 1 includes both implicit and explicit observable behaviors . In our discussion of implicit measures , we do not consider explicit observable behavior , such as “rate” . Categorizing an observable behavior into the appropriate cell in Table 1 can be difficult , because both the intent of the behavior and its scope can be ambiguous . Thus , while the Behavior Category for saving a newly created document could appear to be “Retain” , the B e h av i o r C a t e go r y behavior is probably more appropriately considered “Create” . Similarly , while find and query behaviors involve the creation of text , they are primarily used to locate information for examination , and thus are classified in the “Examine” category . For example , a person might use find to locate a term or passage to examine in a document . Similarly , they might perform a query to locate a document for examination . While querying traditionally applies to documents , the behavior is classified with a Minimum Scope of “Segment” because some systems return best passages rather than documents . It is also difficult to assign the Minimum Scope of a behavior , as the scope can be ambiguous . For example , a behavior such as bookmark acts on a Web page , which is traditionally considered an “Object” . However , when a Web page is considered in the context of its containing Web site , it can be understood as a “Segment” instead . Note , too , that observable behaviors are classified according to the minimum scope for which the behavior could be observed . For example , the minimum scope we might observe for the behavior type is a “Segment” although it is also common for typing to occur during the creation of an object . Similarly , view is identified in the “Examine Segment” category . However , most research has investigated viewing as it relates to objects , and thus that research belongs in the “Examine Object” category . Minimum Scope Segment Object Class Examine [ CLW + 01 ] [ CC02 ] [ JFM97 ] [ KB01 ] [ KC02 ] [ KOR00 ] [ KSK97 ] [ KMM + 97 ] [ Lie95 ] [ LYM02 ] Retain [ Maes94 ] Reference [ Kle99 ] [ PBM + 98 ] [ THA + 97 ] Annotate [ GPS99 ] [ PGS98 ] [ FS91 ] Create [ HHW + 92 ] [ BH99 ] [ Rho00 ] Table 2 : Papers classified based on the observed implicit behaviors they discuss . The papers discussed in greater depth in Section 3 have been highlighted . We classified the thirty papers we selected to include in this article according to the Behavior Category and Minimum Scope of the implicit measures addressed by the paper . [ WRJ02 ] [ RS01 ] [ SZ00 ] [ MS94 ] B e h av i o r C a t e go r y [ MBC + 00 ] [ RP97 ] [ RP97 ] [ MBC + 00 ] [ BLG00 ] [ CLP00 ] [ BP99 ] [ BPC00 ] The classification is shown in Table 2 . Some of the papers , such as [ BLG00 ] , [ MS94 ] and [ RS01 ] , overlap a number of categories and are shown in overlapping gray boxes . Those papers discussed in greater depth in Section 3 are highlighted . A preponderance of the literature falls into the “Examine Object” category . This is not surprising , as document selection and viewing time , both measures included in “Examine Object” , are relatively easy to obtain and are available for every object with which a user interacts . Other areas of Table 2 contain little or no work , suggesting possible categories of observable behavior to explore . One likely reason for the dearth of literature across the Minimum Scope categories of “Segment” and “Class” is that for many systems , the unit with which the user interacts is the object . An exception to this is that many annotation systems consider segments , and this could suggest why much of the annotation literature falls into this category . We further examined the 18 papers that fell into the “Examine Object” category , classifying them into Table 3 along two additional axes . One axis represents the standard software lifecycle based on the spiral model of software development ( c . f . [ Boe88 ] ) : design , implementation , evaluation . Papers in the “Design” category address the issue of what are good implicit measures to use . The “Implementation” category contains papers about implementing systems that use implicit feedback , and those in the “Evaluation” category focus on frameworks for evaluation . Of course , there is overlap among all three of these categories , particularly because the work with implicit measures is still in its infancy . For example , because there do not yet exist many test beds for system evaluation , most system implementation research has necessitated the development of an evaluation scheme . We classify the papers according to the stage they primarily address , but encourage the reader to explore papers from other categories as well . Design Implementation Evaluation Individual [ KB01 ] [ KC02 ] [ MBC + 00 ] [ BP99 ] [ BLG00 ] [ BPC00 ] [ KSK97 ] [ Lie95 ] [ LYM02 ] Group [ CC02 ] [ CLW + 01 ] [ KOR00 ] [ MS94 ] [ RS01 ] [ SZ00 ] [ JFM97 ] [ KMM + 97 ] [ CLP00 ] Table 3 : Papers from the “Examine Object” cell in Table 2 , classified by study type . The papers discussed in greater depth in Section 3 have been highlighted . The other axis in Table 3 focuses on whether the research deals with user preferences on an individual or group level . For example , in the understanding of implicit measures , the amount of time an individual spends reading a document can be compared to that individual’s explicit relevance judgment to understand if reading time is a good implicit measure for relevance , or reading times can be averaged across many users , and compared to a global relevance judgment for that document . Similarly , systems that use implicit measures can use them to help retrieve , filter and recommend items for individual users , or they can provide feedback on an aggregate level by , for example , clustering the documents or highlighting popular articles . Note that many implicit feedback systems built to support individuals do so based on analysis performed over groups . For example , a system that infers an individual’s relevance judgments based on his or her reading time may base the judgment on a threshold derived from averaging the reading time over a group of users . None the less , because such work focuses on supporting the individual , we classify it as “Individual” . While the papers from the “Examine Object” category of Table 2 spread evenly across several of the categories of Table 3 , it is evident that little work has focused primarily on the “Evaluation” category . This is probably because the field is still young , and until now it has been difficult to determine what sort of evaluation test beds would be appropriate . 3 Examination of Key Papers In this section , we provide a more in depth analysis of several papers that we believe are good representatives of the various different areas of Table 2 . Our purpose in examining these papers in more detail is to present the reader with a better idea of how studies of implicit feedback are conducted , how this feedback is typically used and what the key issues and problems in this area are . These papers are necessarily biased toward the work that has examined reading time , as a majority of research has focused on this behavior . [ CLW + 01 ] Claypool , M . , Le , P . , Waseda , M . , and Brown , D . ( 2001 ) . Implicit interest indicators . In Proceedings of the 6 th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’01 ) , USA , 33 - 40 . Claypool , Le , Waseda , and Brown provide a categorization of different interest indicator categories , both explicit and implicit , and address the fundamental question of which observable behaviors can be used as implicit measures of interest . The authors create a customized browser and record the online behavior of seventy - five students , who were instructed to use the browser for 20 to 30 minutes of unstructured browsing . Several behaviors were examined : mouse clicks , scrolling , and time on page . Mouse clicks and scrolling were measured both as a frequency number ( i . e . number of mouse clicks ) and as total time spent . Scrolling was further measured both at the keyboard and with the mouse . Users were asked to explicitly rate each page that they viewed just before the page closed and these ratings were used to evaluate the implicit measures . Users looked at a total of 2 , 267 Web pages and made ratings on 1 , 823 ( 80 % ) of these . The authors found that time spent on a page , the amount of scrolling on a page ( all scrolling measures combined ) and the combination of time and scrolling had a strong positive correlation with the explicit ratings . However , the number of mouse clicks and the individual scrolling measures were found to be ineffective in predicting the explicit ratings . [ MS94 ] Morita , M . , and Shinoda , Y . ( 1994 ) . Information filtering based on user behavior analysis and best match text retrieval . In Proceedings of the 17 th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’94 ) , Ireland , 272 - 281 . Morita and Shinoda explored how behaviors exhibited by users while reading articles from newsgroups could be used as implicit feedback for profile acquisition and filtering . For six weeks , eight users were required to read all articles that were posted to the newsgroups of which they were members and to explicitly rate their interest in the articles . The authors measured the reading time , the saving or following - up of a story and copy for each of the 8 , 000 articles read by their users . They further examined the relationship of three variables on reading time : the length of the document , the readability of the document and the number of news items waiting to be read in the user’s news queue . Very low correlations ( not significant ) were found between the length of the article and reading time , the readability of an article and reading time and the size of the user’s news queue and reading time . Although no statistics are presented , the reading time for articles rated as interesting was longer than for articles rated as uninteresting . Saving , following - up and copying of an article were not found to be related to interests . Based on these results , the authors examined several reading time thresholds for identifying interesting documents . When applied to their data set , they found that the most effective threshold was 20 seconds , resulting in 30 % of interesting articles being identified at 70 % precision . [ RS01 ] Rafter , R . , and Smyth , B . ( 2001 ) . Passive profiling from server logs in an online recruitment environment . In Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on Intelligent Techniques for Web Personalization ( ITWP 2001 ) , USA , 35 - 41 . While the two preceding works found reading time to be related to interests , it is often difficult to effectively deal with reading time distributions because the curves are not normal . Instead , the curves have long tails , with a majority of points at the low end ( toward zero ) . When collected in natural settings , there are often numerous outliers . These distributions often make statistical analysis challenging and may require some transformations . Rafter and Smyth perform a two - step process to prevent spurious reading times in data collected from the log records of users accessing job postings . In the first step , the median of median reading time values per individual job access for both users and jobs were used to calculate a normal reading time for the collection . Spurious reading times were then identified using this normal reading time , and outliers were replaced by this value . Graded reading times per job were then produced by calculating in each user’s profile the number of standard deviations each job’s newly adjusted reading time was above or below the user’s mean reading time . In addition to the reading time , the authors also used raw visits to a job , incorporating a threshold on revisits , as implicit feedback and used the behaviors of applying for a job or emailing the job to oneself to evaluate the implicit measures . Users who had a profile of at least fifteen jobs were included in the analysis ( 412 total users ) . Using the adjusted revisit data and adjusted reading time data was found to result in better prediction performance than using their unadjusted counterparts , suggesting that collection , task and user specific transformations and normalizations on the raw behavioral data can produce more effective predictions of usefulness . [ WRJ02 ] White , R . W . , Ruthven , I . , and Jose , J . M . ( 2002 ) . Finding relevant documents using top ranking sentences : An evaluation of two alternative schemes . In Proceedings of the 25 th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’02 ) , Finland , 57 - 64 . In a controlled laboratory study , White , Ruthven and Jose , examined reading time as a technique for automatically re - ranking sentence - based summaries for retrieved documents . Users completed simulated tasks using three types of systems , one of which automatically re - ranked the top sentences in the summaries based on the user’s reading time of each summary . They normalized the reading times for individuals by requiring users to perform a timing task before each search , where they were presented with a search description and the text of thirty summaries , and asked to read all documents and mark the relevant ones . To derive baseline reading times for each user , reading times for each summary were normalized by the length of the summary and divided by the number of characters to arrive at a character based , user - specific reading time for both relevant and non - relevant summaries . Performance results regarding the implicit system were inconclusive . [ GPS99 ] Golovchinsky , G . , Price , M . N . , and Schilit , B . N . ( 1999 ) . From reading to retrieval : Freeform ink annotations as queries . In Proceedings of the 22 nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’99 ) , USA , 19 - 25 . Research which uses the text that a user generates , be it an annotation or text from a word processing application , has shown promising results with regard to using this text as implicit evidence of user interests . Golovchinsky , Price and Schilit constructed full text queries based on users’ annotated passages of documents and compared these to queries constructed using standard relevance feedback techniques . The motivation for this work was that the words and passages that users mark can provide the system with a more refined , user - specific unit with which to perform relevance feedback and that these passages can help in establishing a context that is better than using just a list of terms . Results from an experiment with ten users annotating and evaluating documents for six topics found that queries derived from users’ annotations produced retrieval performance that was better than standard relevance feedback techniques . [ BH99 ] Budzik , J . , and Hammond , K . ( 1999 ) . Watson : Anticipating and contextualizing information needs . In Proceedings of the 62nd Meeting of the American Society for Information Science , USA , 727 - 740 . Budzik and Hammond proposed a system that automatically retrieved documents and recommended URLs to the user based on what the user was typing . This work was motivated in part by the observation that users typically pose short queries that are highly ambiguous and often lack context . Like Golovchinsky , Price and Schilit [ GPS99 ] , Budzik and Hammond suggest that evidence of context can be found in numerous other applications with which the user interacts . To initially and informally provide some support for their hypothesis , the authors asked ten researchers to submit an electronic version of a paper that they wrote and then asked these users to evaluate the documents that their experimental system had retrieved based on these texts . The results were encouraging , with at least eight of the ten users indicating that at least one of the retrieved results would have been useful . While Budzik and Hammond also provide results from several other informal evaluations , a full - scale , formal evaluation has yet to be performed . [ Kle99 ] Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment . Journal of the ACM , 46 ( 5 ) , 604 - 632 . Perhaps the most impressive large - scale use of implicit feedback comes in the form of Web link analysis . An example of this is Kleinberg ' s work with hubs and authorities . Authorities are authoritative information sources on a topic , and hubs are collections of authorities . Kleinberg suggested that good hubs could be recognized because they point to many good authorities , and similarly , good authorities could be recognized because they are pointed to by many hubs . Thus the links that people make in the course of Web page authoring are interpreted as endorsement . Link analysis , in the form of PageRank [ PBM + 98 ] , is used to great success in practice by Google . From the work reported in this section , it is clear that numerous problems arise when trying to infer information from observable behaviors , because what can be observed does not necessarily reflect the user’s underlying intention . For instance , the amount of time that an object is displayed does not necessarily correspond to the amount of time that the object is examined , yet display time is traditionally treated as an equivalent to reading time . Further , the amount of time an object is actively examined does not necessarily correspond to the user’s interest in that object . As is evidenced by the work described above , it appears that while implicit measures can be useful , they are not necessarily inherently so . Implicit feedback is often difficult to measure and interpret , and should be understood within the larger context of the user’s goals and the system’s functionalities . 4 Future Directions We have looked at some of the relevant work on implicit feedback , and classified and highlighted a diverse set of papers that lay a foundation for the field . We believe that using implicit feedback is an exciting and promising approach to identifying user preference , and in this paper we have called attention to the areas where research in the field has focused , as well as illustrated several areas where there does not exist much work . We have had to be brief in our examination of key papers , and regret the exclusion of many interesting papers from this discussion . We did not consider some types of behaviors that could also be useful , such as those not covered by Table 1 and feedback from outside the digital domain ( e . g . , eye movements and gesture ) . For instance , Maglio , et al . , [ MBC + 00 ] suggested using eye movements to infer user interests and there is a large body of research in the HCI community using eye movements to infer attention . We encourage the interested reader to explore the references provided in this paper further and assure that a longer review of implicit feedback is under construction . To allow for the effective use of implicit feedback , more research needs to be conducted on understanding what observable behaviors mean and how they change with respect to contextual factors . Along with the papers discussed in Section 3 , there is additional evidence that individual , task , topic and collection differences have some effect on the use of reading time as an effective measure of implicit feedback [ KB01 , KC02 ] . While some work has limited the particular type of task under investigation , a more systematic investigation of the relationship between various contextual factors and potential behavioral indicators of interests needs to be undertaken . Not all implicit measures are equally useful and some may only be useful in combination with others . For instance , the selection of an object is different , and perhaps weaker , evidence of interests than the printing or saving of an object , and a document with a low reading time might be printed or saved . It is likely , also , that how implicit measures are collected influence their effectiveness . More tools that allow for the accurate and reliable collection of data , such as the browser developed by Claypool , et al . [ CLW + 01 ] , need to be developed , tested and shared , and further research should be done into how the collection process can encourage implicit feedback to closely match the user’s underlying intent . An in - depth investigation into the research that looked at object examination as a type of implicit feedback ( Table 3 ) revealed that implicit feedback is used to recommend , retrieve and filter objects on both an individual and group level . Our examination further highlighted the lack of literature on developing test beds and evaluation metrics for implicit measures . We hypothesize that this is due to the novelty of the field ; it is difficult to develop a good testing framework while all of the assumptions underlying implicit measures are still being explored . Perhaps now is a good time to look at developing test beds to encourage the further development of implicit measures systems . 5 Acknowledgements We would like to thank Nick Belkin , David Brown and Doug Oard for their feedback . This research was supported by NTT , the Packard Foundation , the Oxygen Partnership , HP and the National Science Foundation . References [ BP99 ] Billsus , D . , and Pazzani , M . J . ( 1999 ) . A personal news agent that talks , learns and explains . In Proceedings of the 3 rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents ( AGENTS 99 ) , USA , 268 - 275 . [ BPC00 ] Billsus , D . , Pazzani , M . J . , and Chen , J . ( 2000 ) . A learning agent for wireless news access . In Proceedings of the 5 th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , ( IUI ’00 ) , USA , 33 - 36 . [ Boe88 ] Boehm , B . ( 1988 ) . A spiral model of software development and enhancement . IEEE Computer , 21 ( 5 ) , 61 - 72 . [ BLG00 ] Bollacker , K . D . , Lawrence , S . , and Giles , C . L . ( 2000 ) . Discovering relevant scientific literature on the Web . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 15 ( 2 ) , 42 - 47 . [ BH99 ] Budzik , J . , and Hammond , K . ( 1999 ) . Watson : Anticipating and contextualizing information needs . In Proceedings of the 62 nd Meeting of the American Society for Information Science , USA , 727 - 740 . [ CLW + 01 ] Claypool , M . , Le , P . , Waseda , and M . , Brown , D . ( 2001 ) . Implicit interest indicators . In Proceedings of the 6 th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’01 ) , USA , 33 - 40 . [ CC02 ] Cooper , M . D . , and Chen , H . M . ( 2001 ) . Predicting the relevance of a library catalog search . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 52 ( 10 ) , 813 - 827 . [ CLP00 ] Cosley , D . , Lawrence , S . , and Pennock , D . M . ( 2002 ) . REFEREE : An open framework for practical testing of recommender systems using ResearchIndex . In Proceedings of the 28 th Very Large Database ( VLDB ‘02 ) Conference , China , 35 - 46 . [ FS91 ] Fischer , G . , and Stevens , C . ( 1991 ) . Information access in complex , poorly structured information spaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ‘91 ) , USA , 63 - 70 . [ GPS99 ] Golovchinsky , G . , Price , M . N . , and Schilit , B . N . ( 1999 ) . From reading to retrieval : Freeform ink annotations as queries . In Proceedings of the 24 th Annual ACM Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’99 ) , USA , 19 - 25 . [ HHW + 192 ] Hill , W . C . , Hollan , J . D . , Wroblewski , D . , and McCandless , T . ( 1992 ) . Edit wear and read wear . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’92 ) , USA , 3 - 9 . [ JFM97 ] Joachims , T . , Freitag , D . , and Mitchell , T . ( 1997 ) . WebWatcher : A tour guide for the World Wide Web . In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence ( ICML ‘97 ) , USA , 770 - 777 . [ KSK97 ] Kamba , T . , Sakagami , H . , and Koseki , Y . ( 1997 ) . ANATAGONOMY : A personalized newspaper on the World Wide Web . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 46 , 789 - 803 . [ KB01 ] Kelly , D . , and Belkin , N . J . ( 2001 ) . Reading time , scrolling and interaction : Exploring implicit sources of user preferences for relevance feedback during interactive information retrieval . In Proceedings of the 24 th Annual International Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ‘01 ) , USA , 408 - 409 . [ KC02 ] Kelly , D . , and Cool , C . ( 2002 ) . The effects of topic familiarity on information search behavior . In Proceedings of the Second ACM / IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries ( JCDL ’02 ) , USA , 74 - 75 . [ KOR00 ] Kim . J . , Oard , D . W . , and Romanik , K . ( 2000 ) . Using implicit feedback for user modeling in internet and intranet searching . University of Maryland CLIS Technical Report 00 - 01 . [ Kle99 ] Kleinberg , J . M . ( 1999 ) . Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment . Journal of the ACM , 46 ( 5 ) , 604 - 632 . [ KMM + 97 ] Konstan , J . , Miller , B . N . , Maltz , D . , Herlocker , J . L . , Gordon , L . R . , and Riedl , J . ( 1997 ) . GroupLens : Applying collaborative filtering to usenet news . Communications of the ACM , 40 ( 7 ) , 77 - 87 . [ Lie95 ] Lieberman , H . ( 1995 ) . Letizia : An agent that assists Web browsing . In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence . USA , 924 - 929 . [ LYM02 ] Liu , F . , Yu , C . , and Meng , W . ( 2002 ) . Personalized Web search by mapping user queries to categories . In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management ( CIKM ‘02 ) . USA , 558 - 565 . [ Maes94 ] Maes , P . ( 1994 ) . Agents that reduce work and information overload . Communications of the ACM , 37 ( 7 ) , 30 - 40 . [ MBC + 00 ] Maglio , P . P . , Barrett , R . , Campbell , C . S . , and Selker , T . ( 2000 ) . SUITOR : An attentive information system . In Proceedings of the 5 th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’00 ) , USA , 169 - 176 . [ MS94 ] Morita , M . , and Shinoda , Y . ( 1994 ) . Information filtering based on user behavior analysis and best match text retrieval . In Proceedings of the 17 th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’94 ) , Ireland , 272 - 281 . [ Nic97 ] Nichols , D . M . ( 1997 ) . Implicit ratings and filtering . In Proceedings of the 5 th DELOS Workshop on Filtering and Collaborative Filtering , Hungary , 31 - 36 . [ OK01 ] Oard , D . W . , and Kim , J . ( 2001 ) . Modeling information content using observable behavior . In Proceedings of the 64 th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , USA , 38 - 45 . [ PBM + 98 ] Page , L . , Brin , S . , Motwani , R . , and Winograd , T . ( 1998 ) . The PageRank citation ranking : Bringing order to the Web . Stanford University Technical Report . [ PGS98 ] Price , M . N . , Golovchinsky , G . , and Schilit , B . N . ( 1998 ) . Linking by inking : Trailblazing in a paper - like hypertext . In Proceedings of the 9 th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia’98 ( Hypertext ‘98 ) , USA , 30 - 39 . [ RS01 ] Rafter , R . , and Smyth , B . ( 2001 ) . Passive Profiling from Server Logs in an Online Recruitment Environment . In Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on Intelligent Techniques for Web Personalization ( ITWP 2001 ) , USA , 35 - 41 . [ Rho00 ] Rhodes , B . J . ( 2000 ) . Margin Notes : Building a contextually aware associative memory . In Proceedings of the 5 th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’00 ) , USA , 219 - 224 . [ RP97 ] Rucker , J . , and Polanco , J . ( 1997 ) . Siteseer : Personalized navigation for the Web . Communications of the ACM , 40 ( 3 ) , 73 - 75 . [ SZ00 ] Seo , Y . W . , and Zhang , B . T . ( 2000 ) . A reinforcement learning agent for personalized information filtering . In Proceedings of the 5 th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’00 ) , USA , 248 - 251 . [ SL96 ] Spink , A . , and Losee , R . M . ( 1996 ) . Feedback in information retrieval . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 31 , 33 - 78 . [ THA + 97 ] Terveen , L . , Hill , W . , Amento , B . , McDonald , D . , and Crete , J . ( 1997 ) . PHOAKS : A system for sharing recommendations . Communications of the ACM , 40 ( 3 ) , 59 - 62 . [ WRJ02 ] White , R . W . , Ruthven , I . , and Jose , J . M . ( 2002 ) . Finding relevant documents using top ranking sentences : An evaluation of two alternative schemes . In Proceedings of the 24 th Annual International Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’02 ) , Finland , 57 - 64 .