Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1208 / s12249 - 023 - 02576 - x REVIEW ARTICLE Highlights on Cell‑Penetrating Peptides and Polymer‑Lipid Hybrid Nanoparticle : Overview and Therapeutic Applications for Targeted Anticancer Therapy Pragathi Devanand Bangera 1 · Divya Dhatri Kara 1 · Katikala Tanvi 2 · Vamshi Krishna Tippavajhala 1 · Mahalaxmi Rathnanand 1 Received : 2 February 2023 / Accepted : 28 April 2023 / Published online : 24 May 2023 © The Author ( s ) 2023 Abstract Polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles ( PLHNs ) have been widely used as a vehicle for carrying anticancer owing to its unique framework of polymer and lipid combining and giving the maximum advantages over the lipid and polymer nanoparticle drug delivery system . Surface modification of PLHNs aids in improved targeting and active delivery of the encapsulated drug . Therefore , surface modification of the PLHNs with the cell - penetrating peptide is explored by many researchers and is explained in this review . Cell - penetrating peptides ( CPPs ) are made up of few amino acid sequence and act by disrupt - ing the cell membrane and transferring the cargos into the cell . Ideally , we can say that CPPs are peptide chains which are cell specific and are biocompatible , noninvasive type of delivery vehicle which can transport siRNA , protein , peptides , macromolecules , pDNA , etc . into the cell effectively . Therefore , this review focuses on the structure , type , and method of preparation of PLHNs also about the uptake mechanism of CPPs and concludes with the therapeutic application of PLHNs surface modified with the CPPs and their theranostics . Keywords anticancer · cell - penetrating peptides · nanotechnology · polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles · targeted delivery · theranostics Introduction Cancer nanotechnology is used as an optimistic tool for many anticancer drugs . Innovation in the design and frame - work of drug delivery to carry the chemical entities to the different sites in the body and their characterization to carry the drug allows for the treatment of a wide range of clini - cal problems . Genes ( DNA / RNA ) , synthetic substances , recently discovered pharmaceuticals , or altered versions of drug molecules from the past are examples of such chemicals . Optimizing nanotechnology as a carrier for drug delivery to the human system is crucial for the therapeutics of many different diseases [ 1 ] . In this regard , a wide variety of submicron materials has been synthesized to act on can - cer cells . Lipid - based and polymer - based nanoparticles have been largely used in the development of delivery vehicles for anticancer drugs , contrast agents , and therapeutics as well as in theranostics [ 2 , 3 ] . Polymer - based nanoparticles have been widely studied in the cancer field . Various natural , semi - synthetic , and synthetic polymers have been used for designing polymer - based nanoparticles . Two of the most popular biodegradable and biocompatible polymers are poly ( lactide - co - glycolide ) ( PLGA ) and chitosan , both of which have received FDA approval for oral and parenteral administration [ 4 ] . Although polymer - based nanoparticles have several benefits , includ - ing sustained and controlled release , higher drug loading capacity , and stability , they also have some disadvantages , including a lack of polymer solubility , the use of organic reagents , and drug interactions with the polymer’s monomer units [ 5 , 6 ] . * Vamshi Krishna Tippavajhala vamshi . krishna @ manipal . edu ; krissrcm @ gmail . com * Mahalaxmi Rathnanand mahalaxmi . r @ manipal . edu 1 Department of Pharmaceutics , Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Manipal Academy of Higher Education , Manipal 576104 , Karnataka , India 2 Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Manipal Academy of Higher Education ( MAHE ) , Manipal 576104 , India AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 2 of 24 Decades of research have been done on liposomes , solid lipid nanoparticles ( SLN ) , and nanostructured lipid carri - ers ( NLC ) as a part of lipid - based nanoparticles used as a drug delivery vehicle . Liposomes showed advantages like low toxicity , biocompatibility ( as phosopholipid either from natural or synthetic source is used in the structure ) , controlled drug release , targeted drug delivery , and large - scale manufacture . They can encapsulate and distribute both hydrophilic and lipophilic substances . However , the main drawbacks include drug leakage from the carrier as well as oxidation and hydrolysis of liposomal phospholipids , which results in structural deterioration and burst drug release [ 7 ] . Another disadvantage of liposomes is their quick clearance by reticuloendothelial system ( RES ) , although this can be avoided by using lipid PEG ( polyethylene glycol ) , which will cover the particles and lengthen the duration they are in cir - culation [ 8 , 9 ] . Consequently , the ability to enhance vesicle performance by using both natural and synthetic polymers was quickly tapped into by liposome preparation technology . Evolution of Polymer‑Lipid Hybrid Nanoparticles The combination of liposomes with polymeric nanoparticles such as polymeric micelles , polymersomes , polyplexes , and polymer protein / drug conjugates is a contemporary trend in the pharmaceutical industry which are found to have wide applications in targeted delivery of anticancer drugs . All of these systems strive to deliver therapeutic agents with maxi - mal effectiveness while causing the least amount of harm to the body’s healthy cells . They make it possible for drug molecules to effectively and safely enter the target region while preventing any possibility of systemic side effects . Moreover , these particles act as a barrier against the immune system and RES , extending the duration that anticancer med - ications are in circulation . These particles can be given the desired features , such as those needed for imaging , stimuli - triggered release , and prolonged circulation time [ 10 , 11 ] . Liposome hybrid nanocarriers known as polymer - caged or polymer - incorporated liposomes or polymer - modified liposomes are made of polymers that have been grafted or attached to their surfaces ( Fig . 1a ) . The creation of liposomes with enhanced shape , particle size , zeta potential , surface characteristics , and membrane flexibility is another advantage of using polymers ; these features are crucial to how they behave in vitro and in vivo [ 12 , 13 ] . Polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) was conjugated to the lipid anchor in the first novel modification of liposomes , which significantly length - ened circulation time , stabilized stress levels , and provided protection from opsonins . These extra characteristics caused hepatic RES to drain more slowly , considerably extending circulation duration [ 14 ] . Table I shows different clinical trial data that suggest the importance of the PEG modifica - tion on to the liposomes . Polymer - modified liposomes ( Fig . 1b ) and cell - based bio - mimetic ( Fig . 1c ) offer potent carriers and permit considerably more effective drug administration , and their application has witnessed a tremendous development in recent years as the next generation of lipid - polymer hybrid nanocarriers . Synthetic nanocarriers will experi - ence clearance by the reticuloendothelial system ( RES ) / Fig . 1 Schematic representation of evolution of polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles . a First - generation polymer hybrid lipid nanoparticles ; b pol - ymer - modified liposomes ; c cell membrane - biofunctionalized nanoparticles ; d cell - polymeric nanoparticle hybrid nanocarriers AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 3 of 24 124 mononuclear phagocyte system ( MPS ) once they have entered the bloodstream . Bio - mimetic nanoparticles based on cell membranes have demonstrated greater potential in establishing lengthy blood circulation , precise recogni - tion for targeting , and immune evasion because natural cell membranes feature particular antigen and structure essential for biological processes [ 15 ] . Recent years have seen the emergence of cell nanopar - ticle hybrid vectors as a means of addressing significant difficulties in nanocarriers linked to the incorporation of nanoparticles into living cells ( Fig . 1d ) . Hybrid cell nano - particle vectors were predicted to control drug release , particularly for substances affected by efflux transporters and passive diffusion . They were also created to lessen the toxicity of the integrated medicine to the carrier cells , protecting the health and tumor - homing capacity of nor - mal cells [ 16 ] . Although there are many reasons to use polymers in liposome preparations , they can all be categorized into the group to overcome some drawbacks of first - generation liposomes . • Increasing the residence time , stealth abilities , and phys - icochemical stability in biological fluids . • Modifying the drug release profile , minimizing payload leakiness , and increasing encapsulation efficiency . • Possessing mucoadhesive and mucopenetrating charac - teristics . • Possessing qualities that respond to stimulus . • Offering a flexible targeting platform . To address the drawbacks of the aforementioned two vehicles , a new generation of nano dimensional carrier sys - tems called polymer - lipid - hybrid nanoparticles ( PLHNs ) has been developed . It is a hybrid made up of both lipids and polymers . In this manner , the inherent properties of poly - mers and lipids can be combined in a way that simultane - ously avoids the disadvantages outlined above . Table I Clinical Trial Data of PEG Modified Liposomes SL . No Study title Condition Phase 1 Clinical Application of Polyethylene Glycol Liposome Doxorubicin ( PLD ) in Primary Lymphoma Lymphoma , non - Hodgkin ; Hodgkin disease Phase 4 2 Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicine and Prolonged Temozolomide in Addition to Radio - therapy in Newly Diagnosed Glioblastoma Glioblastoma Phase 1 Phase 2 3 A Phase 3 , Randomized , Double - Blind Trial of Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin ( PLD ) Plus AMG 386 or Placebo in Women With Recurrent Partially Platinum Sensitive or Resist - ant Epithelial Ovarian , Primary Peritoneal , or Fallopian Tube Cancer Fallopian tube cancer Ovarian cancer Primary peritoneal cancer Phase 3 Fig . 2 a Publication on polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles over the years . * More publications under process ; b statistics of published polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles articles , reviews , and books AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 4 of 24 PLHNs have increased interest in recent years , and as mentioned in Fig . 2 , prove to be one of the nanocarrier for the improved delivery and sustained release . To improve the targeting capacity and delivery of the PLHNs , several surface modification strategies were used . One such strategy is using cell - penetrating peptides on the surface of PLHNs which helps in transport and targets cer - tain receptors that are over expressed in respective cancer pathology . Cell - penetrating peptides are also termed or referred to as protein - transduction domains ( PTDs ) . They contain less than 30 amino acid residues with a net posi - tive charge . CPPs are peptides that can transport active mol - ecules into the cell through biologically active conjugates and act as a promising strategy for cancer diagnosis and treatment [ 17 ] . Peptides present on the cell membrane act by disrupting it and then they pass through the membrane , or reside at the membrane interface and fuse with the cell membrane . These classes of peptides are known as membrane active peptides ( MAPs ) [ 18 ] . MAPs particularly have greater advantages like higher specificity and increased affinity for therapeu - tic agents and biomolecules , ease in synthesis , flexibility for any modification or changes , compatibility with other therapeutic agents , low immunogenicity , and favorable phys - icochemical parameters which makes them compatible [ 17 ] . When we talk about membrane active peptides , we can say that majorly they are divided into 2 classes : the first one is antimicrobial peptides which destroy the cells and the sec - ond class is cell - penetrating peptides ( CPPs ) which transport cargo ( ability to load the therapeutic agents ) across lipid bilayers [ 18 ] . Thirty years ago was the first time the term “cell - pene - trating peptide” ( CPP ) was used and it originated when a small cationic sequence was identified in HIV - 1 protein that is Tat protein , which was called as TAT peptide . CPPs were first discovered in Drosophila melanogaster ( Antennapedia , Antp ) which was an organism model and in human immuno - deficiency virus ( HIV Tat ) retrovirus [ 19 ] . This TAT pep - tide had the ability to carry active molecules or the protein into the cell and nucleus [ 18 , 20 ] . The first discovered CPP was cationic TAT ( YGRKKRPQRRR ) [ 17 ] and second was penetratin ( RQIKIWFQNRRMKWKK ) . Penetratin has the ability to carry large cargoes , including oligonucleotides , proteins , or other peptides , through intracellular components of the cell [ 21 ] . Therefore , CPP contains broad range of peptides with various mechanisms , efficiency , specificity , and intracel - lular targets in trans - membrane transport [ 22 , 23 ] . This broad range of CPPs makes its application in drug delivery and its transport characteristics difficult . Surface - modify - ing PLHNs with the CPPs to enhance transport character - istics are very useful which can be developed by selecting certain CPPs for transportation purpose in order to deliver PLNHs with drug inside the cell for intracellular target of action [ 20 ] . In this review , we have focused on structure of PLHNs , classification of PLHNs and CPPs , method of prepara - tion of PLHNs and CPPs , oral absorption of PLHNs , therapeutic application of PLHNs , intracellular delivery mechanism of CPPs and finally therapeutic applications of PLHNs surface modified with CPPs . Structure of PLHNs By overcoming the drawbacks of lipids and polymers , PLHNs offer tremendous potential for the development of nanotechnology [ 24 ] . The three different building units that make up PLHNs are ( i ) the inner polymeric core , ( ii ) the lipid monolayer , which surrounds the polymeric core , and ( iii ) the outer lipid conjugated PEG layer ( Fig . 3 ) which helps to stabilize and ensure longer retention time in the human system [ 25 ] . The most common types of polymer used in the synthesis of PLHNs are PCL , PLGA , PLA , PbAE , and chitosan [ 26 , 27 ] . These materials are also highly biocompatible and biodegradable [ 28 ] . The lipid and polymer can be bound by different interactions like hydrophobic , van der Waals force , electrostatic inter - actions , or other non - covalent connections where the core of PLHNs is made of polymer with lipid coated in the surface [ 29 ] . Based on the individual medicinal drugs , the outer lipid layer can be modified to promote effective uptake . To create a tailored drug delivery system , the outer lipidic membrane can also be changed by affixing particu - lar antibodies , ligands , aptamers , and bioactive materials like DNA , RNA , or proteins that can be bound covalently or non - covalently [ 30 ] . Fig . 3 Structure of polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticle AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 5 of 24 124 Classification of PLHNs The structural organization of the polymer and lipid in PLHNs determines how they are classified . Polymer Core Lipid Shell PLHNs As the name suggests , polymer core lipid shell consists of a polymer core surrounded by the lipid layer ( Fig . 4a ) . This system can encapsulate both hydrophobic and hydro - philic drugs because of the amphiphilicity of the polymeric core and lipid surface [ 7 ] . The polymeric core protects the drug from systemic metabolism and the lipid surface pro - vides excellent biocompatibility as it mimics the biological membrane [ 31 ] . Core – Shell‑Type Hollow Lipid PLHNs This type of PLHNs consists of concentric multi - layers of A - B - A type ( Fig . 4b ) made up of the outermost lipid layer covering the polymer layer which in turn covers the hollow lipidic layer [ 32 ] . The outer layer of lipids can be PEGylated to improve the systemic circulation time of the system . The multilayer provides improved stability and helps the drug by encapsulating it from the external environment [ 33 , 34 ] . The gap between the polymer and the lipid layers is usually filled with aqueous buffer and cationic or zwitterion phospholipids along with oppositely charged polymers favor electrostatic interactions [ 24 ] . Monolithic PLHNs Another term for monolithic PLHNs ( Fig . 4c ) is mixed lipid polymers in which the lipid is dispersed throughout the polymeric core forming the colloidal carrier for therapeutic agents [ 35 , 36 ] . Here , the polymeric layer can be made using co - polymers and lipid layer should bio - mimic the internal membrane ; therefore , phospholipids can be used [ 37 ] . Polymer‑Caged Liposome Liposomes serve as a carrier for delivering anticancer drugs , DNA , siRNA , proteins , and peptides but have drawbacks like drug leakage , and stability problems ; therefore in this type , the liposomes are coated with the polymer ( Fig . 4d ) to give enhanced drug release and improved stability [ 38 ] . The polymers that are coated can be selected based on the desired nature of drug release for example stimuli responsive polymers [ 39 ] . Erythrocyte Membrane – Coated PLHNs The polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticle is coated with the erythrocyte membrane ( Fig . 4e ) which can be done by the extrusion method . This coating forms distinct nanoparticles which can bio - mimic the surface chem - istry of the RBC , therefore , making them hemocom - patible [ 40 ] . These system escape from macrophages because of the erythrocyte layer and therefore escape uptake by reticuloendothelial system [ 41 ] . Fig . 4 Structure of a polymer core lipid shell PLHNs ; b core – shell - type hollow lipid PLHNs ; c monolithic PLHNs ; d polymer - caged liposome ; e erythrocyte membrane – coated PLHNs AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 6 of 24 Method of Preparation of PLHNs There exist different methods of preparation of PLHNs , which broadly falls under two processes : Two‑Step Method For preparing PLHNPs , two - step method is regularly used in which the polymeric and lipid - based nano - particles are prepared separately ( Fig . 5a ) and then integrated by electrostatic interactions [ 12 , 24 ] . This method yields single , double , or multilayered shells . Polymer - based nanoparticles can be prepared by dis - solving the water immiscible polymer in the organic solvent by nanoprecipitation , emulsification solvent evaporation ( ESE ) , or high - pressure homogeniza - tion [ 42 – 44 ] . This forms a polymeric core that can encapsulate hydrophobic drugs . Lipid - based nano - particles can be prepared by various methods like micro - emulsification , ultrasonication , high - pressure homogenization , melt emulsification , solvent emulsifi - cation , and solvent injection methods Two - step method is further divided into ( i ) conventional and ( ii ) non - conventional process . Conventional Method This type of technique is used in small - scale preparation where the polymeric and lipid nanoparticles were prepared separately as in a two - step method . Desired quantity of lipids was dissolved in an organic solvent which forms a thin layer inside the round bottom flask . Then , the polymeric nanopar - ticles suspension was added to this formed layer of the lipid . Another way is to hydrate the lipid film with the aqueous solvent which forms a vesicle and to this performed vesicle , polymeric nanoparticles were added [ 24 ] . Then , the formed hybrid is subjected to vortexing or ultrasonication and cen - trifugation to separate lipids and PLNs [ 45 ] . Non‑Conventional Method Large - scale production of PLHNs can be done using this method . Here , methods like spray drying and soft lithogra - phy particle molding are used to mix the separately prepared polymeric - and lipid - based nanoparticles [ 24 ] . Wang et al . and co - workers used spray drying technique to prepare PLHs using lactic - co - glycolic acid as the polymer , lecithin as lipid to formulate dry powder inhaler of levofloxacin where spray drying was used to form small - scale micro aggregates of the nanoparticles . Fig . 5 a Schematic represen - tation of two - step synthesis ; b schematic representation of one step method AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 7 of 24 124 One‑Step Method In order to prepare the PLHNs more efficiently by decreasing the time and energy spent , one - step method is used where the lipid and polymer is mixed together ( Fig . 5b ) which eventually self - assemble to form PLHNs . Precipitation of the organic polymeric solution takes place when aqueous solution of lipid is added to it which then self - assembles on the polymeric core through hydrophobic interactions to give PLHNs . This can be prepared by various methods like emul - sification solvent evaporation and nanoprecipitation method as described below [ 24 ] . Emulsification Solvent Evaporation Method This process is categorized into single and double ESE . It was introduced by Gurny et al . [ 24 ] . The method was selected based on the water miscibility of the drug . In the case of water immiscible drugs , a single ESE process was used as it forms an O / W emulsion in which the aqueous phase dissolves lipids . In contrast , the organic solvent dis - solves the polymer and hydrophobic drug . The aqueous lipid phase was added to this organic solvent mixture . Water - insoluble lipids can also dissolve in organic sol - vents . Lipid molecules self - assemble onto the hydrophobic polymer core and encapsulate the drug . For the final step , the organic solvent evaporates to produce PLHNs after homogenization and sonication [ 31 ] . A double ESE pro - cess was used when the encapsulated drug ( antibiotics and anticancer drugs ) was found in the hydrophilic matrix . This method yields core – shell - type hollow lipid PLHNs . By dropwise addition of the aqueous phase with the drug to the oil phase containing polymer and lipid , the primary W / O emulsion type was obtained . The final obtained emulsion was added into the aqueous phase carrying another lipid may be phospholipid , which gives a secondary W / O / W emulsion [ 34 ] . Nanoprecipitation PLHNs were prepared by dissolving the drugs and poly - mers first in water or any organic solvent and then adding lipids or lipid PEGs to the aqueous medium for dispersion . The organic solvent was added to the aqueous phase and heated to 65 – 70 C to precipitate the polymer . As a result of hydrophobic interactions between the polymer core and the lipid or lipid PEG , a uniform distribution was achieved . To reduce particle size , the solution was continuously agitated , sonicated , or homogenized . Centrifugation removes excess polymer and organic solvent . Therefore , this process works by precipitation of the polymer via solvent diffusion and the lipid self - assembles onto the polymer core [ 24 , 31 ] . Oral Absorption of PLHNs Understanding the intestinal uptake of lipids is crucial to understanding PLHN absorption since they contain lipids on their outer surface . Due to its finger - like projections called villi , the small intestine absorbs many substances because of its increased surface area . Consequently , cho - lesterol esters , phospholipids , triacylglycerols ( TAGs ) , and other lipids are absorbed through the intestinal epi - thelium . A variety of cell types exist in the small intestine , including enterocytes that contain micro - villi , goblet cells that secrete mucus , paneth cells that secrete antimicrobial enzymes and lysozymes , and endocrine cells . The epi - thelial cells also have M cells associated with the payer’s patch which are involved in GLAT - gut - associated lym - phoid tissue components [ 46 ] . Nanoparticles are generally transported through the intestinal epithelium by 4 major process known as para - cellular ( transport of molecules between the cells ) , tran - scellular ( transport of molecules through the cells ) , and transcytosis ( receptor specific active transport of the molecules ) by which they enter the systemic circulation through blood or lymph [ 47 ] . The enterocytes absorb lipids from the liver’s bile . As lipids reach the stomach , gastric lipase ( pH - 4 . 0 ) fragments them into diacylglycerols ( DAGs ) and fatty acids . Upon reaching the intestine , these lipids are hydrolyzed by pan - creatic lipase to form monoacylglycerols ( MAG ) and fatty acids . Cholesterase breaks down cholesterol esters into free cholesterol and fatty acids , and pancreatic phospho - lipase breaks down phospholipids into lysophospholipids and fatty acids . The enterocyte cells of the small intes - tine absorb these byproducts of the corresponding lipids . They are re - esterified by proteins like monoacylglycerol acyltransferases ( MGATs ) , diacylglycerol acyltransferases ( DGATs ) , and acyl - CoA : cholesterol acyltransferases ( ACATs ) to TAGs , cholesteryl esters , and phospholipids , which are then packed into pre - chylomicron with apolipo - protein B - 48 ( apoB - 48 ) or stored as intracellular lipid drop - lets . Pre - chylomicron transport vesicles ( PCTVs ) transport pre - chylomicrons from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus for maturation via microsomal triglyceride transfer protein ( MTP ) ( Fig . 6 ) . In the MTP , lipidation of TAGs , cholesteryl esters , and phospholipids along Apo - B - 48 occurs within the pre - chylomicron . By exocytosis , the mature chylomicrons are transported to the lamina propria , where they are absorbed into the circulation by the lym - phatic system [ 48 – 50 ] . AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 8 of 24 Application of PLHNs in Cancer Therapy Cancer Therapy Many studies used PLHNs in various types of cancer to increase the ability to target , penetrate , and increase the cytotoxic effect of the chemotherapeutic agents . PLHNs have been used in different types of cancers like breast can - cer , lung cancer , osteosarcoma , hepatocellular carcinoma , liver cancer , nasopharyngeal carcinoma , cervical cancer , melanoma , ovarian cancer , prostate cancer , and glioblas - toma ( Table II ) . Dual Drug Delivery PLHNs help encapsulate and deliver both hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs and therefore have a greater advantage in co - delivering chemotherapeutic agents , increasing the for - mulation’s efficiency . Alhajamee et al . used chitosan and lecithin as polymers and lipids , respectively , to prepare lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles ( LPHNP ) that encapsulate curcumin ( Cu ) and tamoxifen ( Tmx ) to improve anticancer efficacy and cytotoxicity . Results revealed that ovarian can - cer cells were more severely inhibited by Tmx - Cu - LPHNPs than healthy cells . Based on flow cytometry , AO / PI staining , and upregulation of P53 and caspase - 9 , Tmx - Cu - LPHNPs induce pro - apoptotic effects . A scratch assay and a decrease in metalloproteinase ( MMP - 2 , 9 ) gene production both indi - cate that cancer cells suppress metastasis [ 57 ] . To distribute erlotinib ( ERL ) and bevacizumab ( BEV ) and also to target , inhibit NSCLC , Pang et al . produced lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles ( LPHNPs ) with HA embellishments and pH sensitivity . The HA - ERL / BEV - LPH NPs group had higher tumor inhibition rate and the high - est tumor tissue accumulation concentration with minimal systemic toxicity compared to the 0 . 9 % NaCl control after 21 days [ 58 ] . To increase the anticancer efficacy in osteosarcoma , Yang et al . developed a new doxorubicin ( DOX ) – and edelfos - ine ( EDL ) – loaded lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticle ( DE - FPLN ) . The targeted nanoparticles showed improved cel - lular uptake and sub - cellular distribution when compared to non - targeted nanoparticles . The MTT assay and caspase - 3 / 7 activity assay showed that DE - FPLN formulations were more effective at killing cancer cells than other anticancer agents . It appears that the co - administration of medications in a folic acid – targeted nanoparticle causes apoptosis and cell death , as well as a significant reduction in tumor forma - tion , without any noticeable adverse effects [ 59 ] . Tumour‑Targeted Drug Delivery Tumor - targeted drug delivery is very important to bring out the effective chemotherapy and increasing the ther - apeutic efficacy . Sakpakdeejareon reported the use of transferrin to achieve tumor - targeted delivery , whose receptors melanoma highly expressed , which was cou - pled with lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles entrap - ping plumbagin . Following intravenous injection , results showed that 40 % of B16 - F10 tumors vanished and 10 % of tumors regressed [ 60 ] . Chen et al . presented a study in which they developed lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles ( LPNs ) encapsulating carboplatin ( CBP ) and paclitaxel ( PTX ) together to display synergistic effects in cervical Fig . 6 Absorption of lipids through enterocytes AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 9 of 24 124 cancer . The results showed high tumor distribution and antitumor efficacy , which were confirmed by both in vitro and in vivo studies [ 61 ] . Multidrug Resistance One of the main reasons for cancer patients’ chemothera - peutic treatments failing is multidrug resistance ( MDR ) . It is also very critical to address MDR in order to improve the efficacy of cancer treatment . PLHNs have several advantages , including increased mechanical stability and shape control . Huang et al . developed polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles ( PLN ) for the delivery of psoralen ( PSO ) to treat breast cancer . PSO - PLN exhibited a strong reversal effect on MCF - 7 / ADR cells according to in vitro experi - ments and was modestly localized in liver . As a result , PSO - PLN improves PSO’s ability to release into the body continuously , which not only helps to reverse MDR but also improves the efficacy of treatment [ 62 ] . Yuan et al . also developed polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles ( LPN ) containing psoralen ( P ) to improve the efficacy of doxo - rubicin in multidrug - resistant HepG2 cells . In multidrug - resistant HepG2 / ADR cells , psoralen LPNs ( P - LPNs ) increased the cytotoxicity of doxorubicin ( DOX ) 17 times more than free DOX . Additionally , pro - apoptotic activ - ity , elevated ROS , and depolarization were all observed in P - LPNs . According to mechanistic investigations , P - LPNs boosted the cytotoxicity of DOX by enhancing caspase - 3 cleavage and cytochrome C release , which led to apoptosis in HepG2 / ADR cells [ 63 ] . By encapsulating doxorubicin ( DOX ) in the PLGA core and a NO photodonor ( NOPD ) in the phospholipid shell , Fraix et al . reported the delivery of nitric oxide ( NO ) via customized lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles ( NPs ) under the control of visible light as a method of overcoming DOX resistance in melanoma . The release of NO by multi - cargo NPs is sufficient to obstruct the efflux transporters principally responsible for DOX cellular extrusion , according to research on M14 DOX - resistant melanoma cells . DOX’s anticancer activity was subsequently boosted by increased cellular retention [ 64 ] . To overcome paclitaxel ( PTX ) MDR in lung cancer , Pra - mual et al . used a nanoparticle - mediated photodynamic treatment ( NPs / PDT ) method . They combined PTX with a photosensitizer known as pTHPP in PLGA - lipid hybrid nanoparticles . Various MDR models were used to assess the photocytotoxic effects of the nanoparticles , and the results through flow cytometry showed that combination hybrid system killed the cancer cells through apoptosis . The PLGA - lipid hybrid nanoparticles’ ability to carry pho - tosensitizers or chemotherapeutic drugs suggests that they have the potential to treat both drug - selected and metasta - sis - associated MDR lung cancer cells [ 65 ] . T a b l e II A pp li ca ti on o f P L HN s i n C a n ce r T h e r a py D r ug C a n ce r P r e p a r a ti on m e t hod P o l y m e r s a nd L i p i d s S i ze , ze t a , P D I , a nd EE R e f E m od i n ( E M O ) B r ea s t ca n ce r N a nop r ec i p it a ti on m e t hod P o l y m e r : P L GA . L i p i d : s oyb ea n pho s - pho li p i d S i ze : 122 . 7 ± 1 . 03 n m , ze t a : − 28 . 5 ± 1 . 55 m V , P D I : 0 . 118 , EE : [ 51 ] 5 - fl uo r ou r ac il M C F - 7 ( b r ea s t ca n ce r ) a nd H e L a ce ll s ( hu m a n ce r v i ca l ) ce ll li n e s S i ng l e n a nop r ec i p it a ti on m e t hod w it h m i no r m od i fi ca ti on s P o l y m e r : P C L . L i p i d : L i po i d E 80 S S i ze : l e ss t h a n 270 n m , P D I : l e ss t h a n 0 . 186 , ze t a : w it h i n 25 . 6 ± 2 . 16 , EE : 93 . 57 ± 0 . 656 [ 52 ] M e t ho t r e x a t e G li ob l a s t o m a S o l v e n t i n j ec ti on a nd ho m og e n i s a ti on m e t hod P o l y m e r : P L GA a nd g l y ce r y l t r i p a l - m it a t e S i ze : 173 . 51 – 233 . 37 n m , ze t a : 25 . 78 – 36 . 31 m V , EE : 70 . 56 – 86 . 34 % [ 53 ] S o r a f e n i b ( SF N ) B r ea s t ca n ce r B u l k n a nop r ec i p it a ti on a nd m i c r o fl u - i d i c ( M F ) c o - fl o w n a nop r ec i p it a ti on t ec hn i qu e s P o l y m e r : P L GA . L i p i d : L ec it h i n a nd D S P E - P E G 2000 S i ze : 187 . 9 ± 4 . 5 t o 302 . 0 ± 2 . 0 , P D I : 0 . 100 ± 0 . 1 t o 0 . 246 ± 0 . 1 , Z e t a : − 37 . 7 ± 0 . 9 t o − 30 . 0 ± 0 . 7 [ 54 ] G e m c it a b i n e hyd r o c h l o r i d e B r ea s t ca n ce r M od i fi e d doub l e e m u l s i on s o l v e n t e v a po r a ti on m e t hod L i p i d : S oy a pho s ph a ti dy l c ho li n e ( S P C ) a nd D S P E - P E G 2000 , P o l y m e r : P L GA S i ze : a pp r ox . 200 n m , P D I : a pp r ox . 0 . 2 , Z e t a : a pp r ox . − 18 m V , EE : 45 % [ 55 ] A n a s t r o z o l e ( AN S ) B r ea s t ca n ce r D i r ec t e m u l s i fi ca ti on s o l v e n t e v a po r a - ti on m e t hod L i p i d : s t ea r i c ac i d . P o l y m e r : po l y ca p r o - l ac t on e ( P C L ) S i ze : 193 . 6 2 . 9 t o 218 . 2 1 . 9 n m , Z e t a : 0 . 50 0 . 52 t o 6 . 01 4 . 74 , P D I : 0 . 1 , EE : 80 % [ 56 ] AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 10 of 24 Gene Delivery PLHNs have been used to target specific enzyme by favoring gene delivery . Yang et al . and his colleagues created lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles ( LPHNs ) for gene targeting and efficient delivery , as well as CRISPR / Cas9 for targeting the enzyme that causes resistance to the glioblastoma drug temozolomide ( TMZ ) . In this study , they used the nanoprecipitation method ( poly - mer : PLGA ; lipid : lecithin ) to produce LPHNs contain - ing clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats ( CRISPR ) – associated protein 9 , and the peptide chain CRGD in order to overcome resistance to TMZ treatment caused by the O6 - methylguanine - DNA meth - yltransferase ( MGMT ) enzyme . A focused ultrasound technique ( FUS ) – microbubble ( MB ) was used to help facilitate gene delivery into glioblastomas in vivo with - out affecting the BBB . With focused ultrasonic irradiation ( FUS ) , this formulation enhanced the sensitivity of temo - zolomide towards GBM cells , could locally and safely improve blood – brain barrier permeability in vivo , and made it easier for nanoparticles to collect at the tumor site in mice with orthotropic tumors . With a high level of biosafety , the developed LPHNs also improved the thera - peutic effects of temozolomide in treating glioblastoma , suppressed tumor growth , and extended the longevity of tumor - bearing animals [ 66 ] . Theranostics Potential use of PLHNs in cancer theranostics have not been explored that well . Gu et al . reported the preparation of Cisplatin encapsulated in polymer - lipid hybrid nanopar - ticles ( PLHN ) , where they used the near - infrared fluores - cent dye indocyanine green to treat MCF - 7 cells . LPHN treated with folate showed excellent near - infrared radia - tion ( NIR ) penetrability and improved stability . Accord - ing to cell uptake tests , folate modification targets MCF - 7 cells that overexpress the folate receptor more effectively than A549 cells that express the receptor insufficiently . With the use of an 808 nm NIR laser , LPHN significantly increased apoptosis and necrosis [ 67 ] . Huang and his team reported the use of GSH - sensitive Pt ( IV ) prodrug – loaded transitional phase lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles for theranostic delivery against ovarian cancer . Under ultra - sonic energy , the ready LPHN demonstrated robust echo - genic signals . A delivery approach that uses ultrasonic stimulation and GSH sensitization improved therapeutic results while lowering toxicity . Mechanistic investigations showed that GSH consumption and an increase in the amounts of reactive oxygen species cause cell death [ 68 ] . Types of CPPs Cationic CPPs Cationic CPPs are peptides containing small amino acid series that are largely composed of arginine , lysine , and histidine amino acids . As a result of these amino acid resi - dues , CPPs that bear a positive charge interact with the anionic or acidic contents on the surface of the plasma membrane . The first cationic TAT ( YGRKKRPQRRR ) was identified in the HIV - 1 Tat protein , which constitutes the TAT peptide . It contains 1 tyrosine , 1 glycine , 5 arginines , 2 lysines , 1 proline , and 1 glutamine sequence ( a total of 11 amino acid series ) . As we can see above , there are 5 amino acid residues in TAT which gave rise to the inves - tigation of its derivatives of various lengths like oligoar - ginine [ 20 , 69 ] . Both oligoarginine and oligolysine are posi - tively charged peptides . But interestingly , both of these oligo - peptides showed a difference in cellular uptake and also in intracellular localization [ 21 , 70 ] . And the above statement was confirmed by using a method called as sub - cellular fractionation method or the other way is by the localization of these oligo - peptides in the cytoplasm which was confirmed by their internalization at 4 C versus 37 C . The sequence of cationic CPPs can be oriented in clustered form or mixed form . In clustered form , arginine or lysine amino acids are adjacent to each other . An example of this is the TAT peptide , CPPs derived from the SV40 protein , and synthetically prepared oligoargi - nine CPPs [ 70 ] . Amphipathic CPPs In the above section , we have seen that cationic CPPs con - tain arginine and lysine , which can be oriented in a cluster or mixed sequence , while amphipathic CPPs have arginine amino acid and lysine amino acid residues as well as hydrophobic residues such as valine , leucine , isoleucine , and alanine . Because of the increased levels of hydrophobic residues in the amphipathic CPPs , their binding characteristics to the hydrophobic lipid bilayer in the cell membrane are very distinct from those of the cationic CPPs . As a result , strong hydrophobic interactions were observed in amphipathic CPPs compared to cationic CPPs . When it comes to the insertion of CPPs into the hydrophobic lipid bilayer , it was also seen that insertion was higher in amphipathic CPPs than in cationic CPPs [ 71 ] . Penetratin is one of the second - ary amphipathic CPPs which has very unique properties as it contains both charge and the amphipathic nature [ 72 ] . AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 11 of 24 124 Hydrophobic CPPs Hydrophobic CPPs are the series that accommodate only apolar residues , which are either attached to the pep - tide chain [ 73 ] , or prenylated peptides [ 74 ] , and / or pep - ducins [ 75 ] . A few examples discovered are integrin β3 ( - val - threo - val - leu - ala - leu - gly - ala - leu - ala - gly - val - gly - val - gly - ) and Kaposi fibroblast growth factor ( - ala - ala - val - ala - leu - leu - pro - ala - val - leu - leu - ala - leu - leu - ala - pro - ) [ 76 ] . Hydrophobic CPPs also serve a great importance as they are also involved in enhancing the uptake as well as the delivery of the active components [ 77 ] . Cellular Uptake and Release Mechanism of CPPs The assessment of the internalization behavior of the CPPS is essential , as it affects the safety and efficacy profile . The cellular uptake of CPPs depends on several factors , like pep - tide structure , molecule length , charge distribution , cargo molecules and their behavior , and the plasma membrane structure and its environment . These above characteristics cause the CPPs to interact with many molecules on the cell surface and therefore greatly impact their route of entry into the cell [ 78 ] . Therefore penetration of CPPs is discussed below ( Fig . 7 ) . Direct Translocation Through the Plasma Membrane This process has interesting characteristics as they are energy independent process , occur in single step , and occur at low temperature ( Fig . 8 ) . The translocation / entry of the CPPS to the lipid bilayer cell membrane is explained using 2 models , i . e . , inverted micelle model and the carpet model [ 79 , 80 ] . Inverted Micelle Formation An example of an inverted micelle model , where it was involved in the early stages of the uptake into the cell , is the penetratin peptide series . Penetratin was one of the first described CPPs which was derived from homeoprotein Fig . 7 Schematic representation of different cellular internaliza - tion mechanism of CPPs Fig . 8 Mechanisms of peptide uptake across the phospholipid bilayer membrane by direct translocation AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 12 of 24 Antennapedia . It transferred the active molecule across the phospholipid bilayer and studied in detail [ 81 ] . The internalization process begins with the electrostatic attraction between the peptide chain and the lipophilic cel - lular membrane . As a result of this interaction , the lipid bilayer membrane is disturbed , trapping the CPP peptide chain within the hexagonal - shaped inverted micelles . These micelles have an internal hydrophilic compartment where the CPP peptide is trapped until it is transferred to the cytosol . Once the inversion process takes place , these inverted micelles undergo destabilization , so they release the peptide chain into the cell . Nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) data studies support this model [ 82 ] . Direct Translocation Via Pore Formation Two models are used to explain direct translocation by the formation of pores on the membrane . The first is the barrel - stave model and the second is the toroidal model . Barrel‑Stave Model Barrel - stave is a model which shows that CPPs can diffuse across the phospholipid bilayer and is the characteristic feature of amphipathic α - helical pep - tides . Pore formation includes the following processes : Firstly , the peptide chain interacts with the phospholipid membrane and attaches to it . This results in an increased concentration of peptides on the surface of the cellular membrane . As the concentration of peptides increases , the resting lipid bilayer membrane gets distorted . They form a pore with the outward hydrophobic group , which interacts with the lipid bilayer membrane , and the inwardly facing hydrophilic group , which forms the surface of the pore [ 83 , 84 ] . Toroidal Model In the case of the “toroidal” model , the pep - tide chain interacts with the phospho group and accumulates between the phospho and carbon lipid bilayers of the cell mem - brane . This incorporation of the peptide sequence between the phospholipid bilayer results in thinning of the cell membrane . Also , as the pH increases , the guanidinium group of the CPP peptide chain interacts with the fatty acids . Because of this , the CPPs enter the cell through a transient toroidal pore formation . But as the pH decreases , the CPPs attached to the fatty acids are released into the cell , and eventually , the pore closes [ 85 ] . Carpet Model As the name suggests , in the carpet model , a series of pep - tides adhere to the cellular surface and form a structure simi - lar to the carpet ( Fig . 9 ) . Due to this kind of arrangement , the hydrophobic component of the peptide interacts with the hydrophobic area of the phospholipid cell membrane and causes disruption of the cellular membrane , leading to micellization [ 86 , 87 ] . Endocytosis The endocytosis pathway is a very complex process or mech - anism . Active substances or therapeutic agents are trans - ported into the cell in two distinct ways , namely , through endocytosis and endosomal escape [ 88 ] . Endosomal Uptake Generally , endocytosis is divided into two categories , namely ( a ) phagocytosis and ( b ) pinocytosis . Phagocytosis generally occurs in specialized cells ( macrophages , monocytes , and Fig . 9 Model representing car - pet arrangement of the peptide on the cell membrane AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 13 of 24 124 neutrophils ) where they take up large particles . Pinocytosis is involved in the transport of fluids and solutes . The uptake of the solute occurs most efficiently when the solute is diluted . This is because the dilute solutes are attracted by receptors with high affinity and are concentrated in the endocytic trans - port vesicle . Different mechanisms ( Fig . 10 ) of the pinocytosis pathway are ( i ) macropinocytosis ; ( ii ) clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis ( CME ) ; ( iii ) caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( CvME ) ; and ( iv ) clathrin - and caveolae - independent endocytosis [ 89 ] . Macropinocytosis Macropinocytosis is a form of lipid raft - dependent endocytosis that occurs more rapidly and is receptor independent . A large amount of fluid content is taken up , and this type of uptake is termed fluid phase endo - cytosis ( FPE ) . Due to the simulation of growth factors or other signals , membrane ruffling occurs . Similar to phago - cytosis , there is a cascade of steps that include signals and regulators belonging to the kinase group ( such as Src , PI3 ) and GTPases ( Rho family , Ras family , Rab proteins ) , and induce the macropinocytosis process . These regulators trig - ger actin - mediated membrane protrusions . The so - formed protrusions collapse and eventually fuse with the cellular membrane . This fusion produces large endocytotic vesicles called macropinosomes . These vesicles named macropino - somes mature [ 89 – 93 ] . Clathrin‑Mediated Endosomal Uptake CME is a form of endocytosis that is typically engaged in the uptake of LDL ( low - density lipoprotein ) . The transpor - tation of the active component from outside to inside the cell is via the endocytic pathway . All the processes make use of clathrin and the GTPase dynamin , as this process is receptor - dependent [ 94 ] . The initiation of the CME process starts with the gathering of major proteins required for coat formation , i . e . , clathrin triskelia , which forms clathrin - coated pits . This clathrin triskelion was composed of three heavy chains of clathrin along with closely bound light chains that are made up of clathrin Fig . 10 Mechanisms of peptide uptake across the phospholipid bilayer membrane by endocy - tosis Fig . 11 Stages and process involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 14 of 24 and also an adaptor protein - 2 ( AP2 ) . This AP - 2 is a het - erotetramer , which consists of alpha , beta - 2 , gamma - 2 , and μ2 subunits [ 95 ] . An endocytotic process begins when a ligand binds to a specific cell surface with a strong binding interaction . Because of this strong interaction , clathrin starts assem - bling on the cellular surface in a polyhedral lattice . As a result of the invagination of the clathrin - coated surface , they tend to move towards the cytoplasm by forming pits that acquire a spherical shape along the membrane [ 96 ] . Therefore CME contains 5 stages ( Fig . 11 ) : ( 1 ) initiation of CME events , ( 2 ) cargo loading , ( 3 ) membrane bend - ing / folding , ( 4 ) vesicle disunion , ( 5 ) disassembly of the outer coat . Initiation of CME Events Initiating endocytotic events is the first step in this pathway . It is very critical for regulating the series of biochemical events because it paves the way for the formation of the endocytic vesicle . This is because they determine where the vesicle will be formed on the cel - lular membrane . The endocytic proteins start clustering on the plasma membrane , and because of this clustering , they form a vesicle on the cellular membrane . That is the major components of the plasma membrane , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ) , and the adaptor proteins like AP - 2 interact with each other and favor the formation of vesicles [ 97 ] . The allosteric regulation of AP2 and the change in conformation play a very prominent role in con - trolling the initial steps of CME . When the cystolic AP2 , which is a protein , comes into contact with the cellular membrane , it interacts with the plasma mem - brane , which is rich in PI4 , 5P2 , and because of this interaction , nucleation of clathrin assembly occurs . The cargo , as well as the PI4 , 5P2 , also bonds to the EAPs ( endocytic accessory proteins ) , which triggers the stabilization of the open conformation and pre - vents the early apportion of the clathrin - coated pits . This sustained interaction of the cargo molecules , PI4 , 5P2 , and the EAPs contributes to the growing stages of the clathrin - coated vesicles , and once the growth is complete , maturation of the so - formed vesicle takes place [ 95 ] . Cargo Loading Cargo loading is the second step , right after the initiation of endocytic events . The principle driving this step is the assembly of the clathrin coat on the specific site on the plasma membrane as well as the assembly of the cargo molecules . This type of arrangement triggers the clustering of the cargo molecules onto the specific site on the mem - brane and contributes to the formation of the curvature on the plasma membrane resulting in a clathrin - coated vesicle . After the vesicle forms , particular cargo is incorporated into the vesicle , and the concentration of cargo molecules is very critical because if that concentration is not reached , it can lead to abortion of the clathrin - coated vesicles or scission of the vesicles [ 98 ] . Membrane Bending The following step of CME is mem - brane bending . The endocytosis process requires the bending of the membrane , which is contributed by several modules like the coat , the actin filaments , and the scission proteins . Clathrin first interacts with an adapter protein residing on the plasma membrane . This interaction leads to the assembly of clathrin onto the coat in an icosahedral manner . This results in the polymerization of clathrin and causes membrane curvature , or bending . Actin also plays an important role in membrane bending as the membranes undergo polym - erization and attach to the surface and base of the grow - ing membrane vesicle . The association of clathrin and actin filaments gives a driving force for membrane bending , and actin filaments undergo depolymerization in seconds once the process is complete [ 89 , 96 , 97 ] . Vesicle Disunion As the word implies , vesicle disunion is the dissociation of the formed vesicle from the parent cel - lular membrane . The GTPase dynamin is primarily respon - sible for catalyzing the above - mentioned process . A GTPase dynamin arranges them around the neck of the forming vesi - cle in a helical fashion and dissociates the vesicle from the membrane . Dynamin is generally involved in membrane vesicle scission based on the following process . The first dynamin assembles in a helical manner around the vesicle in the form of a tightly bound oligomer . This results in the constriction of the so - formed vesicle neck . GTP hydrolysis results in membrane fission . Upon the addition of GTP , the dynamin further constricts the formed vesicle , which then undergoes a spontaneous transition into the half - fission state , and finally , to the fission state , releasing the free clathrin - coated vesicle [ 97 , 99 ] . Disassembly of the Coat Once the vesicle is dissociated from the membrane , the next step is the shedding or disas - sembly of the coat . This will enable the newly formed vesi - cle to fuse with the early endosome . The initially attached endocytic proteins released in this process can also be used for future events or saved for the next event . The ATPase also influences the disassembling activity , which results in the depolymerization of clathrin and dynamin [ 95 , 98 ] . Caveolae‑Mediated Endocytosis Pathway Palade was the first one to describe caveolae in 1953 . He described it as a flask or an omega - shaped substance that appears as a small cave - like structure attached to the cellular membrane . AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 15 of 24 124 It was found that it played a very crucial role in endocytosis , lipid digestion , and cell signaling [ 100 ] . Caveolae consist of a structure called caveolin , which is a dimeric protein . This caveolin can bind to cholesterol and insert it into the inner part of the cellular membrane in a loop - like manner , which further self - associates and forms a striated coat on the mem - brane , which undergoes growth [ 89 ] . There are three mem - bers of the Cav family , namely Cav - 1 , Cav - 2 , and Cav - 3 . Cav - 1 and Cav - 2 are mostly found in fibroblasts , adipocytes , endothelial cells , and pneumocytes , whereas Cav - 3 com - municates with skeletal muscle fibers and cardiac myocytes independently of Cav - 1 and Cav - 2 [ 101 , 102 ] . Caveolae - dependent endocytosis is largely depend - ent on the GTPase dynamin . Cav - 1 ligands on a cel - lular membrane interact with the dynamin domain and disrupt the cytoskeleton arrangement of actin fila - ments . Due to this process , dynamin - II replaces the plasma membrane where vesicle internalization occurs . When this happens , dynamin undergoes oligomeriza - tion as well as GTP - dependent conformational changes and results in inserting itself around the neck collar ( Fig . 12 ) , leading to the formation of new vesicles called caveosomes , which help in the transportation of cargo molecules . Afterward , the vesicles undergo vesicle disunion from the originally attached plasma membrane [ 100 , 103 ] . Clathrin‑ and Caveolae‑Independent Endocytosis Basi - cally , this pathway involves in the uptake of lipids and fluids [ 104 ] . Caveolae , as previously stated , are dimeric proteins that have a proclivity to interact with the choles - terol - rich domain and are cave - like structures on the plasma membrane with a diameter of 40 – 50 nm . As a result of their highly lipidic nature , these cave - like structures are very effective in the endocytosis process in any vesicle , sort - ing the membrane proteins and favoring their internaliza - tion [ 105 , 106 ] . The molecular - level process underlying this type of endocytosis can be dynamin dependent or clathrin inde - pendent . They make use of the scission GTPase dynamin , or they may function independently of dynamin without clathrin . The dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton deter - mine the stability and scission processes [ 107 ] . Another process is by clathrin - and dynamin - independent endo - cytosis pathway , which makes use of endophilin - A2 and endophilin - A1 . These endophilin directly facilitates endo - cytosis process by binding to the selected G protein – cou - pled receptors [ 108 ] . Clathrin - dynamin independent is also an endocytic pathway that is involved in the internalization process of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) and fluid phase in multiple cell lines and tis - sues [ 109 ] . In the electron microscope picture , uncoated , tubular intermediates [ 110 ] described as clathrin - inde - pendent carriers ( CLICs ) , were evident , subsequently fus - ing to form GPI - AP - enriched early endosomal compart - ments ( GEECs ) [ 111 ] . Endosomal Release The endosomal release is considered the rate - limiting step because , once the cargo molecules have been uptaken , they must reach the cytosol to exhibit any therapeutic response or inhibit or induce certain actions . There are several mechanisms by which cargo molecules reach the cytosol , mainly membrane disruption and ionic pair formation . By interacting with the negatively charged phospholipid content of the cellular membrane , the positively charged CPPs can induce membrane disruption [ 112 ] . Because of this interaction , pores are formed or can cause leakage in the plasma membrane , through which the CPPs are released . TAT is the most prominent example of this , as it causes leak - age when it interacts with the plasma membrane’s phospho - lipids [ 113 ] . Another mechanism was the formation of an ion pair when the CPPs interacted with the negatively charged , high - lipid plasma membrane , resulting in the partitioning of the CPPs across the membrane lining and the release of the CPPs ; a clear example of this is how the oligo - arginines reached the cytosol [ 114 ] . Fig . 12 Caveolae - mediated pathway where caveolin dimer inserts themselves in vesicles , in loop manner and favors phagocytosis AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 16 of 24 Synthesis of CPPs Emil Fischer carried out the first effective coupling of two amino acids in 1903 using acyl chlorides , but at the time , no adequate amino - protecting group was avail - able for the synthesis of longer peptides . Bergmann and Zervas’ and other inventors’ discovery of the benzylox - ycarbonyl - protecting group enabled the production of the neurohypophysial nonapeptide hormone oxytocin , for which du Vigneaud won the Nobel Prize in 1955 . The invention of solid - phase peptide synthesis ( SPPS ) by Bruce Merrifield , a trailblazer in the field , eased the time - consuming and difficult stages of purification involved in solution phase synthesis [ 115 , 116 ] . The basic idea behind solid - phase peptide synthesis is resin preparation , in which the amino acid is joined to the resin by carboxyl , hydroxyl ( or chloro ) , and amino groups to create ester - or amide - linked peptides , which give us a C - terminal acid or amide peptide , respectively . The first pep - tide loads into the resin with a straight , linear path from the C - terminal to the N - terminal . Here , where urethane deriva - tives are frequently utilized , many cycles of deprotection and amino acid coupling reactions will take place ; the amino group is protected by temporary protecting groups ( T ) , while the side chain of the amino acid group is protected by per - manent protecting groups ( Pn ) . Under benign circumstances , it is simple to remove the temporary protective group ( T ) , preventing the peptide from becoming epimerized . Filtra - tion and washing cycles are used to get rid of excess reac - tants . So , the required sequence of the peptide is achieved by repeatedly performing deprotection and coupling reactions . Finally , the peptide is released from the resin along with the Pn side chain . The desired sequence of peptides nec - essary for distribution via the phospholipid bilayer can be generated using this accepted methodology for solid - phase peptide synthesis [ 115 , 116 ] . Polymer‑Lipid Hybrid Nanoparticles Decorated with Cell‑Penetrating Peptides for Therapeutic Applications—Cancer Therapy The hybrid system can take advantage of polymeric and lipid nanoparticles and can also encapsulate both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs . The targeting of this hybrid system can be achieved by conjugating or decorating the surface with the CPPs , which help to bind the specific receptors . On the other hand , it can also be used to overcome the MDR associ - ated with certain types of cancer . One such example is using a CPP called RGD pep - tide to decorate the surface of the PLHNs containing the hydrophilic or lipophilic chemotherapeutic agent to target the integrin receptors overexpressed in certain types of can - cer . Integrin is a cell surface protein that is important for cell adhesion which is composed of α and β subunits non - cova - lently bond to each other [ 117 ] . During angiogenesis , integ - rin is involved in regulating cell growth , survival , and migra - tion . These integrins include the heterodimers α1β1 , α2β1 , α4β1 , α5β1 , α6β1 , α6β4 , α9β1 , αvβ3 , and αvβ5 [ 118 ] . One of the models of endothelial apoptosis is the caspase activation model , in which RGD peptides directly activate caspases that trigger apoptosis , and the RGD peptide also has a bind - ing site in an integrin that leads to apoptosis [ 117 ] . Shi et . al . developed a hybrid system using a W / O / W emulsion solvent extraction evaporation process with PLGA as a polymer and soybean lecithin as a lipid . The surface was then coated with RGD CPPs in order to target integrin ανβ3 which is overexpressed in 90 % of glioblastoma multiforme . Due to receptor - mediated endocytosis , the RGD surface decorated polymer - lipid hybrid system ( RGD - L - P ) exhib - ited a higher absorption efficiency ( in C6 cells ) than PLGA , lipid nanoparticles , and the hybrid system without the RGD surface coating . Better tumor spheroid penetration con - firmed the RGD - L - P’s ability to target C6 cells that express integrin 3 . RGD - L - P loaded with docetaxel showed greater cytotoxicity in C6 cells due to rapid internalization facili - tated by the RGD peptide sequence . Biodistribution studies using DiR were conducted using near - infrared fluorescence probes , which showed that DiR - loaded RGD - L - P showed better brain - localized fluorescence signals , suggesting better localization and specific binding . Altogether , these findings suggest that RGD - PLHNs are a potential drug delivery strat - egy for the targeted therapy of GBM [ 119 ] . In order to administer isoliquiritigenin ( ISL ) , a dietary supplement with natural anti - breast cancer properties but poor transport and limited bioavailability , Gao et al . also cre - ated a lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticle . A method known as modified single - step nanoprecipitation was used to syn - thesize the hybrid system containing PLGA as a polymer and lecithin as a lipid . The surface of the hybrid system is conjugated with an iRGD peptide so as to preferentially bind αvβ3 and αvβ5 integrin receptors and Nrp1 receptors ( permeability - regulating receptors ) . Results showed higher cellular accumulation , cell toxicity , and apoptosis against breast cancer cells . Higher cellular accumulation was attrib - uted to the surface conjugation of the iRGD peptide onto the hybrid system , which recognizes integrin receptors overex - pressed in breast cancer cells , which resulted in rapid inter - nalization and longer circulation due to the stealth nature of the hybrid system , resulting in enhanced inhibition of tumor growth [ 120 ] . Wang et al . reported the used of RGD peptide with the paclitaxel ( PTX ) in the form of redox - sensitive lipid - polymer AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 17 of 24 124 nanoparticles ( LPNs ) along with its prodrug form and also used cispaltin ( CDDP ) in order to deliver PTX in the form of dual - loaded drug delivery system . LPN was prepared using PLGA as a polymer and soybean lecithin as a lipid system by the emulsification - sonication method . Lung cancer cells and tumor - bearing animal models were used to assess the anticancer efficacy of PTX - loaded LPNs in vitro and in vivo . The IC50 values of the PTX - loaded LPN when compared others showed much stronger anticancer activity . The most effective anticancer effectiveness was also demonstrated by RGD - modified PTX or CDDP LPNs , which reduced mouse tumor size with less systemic toxicity [ 121 ] . Applications Receptor Targeting Integrin Receptor Targeting Integrin receptors , which help in cell adhesion and mediate contacts between cells and the surrounding extracellular glycoproteins composed of α and β subunits , have a significant impact on the behavior of cancerous cells . There are at least 25 distinct integrins that can be created from the 18α and 8β subunits . Integrins function as crucial surface adhesion and cell signaling recep - tors , which have an impact on growth factor signaling , cell survival , proliferation , and migration [ 118 ] . They may also have a significant impact on tumor behavior and metastasis . Therefore , targeting the over expressed integrins in many type of cancers helps in effective delivery of the chemothera - peutic agent . One such approach to target integrin receptor is using CPPs , called RGD peptide ( arginine - glycine - aspartic acid ) which recognizes integrin receptors mainly integrin ανβ3 , αvβ1 , and αvβ5 which are over expressed in many types of cancer and therefore brings about effective target - ing . Yang et al . used modified emulsification technique to develop and optimize lipid - polymer hybrid NPs for targeted delivery . The PLHNs core was made up of PLGA whose 90 % of the surface was coated with lipid monolayer using egg lecithin ( EPC ) and DSPE - PEG . In addition , hybrid NPs loaded with 10 - hydroxycamptothecin ( HCPT ) and the argi - nine - glycine - aspartic acid ( RGD ) peptide were created to target integrin 3 - positive breast cancer cells . It abundantly expressed integrin 3 and as a result , head - to - tail cyclic RGD - containing peptides , or c ( RGDyk ) , have a high affinity for their overexpressed integrin 3 receptors , resulting in tumor angiogenesis and metastasis . Initial DSPE - PEG - OH syn - thesis was followed by succinic anhydride treatment and RGDyk peptide conjugation . This DSPE - PEGc ( RGDyk ) was conjugated to the surface of the prepared polymer - lipid hybrid structure . The cellular uptake and cytotoxic - ity study revealed enhanced permeability to tumor cells via endocytosis and an increased ability to kill cancerous cells due to the conjugation of the cell - penetrating peptide , c ( RGDyk ) . The HCPT , which was encapsulated into hybrid NPs , showed higher drug loading compared to PLGA NPs alone [ 122 ] . Using an emulsification solvent volatilization method , Zhao et al . reported the utilization of Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) pep - tide – modified lipid shell and polymer - core hybrid nanopar - ticles ( lpNPs ) loaded with curcumin ( Cur ) . PLGA - mPEG was used as the polymer core with lecithin / cholesterol surface – coated lipids . In order to improve targeting , lpNPs were surface decorated with Chol – PEG – RGD . Cytotoxic - ity analysis results showed that the curcumin - encapsulated RGD adorned lpNPs maintained strong antitumor activities . A subcutaneous B16 melanoma tumor model was signifi - cantly more sensitive to curcumin - loaded RGD - lpNPs for arresting tumor growth . The results of immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry analysis showed a higher number of apoptotic cells , a reduced number of microvessels , and a reduced number of proliferative cells in comparison to those using curcumin - free RGD - lpNPs . Curcumin - loaded RGD - lpNPs are a strong formulation of curcumin that tar - gets tumors because of their enhanced antitumor effect in melanoma [ 123 ] . Zang et al . reported the used of PLHNs to administer doxorubicin ( DOX ) and sorafenib ( SOR ) simul - taneously , shell - core lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles ( NPs ) coated with the iRGD ( CPPs ) which can be used to achieve tumor - targeting delivery . Human liver cancer cells that expressed integrin showed synergistic cytotoxicity , pro - apoptotic potential , and enhanced internalization rates of both DOX and SOR after adding iRGD to the hybrid system . DOX + SOR with iRGD NPs had a longer circula - tion and bioavailability , according to in vivo pharmacoki - netic research . More impressively , DOX + SOR with iRGD PLHNs markedly improved antitumor effectiveness in mice models with hepatocellular carcinoma xenografts [ 124 ] . CD13 Receptor Targeting Many different forms of solid tumors exhibit high CD13 expression . A multipurpose pro - tein receptor called CD13 , tumors use it to grow , invade , and spread . One of the CPPs named kNGR ( Asn - Gly - Arg ) peptide can target by recognizing and binding to the over - expressed specific isoform of CD13 receptors in solid can - cers [ 125 ] . Gupta et al . , in his project used kNGR peptide which was attached to lipid - polymer - based nanoparticles to deliver paclitaxel ( PTX ) , an anticancer agent . Spectral analysis was used to construct and analyze the kNGR - PEG - DSPE compound . The dual - targeted PLGA - lecithin - PEG core – shell nanoparticles ( PLNs - kNGR - NPs ) were made using a modified nanoprecipitation process . The findings showed that PLNs kNGR - NPs are significantly more cyto - toxic than other NPs due to increased intracellular absorp - tion and apoptosis . It highlights the necessity of stratified AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 18 of 24 nanoparticle design to achieve a synergistic effect in the HT - 1080 tumor – induced paradigm , with a tumor volume reduction percentage rate of 59 . 7 % compared to other formulations developed in Balb / c mice . The hybrid lipid - polymer nanoparticles based on PLNs - kNGR - NPs showed the greatest therapeutic efficacy against solid tumors over - expressing CD13 receptors [ 126 ] . Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor‑2 ( Her2 / neu ) Targeting Her2 / neu , which is overexpressed in 30 % of breast cancers , is a great therapeutic target for the devel - opment of breast cancer medications . For the treatment of breast cancer , Yang et al . reported using a hybrid system that was conjugated with the dual ligands anti - HER2 / neu pep - tide ( AHNP ) and modified HIV - 1 TAT ( mTAT ) . Modified emulsification technique was used to prepare polymer - lipid hybrid ( NPs ) system encapsulating docetaxel with PLGA as polymer and egg lecithin as lipid . An analysis of ligand den - sity showed that altering the surface - ligand densities might change how well the NPs were absorbed by cells . Several endocytic pathways helped for the internalization of NPs according to cell uptake kinetics and mechanism . The dual ligand PLHNs with DTX loading displayed a slower sus - tained drug release and a smaller burst release . The dual - ligand PLHNs modified with DTX were found to be more potent than other NP formulations for treating SK - BR - 3 cancer cells due to the synergistic effect [ 127 ] . Dual Drug Delivery To increase the effectiveness of the therapy , PLHNs and CPPs work together to deliver biomolecules like DNA and RNA together with chemotherapeutic drugs . Dong et al . reported the use of hybrid system ( LPNs ) for the co - deliv - ery of plasmid DNA ( pDNA ) and a chemotherapeutic drug , docetaxel ( DTX ) . Solvent evaporation method was employed which used ( PEI - PEG ) [ poly ( ethylene imine ) polyethyl - ene glycol ] and Compritol1 888 ATO as polymer and lipid respectively . The surface of the hybrid system was decorated with CPPs named TAT to facilitate cellular uptake of gene vectors . The results of the in vitro ( PC3 cancer cells ) and in vivo ( murine prostate cancer model ) studies demonstrated increased anticancer effect both in vitro and in vivo , as well as efficient gene delivery of TAT - modified DTX and pDNA LPNs . Therefore , it was stated that PLHNs and CPPs could be a promising co - delivery nanosystem [ 128 ] . Qiao et al . studied multi - targeted polymer - lipid hybrid delivery system in order to target brain glioma by using a therapeutic gene delivery strategy to deliver and target the blood – brain barrier and improve therapeutic efficacy and synergistic effect . In order to achieve BBB penetration , receptor - mediated endo - cytosis was favored using Angiopep2 peptide ( Ang ) and for rapid endosomal uptake and release , CPP name TAT was used . Tumor - targeting ability under the magnetic field was further improved with the use of iron oxide magnetic nano - particle ( Fe3O4 MNPs ) . PCL which forms core and DOTAP covers the surface was used as polymer and lipid respectively to prepare the hybrid system . The results demonstrated that the Ang - TAT decorated iron oxide LPHNs considerably increased both the transfection efficiency of C6 cells using pEGFP - C1 as the reporter gene and the penetration efficiency of the BBB model produced by hCMEC / D3 cells [ 129 ] . Gene Delivery As an alternative to polyethyleneimine ( PEI ) derivatives or peptide - protein conjugates , PLHNs are used for delivering mRNA - based gene therapy . An improved mRNA delivery method , DMP - 039 , was described by Gao et al . , as using cRGD - R9 as a CPP and a cationic nano - sized DMP backbone . The DMP gene vector’s structure is built from DOTAP lipid and mPEG - PCL polymer , which self - assemble . The cRGD - R9 peptide was added to the DMP backbone to create a peptide - functionalized hybrid delivery system , which increased its capacity to disperse mRNA . The produced DMP - 039 hybrid nanoparticles demonstrated high mRNA distribution efficiency during trans - membrane transit via a variety of routes . By load - ing the suicide gene Bim’s encoded mRNA , a locally injected mBim / DMP - 039 combination effectively inhibited the growth of two colon cancer models . Additionally , intravenous treat - ment of the mBim / DMP - 039 complex effectively and safely slowed the growth of the C26 lung metastatic tumor [ 130 ] . Multidrug Resistant A prominent barrier to effective treatment is multidrug resist - ance ( MDR ) , which causes chemotherapy failure in the majority of patients with cancer . Zang et al . reported the use of iRGD peptide decorated on a lipid - polymer hybrid nano - system ( LPN ) , which was synthesized via two - step synthesis consisting of PLGA as the polymer and egg lecithin ( EPC ) , cholesterol ( CHOL ) as the lipid layer . LPNs were produced with a specific combination proportion of paclitaxel ( PTX ) and tetrandrine ( TET ) to improve cellular internalization and control drug release in ovarian cancer . The major MDR mech - anism in PTX therapy is the upregulation of P - glycoprotein ( P - gp ) receptors , which promote the efflux of the chemothera - peutic agent , reducing its anticancer efficacy . TET was used as a P - gp inhibitor to promote the increased concentration of PTX inside the cancer cells . iRGD CPP was used to target the over - expressed αvβ 3 / 5integrin receptors to improve drug delivery in vivo . As a result of the suppression of P - gp ( by TET ) and conjugation of iRGD CPP , there was an increase in the con - centration of PTX within cancer cells , as confirmed by cellular uptake studies ( Table III ) , and they also effectively increased apoptosis , produced ROS , and arrested the cell cycle [ 132 ] . AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 19 of 24 124 T a b l e III T h e r a p e u ti c A pp li ca ti on s o f P o l y m e r - L i p i d H yb r i d N a nop a r ti c l e s S u rf ace M od i fi e d w it h C e ll - P e n e t r a ti ng P e p ti d e s S l . N o C PP s e q u e n ce D r ug C a n ce r T a r g e ti ng / u s e o f C PP s P o l y m e r a nd li p i d P r e p a r a ti on m e t hod O u t c o m e R e f 1 R GD p e p ti d e 10 - hyd r oxy ca m p t o - t h ec i n B r ea s t ca n ce r s I n t e g r i n α ν β 3 P L GA a nd E gg l e c it h i n M od i fi e d s i ng l e e m u l s i fi ca ti on s o l v e n t e v a po r a ti on m e t hod I n c r ea s e d e ndo c y t o s i s a nd e nh a n ce d a n ti - ca n ce r ac ti v it y [ 131 ] 2 R GD p e p ti d e C u r c u m i n ( C u r ) M e l a no m a I n t e g r i n α ν β 3 a nd α v β 1 P L GA a nd C ho l e s t e r o l W / O / W doub l e e m u l s i - fi ca ti on m e t hod C e ll u l a r up t a k e o f t h e C PP a nd hyb r i d s y s t e m w a s i m p r ov e d a l ong w it h t u m o r g r o w t h i nh i b iti on [ 123 ] 3 m T A T ( C HHHHH R KK RR Q RRRR HHH - HH C ) D o ce t a x e l B r ea s t ca n ce r s H e r 2 / n e u P L GA a nd e gg l ec it h i n M od i fi e d e m u l s i fi ca - ti on t ec hn i qu e S yn e r g i s ti c e ff ec t a nd s up e r i o r t h e r a p e u ti c po t e n c y a g a i n s t t h e ca n ce r ce ll s [ 127 ] 4 R GD p e p ti d e D o ce t a x e l G li ob l a s t o m a m u lti - f o r m e I n t e g r i n α ν β 3 P L GA a nd s oyb e a n l ec it h i n c on s i s ti n g o f 90 – 95 % pho s ph a ti dy l c ho li n e S o l v e n t e x t r ac ti on e v a po r a ti on ( W / O / W e m u l s i on ) E nh a n ce d t u m o r o r p e n e t r a ti on a nd i m p r ov e d t a r g e ti ng ca p ac it y a nd a n ti - p r o li f e r a ti v e ac ti v it y [ 119 ] 5 T A T p e p ti d e D o ce t a x e l ( D T X ) a nd p l a s m i d DN A ( p DNA ) C a s t r a ti on - r e s i s t a n t p r o s t a t e ca n ce r ( CR P C ) C e ll u l a r up t a k e o f g e n e v ec t o r s ( P E I - P E G ) [ po l y ( e t hy l e n e i m i n e ) P o l y e t hy l e n e g l y c o l ] a nd C o m p r it o l 1 888 A T O S o l v e n t e v a po r a ti on m e t hod B e n e fi t s i n c l ud e e ff ec - ti v e g e n e t r a n s po r t , i n v it r o a n ti ca n ce r i m p ac t , a nd i n v it r o t r a n s f ec ti on e ffi c i e n c y [ 128 ] 6 i R GD p e p ti d e ( CR GDK / R G P D / E C ) D oxo r ub i c i n ( DOX ) w it h s o r a f e n i b ( S O R ) H e p a t o ce ll u l a r ca r c i - no m a ( H CC ) I n t e g r i n α ν β 3 a nd α v β 1 P E G - D S P E a nd E P C N o t m e n ti on e d T h e r e s u lt s d e m on - s t r a t e d i m p r ov e d i n t e r n a li za ti on , p r o - a pop t o ti c ca p ac - it y , a nd s yn e r g i s ti c c y t o t ox i c it y [ 124 ] 7 i R GD p e p ti d e P ac lit a x e l ( P T X ) a nd t e t r a nd r i n e ( TET ) O v a r i a n ca n ce r α v β 3 / 5 i n t e g r i n r ece p - t o r s P L GA a nd e gg l ec it h i n ( E P C ) , c ho l e s t e r o l ( C HO L ) T w o s yn t h e s i s s t e p s E nh a n ce d c y t o t ox i c - it y , a pop t o s i s a nd ce ll c y c l e a rr e s t s . P r o m o t e s R O S p r o - du c ti on [ 132 ] 8 i R GD p e p ti d e I s o li qu i r iti g e n i n ( I S L ) B r ea s t ca n ce r s α v β 3 a nd α v β 5 i n t e g r i n r ece p t o r s P L GA a nd l ec it h i n M od i fi e d s i ng l e - s t e p n a nop r ec i p it a ti on m e t hod H i gh e r ce ll u l a r acc u - m u l a ti on , c y t o t ox i c it y a nd ce ll a pop t o s i s [ 120 ] 9 R GD p e p ti d e P ac lit a x e l ( P T X ) N on - s m a ll ce ll l ung ca n ce r ( N S C L C ) α v β 3 i n t e g r i n r ece p t o r s P L GA a nd S oyb ea n l ec it h i n ( S L ) E m u l s i fi ca ti on - s on i ca - ti on m e t hod E nh a n ce d a n tit u m o r ac ti v it y o a nd s yn e r - g i s ti c e ff ec t [ 121 ] 10 T A T p e p ti d e A ng i op e p - 2 p e p ti d e ( A ng ) a nd p DNA B r a i n g li o m a R a p i d nu c l ea r l o ca li za - ti on a nd e ndo s o m a l o r l y s o s o m a l e s ca p e f o r ea s y BBB p e n e t r a ti on P C L a nd DO T A P N o t m e n ti on e d E nh a n ce d p e n e t r a - ti on i n t o BBB a nd i m p r ov e d t a r g e ti ng a b ilit y [ 129 ] AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 20 of 24 Conclusion PLNHs give excellent properties and greater advantages as a drug delivery vehicle for both hydrophilic and lipo - philic drugs . The preparation method determines the type of PLHNs produced which can act either target the intestinal cells for the oral absorption or can also bio - mimic the sys - temic circulation in order to carry some specific drugs . CPPs when combined with the PLHNs not only aid their penetra - tion , but also help in targeting several types of tumors , their microenvironment and the specific over expressed receptors . Therefore , we can conclude by saying that PLHNs conju - gated with the CPPs act as a greater formulation overcoming several barriers . Abbreviations DNA : Deoxyribonucleic acid ; RNA : Ribonucleic acid ; SLN : Solid lipid nanoparticles ; NLC : Nanostructured lipid car - riers ; RES : Reticuloendothelial system ; PEG : Polyethylene glycol ; PLGA : Poly ( lactide - co - glycolide ) ; FDA : Food and Drug Administra - tion ; PVP : Poly - vinyl pyrrolidone ; PVA : Poly - vinyl alcohol ; PG : Poly - glycerol ; PLD : Polyethylene glycol liposome doxorubicin ; PLHNs : Pol - ymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles ; PTDs : Protein - transduction domains ; CPPs : Cell - penetrating peptides ; MAPs : Membrane active peptides ; HIV - 1 : Human immuno - deficiency virus - 1 ; PCL : Polycaprolactone ; PLA : Polylactic acid ; PbAE : Poly ( beta - amino - ester ) ; siRNA : Small interfering RNAs ; RBC : Red blood cells ; ESE : Emulsification solvent evaporation ; O / W : Oil in water ; W / O : Water in oil ; W / O / W : Water in oil in water ; TAGs : Triacylglycerols ; M cells : Microfold cells ; GLAT : Gut - associated lymphoid tissue ; DAGs : Diacylglycerols ; MAG : Monoacyl - glycerols ; MGATs : Monoacylglycerol acyltransferases ; DGATs : Dia - cylglycerol acyltransferases ; CoA : Coenzyme A ; ACATs : Cholesterol acyltransferases ; PCTVs : Pre - chylomicron transport vesicles ; apoB - 48 : Apolipoprotein B - 48 ; MTP : Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein ; Cu : Curcumin ; Tmx : Tamoxifen ; LPHNP : Lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles ; AO / PI : Acridine orange / propidium iodidestain - ing ; P53 : Tumor protein gene ; MMP - 2 , 9 : Metalloproteinase gene ; ERL : Erlotinib ; BEV : Bevacizumab ; NSCLC : Non - small cell lung cancer ; HA : Hyaluronic acid ; NaCl : Sodium chloride ; DOX : Doxo - rubicin ; EDL : Edelfosine ; MTT : ( 3 - ( 4 , 5 - Dimethylthiazolyl - 2 ) - 2 , 5 - diphenyltetrazolium bromide ) ; LPNs : Lipid - polymer hybrid nano - particles ; CBP : Carboplatin ; PTX : Paclitaxel ; MDR : Multidrug resistance ; PSO : Psoralen ; MCF - 7 : Michigan Cancer Foundation - 7 ; HEPG2 cells : Hepatoblastoma cell line ; ROS : Reactive oxygen species ; NO : Nitric oxide ; NOPD : Nitric oxide photodonor ; NPs : Nanoparti - cles ; PDT : Photodynamic treatment ; pTHPP : 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 - Tetrakis ( 4 - hydroxy - phenyl ) - 21H , 23H - porphine ; Cas9 / CRISPR - associated 9 : Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats ( CRISPR ) – associated protein 9 ; TMZ : Temozolomide ; RGD : Argi - nine - glycine - aspartic acid ; cRGD : Cyclic arginine - glycine - aspartic acid ; MGMT enzyme : O6 - methylguanine - DNA methyltransferase ( MGMT ) enzyme ; FUS : Focused ultrasound technique ; MB : Micro - bubble ; GBM : Glioblastoma ; BBB : Blood - brain barrier ; NIR : Near - infrared radiation ; GSH - Pt ( IV ) : Glutathione ( GSH ) - sensitive platinum ( IV ) ; Pt ( IV ) : Platinum IV ; SV40 protein : Simian Vacuolating Virus 40 protein ; NMR : Nuclear magnetic resonance ; CvME : Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) ; iii ) caveolae - mediated endocytosis ; CME : Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; FPE : Fluid phase endocyto - sis ; Src : Steroid receptor coactivator ; PI3 : Phosphatidylinositol ( PI ) 3 - kinases ; GTPase : Guanosine triphosphatease ; LDL : Low - density lipoprotein ; AP2 : Adaptor protein - 2 ; PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 : Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ; EAPs : Endocytic accessory proteins ; ATPase : Adeno - sine triphosphatase ; Cav : Caveolae ; CLICs : Clathrin - independent T a b l e III ( c on t i nu e d ) S l . N o C PP s e q u e n ce D r ug C a n ce r T a r g e ti ng / u s e o f C PP s P o l y m e r a nd li p i d P r e p a r a ti on m e t hod O u t c o m e R e f 11 c R GD ( a r g i n i n e – g l y - c i n e – a s p a r ti c ac i d ) a nd R 9 E n c od i ng m R NA fr o m t h e s u i c i d e g e n e B i m C o l on ca n ce r I nh i b iti ng B c l - 2 ac ti v it y a nd t r i gg e r i ng m it o - c hond r i a l a pop t o s i s m P E G - P C L a nd DO T A P N o t m e n ti on e d I nh i b iti on o f t u m o r p r og r e ss i on w it h h i gh s a f e t y [ 130 ] 12 k NG R ( A s n - G l y - A r g ) p e p ti d e P ac lit a x e l ( P T X ) H u m a n fi b r o s a r c o m a C D 13 r ece p t o r s s p ec i fi c i s o f o r m P L GA a nd l ec it h i n M od i fi e d n a nop r ec i p i - t a ti on p r o ce ss T h e hyb r i d s y s t e m w it h C PP s d e m on s t r a t e d s ub s t a n ti a l c y t o t ox i c - it y , a s e v i d e n ce d by g r ea t e r i n t r ace ll u l a r up t a k e a nd a pop t o - s i s , acc o r d i ng t o t h e r e s u lt s [ 126 ] AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 21 of 24 124 carriers ; GPI - APs : Glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol anchored proteins ; GEECs : Enriched early endosomal compartments ; SPPS : Solid - phase peptide synthesis ; C - terminal : Carboxyl terminal ; N - terminal : Amine terminal ; T : Temporary protecting groups ; Pn : Permanent protecting groups ; DiR : 1 , 10 - Dioctadecyl3 , 3 , 30 , 30 - tetramethylindotricarb - ocya - nine iodide ; ISL : Isoliquiritigenin ; Nrp1 : Neuropilin 1 ; CDDP : Cispal - tin ; IC50 : Half maximal inhibitory concentration ; EPC : Egg lecithin ; DSPE - PEG : 1 , 2 - Distearoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - poly ( ethylene glycol ) ; HCPT : 10 - Hydroxycamptothecin ; mPEG : Meth - oxy - polyethylene glycol ; Chol : Cholesterol ; SOR : Sorafenib ; AHNP : Anti - HER2 / neu peptide ; mTAT : Modified TAT ; DTX : Doc - etaxel ; pDNA : Plasmid DNA ; PEI - PEG : Poly ( ethylene imine ) poly - ethylene glycol ; Ang : Angiopep2 peptide ; Fe 3 O 4 MNPs : Iron oxide magnetic nanoparticle ; DOTAP : N - [ 1 - ( 2 , 3 - dioleoyloxy ) propyl ] - N , N , N - trimethylammonium methyl ; mRNA : Messenger ribonucleic acid ; DMP : Dentin matrix acidic phosphoprotein ; Bim : Bcl - 2 inter - acting mediator of cell death ; TET : Tetrandrine ; P - gp : P - glycoprotein Author Contribution Conceptualization , writing—original draft prepa - ration and literature search : Pragathi Devanand Bangera . Review and editing : Divya Dhatri Kara . Literature search : Katikala Tanvi . Review , editing , guidance , supervision , and conceptualization : Dr . Vamshi Krishna Tippavajhala and Dr . Mahalaxmi Rathnanand . All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript . Funding Open access funding provided by Manipal Academy of Higher Education , Manipal Declarations Conflict of Interest The authors declare no competing interests . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri - bution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adapta - tion , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons licence , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ' s Creative Commons licence , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ' s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this licence , visit http : / / creat iveco mmons . org / licen ses / by / 4 . 0 / . References 1 . Chaudhary Z , Ahmed N , ur . Rehman A , Khan GM . Lipid polymer hybrid carrier systems for cancer targeting : A review . Int J Polym Mater Polym Biomater . 2018 ; 67 ( 2 ) : 86 – 100 . 2 . García - Pinel B , Porras - Alcalá C , Ortega - Rodríguez A , Sarabia F , Prados J , Melguizo C , et al . Lipid - based nanoparticles : appli - cation and recent advances in cancer treatment . Nanomaterials . 2019 ; 9 ( 4 ) : 638 . 3 . Rezvantalab S , Drude NI , Moraveji MK , Güvener N , Koons EK , Shi Y , et al . PLGA - based nanoparticles in cancer treatment . Front Pharmacol . 2018 ; 2 ( 9 ) : 1260 . 4 . Wang Y , Li P , Truong - Dinh Tran T , Zhang J , Kong L . Manu - facturing techniques and surface engineering of polymer based nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery to cancer . Nanomaterials . 2016 ; 6 ( 2 ) : 26 . 5 . Rizwanullah Md , Alam M , Harshita MSR , MohdMA R , Amin S . Polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles : a next - generation nano - carrier for targeted treatment of solid tumors . Curr Pharm Des . 2020 ; 26 ( 11 ) : 1206 – 15 . 6 . Vrignaud S , Benoit JP , Saulnier P . Strategies for the nanoencap - sulation of hydrophilic molecules in polymer - based nanoparti - cles . Biomaterials . 2011 ; 32 ( 33 ) : 8593 – 604 . 7 . Mohanty A , Uthaman S , Park IK . Utilization of polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles for targeted anti - cancer therapy . Molecules . 2020 ; 25 ( 19 ) : 4377 . 8 . Torchilin VP . Recent advances with liposomes as pharmaceutical carriers . Nat Rev Drug Discov . 2005 ; 4 ( 2 ) : 145 – 60 . 9 . Grit M , Crommelin DJ . Chemical stability of liposomes : implications for their physical stability . Chem Phys Lipids . 1993 ; 64 ( 1 – 3 ) : 3 – 18 . 10 . Prabhu RH , Patravale VB , Joshi MD . Polymeric nanoparticles for targeted treatment in oncology : current insights . Int J Nano - medicine . 2015 ; 10 : 1001 . 11 . Peer D , Karp JM , Hong S , Farokhzad OC , Margalit R , Langer R . Nanocarriers as an emerging platform for cancer therapy . Nat Nanotechnol . 2007 ; 2 ( 12 ) : 751 – 60 . 12 . Mukherjee A , Waters AK , Kalyan P , Achrol AS , Kesari S , Yenu - gonda VM . Lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles as a next - gener - ation drug delivery platform : state of the art , emerging technolo - gies , and perspectives . Int J Nanomedicine . 2019 ; 14 : 1937 . 13 . Maghrebi S , Prestidge CA , Joyce P . An update on polymer - lipid hybrid systems for improving oral drug delivery . Expert Opin Drug Deliv . 2019 ; 16 ( 5 ) : 507 – 24 . 14 . Kamaly N , Xiao Z , Valencia PM , Radovic - Moreno AF , Farokhzad OC . Targeted polymeric therapeutic nanoparticles : design , development and clinical translation . Chem Soc Rev . 2012 ; 41 ( 7 ) : 2971 – 3010 . 15 . Rao L , Bu LL , Xu JH , Cai B , Yu GT , Yu X , et al . Red blood cell membrane as a biomimetic nanocoating for prolonged cir - culation time and reduced accelerated blood clearance . Small . 2015 ; 11 ( 46 ) : 6225 – 36 . 16 . Ou W , Jiang L , Gu Y , Soe ZC , Kim BK , Gautam M , et al . Regu - latory T cells tailored with pH - responsive liposomes shape an immuno - antitumor milieu against tumors . ACS Appl Mater Inter - faces . 2019 ; 11 ( 40 ) : 36333 – 46 . 17 . Vale N , Duarte D , Silva S , Salom A , Ferreira A , Jo M . l P re of . 2020 ; 18 . Avci FG , Akbulut BS , Ozkirimli E . Membrane active pep - tides and their biophysical characterization . Biomolecules . 2018 ; 8 ( 3 ) : 1 – 43 . 19 . Bitler BG , Schroeder JA . Anti - cancer therapies that utilize cell penetrating peptides . 2010 : 99 – 108 . 20 . Zaro JL , Shen W chiang . Cationic and amphipathic cell - penetrat - ing peptides ( CPPs ) : Their structures and in vivo studies in drug delivery . 2015 ; 1 – 21 . 21 . Gra A , Lindberg M , Biversta H , Ma L . Structure and positioning comparison of two variants of penetratin in two different mem - brane mimicking systems by NMR . 2003 ; 3063 : 3055 – 63 . 22 . Walrant A , Alves ID , Sagan S . Molecular partners for interaction and cell internalization of cell - penetrating peptides : how identi - cal are they ? Review : 133 – 43 . 23 . Bechinger B , Aisenbrey C . The polymorphic nature of mem - brane - active peptides from biophysical and structural investiga - tions . Curr Protein Pept Sci . 2012 ; 13 ( 7 ) : 602 – 10 . 24 . Dave V , Tak K , Sohgaura A , Gupta A , Sadhu V , Reddy KR . Lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles : Synthesis strategies and biomedical applications . J Microbiol Methods . 2019 ; 160 : 130 – 42 . 25 . Soares DCF , Domingues SC , Viana DB , Tebaldi ML . Polymer - hybrid nanoparticles : Current advances in biomedical applica - tions . Biomed Pharmacother . 2020 ; 131 : 110695 . AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 22 of 24 26 . Pandian A , Jeyasubramanian K , Sureshkumar M . Chitosan nano - carrier system for tumour targeting . Int J Adv Res Ideas Innov Technol . 2019 ; 27 . Scopel R , Falcão MA , Cappellari AR , Morrone FB , Guterres SS , Cassel E , et al . Lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles as a targeted drug delivery system for melanoma treatment . Int J Polym Mater Polym Biomater . 2022 ; 71 ( 2 ) : 127 – 38 . 28 . Persano F , Gigli G , Leporatti S . Lipid - polymer hybrid nanopar - ticles in cancer therapy : Current overview and future directions . Nano Express . 2021 ; 2 ( 1 ) : 012006 . 29 . Zhang L , Zhang L . Lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles : synthesis , characterization and applications . Nano LIFE . 2010 ; 01 ( 01n02 ) : 163 – 73 . 30 . Krishnamurthy S , Vaiyapuri R , Zhang L , Chan JM . Lipid - coated polymeric nanoparticles for cancer drug delivery . Biomater Sci . 2015 ; 3 ( 7 ) : 923 – 36 . 31 . Shah S , Famta P , Raghuvanshi RS , Singh SB , Srivastava S . Lipid polymer hybrid nanocarriers : Insights into synthesis aspects , characterization , release mechanisms , surface functionaliza - tion and potential implications . Colloid Interface Sci Commun . 2022 ; 46 : 100570 . 32 . Zhang L , Chan JM , Gu FX , Rhee JW , Wang AZ , Radovic - Moreno AF , et al . Self - assembled lipid−polymer hybrid nanoparticles : a robust drug delivery platform . ACS Nano . 2008 ; 2 ( 8 ) : 1696 – 702 . 33 . Hadinoto K , Sundaresan A , Cheow WS . Lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles as a new generation therapeutic delivery platform : A review . Eur J Pharm Biopharm . 2013 ; 85 ( 3 PART A ) : 427 – 43 . 34 . Zhuang Y , Zhao Y , Wang B , Wang Q , Cai T , Cai Y . Strategies for preparing different types of lipid polymer hybrid nanoparticles in targeted tumor therapy . Curr Pharm Des . 2021 ; 27 ( 19 ) : 2274 – 88 . 35 . Gao HY , Schwarz J , Michael W . Hybrid lipid - polymer nano - particulate drug delivery composition . US Pat Appl Publ . 2008 ; 1 ( US20080102127A1 ) : 14 . 36 . Shi J , Xiao Z , Votruba AR , Vilos C , Farokhzad OC . Differentially charged hollow core / shell lipid – polymer – lipid hybrid nanopar - ticles for small interfering RNA delivery . Angew Chem Int Ed . 2011 ; 50 ( 31 ) : 7027 – 31 . 37 . Lin CI , Joseph AK , Chang CK , Lee YD . Synthesis and pho - toluminescence study of molecularly imprinted polymers appended onto CdSe / ZnS core - shells . Biosens Bioelectron . 2004 ; 20 ( 1 ) : 127 – 31 . 38 . Alavi S , Haeri A , Dadashzadeh S . Utilization of chitosan - caged liposomes to push the boundaries of therapeutic delivery . Car - bohydr Polym . 2017 ; 10 ( 157 ) : 991 – 1012 . 39 . Chiang YT , Lyu SY , Wen YH , Lo CL . Preparation and charac - terization of electrostatically crosslinked polymer – liposomes in anticancer therapy . Int J Mol Sci . 2018 Jun ; 19 ( 6 ) : 1615 . 40 . Shen YX , Saboe PO , Sines IT , Erbakan M , Kumar M . Biomi - metic membranes : A review . J Membr Sci . 2014 ; 15 ( 454 ) : 359 – 81 . 41 . Tanaka M , Sackmann E . Polymer - supported membranes as mod - els of the cell surface . Nature . 2005 ; 437 ( 7059 ) : 656 – 63 . 42 . Thevenot J , Troutier AL , David L , Delair T , Ladavière C . steric stabilization of lipid / polymer particle assem - blies by poly ( ethylene glycol ) - lipids . Biomacromolecules . 2007 ; 8 ( 11 ) : 3651 – 60 . 43 . Mieszawska AJ , Gianella A , Cormode DP , Zhao Y , Meijerink A , Langer R , et al . Engineering of lipid - coated PLGA nanoparticles with a tunable payload of diagnostically active nanocrystals for medical imaging . Chem Commun . 2012 ; 48 ( 47 ) : 5835 – 7 . 44 . Fenart L , Casanova A , Dehouck B , Duhem C , Slupek S , Cec - chelli R , et al . Evaluation of effect of charge and lipid coating on ability of 60 - nm nanoparticles to cross an in vitro model of the blood - brain barrier : 291 . 45 . Troutier AL , Delair T , Pichot C , Ladavière C . Physicochemical and interfacial investigation of lipid / polymer particle assemblies . Langmuir . 2005 ; 21 ( 4 ) : 1305 – 13 . 46 . MacDonald TT , Monteleone G . Immunity , inflammation , and allergy in the gut . Science . 2005 ; 307 ( 5717 ) : 1920 – 5 . 47 . Pridgen EM , Alexis F , Farokhzad OC . Polymeric nanoparticle drug delivery technologies for oral delivery applications . Expert Opin Drug Deliv . 2015 ; 12 ( 9 ) : 1459 – 73 . 48 . Ko CW , Qu J , Black DD , Tso P . Regulation of intestinal lipid metabolism : current concepts and relevance to disease . Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2020 ; 17 ( 3 ) : 169 – 83 . 49 . D’Aquila T , Hung YH , Carreiro A , Buhman KK . Recent dis - coveries on absorption of dietary fat : Presence , synthesis , and metabolism of cytoplasmic lipid droplets within enterocytes . Biochim Biophys Acta . 2016 ; 1861 ( 8 Pt A ) : 730 – 47 . 50 . Xiao C , Stahel P , Carreiro AL , Buhman KK , Lewis GF . Recent advances in triacylglycerol mobilization by the gut . Trends Endo - crinol Metab . 2018 ; 29 ( 3 ) : 151 – 63 . 51 . Zou T , Lan M , Liu F , Li L , Cai T , Tian H , et al . Emodin - loaded polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles enhance the sensitivity of breast cancer to doxorubicin by inhibiting epithelial – mesenchy - mal transition . Cancer Nanotechnol . 2021 ; 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 15 . 52 . Khan S , Aamir MN , Madni A , Jan N , Khan A , Jabar A , et al . Lipid poly ( ɛ - caprolactone ) hybrid nanoparticles of 5 - fluoroura - cil for sustained release and enhanced anticancer efficacy . Life Sci . 2021 Nov ; 1 ( 284 ) : 119909 . 53 . Bhattacharya S . Methotrexate - loaded polymeric lipid hybrid nanoparticles ( PLHNPs ) : a reliable drug delivery system for the treatment of glioblastoma . J Exp Nanosci . 2021 ; 16 ( 1 ) : 344 – 67 . 54 . Tahir N , Madni A , Li W , Correia A , Khan MM , Rahim MA , et al . Microfluidic fabrication and characterization of Sorafenib - loaded lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles for controlled drug delivery . Int J Pharm . 2020 ; 581 : 119275 . 55 . Yalcin TE , Ilbasmis - Tamer S , Takka S . Antitumor activity of gemcitabine hydrochloride loaded lipid polymer hybrid nano - particles ( LPHNs ) : In vitro and in vivo . Int J Pharm . 2020 Apr ; 30 ( 580 ) : 119246 . 56 . Massadeh S , Omer ME , Alterawi A , Ali R , Alanazi FH , Almutairi F , et al . Optimized polyethylene glycolylated polymer – lipid hybrid nanoparticles as a potential breast cancer treatment . Pharmaceutics . 2020 ; 12 ( 7 ) : 666 . 57 . Alhajamee M , Marai K , Al Abbas SMN , Homayouni TM . Co - encapsulation of curcumin and tamoxifen in lipid - chi - tosan hybrid nanoparticles for cancer therapy . Mater Technol . 2022 ; 37 ( 9 ) : 1183 – 94 . 58 . Wu R , Zhang Z , Wang B , Chen G , Zhang Y , Deng H , et al . Com - bination chemotherapy of lung cancer – co - delivery of docetaxel prodrug and cisplatin using aptamer - decorated lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles . Drug Des Devel Ther . 2020 ; 14 : 2249 . 59 . Yang P , Zhang L , Wang T , Liu Q , Wang J , Wang Y , et al . Doxo - rubicin and edelfosine combo - loaded lipid – polymer hybrid nano - particles for synergistic anticancer effect against drug - resistant osteosarcoma . OncoTargets Ther . 2020 ; 13 : 8055 . 60 . Sakpakdeejaroen I , Somani S , Laskar P , Mullin M , Dufès C . Regression of melanoma following intravenous injection of plumbagin entrapped in transferrin - conjugated , lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles . Int J Nanomedicine . 2021 ; 16 : 2615 . 61 . Wang J . Combination treatment of cervical cancer using folate - decorated , pH - sensitive , carboplatin and paclitaxel co - loaded lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles . Drug Des Devel Ther . 2020 ; 14 : 823 . 62 . Huang Q , Cai T , Li Q , Huang Y , Liu Q , Wang B , et al . Prepara - tion of psoralen polymer – lipid hybrid nanoparticles and their reversal of multidrug resistance in MCF - 7 / ADR cells . Drug Deliv . 2018 ; 25 ( 1 ) : 1044 – 54 . 63 . Yuan Y , Cai T , Callaghan R , Li Q , Huang Y , Wang B , et al . Psoralen - loaded lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles enhance doxorubicin efficacy in multidrug - resistant HepG2 cells . Int J Nanomedicine . 2019 ; 14 : 2207 . AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 Page 23 of 24 124 64 . Fraix A , Conte C , Gazzano E , Riganti C , Quaglia F , Sortino S . Overcoming doxorubicin resistance with lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles photoreleasing nitric oxide . Mol Pharm . 2020 ; 17 ( 6 ) : 2135 – 44 . 65 . Pramual S , Lirdprapamongkol K , Jouan - Hureaux V , Barberi - Heyob M , Frochot C , Svasti J , et al . Overcoming the diverse mechanisms of multidrug resistance in lung cancer cells by photodynamic therapy using pTHPP - loaded PLGA - lipid hybrid nanoparticles . Eur J Pharm Biopharm . 2020 ; 149 : 218 – 28 . 66 . Yang Q , Zhou Y , Chen J , Huang N , Wang Z , Cheng Y . Gene therapy for drug - resistant glioblastoma via lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles combined with focused ultrasound . Int J Nano - medicine . 2021 ; 16 : 185 . 67 . Gu L , Shi T , Sun Y , You C , Wang S , Wen G , et al . Folate - modi - fied , indocyanine green - loaded lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparti - cles for targeted delivery of cisplatin . J Biomater Sci Polym Ed . 2017 ; 28 ( 7 ) : 690 – 702 . 68 . Huang H , Dong Y , Zhang Y , Ru D , Wu Z , Zhang J , et al . GSH - sensitive Pt ( IV ) prodrug - loaded phase - transitional nanoparti - cles with a hybrid lipid - polymer shell for precise theranostics against ovarian cancer . Theranostics . 2019 ; 9 ( 4 ) : 1047 – 65 . 69 . El - sayed A , Futaki S , Harashima H . Delivery of macromol - ecules using arginine - rich cell - penetrating peptides : ways to overcome endosomal entrapment . 2009 ; 11 : 1 . 70 . Jiao CY , Delaroche D , Burlina F , Alves ID , Chassaing G , Sagan S . Translocation and endocytosis for cell - penetrating peptide internalization . J Biol Chem . 2009 ; 284 ( 49 ) : 33957 – 65 . 71 . Pisa M Di , Swiecicki J - M . Translocation mechanism ( s ) of cell - penetrating peptides : Biophysical studies using artificial mem - brane bilayers . 2015 ; 72 . Alves ID , Goasdoué N , Correia I , Aubry S , Galanth C , Sagan S , et al . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Membrane interaction and perturbation mechanisms induced by two cationic cell penetrat - ing peptides with distinct charge distribution . 2008 ; 1780 : 948 – 59 . 73 . Schafmeister CE , Po J , Verdine GL . An All - hydrocarbon cross - linking system for enhancing the helicity and metabolic stability of peptides . 2000 ; 6 : 12364 – 5 . 74 . Alves ID , Goasdoué N , Correia I , Aubry S , Galanth C , Sagan S , et al . Membrane interaction and perturbation mechanisms induced by two cationic cell penetrating peptides with distinct charge distribution . Biochim Biophys Acta BBA - Gen Subj . 2008 ; 1780 ( 7 – 8 ) : 948 – 59 . 75 . Covic L , Gresser AL , Talavera J , Swift S , Kuliopulos A . Activa - tion and inhibition of G protein - coupled receptors by cell - pene - trating membrane - tethered peptides . 2002 ; 99 ( 2 ) : 643 – 8 . 76 . Watkins CL , Brennan P , Fegan C , Takayama K , Nakase I , Futaki S , et al . Cellular uptake , distribution and cytotoxicity of the hydrophobic cell penetrating peptide sequence PFVYLI linked to the proapoptotic domain peptide PAD . J Controlled Release . 2009 ; 140 ( 3 ) : 237 – 44 . 77 . Deshayes S , Morris M , Heitz F , Divita G . Delivery of proteins and nucleic acids using a non - covalent peptide - based strategy ☆ . 2008 ; 60 : 537 – 47 . 78 . Ezzat K , Zaghloul EM , El S , Lehto T , El - sayed R , Magdy T , et al . Solid formulation of cell - penetrating peptide nanocomplexes with siRNA and their stability in simulated gastric conditions . J Control Release . 2012 ; 162 ( 1 ) : 1 – 8 . 79 . Trabulo S , Cardoso AL , Mano M . Lima MCP De . Cell - penetrat - ing peptides—mechanisms of cellular uptake and generation of delivery systems . 2010 : 961 – 93 . 80 . Guidotti G , Brambilla L , Rossi D . Cell - penetrating pep - tides : from basic research to clinics . Trends Pharmacol Sci . 2017 ; xx : 1 – 19 . 81 . Ruseska I , Zimmer A . Internalization mechanisms of cell - pene - trating peptides . 2020 ; 82 . Derossi D , Chassaing G , Prochiantz A . Trojan peptides : the penetratin system for intracellular delivery . 1998 ; 8 ( February ) 83 . Copolovici DM , Langel K , Eriste E . Cell - penetrating peptides : Design . Synthesis , and Applications . 2014 ; ( 3 ) : 1972 – 94 . 84 . Herce HD , Garcia AE , Litt J , Kane RS , Martin P , Enrique N , et al . Arginine - rich peptides destabilize the plasma membrane , consistent with a pore formation translocation mechanism of cell - penetrating peptides . Biophysj . 2009 ; 97 ( 7 ) : 1917 – 25 . 85 . Bechara C , Sagan S . Cell - penetrating peptides : 20 years later , where do we stand ? FEBS Lett . 2013 ; ( May ) 86 . Oren Z . Mode of action of linear amphipathic alpha - helical anti - microbial peptides . 1998 ; ( 6 ) : 451 – 463 . 87 . Shai Y . Mechanism of the binding , insertion and destabilization of phospholipid bilayer membranes by K - helical antimicrobial and cell non - selective membrane - lytic peptides . 1999 ; 1462 . 88 . Zhao F , Zhao Y , Liu Y , Chang X , Chen C . Cellular uptake , intracellular trafficking , and cytotoxicity of nanomaterials . 2011 ; 10 : 1322 – 37 . 89 . Conner SD , Schmid SL . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . 2003 ; 422 ( March ) : 37 – 44 . 90 . Wadia JS , Stan RV , Dowdy SF . Transducible TAT - HA fusogenic peptide enhances escape of TAT - fusion proteins after lipid raft macropinocytosis . 2004 ; 10 ( 3 ) : 310 – 5 . 91 . Jones AT . Macropinocytosis : searching for an endocytic identity and a role in the uptake of cell penetrating peptides . 2007 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 670 – 84 . 92 . Lim JP , Gleeson PA . Macropinocytosis : an endocytic pathway for internalising large gulps . Immunol Cell Biol . 2011 ; 89 ( 8 ) : 836 – 43 . 93 . Swanson J , Biology C , Avenue L , Watts C . Macropinocytosis . 1995 ; 5 ( November ) : 424 – 8 . 94 . Brodsky FM , Chen CY , Towler MC , Wakeham DE . Biological Basket weaving : formation and function of biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . 2014 ; ( May ) . 95 . Mettlen M , Chen PH , Srinivasan S , Danuser G , Schmid SL . reg - ulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem . 2018 ; 87 ( 1 ) : 871 – 96 . 96 . Haucke V , Kozlov MM . Membrane remodeling in clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis . 2018 : 1 – 10 . 97 . Smith SM , Baker M , Halebian M , Smith CJ . Weak molecular interactions in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . 2017 ; 4 ( November ) 98 . Kaksonen M , Roux A . Mechanisms of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis . Nat Publ Group ; 2018 . 99 . Antonny B , Burd C , De CP , Chen E , Daumke O , Ford M , et al . Membrane fission by dynamin : what we know and what we need to know . 2016 ; 35 ( 21 ) : 2270 – 84 . 100 . Branza - nichita N , Macovei A , Lazar C . Caveolae - dependent endocytosis in viral infection : 1 – 32 . 101 . Way M . Parton RG . M - caveolin , a muscle - specific caveolin - related protein . 1995 ; 376 : 108 – 12 . 102 . Song KS , Scherer PE , Tang Z , Okamoto T , Li S , Chafel M , et al . Expression of caveolin - 3 in skeletal , cardiac , and smooth . J Biol Chem . 1996 ; 271 ( 25 ) : 15160 – 5 . 103 . Weir DL , Laing ED , Smith IL , Wang L - Fa , Broder CC . Host cell virus entry mediated by Australian bat lyssavirus G envelope gly - coprotein occurs through a clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway that requires actin and Rab5 . 2014 ; 1 – 10 . 104 . Kirkham M , Parton RG . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : New insights into caveolae and non - caveolar lipid raft carriers . 2005 ; 1745 : 273 – 86 . 105 . Edidin M . Shrinking patches and slippery rafts : scales of domains in the plasma . 2001 ; 11 ( 12 ) : 492 – 6 . 106 . Anderson RGW , Jacobson K . A role for lipid shells in tar - geting proteins to caveolae , rafts , and other lipid domains . 2014 ; 1821 : 2002 . AAPS PharmSciTech ( 2023 ) 24 : 124 1 3 124 Page 24 of 24 107 . Johannes L , Parton RG , Bassereau P , Mayor S . Building endo - cytic pits without clathrin . 2015 ; 16 ( May ) : 311 – 21 . 108 . Boucrot E , Ferreira APA , Almeida - souza L , Debard S , Vallis Y , Howard G , et al . Endophilin marks and controls a clathrin - inde - pendent endocytic pathway . Nature . 109 . Chadda R , Howes MT , Plowman SJ , Hancock JF , Parton RG , Mayor S . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . 2007 ; 702 – 717 . 110 . Kirkham M , Fujita A , Chadda R , Nixon SJ , Kurzchalia TV , Sharma DK , et al . Ultrastructural identification of uncoated cave - olin - independent early endocytic vehicles . 2005 ; 168 ( 3 ) : 465 – 76 . 111 . Kalia M , Kumari S , Chadda R , Hill MM , Parton RG , Mayor S . Endosomal compartments fuse with sorting endosomes via a Rab5 / phosphatidylinositol - 3‘ - kinase – dependent machinery □ . 2006 ; 17 ( August ) : 3689 – 704 . 112 . Erazo - oliveras A , Muthukrishnan N , Baker R , Wang T - Y , Philippe PJ . Improving the endosomal escape of cell - pene - trating peptides and their cargos : strategies and challenges . 2012 ; 1177 – 1209 . 113 . Yang S - T , Zaitseva E , Chernomordik LV , Melikov K . Cell - pene - trating peptide induces leaky fusion of liposomes containing late endosome - specific anionic Lipid . Biophysj . 2010 ; 99 ( 8 ) : 2525 – 33 . 114 . Herrmann A . Live - cell analysis of cell penetration ability and toxicity of oligo - arginines ‡ . 2008 ; ( December 2007 ) : 469 – 476 . 115 . Coin I , Beyermann M , Bienert M . Solid - phase peptide synthesis : from standard procedures to the synthesis of difficult sequences . Nat Protoc . 2007 ; 2 ( 12 ) : 3247 – 56 . 116 . Amblard M , Fehrentz JA , Martinez J , Subra G . Methods and pro - tocols of modern solid phase peptide synthesis . Mol Biotechnol . 2006 ; 33 ( 3 ) : 239 – 54 . 117 . Yu YP , Wang Q , Liu YC , Xie Y . Molecular basis for the targeted binding of RGD - containing peptide to integrin αVβ3 . Biomateri - als . 2014 ; 35 ( 5 ) : 1667 – 75 . 118 . Avraamides CJ , Garmy - Susini B , Varner JA . Integrins in angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis . Nat Rev Cancer . 2008 ; 8 ( 8 ) : 604 – 17 . 119 . Shi K , Zhou J , Zhang Q , Gao H , Liu Y , Zong T , et al . Arginine - glycine - aspartic acid - modified lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparti - cles for docetaxel delivery in glioblastoma multiforme . J Biomed Nanotechnol . 2015 ; 11 ( 3 ) : 382 – 91 . 120 . Gao F , Zhang J , Fu C , Xie X , Peng F , You J , et al . iRGD - modified lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles loaded with isoliquiritigenin to enhance anti - breast cancer effect and tumor - targeting ability . Int J Nanomedicine . 2017 ; 12 : 4147 – 62 . 121 . Wang G , Wang Z , Li C , Duan G , Wang K , Li Q , et al . RGD peptide - modified , paclitaxel prodrug - based , dual - drugs loaded , and redox - sensitive lipid - polymer nanoparticles for the enhanced lung cancer therapy . Biomed Pharmacother . 2018 ; 106 : 275 – 84 . 122 . Yang Z , Luo X , Zhang X , Liu J , Jiang Q . Targeted delivery of 10 - hydroxycamptothecin to human breast cancers by cyclic RGD - modified lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles . Biomed Mater . 2013 ; 8 ( 2 ) : 025012 . 123 . Zhao Y , Lin D , Wu F , Guo L , He G , Ouyang L , et al . Discovery and in vivo evaluation of novel RGD - modified lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery . Int J Mol Sci . 2014 ; 15 ( 10 ) : 17565 – 76 . 124 . Zhang J , Hu J , Chan HF , Skibba M , Liang G , Chen M . iRGD decorated lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles for targeted co - delivery of doxorubicin and sorafenib to enhance anti - hepato - cellular carcinoma efficacy . Nanomed Nanotechnol Biol Med . 2016 ; 12 ( 5 ) : 1303 – 11 . 125 . Van Hensbergen Y , Broxterman HJ , Rana S , Van Diest PJ , Duyndam MC , Hoekman K , et al . Reduced growth , increased vascular area , and reduced response to cisplatin in CD13 - over - expressing human ovarian cancer xenografts . Clin Cancer Res . 2004 ; 10 ( 3 ) : 1180 – 91 . 126 . Gupta M , Sharma V , Sharma K , Kumar A , Sharma A , Kazmi I , et al . A kNGR peptide - tethered lipid – polymer hybrid nano - carrier - based synergistic approach for effective tumor therapy : development , characterization , ex - vivo , and in - vivo assessment . Pharmaceutics . 2022 ; 14 ( 7 ) : 1401 . 127 . Yang Z , Tang W , Luo X , Zhang X , Zhang C , Li H , et al . Dual - ligand modified polymer - lipid hybrid nanoparticles for docetaxel targeting delivery to Her2 / neu overexpressed human breast can - cer cells . J Biomed Nanotechnol . 2015 ; 11 ( 8 ) : 1401 – 17 . 128 . Dong S , Zhou X , Yang J . TAT modified and lipid – PEI hybrid nanoparticles for co - delivery of docetaxel and pDNA . Biomed Pharmacother . 2016 ; 84 : 954 – 61 . 129 . Qiao L , Qin Y , Wang Y , Liang Y , Zhu D , Xiong W , et al . A brain glioma gene delivery strategy by angiopep - 2 and TAT - modified magnetic lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles . RSC Adv . 2020 ; 10 ( 68 ) : 41471 – 81 . 130 . Gao Y , Men K , Pan C , Li J , Wu J , Chen X , et al . Function - alized DMP - 039 hybrid nanoparticle as a novel mRNA vector for efficient cancer suicide gene therapy . Int J Nanomedicine . 2021 ; 16 : 5211 . 131 . Yang Z , Luo X , Zhang X , Liu J , Jiang Q . Targeted delivery of 10 - hydroxycamptothecin to human breast cancers by cyclic RGD - modified lipid – polymer hybrid nanoparticles . Biomed Mater . 2013 ; 8 ( 2 ) : 025012 . 132 . Zhang J , Wang L , Fai Chan H , Xie W , Chen S , He C , et al . Co - delivery of paclitaxel and tetrandrine via iRGD peptide conju - gated lipid - polymer hybrid nanoparticles overcome multidrug resistance in cancer cells . Sci Rep . 2017 ; 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 14 . Publisher ' s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .