Research Article Acute ligand - independent Src activation mimics low EGF - induced EGFR surface signalling and redistribution into recycling endosomes Medts T . de Diesbach , A . Cominelli , F . N ' Kuli , D . Tyteca ⁎ , 1 , P . J . Courtoy 1 Université catholique de Louvain and de Duve Institute ( ICP ) , CELL Unit , UCL - 75 . 41 , avenue Hippocrate , 75 , 1200 Brussels , Belgium A R T I C L E I N F O R M A T I O N A B S T R A C T Article Chronology : Received 1 April 2010 Revised version received 12 August 2010 Accepted 2 September 2010 Available online 9 September 2010 Src , a non - receptor tyrosine kinase , is a key signal transduction partner of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) . In human breast cancer , EGFR and Src are frequently over - expressed and / or over - activated . Although reciprocal activation is documented , mechanisms underlying Src : EGFR interactions are incompletely understood . We here exploited ts / v - Src thermo - activation in MDCK monolayers to test whether acute Src activation impacts on signalling and trafficking of non - liganded EGFR . We found that thermo - activation caused rapid Src recruitment to the plasma membrane , concomitant association with EGFR , and its phosphorylation at Y845 and Y1173 predominantly at the cell surface . Like low EGF concentrations , activated Src ( i ) decreased EGF surface binding without affecting the total EGFR pool ; ( ii ) triggered EGFR endocytosis via clathrin - coated vesicles ; ( iii ) and led to its sequestration in perinuclear / recycling endosomes with avoidance of multivesicular bodies and lysosomal degradation . Combined Src activation and EGF were synergistic for EGFR - Y845 and - Y1173 phosphorylation at some endosomes . We conclude that acute effects of Src in MDCK cells may mimic those of low EGF on EGFR activation and redistribution . Src : EGFR interactions may be sufficient to trigger EGFR activation and might contribute to its local signalling , without requiring either soluble extracellular signal or receptor over - expression . © 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : EGFR Src Recycling endosome Plasma membrane signalling Introduction The epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) , a paradigmatic receptortyrosinekinase ( RTK ) , isactivatedbyseveralligandssuchas EGF or transforming growth factor - α ( TGF α ) and controls a variety of biological processes including proliferation , differentiation , and apoptosis . Non - liganded EGFR localizes to the plasma membrane , mainly at membrane rafts [ 1 – 3 ] . Upon ligand binding , EGFR undergoes dimerization leading to transphosphorylation on several tyrosine residues in its C - terminal cytoplasmic domain [ 4 , 5 ] . These phosphotyrosine residues serve as docking sites for a variety of interactingproteinpartnersinvolvedintheactivationandregulation of numerousintracellularsignallingcascades , includingtheAkt / PKB and MAPK / Erk pathways [ 6 ] . Ligand binding further induces EGFR ubiquitylation , which accelerates its internalization by clathrin - dependent ( and possibly - independent ) endocytosis , leading to EGFR surface down - regulation ( for a review , see Refs . [ 7 , 8 ] ) . Depending on ligand nature and / or concentration , intracellular EGFR is either recycled to the cell surface , or sequestered into the intraluminal membranes of multivesicular bodies ( MVB ) leading to E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 ⁎ Corresponding author . Fax : + 32 2 764 75 43 . E - mail address : donatienne . tyteca @ uclouvain . be ( D . Tyteca ) . 1 Equal seniors authors . 0014 - 4827 / $ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2010 . 09 . 001 available at www . sciencedirect . com www . elsevier . com / locate / yexcr lysosomal degradation [ 9 – 11 ] . A large body of evidence indicates that EGFR signalling may not be restricted to the plasma membrane but includes deep endocytic compartments , in close proximity to its nuclear targets ( for a review , see Refs . [ 12 , 13 ] ) . According to this view , EGFR endocytosis is not merely a mean to turn off activated receptor , but an additional regulatory mechanism to amplify or finely tune the signalling outcome . Src is the prototype member of non - receptor Src family kinases ( SFK ) , which are versatile cytosolic kinases and kinase - independent adaptors that regulate / amplify a variety of biological processes , including proliferation , adhesion , migration , differentiation , apoptosis andtranscription , whichareinducedbynumerousanddiversecellular receptors , including EGFR and Focal adhesion kinase [ FAK ; 14 ] . Src comprises five domains : ( i ) an amino - terminal myristoylation site enabling a weak interaction with the plasma membrane ( Src is not palmitoylated ) ; ( ii ) SH3 and ( iii ) SH2 domains , both involved in mutually exclusive intra - or inter - molecular interactions and kinase - independentadaptorfunctions ; ( iv ) akinasedomainorganizedintwo lobes linked by an activation loop which contains a autophosphoryla - tionsiteatY416 , criticalformaximalactivity ( andaconvenientmarker thereof ) ; and ( v ) a carboxy - terminal regulatory region containing Y527 , crucial for the regulation of c - Src tyrosine kinase activity [ 14 ] . When Y527 is phosphorylated , c - Src kinase is suppressed by intramolecular interactions . Conversely , lack of Y527 by mutation or C - terminal deletion ( as in v - Src ) results in a constitutively active kinase . Activated Src initiates intracellular signalling by binding to protein substrates via its SH3 and SH2 domains , generally inducing their tyrosine phosphorylation . Investigations in murine fibroblasts and in human breast cancer cells have revealed EGFR : c - Src synergy , as evidenced by strong increase of DNA synthesis , soft agar colony growth and tumor formation in nude mice [ 15 , 16 ] . Moreover , in various human cancers , particularly of breast , both EGFR and Src are frequently over - expressed and / or over - activated [ 17 ] . Although the mechan - isms underlying EGFR : Src interactions are incompletely under - stood , reciprocal interactions have been clearly demonstrated . Indeed , EGFRstimulationtriggersthecatalyticactivityofSrcwhich , in turn , phosphorylates EGFR on unique tyrosine residues . Conversely , stable transfection with a c - Src - GFP construct pro - motes sustained EGFR activation in absence of added ligand [ 18 ] . Constitutive Src over - expression was reported to cause no change in half - life of free EGFR but to accelerate the internalization rate constant of EGF : EGFR complexes [ 19 ] . However , constitutive activation of Src kinases by mutations does not necessarily mimic activation mediated by receptor - stimulated pathways where these kinases are generally activated only transiently [ 14 ] . Ourlaboratoryhaspreviouslyreported [ 20 – 24 ] thatv - Srcthermo - activation ( i ) is associated with its membrane recruitment to functionally distinct ( cholesterol - dependent and - independent ) sig - nallingdomains ; ( ii ) acceleratespinocytosisandmotilitybyimpacting on cortical actin ; ( iii ) and abrogates chemotaxis , by generating “ parasitic ” signalling all over the cell surface . The two latter effects were shown to be mediated by a cascade of early enzymatic relays acting on membrane lipid substrates , namely PI3K , phospholipase C and D . To better understand the interactions betweenSrc and EGFR in theabsenceofsolublenaturalligands , weherefurtherexploitedacute synchronous ts / v - Src thermo - activation with the aim to address whether and how Src impacts on EGFR signalling and trafficking . We particularly examined whether Src activation could somehow mimic the short - term effects of EGF addition , like Jak and Tyk mimic those of erythropoietin and trombopoietin on their cognate receptors [ 25 ] . These questions are potentially relevant , in view of the numerous reports on EGFR and Src synergism as well as frequent co - over - expression in cancer . We found that the effects of Src activation on EGFR mimic several effects of EGF , including ( i ) phosphorylation of signalling EGFR tyrosine residues , at the cell surface ; ( ii ) EGFR endocytosis via clathrin - coated vesicles ; and ( iii ) sequestration in perinuclear / recycling endosomes with avoidance of MVB and lysosomal degradation . Data further suggest that EGF and Src are synergistic for EGFR phosphorylation on some endosomes . We conclude that Src : EGFR interaction may be sufficient to cause sustained activation of non - liganded , non - overexpressed EGFR . Materials and methods Antibodies Phosphopeptide - specific rabbit antibodies raised against Src pY416 , EGFR - pY845 , EGFR - pY1068 , EGFR - pY1173 , Akt - pS473 or ERK1 / 2 - pT202 / pY204 were from Cell Signalling ( Danvers , MA , USA ) . Anti - EGFR ( sheep ) , raised against a juxtamembrane cytoplasmic epitope , was from Fitzgerald ( Concord , MA , USA ) . Anti - paxillin ( rabbit ) was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) . We used the following mouse monoclonal antibodies ( MAb ) recognizing chicken Src ( IgG2b ; EC10 ; Upstate Biotechnology , New York , NY , USA ) ; transferrin receptor ( TfR , IgG1 ; Zymed , South San Francisco , CA , USA ) ; β - actin ( IgG2a ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO , USA ) ; the Golgi marker , GM130 ( IgG1 ; BD Biosciences , Franklin Lakes , NJ , USA ) ; clathrin heavy chain ( IgG1 ; purified from the hybridoma kindly provided by Dr . F . Brodsky ) ; LBPA ( IgG1 ; Echelon Biosciences Inc . , Salt Lake City , UT , USA ) . Alexa - 568 phalloidin and Alexa - 488 or - 568 secondary antibodies were from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA , USA ) . Cell culture , transfection and pharmacological treatments MDCK cells infected with a retroviral expression vector for the thermosensitive v - Src variant , v - Src / ts LA31 , were generated by Dr . J . Behrens , generously provided by Dr . M . Mareel and propagated in DMEM containing 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) . A regular subculture schedule was essential to keep a stable phenotype . Despite this rigid protocol , background tyrosine phosphorylation signals of Src and EGFR varied between undetectable to very low , yet detectable levels . For most experiments , cells plated were seeded at high density ( 75 10 3 / cm 2 ) in 30 cm 2 Petri dishes or glass coverslips . After exactly one day of culture , cells were serum - starved for a total of 2 h . During the last hour of serum starvation , cells were either kept at 40 °C and exposed or not to 3 nM recombinant human EGF ( Sigma ) during the last 20 min , or transferred to 34 °C . In some experiments , cells were transfected using lipofectamine with Rab4 - GFP ( 0 . 2 μ g DNA and 0 . 8 μ l lipofectamine / cm 2 ) , Rab5 - YFP , Rab7 - GFP or Rab11 - GFP ( 0 . 125 μ g DNA and 0 . 5 μ l lipofectamine / cm 2 ) at 40 °C for 6 h [ 26 – 28 ] . The solution was replaced by medium supplemented by 10 % FCS without antibiotics . After 24 h , cells were serum - starved and exposed to EGF or transferred to 34 °C , then processed for immunolabeling . In some other experiments , cells were serum starved as above and treated during the last hour with 5 mM methyl - beta - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ; Sigma ) , leading to a ~ 25 % depletion of total cell cholesterol [ 24 ] . 3240 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 Western blotting Cells were washed three times with ice - cold PBS and solubilized in lysis buffer [ 1 % Nonidet P - 40 in 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 1 mM NaF , and complete protease inhibitors ( Roche ) ] followed by sonication . Cell protein content was measured by the BCA assay . Equal protein loads ( ~ 25 μ g ) were resolved by SDS - PAGE ( 7 % acrylamide ) and electro - blotted onto nitrocellulose membranes ( Amersham , UK ) . After saturation for at least2 hinblottingbuffer [ 0 . 15 % ( w / v ) Tween20 ( Merck ) in50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 90 mM NaCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 , and 5 % ( w / v ) of either milk powder ( Nestle ) or BSA ( PAA Laboratories GmnH , Austria ) ] , membranes were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies ( usually 1 : 1000 in blotting buffer , except for MAb anti - β - actin , 1 : 10 , 000 ) . After 5 washes ( 5 min each ) with blotting buffer , blots were incubated at room temperature with HRP - conjugated appropriate secondary antibodies for 1 h ( ~ 1 : 20 , 000 in blotting buffer ) , washed again 5 times , transferred to PBS and revealed by chemoluminescence ( ECL kit , PerkinElmer , Boston , MA , USA ) using Kodak X - omat blue films , scanned at high resolution ( Epson perfection 4990 photo ) and quantified using Scion software . Each comparison was based on quantifications from the same blot . Co - immunoprecipitation Cells were washed with ice - cold PBS and solubilized in immuno - precipitation buffer [ 1 ml / 30 cm 2 Petri dishes of 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) Triton X - 100 / 0 . 5 % Nonidet P - 40 in 25 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , and complete protease inhibitors ] . Cell extracts were cleared by centrifugation ( 14 , 000 × g ×5 min ) and supernatants ( ~ 1 ml ) were immunopre - cipitated with 2 . 5 μ g anti - EGFR antibodies . Protein A - sepharose beads ( GE Healthcare Bio - Sciences , UK ) were washed 3 times by sedimentation / resuspension with 600 μ l PBS , 3 times with 600 μ l of immunoprecipitation buffer , then pelleted in 10 mM Tris pH 7 . 4 . The entire procedure was performed at 4 °C . Immunoprecipitates were analyzed by western blotting as described above . Surface trypsinization After 3 washes with ice - cold PBS , cells were surface - digested at 4 °C with 1 ml of 1 % ( w / v ) trypsin ( Worthington , Lakewood , NJ , USA ) in PBS for 1 h on a rocking platform . After 3 washes with PBS , digestion was stopped by 10 min incubation at 4 °C with serum . Cells were again washed 5 times with PBS then solubilized for SDS - PAGE and western blotting . Surface biotinylation Cell surface biotinylation was carried out at 4 °C according to a published procedure , with some modifications [ 29 ] . Briefly , cells were washed with ice - cold PBS and surface - biotinylated with 800 μ l of 1 . 5 mg / ml sulfo - NHS - biotin ( Pierce , Rockford , IL , USA ) in PBS for 2 h on a rocking platform . Cells were washed again twice with ice - cold PBS containing 100 mM glycine , pH 7 . 2 and kept for 20 min in the same medium to quench unbound biotin reagent , then lysed by 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) Triton X - 100 / 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) Nonidet P - 40 in 25 mM Tris - HCl , pH 6 . 8 supplemented with a defined protease inhibitor mixture ( 1 μ g / ml pepstatin , 10 μ g / ml leupeptin , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ) for 1 h under vigorous shaking . After clearing by centrifugation ( 13 , 000 × g ×20 min ) , 200 μ l of supernatant were incubated overnight with an equal volume of streptavidin beads ( Pierce ; capacity , ~ 40 μ g biotinylated BSA ) . After beads centrifugation ( 13 , 000 × g ×20 min ) , supernatants were saved for analysis of the non - biotinylated fraction . Beads were washed 6 times with 600 μ l of lysis buffer , resuspended in 50 μ l buffer supplemented by 50 mM dithiothreitol , and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and western blotting . Confocal microscopy Cells were washed with ice - cold PBS and fixed with 4 % formalde - hyde ( w / v ) in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 4 , at 4 °C for 15 min , then permeabilized with 0 . 05 % saponin ( w / v ) in PBS for 20 min . Non - specific signals were quenched by Q - PBS [ PBS supplemented with 1 % BSA , 0 . 1 % L - lysine and 0 . 01 % saponin ( all w / v ) ] , which was also used for subsequent incubations with antibodies and washes . Afterincubation withcombined primary antibodies , coverslipswere washed6timesfor5 mineachwithQ - PBS , incubatedwithcombined Alexa Fluor - conjugated secondary antibodies , washed again 6 times with Q - PBS , rinsed 3 times in PBS , post - fixed in 4 % ( w / v ) formaldehyde for 5 min , rinsed 3 times in PBS and mounted in Mowiolinthedarkovernight . Thelackofcross - contaminatingdueto the mixing of primary and of secondary antibodies was verified by fullsignaldissociationinatleastoneexperimentalconditionforeach mixture . Preparations were examined with an LSM 510 META confocal microscope ( Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) or an Axiovert confocal microscope ( Zeiss ) coupled to MRC 1024 equipment ( Bio - Rad , Richmond , CA , USA ) , inbothcasesusingaPlan - Apochromat63× / 1 . 4 oil DIC objective . Radioligand binding and endocytosis Forty μ g of recombinant human EGF were labeled with 1 mCi of Na 125 I ( Amersham Biosciences , UK ) in iodogen - precoated tubes ( Pierce ) to a specific radioactivity of ~ 14 , 000 cpm / ng protein . One mg of iron - saturated human transferrin ( Sigma ) was labeled with 2 mCiofNa 125 Iusingiodo - beads ( Pierce ) toaspecificradioactivityof ~ 3 , 000 cpm / ngprotein . Surfacebindingwasperformedat3 nM 125 I - EGF or 50 nM 125 I - transferrin in DMEM containing 0 . 1 % BSA for 2 h on ice under gentle rocking ( binding step ) . Some cells were further re - incubatedat40 °Cor34 °Cfortheindicatedtimes ( internalization of surface - bound ligand ) , washed extensively with PBS at 4 °C , then 125 I - EGF was surface - stripped by acid wash ( 50 mM glycine , pH 2 . 5 , in 250 mM NaCl ) whereas 125 I - transferrin was surface - digested withpronaseasdescribedinRef . [ 30 ] , andpelleted . Cellswererinsed in PBS , lysed in 0 . 1 % ( w / v ) Triton X - 100 and sonicated . Radioactivity associated with the pellet and with the supernatant was counted with a gamma counter ( Minaxi auto - gamma 5000 series , PerkinEl - mer , MA , USA ) , normalized to the cell protein content and taken as measure of intracellular and surface - bound ligands , respectively . Competition by a 200 - fold molar excess of cold ligand decreased radioligand binding by > 97 % . Real - time RT - PCR Total RNA was extracted ( SV total RNA isolation system ; Promega ) from 5×10 6 MDCK cells grown at 40 °C , serum - starved for 1 h and either maintained at 40 °C or transferred for 1 h at 34 °C . After quantification by spectrophotometry at 260 nm , aliquots of 200 ng RNAwerereverse - transcribedusingtheoligo ( dT ) protocolofcloned 3241 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 avian myeloma virus RT - PCR system ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Oligonucleotide primers ( Suppl . Table I A ; Eurogentec , Liège , Belgium ) were derived from canis lupus familiaris cDNA sequences for EGFR , ErbB2 , ErbB3 , ErbB4 and GAPDH , using the Primer - Blast software ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / tools / primer - blast ) . Quantitative PCR amplification was performed on the Icycler real - time PCR detection system ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) with the Platinum SYBR Green qPCR Supermix - UDG kit ( Invitrogen - Life Technologies ) , in a final volume of 20 μ l with 500 nM specific primers and 3 mM MgCl 2 . After cDNA denaturation at 95 °C for 10 min , cDNAs were subjected to up to 45 amplification cycles , each oneincluding20 secofdenaturationat95 °Cand30 secofannealing and elongation at 60 °C . The fluorescence signal was measured after eachcycle . Astandardcurveandacontrolreactionwithouttemplate were performed in each assay . A single specific meltingtemperature was consistently obtained at the end of each run for EGFR , ErbB2 , ErbB3 , ErbB4 and GAPDH , confirming the validity of SYBR Green - based assays . All PCRs were performed in independent duplicates , and mean CT were compared with GAPDH . Wound healing assay Cellsare growntoconfluencyonplasticPetridishes , then induced to re - populatea ‘ wound ’ createdbystrippingasharplydefinedchannel using a razor - blade . To prevent growth during migration , cells were pre - treated for 2 h with 30 μ M mitomycin C ( Sigma ) at 40 °C in FCS - free medium [ 21 ] . After band - stripping , cells were allowed to migrate into the wound for 24 h in FCS - free DMEM at 40 °C or 34 °C supplemented or not with 3 nM EGF , fixed with 4 % formaldehyde in PBS for 20 min at 4 °C , then stained with Crystal Violet for another 20 min at 4 °C . End - point result of the population movement was determined asnumber of cellsthat hadcolonized thewound margin in random microscopic fields using a 20x objective . Statistical analyses Most values are presented as means±SEM and the significance of differences were tested using Student ' s t test ; migration frequency histograms were compared by the Kolmogorov – Smirnov test . Symbolsare : * , p < 0 . 05 ; * * , p < 0 . 01 ; * * * , p < 0 . 001 ; NS , notsignificant . Results Autonomously activated Src is recruited to the plasma membrane where it interacts with EGFR and triggers its signalling Since most cancers are of epithelial origin , we have selected the MDCK / tsLA31 clone derived from the paradigmatic MDCK cell line type I , to investigate the acute impact of Src activation on EGFR signalling and trafficking . As shown by real - time quantitative PCR ( qPCR ; Suppl . Table I ) , all four members of EGFR family are well - expressed in this cell line , further validating the interest of this experimental system . Thanks to this clonal construct , propagation at a non - permissive temperature ( 40 °C ) prevents genetic drift . Transfer to a permissive temperature ( 34 °C ) leads to rapid , synchronous v - Src reactivation , allowing the study of its short - term effects . The rapid kinetics of v - Src thermo - activation was confirmed by western blotting using Src - pY416 phosphopeptide - specific antibodies , which identify the key phosphorylation event in its activation loop , thus reflecting the maximally active kinase . Data were analyzed by reference to total chicken Src , distinguished from endogenous ( canine ) Src kinases by MAb EC10 . As shown by Fig . 1A , the 60 - kDa band identified by pY416 - antibody was not ( or barely ) detectable at 40 °C but rapidly increased in intensity upon transfer to 34 °C ( t 1 / 2 ~ 30 min ) to level off after ~ 1 h . Total v - Src protein ( EC10 ) remained constant during this interval . Both observations are in perfect agreement with our previous report [ 22 ] . To analyze the resulting short - term cellular effects , we systematically compared serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells be - tween 40 °C ( Src inactive ) and at 1 h after transfer to 34 °C ( to reach maximal v - Src / tsLA31 activation ) . The impact of autono - mous Src activation on EGFR was further compared to that of exposure to a low EGF concentration ( 3 nM ) for 20 min , the peak of EGF - induced EGFR phosphorylation in these cells . We recently reported that v - Src thermo - activation in MDCK / tsLA31 cells causes its membrane recruitment to functionally distinct domains , responsible for activation of Akt ( sensitive to methyl - β - cyclodextrin [ Μβ CD ] , indicating dependence on rafts ) and ERK signalling ( insensitive to Μβ CD ) , respectively [ 24 ] . Therefore , we first clarified the short - term relation between v - Src thermo - activation and its subcellular localization , by double immunofluorescence for avian ( EC10 ) and active ( pY416 ) Src kinases ( Fig . 1B ) . At 40 °C , v - Src immunolabeling produced a diffuse signal throughout the cytoplasm , with a punctuate concentration at the perinuclear region , and a faint signal at the plasma membrane ( Figs . 1B , a , c ) . This contrasted with its major redistribution to the cell surface at 34 °C ( Figs . 1B , d , f ) . Whereas no pY416 signal was detected by immunofluorescence at 40 °C in serum - starved cells ( Figs . 1B , b , c ) , thermo - activated Src localized to the plasma membrane , with the expected excellent colocaliza - tion with total avian Src ( Fig . 1B , e , f ) . The relation between Src activation and relocalization is in good agreement with several reports [ 24 , 31 – 34 ] . Since both EGFR and active v - Src are recruited to plasma membrane rafts , we next examined by co - immunoprecipitation whether Src and EGFR could physically interact ( Fig . 1C ) . No specific interaction between EGFR and v - Src could be detected at 40 °C ; in contrast , astrongsignalforv - Src ( EC10 ) wasreadilydetectedinEGFR immunoprecipitates at 34 °C . Thus , thermo - activated v - Src not only translocated to the plasma membrane but also physically interacted with EGFR , either as a cause or a consequence of this translocation . We thus examined whether the physical interaction between Src and EGFR at the plasma membrane would lead to a similar EGFR activation as induced by its natural ligand , EGF . This was tested by western blotting using validated phosphopeptide - specific antibodies allowing to distinguish three phosphorylated tyrosine residues ( EGFR - pY845 , - pY1068 , - pY1173 ) . These phos - phorylation sites were selected because ( i ) Y845 is the major target of c - Src ; ( ii ) Y1068 and Y1173 are substrates for EGFR transphosphorylation ; and ( iii ) the two latter are involved to relay EGFR signalling to its two major downstream signalling pathways , PI3K - Akt and MAPK - ERK1 / 2 . Although the pattern of EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation was qualitatively comparable between low EGF exposure and Src activation , quantitatively however , v - Src was much more potent than EGF to phosphorylate EGFR at Y845 and Y1173 , whereas pY1068 showed a comparable response ( Fig . 2 ) . We further evaluated the activation state of the Akt and ERK1 / 2 pathways , using phospho - specific antibodies to Akt - pS473 3242 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 and ERK1 / 2 - pT202 / pY204 respectively . As predicted from a qualitatively comparable but quantitatively stronger EGFR - Y1173 phosphorylation , v - Src activated the two signalling pathways like , yet more strongly than , EGF ( Fig . 2 , two lower rows ) . No such activation of EGFR was observed when cells kept at 40 °C were exposed to media conditioned by MDCK / tsLA31 cells cultured at 34 °C for up to 5 h ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , the ligand - blocking monoclonal antibody , Cetuximab , which effectively suppressed EGF response in canine MDCK cells at 40°C , did not abrogate EGFR phosphorylation at Y845 nor downstream activa - tion of Akt at 34 °C ( Suppl . Fig . 1 ) . These two important controls ruled out an autocrine effect of the Src activation , such as enhanced expression or release of bioactive EGFR ligands [ 35 ] . Thus , the effects on EGFR could be ascribed to autonomous v - Src activation and these effects qualitatively mimicked the effects of exogenous EGF , i . e . by triggering EGFR transphosphorylation associated with activation of its downstream signalling pathways . To determine whether Src - induced transactivation of EGFR would playasignificantroleintheglobalactivationofAktandERK1 / 2 , cells were treated with 1 μ M AG1478 , a potent and selective inhibitor of EGFR - kinase . As expected , EGF - stimulated phosphorylation of Akt and ERK1 / 2 at40 °Cwassuppressed byAG1478 . Incontrast at34 °C , AG1478 only minimally affected Akt and ERK1 / 2 phosphorylation , which can be explained by a predominant direct ( EGFR - indepen - dent ) activation of MAPK - ERK1 / 2 and PI3K - Akt pathways ( Suppl . Fig . 2 ; [ 14 ] ) . This observation does , however , not exclude local Src : EGFR synergistic effects ( see below ) . Autonomously activated Src decreases EGF cell surface binding without affecting the total EGFR pool Since autonomous Src activation in serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells led to a physical interaction with EGFR at the plasma membrane , resulting into a robust EGFR - kinase activity , we next evaluated whether this would trigger EGFR surface redistribution and intracellular trafficking and , in the latter case , would lead to either the degradative or the recycling pathways . To these aims , we first measured receptor - mediated endocytosis of 3 nM 125 I - EGF by the classical 2 - step procedure ( surface binding at 4 °C for 2 h followed by short - term internalization upon re - warming to 34 °C or 40 °C , as appropriate ) , as determined by the kinetics of acquisition of resistance to surface - stripping by an acid wash ( Fig . 3A ) . 125 I - EGF internalization kinetics was further compared to the constitutive receptor - mediated endocytosis of 125 I - transferrin , as determined by acquisition of resistance to surface pronase digestion . We first verified that the 2 h incubation at 4 °C did not detectably activate Src ( no pY416 signal ) . When cells had been pre - incubated at 34 °C for 1 h so as to maximally activate Src , the absolute rate of 125 I - EGF internalization decreased by ~ 2 - fold as Src - pY416 Src ( EC10 ) B 40 o C 34 o C , 1 h merge a b c d e f IP : EGFR 34 o C , 1 h 40 o C C Src ( EC10 ) EGFR input Ctrl Ab Ctrl Ab kDa 170 60 IB input A Src ( EC10 ) Src - pY416 actin 0 15 30 45 60 120 34 o C ( min ) 60 kDa 60 40 N Fig . 1 – Thermo - activated Src is recruited to the plasma membrane and interacts with EGFR . MDCK / tsLA31 cells were pre - incubated for 1 h in serum - free medium and either kept at a non - permissive temperature for Src kinase ( 40 °C ) or transferred to a permissive temperature ( 34 °C ) for the indicated times . A . Rapid activation of v - Src tsLA31 in MDCK cells ( t 1 / 2 ~ 30 min ) . Total cell lysates were immunoblotted with anti - Src - pY416 ( reflecting fully active kinase ) , - v - Src ( EC10 , specific for chicken Src ) and β - actin . Representative blots of 3 independent experiments are shown . B . Autonomously activated v - Src is translocated to the plasma membrane . Cells were double - immunolabeled for v - Src ( EC10 , green , left ) and Src - pY416 ( red , middle ) with merged images at right . At 40 °C , note the slightly punctuate , mostly cytoplasmic pattern for v - Src , with some perinuclear clustering ( N , nucleus ) and faint plasma membrane signal ( a ) without detectable active Src kinase ( b ) . At 34 °C , notice instead the concomitant translocation of a major pool of Src to the plasma membrane ( d ) and its activation ( e ) . Images are representative of 3 independent experiments . All scale bars , 10 μ m . C . Autonomously activated v - Src interacts with EGFR . EGFR were immunoprecipitated ( IP ) from 200 μ g cell lysates ( input , 1 / 20 ) with anti - EGFR antibody ( Ab ) or without antibody as a negative control ( Ctrl ) , followed by immunoblotting ( IB ) with antibodies against EGFR and v - Src ( EC10 ) . Note specific co - immunoprecipitation between EGFR and Src only at 34 °C ; the weak EC10 band around 60 kDa observed without EGFR antibodies is regarded as background . Representative blots of 3 independent experiments are shown . 3243 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 compared to cells kept at 40 °C whereas that of 125 I - transferrin was undistinguishable at both permissive and restrictive temperatures , excluding a significant effect of this modest temperature change ( 6 °C ) on clathrin - mediated endocytosis . The lack of detectable effect of this temperature change on 125 I - transferrin endocytosis was already reported in Rat 1 / tsLA29 cells [ 30 ] . To next examine whether this 2 - fold decrease of 125 I - EGF entry upon short - term Src activation would simply reflect a comparable decrease of the total EGFR pool , as previously observed at 24 h after v - Src activation in the same cells [ 21 ] , cell lysates were immuno - blotted with anti - EGFR and - transferrin receptor ( TfR ) as control . Interestingly , neither EGFR nor TfR total pools were modified at 1 h after transfer to the permissive temperature for Src activation ( Fig . 3B ) . Thiscontrastedwitha ~ 70 % decreaseoftheEGFRpoolafter cells had been exposed to a nearly saturating concentration of EGF ( 60 nM ) for the same interval , likely due to EGF - induced transfer to the degradative pathway ( Suppl . Fig . 3 ) . To further test whether Src caused a redistribution of unaltered total EGFR away from the surface - accessible pool , competent for ligand binding , cells were surface - labeled at 4 °C for 2 h with EGF and Tf radioligands ( Fig . 3C ) . Srcactivationindeeddecreased 125 I - EGFcellsurfacebindingby ~ 50 % without affecting that of 125 I - transferrin , confirming the conclusion that v - Src activation decreased by two - fold EGF endocytosis simply due to a corresponding decrease of EGF - binding competent receptors at the cell surface . Src induces a reversible intracellular sequestration of EGFR The decrease of EGF surfacebindingcould beexplained byeitherthe translocation of EGFR to an incompetent cell surface pool , e . g . A B C 0 50 100 150 200 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 20 40 60 80 0 2 4 6 8 10 125 I - transferrin Incubation time ( min ) I n t r a c e ll u l a r ( f m o l e s / m g c e ll p r o t ) 125 I - EGF 40 o C 34 o C actin kDa 40 170 60 Src - pY416 95 EGFR TfR 40 o C 40 o C 34 o C 34 o C 40 o C 40 o C 34 o C 34 o C 100 T o t a l r e c ep t o r ( % o f 40 o C ) 0 20 40 60 80 TfR EGFR NS NS S u r f a c e - bound ( % o f 40 o C ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 NS * * 125 I - transferrin 125 I - EGF Fig . 3 – Autonomously activated Src decreases EGF cell surface binding and its endocytic uptake without affecting the total EGFR pool . Serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells were either kept at 40 °C ( open squares ) or transferred to 34 °C for 1 h ( filled squares ) . A . Autonomous Src activation selectively decreases EGF receptor - mediated endocytosis . Cells were surface - labeled at 4 °C for 2 h with 125 I - EGF ( left ) or 125 I - transferrin ( right ) and washed ( binding step , shown at C ) , or further re - incubated at 40 °C or 34 °C for the indicated times ( internalization of surface - bound ligand ) . After washing , radioligands accessible at 4 °C were removed by acid wash or pronase digestion and radioactivity in cell lysates was taken as measurement of intracellular 125 I - EGF or 125 I - transferrin . Data are expressed by reference to cell protein content and are means±SEM of at least 9 dishes from at least 3 separate experiments . B . Src activation does not alter the total EGFR pool . Western blotting of total cell lysates from duplicate dishes . Representative blots of 4 independent experiments are shown at left . Quantification of EGFR and TfR at right is expressed as percentage of total receptor at 40 °C . C . Src activation selectively decreases EGF cell surface binding . Cells were surface - labeled at 4 °C with 125 I - EGF or 125 I - transferrin for 2 h and washed . Radioligand binding is normalized to the cell protein content and expressed as percentage of cells maintained at 40 °C prior to the binding step . Data are means±SEM of at least 9 dishes from at least 3 separate experiments . 40 o C + EGF 20’ 34 o C , 1 h kDa EGFR EGFR - pY845 EGFR - pY1068 Akt - pS473 ErK1 / 2 - pT202 / pY204 4442 170 170 170 Src - pY416 EGFR - pY1173 170 40 o C 60 60 Fig . 2 – Autonomous Src activation triggers EGFR phosphorylation and activates its two major signalling pathways , Akt and ERK1 / 2 . Serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells were either kept at 40 °C in the absence ( left ) or presence of 3 nM EGF for 20 min ( middle ) , or transferred to 34 °C for 1 h to maximally activate v - Src kinase ( right ) . Total lysates were assessed for the phosphorylation of Src , EGFR , Akt and ERK1 / 2 , using the indicated phospho - specific antibodies . The total level of EGFR is shown for reference in the second row . Notice that Src activation leads to qualitatively similar EGFR phosphorylation and signalling pattern as EGF , albeit with a stronger intensity for Src , except for pY1068 EGFR . Representative blots of 3 independent experiments are shown . 3244 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 “ paralyzed ” atlipid rafts ( [ 36 ] ) , orbyitsredistributionto inaccessible intracellular ( endosomal ) compartments . To distinguish between these two possibilities , cells were partially depleted of cholesterol using 5 mM methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) for 1 h , then tested for 125 I - EGF - binding . This treatment affected neither Src activation nor EGFR total pool ( Fig . 4A ) but led to a moderate ( ~ 25 % ) , yet highly significant increase of 125 I - EGF - binding to the cell surface at the restrictive temperature ( Fig . 4B , compare bars 1 and 3 ) , as already reported in HeLa cells [ 36 ] . A similar proportional increase by M β CD of surface - accessible EGF - binding sites was also observed at the permissive temperature ( Fig . 4B , compare bars 2 and 4 ) , indicating that the decrease of EGF - binding sites upon Src activation could not be explained by relocation towards an incompetent plasma membrane pool . We therefore directly addressed the second possibility , i . e . EGFR redistribution to intracellular compartments , by using two complementary biochemical approaches , surface biotinylation and surface trypsinization . The first approach has no limitation in accessibility to deeply invaginated pits , because of the very small size of the biotinylation reagent [ 37 ] , but biotinylation is usually not complete . By comparison , surface trypsinisation could be expected to achieve full extracellular cleavage , and indeed yielded the predicted lower Mr band of the combined membrane - spanning and cytoplasmic domain at ~ 75 kDa ( data not shown ) . However , accessibility to deeply invaginated pits to this ~ 24 kDa enzyme may not be complete , despite its small size . Surface biotinylation disclosed a ~ 40 % decrease of surface EGFR upon Src activation as compared with cells kept at 40 °C , without detectable change in the surface abundance of TfR ( Figs . 4C , D ) . The lack of detectable actin biotinylation confirmed the integrity of the plasma membrane , based on its impermeability to the sulfonated NHS - biotin probe . Likewise , based on surface trypsinization assay , the vast majority of EGFR pool was localized at the cell surface at 40 °C ( ~ 80 % trypsin - sensitive ) , but this pool was decreased by ~ 2 - fold after Src activation at 34 °C ( ~ 40 % trypsin - sensitive ) . The integrity of plasma membrane after surface trypsinization was confirmed by full actin resistance to trypsin digestion at both temperatures ( Figs . 4E , F ) . Thus , in the absence of added ligand , Src activation was able to induce intracellular sequestration of EGFR and this effect was specific since the sizeable fraction of intracellular TfR at 40 °C did not change at 34 °C . Since v - Src activation led to higher levels of EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation than low EGF concentrations , yet did also not cause EGFR degradation in contrast to prolonged exposure to saturating concentrations of EGF , we next investigated whether surface EGFR down - regulation by Src activation was reversible . The kinetics of v - Src thermo - inactivation upon return to 40 °C was undistinguishable from that of its thermo - activation upon transfer to 34 °C ( t 1 / 2 , 30 min ; maximal response , 1 h ) , and EGFR trypsin - resistance upon transfer to 34 °C fully disappeared upon re - incubation at 40 °C ( data not shown ) . Autonomous Src activation induces endocytosis of EGFR via clathrin - coated vesicles into perinuclear / recycling endosomes Since data reported thus far indicated that v - Src induced a reversible , ligand - independent EGFR surface down - regulation , mimicking the effect of low EGF concentrations , we analyzed into more details the mechanisms of EGFR endocytosis and intracellular trafficking by confocal microscopy . In serum - starved cells kept at 40 °C , EGFR localization was restricted to discrete , non - clathrin - coated plasma membrane domains ( Fig . 5A , left panels , arrowheads ) . Either low EGF addition or transfer to the permissive temperature for Src activation induced a similar E T r y p s i n - s en s i t i v e f r a c t i on ( % o f 40 o C ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 NS * TfR EGFR EGFR TfR actin 40 95 170 trypsin 40 o C 34 o C - - + + kDa C EGFR TfR actin 40 95 170 kDa 40 o C 34 o C 100 0 20 40 60 80 S u r f a c e - b i o t i n y l a t ed ( % o f 40 o C ) NS * * TfR EGFR A B Src - pY416 EGFR 60 170 M β CD 40 o C 34 o C - - + + kDa * * * S u r f a c e - bound 125 I - E G F ( % o f c on t r o l a t 40 o C ) 40 o C 40 o C 34 o C 34 o C 40 o C 40 o C 34 o C 34 o C 40 o C 40 o C 34 o C 34 o C 0 25 50 75 100 125 * * * * * M β CD Ctrl D F Fig . 4 – Autonomous Src activation induces intracellular EGFR sequestration . Serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells were either kept at 40 °C ( open bars at B , D and F ) or transferred to 34 °C for 1 h ( filled bars ) . A , B . Cholesterol depletion increases EGFR surface availability but does not prevent its down - regulation by v - Src . Serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells were incubated in the absence ( − ) or presence ( + ) of 5 mM M β CD for 1 h at both temperatures . A . Cholesterol depletion ( ~ 25 % ) affects neither Src activation nor total EGFR pool . Total cell lysates were immunoblotted with anti - Src - pY416 and - EGFR . B . Radioligand surface binding . 125 I - EGF cell surface labeling was analyzed as at Fig . 3C . C – F . v - Src decreases the EGFR cell surface pool by two - fold . C , D . Surface biotinylation . Untreated cells were surface - biotinylated at 4 °C for 2 h and lysed . Biotinylated surface proteins were isolated on streptavidin beads and analyzed by western blotting for EGFR , TfR ( positive control ) and actin ( negative control ) . E , F . Surface trypsinization . Untreated cells were surface - digested ( + ) or not ( − ) with trypsin at 4 °C for 2 h , quenched with serum and analyzed by western blotting for EGFR , TfR ( positive control ) and β - actin ( negative control ) . For each method , representative blots of 3 – 4 independent experiments are presented . Quantifications are expressed as surface - accessible fractions in percentage of cells kept at 40 °C before surface trypsinization . 3245 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 translocation of EGFR to clathrin - coated pits / vesicles ( Fig . 5A , middle and right panels , arrows ) . In addition , while EGFR was essentially localized to the cell surface in untreated cells kept at 40 °C , it largely relocated to endosomes and concentrated in a perinuclear compartment upon either EGF addition or Src activation ( Fig . 5B , middleandrightcolumns ) , providingthedirectexplanation for the decrease of EGFR plasma membrane pool quantified by surface biotinylation and trypsinization . Since EGFR intracellular translocation was reversible , we further defined its intracellular localization . To this aim , cells were double - immunolabeled for EGFR and either TfR or GM130 , to respectively label the perinuclear recycling compartment and the Golgi apparatus . Upon either low EGF addition or Src activation , EGFR was fully segregated from GM130 ( Figs . 5Be , f ) but largely colocalized with TfR in the perinuclear region and in recycling endosomes ( Figs . 5Bb , c ) . To better define the effect of Src activation on EGFR trafficking , cells were transfected to reach a low level of expression for Rab5 - , Rab4 - or Rab11 - YFP or - GFP constructs . These three small GTPases regulate sequential transport steps along the endocytic / recycling pathway ; define distinct membrane domains on early and recycling endosomes ; and allow to distinguish between the rapid vs slow recycling routes [ 26 ] . As shown by Figs . 6a – c , either addition of low EGF concentration ( 3 nM ) at 40 °C or Src activation without added EGF at 34 °C led to extensive redistribution of EGFR to Rab5 - compartments , presumably APPL - bearing endosomes [ 38 ] . Some co - segregation could also be observed between EGFR and Rab4 - bearing endosomes ( Figs . 6d – f ) , but EGFR fully dissociated from Rab11 - endosomes under all tested conditions ( Figs . 6g – i ) . To further exclude sorting to multivesicular bodies / late endosomes , cells were either transfected with Rab7 - GFP and immunolabeled for EGFR or double - immunolabeled for lysobi - sphosphatidic acid ( LBPA ; [ 39 ] ) and EGFR . Whereas low EGF addition ( 3 nM ) led to no colocalization between EGFR and Rab7 or LBPA ( Figs . 6j – o ) , 300 nM clearly opened the way to partial association with Rab7 or LBPA ( data not shown ) . Thus , autono - mous Src activation induced clathrin - mediated endocytosis of EGFR , which was orientated to Rab4 - recycling endosomes , thus protected against transfer to MVB / late endosomes . Autonomous Src activation triggers EGFR phosphorylation at the plasma membrane In view of the extensive redistribution of EGFR to endosomes and the strong activation of the MAPK pathway , both induced by Src , and in the context of a controversy as to whether EGFR signalling occurs exclusively at the cell surface or benefits via endosomal trafficking to closer proximity to its nuclear target , thereby decreasing diffusion distance in a crowded cytoplasm [ 40 , 41 ] , we looked for intracellular EGFR activation state . To this aim , cells were double - immunolabeled for EGFR and either EGFR - pY845 , to search for a possible sustained activation by Src ( Fig . 7 , second row ) , or EGFR - pY1173 , to evaluate its signalling activity to the MAPK pathway ( Fig . 7 , third row ) . In serum - starved cells kept at 40 °C , we confirmed that EGFR was localized to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 7 , green at d , g ) , without detection of EGFR - pY845 nor - pY1173 , as expected from western blotting data ( Fig . 7 , no red signal at d , g ) . Upon either low EGF exposure or autonomous Src activation , EGFR phosphorylated at Y845 and Y1173 also localized at , or close to the plasma membrane ( red in Fig . 7 ) , together with Src ( Fig . 7 , first row ) , with only very faint signal associated with the intracellular EGFR pool ( arrows at c and i ) . Interestingly , reconstructed X – Z vertical sections revealed that phosphorylated EGFR essentially co - distributed with v - Src at the lateral membrane ( arrowheads at insets below Figs . 7b , c ) . Thus , EGFR signalling essentially occurred at the plasma membrane upon Src activation . To sensitize detection of signalling endosomes and to test for EGF : Src synergy into intracellular signalling , we analyzed EGFR - pY845 and - pY1173 immunolabelling upon concomitant Src activation and EGF addition ( Fig . 8 ) . Although EGFR phosphory - lation mainly occurred at the cell periphery upon Src activation ( c and g ) or 20 min exposure to EGF alone ( b and f ) , combined Src and EGF allowed to readily evidence EGFR - pY845 and - pY1173 at perinuclear endosomes ( arrows at d and h ) , indicating that EGFR signalling also occurred next to the nucleus in our experimental conditions , and providing evidence for synergy between EGF and Src in these organelles . Functional read - out of Src : EGFR global synergism : Focal adhesion reorganization and migration Acute synergy was further tested using two functional read - outs . Since activated Src is rapidly recruited to focal adhesions [ 42 ] and accelerates spontaneous cell motility [ 21 ] , we performed double confocal labeling for paxillin and F - actin at the ventral face and measured spontaneous cell motility by the wound healing assay . As shown by Suppl . Fig . 4A , either EGF addition at 40 °C or v - Src activation at 34 °C triggered within 2 hours , in a large fraction of the cells , a comparable partial relocation and more extensive clustering of paxillin towards the periphery of the ventral face , together with some reorganization of parallel actin stress into asters [ 43 ] , with branches merging into paxillin clusters ( Suppl . Fig . 4A ; compare panels b and c with panel a ) . Upon combined Src activation and EGF addition , focal adhesions were clearly enlarged , so as to resemble podosomes of invading cells ( Suppl . Fig . 4Ad ) . This qualitative analysis was complemented by a study of cell motility , based on the wound healing assay in the absence of serum ( Suppl . Fig . 4B ) . At the non - permissive temperature , EGF addition had no detectable effect on cell migration under the assay conditions ( left ) . Src thermo - activation induced a three - fold increase of absolute migration frequency ( compare blue columns at 40 °C and 34 °C ) . This data is in good agreement with our previous result on the effect of Src activation in MDCK / tsLA31 cells and Rat - 1 / tsLA29 fibroblasts after 6 h in the presence of serum [ 21 ] . Upon combined EGF addition and Src activation , absolute migration frequency increased by ~ 5 - fold ( p < 0 . 05 as compared with 40 °C with or without EGF by the Kolmogorov – Smirnov test ) . Both analyses indicated a global functional synergism between Src and EGF on short - term signalling in MDCK cells , probably due to cumulative impact on several steps of the cascade ( see AG1478 experiments ) , although a contribution of direct / local Src : EGFR interaction cannot be excluded ( see Fig . 8 ) . Discussion Using MDCK cells expressing endogenous EGFR and the thermo - sensitive v - Src variant , tsLA31 , we have here shown that autonomous Src activation triggers its recruitment to the cell surface where it physically interacts with EGFR and triggers its 3246 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 34 O C , 1 h g h i 40 O C + EGF 20’ d f e 40 O C E G F R c l a t h r i n m e r ge a c b b e c f E G F R / E G F R / T f R a G M 130 d A B Fig . 5 – Like low EGF addition , Src activation induces EGFR endocytosis via clathrin - coated pits towards the recycling pathway . Serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells were either kept at 40 °C in the absence ( left ) or presence of 3 nM EGF for 20 min ( middle ) or transferred to 34 °C for 1 h without EGF addition ( right ) . Cells were double - immunolabeled for EGFR ( green ) and clathrin heavy chain ( A ; red ) or TfR ( B , a – c ; red : the entire endocytic recycling pathway ) or GM130 ( B , d – f ; red : Golgi ) . A . At 40 °C , notice the discontinuous labeling of EGFR without any colocalization with clathrin at the surface of untreated cells ( arrowheads ) . In contrast , like EGF addition , Src activation is sufficient to trigger extensive colocalization of EGFR with clathrin at the plasma membrane ( arrows ) . B . Upon either exposure to EGF or Src activation , EGFR largely colocalizes with TfR ( b , c ) but is fully resolved from GM130 ( e , f ) . Images are representative of 2 – 4 independent experiments . Scale bars : 2 μ m at A and 5 μ m at B . 3247 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 signalling . Activated Src induces EGFR surface down - regulation via clathrin - coated vesicles by sequestration into recycling endo - somes without accelerating degradation , raising the possibility of sustained EGFR endosomal signalling , which could be documented using EGFR - specific phosphopeptide immunolabelling . However , the synergistic effects of Src and EGF on focal adhesions and cell 40 O C + EGF 20’ 34 O C , 1 h 40 O C R ab11 / E G F R e f d h i g R ab5 / E G F R b c a R ab4 / E G F R R ab7 / E G F R L BPA / E G F R n k o l m j Fig . 6 – Like low EGF addition , Src activation orientates EGFR to Rab4 - recycling endosomes but protects against transfer to MVB / late endosomes . MDCK / tsLA31 cells were either transfected for low expression levels ( green ) of Rab5 - YFP ( a – c ) , Rab4 - GFP ( d – f ) , Rab11 - GFP ( g – i ) or Rab7 - GFP ( j – l ) , to distinguish the early endosomes from the rapid vs slow recycling routes vs the degradative pathway , then immunolabeled for EGFR ( a – l , red ) or double - immunolabeled for LBPA ( m – o , green ) and EGFR ( m – o , red ) . Upon either exposure to 3 nM EGF or Src activation , EGFR largely colocalizes with Rab5 and Rab4 ( a – f ) but is fully resolved from the slow recycling route labeled by Rab11 ( g – i ) and from the degradative pathway evidenced by Rab7 and LBPA . Images are representative middle confocal sections of 1 – 4 independent experiments . All scale bars , 5 μ m . 3248 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 motility are more likely due to cumulative impact of Src on several steps of the signalling cascade . There is little doubt that the molecular mechanism of autonomous v - Src thermo - activation differs from c - Src activation upon interaction with its preferred SH2 and / or SH3 natural partners . However , although the effects of v - Src on EGFR phosphorylation and downstream signalling were in general much stronger than those observed upon low EGF addition , ( i ) brief thermo - activation at 34 °C or low EGF exposure at 40 °C were equally sufficient to recruit the bulk of v - Src to the plasma membrane , arguing against saturation by over - expression ; ( ii ) the intensity of activation for the important tyrosine residue 1068 was b 40 O C + EGF 20’ e h c 34 O C , 1 h f i a S r c E G F R - p Y 845 40 O C E G F R E G F R - p Y 845 d g E G F R E G F R - p Y 1173 Fig . 7 – Like EGF addition , Src triggers EGFR signalling at the lateral plasma membrane . Serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells were either kept at 40 °C in the absence ( left ) or presence of 3 nM EGF for 20 min ( middle ) or transferred to 34 °C for 1 h ( right ) . In each row , upper panels are X – Y confocal sections where dotted lines indicate the position of corresponding X – Z reconstructed vertical sections , shown below after centering . a – c . Translocation of activated v - Src to the plasma membrane induces phosphorylation of EGFR at Y845 essentially at the cell surface . In the absence of EGF or active v - Src , there is no detectable EGFR phosphorylation at EGFR - pY845 ( a ) . Both EGF addition and v - Src activation independently lead to recruitment of most v - Src to the plasma membrane ( b compare with a ) . Notice the concentration of EGFR phosphorylation by activated Src at the lateral plasma membrane , best visible in vertical ( X , Z ) sections recorded at the position of the dotted lines in horizontal sections ( arrowheads ) . Small arrows at c point to cluster of a few intracellular dots , weakly labeled for EGFR - pY845 , likely signalling endosomes . d – f . Src activation induces EGFR internalization without detectable phosphorylation at Y845 . Same procedure as at A except for direct comparison between total EGFR ( green ) and EGFR - pY845 ( red ) . Abundant intracellular green dots without detectable red signal suggest the rapid dephosphorylation of Y845 in internalized EGFR . g – i . EGFR phosphorylation at Y1173 also essentially occurs at the cell surface . Same procedure as at B for the comparison between EGFR ( green ) and EGFR - pY1173 ( red ) . Notice that whereas both EGF or Src trigger a strong internalization of total EGFR , EGFR - pY1173 also remains mostly restricted to cell surface . Images are representative confocal sections at the nucleus of 3 independent experiments . All scale bars , 5 μ m . 3249 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 comparable in thetwoconditions ; and ( iii ) the effects ofSrc and EGF on signalling were synergistic for endosomal EGFR phosphorylation , like Src and PDGF in our previous report [ 21 ] . Thus , our data suggest that autonomous Src activation largely mimics and may potentiate the effects of low EGF concentration on EGFR . Autonomous Src activation rapidly drives its association with EGFR in a ligand - independent manner We have here shown that thermo - activated v - Src physically interacts with EGFR and triggers its phosphorylation in the absence of ligand . Early investigations into the molecular interac - tions between c - Src and EGFR [ 15 , 44 ] or HER2 [ 45 , 46 ] have revealed that c - Src becomes recruited onto activated EGFR homodimers or EGFR : HER2 heterodimers . Despite the structural similarities between the cytoplasmic domains of EGFR and HER2 , both involved in human cancer , a striking difference was noted between c - Src : EGFR and c - Src : HER2 complexes . Physical associa - tion of Src with EGFR was found to be ligand - dependent while the formation of c - Src : HER2 complex occurred in the absence of added ligand . Interestingly , both receptor isoforms are well - expressed in MDCK / tsLA31 cells . Since Src can trigger expression and activation of transmembrane EGFR ligand precursors by metalloproteinase - dependent shedding [ 47 , 48 ] , itwasessentialtoexcludethepossibilitythatourobservations reflected endogenous EGFR liganding due to an autocrine mechanism . The failure to ( i ) reproduce Src effects on EGFR by addition of media conditioned at 34 °C to serum - starved cells at 40 °C and , conversely , ( ii ) to abrogate Src effects at 34 °C by blocking EGFR with the monoclonalantibody , Cetuximab , allowtoruleoutthisexplanationfor our results . Instead , our observations support the proposal that autonomously activated v - Src can find its way to interact ( directly or indirectly via HER2 ) with inactive EGFR and to trigger its phosphor - ylation and activation . Such an hypothesis is consistent with a recent report concluding that c - Src : HER2 association depends neither on HER2 phosphorylation nor on its kinase activity [ 49 ] . Short - term autonomous Src activation induces a selective , reversible EGFR down - regulation by endocytosis via clathrin - coatedpitsandsequestrationintorecyclingendosomes Non - liganded EGFR is constitutively internalized at the slow , bulk membrane internalization rate ( if not more slowly ) , but essentially localizes to the cell surface because its constitutive recycling rate is much faster [ 50 , 51 ] . We confirm the predominant localization of non - liganded EGFR to the apical MDCK cell surface at the restrictive temperature ( almost full cleavage by trypsin ) , and demonstrate its strong surface down - regulation upon autonomous Src activation , without detectable degradation ( same total pool , but acquisition of partial refractoriness to surface digestion ) . Taken together , these observations would suggest that primary Src activation may be sufficient to promote EGFR signalling and internalization . This can be explained by three mechanisms . First , upon EGF - binding , c - Src phosphorylates the clathrin heavy chain in the hub domain controlling triskelion assembly , thereby promoting extension or remodeling of the clathrin coat lattice at plasma membrane pits [ 52 ] . Second , Src stimulates dynamin self - assembly and GTPase activity , thus favoring the budding of coated vesicles [ 53 ] . Third , c - Src regulates the fate of internalized EGFR . Of particular interest , c - Src over - expression was reported to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of the ubiquitin ligase c - Cbl , which triggers c - Cbl ubiquitylation and proteasomal destruction . As a consequence , EGFR ubiquitylation by c - Cbl was restrained and internalization was impaired [ 54 ] . The rapid translocation we observed in our short - term studies is thus clearly distinct from biosynthetic effects evidenced in previous reports using Rat - 1 cells bearing the other thermosensi - tive v - Src variant , tsLA29 , after much longer intervals of activation ; and in studies where prolonged v - Src activation reversibly down - modulated EGFR without affecting EGFR degradation rate , by decreasing its biosynthesis rate [ 55 , 56 ] . The difference between short - term and long - term Src exposure could also explain why our observations appear opposite to previous reports using fibroblasts either stably overexpressing or defective in c - Src , which led to the b d 40 C a 34 C , 1 h c EGFR - pY845 f e h g EGFR - pY1173 40 C + E G F , 20 m i n 34 C , 1 h + E G F , 20 m i n Fig . 8 – Synergy between Src and EGF for EGFR endosomal signalling . Serum - starved MDCK / tsLA31 cells were either kept at 40 °C or transferred to 34 °C for 1 h in the absence or presence of 3 nM EGF for 20 min , then immunolabeled for EGFR - pY845 ( a – d ) or EGFR - pY1173 ( e – h ) . Arrows indicate signalling endosomes . All scale bars , 10 μ m . 3250 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 conclusion that , albeit not essential , Src selectively accelerates EGFR , but not TfR internalization [ 19 , 57 ] . In our short - term ( 1 h ) experiments , autonomous Src activation actually slowed - down 125 I - EGF internalization ( thus presumably EGFR internalization ) yet increased EGFR intracellular pool , pointing to an additional inhibitory effect of Src on EGFR recycling , which remains to be kinetically tested . Ligand binding to EGFR strongly accelerates its internalization and down - regulation , be it via clathrin - dependent or - independent pathways [ 7 , 8 ] . Here , we provide confocal imaging evidence that restingcellsurfaceEGFRisfullysegregatedfromclathrin - coatedpits , but becomes largely associated with clathrin upon either low EGF exposure or autonomous Src activation . This data is in excellent agreement with several studies which demonstrated that EGF addition induces recruitment of EGF : EGFR complex to clathrin - coated pits at the plasma membrane [ 58 , 59 ] . However , additional mechanisms for EGFR internalization cannot be excluded . For example , a recent report in HeLa cells has indicated that , upon EGF addition , EGFR co - internalizes with Src via macropinocytosis [ 18 ] . Altough Src triggers a robust apical macropinocytosis in MDCK cells after 6 h , this response was modest after only 1 h [ 22 ] . Following EGF - induced endocytosis , we confirm in MDCK cells that EGFR is oriented either to the recycling or degradative pathway , depending on EGF concentration , in good agreement with reports concluding that EGFR is preferentially internalized at low EGF concentrations by a clathrin - dependent route and at higher concentration by a clathrin - independent pathway leading todegradation [ 60 , 61 ] . LikelowEGFconcentration , autonomousv - Src activation led EGFR to the Rab4 - bearing recycling endosomes and did not trigger ( instead probably prevented ) transfer into MVB and lysosomal degradation . An analogy can thus be drawn with liganding by the soluble extracellular signal , TGF α , which triggers EGFR internalization but rapidly dissociates therefrom upon mild endoso - mal acidification [ 62 ] thereby allowing for receptor dephosphoryla - tion , deubiquitylation and cell surface recycling [ 63 ] . Likewise , we propose that the versatile intracellular Src signal , whatever its site of activation ( focal adhesions , adherent junctions . . . ) spontaneously associates with the cytoplasmic domain of non - liganded EGFR or HER2 and recruits c - Cbl . Our preliminary immunoprecipitation experiments indeed suggest Src - induced EGFR mono - ubiquitylation . SubsequentintracellulardissociationwouldallowEGFRdeubiquityla - tion and recycling . An additional mechanism has been documented that should enhance intracellular EGFR signalling and / or prevent lysosomal degradation . Indeed , Src negatively regulates c - Cbl by a “ suicide ” loop , whereby Src causes c - Cbl tyrosine phosphorylation which induces its own ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation [ 54 , 64 ] . This fascinating possibility deserves to be addressed . Src triggers EGFR signalling mainly , but not exclusively , at the plasma membrane ; Src and EGF synergize EGFR endosomal signalling Upon strong EGF exposure , EGFR internalization results in silencing of signalling due to receptor degradation [ 65 – 68 ] . However , before degradation , or at lower ligand exposure , internalized EGF : EGFR complex could maintain its signalling ability from endosomes [ 40 , 69 ] . Furthermore , redistribution to endosomes of tyrosine - phosphorylated EGFR and associated transducers confirms that signal transduction might continue after internalization of ligand - activated EGFR , and supports the view that endocytosis provides spatial regulation in the signalling cascade . With the limitations of analyzed responses , EGFR signalling phosphorylation in MDCK cells upon either short - term Src activation or low EGF exposure mainly occurred at or very close to the cell surface , and only could the combination of active Src and EGF allow clear - cut detection of EGFR signalling at endosomes . In contrast , stable over - expression of c - Src - GFP without EGF addition was reported to cause prolonged retention of internalized and activated EGFR in the perinuclear region of HeLa cells [ 18 ] . It remains to be clarified whether this apparent discrepancy stems from differences in cell type , level and duration of Src expression or sensitivity of phosphopeptide - immunodetection . Biological relevance and perspectives In this study , we have established that extracellular ligand - independent Src activation can activate EGFR and cause its redistribution to the endosomal recycling route with avoidance of the degradation pathway , like TGF α or low EGF concentrations . Whether this allows for amplification by ternary Src : EGFR1 : EGFR2 complexes , both receptor isoforms being well - expressed by MDCK / tsLA31 cells , remains to be clarified . Moreover , besides a predominant cell surface EGFR signalling , Src and EGF synergize at perinuclear signalling endosomes , which opens interesting per - spectives for the local amplification or fine tuning of EGFR control of gene expression . In many cases of human cancer , not only EGFR but also Src is overexpressed and activated without any mutation . Thus , enhanced Src : EGFR interactions could become sufficient for sustained EGFR activation and signalling , even without ligand exposure or requiring EGFR over - expression . Supplementary materials related to this article can be found online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2010 . 09 . 001 . Acknowledgments We gratefully thank Drs . J . Behrens and M . Mareel for providing the original MDCK / tsLA31 cell line ; Drs . C . Bucci , B . Sonnichsen and M . Zerial for the four Rab constructs ; Dr . S . Constantinescu ( this Institute ) for several advices throughout this study ; Mrs . L . Thanh , M . Leruth and Mr . B . Marien and Y . Marchand for excellenttechnical , pictorial and editorial assistance ; and grants from UCL , F . R . S . / FNRS , Télévie , Région bruxelloise , Région wallonne , Loterie Nationale , Actions de recherche concertées , Interuniversity Attraction poles and EU ( EUNEPHRON ) . TM held a training grant from Télévie ; PdD and DT were Research Associates at F . R . S . / FNRS . R E F E R E N C E S [ 1 ] R . Z . Adolfo , M . C . Pilar , P . K . Nicolás , L . D . José , Membrane distribution of epidermal growth factor receptors in cells expressing different gangliosides , Eur . J . Biochem . 271 ( 2004 ) 2428 – 2437 . [ 2 ] T . Ringerike , F . D . Blystad , F . O . Levy , I . H . Madshus , E . Stang , Cholesterol is important in control of EGF receptor kinase activity but EGF receptors are not concentrated in caveolae , J . Cell Sci . 115 ( 2002 ) 1331 – 1340 . [ 3 ] E . Keating , A . Nohe , N . O . Petersen , Studies of distribution , location and dynamic properties of EGFR on the cell surface measured by 3251 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 image correlation spectroscopy , Eur . Biophys . J . 37 ( 2008 ) 469 – 481 . [ 4 ] B . Linggi , G . Carpenter , ErbB receptors : New insights on mechanisms and biology , Trends Cell Biol . 16 ( 2006 ) 649 – 656 . [ 5 ] T . H . Heibeck , S . - J . Ding , L . K . Opresko , R . Zhao , A . A . Schepmoes , F . Yang , A . V . Tolmachev , M . E . Monroe , D . G . Camp , R . D . Smith , H . S . Wiley , W . - J . Qian , An extensive survey of tyrosine phosphorylation revealing new sites in human mammary epithelial cells , J . Proteome Res . 8 ( 2009 ) 3852 – 3861 . [ 6 ] Y . Yarden , B . Z . Shilo , Snap shot : EGFR signaling pathway , Cell 131 ( 2007 ) 1018 . [ 7 ] I . H . Madshus , E . Stang , Internalization and intracellular sorting of the EGF receptor : A model for understanding the mechanisms of receptor trafficking , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 3433 – 3439 . [ 8 ] A . Sorkin , L . K . Goh , Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of ErbBs , Exp . Cell Res . 315 ( 2009 ) 683 – 696 . [ 9 ] J . A . McKanna , H . T . Haigler , S . Cohen , Hormone receptor topology and dynamics : Morphological analysis using ferritin - labeled epidermal growth factor , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 76 ( 1979 ) 5689 – 5693 . [ 10 ] K . Miller , J . Beardmore , H . Kanety , J . Schlessinger , C . R . Hopkins , Localization of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor within the endosome of EGF - stimulated epidermoid carcinoma ( A431 ) cells , J . Cell Biol . 102 ( 1986 ) 500 – 509 . [ 11 ] J . L . Carpentier , M . F . White , L . Orci , R . C . Kahn , Direct visualization of the phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptor during its internalization in A - 431 cells , J . Cell Biol . 105 ( 1987 ) 2751 – 2762 . [ 12 ] A . Sorkin , M . von Zastrow , Endocytosis and signalling : Intertwining molecular networks , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2009 ) 609 – 622 . [ 13 ] L . Sadowski , I . Pilecka , M . Miaczynska , Signaling from endosomes : Location makes a difference , Exp . Cell Res . 315 ( 2009 ) 1601 – 1609 . [ 14 ] S . M . Thomas , J . S . Brugge , Cellular functions regulated by Src family kinases , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 ( 1997 ) 513 – 609 . [ 15 ] M . C . Maa , T . H . Leu , D . J . McCarley , R . C . Schatzman , S . J . Parsons , Potentiation of epidermal growth factor receptor - mediated oncogenesis by c - Src : Implications for the etiology of multiple human cancers , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 92 ( 1995 ) 6981 – 6985 . [ 16 ] J . S . Biscardi , R . C . Ishizawar , C . M . Silva , S . J . Parsons , Tyrosine kinase signalling in breast cancer : epidermal growth factor receptor and c - Src interactions in breast cancer , Breast Cancer Res . 2 ( 2000 ) 203 – 210 . [ 17 ] E . Sandilands , M . C . Frame , Endosomal trafficking of Src tyrosine kinase , Trends Cell Biol . 18 ( 2008 ) 322 – 329 . [ 18 ] M . Donepudi , M . D . Resh , c - Src trafficking and co - localization with the EGF receptor promotes EGF ligand - independent EGF receptor activation and signaling , Cell . Signal . 20 ( 2008 ) 1359 – 1367 . [ 19 ] M . F . Ware , D . A . Tice , S . J . Parsons , D . A . Lauffenburger , Overexpression of cellular Src in fibroblasts enhances endocytic internalization of epidermal growth factor receptor , J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 1997 ) 30185 – 30190 . [ 20 ] M . Amyere , B . Payrastre , U . Krause , P . Van Der Smissen , A . Veithen , P . J . Courtoy , Constitutive macropinocytosis in oncogene - transformed fibroblasts depends on sequential permanent activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase and phospholipase C , Mol . Biol . Cell 11 ( 2000 ) 3453 – 3467 . [ 21 ] A . Platek , M . Mettlen , I . Camby , R . Kiss , M . Amyere , P . J . Courtoy , v - Src accelerates spontaneous motility via phosphoinositide 3 - kinase , phospholipase C and phospholipase D , but abrogates chemotaxis in Rat - 1 and MDCK cells , J . Cell Sci . 117 ( 2004 ) 4849 – 4861 . [ 22 ] M . Mettlen , A . Platek , P . Van Der Smissen , S . Carpentier , M . Amyere , L . Lanzetti , P . de Diesbach , D . Tyteca , P . J . Courtoy , Src triggers circular ruffling and macropinocytosis at the apical surface of polarized MDCK cells , Traffic 7 ( 2006 ) 589 – 603 . [ 23 ] A . Platek , V . S . Vassilev , P . de Diesbach , D . Tyteca , M . Mettlen , P . J . Courtoy , Constitutive diffuse activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase at the plasma membrane by v - Src suppresses the chemotactic response to PDGF by abrogating the polarity of PDGF receptor signalling , Exp . Cell Res . 313 ( 2007 ) 1090 – 1105 . [ 24 ] P . de Diesbach , T . Medts , S . Carpentier , L . D ' Auria , P . Van Der Smissen , A . Platek , M . Mettlen , A . Caplanusi , M . F . van den Hove , D . Tyteca , P . J . Courtoy , Differential subcellular membrane recruitment of Src may specify its downstream signalling , Exp . Cell Res . 314 ( 2008 ) 1465 – 1479 . [ 25 ] S . N . Constantinescu , M . Girardot , C . Pecquet , Mining for JAK - STAT mutations in cancer , Trends Biochem . Sci . 33 ( 2008 ) 122 – 131 . [ 26 ] B . Sonnichsen , S . De Renzis , E . Nielsen , J . Rietdorf , M . Zerial , Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 , J . Cell Biol . 149 ( 2000 ) 901 – 914 . [ 27 ] C . Bucci , P . Thomsen , P . Nicoziani , J . McCarthy , B . van Deurs , Rab7 : A key to lysosome biogenesis , Mol . Biol . Cell 11 ( 2000 ) 467 – 480 . [ 28 ] C . Bucci , A . Lutcke , O . Steele - Mortimer , V . M . Olkkonen , P . Dupree , M . Chiariello , C . B . Bruni , K . Simons , M . Zerial , Co - operative regulation of endocytosis by three Rab5 isoforms , FEBS Lett . 366 ( 1995 ) 65 – 71 . [ 29 ] M . Sargiacomo , M . Lisanti , L . Graeve , A . Le Bivic , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , Integral and peripheral protein composition of the apical and basolateral membrane domains in MDCK cells , J . Membr . Biol . 107 ( 1989 ) 277 – 286 . [ 30 ] A . Veithen , P . Cupers , P . Baudhuin , P . J . Courtoy , v - Src induces constitutivemacropinocytosisinratfibroblasts , J . CellSci . 109 ( Pt8 ) ( 1996 ) 2005 – 2012 . [ 31 ] S . A . Courtneidge , A . D . Levinson , J . M . Bishop , The protein encoded by the transforming gene of avian sarcoma virus ( pp 60src ) and a homologous protein in normal cells ( pp60proto - src ) are associated with the plasma membrane , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 77 ( 1980 ) 3783 – 3787 . [ 32 ] L . R . Rohrschneider , Immunofluorescence on avian sarcoma virus - transformed cells : Localization of the src gene product , Cell 16 ( 1979 ) 11 – 24 . [ 33 ] L . R . Rohrschneider , R . N . Eisenman , C . R . Leitch , Identification of a Rous sarcoma virus transformation - related protein in normal avian and mammalian cells , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 76 ( 1979 ) 4479 – 4483 . [ 34 ] M . J . Welham , J . A . Wyke , A single point mutation has pleiotropic effects on pp 60v - src function , J . Virol . 62 ( 1988 ) 1898 – 1906 . [ 35 ] W . J . Wasilenko , Down - modulation of EGF receptors in cells transformed by the src oncogene , J . Cell . Physiol . 131 ( 1987 ) 450 – 457 . [ 36 ] K . Roepstorff , P . Thomsen , K . Sandvig , B . van Deurs , Sequestration of epidermal growth factor receptors in non - caveolar lipid rafts inhibits ligand binding , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 18954 – 18960 . [ 37 ] S . L . Schmid , E . Smythe , Stage - specific assays for coated pit formation and coated vesicle budding in vitro , J . Cell Biol . 114 ( 1991 ) 869 – 880 . [ 38 ] M . Miaczynska , S . Christoforidis , A . Giner , A . Shevchenko , S . Uttenweiler - Joseph , B . Habermann , M . Wilm , R . G . Parton , M . Zerial , APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment , Cell 116 ( 2004 ) 445 – 456 . [ 39 ] F . G . van der Goot , J . Gruenberg , Intra - endosomal membrane traffic , Trends Cell Biol . 16 ( 2006 ) 514 – 521 . [ 40 ] Y . Wang , S . Pennock , X . Chen , Z . Wang , Endosomal signaling of epidermal growth factor receptor stimulates signal transduction pathways leading to cell survival , Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 ( 2002 ) 7279 – 7290 . [ 41 ] P . Burke , K . Schooler , H . S . Wiley , Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling by endocytosis and intracellular trafficking , Mol . Biol . Cell 12 ( 2001 ) 1897 – 1910 . [ 42 ] V . J . Fincham , V . G . Brunton , M . C . Frame , The SH3 domain directs acto - myosin - dependent targeting of v - Src to focal adhesions via phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase , Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 ( 2000 ) 6518 – 6536 . [ 43 ] K . Takaishi , T . Matozaki , K . Nakano , Y . Takai , Multiple downstream signalling pathways from ROCK , a target molecule of Rho small G 3252 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3 protein , inreorganization of the actin cytoskeleton inMadin - Darby canine kidney cells , Genes Cells 5 ( 2000 ) 929 – 936 . [ 44 ] D . K . Luttrell , A . Lee , T . J . Lansing , R . M . Crosby , K . D . Jung , D . Willard , M . Luther , M . Rodriguez , J . Berman , T . M . Gilmer , Involvement of pp 60c - src with two major signaling pathways in human breast cancer , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 ( 1994 ) 83 – 87 . [ 45 ] S . K . Muthuswamy , W . J . Muller , Direct and specific interaction of c - Src with Neu is involved in signaling by the epidermal growth factor receptor , Oncogene 11 ( 1995 ) 271 – 279 . [ 46 ] S . K . Muthuswamy , P . M . Siegel , D . L . Dankort , M . A . Webster , W . J . Muller , Mammary tumors expressing the neu proto - oncogene possess elevated c - Src tyrosine kinase activity , Mol . Cell . Biol . 14 ( 1994 ) 735 – 743 . [ 47 ] J . Guerrero , J . F . Santibanez , A . Gonzalez , J . Martinez , EGF receptor transactivation by urokinase receptor stimulus through a mechanism involving Src and matrix metalloproteinases , Exp . Cell Res . 292 ( 2004 ) 201 – 208 . [ 48 ] H . Zhang , D . Chalothorn , L . F . Jackson , D . C . Lee , J . E . Faber , Transactivation of epidermal growth factor receptor mediates catecholamine - induced growth of vascular smooth muscle , Circ . Res . 95 ( 2004 ) 989 – 997 . [ 49 ] R . Marcotte , L . Zhou , H . Kim , C . D . Roskelly , W . J . Muller , c - Src associates with ErbB2 through an interaction between catalytic domains and confers enhanced transforming potential , Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 ( 2009 ) 5858 – 5871 . [ 50 ] H . S . Wiley , Trafficking of the ErbB receptors and its influence on signaling , Exp . Cell Res . 284 ( 2003 ) 78 – 88 . [ 51 ] H . S . Wiley , J . J . Herbst , B . J . Walsh , D . A . Lauffenburger , M . G . Rosenfeld , G . N . Gill , The role of tyrosine kinase activity in endocytosis , compartmentation , and down - regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor , J . Biol . Chem . 266 ( 1991 ) 11083 – 11094 . [ 52 ] A . Wilde , E . C . Beattie , L . Lem , D . A . Riethof , S . H . Liu , W . C . Mobley , P . Soriano , F . M . Brodsky , EGF receptor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphorylation of clathrin , influencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake , Cell 96 ( 1999 ) 677 – 687 . [ 53 ] S . Ahn , J . Kim , C . L . Lucaveche , M . C . Reedy , L . M . Luttrell , R . J . Lefkowitz , Y . Daaka , Src - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation regulates dynamin self - assembly and ligand - induced endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 26642 – 26651 . [ 54 ] J . Bao , G . Gur , Y . Yarden , Src promotes destruction of c - Cbl : Implications for oncogenic synergy between Src and growth factor receptors , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 ( 2003 ) 2438 – 2443 . [ 55 ] W . J . Wasilenko , M . Nori , N . Testerman , M . J . Weber , Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor biosynthesis caused by the Src oncogene product , pp 60v - Src , Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 ( 1990 ) 1254 – 1258 . [ 56 ] W . J . Wasilenko , D . M . Payne , D . L . Fitzgerald , M . J . Weber , Phosphorylation and activation of epidermal growth factor receptors in cells transformed by the src oncogene , Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 ( 1991 ) 309 – 321 . [ 57 ] T . Sorkina , F . Huang , L . Beguinot , A . Sorkin , Effect of tyrosine kinase inhibitors on clathrin - coated pit recruitment and internalization of epidermal growth factor receptor , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 27433 – 27441 . [ 58 ] C . Puri , D . Tosoni , R . Comai , A . Rabellino , D . Segat , F . Caneva , P . Luzzi , P . P . Di Fiore , C . Tacchetti , Relationships between EGFR signaling - competent and endocytosis - competent membrane microdomains , Mol . Biol . Cell 16 ( 2005 ) 2704 – 2718 . [ 59 ] J . Z . Rappoport , S . M . Simon , Endocytic trafficking of activated EGFR is AP - 2 dependent and occurs through preformed clathrin spots , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 1301 – 1305 . [ 60 ] S . Sigismund , E . Argenzio , D . Tosoni , E . Cavallaro , S . Polo , P . P . Di Fiore , Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation , Dev . Cell 15 ( 2008 ) 209 – 219 . [ 61 ] S . Sigismund , T . Woelk , C . Puri , E . Maspero , C . Tacchetti , P . Transidico , P . P . Di Fiore , S . Polo , Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 ( 2005 ) 2760 – 2765 . [ 62 ] R . Ebner , R . Derynck , Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor - alpha : Differential intracellular routing and processing of ligand - receptor complexes , Cell Regul . 2 ( 1991 ) 599 – 612 . [ 63 ] K . E . Longva , F . D . Blystad , E . Stang , A . M . Larsen , L . E . Johannessen , I . H . Madshus , Ubiquitination and proteasomal activity is required for transportoftheEGFreceptortoinnermembranesofmultivesicular bodies , J . Cell Biol . 156 ( 2002 ) 843 – 854 . [ 64 ] M . Yokouchi , T . Kondo , A . Sanjay , A . Houghton , A . Yoshimura , S . Komiya , H . Zhang , R . Baron , Src - catalyzed phosphorylation of c - Cbl leads to the interdependent ubiquitination of both proteins , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 35185 – 35193 . [ 65 ] G . Carpenter , S . Cohen , 125I - labeled human epidermal growth factor . Binding , internalization , and degradation in human fibroblasts , J . Cell Biol . 71 ( 1976 ) 159 – 171 . [ 66 ] G . Carpenter , S . Cohen , Human epidermal growth factor and the proliferation of human fibroblasts , J . Cell . Physiol . 88 ( 1976 ) 227 – 237 . [ 67 ] C . M . Stoscheck , G . Carpenter , Characterization of the metabolic turnover of epidermal growth factor receptor protein in A - 431 cells , J . Cell . Physiol . 120 ( 1984 ) 296 – 302 . [ 68 ] C . M . Stoscheck , G . Carpenter , Down regulation of epidermal growth factor receptors : direct demonstration of receptor degradation in human fibroblasts , J . Cell Biol . 98 ( 1984 ) 1048 – 1053 . [ 69 ] G . M . Di Guglielmo , P . C . Baass , W . J . Ou , B . I . Posner , J . J . Bergeron , Compartmentalization of SHC , GRB2 and mSOS , and hyperphosphorylation of Raf - 1 by EGF but not insulin in liver parenchyma , EMBO J . 13 ( 1994 ) 4269 – 4277 . 3253 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 6 ( 2 0 1 0 ) 3 2 3 9 – 3 2 5 3