Cancer and Metastasis Reviews 12 : 303 - 324 , 1993 . © 1993 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . Vascular permeability factor ( VPF , VEGF ) in tumor biology Donald R . Senger , Livingston Van De Water , Lawrence E Brown , Janice A . Nagy , Kiang - Teck Yeo , Tet - Kin Yeo , Brygida Berse , Robert W . Jackman , Ann M . Dvorak and Harold E Dvorak Departments of Pathology , Beth Israel Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02215 , USA Key words : vascular permeability factor , vascular endothelial growth factor , endothelial cells Summary Vascular permeability factor ( VPF ) , also known as vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , is a multifunc - tional cytokine expressed and secreted at high levels by many tumor cells of animal and human origin . As secreted by tumor cells , VPF / VEGF is a 34 - 42 kDa heparin - binding , dimeric , disulfide - bonded glycoprotein that acts directly on endothelial cells ( EC ) by way of specific receptors to activate phospholipase C and induce [ Ca2 + ] i transients . Two high affinity VPF / VEGF receptors , both tyrosine kinases , have thus far been de - scribed . VPF / VEGF is likely to have a number of important roles in tumor biology related , but not limited to , the process of tumor angiogenesis . As a potent permeability factor , VPF / VEGF promotes extravasation of plasma fibrinogen , leading to fibrin deposition which alters the tumor extracellular matrix . This matrix pro - motes the ingrowth of macrophages , fibroblasts , and endothelial cells . Moreover , VPF / VEGF is a selective endothelial cell ( EC ) growth factor in vitro , and it presumably stimulates EC proliferation in vivo . Further - more , VPF / VEGF has been found in animal and human tumor effusions by immunoassay and by functional assays and very likely accounts for the induction of malignant ascites . In addition to its role in tumors , VPF / VEGF has recently been found to have a role in wound healing and its expression by activated macrophages suggests that it probably also participates in certain types of chronic inflammation . VPF / VEGF is expressed in normal development and in certain normal adult organs , notably kidney , heart , adrenal gland and lung . Its functions in normal adult tissues are under investigation . L Introduction The microvasculature of tumors is hyperpermeable compared with that of most normal tissues [ 1 - 6 ] . As a consequence , fluid and plasma proteins accumu - late in the interstitium of solid tumors ; fluid accu - mulation is most evident and least restricted when tumors enter body cavities and assume an ascites growth pattern . The generalized hyperpermeability of tumor blood vessels suggested the hypothesis that tumor cells render tumor vessels leaky by se - creting a vascular permeability factor ( VPF ) [ 7 ] . Subsequently , we obtained direct evidence for such a factor by demonstrating that serum - free tumor cell culture medium , as well as cell - free tumor as - cites from experimental animals , contained a mac - romolecular activity which caused the blood vessels of normal guinea pig skin to become hyperperme - able ( Fig . 1 ) [ 7 , 8 ] . Moreover , we found that all of this activity was attributable to a tumor cell secreted heparin - binding protein with electrophoretic mo - bility corresponding to M r 34 - 42 , 000 . Neutralizing antibody to this VPF blocked the increased perito - neal influx associated with the ascites growth of gui - nea pig line 10 tumor cells , further implicating this protein as important in promoting ascites fluid ac - cumulation [ 8 ] . Analysis of human tumor cell lines in vitro indicated that they also secreted a heparin - 304 Fig . 1 . The Miles assay for measuring increased vascular perme - ability in guinea pig skin . Mediators of increased permeability , such as VPF or histamine , cause bluing at the site of intradermal injection within 3 - 5 minutes , whereas control , isotonic solutions , e . g . , saline , serum - free culture media , elicit no response . Test samples from left to right : cell and serum - free line 10 culture me - dium harvested after 1 , 5 and 24 hrs . of culture , respectively . Note progressive intensity of blue ( here black ) spots as a function of time in cell culture . VPF accounts for all of the vessel permeabil - ity - enhancing activity in this medium . binding VPF with characteristics very similar to those of the guinea pig protein ; VPF expression was markedly higher in tumorigenic cells than in non - tumorigenic parental cell lines [ 9 ] . In short , several lines of evidence suggested that expression and se - cretion of a vascular permeabilizing activity was a general property of malignant tumor cells , that an identical or closely related VPF protein was re - sponsible for this activity in diverse cells and spe - cies , and that VPF expression by tumor cells had important consequences for the tumor microenvi - ronment . Among these were the extravasation of plasma proteins into the tumor extracellular matrix , leading to fluid accumulation ; and the subsequent clotting of extravasated fibrinogen to form cross - linked fibrin , a characteristic feature of many ani - mal and human tumors [ 7 , 10 ] . More recently , several laboratories have inde - pendently isolated a protein from normal pituitary follicular cells that has selective mitogenic activity for cultured endothelial cells and that was therefore named vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) [ 11 , 12 ] . N - terminal amino acid sequence and other structural features suggested that VPF and VEGF were very similar or identical proteins , and Connol - ly et al . demonstrated that tumor - secreted VPF pro - moted endothelial cell growth [ 13 ] . All evidence in - dicates that tumor VPF and pituitary VEGF are en - coded by the same gene ; moreover , identification of VPF as an endothelial cell growth factor suggests an additional important role for this protein in tumor biology as a direct promoter of endothelial cell pro - liferation . Thus , VPF / VEGF can be viewed as a multifunctional cytokine which : ( 1 ) modifies the ex - tracellular matrix by promoting plasma protein ex - travasation with resulting fibrin deposition , and ( 2 ) directly stimulates growth of vascular endothelial cells . Additional functional activities now attribut - able to VPF / VEGF as well as more detailed discus - sion of the likely role this protein plays in the com - plex process of tumor stroma generation and angio - genesis will be discussed in this review . II . VPF / VEGF structure VPF / VEGF has been purified from several sources including tumor cell lines of guinea pig , human and rat origin as well as normal bovine pituitary follic - ular cells [ 11 , 12 , 14 - 18 ] . An electrophoretic analysis of VPF purified from guinea pig line 10 tumor cells is shown in Fig . 2 wherein VPF migrated as a broad band corresponding to an M r of 34 , 000 to 42 , 000 . However , following reduction of disulfide bonds , VPF exhibited markedly increased mobility with major bands corresponding to M r 22 , 000 ; 20 , 000 ; and 17 , 000 . N - terminal amino acid sequence analys - es of purified VPF consistently revealed a single amino terminus , suggesting that VPF is a dimeric disulfide - bonded ' protein consisting of polypep - tides with identical N - termini but with some hetero - geneity in other regions [ 16 ] . Consistent with this hypothesis , guinea pig tumor VPF was visualized on immunoblots ( stained with antibody raised to a 24 amino acid peptide representing VPF NH2 - termi - nal seqence ) as a broad band corresponding to 34 , 000M2 , 000 Da . Moreover , following reduction , the major antibody - reactive bands migrated in the region of 22 , 000 to 17 , 000 Da ( Fig . 3 ) .