Crowd Creativity through Combination Lixiu Yu Stevens Institute of Technology Castle Point on Hudson , Hoboken NJ 07030 USA lisayu1103 @ gmail . com ABSTRACT The goal of this research is to perform large - scale experiments to see if the crowd , mediated by technology , produces creative designs by combining designs . To fulfill this goal , a sequential combination system is built . The system is a variant on a human based genetic algorithm , through which the crowd participates in an iterative process of design , evaluation , and combination . The study will provide a way of creatively solving problems in a number of different domains . It will also shed light on the mechanisms of social creativity : how individuals can build on each other’s work and how technology can facilitate design by encouraging collaboration through shared designs . Author Keywords Crowdsourcing , creativity , design ACM Classification Keywords H5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces ACM General Terms Design INTRODUCTION How can a crowd be organized to generate creative ideas ? Crowdsourcing makes it possible to assemble large numbers of workers in a short amount of time . It is a process that is part technology – an online marketplace with micropayments possible – and part organization – a coordination mechanism [ 10 ] . This process can be implemented with a wide range of possible structures , and many remain untried . In the proposed dissertation , I will look at a specific form of collaboration , in which members of the crowd combine the ideas of peers . This choice is motivated by the common claim made in management literature that innovation is at its heart the recombination of existing knowledge [ 3 , 6 ] . Psychology researchers also claim that creativity results from a combination process [ 11 , 12 ] . In a third literature , from the field of optimization , combination has been operationalized as crossover , a process in genetic algorithms [ 1 , 4 , 7 ] . In sum , these three different literatures suggest ways of addressing combination , but none in themselves are both specific enough to apply to design problems and flexible enough to tackle the types of ill - defined problems that characterize most product development . Synthesizing ideas from the three fields , I propose such a process , calling it a sequential combination system : one crowd creates a first generation of designs , and then new crowds create successive generations by combining the designs made by previous crowds . I will describe the system in detail and report an experiment conducted with the system , one of several to be performed to complete my dissertation . THE SEQUENTIAL COMBINATION SYSTEM In order to clearly specify the sequential combination system , the way a genetic algorithm works will first be described . All variants of these algorithms start with a first generation population , and perform a fitness ranking . Then , members of the population are selected to become parents of the next generation . Most often , tournament selection is used : two parents are selected at random , and the fitter chosen . Another two parents are selected , and the fitter chosen . The two fit parents then produce offspring through a combination procedure . These offspring serve as a new population , which is then ranked , and the process repeats . Because combination can sometimes take the worst features of highly ranked parents , and thereby degrade the available genetic pool , a set of the strongest parents survive into the next generation without change , an attribute of the algorithm referred to as elitism [ 1 ] . The sequential combination system is based on the above description . It integrates together organizational processes , software tools , and a crowdsourcing market . The organizational process is based on the idea of a genetic algorithm [ 4 , 7 ] implemented with human participants [ 9 ] : one crowd creates a first generation of designs , and then successive crowds create successive generations by combining the designs made by previous crowds . The fitness ranking in the system is based on the creativity scores of the designs , as evaluated by crowds . Tournament selection is used to pick the parents presented to the next generation crowds for combination . In each generation , 20 highest - rated designs are automatically promoted to the next generation in a process called elitism [ 1 ] . Figure 1 . The generations of the experiment . Specifically , the solicitation and management of participants are handled through Amazon Mechanical Turk . All participants receive nominal compensation for either generating or evaluating designs . When participants engage in idea generation , they are directed to a Google document page already opened as a drawing . This same page , in later generations , presents the designs to be combined . The drawing tool provides many menu choices including a freehand sketch option , a vector line , text , and pull - down shape palette . The system is run for three generations , as summarized in Figure 1 . THE EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS In the experiment , participants were asked to design chairs for children and present their designs through sketches . It was run through three generations with 1207 participants . The creativity of the designs from the last generation was compared to the creativity of the initial designs from the first generation . The consensus in the creativity literature is that only original ideas that are also practical should be called creative [ 2 ] . Operationally , this leads to a binary measure of creativity that includes only designs that exceed a certain threshold on both the scales of originality and practicality [ 2 ] . All designs were evaluated by the crowd on two scales : originality and practicality . The designs were then further classified as being creative or not based on the two scales . The results show that the number of creative designs in the last generation is significantly greater than that in the first generation , as shown in Figure 2 . Figure 2 . On the left and right are example chairs from the first and third generation . The bar chart shows the proportion of creative designs . The error bars indicate 95 % confidence intervals . FUTURE RESEARCH Future research in the dissertation will focus on two directions . One direction considers a different evaluation mechanism , purchases in virtual worlds . The evaluation of designs in the reported experiments was based on the crowd’s judgments . Another important test of a creative design , though , happens after it is implemented and becomes an innovation . That is , eventually the consumer or user evaluates the product for purchase and ongoing use . However , for many products , such as the chair example discussed here , production tests are probably infeasible . Some virtual environments have products and economies – so it would be possible to design and sell designs without the need for any physical manufacturing . Therefore , a future experiment will run sequential combination on a virtual worlds problem : three - dimensional products will be designed , combined and sold . A second direction seeks to understand exactly how combination works . The current results show that the sequential combination system as a whole influences the creativity of the later combined designs . Several processes are involved in the system : combination , tournament selection , and elitism . To test whether combination leads to creativity—the hypothesis behind this work—future experiments will be run to control for the effects of tournament selection and elitism . And the ways features propagate in the different conditions will be examined to determine how exactly people combine ideas , and how such design ideas propagate . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Funding for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation , awards IIS - 0855995 and IIS - 0968561 . REFERENCES 1 . Deb , K . Multi - objective optimization using evolutionary algorithms . UK : Wiley , Chichester , 2001 . 2 . Finke , R . Creative Imagery : Discoveries and Inventions in Visualization , Lawrence Erlbaum , USA , 1990 . 3 . Fleming , L . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search , Management Science . 47 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 117 - 132 . 4 . Goldberg , David E . Genetic Algorithms in Search , Optimization and Machine Learning , MA : Kluwer Academic Publishers , 1989 . 5 . Google Docs Drawing Application . http : / / docs0 . google . com / demo / edit ? id = scACRQaIm3t8 3kVISWPhWfrqx # drawin 6 . Henderson , R . M . & Clark , K . B . Architectural innovation : the reconfiguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms . ASQ , 35 , 1 ( 1990 ) . 7 . Holland . J . H . Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press , 1975 . 8 . Kittur , A . , Chi , E . H . , & Suh , B . Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk . In Proc . CHI 2008 , ACM ( 2008 ) , 453 - 456 . 9 . Kosorukoff , A . Human based genetic algorithm . In Proc . IEEE Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 2001 . 10 . Quinn , A . J . , & Bederson , B . A Taxonomy of Distributed Human Computation . Technical Report HCIL - 2009 - 23 [ University of Maryland ] , 2009 . 11 . Simonton , D . K . Scientific creativity as constrained stochastic behavior : The integration of product , person , and process perspectives . Psychological Bulletin , 129 , 2003 , 475 - 494 . 12 . Thagard , P . Conceptual revolutions . New Jersey : Princeton University Press , 1992 . Generation 1 Generation 3 P r opo r t i on o f c r ea t i v e de s i gn s 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6