A Consumer Needs - Driven Approach for Finding IT - Service Bundles Sybren de Kinderen VU University Amsterdam De Boelelaan 1081 1081 HV , Amsterdam , The Netherlands sdkinde @ few . vu . nl Jaap Gordijn VU University Amsterdam De Boelelaan 1081 1081 HV Amsterdam , The Netherlands gordijn @ cs . vu . nl Abstract Today , IT - support for enterprises is increasingly deliv - ered as a commercial service . Consequently , IT - service pro - visioning requires at least two enterprises , a seller and a buyer . Moreover , the seller itself can often be considered as a network of enterprises , jointly satisfying an IT - need of a buyer , thereby utilizing each other strengths . In this paper , we contribute an ontologically well - founded methodology called e 3 service for creating multi - supplier IT - service bun - dles that satisfy customer IT - needs . Such IT - needs , actually being high level problem statements that often require mul - tiple IT - services to cover ( hence the term bundle ) , are often too ill - deﬁned to ﬁnd speciﬁc IT - services for , thus requiring a systematic approach to ﬁnding these solutions . The main idea behind e 3 service is to conceptualize established ideas from service marketing literature , with the ultimate aim to generate a bundle of IT - services semi - automatically start - ing from a vague customer need . This paper focuses itself on a systematic analysis of a customer need , or : how to gradually arrive from a vague problem statement to speciﬁc IT - services covering this problem statement . We illustrate this process by using ﬁndings from a case study performed with an industry partner . 1 . Introduction In recent years , the notion of customizable bundles of IT - services to satisfy complex needs from speciﬁc cus - tomers , has gained interest . Consider a daily - life example of obtaining Internet access as provided by Internet Service Providers ( ISPs ) . Here , the proposition of an ISP is actually a bundle consisting of more elementary service outcomes , such as IP - based access , an email box , space to host a web - site , and access to newsgroups . However , depending on cus - tomer needs , other bundles are possible , for instance only IP - based access plus email plus IP - telephony . In addition to creating various bundles for customization of IT - services to provide a closer match to customer needs , such IT - services are increasingly offered by a networked value constellation , rather than just a single enterprise [ 17 ] . By doing so , suppli - ers can utilize their core competencies , while still offering ( jointly ) a satisfying , complex , service to customers . In the ISP - example , Internet access can be a multi supplier bun - dle where IP - access is provided by a telecom operator , an email box is offered by a commercial enterprise utilizing economies of scale , as can hold for website hosting , which may be offered by yet another enterprise . Guidelines on creating customized service bundles have already been studied in business literature , most notably by [ 11 ] , [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] . However , these guidelines are fairly generic ( the focus is on just services and not speciﬁcally on IT - services ) . Moreover , they lack a conceptualization and for - malization so it is difﬁcult to systematically and ( semi - ) au - tomatically reason about service bundles . Such reasoning is important , because IT - services , as mentioned by the ISP example , are bought and provisioned online , enabled by information technology . To adequately facilitate this buy - ing and provisioning process , the elicitation of IT - needs , as well as the selection of commercial IT - services that can be provisioned to satisfy such needs , should by supported by information technology as much as possible . To put it differently , on the long term we are aiming to contribute computer - aided composing and provisioning of commercial IT - service bundles satisfying a complex need in a network of enterprises . It is important at this point to understand that we con - sider IT - services really as commercial services : economic activities , deeds and performances of a mostly intangible nature [ 15 ] , with a focus on those services that can be or - dered and provisioned ( nearly ) online . This is in contrast with web services and related standards such as BPSS [ 1 ] , BPEL4WS [ 2 ] , WSCI [ 3 ] , and WS - Coordination [ 5 ] , to name only a few : these are mainly intended to arrive at a cross - organizational computing platform to facilitate inter - operability on a more technical level . Obviously , web ser - vices potentially can serve as an implementation platform for the commercial IT - services we have in mind . In previ - ous work ( see Section 2 ) , we have proposed ( 1 ) an ontol - ogy to represent a supplier perspective on service outcomes ( basically a service - catalogue of suppliers , including con - straints that can be used to reason about potential service - bundles ) , ( 2 ) a basic ontology to represent needs , and ( 3 ) a reasoner that bridges needs and services using a feature solution graph ( [ 8 ] , mapping needs on alternative service outcomes ) . The contribution of this paper is then two - fold . First , it proposes a customer - oriented lightweight ontology to rep - resent and reason about customer needs . Second , we show how this ontology can be used to ( 1 ) elicit needs of con - sumers , and to ( 2 ) ﬁnd service outcomes , as represented by using our supply - side ontology on services . The customer - need ontology , as well as its use for need - elicitation and service - bundling reasoning is explained in Section 3 . In Section 4 , we apply the ontologies to a case study we per - formed in cooperation with MalieNet ; a real - life networked value constellation . Finally , in Sections 5 and 6 , we present a discussion and our conclusions . 2 Previous work : Serviguration This paper builds upon previous research we did on serviguration [ 4 ] . Serviguration ( service conﬁguration ) provides computer supported reasoning about general ser - vice bundles , by combining concepts from business litera - ture ( e . g . various kinds of dependencies between services , which can be seen as constraints for the bundling reasoner ) with concepts from computer science ( e . g . RDF ontologies , and production rules on top of these , as used in the ﬁeld of knowledge engineering ) . Case studies in the realm of electricity supply and healthcare we have performed , have shown that by using this methodology , meaningful bundles of services can generated semi - automatically [ 4 ] . More - over , given the - per case study - supplier - oriented service catalogue started with , in principle a signiﬁcant amount of different bundles are possible ( millions ) , which servigura - tion reduced by the reasoning process to a few relevant bun - dles ( tenths ) , based on stated consumer needs , and supplier - oriented relationships ( and constraints ) between elementary services . So , serviguration is a good ﬁrst attempt to arrive at automated conﬁguration of a networked value constellation , in which a series of suppliers satisfy an need by bundling services . However , serviguration concentrates on conceptualizing services mainly from a supplier perspective . For instance , a service such as email , occurring in a catalogue of an ISP , would be related as enhancing service to the service IP - access . From a supply - side perspective , this relation can be motivated by the technical consideration that modems re - quired for IP - access provisioning , and servers required for email account hosting , are for example co - located at the same site , and therefore ( as a bundle ) cost less , than if these services were located at different physical locations ( due to the fact that broadband connections between two sites can be avoided ) . As a consequence , to satisfy a need to surf on the web the bundling reasoner would ﬁnd a bundle [ IP - access ] , and a bundle [ IP - access , email ] . It is important to understand that the [ IP - access , email ] bundle is found , due to technical , supplier - oriented , reasons ( co - location as a re - sult of which the bundle can be offered cheaper ) , rather than that is directly based on a customer requirement who may need in addition to IP - access also email . Ideally we would like to generate only those bundles that contain precisely those features the customer is interested in , and not bundles that contain unnecessary features that have to be paid for non - the - less . To this end , serviguration employs a rudimen - tary customer need ontology , which uses another terminol - ogy then is done for the supply side of services . The idea that customers may have a different perspective on services than suppliers do is amongst others also stated by [ 18 ] . In order to improve the generation of bundles by avoiding un - necessary extra services , we detail in this paper ( Section 3 ) a customer - oriented need / want / demand ontology , that is capable of representing relationships ( and constraints ) be - tween needs / wants / demands that are grounded in consumer needs , and not in supplier - oriented motivations . A second and related issue is that serviguration makes a clear , sharp - cut , distinction between a supplier perspec - tive , and a customer perspective . Using a feature - solution graph [ 8 ] , needs of customers ( features ) are then mapped onto service - outcomes of suppliers ( solutions ) . As a re - sult , serviguration deﬁnes the customer perspective inde - pendently of the supply side perspective . However , to im - prove serviguration , we propose to make a more gradual movement from needs to service - outcomes . We consider it as hard to deﬁne customer needs independently from what kind of IT - services are offered by suppliers . To put it dif - ferently , it is difﬁcult to state problems ( needs ) , without having some form of solution ( service - outcomes ) already in mind . In general , this observation has been made already quite a while ago in Computer Science [ 7 ] , and in the de - sign literature by [ 6 ] . Also , the observation is backed up by the means - end chaining theory [ 12 ] , where laddering is employed to abstract away from speciﬁc product attributes that are typically deﬁned by the supplier ( e . g . a product brand like Levis ) to the consequences derived from those at - tributes that are typically deﬁned on the customer side ( e . g . Levis provide for more social prestige ) . This position also closely relates to discussions in Requirements Engineering . In [ 19 ] , with respect to requirements , a distinction is made between problem descriptions ( e . g . goals , problem frames , value models ) and solution speciﬁcations ( e . g . cf . IEEE 830 ) . A key question is then how to move from a prob - lem description to a solution speciﬁcation . In this paper , we explore a gradual move , during which more and more solu - tion aspects ( services ) are included to arrive at a satisfying solution for an initial problem statement ( customer need ) . Gradually moving from problem to solution has the added advantage of being able to ﬁnd substitutes for service out - comes more easily , since considering solutions at different levels also allows for exploration of substitutes at different levels ; in a sense , this is a useful to suppliers who are re - viewing their competition . Later in this paper , we explain more precisely how we see this . Finally , serviguration concentrates on commercial ser - vices as a rather generic construct . The aim of this work is to focus on IT - services , to ultimately generate and build networked IT - value constellations . In sum , to address these fore mentioned issues , our e 3 service methodology , building upon serviguration , has two main purposes : 1 . it intends to elaborate on the cus - tomer perspective on services , and to take the interplay be - tween the customer and suppply side more into account . 2 . it specializes itself towards reasoning about IT - service bundling , more speciﬁcally those that can be delivered on - line . Focusing on this domain also allows for standard - izing certain service attributes , such as a standard QoS - measurements as quality attributes for IT - services . This is however beyond the scope of this paper . 3 e 3 service : Needs - driven IT - service bundling In this section , an explanation will be provided of e 3 service . First , we will discuss how e 3 service employs value modeling to elicit the service outcomes of the ser - vice outcomes on which a bundling analysis will be per - formed . After this , we will show how e 3 service analyzes customer needs , taking the existing service outcomes as a starting point . Although it is counterintuitive to elicit customer needs in this way , there are reasons to do so . The most important reason is that we often operate in an already up - and - running business context ( in practice , uncharted territories seldom occur ) , with already available service outcomes available . To our experience , a key issue is then to understand which beneﬁts a customer can derive from certain service out - comes . These beneﬁts would be more difﬁcult to ﬁnd when reasoning in a top - down fashion - i . e . when starting from customer needs ( meaning ; the problems that are to be solved by employing the services ) - since speciﬁc service outcomes and the ends to which these can be employed are then left out of the elicitation process . 3 . 1 Step 1 : Employing value modeling to elicit service outcomes The ﬁrst step in e 3 service is to elicit the services on which the bundling analysis will be performed , where we consider the services to be economically valuable services produced and consumed in a network of enterprises . For this purpose , we employ a value perspective . This is neces - sary because we need to be familiar with the available ser - vices and the beneﬁts thereof ﬁrst if we want to reason about the speciﬁc customer needs they satisfy . Also , a conceptu - alization of the service outcome allows us to focus on ana - lyzing needs that are important to scrutinize further . This is because familiarity with the main beneﬁts of the service - as gained through value modeling - enables us to ask the ques - tion of why these beneﬁts are important to the customer , thus providing a good starting point for arriving at customer needs . In marketing literature , a similar approach is towards needs elicitation is the laddering - technique [ 12 ] mentioned earlier . In this paper , we employ e 3 value [ 10 ] to elicit the bene - ﬁts provided by the services , followed by a bundling analy - sis . The e 3 value methodology helps in understanding a net - work of enterprises in terms of the enterprises themselves , the value adding activities they perform , and the valuable objects they transfer with each other . Here , the valuable ob - jects should be seen as IT - service outcomes . In addition , e 3 value allows to reason about economic reciprocity and about the Discounted Net Present Value Flow ( DNPVF ) on a per actor basis , to evaluate economic feasibility for each actor participating in a value constellation . 3 . 2 Step 2 : Elicit and further analyze cus - tomer needs The next step in the e 3 service methodology is to elicit and analyze customer needs , using the found service out - comes as an input . As in serviguration , e 3 service employs a need / want / demand hierarchy [ 13 ] as a basis for specify - ing customer needs into demands that are speciﬁc enough for matching against service outcomes , but adds to these need / want / demand concepts typed relationships , to facility a gradual move from need ( problem ) to service - outcome ( solution ) . In the next section we will explain the concepts used in our ontology , with a focus on the need / want / demand hierarchy . Next we show how to stepwise arrive at a cus - tomer need speciﬁcation , using the service outcome as a starting point . 3 . 2 . 1 The e 3 service customer need ontology The basic thought behind using a need / want / demand point of view , is that it enables the detailing of a need - being a problem of the customer that exists independently of the service - into demands using the concept of a customer want as an intermediary level . The difference between the want and demand is that a want is typically a generic satisﬁer for a need , and most importantly : that a want does not contain the notion of the customer being able and willing to pay for it . As an example , consider a person in London , who ‘wants to talk to a person in Paris’ ( a need ) and that ( s ) he has cho - sen to travel to Paris to satisfy this need . Then ‘transporta - tion’ is a want , since it is a generic satisﬁer for being able to talk to one another and moreover , it does not contain the notion of whether the customer is willing and able to pay for it ; other wants are of course also possible , such as using some form of ‘electronic communication’ . Demands are in this example the modes of transportation , e . g . by ‘boat’ , ‘train’ or ‘airplane’ ; each of them containing a fairly good idea on how much the customer has to pay for getting from London to Paris . The notion of using need / want / demand for specializa - tion of customer needs is depicted in Figure 1 . Through the relationship between sacriﬁce and demand depicted in the model , it is again stressed that the notion of the cus - tomer being willing and able to pay for a service outcome is important , since a favorable attitude towards acquiring a service does not automatically imply actual acquisition of that service ( e . g . the person mentioned earlier might prefer to ﬂy business class , but also might not be able to afford it ) . In marketing theory this is further backed up by [ 9 ] , who states in the Theory of Reasoned Action ( TRA ) that it is crucial to analyze the customers’ willingness to actually buy a service , and not to merely focus on measuring how favorable the attitude towards a service is . Using different levels of abstractions ( need / want / demand ) while reasoning about customer needs has the advantage of identifying substitutes for a certain service more easily . For instance , recall that ‘transportation’ in our running example is only a way in which the need could be satisﬁed ; an alternative could be some form of ‘electronic communication’ . This shows that a gradual approach toward needs - elicitation allows for a broader view of solutions that can be used to substitute a certain service in a way that is similar to Porters’ Five Forces model [ 16 ] . In this model , one of the considerations is to also review substitutes for a product , and not to merely review direct competition that offers a product with similar features . This is similar to the difference between a want and demand , where direct competition can satisfy the same demand and on a higher level of abstraction , different substitute satisﬁers compete for satisfying the same need . From the model , it can also be observed that a typed re - lationship between demands can exist . This is derived from the fact that some types of service dependencies , such as the enhancing service of a spam ﬁlter to complement a ba - sic e - mail service , typically have a customer component and therefore needs to be reviewed from a customer perspective as well . Such service dependencies are derived from mar - keting literature [ 11 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] , and deﬁne in what ways two services can be related to one another . The example of the spam ﬁlter for instance , is typically a value - enhancing ser - vice that can optionally be delivered next to a basic e - mail service . However , there are also other types of service de - pendencies that can exist such as a core / supporting relation - ship between two services , where the core service - to use our running example : e - mail - cannot be delivered without some type of supporting services , such as administration . So far , we have found two service dependencies that have a customer component . These are : • A core / enhancing relationship - fulﬁlling the enhanc - ing demand positively contributes to satisfying the need belonging to the core demand . Our perception of this dependency differs somewhat from the original interpretation found in service literature ( and also in serviguration ) . Originally , this relationship is deﬁned between two ﬁxed service outcomes , provisioned by ﬁxed suppliers . However , as we try to reason about IT - service bundling in a networked business setting , we try to abstract away from ﬁxed suppliers and there - fore deﬁne the core / enhancing dependency between demands ( without having in mind a speciﬁc supplier already ) . Moreover , placing this dependency on the customer side allows us to express this dependency in customer terminology , thus allowing the customer to make the decision of whether or not a certain en - hancing service should be included in a service bundle . An example of this relationship would be the e - mail - spam ﬁlter mentioned earlier . • Optional bundling - which are more loosely related demands , the most important difference with the core / enhancing service being that these demands do not share the same need as a root . This also means that when fulﬁlled , optionally bundled services do not di - rectly add value to the core service . An example of op - tional bundling could in the case of e - mail be stream - ing video , which is something very different from the core service but could be something that adds value to the customer as well . The usefulness of analyzing these dependencies from a cus - tomer perspective is that it allows us to deﬁne more cus - tomized service bundles : this is due to the fact that model - ing these dependencies on the customer side allows for ask - ing customers directly whether they are interested in extra services based on the wants and demands fulﬁlled by this extra service , rather than ﬁrst deriving bundles of service outcomes . For instance , say that the want beloning to the demand of a spam - ﬁlter is decrease unwanted mail , then the question can be asked to the customer : would you also like a spam - ﬁlter , in order to decrease the number of unwanted e - mails ? When answered positively , this demand can be taken into account in the bundling process ; otherwise , it is left out . We also added the concept of quality attributes to de - mands ( not shown in Figure 1 ) . These aim at describing the non - functional properties of a service , such as some reliability - metric , and play a key - role in customer satisfac - tion . Quality attributes have a place on the customer per - spective since in marketing literature , service quality usu - ally is perceived to be the difference between what the cus - tomer expects from a certain service ( derived from e . g . past experiences or promises made ) and the actual service which can really be delivered [ 20 ] For example , imagine that an ISP - customer expects a uptime - which can be presumed as a metric of reliability - of 99 % of the time spent online , while the ISP might only be able to guarantee 95 % uptime . This would result in a negative gap between expected quality and that which can be delivered , which provides us with an in - dication that the customer will probably be unsatisﬁed with this service if ( s ) he were to leave the situation unchanged ( where changes include going to another provider , or try - ing to lower customer expectations concerning the level of quality ) . Due to lack of space however , we will not address this notion of quality further . 3 . 2 . 2 Finding needs using service outcomes as a start - ing point So far , we reviewed the concepts from e 3 service , now how do we use these concepts in practice to elicit and further analyze customer needs . To this end , we take the following steps : 1 . Derive demands from service outcomes . Transform - ing service outcomes into customer demands means that we should abstract away from attributes speciﬁc to a certain supplier and only focus on the main beneﬁt provided by the service in question . In our transporta - tion example , a speciﬁc carrier like Easyjet can ab - stract away from his / her ‘transportation’ service , with speciﬁc properties such as no ‘on - ﬂight meals’ , to a more generic demand : ‘ﬂight’ Note that it is impor - tant to abstract away from the individual organizations providing the service outcomes , unless certain service outcomes have such a unique character they are only provisioned by just one supplier . This notion of ab - straction is important since in principle a demand can be satisﬁed by multiple suppliers . 2 . Cluster demands into wants . This can be done by re - viewing which demands must be satisﬁed together , and Figure 1 . needs ontology by asking the question what instrumental goal is ful - ﬁlled by the satisfaction of these demands . We per - form this type of intermediary clustering - intermedi - ary meaning ; without directly moving to a problem de - scription - in order to ﬁnd a labeled , common denomi - nator for related demands , so that it is clear why certain demands must be satisﬁed together . How this cluster - ing works , is illustrated in section 4 . 3 . Derive needs from wants . In order to elicit a customer need , we try to ﬁnd the terminal goal that is ( partially ) achieved by fulﬁlling the instrumental goal of a want . In other words ; when eliciting needs , one tries to ﬁnd a problem that is ( partially ) solved by fulﬁlling a want . 4 . Deﬁne dependencies between demands . Having clari - ﬁed the needs , it is now possible to deﬁne relationships between demands using the dependencies discussed earlier . Finding them can be done by using mentioned dependencies as guidelines ; for instance , when one ﬁnds that 1 ) fulﬁlling one demand contributes posi - tively to satisfying the need of another demand and that 2 ) this demand does not necessarily have to be fulﬁlled to satisfy that need , then a core / enhancing relationship exists . Reviewing if an optionally bundled relationship exists can be done by asking a slightly different ques - tion ; given a certain demand X , would the customer be interested in satisfying another demand Y as well , independently of whether satisfying that demand con - tributes to satisfying the need corresponding to X ? Using this approach , we are able to construct a grad - ual transition from problem statement to solution , instead of deﬁning a clear - cut distinction between them . Next , we show how this transition works in practice . 4 A real - life case study with e 3 service In this section , we will illustrate the principles discussed using a case study carried out with MalieNet . 4 . 1 The MalieNet case study 4 . 1 . 1 MalieNet ; an IT - service provider for industry - platforms Malienet is an ( IT - ) service provider aimed at the Branch Organizations ( BO’s ) in the Netherlands . These BO’s are organizations that represent companies working within the same industry , or branch ( e . g . the branch organization for all companies that sell cars ) . The companies represented by the BO’s are the members of a BO , and these mem - bers pay contribution in return for e . g . extensive lobbying ( the results of which could be beneﬁcial to a whole indus - try sector ) . The BO’s themselves are also a member of one overarching organization ; VNO / NCW ( the organization of the Dutch employers ) . An overview of the relationships be - tween the mentioned parties can be seen in ﬁgure 2 . Malienet has been initiated because the BO’s were loos - ing members ( thus generating less revenue due to the contri - bution paid by these members ) , the underlying cause being that the BO’s members paid contribution but were not see - ing much that is of added value for them in return . The BO’s , are for the large part rather traditionally thinking or - ganizations that - besides lobbying and providing industry - speciﬁc consultation regarding rules and regulations - do not provide that much that is of added value for their mem - bers . When also taking into account the trend of member organizations organizing matters themselves ( e . g . check - ing rules and regulations online ) , there is an indication that something should change for the BO’s to prevent them from getting into trouble by loosing members and thus the con - tribution paid by them . The aim of Malienet is to transform BO’s into innovative organizations , by means of IT - service provisioning and con - sultancy regarding its business - wise deployment . The idea is that in that way , BO’s also offer IT - enabled services to their members , thereby giving them more of their money’s worth ( e . g . by providing members with online community services that would enable them to communicate with one another online ) . For this purpose , MalieNet has an extensive catalogue of IT - services that can be provided to the BO , ranging from stand - alone content management services to an integrated ERP - package covering all aspects of an organization . How - ever , MalieNet does not actually realize any of the IT - services it provides ; this is done by specialized partners . MalieNets role is in bringing together the relevant parties that are necessary to realize certain innovative service out - comes . In this respect , MalieNet is a typical networked or - ganization ; it consists of a number of companies that each focuses on his / her core competency , where the core compe - tency of MalieNet lies in knowing who to bring together . A concrete example of this is that MalieNet brought a num - ber of BO’s and a CRM - provider together , so that a CRM - package could be developed that was tailored to the require - ments of a BO . In this case study , we will focus on one of MalieNets’ IT - services ; providing the ability of creating mailings online . 4 . 1 . 2 The Direct Mail service outcome from MalieNet Our cooperation with MalieNet started with an initial in - terview session with MalieNet’s sales representative and its consultants . After this session , we constructed an e 3 value model for the MalieNet constellation , which re - vealed amongst others a Direct Mail service . The goal of MaileNets Direct Mail ( DM ) service is to provide the mem - bers of a BO with the possibility of setting up a DM ini - tiative through the website of their BO . The service is of - fered in cooperation with a logistic service provider , here the biggest postal company in The Netherlands : TNT . The idea behind this service is that a member of a BO could go to the BO’s website , design its own mailing using a wizard , and having the designed cards delivered physically a few days later . This way , the BO’s members do not have to go through the hassle that is usually associated with DM them - selves ( e . g . employees having to prepare mailings them - selves , thus wasting valuable time ) . However , this service turns out to be less popular than expected , one of the main reasons being the simplicity of the service . Currently , the DM - service only allows the customer to order customized A5 - sized cards ( meaning ; that the customer is able to deﬁne the front and back of the cards and nothing more ) . After a second session with MalieNet’s sales represen - tative and a TNT representative , it was felt that more value can be added to this service in order to make it more at - tractive to the BO , since the organization that implements this IT - service - TNT - also offers related IT - services ( e . g . an IT - service that allows the customer to design customized stamps online ) . These could , when offered together with the basic card - service , make the DM - service more attrac - tive . The current problem however is that the IT - services offered by TNT are presented in a fragmented manner ( e . g . the customized stamp is offered separately from the DM - service ) the implication being that the BO’s might not even be aware of these value - added services . The question from MalieNet therefore becomes : how can we make the DM - service outcome more attractive by bundling and thus better employing existing IT - services ? Ideally , we envision that a member of a BO could go their BO’s website and , on the basis of ﬁlling in a short multiple - choice questionnaire re - ceives a bundle of IT - services that best ﬁts its DM - needs Figure 2 . MalieNet ; providing IT - services for industry platforms who in turn are enabled to add more value to their members instead of the basic card design service . 4 . 2 Step 1 : Using value modeling to elicit the TNT Direct Mail service outcome As stated , we review the services on which a bundling analysis will be performed ﬁrst in order to take them into account when reasoning about needs in the next step . The results of this analysis can be seen in ﬁgure 3 , which shows the individual services of TNT as they exist currently , as well as the way in which they are provisioned to the mem - bers of the BO . We also chose to model some value activi - ties in dashed lines . This is to indicate that the provisioning of the online DM - service , even though they might appear as being provisioned by the BO itself , is actually realized by TNT ; the only value added by the BO is that they provide for a central website on which this functionality is offered ( which could act as a portal for their members ) and that they provide for some branch - speciﬁc card designs , but the ser - vice in itself and the basic beneﬁts provided by it ( a set of customized DM - cards ) stay the same . Because of this - the IT - service provided by the BO being an ”‘instantiation”’ of an IT - service provided by TNT - the idea is to model these IT - services differently , with the aim of not including them in the bundling analysis since this same instantiation can of course also be performed after a bundle has been generated . 4 . 3 Step 2 : Elicit and further analyze cus - tomer needs from DM services As explained , we ﬁrst derive customer demands from the available service outcomes ( the value objects as elicited by performing step 1 ) . A comprehensive picture of all steps ( and thus how we gradually move from need to service out - come ) can be found in ﬁgure 4 . The translation of service outcomes into customer demands can be thought of as a pro - cess of instantiation , where a modeled service outcome is a class and a demand an instantiation of that class . In our Figure 3 . MalieNet ; Individual IT - services example , we can imagine that the service outcome ‘cus - tomized DM - card’ can be instantiated as a card containing introductory information but we can also imagine instanti - ating this service outcome as an invitation to an event . It is worth to note that we do not model a separate instanti - ation for every service outcome . In the case study , we il - lustrate this by letting both the DM - card and easy response card point toward the same demand ; this is because both service outcomes provide the same beneﬁt and as such can act as a substitute for one another . It has to be pointed out , however , that both services can have differences regarding speciﬁc properties ; in this case , the speciﬁc property that distinguishes the easy response card from the ordinary cus - tomized DM card is the response medium , where the easy response card allows the customer to react directly by send - ing back the card itself , while the ordinary DM card does not provide that option . After having deﬁned the demands based upon the spe - ciﬁc service outcomes , we cluster the demands into higher level wants . In our case study , this is illustrated by the clus - tering of the demand ‘prospect information’ with ‘send in - troductory information using direct mail’ in the want ’cre - ate awareness through sending information’ . The useful - ness of clustering demands into wants is that it shows which demands must be satisﬁed together . In this case , sending in - formation to prospects cannot be performed without having some basic information on these prospects ( e . g . addresses ) , which is a dependency that exists independently of how this prospect information is going to be delivered . In order to complete the need / want / demand hierarchy , wants are ﬁnally clustered into needs by reviewing what type of problem a want ( partially ) satisﬁes . In this case , the want ‘create awareness through sending information’ is used to satisfy the basic problem of ‘attracting prospects’ . The need of attracting prospects can also be be satisﬁed through other means . For instance , the need for attracting prospects can also be fulﬁlled by investing more in exist - ing customers , with the assumption that positive word - of - mouth helps when acquiring new customers . This backs up the statement that by using different levels of abstraction when reasoning about needs , it is also easier to ﬁnd substi - tutes . Finally , we add dependencies between the demands . In the graph , we can see the two types of dependencies we identiﬁed so far ; • The core / enhancing relationship which in this case re - lates the core service to services that further person - alize the mailing . When satisﬁed , this demand allows the customers’ mailing to stand out , which in the end positively contributes to satisfying the need belonging to the core demand • The optional bundling relationship , which points to a demand that has a separate need as a root . Note that it was worthwhile to model this dependency in this case study , since many of the members of the BO are small companies that typically have little experience in us - ing direct mail . As such , they could use some type of support , especially since it is expected that the real dif - ﬁculty with direct mail does not reside in realizing the mailing using some online wizard , but rather in think - ing up such points as : what do I want to accomplish with my mail ? and derived from that : what should the mailing look like and what message should I get across ? When a member of a BO is left in the dark with respect to answering these questions - as is cur - rently the case - it is also expected that it is less likely that ( s ) he will acquire the service . Rather , when the question concerning support is directly asked to the member of the BO in some type of wizard then at least ( s ) he knows that it is possible to receive aid in setting up a DM initiative . 5 Lessons Learned During the development of e 3 service and its application in practice we learned some important lessons , some of which served as a starting point for improving our method - ology . In this section we will discuss some of these lessons , together with a few observations that did not lead to adjust - ment in e 3 service , but are important for further research . Lesson 1 : Service dependencies that posses a customer component should be reviewed from such a perspective as well . The methodology that we used as a basis for e 3 service , serviguration , reviewed service - dependencies from a supply side perspective only . During the execution of this case study however , we found that it is useful to review these dependencies between customer demands also , since it allowed us to take a more customer - oriented approach to - ward service bundling . For instance , it allows us to include only those value - enhancing services in a bundle that are of interest to the customer . This is because the customer is allowed to make a choice on the demand him / herself , by trading off the costs inherent do the demand ( recall that a demand is typiﬁed by an idea of how much it costs ) with the way in which satisfying the demand contributes to satis - fying the need belonging to the core demand . Beforehand , this was not possible since serviguration generated all pos - sible service bundles and as such also came up with bundles containing extra services in which the customer might not be not interested . Lesson 2 : It is useful to take the existing service out - comes as a starting point . When reasoning about cus - tomer needs , it was found to be useful to take the existing service outcomes as a starting point . This is because it al - lows for brainstorming about the ways in which the cus - tomer can beneﬁt from the service outcomes provided , such as the fact that an easy response card can be used not only for sending introductory information , but also for sending around an invitation to an event to existing customers . It is more difﬁcult to ﬁnd such speciﬁc applications when we reason in a top - down fashion ( i . e . starting from a need ) since in that case , the speciﬁc service outcomes and also the possibilities provided by them are not taken into account . Lesson 3 : Trying to reason more formally about cus - tomer needs is possible , albeit to a limited extent . Find - ing speciﬁc , systematic guidelines toward eliciting IT - needs Figure 4 . A gradual transition from need ( problem ) to service - outcome ( solution ) has proven to be difﬁcult . This is illustrated by our attempt of ﬁnding guidelines for grouping demands into wants ; we were able to deﬁne only few and concluded that there is no such thing as a ﬁxed recipe to ﬁnding a want , besides think - ing of it as a generic category that can be used to cluster demands together on the one hand , and being an instrumen - tal goal toward satisfying a terminal goal on the other . 6 Conclusions and further research This paper presented a ﬁrst step towards creating a methodology that can be used to create bundles of IT - services tailored to a customer need . We showed that a gradual transition exists between problems as speciﬁed by the customer and IT - services that satisfy these problems , and that taking existing service outcomes as a starting point when eliciting customer these problems - as a variation on the laddering - methodology - can be a useful approach . Further research includes building standard IT - service taxonomies using existing commercially oriented service li - braries such as ITIL as a starting point , with the aim of 1 ) standardizing reasoning on quality attributes , and 2 ) to be able to ﬁnd demands more quickly and less arbitrary , based upon the descriptions of generic service classes rather than speciﬁc services delivered by a single provider . Also , we would like to investigate the impact a business model has on ﬁnding services that match needs . In the cur - rent case study , there is a central organization - MalieNet - that has a catalogue of services , but we wonder what would happen if the customer itself searches for the IT - services necessary to cover its need . Because there is no such thing as a centralized catalogue in that case , the question arises of how to ﬁnd IT - services that cover a need sufﬁciently in a more decentralized business environment . Acknowledgements . We are grateful for the input of Pieter van der Ploeg from MalieNet , and Hans Burg and Frank Verlaan from Boer & Croon . They provided us with useful discussions concerning the case study and - from their practical background - gave indirect indications that a strict separation between customer and supply side can not exist . This research has been partly funded by NWO / STW / Jacquard as the project VITAL . References [ 1 ] ebXML business process speciﬁcation schema version 1 . 01 , http : / / www . ebxml . org / specs / ebBPSS . pdf , 2001 . [ 2 ] T . Andrews , F . Curbera , H . Dholakia , J . K . Y . Goland , F . Leymann , K . Liu , D . Roller , D . Smith , S . Thatte , I . Trickovic , and S . Weerawanara . Business pro - cess execution language for web services version 1 . 1 , http : / / www . ebxml . org / specs / ebBPSS . pdf . Technical report , 2003 . [ 3 ] A . Arkin , S . Askary , S . Fordin , W . Jekeli , K . Kawaguchi , D . Orchard , S . Pogliani , K . Riener , S . Struble , P . Takasci - Nagy , I . Trickovic , and S . Zimek . Web service choreography interface ( WSCI ) 1 . 0 , http : / / www . w3 . org / TR / wsci / . Techni - cal report , 2002 . [ 4 ] Z . Baida . Software - aided service bundling . PhD thesis , Free University Amsterdam , May 2006 . [ 5 ] L . Cabrera , G . Copeland , W . Cox , M . Feingold , T . Fre - und , J . Johnson , C . Kaler , J . Klein , D . Langworthy , A . Nadalin , D . Orchard , I . Robinson , J . Shewchuk , and T . Storey . Web services coordination ( WS - Coordination ) , ftp : / / www6 . software . ibm . com / software / developer / library / ws - coordination . pdf . Technical report , 2003 . [ 6 ] N . Cross . Creative cognition in design : processes of excep - tional designers . In C & C ’02 : Proceedings of the 4th con - ference on Creativity & cognition , pages 14 – 19 , New York , NY , USA , 2002 . ACM Press . [ 7 ] O . - J . Dahl , E . Dijkstra , and C . Hoare . Structured Program - ming , volume 8 of A . P . I . C . Studies in Data Processing . Aca - demic Press , 1972 . [ 8 ] H . de Bruin and H . van Vliet . Quality - driven software ar - chitecture composition . Journal of Systems and Software , 269 - 284 ( 3 ) , 2003 . [ 9 ] M . Fishbein . Belief , attitude , intention and behavior : an introduction to theory and research . Addison - Wesley , 1978 . third print . [ 10 ] J . Gordijn and H . Akkermans . Value based requirements en - gineering : Exploring innovative e - commerce idea . Require - ments Engineering Journal , 8 ( 2 ) : 114 – 134 , 2003 . [ 11 ] C . Gr¨onroos . Service Management and Marketing . Lexing - ton Books , 1990 . [ 12 ] J . Gutman and T . Reynolds . Laddering theory - analysis and interpretation . Journal of Advertising Research , 28 ( 1 ) : 11 , Febraury / March 1988 . [ 13 ] P . Kotler . Marketing Management . Prentice Hall , 2000 . [ 14 ] C . Lovelock . Service Marketing - People , Technology , Strat - egy . Prentice Hall , 2001 . Fourth edition . [ 15 ] R . Normann . Service Management - strategy and leadership in service business . Wiley , 2000 . third edition . [ 16 ] M . Porter . competitive strategy - techniques for analyzing industries and competitors . Free Press , 1998 . 1st Free Press edition . [ 17 ] D . Tapscott , D . Ticoll , and A . Lowy . Digital Capital - Har - nessing the Power of Business Webs . Nicholas Brealy Pub - lishing , 2000 . [ 18 ] M . VasarHelyi and M . Greenstein . Underlying principles of the electronization of business ; a research agenda . Interna - tional Journal of Accounting Information Systems , 4 ( 1 ) : 1 – 25 , December 2003 . [ 19 ] R . Wieringa . Requirements researchers : Are we really doing research ? Requirements Engineering , 10 : 304 – 306 , 2005 . [ 20 ] V . Zeithaml and M . Bitner . Services Marketing . McGraw - Hill , 1996 .