International Journal of e - Collaboration , 11 ( 2 ) , 47 - 73 , April - June 2015 47 Copyright © 2015 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . ABSTRACT Spanning boundaries has emerged as a key topic in the scholarship on distributed organizing . Nonetheless , most of the works are motivated by boundaries designated by static demarcations of time and / or place , while only recently there is some evidence emphasizing the dynamic aspects of boundaries and boundary spanning . Following the latter tradition , the present research attempts to examine the antecedents of boundary span - ning in the context of e - collaboration . This is approached using a cross case assessment of two interpretive case studies . The results suggest that cross - organizational e - collaboration can be analyzed in relation to five constructs : ( a ) representations through which collaborative engagements are attained ; ( b ) the affordances of the ( social ) medium for reconfiguring agency , both human and non - human ; ( c ) boundary negotiating artifacts ; ( d ) source of togetherness and sense of community ; and ( e ) type of enacted cyber - structures . It turns out that these five constructs can be used to anchor and qualify a range of boundary spanning e - collaboration regimes . Antecedents of Boundary Spanning E - Collaboration Demosthenes Akoumianakis , Technological Educational Institute of Crete , Crete , Greece Keywords : Boundary Spanning , Cyber - Structures , E - Collaboration , Principled Strategy , Virtual Work INTRODUCTION One prominent trend in organization research is the study of sociomaterial practices as enacted in increasingly distributed settings within and across organizations ( Orlikowski , 2007 ; Leon - ardi , 2011 ) . In this vein , the role of Information Technology ( IT ) is vital as it catalyzes digital en - counters , but most importantly , it re - configures agency , either through new performative capac - ity or by invoking novel human intentionality such as collaboration across boundaries ( Kock & Nosek , 2005 ) . Nonetheless , most of the related scholarship tends to rely on a conception of IT as a black box ( Orlikowski 2007 ) – discrete artifact with designated features , affordances and information - processing properties – thus offering partial and inconclusive insights into the technologies’ inscribed features that enable or constrain boundary spanning collaboration . This is also evident from recent empirical studies calling for more detailed treatments of the technology - embedded qualities re - shaping computer - mediated realities and more elaborate accounts of how such re - shaping implicates new capabilities for distributed organizing ( Lanzara , 2010 ; Jarvenpaa & Lang , 2011 ; Bailey , Leonardi & Barley , 2012 ) . In line with these quests , the present re - search attempts to investigate intrinsic proper - ties of boundary spanning e - collaboration in the context of increasingly ubiquitous environments where togetherness is not pre - existent or at best acquired in the process of and through co - prac - ticing . This is approached by using a cross - case assessment of two interpretive case studies . The DOI : 10 . 4018 / ijec . 2015040104 Copyright © 2015 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . 48 International Journal of e - Collaboration , 11 ( 2 ) , 47 - 73 , April - June 2015 first case study covers an information - based industry namely tourism and is illustrative of boundary spanning e - collaboration in a busi - ness / professional setting . The second case examines a network music notation lesson , anchoring boundary spanning e - collaboration in a learning / creative arts setting . Our objective is to synthesize empirical findings to advance a proposition for a principled strategy that anchors boundary spanning e - collaboration in relation to a set of recurrent themes and constructs that direct attention to both technology - inscribed and technology - enacted features . The value of the proposed strategy is demonstrated by briefly discussing how it was used to guide analyti - cal inquiries into a regional virtual alliance in organic farming . The rest of the paper is structured as fol - lows . The next section reviews related work with the aim to assess current thinking and emerging trends in virtual teams , representations and collaborative practices . The emphasis is on identifying the theoretical and engineering gaps relevant to and motivating the present work . Then , we describe our reference cases and compare them using a common lens ( or principled strategy ) relying on qualitative data and experiences of recent ethnographic assess - ments . This helps identify intrinsic properties and the changing fabric of boundary spanning e - collaboration . In an attempt to assess the practical implications of the concepts devel - oped , we discuss how the principled strategy has been recruited to inform the design of e - collaboration tools for a regional virtual alliance in organic farming . The paper is wrapped up with a summary of contributions and pointers to further research . THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS There are two steams of research that are rel - evant to the present work . The first is related to constituents of e - collaboration which are either embedded in or enacted through technology , while the second stream addresses commonali - ties and differences of computer - mediated ( and remediated ) practices that span across prox - imity , thematic , intra - or inter - organizational boundaries . By reviewing related works , key principles are formulated to guide further analysis . Constituents of E - Collaboration In broad terms e - collaboration refers to “col - laboration among individuals engaged in a common task using electronic technologies” ( Kock et al . , 2001 , p . 1 ) . In effect , it coins the entanglement of a range of digital technologies and human agency to serve designated social practices such as communication , knowledge sharing , networking , etc . Through such an entanglement , digital technologies ( not only computers ) are appropriated by humans to at - tain common goals ( Kock , 2005 ) , and as this appropriation takes place recurrently , it enacts different configurations of people , artifacts and social relations . Since e - collaboration is not a naturally occurring phenomenon , it may be con - sidered as being amenable to design interven - tion . In this vein , there have been scholarships concentrating on the different aspects . One fairly established thread of research concentrates on properties of team work such as unity of purpose , the team’s identity as a social structure and the members’ shared responsibility for outcomes ( Cohen & Bailey , 1997 p . 241 ) aiming to assess their relevance in virtual settings ( Jarvenpaa & Leidner , 1999 ; Powell , Piccoli & Ives , 2004 ) and in designated situations where geographically , organization - ally and / or time dispersed team members are brought together to negotiate the accomplish - ment of meaningful work ( Kock & Nosek , 2005 ; Jarvenpaa & Lang , 2011 ) . Another research path explores e - collabo - ration from an arti - factual baseline attempting to qualify how knowledge is transferred across sites . Blau ( 2011 ) has examined different ways of exchanging knowledge in networks , focus - ing on exchanges within , between , and without institutions . Scholars in the field of Computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) have also explored concepts such as boundary artifacts 25 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / antecedents - of - boundary - spanning - e - collaboration / 121991 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Communications and Social Science . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content An Ontology Approach to Collaborative Engineering For Producibility Fredrik Elgh and Staffan Sunnersjo ( 2007 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 21 - 45 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / ontology - approach - collaborative - engineering - producibility / 1965 ? camid = 4v1a Towards a Reference Architecture for Collaborative Work Environments Vassilios Peristeras , Maria Antonia Martínez - Carreras , Antonio F . Gómez - Skarmeta , Wolfgang Prinz and Peyman Nasirifard ( 2010 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 14 - 32 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / towards - reference - architecture - collaborative - work / 40252 ? camid = 4v1a The Influence of Information Technology on Organizational Behavior : Study of Identity Challenges in Virtual Teams Babak Sohrabi , Aryan Gholipour and Behnam Amiri ( 2013 ) . Interdisciplinary Applications of Electronic Collaboration Approaches and Technologies ( pp . 79 - 95 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / influence - information - technology - organizational - behavior / 68605 ? camid = 4v1a Marketing for Children Using Social Interaction Technologies Ruth E . Brown ( 2010 ) . Handbook of Research on Social Interaction Technologies and Collaboration Software : Concepts and Trends ( pp . 462 - 472 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / marketing - children - using - social - interaction / 36053 ? camid = 4v1a