RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY ◥ CELL BIOLOGY The nucleus acts as a ruler tailoring cell responses to spatial constraints A . J . Lomakin * †‡ , C . J . Cattin † , D . Cuvelier § , Z . Alraies § , M . Molina , G . P . F . Nader , N . Srivastava , P . J . Saez , J . M . Garcia - Arcos , I . Y . Zhitnyak , A . Bhargava , M . K . Driscoll , E . S . Welf , R . Fiolka , R . J . Petrie , N . S . De Silva , J . M . González - Granado , N . Manel , A . M . Lennon - Duménil , D . J . Müller * , M . Piel * ‡ INTRODUCTION : The human body is a crowded place . Thiscrowdingisevenmoreacutewhenthe regulation of cell growth and proliferation fails during the formation of a tumor . Dealing with the lack of space in crowded environments pre - sentscellswithachallenge . Thisisespeciallytrue forimmunecells , whosetaskistopatroltissues , causing them to experience both acute and sus - tained deformation as they move . Although changes in tissue crowding and associated cell shape alterations have been known by pathol - ogists to be key diagnostic traits of late - stage tu - morssincethe19thcentury , the impact ofthese changes on the biology of cancer and immune cellsremainsunclear . Moreover , itisnotknown whethercellscandetectandadaptivelyrespondtodeformationsindenselypackedspaces . RATIONALE : To test the hypothesis that cells possess an ability to detect and respond to environmentally induced changes in their shape , we fabricated artificial microenviron - mentsthat mimictheconditions experiencedby tumor and immune cells in a crowded tissue . By combining dynamic confinement , force measurements , and live cell imaging , we were able to quantify cell responses to precisely con - trolled physical perturbations of their shape . RESULTS : Our results show that , although cells are surprisingly resistant to compressive forces , they monitor their own shape and develop an active contractile response when deformed be - low a specific height . Notably , we find that this isachievedbycellsmonitoringthedeformationoftheirlargestinternalcompartment : the nu - cleus . We establish that the nucleus provides cellswithaprecisemeasureoftheextentoftheirdeformation . Once cell compression exceeds the size of the nucleus , it causes the bounding nu - clear envelope ( NE ) to unfold and stretch . The onset of the contractile response occurs when the NE reaches a fully unfolded state . This tran - sition in the mechanical state of the NE and its membranespermitscalciumreleasefrominter - nalmembranestoresandactivatesthecalcium - dependent phospholipase cPLA2 , an enzyme known to operate as a molecular sensor of nu - clearmembranetensionandacriticalregulatorofsignalingandmetabolism . Activated cPLA2 catalyzes the formation of arachidonic acid , an omega - 6fattyacidthat , amongotherprocesses , potentiates the adenosine triphosphatase activ - ity of myosin II . This induces contractility of theactomyosincortex , whichproducespushing forces to resist physical compression and to rap - idlysqueezethecelloutofitscompressivemicro - environment in an “ evasion reflex ” mechanism . CONCLUSION : Althoughthenucleushastradition - ally been considered a passive storehouse for ge - netic material , our work identifies it as an active compartment that rapidly convers mechanical inputs into signaling outputs , with a critical role of its envelope in this sensing function . The nu - cleus is able to detect environmentally imposed compression and respond to it by generating a signalthatisusedtochangecellbehaviors . This phenomenonplaysacriticalrole in ensuringthat cells , suchastheimmunecellswithinatumor , can adapt , survive , and efficiently move througha crowdedandmechanicallyheterogeneousmicro - environment . Characterizing the full spectrumof signals triggered by nuclear compression has the potential to elucidate mechanisms underlying signaling , epigenetic , andmetabolicadaptations ofcellstotheirmechanoenvironmentandisthusanexcitingavenueforfutureresearch . ▪ RESEARCH Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , 310 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 1 of 1 The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online . * Corresponding author . Email : alexis . lomakin @ ccri . at , alexis . lomakin @ meduniwien . ac . at ( A . J . L . ) ; daniel . mueller @ bsse . ethz . ch ( D . J . M . ) ; matthieu . piel @ curie . fr ( M . P . ) † These authors contributed equally to this work . ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work . § These authors contributed equally to this work . Cite this article as A . J . Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) . DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . aba2894 READ THE FULL ARTICLE AT https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aba2894 The nuclear ruler and its contribution to the “ life cycle ” of a confined cell . ( 1 ) Cell confinement below resting nucleus size , leading to nuclear deformation and to unfolding , and stretching of the nuclear envelope . ( 2 ) Nuclear membrane tension increase , which triggers calcium release , cPLA2 activation , and arachidonic acid ( ARA ) produc - tion . ( 3 ) Actomyosin force ( F ) generation . ( 4 ) Increased cell migratory capacity and escape from confinement . RESEARCH ARTICLE ◥ CELL BIOLOGY The nucleus acts as a ruler tailoring cell responses to spatial constraints A . J . Lomakin 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 * †‡ , C . J . Cattin 7 † § , D . Cuvelier 6 , 8 ¶ , Z . Alraies 6 , 8 , 9 ¶ , M . Molina 5 # , G . P . F . Nader 6 , 8 , N . Srivastava 6 , 8 , P . J . Saez 6 , 8 * * , J . M . Garcia - Arcos 6 , 8 , I . Y . Zhitnyak 6 , 8 , 10 , A . Bhargava 9 , M . K . Driscoll 11 , 12 , E . S . Welf 11 , 12 , R . Fiolka 11 , 12 , R . J . Petrie 13 , N . S . De Silva 9 , J . M . González - Granado 14 , 15 , N . Manel 9 , A . M . Lennon - Duménil 9 , D . J . Müller 7 * , M . Piel 6 , 8 * ‡ The microscopic environment inside a metazoan organism is highly crowded . Whether individual cells can tailor their behavior to the limited space remains unclear . In this study , we found that cells measure the degree of spatial confinement by using their largest and stiffest organelle , the nucleus . Cell confinement below a resting nucleus size deforms the nucleus , which expands and stretches its envelope . This activates signaling to the actomyosin cortex via nuclear envelope stretch - sensitive proteins , up - regulating cell contractility . We established that the tailored contractile response constitutes a nuclear ruler – based signaling pathway involved in migratory cell behaviors . Cells rely on the nuclear ruler to modulate the motive force that enables their passage through restrictive pores in complex three - dimensional environments , a process relevant to cancer cell invasion , immune responses , and embryonic development . M uch like modern - day engineered devi - ces , cells in the human body are able to make measurements . For example , epithelial cells in the intestine monitor local cell densities and exit the tissue above a threshold density , preventing hyper - plasia ( 1 ) . Immune cells can estimate the pore size of surrounding tissues to choose the site of least mechanical resistance for migration ( 2 ) . Epidermal stem cells use the amount of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) available for cell attachment and spreading as a guidance cue in their cell fate decision - making ( 3 ) . These examples illustrate the sensitivity of complex cell behaviors to environmental spatial and mechanical constraints , known in quantita - tive sciences as boundary conditions ( BCs ) ( 4 ) . Although the importance of BCs in cell physiology is increasingly recognized , only a few mechanisms by which cells can measure specific BCs are precisely identified [ e . g . , the stiffness of the substrate on which cells grow ( 5 ) or the geometry of their adhesive envi - ronment ( 6 ) ] . Among the known mechanisms , most are related to either strain ( deformation ) or stress ( forces ) and are collectively referred to as mechanotransduction pathways ( 7 ) . In this study , we investigated whether cells are also equipped with a mechanism to mea - sure absolute dimensions , which could inform them about distances between neighboring cells or matrix pore size . In our previous study , wediscoveredthatmanyhistologicallyunrelatedcelltypeschangetheirmigratorystrategiesinresponsetothespecificconfinementheight ( 8 ) . This almost universally leads to a long - lasting increase in actomyosin contractility and amoeboid cell propulsion in the absence of specific adhesion to the substrate . Together withsimilarfindingsinearlyzebrafishembryos ( 9 ) , these observations illustrate the simplest case in which cells measure one of their di - mensions to adapt their behavior to local BCs in vitro and in vivo . However , the mecha - nism underlying this phenomenon remained unknown . Cells detect their height and trigger contractile responses below a threshold height To elucidate the mechanism by which cells measure their dimensions , we applied a re - ductionist approach in which the degree of cell confinement is precisely controlled and paralleled with quantitative microscopy . We confined single nonadherent , initially rounded , interphase cells by using an ion beam – sculpted flat silicon microcantilever ( Fig . 1A ) mounted on an atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) setup ( 10 ) and simultaneously monitored the acto - myosin cytoskeleton dynamics and contractile force generation by employing confocal video - microscopy and AFM - based force spectroscopy . Using the cell line HeLa - Kyoto ( human cervical carcinoma ) that expresses MYH9 - GFP ( myosin IIA ) , we performed confinement experiments in which the height of the same single cell is changed in a stepwise fashion , starting from 20 m m ( average nonconfined cell diameter is 20 ± 4 m m , n = 100 cells ) . We found that upon reaching a specific confinement height , cells begin responding by steadily in - creasing theforcewithwhich theypush against the confining cantilever ( 6 - to 5 - m m confine - ment in Fig . 1A ) . Each cell had its own trigger height at which it generated the force response ( Fig . 1A , right graph ) . Most cells remained insensitive to 10 - m m confinement ( which cor - responds to half of the initial cell height ; Fig . 1B ) , whereas almost 100 % of analyzed cells displayed the response upon reaching 5 - m m confinement ( Fig . 1A , right graph ) . We thus chose to systematically study the response of cells to 5 - versus 10 - m m confinement height . Our analyses showed that cell confinement to 5 m m , but not 10 m m , stimulates rapid ( 2 . 05 ± 0 . 33min , n = 10 cells ) recruitment of myosin II ( hereafter referred to as myosin ) from the cytosol to the cortex ( Fig . 1 , C and D , fig . S1A , and movie S1 ) , followed by cell cortex contrac - tion and force production ( Fig . 1E ) . Both phenomena required myosin activity ( Fig . 1 , D and E ) and culminated in a sustained ( up to severalhours ) andactive nonapoptoticplasma membrane ( PM ) blebbing ( movie S2 ) , whose degreeisdirectlyproportionaltocorticalmyosinconcentration ( fig . S1 , B to D ) . Measuring cell blebbing index in several other primary and immortalized cell lines under different con - finement heights confirmed the generality of our observations ( fig . S1E ) . To test whether cells would also adapt their cortical actomyosin contractility to the degree of environmental confinement in a context that more closely recapitulates in vivo settings , we examined human fibrosarcoma cells HT1080 infiltrating three - dimensional ( 3D ) cell - derived matrices ( CDMs ) ( Fig . 1F ) . Cortical recruitment of myosin inthesecellslinearlyscaledwiththeself - imposed smallest dimension of the cell ( Fig . 1F ) , thus validating our AFM - based observations . Nota - bly , switchingcellsbacktotheinitialunconfined state in our AFM experiments induced a rapid ( 3 . 78 ± 0 . 94 min , n = 7 cells ) relocalization of myosin to the cytosol ( fig . S1F ) , indicating that persistent contractility required a sustained RESEARCH Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 1 of 13 1 St . Anna Children ’ s Cancer Research Institute ( CCRI ) , Vienna , Austria . 2 Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases ( LBI - RUD ) , Vienna , Austria . 3 CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine , Austrian Academy of Sciences ( ÖAW ) , Vienna , Austria . 4 Medical University of Vienna ( MUV ) , Vienna , Austria . 5 Centre for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine , School of Basic and Medical Biosciences , King ’ s College London , London , UK . 6 Institut Curie , PSL Research University , CNRS , UMR 144 , Paris , France . 7 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering , ETH Zurich , Basel , Switzerland . 8 Institut Pierre Gilles de Gennes , PSL Research University , Paris , France . 9 Institut Curie , PSL Research University , INSERM , U 932 , Paris , France . 10 N . N . Blokhin Medical Research Center of Oncology , Moscow , Russia . 11 Department of Cell Biology , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX , USA . 12 Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX , USA . 13 Department of Biology , Drexel University , Philadelphia , PA , USA . 14 LamImSys Lab , Departamento de Fisiología , Facultad de Medicina , Universidad Autónoma de Madrid ( UAM ) , Madrid , Spain . 15 Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre ( imas12 ) , Madrid , Spain . * Corresponding author . Email : alexis . lomakin @ ccri . at , alexis . lomakin @ meduniwien . ac . at ( A . J . L . ) ; daniel . mueller @ bsse . ethz . ch ( D . J . M . ) ; matthieu . piel @ curie . fr ( M . P . ) † These authors contributed equally to this work . ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work . § Present address : F . Hoffmann - La Roche Ltd . , Basel , Switzerland . ¶These authors contributed equally to this work . # Present address : Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia ( IBEC ) , Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology ( BIST ) and University of Barcelona , Barcelona , Spain . * * Presentaddress : DepartmentofBiochemistryandMolecularCellBiology , University Medical Center Hamburg - Eppendorf , Hamburg , Germany . confinement below the threshold height . Collectively , these experiments showed that single cells can sense the difference between 10 and 5 m m and can trigger a sustained , yet reversible , active contractile response at a specific height . Cell height – specific contractile responses depend on nuclear envelope – and / or endoplasmic reticulum – mediated signals We next performed experiments to narrow the range of potential mechanisms involved in this height - dependent contractile response . Confinement experiments on adherent , well - spread cells showed qualitatively the same threshold - like response as we established for rounded nonadherent cells ( fig . S2 , A to C ) . Moreover , experimental manipulations of extracellular [ Ca 2 + ] or [ Mn 2 + ] to modulate Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 2 of 13 Fig . 1 . Cells sense their own height and up - regulate actomyosin contractility at a specific height . ( A ) ( Left ) Representative force curve in response to stepwise ( 1 - m m increment , 5 - min interval ) confinement of a cell by the flat microcantilever . ( Right ) Percentage of cells displaying a sustained force increase ( > 15 nN ) as a function of height . ( B ) 3D images ( xz views ) of the same live HeLa - Kyoto cell expressing MYH9 - GFP at indicated heights ( h ) . ( C ) Time - lapse image sequence of the same live cell ( xy views ; single , midplane , confocal slices ) at 10 m m ( top ) , followed by a height change to 5 m m ( bottom ) . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( D ) ( Left ) Representative graph of myosin cortex - to - cytoplasm ratio as a function of time in the same live cell upon 10 - m m and subsequently 5 - m m confinement . ( Middle and right ) The same ratio measured in single live cells at 10 - m m and subsequently 5 - m m confinement in the presence of DMSO or the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 ( n = 10 cells per condition ; P value , paired t test ) . Measurements were taken 5 min after application of each confinement height . ( E ) ( Left ) Repre - sentative force response curve ( D F , force increase ) as a function of time in the same live cell upon 10 - m m and subsequently 5 - m m confinement . ( Middle ) Statistical analysis of force response ( D F ) in cells at 10 versus 5 m m . ( Right ) Statistical analysis of force response ( D F ) to 5 - m m confinement in cells treated with DMSO or Y27632 . Measurements were taken 5 min after application of the confinement . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ( mean ± SD ; n = 10 cells per condition ; P value , unpaired t test ) . ( F ) ( Left ) Representative image of 3D dermal fibroblast CDM stained with a collagen I antibody . ( Middle ) Representative images of HT1080 cells expressing GFP - myosin light chain 2 ( GFP - MLC2 ) in 3D CDM ( xy views , single confocal slices ) with the smallest cell dimension ( h ) measured as 10 and 5 m m . ( Right ) Self - imposed smallest cell dimensions plotted against corresponding values for myosin cortex - to - cytoplasm ratio in the cells within 3D CDM ( n = 30 cells ) . Scale bar , 20 m m . min RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 3 of 13 Fig . 2 . The height - specific contractile response is controlled by mecha - nisms associated with nuclear – ER membrane stretch . ( A ) Cortical myosin levels ( left ) and force response ( D F ; right ) to 5 - m m confinement of HeLa - Kyoto cells treated with drugs affecting PM tension and extracellular [ Ca 2 + ] out ( blue ) or ER - NE tension and intracellular [ Ca 2 + ] in ( red ) . See table S1 for drug target description and materials and methods for drug concentrations . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ( mean ± SD ; n = 10 cells per perturbation ; see table S2 for statistics ) . ( B ) 3D xz views of the DAPI - stained nucleus at 20 , 10 , and 5 m m . ( C ) ( Left ) xy views of the nucleus at 10 and 5 m m . ( Middle and right ) Measurements of nuclear area and volume at 10 m m and subsequently 5 m m ( n = 10 cells ; P value , paired t test ) . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( D ) ( Left top ) Images of the LAP2 - GFP – labeled NE confined to 20 , 10 , and 5 m m . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( Left bottom ) Zoomed - in view of a gradually opening nuclear fold . Scale bar , 2 . 5 m m . ( Right ) EOP NE at 10 m m and subsequently 5 m m ( upper graph , n = 10 different cells ; P value , paired t test ) and statistics of EOP NE in cell populations at 20 , 10 , and 5 m m ( lower graph , data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 30 cells per height ; P value , unpaired t test ) . ( E ) Images of the LAP2 - GFP – labeled NE and EOP NE quantifications in live cells confined to 5 m m and unconfined to 20 m m ( n = 10 cells ; P value , paired t test ) . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( F ) NE fluctuation curves at various confinement heights ( h ) and quantifications of NE fluctuations at 10 and subsequently 5 m m ( n = 10 cells ; P value , paired t test ) or in cell populations at 20 , 10 , and 5 m m ( mean ± SD ; n = 30 cells per height ; P value , unpaired t test ) . ( G ) Images of NUP107 – GFP - labeled nuclear pores ( NPs ) and quantification of inter - NP ( NP - NP ) distance at 10 and subsequently 5 m m ( n = 10 cells ; P value , paired t test ) . Scale bar , 0 . 5 m m . ( H ) Images of nuclear cPla2 - mKate2 signal and quantification of its NE - to - nucleoplasm ( NE / NPM ) ratio at 10 and subsequently 5 m m ( n = 10 cells ; P value , paired t test ) . Scale bar , 1 . 5 m m . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE engagement of integrins during cell contact with the surface of the confining cantilever ( 11 ) did not affect the response in nonadherent suspended cells ( fig . S2D ) . This suggested that the sensing mechanism does not depend on classical integrin - based mechanotransduction pathways . The sustained increase in contrac - tility ( fig . S1D ) , and the fact that the response was dependent on the confinement height per se rather than the speed of confinement ( fig . S3 ) , renders unlikely a signal originating from strain in the actin cortex or the PM , because these structures dissipate stress in minutes as a result of fast turnover ( 12 ) . A natural candidate that matches the range of relevant confinement heights at which the response is triggered and that can display long - term stress due to slow turnover of its stiff elastic shell is the cell nucleus ( 13 ) . Indeed , the nucleus , and more specifically its envelope , has been shown in the recent years to trigger diverse cell re - sponses when the nuclear compartment is deformed : entry of the transcription factors YAP / TAZ ( 14 ) , activation of the ATR kinase ( 15 ) , release of calcium ( 16 ) , activation of the calcium - dependent phospholipase cPLA2 ( 17 ) , and nuclear envelope ( NE ) rupture accompa - nied by DNA damage ( 18 ) . Considering that the response to confinement was reversible and required only a few minutes for its manifestation , potential changes at the level of cell transcription and translation are not likely , and we confirmed this experimentally by acutely inhibiting the processes of tran - scription and translation ( fig . S4A ) . Blocking the ATR kinase activity did not yield a pheno - type either ( fig . S4B ) . Moreover , ruptures of neither the NE nor the PM were observed at 5 - m m confinement ( fig . S4 , C and D ) , excluding a mechanism based on an extracellular signal influx through transient holes in the PM or mixing of cytoplasmic and nuclear contents . We thus performed a small pharmacological inhibitors screen , targeting mechanotransduc - tive pathways compatible with a cellular con - finement response on a time scale of minutes ( table S1 ) . The screen ( Fig . 2A and table S2 ) showed that extracellular calcium , PM - associated stretch - sensitive channels , and PM tension are not involved in the response to confinement . However , intracellular calcium , intracellular stretch - sensitive calcium channels associated with the perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , the calcium - dependent myosin light chain Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 4 of 13 Nucleus - to - cytoskeleton signaling Fig . 3 . The nuclear ruler working model . ( A ) ( Top ) Representative graph of temporal evolution of NE unfolding ( EOP NE , blue ) and PM blebbing ( EOP PM , red ) . ( Bottom ) Time - lapse image sequence of the LAP2 - GFP – labeled NE ( blue ) and Lifeact - mCherry – labeled F - actin ( red ) in the same live cell responding to the sequential confinement to 20 , 10 , and 5 m m . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) Height for the onset of contractile force response as a function of the degree of NE folding ( EOP NE ) before confinement ( n = 20 cells ) . ( C ) Sketch of the working model : Cells use the nucleus as an internal ruler for their height . When a cell deforms below the resting height ( h 1 ) of its nucleus , the nuclear surface area ( S ) increases while the nuclear volume ( V ) remains constant . At a critical height ( h 2 ) , the NE fully expands and gets stretched increasing its tension ( T ) . The increase in NE tension stimulates stretch - sensitive proteins whose activity promotes and / or reinforces cortical actomyosin contractility . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE kinase MLCK , and the NE tension sensor cPLA2 were required for the contractile response , pointing to a signal emanating from the peri - nuclear ER and / or the NE to activate acto - myosin contraction at a specific confinement height . Consistently , imaging of intracellular calcium with the GCaMP6 calcium biosensor revealed a strong increase in cytosolic calcium upon 5 - m m confinement ( fig . S5A ) , which was inhibited by blocking intracellular stretch - sensitive calcium channels InsP3Rs with 2APB ( fig . S5B ) , but not via chelation of extracellular calcium with BAPTA ( fig . S5A ) . Conversely , adding ionomycin ( to artificially increase cyto - solic calcium concentration ) or the signaling lipidarachidonic acid ( ARA ) [ an omega - 6 fatty acid that can be produced in a NE stretch - sensitive manner via enzymatic activity of cPLA2 on nuclear membranes ( 17 ) ] to cells confined to 10 m m induced persistent blebbing without further confinement ( fig . S5C ) . Finally , analysis of the supernatant of a population of confined cells ( using a microfabricated con - finement device ; see materials and methods ) showed an increase in ARA production upon 5 - m m confinement , which is lost upon cPLA2 inhibition with AACOCF3 / AA ( fig . S5D ) . Nota - bly , unlike Y27632 , which globally perturbed basal cell contractility at both 10 and 5 m m , the drugs yielding a phenotype in our mini - screen exerted their effect only at 5 m m , as follows from our measurements of cortical cell tension , cellpressure , andmyosin cortex - to - cytosolratio at 10 m m ( fig . S5E ) . This indicated that the tar - gets of the drugs become functionally engaged in a trigger - like fashion when the cell is con - fined below 10 m m . These results , together with the controls for drugs activity ( fig . S5F ) , sug - gested that the nuclear membrane compart - ment , continuous with the perinuclear ER , might be involved in measuring the cell di - mensions and triggering the contractile re - sponse below a specific confinement height . The trigger height for contractile cell responses is determined by NE tension To understand how the NE – perinuclear ER and associated signaling pathways could be engaged in triggering the sustained contract - ile response of cells to a specific confinement height , we decided to characterize nuclear shape and deformation state at 20 - , 10 - , and 5 - m m confinement ( Fig . 2B ) . We observed that thenuclear volumeundergoesonlyveryminor changes , whereas projected surface area of the nucleus increases substantially between 10 - and 5 - m m confinement ( Fig . 2C ) , suggesting a potential expansion of the NE . Indeed , we found that the NE in rounded nonadherent cells displays large folds and wrinkles , which become less prominent at 10 m m and com - pletely disappear at 5 m m ( Fig . 2D ) . To charac - terize this phenomenon quantitatively , we estimated the NE folding index by measuring the excess of the perimeter of the NE ( EOP NE ) in the same single cell at various heights or by statistically comparing this parameter across populations of cells confined to a specific height . We found that EOP NE decreases as cells get more confined [ Fig . 2D ; we also confirmed this result with an additional metric : standard deviation of the local curvature along the NE perimeter ( fig . S5G ) ] . Unconfining cells led to a rapid refolding of the envelope , concomitant with the loss of the contractile response ( Fig . 2E ) . These measurements suggested that within the range of confinement heights applied in our experiments , the nucleus maintains a constant volume by progressively unfolding its envelope until it reaches a fully unfolded state at 5 m m . A higher degree of confinement and more severe nuclear compression result in a substantial loss of nuclear volume [ reported previously on the basis of micropipette aspi - ration experiments ( 19 ) ] and , eventually , NE rupture events that become predominant below 3 - m m confinement height ( 20 ) . As the NE fully unfolds , it is likely to reach a state in which it stretches and becomes tensed . To estimate this parameter , we first measured the thermally and actively driven fluctuations of the NE on the time scale of seconds [ see materials and methods and ( 21 ) ] . We found that the amplitude of the fluctua - tionssystematicallydecreasesascellsget more confined ( Fig . 2F ) , consistent with an increase in the NE tension . Imaging nuclear pores in the NE of the same cell at various heights showed that confinement from 10 to 5 m m causes neighboring nuclear pores to become more distant from each other , consistent with a stretching of the NE ( Fig . 2G ) . Finally , we observed that the mKate2 - tagged phos - pholipase cPla2 , sensing lipid crowding in the NE ( 17 ) , remains in the nucleoplasm at 10 m m but relocalizes to the NE at 5 m m Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 5 of 13 Fig . 4 . Correlation between nuclear stretching and cortical recruitment of myosin in experimentally deformed and spontaneously moving cells . ( A ) ( Left ) Representative images of DAPI - stained ( magenta ) HeLa - Kyoto cells microfluidically pushed into bottleneck PDMS constrictions . Color - coded nuclear outlines at different time points for a cell pushed into the constriction are shown at the bottom . ( Middle ) Representative image sequence of the nucleus ( magenta ) and MYH9 - GFP – labeled myosin ( green ) in a live cell pushed into the constriction . ( Right top and bottom ) Images of the nucleus inside the bottleneck constriction reaching roundness equivalent to 10 - and 5 - m m confinement heights , and graph of the nuclear roundness index ( magenta ) and myosin cortical recruitment ( green ) in time representative of n = 30 cells . ( B ) ( Left ) Representative images ( xy views , single confocal slices ) of RFP - NLS – labeled nuclei ( top ) and GFP - MLC2 – labeled myosin in HT1080 cells within 3D CDM . ( Middle ) Smallest nuclear dimension plotted against corresponding values of EOP NE . ( Right ) Myosin cortex - to - cytoplasm ratio plotted against corresponding values of EOP NE ( n = 30 cells ) . Scale bar , 5 m m . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE ( Fig . 2H ) , a transition previously shown to be triggered by nuclear membrane tension increase and to correspond with cPLA2 enzyme activation ( 17 ) . Overall , these observations suggested that confinement to 5 m m stretches the NE . To assess whether the height threshold at which cells display the active contractile response coincides with the induction of NE stretching , we took advantage of the variety of nuclear shapes and folding states in the cell population and systematically investigated these parameters along with contractile force and cell morphology readouts . First , correlative recording of F - actin and the NE ( Fig . 3A , bot - tom images ) enabled us to observe that NE unfoldingtemporallyprecedestheonsetofthecontractileresponse ( Fig . 3A , top graph , and movie S3 ) , with a delay of 38 ± 17 s ( n = 20 cells ) . This is compatible with a causal link between the NE unfolding - stretching and the onset of a sustained contractile response . Second , wefoundthatcellswithmorefoldednucleibeforeconfinement ( larger EOP NE ) start to contract at a lower confinement height ( Fig . 3B ) , indicating thatthedegreeofNEfoldingsetsthe sensitivity thresholdfor theabilityofcellstodiscriminate between different confinement heights . Because we used cultured proliferating cells in our experiments , a source of cell - to - cell variability in responses to confinement could come from the cell cycle stage , which introduces a natural range of NE states in a cell population ( 21 ) . Therefore , we decided to test a FUCCI HeLa cell line expressing fluorescent cell cycle stage markers in our confinement experiments . We determined that unconfined G 1 cells have significantly higher values of EOP NE than G 2 cells ( fig . S5H ) . Whereas the unconfined cell height and me - chanical state ( basal cortical tension and cell pressure ) at 10 - m m confinement were similar for rounded , nonadherent G 1 and G 2 cells ( fig . S5H ) , G 2 cells required less confinement than G 1 cells to trigger the contractile response ( fig . S5H , bottom right graph ) . This result further confirmed that the state and size of the nu - cleus defines a ruler to trigger the active con - tractile cell response . It also suggested that the nuclear ruler might render proliferating cells more or less sensitive to deformations , de - pending on their cell cycle stage . The nuclear ruler working model Collectively , our results suggested the follow - ing working model ( Fig . 3C ) : Each single cell in the rounded state has a certain nuclear volume and an excess of NE surface area stored in NE folds . When one of the dimensions of the cell is reduced below the resting nuclear diameter , the nucleus deforms and its envel - ope unfolds . Once the NE reaches full unfold - ing , it stretches , potentially together with the perinuclear ER , leading to calcium release from internal stores and cPLA2 relocalization onto the stretched NE , followed by cPLA2 enzyme activation and production of ARA . Both cal - cium ions and ARA are classical second mes - sengermoleculeswithawell - knownstimulatory effect on actomyosin contractility ( 22 – 24 ) , thus mechanistically linking cell height to cell con - tractility . Consistent with this model , the correl - ative live recording of cPla2 - mKate2 , calcium ( GCaMP6 - EGFP ) , and forces during cell height change from 10 to 5 m m and show relocaliza - tion of cPla2 within 20 s and intracellular cal - cium increase within less than 1 min , both phenomena preceding the contractile response of the cell ( fig . S5I ) . A first direct prediction of the nuclear ruler model is that as cells start squeezing through a tissue opening with a size smaller than a resting nuclear diameter , they should deform , unfold , and stretch their nuclei . This activity would lead to an increase in cortical myosin concentration . To test this prediction in a controlled and quantitative manner , we micro - fluidically flowed HeLa cells through micro - channels with bottleneck constrictions . We found that nuclear deformations reflected in changes of the nuclear roundness index precede myosin accumulation at the cortex and that this takes place when the nuclear diameter is changed to ~ 5 m m , but not 10 m m ( Fig . 4A ) . To examine whether these dependencies can be observed in spontaneously migrating cells in a more physiological context , we looked at invasive HT1080 cells maneuvering through a 3D CDM . By plotting myosin cortical accumu - lation against the PM excess of perimeter ( i . e . , cell blebbing and thus contractility measure ) , we verified that our measure of myosin re - cruitment at the cell cortex is a good predictor of the degree of cell contractility in 3D ( fig . S6 ) . This parameter scaled with the extent of Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 6 of 13 Fig . 5 . Enucleated cells and cells regioselectively confined to avoid the nucleus do not trigger contractile responses at relevant heights . ( A ) ( Left ) Representative images ( xy views ) of a nucleated [ DAPI ( blue ) – positive ] cell and an enucleated ( DAPI - negative ) cytoplast . ( Right ) xz views of a cell and a cytoplast of similar height representative of those selected for analyses . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) Images ( top ) and quantifications ( bottom ) of myosin cortical accumulation ( left ) and force response ( D F , right ) in cells ( n = 10 ) and cytoplasts ( n = 10 ) confined to 10 versus 5 m m . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; P value , unpaired t test . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( C ) Regioselective confinement of the nuclear region ( lower cell ) versus the nucleus - free lamella ( upper cell ) . Cyan , DAPI nuclear stain ; Red hot , myosin signal ; Dashed squares , zoomed regions ( right images ) . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( D ) Quantifications of myosin cortical accumulation and force response ( D F ) upon nuclear ( n = 10 ) and lamellar cortex ( n = 10 ) confinement . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; P value , unpaired t test . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE nuclear surface folding , which in turn was dependent on the smallest nuclear dimension ( Fig . 4B ) . These data showed that both im - posed and spontaneous nuclear deformations observed in migrating cells correlate with the contractile response , suggesting that the nuclear ruler could be relevant in physiological contexts such as cells circulating in blood capillaries or migrating through dense tissues . Cells without the nucleus show defective contractile responses to spatial confinement A second prediction of our working model is that removing the cell nucleus should affect the contractile response to confinement . We thus produced cytoplasts by cell enucleation using centrifugation ( 25 ) . This resulted in a mixed population of enucleated cytoplasts and nucleated cells ( Fig . 5A ) . Cytoplasts , on aver - age , had a smaller volume than nucleated cells ( fig . S7A ) but a rather similar height ( cell volume scales to the cubic root of cell diameter ) . Thus , we were able to compare nucleated cells and enucleated cytoplasts of similar initial heights confined to 10 and 5 m m . Whereas nucleated cells showed the expected contractile response at 5 m m , this was not the case for enucleated cytoplasts ( Fig . 5B and movie S4 ) . Cytoplasts were not deficient in the contractile response pathway , because confin - ing them further to 1 m m triggered both a force responseandmyosin recruitment atthecortex ( fig . S7B ) , although to a significantly lesser extent than nucleated cells at 5 m m . Moreover , although the response of cytoplasts was re - duced upon treatment with 2APB inhibiting calcium release from internal stores , it was not affected by treatment with the cPLA2 inhibitor AACOCF3 ( fig . S7B ) . This sug - gested that the pathway triggered at 1 m m in cytoplasts could be different from that activated in nucleated cells at 5 m m . Such pathway might involve direct compression of other endomembranes [ e . g . , the ER that remained present in enucleated cytoplasts ( fig . S7C ) ] . To further demonstrate the difference in re - sponsiveness to confinement provided by the nucleus versus the rest of the cell , we used spread nucleated cells and took advantage of the small size of the wedged cantilever tip to apply a local deformation on the cell ( Fig . 5C ) . This experiment showed that locally compress - ing the cell cortex in the lamellar region , even down to < 1 m m ( fig . S8 and movie S5 ) , produces only a very transient response , whereas con - fining the part of the cell that contains the nucleus results in a sustained contractile re - sponse ( Fig . 5D and movie S6 ) . Upon nuclear deformation , myosin cortical recruitment oc - curred even in the region that was not directly confined ( Fig . 5D ) . This showed that the contractile response is not due to the cell de - formation per se , but rather to a signal that could get released locally and propagate away from the nucleus ( indeed , the increase in contractility in the nonconfined part man - ifested with a slight delay compared with that in the nuclear region ; movie S6 ) . In conclu - sion , consistent with our working model , the nucleus is required to set the size at which the contractile response is triggered , and the deformation of nuclear or nucleus - associated compartments is necessary to trigger the sus - tained response . Cells with altered NE properties have a defective nuclear ruler We further tested the nuclear ruler model by affecting the stiffness and the folded state of the NE . Lamin A / C – depleted cells ( fig . S9A ) displayed nuclear dysmorphia and a floppier ( Fig . 6A ) but did not undergo excessive cell death , even upon confinement to 5 - m m height ( fig . S9B ) , at which the depleted cells also show a high rate of NE ruptures ( Fig . 6A , bottom left graph ) . This mechanical instability of the NE , together with the modifications of NE visco - elastic properties upon lamin A / C depletion , could contribute to the relaxation of tension in the envelope . Although volume , projected area ( fig . S9C ) , and surface folding ( fig . S9D ) of lamin A / C – depleted nuclei were not signifi - cantly affected , we found that NE fluctuations in the depleted cells did not decrease in re - sponse to 20 - , 10 - , and 5 - m m confinement ( Fig . 6A , top right graph ) , incontrastto controlcells ( Fig . 2F ) . This suggested that the envelope of depleted nuclei remained floppy at all con - finement heights . Confinement of depleted cells to 5 m m did not trigger intracellular calcium release , nor did it increase levels of ARA production ( fig . S9E , “ 5 m m confinement ” subpanel ) . Consistently , although their basal mechanics were unaltered at 10 m m ( fig . S9E , “ 10 m m confinement ” subpanel ) , the depleted cells displayed an attenuated contractile re - sponse at 5 - m m confinement ( Fig . 6A , bottom right graph , and fig . S9F ) . This finding is con - sistent with the nuclear ruler model and further suggeststhattheleveloflaminA / C , whichvaries considerably in different cell types and environ - mental conditions , can modulate the response of cells to spatial confinement by affecting the mechanical properties of the NE . The inner nuclear membrane and ER mem - brane protein lamin B receptor ( LBR ) is known to control NE folding in a dose - dependent manner ( 26 ) . Its overexpression leads to peri - nuclear ER expansion and overproduction of NE membranes , which in turn provides addi - tional NE surface area to accommodate excess membrane protein ( 27 , 28 ) . Indeed , our meas - urements of nuclear surface folding showed that LBR - GFP overexpressing ( OE ) cells have a highly folded nucleus and fail to unfold it in response to 5 - m m confinement , in contrast to LAP2 / LAP2b - expressing ( control ) cells ( Fig . 6B , images and top graph , and fig . S9G ) . Consist - ently , LBR overexpression abrogated both cyto - plasmic calcium increase and levels of ARA production at 5 m m ( fig . S9H , “ 5 m m confine - ment ” subpanel ) . Although their basal cortical mechanics were unaltered at 10 m m ( fig . S9H , “ 10 m m confinement ” subpanel ) , LBR - GFP OE cells significantly impaired contractile responses Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 7 of 13 Fig . 6 . The nuclear ruler is defective in cells with altered NE properties . ( A ) ( Top left ) Representative images of DAPI - stained nuclei in HeLa - Kyoto cells treated with control or LMNA siRNA . ( Top right ) Quantifications of NE fluctuations in LMNA siRNA - treated cells under 20 - , 10 - , and 5 - m m confinement ( data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 20 cells per height ; P value , unpaired t test ) . ( Bottom left ) Percentage of cells displaying nuclear rupture at 5 m m . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; n = 15 cells per condition . ( Bottom right ) Force response ( D F ) to 5 - m m confinement . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 10 ( Ctrl si ) and 15 ( LMNA si ) cells ; P value , unpaired t test . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( B ) ( Top ) Representative images of NE in HeLa - Kyoto cells stably expressing LAP2 - GFP or ectopically overexpressing ( OE ) LBR - GFP and corresponding EOP NE quantifications . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 10 cells per condition ; P value , unpaired t test ) . ( Bottom ) Force response ( D F ) to 5 - m m confinement . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 10 ( LAP2 ) and 15 ( LBR OE ) cells ; P value , unpaired t test . Scale bar , 10 m m . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE to 5 - m m confinement ( Fig . 6B , bottom graph , and fig . S9I ) . Therefore , we concluded that NE folding and unfolding constitutes a key element of the nuclear ruler mechanism . These findings further suggested that modulation of NE com - ponents that affectthe extent ofNE folding [ e . g . , LBR and SUN2 ( 29 ) ] could allow different cell types to trigger responses to various levels of confinement or to measure different ranges of sizes , depending on their function . The nuclear ruler participates in adaptive modulation of cell propulsion during confined migration We hypothesized that the nuclear ruler mech - anism can be used by migrating cells to increase Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 8 of 13 Fig . 7 . The nuclear ruler function in immune cell migration . ( A ) ( Left and middle ) Cartoons illustrating primary culture of iDCs and their confinement between two parallel surfaces inducing a highly migratory DC phenotype . ( Right top ) iDC velocity measured at 10 - m m ( n = 20 cells ) , 4 - m m ( n = 35 cells ) , and 3 - m m ( n = 35 cells ) confinement height ( h ) . ( Right bottom ) Cell velocity ( v cell ) measured at 3 - m m confine - ment in control [ DMSO and wild - type ( WT ) ] versus cPLA2 - inhibited ( AACOCF3 / AA treat - ment ) or Lmna knockout ( KO ) cells ( n = 20 cells per condition ) . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; P value , unpaired t test . ( B ) ( Top ) Temporal color - coded cell tracks from a repre - sentative time - lapse movie of control ( Ctrl si ) and cPLA2a - depleted ( Pla2g4a si ) LifeAct - GFP – expressing iDCs under 3 - m m confinement . ( Bottom ) Statistical analysis of cell velocity ( v cell ) for control and depleted cells at 4 - versus 3 - m m confinement . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 20 cells per condition ; P value , unpaired t test . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( C ) Representative images of DAPI - stained nuclei ( xy view , single confocal slices ) and EOP NE quantifications in iDCs at 4 - versus 3 - m m confinement . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 35 cells per condition ; P value , unpaired t test . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( D ) Representative images and quantifications of myosin cortical accumulation in control ( Ctrl si ) and cPLA2a - depleted ( Pla2g4a si ) MYH9 - GFP – expressing iDCs at 4 - and 3 - m m confinement . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n = 20 cells per condition ; P value , unpaired t test . Scale bar , 15 m m . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE their propulsion when surrounding space becomes limited , explaining the switch to fast amoeboid migration upon confinement of slow mesenchymal cells , which we reported previously ( 8 ) . In support of this hypothesis , we found that single HeLa - Kyoto cells , re - maining under the confining AFM cantilever for prolonged periods of time , can sponta - neously initiate movement , enabling the cells to evade the cantilever ( fig . S10A ) . We also observed the predicted increase in migration speed upon confinement of immature mouse bone marrow – derived dendritic cell ( iDC ) pop - ulations using our microfabricated confiner device ( Fig . 7A ) ( 30 ) . This speed increase was lost upon functional ablation of cPLA2 ( Fig . 7A , bottomgraph ; fig . S10B , upper rightgraph ; and Fig . 7B , right graph ) or lamin A ( Fig . 7A , bottom graph ) ( 31 ) and corresponded specifi - callyto the confinement height ( 3 m m ) at which iDC nuclei get fully unfolded ( Fig . 7C ) . Con - sistently , myosin accumulated atthe iDC cortex in a cPLA2 - dependent manner specifically at 3 m m ( Fig . 7D ) . A large fraction of iDCs at 3 m m switched to a migratory polarized cell shape phenotype , characteristic of fast - moving cells , that was almost entirely lost upon cPLA2 de - pletion ( Fig . 7B , fig . S10B , and movie S7 ) . Over - all , the data obtained from both HeLa - Kyoto cells and primary iDCs suggested that the nuclear ruler pathway could be involved in triggeringacontractile “ evasionreflex , ” helping invasive cells to either rapidly escape or pene - trate the most confined regions of dense tissues . To further test the function of the nuclear ruler in invasive cell migration , we assessed the protease - independent ability of human metastatic skin melanoma cells ( MCs ) , a well - established cellular model employing contractility - driven , amoeboid invasive motion in vivo ( 32 ) , to chemotactically transmigrate ( fig . S10C ) through 3D dermal collagen gels or synthetic polycarbonate membranes with different poro - sity . 3D collagen lattices ( Fig . 8A , left images ) dis - played pore sizes ranging from 1 to 12 m m ( fig . S10D ) , thus representing a heterogeneous , me - chanicallyrestrictiveenvironmentinwhichcellsareexpectedtodeformtheirnuclei . Indeed , per - turbations targeting the nuclear ruler pathway affected the efficiency of MC transmigration through 3D collagen ( Fig . 8A , right graph , and tableS3 ) . Consistent withthediameterof their nuclei ( 11 ± 2 m m , n = 100 cells ) , MCs were depen - dentonbasalactomyosincontractilityorpathwaysassociatedwiththenuclearruleronlywhentrans - migrating through 8 - but not 12 - m m pores of polycarbonatemembranes ( Fig . 8B , leftimages ; fig . S10E ; and table S3 ) . These results suggested that , owing to the nuclear ruler , migratory cells canusetheenergeticallycostlyactomyosin con - tractility motor on demand , whenthelocal cell environment becomes restrictive to migration . Discussion Collectively , our data establish a nongenetic function for the nucleus as an internal ruler . Relying on this ruler , cells can measure the degree of their environmental confinement and rapidly tailor specific behaviors to adapt to the confinement at time scales shorter than those associated with changes in gene expres - sion . In the context of cell migration , such tailored cellular behaviors might help cells avoid environmental entrapment , which is relevant to cancer cell invasion , immune cell patrolling of peripheral tissues , and progenitor cell motility within a highly crowded cell mass of a developing embryo ( 33 ) . The nuclear ruler mechanism defines an active function for the nucleus in cell migration , potentially explain - ing why enucleated cells show a poor motile capacity in dense collagen gels ( 34 ) . Engaging thenuclearrulerandgeneratingpropulsiveforces , cells can push their largenucleus through small openings , thus overcoming the rate - limiting effect of the bulky and stiff nucleus on con - finedmigration . However , somehighlyspecialized Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 9 of 13 Fig . 8 . The nuclear ruler function in cancer cell migration . ( A ) ( Left ) 3D light - sheet microscopy images of atelopeptide fibrillar bovine dermal collagen ( 1 . 7 mg ml − 1 ) lattices . ( Right ) Quantifications of the percentage of human MCs A375P able to chemotactically transmigrate through the lattice ( 1 mm thick ) in the presence of the broad - spectrum matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor GM6001 in conditions affecting cell contractility ( Y27 , BBS , and ML7 ) , NE properties ( LMNA si and LBR OE ) , cPLA2 expression and activity ( PLA2G4A si , AA , and PA ) , and stretch - sensitive calcium release ( Gd 3 + , GsMTx4 , 2APB , and Xesto ) . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n ≥ 300 cells per condition . See table S3 for drug target description and pairwise statistical comparisons ; see materials and methods for drug concentrations . ( B ) Scanning electron microscopy images of polycarbonate membranes with 12 - m m ( blue ) and 8 - m m ( red ) pores ( scale bar , 10 m m ) , and quantifications of the percentage of A375P cells able to chemotactically transmigrate through the pores in the conditions specified in ( A ) . Data are from ≥ 2 experiments ; mean ± SD ; n ≥ 300 cells per condition . See table S3 for drug target description and pairwise statistical comparisons ; see materials and methods for drug concentrations . The dotted line in ( A ) and ( B ) represents the cell transmigration rate upon global perturbation of actomyosin contractility . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE and short - lived cells , such as neutrophils , trade nuclear size and stiffness for uncompromised migration through dense tissue regions . To achieve this , maturing neutrophils transcrip - tionally up - regulate LBR and down - regulate LMNAexpressionthatmakesthenucleushighlypliable ( 35 ) and might cancel its rate - limiting effect and ruler function in the context of confined migration . The nuclear ruler mechanism relies on NE tensionsensingbythephospholipid - hydrolyzing enzyme cPLA2 ( 13 , 17 ) . The enzymatic activity of cPLA2 is fundamental to the eicosanoid biosynthetic pathway known for its function as an essential mediator of paracrine inflam - matory signaling in the immune system , with effects on immune cell contractility and mi - gration ( 36 , 37 ) . The function we propose here relies on direct mechanical activation of cPLA2 and subsequent release of ARA , but it does not exclude the induction of the downstream sig - naling associated with ARA metabolism . When we confined the nucleus in only one cell of a pair of closely juxtaposed cells , we did not observe any signs of contractility activation in the neighboring cell ( fig . S11 ) , which suggests that paracrine signaling might not be suffi - cient to activate contractility in this case . Fully characterizing the signaling cascade triggered by mechanical activation of the cPLA2 path - way and subsequent changes in lipid metab - olism in the context of confined cell migration is an important perspective for future studies . We also showed that the nuclear ruler path - way depends on stretch - activated intracellular calcium release . Here , we pinpointed a role for InsP3Rs , but there are many other stretch - sensitivecalciumchannelsontheERandnuclearmembranes ( 38 ) that could contribute to the pathwayinacelltype – orcontext - specificfashion . Establishing the nucleus as an internal ruler of theextracellularenvironment opensavenues of research in the field of single - cell migration as well as in tissue homeostasis and develop - mental biology . Indeed , morphological changes associated with cell spreading on the ECM are known to affect nuclear morphology and cell cycle progression ( 39 ) . Therefore , the nuclear ruler might contributetocellfatechoicesduring tissuegrowth . Giventhatcellcrowdingintissues such as epithelia alters the cell shape and aspect ratio , tissue cells [ in addition to the known mechanisms ( 1 ) ] may use the nucleus as a sensor of local cell density . Materials and methods Cell culture Human cervical adenocarcinoma cells HeLa - Kyoto stably expressing myosin IIA ( MYH9 ) – GFP and LifeAct - mCherry or MYH9 - GFP and the PM - targeting CAAX box fused to mCherry , or LAP2 / LAP2b - GFP , NUP107 - GFP , HeLa ( CCL - 2 ) cells stably expressing cPla2 - mKate2 , human fibrosarcoma cells HT1080 expressing GFP - myosin light chain 2 and RFP - NLS , primary human foreskin fibroblasts ( HFFs ) , human MCs A375P , N - rasV12 oncogene - transformed rat liver epithelial cells IAR - 2 , and canine kidney epithelial cells MDCK - 2 were maintained in DMEM / F12 supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Invi - trogen ) at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . Human epidermal stem cells were cultured as previously described ( 40 ) . All cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination using MycoScope PCR Myco - plasma Detection Kit ( Genlantis ) . Mouse bone - marrow – derived immature dendritic cells ( iDCs ) were obtained by culturing bone marrow cells ( from both male and female 8 - to 10 - week - old LifeAct - GFP mice ( 41 ) , MYH9 - GFP mice ( 42 ) , andcontrol ( JAXmicestocknumber : 000664 ) or Lmna KO mice ( 31 ) for 10 to 11 days in complete DC medium ( IMDM medium supplemented with fetal calf serum ( FCS , 10 % ) , glutamine ( 20 mM ) , penicillin - streptomycin ( 100 U / ml ) , b - mercaptoethanol ( 50 m M ) , and granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating factor / GM - CSF ( 50 ng / ml ) – containing supernatant obtained from transfected J558 cells . Transfection procedure , expression vectors , and siRNA oligonucleotides Cells were transfected with plasmid DNA using Lipofectamine LTX reagent ( Invitrogen ) tran - siently or stably , according to manufacturer ’ s protocol . For RNA interference experiments , cells were transfected with small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) oligonucleotides using Lipofect - amineRNAiMAXreagent ( Invitrogen ) , according to manufacturer ’ s protocol . In experiments on cPLA2a knockdown in bone marrow – derived mouse immature dendritic cells ( iDCs ) , the cells were transfected using the Amaxa mouse Dendritic Cell Nucleofector Kit ( Lonza ) . The following expression vectors were used for plasmid DNA transfections : empty vector pEGFP - C1 ( Clontech ) ; Addgene plasmids : 61996 LBR pEGFP - N2 ( 646 ) ( 43 ) , 40753 pGP - CMV - GCaMP6s ( 44 ) , 86849 pBOB - EF1 - FastFUCCI - Puro ( 45 ) . To knock down LMNA or cPLA2a , cells were transfected with nontargeting siRNA ( control ) or validated ON - TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNA reagents ( Dharmacon ) tar - geting human - specific LMNA mRNA ( cat . no . L - 004978 - 00 - 0005 ) , human - specific PLA2G4A mRNA ( cat . no . L - 009886 - 00 - 0005 ) , or mouse - specific Pla2g4a mRNA ( cat . no . L - 063167 - 01 - 0010 ) . Unless stated otherwise , cells were analyzed 72 hours post - transfection using standard Western blot or immunofluorescent analysis protocols . Based on quantitative den - sitometry of proteins , the knockdown efficiency was estimated as 84 . 7 ± 2 . 5 % ( 3 repeats ) . Ad - ditionally , lentiviral transductions were per - formed to achieve lamin A knockdown in HeLa cells . Viral particles were produced by transfection of 0 . 8 million 293FT cells with 3 m g DNA and 8 m l TransIT - 293 ( Mirus Bio ) per well . For shRNA mediated knockdown of lamin A , 0 . 4 m g CMV - VSVG , 1 m g psPAX2 and 1 . 6 m g of either pLKO . 1 - puro - LMNAsh4 ( TRCN0000061837 , target sequence GCCGTG - CTTCCTCTCACTCAT ) or pLKO1puro - shLACZ ( target sequence GCGATCGTAATCACCC - GAGTG ) as negative control were combined . Viral supernatants were harvested 48 hours post - transfection , filtered at 0 . 45 m M , and added on to HeLa cells that had been seeded 1 day before transduction at a 2 : 1 ratio of viral supernatant : medium containing protamine at a final concentration of 1 m g / ml . Cells were washed once in PBS and passaged at 48 hours post - transduction with 2 m g / ml of puromycin for selection of stably transduced cells . Drug treatments The following pharmacological inhibitors and chemical compounds were used : 10 m M ROCK - mediated contractility inhibitor Y27632 ( Y27 ) ( EMD ) , 10 m M myosin II ATPase inhibitor blebbistatin ( BBS ) ( TorontoResearchChemicals ) , 20 m M Ca 2 + - sensitive myosin light chain kinase / MLCK inhibitor ML - 7 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1 mM apoptosis inducer hydrogen peroxide ( H 2 O 2 ) , 1 m M transcription inhibitor triptolide ( TRP ) ( Tocris Bioscience ) , 50 m g ml − 1 translation inhibitor cycloheximide ( CHX ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1 m M AZD6738 inhibiting the Serine / Threonine protein kinase Ataxia Telangiectasia and Rad3 related ( ATR ) capable of sensing NE tension ( Tocris Bioscience ) , 10 m M nonspecific PM per - meability marker propidium iodide ( PI ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 0 . 4 mM PM tension reducer sodium deoxycholate ( DOCL ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 10 m M gadolinium ( III ) chloride ( Gd 3 + ) or 5 m M pep - tide GsMTx4 from the tarantula venom affect - ing mechanosensitive ion channels on the PM ( Tocris Bioscience ) , 2 mM extracellular Ca 2 + chelator BAPTA ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 10 m M intra - cellular Ca 2 + chelator BAPTA - AM ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 10 m M ionomycin ( IOM ) directly facilitating thetransport of Ca 2 + across thePM ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 70 m M signaling lipid arach - idonic acid ( ARA ) ( a product of enzymatic activity of the NE stretch - sensitive enzyme cPLA2 ) activating actomyosin contractility ( Cay - man Chemical ) , 20 m M AACOCF3 ( AA ) or 10 m M PACOCF3 ( PA ) inhibiting the NE stretch - sensitive enzyme cPLA2 ( Tocris Bio - science ) , 100 m M 2APB or 10 m M Xestospongin C ( Xesto ) blocking stretch - activated inositol triphosphate receptors ( InsP3Rs ) on the ER / nuclear membranes ( Tocris Bioscience ) , and 20 m M broad - spectrum matrix metallopro - teinase inhibitor GM6001 ( Merck Millipore ) . Growth medium was supplemented with 1 % DMSO ( vol / vol ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in control experiments . Western blotting CellswerecollectedandresuspendedinLaemmlibuffer . Proteins were separated using sodium dodecylsulfatepolyacrylamidegelelectrophoresis Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 10 of 13 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE ( SDS - PAGE ) and transferred onto PVDF mem - branes . After incubation with primary [ Lamin A / C antibody no . 2032 ( Cell Signaling Tech - nology ) , cPLA2a antibody no . PA5 - 29100 ( Invi - trogen ) , and GAPDH antibody no . # ab9483 ( Abcam ) ] and secondary [ IRDye and VRDye ( LI - COR ) ] antibodies , the membranes were visualized using Odyssey CLx Infrared Imag - ing System ( LI - COR ) . Quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) To assess the efficacy of the siRNA treatment , qPCR was carried out on iDCs after 48 hours of the siRNA treatment . RNA extraction was performed using RNeasy Micro RNA kit ( Qiagen ) , according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol . cDNA was produced using the high capacity cDNA synthesis kit ( Thermo Fisher ) , according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol , start - ing from 1 m g of RNA . Quantitative PCR experi - ments were performed using Taqman Gene ExpressionAssay ( AppliedBiosystems ) andcar - ried out on a Lightcycler 480 ( Roche ) using the settings recommended by the manufacturer . The following primers were used : Mm01284324 _ m1 for PLA2g4 and Mm99999915 for GAPDH as a control . cPLA2a expression was assessed in si - control and si - cPLA2a iDCs . Samples were run in triplicate for each condition . Data were sub - sequently normalized to GAPDH values , and to the values obtained in control iDCs . The fold changewascalculatedusingtheformula2 - DD CT . Single - cell flat AFM - based confinement coupled to live cell imaging Trypsinized cells were resuspended in CO 2 - independent , phenol red - free DMEM / F - 12 me - dium supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Invitrogen ) and plated on glass - bottomed 35 - mm dishes ( FluoroDish , WPI ) . Experiments with non - adherent cells were initiated 30 min after cell plating to allow for cell sedimentation . Spread cells were obtained 6 hours post cell plating . Dishes with cells were mounted in a dish heater ( JPK Instruments ) and kept at 37°C under an inverted light microscope ( Axio Observer . Z1 ; Zeiss ) equipped with a confocal microscope unit ( LSM700 ; Zeiss ) andAFMhead ( CellHesion 200 ; JPK Instruments ) . Focused ion beam ( FIB ) – sculpted , flat silicon microcantilevers wereprocessed and calibrated as described in ( 46 ) . The microcantilevers were fixed on a standard JPK glass block and mounted in the AFM head . The cantilever was lowered on the cell to a preset height with a constant speed of 0 . 5 m m·s − 1 , and the resulting varying force and cantilever height were re - corded over time . At the same time , differential interference contrast and fluorescence images atthemidplaneoftheconfinedcell ( theimaging settings were readjusted to the medial plane of the cell each time the cell was confined to a specific height ) were recorded every 5 s using a 63× water immersion objective . All microscopy equipment was placed , and experiments were carried out in a custom - made isolation box . Determination of cell pressure and cortical tension Cell geometry , pressure , and cortical tension were measured on the basis of AFM and imaging data , as described in ( 46 ) and ( 47 ) . Production of cytoplasts Enucleated cells were generated as described in ( 25 ) and ( 48 ) . Microfabrication - based confinement of cell populations To obtain large quantities of confined cells for cell population or biochemical studies , cell con - finement was performed using a homemade device ( 8 ) consisting of a suction cup made in polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS , RTV615 , GE ) used to press a confining coverslip bearing PDMS microspacers ( micropillars ) on top of the cul - ture substrate populated with cells . The height of the micropillars ( 10 m m versus 5 m m ) de - termines the height for spatial confinement of cells between the coverslip and the substrate . A version of the cell confiner adapted to multi - well plates was used to perform multiple ex - periments in parallel ( 20 ) . The molds for the PDMS microspacers were fabricated following standard photolithography procedures . The sur - face of the confining side was always treated with nonadhesive pLL - PEG ( SuSoS ) . Assaying activation of apoptosis in live cells To detect levels of active apoptotic caspases , theImage - iTLIVE RedPolyCaspases detection kit based on a fluorescent inhibitor of caspases ( FLICA ) methodology ( I35101 , Molecular probes ) was used according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol . Biochemical measurements of ARA release Cells were confined using microfabricated devices as described in the subsection “ Microfabrication - based confinement of cell populations . ” Confinement was released , and the cells were immediately extracted with Dole ’ s solution ( heptane , isopropyl alcohol , 1 N sulfuric acid ; 10 : 40 : 1 ) . Pentafluorobenzyl esters of the fatty acids were prepared and quantified by gas chromatography – mass spectrometry with reference to an internal standard of d8 - AA as described in ( 49 ) . Epithelial monolayer stretching A custom - made stretching device was used to perform epithelial monolayer stretching ex - periments , as described in ( 1 ) . Chemotactic transmigration assays Serum - starved A375P cells were harvested and transferred in serum - free medium to the upper compartment of 5 - m m - pore , 8 - m m - pore ( cat . No . 3421 and 3428 , Corning ) , or 12 - m m - pore ( cat . no . CBA - 107 , Cell Biolabs Inc . ) poly - carbonate membrane inserts ( transwells ) . Cell density was adjusted according to the specific area of each transwell with 5 × 10 4 , 1 . 5 × 10 5 , and 7 . 5 × 10 5 cells added to 5 - , 12 - , and 8 - m m transwells , respectively . Cells were allowed to transmigrate toward the lower compartment containing 10 % FBS for12 hours . Transmigration efficiency was calculated as number of cells at the lower compartment divided by the num - ber of cells added to the upper compartment of a transwell . To examine the ability of A375P cells to chemotax through 3D collagen gels , atelo - peptide fibrillar bovine dermal collagen ( cat . no . 5005 - B ; PureCol , Advanced BioMatrix ) was prepared at 1 . 7 mg ml − 1 in DMEM and allowed to polymerize in the upper compartment of the 12 - m m - pore polycarbonate membrane insert ( cat . no . CBA - 107 , Cell Biolabs Inc . ) . Serum - starved cells were seeded on top of the col - lagen pad in serum - free medium , allowed to adhere and transmigrate through the collagen layer and the membrane toward the lower compartment containing10 % FBS for24hours . Transmigration efficiency was calculated as number of cells at the lower compartment divided by the number of cells added to the upper compartment of the transwell . Generation of 3D CDMs HFFs were plated at high density on gelatin - coated and glutaraldehyde - treated 35 - mm ( 4 × 10 5 cells , MatTek ) or 50 - mm ( 5 . 7 × 10 5 cells , Warner Instruments ) glass - bottom dishes . Cultures were maintained for 10 days , adding new media with 50 m g / ml ascorbic acid every other day . The matrices were denuded of cells by adding extraction buffer ( 20 mM NH 4 OH and 0 . 5 % Triton X100 in PBS ) for 10 min at room temperature and washed with PBS . Quantitative image analysis Fluorescence intensity levels ( mean gray values , arbitrary units ) were obtained from background subtracted images using the ImageJ / Fiji software ( NIH ; http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / index . html ) . The Imaris ( version 8 . 3 ) image analysis soft - ware ( Bitplane ) was used to measure nuclear volume reconstructed from 3D confocal micro - scopy images . The dimensionless parameter excess of perimeter ( EOP ) was calculated to estimate the amount of NE or PM area stored in macro - and microfolds . To calculate EOP , we first ob - tained values for perimeter ( P ) and surface area ( A ) from 2D images taken at the maximum radius of the nucleus ( NE marker LAP2 - GFP labeling ) orcell ( PMmarkerCAAXbox - mCherry labeling ) . Next , we introduced R 0 as the radius of the circle defined by the area A , which allowed us to compute EOP as the ratio be - tween ( P − 2 p R 0 ) and ( 2 p R 0 ) . EOP values of a Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 11 of 13 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE highly folded object tend to be close to 1 , whereas EOP of an object with a smooth sur - face tend to be close to 0 . Additional theoret - ical calculations were performed to account for experimentally observed changes in nuclear aspect ratio ( AR ) ; no significant contribu - tion of AR changes to the measured values of EOP was observed . Nuclear roundness index was obtained using the shape descriptors tool in ImageJ / Fiji . The MIPAR v . 3 . 2 . 3 . image analysis software ( MIPAR Software ) and the Kappa plugin for ImageJ / Fiji ( https : / / github . com / brouhardlab / Kappa / tree / master / docs # fit - the - curve - to - the - data ) were used to estimate NE surface curvature . To measure NE fluctuations , nuclei of live cells expressing LAP2 - GFP were recorded using a high frame rate acquisition mode ( 250 msec per frame ) for 5 min . The position of each nucleus was corrected for linear and rotational drift using the Stackreg plugin of the ImageJ / Fiji software . Upon drift correc - tion , the edge of the nucleus was registered at a given angle . NE fluctuations were calculated by measuring the standard deviation of the NE from its mean position . To precisely position the NE , linescans across the NE ( intensities along a line of 1 pixel in width perpendicular to the NE ) were made at different positions along theNE . For each point along theNE and for each time point in the movie , the point of maximum intensity was calculated on the linescan and a parabola was fitted on points before and after the maxima to determine the localization of the NE with a subpixel resolu - tion . For each position along the NE , the mean position was taken as the mean of all time points . The standard deviation of the position of the NE around this mean position was taken as one measure for the fluctuation of the NE . Each point along the NE contributes one mea - sure . Obtained mean NE fluctuation values were expressed in micrometers . The same ap - proach can be applied to measure PM fluctua - tions . Afloppy , andthuslesstensed , membrane is expected to fluctuate more , whereas a mem - brane under tension exhibits no or diminished fluctuations . The distance between neighboring nuclear pores ( NP - NP distance ) was estimated for the same living cell expressing a NP maker NUP107 - GFP at different degrees of spatial confinement . To this end , a medial confocal slice of the nucleus was obtained to then trace individual NPs along the NE using the Line - scan function of the MetaMorph ( version 7 . 7 ) software ( Molecular Devices ) . Each individ - ual NP was resolved as a local maximum of fluorescence intensity on the Linescan diagram . Thedistancebetweennearestlocalmaximawas represented as NP - NP distance . Cell speed was analyzed using the manual tracking plugin of ImageJ / Fiji . To measure collagen pore sizes , collagen fibers were imaged via axially swept light - sheet microscopy ( 50 ) . The fibers were then detected from the deconvolved images by ap - plying a steerable filter ( 51 ) followed by non - maximum suppression . We then calculated pore sizes using a custom - written Matlab code implementing the algorithm described in ( 2 ) . Statistics and reproducibility of experiments Unless stated otherwise , statistical significance was determined by two - tailed unpaired or paired Student ’ s t test after confirming that the data met appropriate assumptions ( nor - mality , homogenous variance , and independent sampling ) . Statistical data are presented as average ± either SEM or SD . Sample size ( n ) and P value are specified in the text of the paper or figure legends . Samples in most cases were defined as the number of cells counted or examined within multiple different fields of view on the same dish or slide , and thus re - present data from a single sample within a single experiment . When data from a single sample are shown , they are representative of at least three additional samples from inde - pendent experiments . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . G . T . Eisenhoffer et al . , Crowding induces live cell extrusion to maintain homeostatic cell numbers in epithelia . Nature 484 , 546 – 549 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature10999 ; pmid : 22504183 2 . J . Renkawitz et al . , Nuclear positioning facilitates amoeboid migration along the path of least resistance . Nature 568 , 546 – 550 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 019 - 1087 - 5 ; pmid : 30944468 3 . B . Trappmann et al . , Extracellular - matrix tethering regulates stem - cell fate . Nat . Mater . 11 , 642 – 649 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat3339 ; pmid : 22635042 4 . M . D . Vahey , D . A . Fletcher , The biology of boundary conditions : Cellular reconstitution in one , two , and three dimensions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 26 , 60 – 68 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2013 . 10 . 001 ; pmid : 24529247 5 . R . Oria et al . , Force loading explains spatial sensing of ligands by cells . Nature 552 , 219 – 224 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature24662 ; pmid : 29211717 6 . M . Théry , A . Jiménez - Dalmaroni , V . Racine , M . Bornens , F . Jülicher , Experimental and theoretical study of mitotic spindle orientation . Nature 447 , 493 – 496 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature05786 ; pmid : 17495931 7 . J . Z . Kechagia , J . Ivaska , P . Roca - Cusachs , Integrins as biomechanical sensors of the microenvironment . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 457 – 473 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0134 - 2 ; pmid : 31182865 8 . Y . - J . Liu et al . , Confinement and low adhesion induce fast amoeboid migration of slow mesenchymal cells . Cell 160 , 659 – 672 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 01 . 007 ; pmid : 25679760 9 . V . Ruprecht et al . , Cortical contractility triggers a stochastic switch to fast amoeboid cell motility . Cell 160 , 673 – 685 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 01 . 008 ; pmid : 25679761 10 . M . P . Stewart , Y . Toyoda , A . A . Hyman , D . J . Müller , Tracking mechanics and volume of globular cells with atomic force microscopy using a constant - height clamp . Nat . Protoc . 7 , 143 – 154 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2011 . 434 ; pmid : 22222789 11 . F . Kong , A . J . García , A . P . Mould , M . J . Humphries , C . Zhu , Demonstration of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 1275 – 1284 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200810002 ; pmid : 19564406 12 . A . G . Clark , O . Wartlick , G . Salbreux , E . K . Paluch , Stresses at the cell surface during animal cell morphogenesis . Curr . Biol . 24 , R484 – R494 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 03 . 059 ; pmid : 24845681 13 . B . Enyedi , P . Niethammer , A Case for the Nuclear Membrane as a Mechanotransducer . Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 9 , 247 – 251 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12195 - 016 - 0430 - 2 ; pmid : 27453760 14 . A . Elosegui - Artola et al . , Force Triggers YAP Nuclear Entry by Regulating Transport across Nuclear Pores . Cell 171 , 1397 – 1410 . e14 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 10 . 008 ; pmid : 29107331 15 . A . Kumar et al . , ATR mediates a checkpoint at the nuclear envelope in response to mechanical stress . Cell 158 , 633 – 646 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 046 ; pmid : 25083873 16 . N . Itano , S . Okamoto , D . Zhang , S . A . Lipton , E . Ruoslahti , Cell spreading controls endoplasmic and nuclear calcium : A physical gene regulation pathway from the cell surface to the nucleus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 5181 – 5186 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0531397100 ; pmid : 12702768 17 . B . Enyedi , M . Jelcic , P . Niethammer , The Cell Nucleus Serves as a Mechanotransducer of Tissue Damage - Induced Inflammation . Cell 165 , 1160 – 1170 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 04 . 016 ; pmid : 27203112 18 . M . Raab et al . , ESCRT III repairs nuclear envelope ruptures during cell migration to limit DNA damage and cell death . Science 352 , 359 – 362 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aad7611 ; pmid : 27013426 19 . A . C . Rowat , J . Lammerding , J . H . Ipsen , Mechanical properties of the cell nucleus and the effect of emerin deficiency . Biophys . J . 91 , 4649 – 4664 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 086454 ; pmid : 16997877 20 . M . Le Berre , J . Aubertin , M . Piel , Fine control of nuclear confinement identifies a threshold deformation leading to lamina rupture and induction of specific genes . Integr . Biol . 4 , 1406 – 1414 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1039 / c2ib20056b ; pmid : 23038068 21 . F . - Y . Chu , S . C . Haley , A . Zidovska , On the origin of shape fluctuations of the cell nucleus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 10338 – 10343 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1702226114 ; pmid : 28900009 22 . F . - C . Tsai , T . Meyer , Ca2 + pulses control local cycles of lamellipodia retraction and adhesion along the front of migrating cells . Curr . Biol . 22 , 837 – 842 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2012 . 03 . 037 ; pmid : 22521790 23 . P . Solanes et al . , Space exploration by dendritic cells requires maintenance of myosin II activity by IP3 receptor 1 . EMBO J . 34 , 798 – 810 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201489056 ; pmid : 25637353 24 . M . C . Gong et al . , Arachidonic acid inhibits myosin light chain phosphatase and sensitizes smooth muscle to calcium . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 21492 – 21498 ( 1992 ) . pmid : 1328235 25 . V . Rodionov , E . Nadezhdina , J . Peloquin , G . Borisy , Digital fluorescence microscopy of cell cytoplasts with and without the centrosome . Methods Cell Biol . 67 , 43 – 51 ( 2001 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 01 ) 67004 - 3 ; pmid : 11550480 26 . S . Gravemann et al . , Dosage effect of zero to three functional LBR - genes in vivo and in vitro . Nucleus 1 , 179 – 189 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 4161 / nucl . 11113 ; pmid : 21326950 27 . Y . Ma et al . , Lamin B receptor plays a role in stimulating nuclear envelope production and targeting membrane vesicles to chromatin during nuclear envelope assembly through direct interaction with importin beta . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 520 – 530 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03355 ; pmid : 17251381 28 . J . Ellenberg et al . , Nuclear membrane dynamics and reassembly in living cells : Targeting of an inner nuclear membrane protein in interphase and mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1193 – 1206 ( 1997 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 6 . 1193 ; pmid : 9298976 29 . D . A . Donahue et al . , SUN2 Overexpression Deforms Nuclear Shape and Inhibits HIV . J . Virol . 90 , 4199 – 4214 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 03202 - 15 ; pmid : 26865710 30 . M . Le Berre , E . Zlotek - Zlotkiewicz , D . Bonazzi , F . Lautenschlaeger , M . Piel , in Methods in Cell Biology ( Elsevier , 2014 ) , pp . 213 – 229 . 31 . Y . Kim , Y . Zheng , Generation and characterization of a conditional deletion allele for Lmna in mice . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 440 , 8 – 13 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2013 . 08 . 082 ; pmid : 23998933 32 . V . Sanz - Moreno et al . , Rac activation and inactivation control plasticity of tumor cell movement . Cell 135 , 510 – 523 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 09 . 043 ; pmid : 18984162 33 . V . Venturini , F . Pezzano , F . C . Castro , H . - M . Häkkinen , S . Jiménez - Delgado , M . Colomer - Rosell , M . M . Sánchez , Q . Tolosa - Ramon , S . Paz - López , M . A . Valverde , P . Loza - Alvarez , M . Krieg , S . Wieser , V . Ruprecht , The nucleus measures shape deformation for cellular proprioception and regulates adaptive morphodynamics . bioRxiv 865949 [ Preprint ] . 5 December 2019 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 865949 . 34 . D . M . Graham et al . , Enucleated cells reveal differential roles of the nucleus incellmigration , polarity , andmechanotransduction . Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 12 of 13 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE J . Cell Biol . 217 , 895 – 914 ( 2018 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201706097 ; pmid : 29351995 35 . H . R . Manley , M . C . Keightley , G . J . Lieschke , The Neutrophil Nucleus : An Important Influence on Neutrophil Migration and Function . Front . Immunol . 9 , 2867 ( 2018 ) . doi : 10 . 3389 / fimmu . 2018 . 02867 ; pmid : 30564248 36 . P . V . Afonso et al . , LTB4 is a signal - relay molecule during neutrophil chemotaxis . Dev . Cell 22 , 1079 – 1091 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2012 . 02 . 003 ; pmid : 22542839 37 . R . Majumdar , A . Tavakoli Tameh , C . A . Parent , Exosomes Mediate LTB4 Release during Neutrophil Chemotaxis . PLOS Biol . 14 , e1002336 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1002336 ; pmid : 26741884 38 . M . T . Alonso , J . García - Sancho , Nuclear Ca ( 2 + ) signalling . Cell Calcium 49 , 280 – 289 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceca . 2010 . 11 . 004 ; pmid : 21146212 39 . J . Aureille et al . , Nuclear envelope deformation controls cell cycle progression in response to mechanical force . EMBO Rep . 20 , e48084 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 15252 / embr . 201948084 ; pmid : 31368207 40 . F . Watt , B . Simon , D . Prowse , in Cell Biology ( Elsevier , 2006 ) , pp . 133 – 138 . 41 . J . Riedl et al . , Lifeact mice for studying F - actin dynamics . Nat . Methods 7 , 168 – 169 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth0310 - 168 ; pmid : 20195247 42 . Y . Zhang et al . , Mouse models of MYH9 - related disease : Mutations in nonmuscle myosin II - A . Blood 119 , 238 – 250 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 06 - 358853 ; pmid : 21908426 43 . N . Zuleger et al . , System analysis shows distinct mechanisms and common principles of nuclear envelope protein dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 193 , 109 – 123 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201009068 ; pmid : 21444689 44 . T . - W . Chen et al . , Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity . Nature 499 , 295 – 300 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature12354 ; pmid : 23868258 45 . S . - B . Koh et al . , A quantitative FastFUCCI assay defines cell cycle dynamics at a single - cell level . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 512 – 520 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 195164 ; pmid : 27888217 46 . C . J . Cattin etal . , Mechanicalcontrolofmitoticprogressioninsingle animal cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 , 11258 – 11263 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1502029112 ; pmid : 26305930 47 . E . Fischer - Friedrich , A . A . Hyman , F . Jülicher , D . J . Müller , J . Helenius , Quantification of surface tension and internal pressure generated by single mitotic cells . Sci . Rep . 4 , 6213 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep06213 ; pmid : 25169063 48 . V . Rodionov , E . Nadezhdina , G . Borisy , Centrosomal control of microtubule dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 115 – 120 ( 1999 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 1 . 115 ; pmid : 9874781 49 . D . Riendeau et al . , Arachidonyl trifluoromethyl ketone , a potent inhibitor of 85 - kDa phospholipase A2 , blocks production of arachidonate and 12 - hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid by calcium ionophore - challenged platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 15619 – 15624 ( 1994 ) . pmid : 8195210 50 . K . M . Dean , P . Roudot , E . S . Welf , G . Danuser , R . Fiolka , Deconvolution - free Subcellular Imaging with Axially Swept Light Sheet Microscopy . Biophys . J . 108 , 2807 – 2815 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2015 . 05 . 013 ; pmid : 26083920 51 . M . Jacob , M . Unser , IEEE Trans . Pattern Anal . Machine Intell 26 , 1007 – 1019 ( 2004 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors wish to acknowledge I . Poser and A . Hyman ( Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden , Germany ) for providing stable BAC transgenic HeLa cell lines expressing various fluorescent protein markers , P . Niethammer ( Sloan Kettering Institute , New York , NY , USA ) for sharing the HeLa cell line that stably expresses cPla2 - mKate2 , and V . Sanz - Moreno ( Queen Mary University of London , London , UK ) for providing A375P cells . LBR pEGFP - N2 ( 646 ) was a gift from E . Schirmer ( Addgene plasmid no . 61996 ; http : / / n2t . net / addgene : 61996 ; RRID : Addgene _ 61996 ) . pGP - CMV - GCaMP6s was a gift from D . Kim and the GENIE Project ( Addgene plasmid no . 40753 ; http : / / n2t . net / addgene : 40753 ; RRID : Addgene _ 40753 ) . pBOB - EF1 - FastFUCCI - Puro was a gift from K . Brindle and D . Jodrell ( Addgene plasmid no . 86849 ; http : / / n2t . net / addgene : 86849 ; RRID : Addgene _ 86849 ) . We thank L . Allison and R . Fleck ( Centre for Ultrastructural Imaging at King ’ s College London , London , UK ) and D . Mathys ( Swiss Nanoscience Institute at University of Basel , Basel , Switzerland ) for performingscanning electron microscopy of polycarbonate membranes and focused ion beam – based flat AFM cantilever nanofabrication , respectively . We are grateful to B . Baum ( University College London , London , UK ) , D . Gerlich ( Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences , Vienna , Austria ) , and M . Kraakman ( Children ’ s Cancer Research Institute , Vienna , Austria ) for comments on the manuscript . We also thank G . Charras ( University College London , London , UK ) for the advice about estimating internuclear pore distance in nuclei at various degrees of spatial confinement , and N . Carpi ( Institut Curie , Paris , France ) for technical assistance with experiments . We also thank A . Williart , L . Barbier , and P . Vargas ( Institut Curie , Paris , France ) for performing additional experiments during the revision of the article , which were finally not included in the article but helped our reasoning . Some illustrations accompanying figures of the present manuscript were partially generated using the BioRender . com online tool . Funding : The research leading to these results has received funding from the People Programme ( Marie Sk ł odowska - Curie Actions ) of the European Union ’ s Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007 - 2013 ) under REA grant agreement PCOFUND - GA - 2013 - 609102 , through the PRESTIGE programme coordinated by Campus France . A . J . L . was supported by the Marie Curie & PRESTIGE Fellowship ( grant 609102 ) , London Law Trust Medal Fellowship ( grantMGS9403 ) , anda Career Grantfor Incoming International Talent ( grant 875764 ) from the Austrian Research Promotion Agency ( FFG ) . D . J . M . was supported by the National Center of Competence in Research ( NCCR ) Molecular Systems Engineering . This work was also supported by the Institut Pierre - Gilles de Gennes - IPGG ( Equipement d ’ Excellence , “ Investissements d ’ avenir , ” program ANR - 10 - EQPX - 34 and Laboratoire d ’ Excellence , “ Investissements d ’ avenir ” program ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0001 - 02 PSL and ANR - 10 - LABX - 31 . This work was additionally supported by the Institut National du Cancer ( INCa grant 2018 - PL Bio - 02 ) to M . P . and INCa ( grant 2019 - PL BIO - 07 ) and INSERM Plan Cancer Single Cell ( grant 19CS007 - 00 ) to N . M . and M . P . R . J . P . was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01GM126054 . R . F . received funding from the National Institutes of Health ( grants R35GM133522 - 01 and R33CA235254 - 02 ) . J . M . G . G . was financed by Instituto de Salud Carlos III ( ISCIII ) ( PI17 / 01395 ; PI20 / 00306 ) and I3 SNS program . M . D . was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences ( grant K99GM123221 ) . N . S . D . S . received a Marie Sk ł odowska - Curie Individual Fellowship ( DCBIO 751735 ) and an EMBO Long - Term Fellowship ( ALTF 1298 - 2016 ) . I . Z . was supported by a Metchnikov Fellowship from the Franco - Russian Scientific Cooperation Program and the Russian Science Foundation ( grant 16 - 15 - 10288 ) . Author contributions : A . J . L . , C . J . C . , D . J . M . , and M . P . designed the project . A . J . L . and M . P . jointly supervised the project . A . J . L . and C . J . C . performed all key experiments and analyzed the data . D . C . analyzed most of force spectroscopy data and developed analytical approaches to estimate the degree of nuclear membrane folding . Z . A . , G . P . F . N . , P . J . S . , and A . M . L - D . performed experiments with primary mouse immature dendritic cells . M . M . performed experiments with A375P cells . G . P . F . N . performed experiments with HeLa - cPla2 cells and with Lamin A / C – depleted HeLa cells . N . S . performed experiments with HeLa - LAP2 cells and developed analytical approaches to estimate the degree of nuclear membrane fluctuation . J . M . G - A . and I . Z . performed Western blot analysis of LMNA knockdown efficiency as well as experiments on the effect of transcription and translation inhibition in HeLa cells . J . M . G - A . additionally assisted with manuscript preparation for submission . A . B . performed shRNA - mediated LMNA knockdown in HeLa cells . N . D . S . and J . M . G . G . provided Lmna KO DCs and mice . N . M . supervised A . B . and N . S . D . S . M . K . D . , E . S . W . , and R . F . analyzed 3D collagen data . R . J . P . performed experiments with HT1080 cells in 3D CDMs . A . J . L . , C . J . C . , D . J . M . , and M . P . wrote the manuscript . All authors discussed the results and implications , and commented on the manuscript at all stages ; Competing interests : The authors declare no competing interests . Data and materials availability : All data are available in the main text or the supplementary materials . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS science . sciencemag . org / content / 370 / 6514 / eaba2894 / suppl / DC1 Figs . S1 to S11 Tables S1 to S3 MDAR Reproducibility Checklist Movies S1 to S7 View / request a protocol for this paper from Bio - protocol . 20 November 2019 ; resubmitted 29 June 2020 Accepted 28 August 2020 10 . 1126 / science . aba2894 Lomakin et al . , Science 370 , eaba2894 ( 2020 ) 16 October 2020 13 of 13 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE