Analogy involves accessing and transferring elements from familiar categories in order to use it in the construc-­ tion of a novel idea—for example , in an attempt to solve a problem or explain a concept ( Gentner , 1998 ) . Analogi-­ cal reasoning is assumed to be a general human capacity ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) involved in most domains , al-­ though , perhaps most notably , in creative problem-­solving domains , such as science , design , and art . Engineering design—perhaps , especially , the early conceptual stage of the design process—is one such creative domain . De-­ sign theorists ( e . g . , Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ; Gold-­ schmidt , 2001 ; Roozenburg & Eekels , 1996 ) have argued for the importance of analogy in design , and several de-­ sign tools or techniques make extensive use of analogy , including Synectics ( e . g . , Gordon , 1961 ) and TRIZ ( e . g . , Terninko , Zusman , & Zlotin , 1998 ) . Furthermore , anec-­ dotes concerning inventors and engineers who have made breakthrough discoveries or inventions following distant analogical transfer abound in the creativity literature . One of the most famous is George de Mestral , who developed Velcro after examining the seeds of the burdock root that had attached themselves to his dog . Regardless of whether these anecdotes are true , the sheer number of famous sto-­ ries illustrates the importance engineering designers have placed on analogy . In this article , we will examine three general questions about how analogies support a creative domain such as engineering design . ( 1 ) What kinds of analogies ( close or distant ) tend to get evoked during design ? ( 2 ) How is the process of retrieving analogues influenced by the various forms of concrete-­to-­abstract objects found in design ? and ( 3 ) What general functions do analogies serve in de-­ sign ? The answers to these questions will extend our un-­ derstanding of analogical reasoning . In the sections that follow , we will expand on what is currently known and expected regarding these three questions . Analogical Distance In analogical transfer , the distance between the source and the target may be large or small . For example , a de-­ signer trying to develop door handles for the auto industry may make an analogy to other door handles in the auto industry ( within-­domain , or local , analogies ) or may make an analogy to telephones or oysters in developing the de-­ sign ( between-­domain , or distant , analogies ; see Dunbar , 1995 ; Dunbar & Blanchette , 2001 ; Vosniadou & Ortony , 1989 ) . Local analogies involve greater superficial similar-­ ity between the source and the target , as compared with the lesser amounts of superficial similarity involved in distant analogies . This increase in superficial similarity may make local analogies easier to access ( e . g . , Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ) . Both local and distant analogies involve structural simi-­ larity . But since distant analogies involve two vastly dif-­ 29 Copyright 2007 Psychonomic Society , Inc . The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : The case of engineering design B o T . C hrisTensen Copenhagen Business School , Copenhagen , Denmark and C hrisTian d . s Chunn University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania Analogy was studied in real-­world engineering design , using the in vivo method . Analogizing was found to occur frequently , entailing a roughly equal amount of within-­ and between-­domain analogies . In partial support for theories of unconscious plagiarism ( Brown & Murphy , 1989 ; Marsh , Landau , & Hicks , 1996 ) and Ward’s ( 1994 ) path-­of-­least-­resistance model , it was found that the reference to exemplars ( in the form of prototypes ) significantly reduced the number of between-­domain analogies between source and target , as compared with using sketches or no external representational systems . Analogy served three functions in relation to novel de-­ sign concepts : identifying problems , solving problems , and explaining concepts . Problem identifying analogies were mainly within domain , explanatory analogies were mainly between domain , and problem-­solving analogies were a mixture of within-­ and between-­domain analogies . Memory & Cognition 2007 , 35 ( 1 ) , 29 - 38 B . T . Christensen , bo @ virksom . dk 30 C hristensen and s Chunn ferent bodies of knowledge , it may be more difficult to ensure successful transfer of solution elements in design problem solving from the source to the target , because the domains may differ in multiple subtle ways ( Johnson-­ Laird , 1989 ) . The use of distant analogies may be positively related to originality in design . Although experimental evidence on the subject is scarce , Dahl and Moreau ( 2002 ) found that the greater the percentage of distant analogies used during design , the more significantly positive the effect on the es-­ timated originality of the design of the resulting product . Furthermore , in an experimental study of visual analogy in design , Casakin ( 2003 ) found that both novices and ex-­ perts produced more between-­domain than within-­domain analogies . The experimental setup involved providing subjects with visually analogous displays and instructing them to use analogies , and this choice of experimental setup may have significantly affected the results . These research findings and anecdotal evidence would lead one to assume that distant analogies are very common in de-­ sign and play an important part in the generation of cre-­ ative products . In science , similar anecdotal evidence of distant anal-­ ogizing’s leading to breakthrough discoveries exists ( see , e . g . , Ghiselin , 1954 ; Shepard , 1978 ) . However , in his studies of real-­world analogy in microbiology , Dunbar ( 1995 , 2001a ) found that distant analogies did not play a significant part in discovery . Dunbar divided analogies into local , regional , and distant and found that distant analogies were very rare , in comparison with local and regional analogies . So , it is unknown whether real-­world designers use mainly within-­domain or between-­domain analogies . Insofar as the real-­world science findings can be gener-­ alized , we would expect distant analogies to be rare in real-­world design . But insofar as Casakin’s experimental findings can be generalized , we would expect designers to use mainly distant analogies . Preinventive Structures and Analogy Preinventive structures are precursors for the final ex-­ ternalized creative products . Although the term preinven - tive structure typically refers to unsupported cognitive structures ( e . g . , visual patterns , object forms , or mental models ; Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ) , it may also refer to cognitive structures with the external support of sketches or prototypes . Creative cognitive processes in concept de-­ sign are frequently supported by external representational systems , such as sketching ( McGown , Green , & Rodgers , 1998 ) and the construction of mock-­ups and prototypes ( Römer , Pache , Weisshahn , Lindemann , & Hacker , 2001 ) . In a survey of engineering designers , Römer et al . found that 96 % reported using sketches and models during the development of solution concepts . Notably , this was also the case during the early stages of design ( task clarifi-­ cation and concept design ) , where 95 % reported using sketches and 58 % reported using prototypes . In some cases , preinventive structures may influence analogy use . It is well known that employing exemplars or fixating elements in either memory or the environment may constrain performance or creativity . Prime examples include such phenomena as functional fixedness , which involves restricting the uses of objects to well-­known func-­ tions ( Maier , 1931 ) , and mental set , which involves situ-­ ationally induced obstacles to problem solving ( Luchins , 1942 ) . Furthermore , it has been found that providing ( Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ; Jaarsveld & van Leeuwen , 2005 ; Jans-­ son & Smith , 1991 ; Marsh , Bink , & Hicks , 1999 ; Marsh , Ward , & Landau , 1999 ; Ward , 1994 ) or retrieving ( Ward , 1994 ) existing examples may inhibit generative creative processes and may lead to a higher proportion of property transfers from the examples into the subject’s own work ( e . g . , Marsh , Landau , & Hicks , 1996 ) , even when the sub-­ ject is explicitly instructed to avoid such transfer ( e . g . , Smith , Ward , & Schumacher , 1993 ) . Source monitoring of this property transfer is especially poor in generative tasks ( e . g . , Marsh , Landau , & Hicks , 1997 ) , which originally led to the label unconscious plagiarism , or cryptomnesia ( Brown & Murphy , 1989 ; Marsh & Bower , 1993 ; Marsh & Landau , 1995 ; Marsh et al . , 1999 ) . Such studies are usu-­ ally not discussed under the analogical-­reasoning heading , even though they do concern transfer of elements from previous examples into new creations . Ward ( 1994 , 1995 , 1998 ) proposed a path-­of-­least-­ resistance model to account for some of these findings . This model states that the default approach in tasks in-­ volving the imagination , especially when few constraints must be satisfied , is to access a specific known entity or category exemplar and then to pattern the new entity after it . In support of this model , Ward ( 1994 ; Ward , Patter-­ son , Sifonis , Dodds , & Saunders , 2002 ) found that people who reported basing their novel constructions on spe-­ cific exemplars were less original than people who used other strategies . Property transfer in generative tasks has proven robust across a variety of settings , including engi-­ neering design tasks conducted in the lab ( Christiaans & Andel , 1993 ; Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ; Jansson & Smith , 1991 ) . Jansson and Smith had mechanical engineering students and professional designers work on simple de-­ sign problems , such as how to construct a car-­mounted bicycle rack , with ( the fixation group ) or without ( the no-­ fixation group ) a specific example being provided by the experimenter . They found that the fixation group included more properties from the examples . ( However , it should be noted that a failure to replicate this finding has been reported by Purcell & Gero , 1992 . ) Following up earlier work , Dahl and Moreau had undergraduate engineering students design new products that would solve problems for the commuting diner ( e . g . , difficulties with spillage , consumption and storage of food during automotive driv-­ ing ) . Subjects who saw an example sketch of a drive-­in window tray transferred more properties of the example and generated fewer distant analogies than did the subjects who saw no sketch . Taken together , the research on fixation and exemplar influence in generative tasks supports the notion that having or making examples available will bias people’s creations toward features in those examples . In making a nalogy in r eal - W orld d esign 31 these findings relevant to the analogy literature , it could be argued that since objects from similar domains share more superficial similarity than do objects from dissimi-­ lar domains and superficial similarity is one of the key driving forces of analogical access , we would expect that the presence or availability of within-­domain exemplars would increase the likelihood of within-­domain analo-­ gizing ( Ward , 1998 ) . In other words , the presence of within domain examples may make it hard for subjects to break away from local analogies , since superficial similarity dominates access and distant analogies will be less superficially similar than local analogies . Providing prior within-­domain examples should thus bias people’s creations toward features contained in those examples ( Marsh et al . , 1996 ) . This within-­domain biasing could , for example , be the case when designers use the external support of prototypes during the concept phases in en-­ gineering design , as compared with conditions without such support . However , it has never been tested whether exemplars that are a natural part of the design process , such as external support systems in the form of sketches or prototypes generated by the designers themselves , also constrain analogical distance . Some tentative support has come from experiments in which visual analogues were provided as hints in problem solving ( Beveridge & Par-­ kins , 1987 ) and design ( Bonnardel & Marmèche , 2004 ; Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ) , indicating that providing visual information can lead to the transfer of solution ele-­ ments . Furthermore , Craig , Nersessian , and Catrambone ( 2002 ) examined the functioning of diagrams in analogical problem solving and found that aspects of drawings , such as view and configuration , can afford analogical transfer , but they did not focus on analogical distance . These findings from the literature on fixation , exemplar influence in generative tasks , and analogical transfer lead to the following hypothesis : Use of within-­domain exter-­ nal support , such as prototypes and sketching during the concept design phase , will result in a lower proportion of between-­domain analogies , in comparison with using no such external support . This prediction leaves open the question of whether there may be a difference in average analogical distance between external support relying on sketching and that relying on prototypes . If one compares sketches with pro-­ totypes , one could argue that sketching is characterized by density and ambiguity ( Goel , 1995 ) and concentrates ( like diagrams , but unlike drafting ) primarily on illustrating the structural aspects of objects-­to-­be . As such , it could be argued that sketching involves less superficial similarity , as compared with prototypes . This argument leads to the hypothesis that sketches will result in higher proportions of between-­domain analogies , relative to within-­domain analogies , when compared with external supports with high resolution and superficial detail , such as prototypes . Functions of Analogy in Engineering Design Analogies are constructed for different purposes . In his studies of microbiology labs , Dunbar ( 1997 , 2001a ) dis-­ tinguished four types of functions for analogies : forming hypotheses , designing experiments , fixing experiments , and explaining concepts to other scientists . However , these functions are , at least in part , specific to science and do not apply to design . Although engineering design cer-­ tainly can involve experimentation , other kinds of activity are more prevalent and important , such as the construc-­ tion , modification , and evaluation of novel and useful ob-­ jects . Another classification of the function of analogies comes from Ward ( 1998 ) , who classified analogies in in-­ vention or design as either explanatory or inventive . Along similar lines , Bearman , Ball , and Ormerod ( 2002 ) exam-­ ined analogy , using a simulated real-­world management decision-­making task in a study involving undergraduate students . In this context , they distinguished between two different functions of analogies : problem solving and il-­ lustration . Both of these functions are well suited for the ill-­structured domain of engineering design . Adapting these prior findings to the design setting , we will distinguish three functions of analogies : explanation , problem solving , and problem identification . Engineer-­ ing design is frequently conducted in teams , rather than individually , whereby communicating novel ideas to other members of a team becomes an important part of the process . Explanations through analogy can be a way of enhancing and ensuring comprehension , while avoiding misunderstanding when dealing with novelty . Thus , expla-­ nation or illustration using analogy is certainly a function to be expected in engineering design . Another function analogy is expected to serve is that of problem solving . In-­ deed , this function is perhaps the primary reason research-­ ers have focused on analogy in design and science . In ad-­ dition to these two functions , problem identification may be an important function , especially in the early concep-­ tual stages of engineering design . When novel concepts are developed , it is necessary to try to foresee whether a novel idea or concept would work under particular cir-­ cumstances . In this case , analogy may play some part in evaluating novel concepts , in that it is possible to trans-­ fer not only solutions , but also potential problems from sources with which the subject has had past experience . Here , the elements to be transferred from the source to the target involve potential design problems that the new concept may display . The analogical functions may interact with external support . Communicative alignment ( i . e . , making sure ev-­ eryone is talking about the same thing ) quickly becomes a problem when novel ideas have to be shared among group members , because team members may not be certain that they are referring to the same not-­yet-­existing design ob-­ ject . It could be hypothesized that the need for communi-­ cative alignment will be greater when the design object takes the form of an idea than when external support is present , thereby producing more explanatory analogies . The frequency of these three kinds of analogical func-­ tions in real-­world design remains to be seen . On the basis of the results in Dunbar ( 1997 , 2001a ) and Bearman et al . ( 2002 ) , we should at least predict that a substantial proportion of the analogies will involve explanations . In science , Dunbar found that almost half of the analogies 32 C hristensen and s Chunn were explanatory , and in management decision making , Bearman et al . found that 27 % of the analogies served the function of illustration . We predicted that analogical distance will interact in particular ways with analogical function . In science , Dunbar ( 1997 , 2001a ) has argued that between-­domain analogies are primarily explanatory in function . Between-­ domain analogizing may be necessary in explaining novel design concepts exactly because the concept is new to the domain . Furthermore , problem identification in evalu-­ ation may involve primarily within-­domain analogies . Within-­domain analogies may be ( 1 ) more accessible , due to superficial similarity , ( 2 ) more available , due to within-­domain expertise , and ( 3 ) more appropriate for identifying problems , because within-­domain analogies may increase the chances of successful transfer . Finally , because engineering design involves the production of novel and useful solutions , solving problems by relating them to past within-­domain knowledge may frequently not be enough to construct an original product . Therefore , a mixture of within-­ and between-­domain analogies are to be expected when the function of the analogy is to solve a design problem . METHOD Data were collected using Dunbar’s ( 1995 , 1997 ; Dun-­ bar & Blanchette , 2001 ) in vivo methodology . In vivo methodology allows the researcher to study expert think-­ ing and reasoning “online” in the real world . To this end , a major international company focusing on engineering design in the domain of medical plastics was selected for its persistent creativity displayed over many years . The company’s research and development ( R & D ) department had won multiple awards for a number of different de-­ signs . Upon contacting the R & D department , a particular design project about to start up was chosen as the focus . The design project involved a total of 19 expert engineer-­ ing designers organized into three subgroups focusing on different aspects of the design object and involved design-­ ing a new and improved product in a domain in which the company already had multiple products and extensive experience . The three subgroups were organized as mul-­ tidisciplinary teams , involving different functions . The design project would span over 2 years . When in vivo research is conducted , it is necessary to lo-­ cate a suitable object of study ( or time point ) for the study of , in this case , design thinking and reasoning . A suitable object of study should include a broad cross-­section of de-­ sign activities , should include mainly design activities in the here and now ( e . g . , rather than retrospective accounts of designing ) , and should involve natural dialogue be-­ tween the designers so as to avoid potentially problematic think - aloud instructions ( see also Christensen , 2005 ) . For example , Kevin Dunbar studied scientific thinking and reasoning by recording lab group meetings because he found that they “provided a far more veridical and com-­ plete record of the evolution of ideas than other sources of information” ( Dunbar , 2001b , p . 120 ) . An analogous object of study in design turned out to be subgroup product development meetings . Each subgroup in the project held product development meetings on a regular basis ( e . g . , weekly ) . Because the designers were talking out loud , there was an external record of thinking and reasoning . The primary function of these subgroup product development meetings was the creative develop-­ ment of design artifacts—that is , actual creating and prob-­ lem solving in collaboration—and the activity included brainstorming , developing concepts , solving design prob-­ lems , planning data collection and the next steps of the design process , testing and evaluating mock-­ups and pro-­ totypes , sketching activity , conducting experiments , and discussing and exchanging knowledge about end users and production methods . Furthermore , it was found that the vast majority of the design activity at these meetings concerned design thinking and reasoning in the here and now . Therefore , the subgroup product development meet-­ ings were chosen as the most suitable object of study . In the present article , the meetings of one particular subgroup will be examined . This subgroup had the task of developing completely novel features for the new product and was chosen over the other subgroups working on im-­ proving existing features , due to the expectation that the new feature task requirement would maximize the density of creative cognitive elements . It consisted of 5 core mem-­ bers ( 1 of them female and 4 male ) representing different functions ( industrial designer , lab technician , project man-­ ager ) and backgrounds ( machine engineering , architecture , machinist ) . They all had extensive experience in medical plastics and design ( 10 , 10 , 20 , 27 , and 35 years ) . Besides these core members , the team would invite experts with specialized knowledge from other parts of the company to participate in the group meetings , when required . The subgroup product development meetings were vid-­ eotaped using a single camera capturing design objects present on the table between the designers and object han-­ dling ( e . g . , holding prototypes or sketching activity ) , albeit not in detail . Furthermore , gestures and the general direc-­ tions of gaze of the designers could be discerned from the video . During the meetings , the experimenter was present as an observer only . No special instruction to think aloud was given . The designers were merely asked to continue with the meeting as they normally would . Following each meeting , design objects ( sketches and prototypes ) that had been present were videotaped in close-­up , sometimes with one of the designers explaining the functioning of the ob-­ ject in voice-­over . Each meeting lasted between 30 min and 2 h . Subgroup product development meetings were recorded during the concept phase , or first 5 months , of the design project . This time frame was chosen in order to maximize the den-­ sity of the creative cognition data . The recordings were transcribed and segmented according to complete thought . A total of seven transcripts , covering approximately 9 h of video , were used in the present data analysis , yielding a total of 7 , 414 segments . Each segment was supplemented with information re-­ garding which ( if any ) design object presently in the room a nalogy in r eal - W orld d esign 33 was the focus of attention of the person speaking ( typi-­ cally , a design object , such as a sketch or prototype located on the table between the designers ) . This information was coded for each segment , using the video recording of the design session ( not the verbal data ) . Focus of attention was operationalized as either actual handling or holding a particular object , pointing to a particular object , or gazing toward a particular object ( if this was possible to discern from the video ) . The main unit of analysis was the seg-­ mented data . The designers developed multiple design concepts , and most were discarded again . The designers would work on several different design concepts at each meeting , al-­ though usually two or three would be the main focus of each session . Protocol Coding The transcripts were initially reduced by coding for off-­ task behavior ( e . g . , jokes , banter between the designers , office gossip , or events unrelated to design ) and episodes dealing with summarizing past meetings or planning future meetings or data collection . This coding removed 1 , 602 segments from further analysis . Then the transcripts were coded for type of preinventive structure and analogy . All analogies were then coded further for analogical distance and analogical purpose . All the transcripts were coded by the first author . Reliability checks were conducted by an independent coder who had received training both in pro-­ tocol analysis in general and in this coding scheme , using spare data from a different subgroup . Coding of Type of Preinventive Structure For each segment , we coded whether the verbally ref-­ erenced design object was unsupported by external repre-­ sentations ( idea ) , supported by sketches ( sketch ) , or sup-­ ported by 3-­D physical objects in the form of prototypes ( prototype ) . These types of design objects in the making will be referred to as preinventive structures ( Finke et al . , 1992 ) . These three types exhausted the types of design objects found in the transcripts . In addition , a finalized existing product ( other ) category was used to capture ref-­ erences solely to existing products on the market , either from the same company or from a competitor . These other segments , referring exclusively to products already on the market , were excluded from further analysis because they were not considered creative design objects in the mak-­ ing . Note that this coding scheme did not exclude analogy segments in which existing products were used as a source to create a novel concept , because in that case , the novel concept was considered a preinventive structure . Coding of Analogy All the segments were coded for analogies , following the method developed by Dunbar ( 1995 , 1997 ) . Any time a designer referred to another base of knowledge to ex-­ plain , create , modify , or evaluate a design , it was coded as an analogy . An analogy was defined as consisting of both an explicit mapping and an explicit transfer . Mapping and transfer can take place in separate segments . For example , an analogy is a statement such as “This reminds me of one of John’s old ideas , where he put holes in the side of the box . Could you do something similar here ? ” Here , the first sentence maps the old idea to the present context , and the second sentence ensures explicit transfer from the old idea to the new one . Without the last sentence ( in ital-­ ics ) , this example cannot be counted as an analogy , due to a lack of explicit transfer . Without explicit structural transfer , the mapping may lead to nothing more than a statement of similarity ( A is like B ) . Coding of Analogical Distance All the analogies were coded for analogical distance . Two levels of analogical distance were used : within do-­ main and between domain . Within-­domain analogies were defined as analogical mappings within the domain of medical plastics ( for example , to existing products from the same company or from competitors ) . Between-­ domain analogies were analogies made to domains out-­ side of medical plastics ( for example , to the auto industry , biology , or sports ) . Coding of Analogical Function All the analogies were coded for one of three functions . The function could concern identifying possible problems in a new design , taken from an analogous source ( identify problem ) . Another function could involve solving design problems ( solve problem ) , where the transfer from source to target included elements that would potentially solve a particular design problem that the target was having . Finally , the function of the analogy could be to explain a design to the other designers ( explain ) . All the analogies could be classified using these three categories . RESULTS Interrater Reliability Reliability coding was done on two full transcripts ( ap-­ proximately 18 % of the data ) . All disagreements between coders were resolved through discussion . For each code , a reliability kappa coefficient was calculated : type of pre-­ inventive structure , . 73 ; analogy , . 71 ; analogical distance , 1 . 00 ; analogical function , . 80 . All the codes reached a sat-­ isfactory level ( . . 70 ) , with perfect agreement for analogi-­ cal distance . Frequency of Analogies A total of 102 analogy segments were found in the seven transcripts ( M 5 11 . 3 analogy segments per hour of verbal data ) . The range of analogy segments was 4 – 21 per transcript , showing that analogies were commonly used by the designers during product development meetings . Analogical Distance The analogies were 55 % within and 45 % between do-­ main . All the transcripts contained both within-­domain analogies and between-­domain analogies . It thus appears that within-­domain and between-­domain analogies were used in roughly similar quantities and that both occurred 34 C hristensen and s Chunn frequently . Examples of between-­domain sources in-­ cluded potato print , zippers , credit cards , children’s slides , milk containers , shoes , toilet paper , cars , Christmas deco-­ rations , water wheels , picture puzzles , Venetian blinds , and lingerie . In short , a large number of distant domains , seemingly with little or no relation or superficial simi-­ larity to medical plastics , were accessed and used during design problem solving . To substantiate the theoretical claim that within-­domain analogies shared more superficial similarity than did between-­domain analogies in the present sample , we com-­ puted whether each analogical source and target shared four different superficial similarities : basic size , basic shape , basic color , and basic materials used . No between-­domain analogy shared all of these four features , whereas 85 % of the within-­domain analogies shared all four features . On the other hand , 61 % of the between-­domain analogies shared none of the four superficial similarity features , as compared with zero cases for within-­domain analogies . An independent t test revealed that within-­domain analo-­ gies ( M 5 3 . 82 ) had significantly more shared superficial features than did between-­domain analogies ( M 5 0 . 52 ) [ t ( 100 ) 5 17 . 21 , p , . 001 ] . Although these four features are not a complete list of superficial similarities , this very large difference in four basic features does lend support to the claim that there is a close relationship between degree of superficial similarity and domain specificity in analogy in the present sample . Preinventive Structures and Analogy Use Figure 1 presents the percentages of analogies in seg-­ ments associated with ideas , sketches , and prototypes . Chi-­square results indicated that there were significant differences between conditions [ χ 2 ( 2 ) 5 7 . 96 , p , . 019 ] . A number of subsequent 2 3 2 chi-­square analyses were conducted on each individual pair of preinventive struc-­ tures ( idea vs . sketch , idea vs . prototype , and sketch vs . prototype ) 3 presence versus absence of analogies . These analyses indicated that ideas had a significantly higher percentage of analogies than did prototypes [ χ 2 ( 1 ) 5 7 . 88 , p , . 006 ] , whereas sketches did not differ significantly from either ideas or prototypes ( see Figure 1 ) . The design-­ ers thus produced more analogies when referring to un-­ supported ideas than when they referred to prototypes . To examine the relation between analogical distance and preinventive structure , a chi-­square between analogi-­ cal distance ( between domain , within domain , or no anal-­ ogy ) and preinventive structure ( ideas or prototypes ) was conducted . Sketches were removed from this analysis , due to their having an expected count of less than five . The results showed significant differences in analogical distance [ χ 2 ( 2 ) 5 19 . 26 , p , . 001 ] . The same number of within-­domain analogies were produced for idea and pro-­ totype segments , but significantly more between-­domain analogies were produced for idea segments than for proto-­ type segments ( see Figure 2 ) . The overall result , that ideas were linked to more analogies in total than were proto-­ types , is therefore attributable to prototypes’ having fewer between-­domain analogies . To examine whether the ratio of within-­ to between-­ domain analogies differed between sketches , ideas , and pro-­ totypes , Fisher’s exact tests were conducted on the number of within-­ and between-­domain analogies for each pair of preinventive structures ( see Figure 3 ) , thereby eliminating the no - analogy baseline segments . The results indicated that , as before , ideas differed from prototypes ( two-­tailed Fisher’s exact test , p , . 001 ) , with more between-­ domain analogies for ideas . Furthermore , sketches differed from prototypes ( two-­tailed Fisher’s exact test , p , . 019 ) , with sketches producing more between-­domain analogies , relative to within-­domain analogies . Sketches did not dif-­ fer significantly from ideas ( two-­tailed Fisher’s exact test , p 5 1 . 0 ) . Thus , both ideas and sketches were associated with more between-­domain analogies , relative to within-­ domain analogies , as compared with prototypes . Analogical Function The functions of the analogies were distributed roughly evenly across the three categories , with 28 % of the anal-­ ogy segments focusing on identifying problems , 40 % on solving problems , and the remaining 32 % on explaining . Analogy thus regularly served each of the three functions in the present data set . To examine whether the ratio of within-­ and between-­ domain analogies varied with analogy function , a chi-­square test was conducted ( see Figure 4 ) , revealing significant differences between the three types of functions [ χ 2 ( 2 ) 5 20 . 93 , p , . 001 ] . Subsequent 2 3 2 chi-­squares ( each in-­ dividual pair of functions 3 proportion of between-­domain analogies ) revealed that there were significant differences between all the pairs of analogical functions : identify prob-­ lem versus solve problem [ χ 2 ( 1 ) 5 6 . 72 , p , . 01 ] , solve problem versus explain [ χ 2 ( 1 ) 5 6 . 19 , p , . 02 ] , and identify problem versus explain [ χ 2 ( 1 ) 5 20 . 83 , p , . 001 ] . As was predicted , the results indicate that analogies used to identify Figure 1 . Percentages of segments with analogies by type of pre - inventive structure ( with standard error bars ) . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 5 . 0 6 . 0 Idea ( N = 1 , 616 ) Sketch ( N = 220 ) Prototype ( N = 1 , 383 ) Type of Preinventive Structure P e r c e n t a g e o f S e g m e n t s W i t h A n a l o g i e s a nalogy in r eal - W orld d esign 35 problems primarily utilized within-­domain sources , whereas explanatory analogies mainly used between-­domain sources and problem-­solving analogies used a mixture of within-­ and between-­domain analogies . A category of special interest to design problem solving is the category related to the solving of problems by utiliz-­ ing between-­domain analogies . This category has tradi-­ tionally been linked to radical novelty in design problem solving , as evidenced in anecdotes . Two examples will be provided to illustrate this kind of analogy in the present data set . 1 The designers were trying to create a kind of portable slide or tube that could be used to transport liquid from one container to another at a somewhat shallow slope without support . At the same time , the device had to be soluble in water over a few hours or days . However , these requirements raised problems , in that at least two of the constraints appeared to be in conflict . Portability required the device to be either somewhat small or at least foldable . But the function of supporting liquid at a shallow angle meant that the obvious choice of material was a hard and sturdy one . Similarly , there was a conflict between imme-­ diate durability and solubility : how to combine hard and sturdy with foldable and soluble . This conflict led to the following exchange : Designer A what if you made . . . now I’m just saying some-­ thing . . . the stuff you make Venetian blinds of for example . . . they can be bent . B yes they can . . . A . . . folded . . . B Yes A . . . and when you . . . when they want to . . . but you can’t dump them in water B No , ’cause they’re made of steel A But they are . . . they have this curve , they can be folded into next to nothing . . . it’s B Yes , that’s right , but it is . . . it is really really thin steel , and that’s why it goes click-­click . . . Following this exchange , the designers left the Venetian blinds analogy , not to return . The problem solving attempt apparently failed , even though several constraints were met by the analogy ( foldable ; solid and sturdy ) , because a further constraint ( water soluble ) was not met by the sug-­ gested analogy . Another example of between-­domain problem-­solving analogies involved a different design concept . Again , a design requirement was that it had to be water soluble , but this time , the design involved a container for small amounts of liquid , capable of holding the liquid for a few minutes before falling apart . The problem was find-­ ing a suitable material for the design . Most plastics the team discussed were too durable . The following exchange ensued : Designer A But . . . what’s it called . . . one of these things . . . [ points to an envelope ] . . . if you made it in a paper bag , that will take some time . . . maybe . . . perhaps you should . . . if you could make it look flushable . . . B . . . but it’s going to be hard to flush A Well yes but you could . . . it has to be made flushable . . . Figure 2 . Percentages of segments containing within - domain and between - domain analogies in the data set by preinventive structure ( with standard error bars ) . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 Within Domain Between Domain Analogical Distance P e r c e n t a g e o f S e g m e n t s IdeaSketchPrototype Figure 3 . Percentages of analogies that were between - domain by preinventive structure ( with standard error bars ) . 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Idea ( N = 64 ) Sketch ( N = 8 ) Prototype ( N = 30 ) Type of Preinventive Structure P e r c e n t a g e B e t w e e n D o m a i n 36 C hristensen and s Chunn C We’re going to make it out of paper ! The designers worked on this idea for a novel kind of material for their product for quite some time to follow , conducting experiments by using the envelope mentioned in the transcript . Later in the meeting , it was decided to ex-­ amine different types of paper and to develop prototypes of the product . Apparently , the analogy to the envelope was a successful one . In conclusion , the designers did use between-­domain analogies in their active problem solv-­ ing , supporting the view that distant analogies may play an important part in engineering design . However , it should be noted that analogies also served functions other than solving problems ( such as explaining concepts and iden-­ tifying problems ) . Furthermore , within-­domain analogies were used just as frequently in solving problems , showing that between-­domain analogies were not the only type of analogies used in solving problems . Communicative Alignment To examine whether or not more explanatory analogies would be found when unsupported ideas were used , due to the absence of any external referents , explanatory analo-­ gies for ideas versus prototypes were compared , using a chi-­square test , excluding problem identification and problem-­solving analogies . Chi-­square tests could not be conducted for the sketch category , due to low-­ N problems ( 7 out of 219 segments were explanatory analogies ) , so the sketch category was excluded from the analysis . Com-­ paring ideas with prototypes did yield a significant result in the expected direction [ χ 2 ( 1 ) 5 13 . 01 , p , . 002 ; see Figure 5 ] . The significant relation between explain analogies and idea versus prototype segments could have interacted with the previous result on the relation between analogical dis-­ tance and preinventive structures , since explain analogies are mainly between domain . To examine whether the higher proportion of explain analogies for ideas than for proto-­ types interacted with , and perhaps created , the relationship between analogical distance and preinventive structure , we excluded all explain analogies from the data set and again ran an analysis on the relation between analogical distance and preinventive structure . The results were significant in the expected direction [ χ 2 ( 1 ) 5 8 . 33 , p , . 004 ] , with ideas still producing more between-­domain analogies than did prototypes , indicating that the interaction with analogi-­ cal function did not create the relation between analogical distance and preinventive structure . Temporal Development or Order Confound Tests In comparing sketches and prototypes in a naturalistic setting , it is important to consider whether there is an in-­ herent temporal or order confound . That is , can any dif-­ ference in performance with ideas versus sketches versus prototypes be attributed to when they are used in the design process ? For example , unsupported ideas may be more prevalent in the early stages of problem solving , whereas prototypes may be more prevalent at the later stages , with sketching somewhere in between . This might lead to con-­ founds in the present results and to spurious associations among the variables . We examined this potential confound empirically . All significant results were reanalyzed by tem-­ poral halves . The data were split in two ways . First , to test for temporal effects between transcripts , the transcripts were ranked according to data collection date , and the first half of the collected transcripts was separated from the second half . Second , to test for temporal effects within each transcript , each transcript was split into two halves . Under both approaches , the prior analyses were conducted for the first halves and the second halves separately . In the majority of cases , each half of the data yielded significant results in the same direction as that for the total data set . In some cases , due to low-­ N problems , one of the halves did not yield significant results or chi-­square tests could not be conducted , due to expected counts of less than five . But it is important to note that in all cases , the directionality of Figure 4 . Percentages of between - domain analogies by analogi - cal function ( with standard error bars ) . 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Identify Problem ( N = 28 ) Solve Problem ( N = 41 ) Explain ( N = 33 ) Analogy Function P e r c e n t a g e B e t w ee n D o m a i n Figure 5 . Percentages of segments with explain analogies by preinventive structure ( with standard error bars ) . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 Idea ( N = 1 , 574 ) Prototype ( N = 1 , 357 ) Preinventive Structure P e r c e n t a g e o f S e g m e n t s W i t h E x p l a i n A n a l o g i e s a nalogy in r eal - W orld d esign 37 the data was the same as that for the total data set . Thus , time course confounds could not explain our results . DISCUSSION In the present study , we examined the design processes of a creative , real-­world design team in depth to test the interaction between preinventive structures and analogical transfer of different forms . Although the overall base rates of different activities may be peculiar to this particular team or to the particular objects that they were designing , we take the patterns of the functional roles of preinventive structures with respect to analogical transfer to be a gen-­ eral , albeit preliminary , picture of design cognition . The present study showed that , unlike in real-­world sci-­ ence , between-­domain analogies are quite frequent in en-­ gineering design and almost as frequent as within-­domain analogies , suggesting that they serve important functions in design cognition ( especially for explanations , but also for problem solving ) , as would be predicted from the large number of anecdotes and design tools claiming that between-­domain analogies are crucial to design . But as has been found in the domain of science , within-­domain analogies also play an important role in design . More analogies were made when the designers were not using external representations than when they were refer-­ ring to prototypes . This finding could be explained by a differential number of between-­domain analogies between ideas and prototypes . Previous studies and theories have suggested that making within-­domain exemplars available during the creative constructive process tends to lead sub-­ jects to unconsciously plagiarize these exemplars when they try to construct novel objects . The present research extended this finding by showing that the within-­domain exemplars may even be the designers’ own prototypes con-­ straining the creative process , as evidenced in a reduction in the number of between-­domain analogies the designers made . When the designers were referring to prototypes , they made very few between-­domain analogies , and nota-­ bly fewer than when referring to either sketches or ideas unsupported by external representations . This finding sup-­ ports the hypothesis that within-­domain exemplars con-­ strain creativity by providing paths of least resistance for design analogizing . In other words , if exemplars are present , the designers are less likely to think about domains other than the present one . Apparently , constraining exemplars in creativity include not only accidental exemplars in the immediate environment , but also external representations made and used by the designers themselves to ( paradoxi-­ cally ) help the creative process along ! Notably , however , sketching appeared not to constrain analogical distance in the present data set , which could , perhaps , explain in part why designers are so prone to sketching . This finding has potentially important implications for how the early stages of design should be structured . In so far as the designer’s current design goal involves generat-­ ing novel and original products , a tentative recommenda-­ tion could be to use sketching and idea generation unsup-­ ported by external representation in the early stages of design and , perhaps , to postpone prototyping until several promising concepts have been developed . The functions of analogy in engineering design , as re-­ vealed by the present study , include explanation , problem solving , and problem identification . As has been found in previous research in science , a significant part of the analogies made had an explanatory function in relation to explaining concepts to other designers . It is possible that one of the primary reasons for the importance of explana-­ tory analogies is that in design involving the development of novel concepts , communicative alignment in a group becomes a main concern when the object being referenced exists only in the mind of other team members . Indeed , ideas did have more explanatory analogies than did proto-­ types . A large proportion of analogies were made to solve design problems , as would be expected on the basis of previous research and the conclusions of design theorists . But support for a third and new function was also found , in that several analogies concerned identifying problems in novel designs . Here , rather than transferring solutions to the novel design , what was transferred was the expected existence of potential design problems , taken from past sources with which the designers had experience . This type of analogical transfer served a function in the quick evaluation of newly developed design concepts . These three types of analogy functions in design had dif-­ ferential ratios of within-­ to between-­domain analogies . As was hypothesized , problem identification analogies were mainly within domain , explanatory analogies were more frequently ( and mainly ) between domain , and problem-­ solving involved a mixture of within-­ and between-­domain analogies . Unlike Dunbar’s ( 1995 , 2001a ) findings in sci-­ ence , between-­domain analogies not only were made to explain concepts , but concerned problem solving as well . These results indicate the importance of between-­domain analogies in real-­world engineering design , as has also been suggested by anecdotes and design techniques , but at the same time , the results stress that analogy serves sev-­ eral other functions in design . Overall , this work has expanded our understanding of analogical reasoning , showing how it interacts with the function of the analogy and the external environment of the problem solver . AUTHOR NOTE Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to B . T . Christensen , Department of Marketing , Copenhagen Business School , Solbjerg Plads 3 , 2000 Frederiksberg , Denmark ( e-­mail : bo @ virksom . dk ) . REFERENCES Bearman , C . R . , Ball , L . J . , & Ormerod , T . C . ( 2002 ) . An exploration of real-­world analogical problem solving in novices . In W . D . Gray & C . D . Schunn ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 101-­106 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Beveridge , M . , & Parkins , E . ( 1987 ) . Visual representation in analogi-­ cal problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 230-­237 . Bonnardel , N . , & Marmèche , E . ( 2004 ) . Evocation processes by nov-­ ice and expert designers : Towards stimulating analogical thinking . Creativity & Innovation Management , 13 , 176-­186 . Brown , A . S . , & Murphy , D . R . ( 1989 ) . Cryptomnesia : Delineating 38 C hristensen and s Chunn inadvertent plagiarism . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learn - ing , Memory , & Cognition , 15 , 432-­442 . Casakin , H . ( 2003 ) . Visual analogy as a cognitive strategy in the design process : Expert versus novice performance . In N . Cross & E . Ed-­ monds ( Eds . ) , Expertise in design . Sydney : University of Technology , Creativity & Cognition Press . Casakin , H . , & Goldschmidt , G . ( 1999 ) . Expertise and the use of vi-­ sual analogy : Implications for design education . Design Studies , 20 , 153-­175 . Christensen , B . T . ( 2005 ) . A methodology for studying design cogni-­ tion in the real-­world [ Online ] . In Digital proceedings from NORDES : The First Nordic Design Research Conference . Copenhagen . Christiaans , H . , & Andel , J . v . ( 1993 ) . The effects of examples on the use of knowledge in a student design activity : The case of the “flying Dutchman . ” Design Studies , 14 , 58-­74 . Craig , D . L . , Nersessian , N . J . , & Catrambone , R . ( 2002 ) . The role of diagrams and diagrammatic affordances in analogy . In W . D . Gray & C . D . Schunn ( Eds . ) , Proceedings from the 24th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 250-­255 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Dahl , D . W . , & Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The influence and value of ana-­ logical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 , 47-­60 . Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientific reasoning in real-­world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365-­395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dunbar , K . ( 1997 ) . How scientists think : On-­line creativity and concep-­ tual change in science . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 461-­493 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Dunbar , K . ( 2001a ) . The analogical paradox : Why analogy is so easy in naturalistic settings yet so difficult in the psychological laboratory . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science ( pp . 313-­334 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dunbar , K . ( 2001b ) . What scientific thinking reveals about the nature of cognition . In K . Crowley , C . D . Schunn , & T . Okada ( Eds . ) , Design - ing for science : Implications from everyday , classroom , and profes - sional settings ( pp . 115-­140 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Dunbar , K . , & Blanchette , I . ( 2001 ) . The in vivo / in vitro approach to cognition : The case of analogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 5 , 334-­339 . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . Analogy . In W . Bechtel & G . Graham ( Eds . ) , A com - panion to cognitive science ( pp . 107-­113 ) . Malden , MA : Blackwell . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524-­575 . Ghiselin , B . ( 1954 ) . The creative process : A symposium . Berkeley : Uni-­ versity of California Press . Goel , V . ( 1995 ) . Sketches of thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , Bradford Books . Goldschmidt , G . ( 2001 ) . Visual analogy : A strategy for design rea-­ soning and learning . In C . M . Eastman , W . M . McCracken , & W . C . Newstetter ( Eds . ) , Design knowing and learning : Cognition in design education ( pp . 199-­220 ) . Amsterdan : Elsevier . Gordon , W . J . J . ( 1961 ) . Synectics : The development of creative capac - ity . New York : Harper & Row . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 332-­340 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in cre - ative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jaarsveld , S . , & van Leeuwen , C . ( 2005 ) . Sketches from a design process : Creative cognition inferred from intermediate products . Cog - nitive Science , 29 , 79-­101 . Jansson , D . G . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design fixation . Design Stud - ies , 12 , 3-­11 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1989 ) . Analogy and the exercise of creativity . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 313-­331 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Luchins , A . S . ( 1942 ) . Mechanisation in problem solving : The effect of Einstellung . Psychological Monographs , 54 ( Whole No . 248 ) . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans : II . The solution of a prob-­ lem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal of Comparative Psy - chology , 8 , 181-­194 . Marsh , R . L . , Bink , M . L . , & Hicks , J . L . ( 1999 ) . Conceptual prim-­ ing in a generative problem-­solving task . Memory & Cognition , 27 , 355-­363 . Marsh , R . L . , & Bower , G . H . ( 1993 ) . Eliciting cruptomnesia : Uncon-­ scious plagiarism in a puzzle task . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 19 , 673-­688 . Marsh , R . L . , & Landau , J . D . ( 1995 ) . Item availability in cryptom-­ nesia : Assessing its role in two paradigms of unconscious plagiarism . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cogni - tion , 21 , 1568-­1582 . Marsh , R . L . , Landau , J . D . , & Hicks , J . L . ( 1996 ) . How examples may ( and may not ) constrain creativity . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 669-­680 . Marsh , R . L . , Landau , J . D . , & Hicks , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Contributions of inadequate source monitoring to unconscious plagiarism during idea generation . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 23 , 886-­897 . Marsh , R . L . , Ward , T . B . , & Landau , J . D . ( 1999 ) . The inadvertent use of prior knowledge in a generative cognitive task . Memory & Cogni - tion , 27 , 94-­105 . McGown , A . , Green , G . , & Rodgers , P . A . ( 1998 ) . Visible ideas : In-­ formation patterns of conceptual sketch activity . Design Studies , 19 , 431-­453 . Purcell , A . T . , & Gero , J . S . ( 1992 ) . Effects of examples on the results of a design activity . Knowledge - Based Systems , 5 , 82-­91 . Römer , A . , Pache , M . , Weisshahn , G . , Lindemann , U . , & Hacker , W . ( 2001 ) . Effort-­saving product representations in design—results of a questionnaire survey . Design Studies , 22 , 473-­491 . Roozenburg , N . F . M . , & Eekels , J . ( 1996 ) . Product design : Funda - mentals and methods . Chichester , U . K . : Wiley . Shepard , R . N . ( 1978 ) . Externalization of mental images and the act of creation . In B . S . Randawa & W . E . Cofman ( Eds . ) , Visual learning , thinking , and communication ( pp . 133-­189 ) . New York : Academic Press . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Schumacher , J . S . ( 1993 ) . Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation task . Memory & Cogni - tion , 21 , 837-­845 . Terninko , J . , Zusman , A . , & Zlotin , B . ( 1998 ) . Systematic innovation An introduction to TRIZ . Boca Raton : St Lucie Press . Vosniadou , S . , & Ortony , A . ( 1989 ) . Similarity and analogical reason-­ ing : A synthesis . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 1-­7 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Ward , T . B . ( 1994 ) . Structured imagination : The role of category struc-­ ture in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology , 27 , 1-­40 . Ward , T . B . ( 1995 ) . What’s old about new ideas ? In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 157-­ 178 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ward , T . B . ( 1998 ) . Analogical distance and purpose in creative thought : Mental leaps versus mental hops . In K . J . Holyoak , D . Gentner , & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in analogy research : Integration of theory and data from the cognitive , computational , and neural sci - ences ( pp . 221-­230 ) . Sofia : New Bulgarian University . Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , Sifonis , C . M . , Dodds , R . A . , & Saun - ders , K . N . ( 2002 ) . The role of graded category structure in imagina-­ tive thought . Memory & Cognition , 30 , 199-­216 . NOTE 1 . The examples do not provide exact details about the product in question , to ensure anonymity for the company , but care has been taken to correctly illustrate the structural requirements . Except to change two concepts that could have endangered anonymity , the protocol excerpts have not been altered in any way . ( Manuscript received April 1 , 2005 ; revision accepted for publication November 3 , 2005 . )