Computer Supported Cooperative Work 10 : 29 – 74 , 2001 . © 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . 29 The Communication Bottleneck in Knitwear Design : Analysis and Computing Solutions CLAUDIA ECKERT Engineering Design Centre , Engineering Department , University of Cambridge , Trumpington Street , Cambridge , CB2 1PZ , UK ( E - mail : cme26 @ cam . ac . uk ) ( Received 21 December 1998 ) Abstract . Communication between different members of a design team often poses difﬁculties . This paper reports on the results of a detailed empirical study of communication in over twenty British , German and Italian knitwear companies . The knitwear design process is shared by the designers , who plan the visual and tactile appearance of the garments , and the technicians , who have to realise the garment on a knitting machine . They comprise a typical but small design team whose members have different backgrounds and expertise . Knitwear design allows a detailed analysis of the causes and effects of communication breakdown . Designers specify their designs inaccurately , incompletely and inconsistently ; technicians interpret these speciﬁcations according to their previous experience of similar designs , and produce garments very different from the designers’ original intentions . Knitwear is inherently difﬁcult to describe , as no simple and complete notation exists ; and the rela - tionship between visual appearance and structure and technical properties of knitted fabric is subtle and complex . Designers and technicians have different cognitive approaches and are very different people . At the same time the interaction between designers and technicians is badly managed in many companies . This paper argues that improving the accuracy and reliability of designers’ speciﬁcations would signiﬁcantly enhance the design process . It concludes with a description of the architecture of an intelligent automatic design system that generates technically correct designs from the designers’ customary notations . Key words : automatic design , communication , design , ethnography , knitwear , notation , team working 1 . Introduction The strength of a design team often lies in its diversity , but diversity can also made teamwork problematic . Every person has a particular personality and works in a different way ; each brings different expertise and experience to the task . Designers with different expertise and areas of responsibility can have radically different conceptions of designs and the activities involved in producing them . How different members of a design team communicate is a major factor inﬂuencing any collabo - rative design process , and communication breakdowns can cause severe problems . How do patterns of interaction and the means by which ideas are communicated inﬂuence the success of design processes ? 30 CLAUDIA ECKERT This paper presents the results of an ethnographic study of the patterns of communication observed in the knitwear industry with an analysis of the diverse factors contributing to the communication breakdown . It discusses how computer support for collaborative design can alleviate these problems . 1 . 1 . K NITWEAR DESIGN AS A DOMAIN Knitwear design is the creation of a technically complex product according to aesthetic considerations – the relationship between the appearance of a knitted structure and its structural characteristics is subtle and complex . While being an important industry in its own right , the knitwear industry shares important characteristics with both other aesthetic design industries and engineering design . Knitwear design is shared primarily between the designers , who design the visual and tactile appearance of a garment based on fashion trends and customer require - ments , and the knitwear technicians , who are responsible for programming knitting machines to realise these design ideas . The knitwear design process is essentially linear : the key communication act is the hand - over of design speciﬁcations to a different team member ( usually but not always nearby ) . Signiﬁcant inefﬁciencies in the design process stem from problems in the communication between designers and technicians : partly from the fact that it is a hand - over between separate people doing separate activities ; and partly from the form that the speciﬁcations take . For the comprehension of this paper it is essential to note that knitwear design is not an activity carried out jointly and concurrently by the designers and the technicians , but that technicians are expected to realise design ideas in whose creation they have not been involved . The designers undertake the conceptual design of the garment , which as in other industries is usually skeletal , vague and tentative . In developing the knitting machine programs the knitwear technicians work out the detailed design of the fabric . Pattern cutters construct the cutting pattern for the shape of the garment and assemble the sample garment thus deﬁning the details of the shape . The back - ground and training of the person constructing the cutting pattern varies ; in the UK they have often risen from shop ﬂoor sewing and fabric cutting tasks and are therefore referred to by their old title as “pattern cutter” or “make up person” . In some smaller companies the designers do this job . The division of labour between the knitwear technicians and the pattern cutters is changing , as more and more knitwear is not cut to shape , but knitted to shape . Both technicians and make up people play an important role in detailed design ; however what they do is not recognised as designing in the culture of the knitwear industry . The knitwear design team is small compared with those designing complex engineering products , but is typical in that different team members have different responsibilities , interests and expertise but their collaboration is essential for the success of the product . A typical knitwear company has two or three designers , one or two knitwear technicians and one pattern cutter , who also does some garment make up . The largest companies we