149 Signal transduction proteins that can integrate multiple upstream signals play a critical role in the complex regulatory circuits that control cellular behavior . The two signaling node proteins cyclin - dependent kinase 2 and the actin regulator neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein have qualitatively similar signaling properties . Recent studies , however , reveal that these proteins utilize distinct mechanisms of signal integration , leading to subtle but important quantitative differences in behavior . Addresses Institute of Molecular Biology and Department of Chemistry , 1229 University of Oregon , Eugene , OR 97403 - 1229 , USA ; * Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology , Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , 513 Parnassus Avenue , University of California , San Francisco , CA 94143 - 0450 , USA ; e - mail : wlim @ itsa . ucsf . edu Correspondence : Wendell A Lim Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2002 , 14 : 149 – 154 0955 - 0674 / 02 / $ — see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . Published online 30 January 2002 DOI 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 02 ) 00307 - 1 AbbreviationsARP 2 / 3 actin - related protein 2 / 3 CAK Cdk - activating kinase Cdk cyclin - dependent kinase GDP G - protein - binding domain N - WASP neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein PIP2 phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate SH2 / 3 Src homology 2 / 3 Introduction : signaling nodes are points of pathway integration Cellular responses to external stimuli are controlled by diverse signal transduction pathways . Over the past decade , it has become clear that most pathways do not transmit information in a simple linear fashion ; rather , what at first appear to be individual pathways are actually highly interconnected networks . An emerging goal in modern cell biology is to understand the cellular circuitry by mapping the regulatory network connections and quantitatively understanding network properties that yield precise and sophisticated biological control . To quantitatively understand the behavior of signaling networks , some of the most crucial elements to study are signaling nodes — the connection points between multi - ple pathways . Nodes can be defined as signaling elements that can detect multiple upstream inputs . Signal integrat - ing nodes are a subset of nodes that yield differential responses depending on the combination of inputs present ( Figure 1 ) . Simple signaling switches respond to an input A with a response X , but are only useful in transmitting information within a linear pathway . Signal integrating nodes , in contrast , can detect multiple inputs ( A and B ) . A critical requirement for signal integration is that the simul - taneous presentation of inputs A and B yields a response , Z , that is qualitatively or quantitatively distinct from the sum of the responses to input A and input B individually ( responses X and Y , respectively ) . Integration could be either positive ( Z > > X + Y ) or negative ( Z < < X + Y ) . Integrating nodes are critical for linking the effects of multiple pathways and can allow for highly specific combi - natorial input control of a single response . For example , promoters often function as integrating nodes : transcrip - tion is highly dependent on the convergent presence of a particular combination of induced transcription activators , as well as the absence of inhibitory factors [ 1 – 4 ] . Moreover , integrating nodes allow for complex behavior such as feedback control , in which a downstream response can also act as an additional input for upstream nodes . What are the molecular and thermodynamic mechanisms by which signal integration can be achieved ? In this review , we will focus on intracellular node proteins capable of positive signal integration . This behavior is often described using the vaguely defined term ‘synergistic’ , since in most cases response of these proteins to single inputs is weak , whereas the response to co - stimulation by How signaling proteins integrate multiple inputs : a comparison of N - WASP and Cdk2 Kenneth E Prehoda and Wendell A Lim * Figure 1 The distinction between simple switch and signal integrating node . A simple signaling switch produces only output X upon stimulation with input A . An integrating node responds to at least two different inputs , A and B , but the responses to both inputs simultaneously , Z , is distinct from the sum of the responses , X and Y , that result from each input alone . The node displays synergistic effects , or positive integration , if the response to both inputs simultaneously is greater than the sum of the individual responses . Current Opinion in Cell Biology A X A B X A B Y Z A B Integrating node ( X + Y ≠ Z ) Simpleswitch INPUT OUTPUT INPUT OUTPUT Synergistic if X + Y < < Z multiple inputs is strong . Positive integrating nodes therefore qualitatively approximate logical AND gates — the digital circuit elements that require two inputs to yield a response . Here , we will examine two such protein nodes : the actin regulatory protein N - WASP ( neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ) , and the cell cycle regulatory protein Cdk2 ( cyclin - dependent kinase 2 ) . Despite their qualitative similarities , recent studies have revealed that these two nodes use different mechanisms , which leads to subtle but important quantitative differ - ences in signal integration properties . Understanding these distinct mechanisms of signaling integration is likely to be necessary in order to understanding the behavior of larger , complex cellular networks . N - WASP and Cdk2 : two nodes that approximate AND gates N - WASP integrates Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate stimulation of actin polymerization Actin polymerization is regulated in a precise spatial and temporal manner , to provide the mechanical force required for cell movement , morphogenesis and endocytosis . Directed movement requires the coordinated action of many signaling pathways . WASP and its more widely expressed homologue N - WASP have emerged as central node proteins that regulate actin polymerization in response to multiple upstream signals [ 5 – 7 ] . Output activity of N - WASP — actin polymerization — is mediated through the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex , a seven - protein complex capable of stimulating actin filament nucleation [ 5 , 7 ] . Basal activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex is low , but can be dramatically increased by interaction with N - WASP . The Arp2 / 3 stimulatory activity of N - WASP , however , is itself tightly regulated under basal conditions : intact N - WASP is a very poor activator of Arp2 / 3 but becomes fully active upon stimulation with certain upstream signaling molecules [ 8 ] . A number of these upstream activators of N - WASP ( Figure 2a ) have been identified , including the Rho GTPase Cdc42 , the acidic phospholipid phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphos - phate ( PIP2 ) [ 9 •• , 10 •• ] , and several Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) - containing proteins including Nck , Grb2 and WISH [ 11 – 13 ] . Cdc42 and PIP2 are the best characterized of these . Activation of N - WASP by GTP - bound Cdc42 and PIP2 is highly synergistic : either input alone is a poor activator , but co - stimulation yields potent activation . Thus N - WASP approximates an AND gate , requiring both inputs to promote potent Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization . Integrated activation by Cdc42 and PIP2 may help specif - ically target actin polymerization to membrane sites at which both inputs are present . Cdk2 integrates the effects of cyclin binding and phosphorylation in cell cycle regulation The eukaryotic cell cycle requires precise temporal coordi - nation of major events , ranging from DNA synthesis to mitosis . These events are controlled largely by a class of proteins known as the cyclin - dependent kinases . As might be expected , Cdk activity is extremely tightly regulated , by multiple inputs ( reviewed in greater depth elsewhere [ 14 ] ) . Cdks are now known to be involved in regulating several cellular processes , but here we focus only on one of the best - studied Cdks — the vertebrate Cdk2 protein . Full activation of Cdk2 requires two inputs ( Figure 2b ) . First , Cdk2 must bind to a cyclin subunit , a polypeptide whose concentration oscillates over the course of the cell cycle . ( We will focus on the interaction of Cdk2 with cyclin A , which is present during S phase and G2 . ) Second , Cdk2 must be phosphorylated on residue Thr160 , in a segment 150 Cell regulation Figure 2 Two examples of positive integrating node proteins . ( a ) The actin regulatory protein N - WASP can activate the Arp2 / 3 complex , stimulating actin filament nucleation . However , under basal conditions N - WASP is repressed . The inputs Cdc42 ( GTP - bound ) and PIP2 are poor activators alone , but together are potent activators . ( b ) The cell - cycle regulatory protein Cdk2 requires two inputs to display maximal kinase activity : cyclin A must bind and Thr160 in the T loop must be phosphorylated by CAK . Both of these nodes integrate other positive or negative inputs , as indicated . However , we do not focus on these other inputs here . Current Opinion in Cell Biology Actin polymerization ( via Arp2 / 3 ) Kinaseactiivty Cdk2 N - WASP Other inputs : • SH3 domains positive • WIP negative ( ? ) Other inputs : • CKI ( e . g . p27 ) negative • Tyr15 negative phosphorylation CAK OUTPUT INPUT ( a ) OUTPUT INPUT ( b ) Phosphorylation ( T loop ) Cyclin A Cdc42 PIP 2 referred to as the ‘T loop’ . Phosphorylation is catalysed by the Cdk - activating kinase ( CAK ) . There are also several known inhibitory inputs for Cdk2 , which we will not discuss here but are reviewed elsewhere [ 15 ] . Our main focus here will be on understanding how Cdk2 approxi - mates an AND gate , displaying full activity only upon cyclin A binding and T - loop phosphorylation . N - WASP signal integration N - WASP is a cooperative , two - state switch Recent mechanistic studies suggest that N - WASP , with respect to Cdc42 and PIP2 activation , acts as a two - state switch — the protein can exist in either an active ‘open’ state or an inactive ‘closed’ state ( Figure 3 ) . It is clear that N - WASP acts to integrate Cdc42 - and PIP2 - based signals because these two inputs act in a highly cooperative man - ner to stabilize the active state . More specifically , N - WASP has a constitutively active output domain ( referred to as the VCA domain ) at its carboxyl terminus . This domain is sufficient to bind and fully activate the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 8 ] . However , in the intact protein amino - terminal regulatory regions act in concert to lock the protein in an inactive , closed state , through a set of auto - inhibitory interactions . Specifically , two domains are critical for auto - inhibition : a highly basic motif ( B ) and the adjacent G - protein - binding domain ( GBD ) [ 9 •• , 10 •• ] . PIP2 and Cdc42 activate the protein by binding the B and GBD modules , respectively , in a manner that disrupts the auto - inhibitory interactions . Thus , binding of the inputs acts to stabilize the open state in which the VCA domain is released and fully activated . Cooperativity of input binding is observed — initial bind - ing of one input pays the energetic cost of disrupting the closed state , thereby increasing the apparent affinity of the second input by a cooperativity factor c . In vitro experi - ments indicate that the c factor for N - WASP activation is approximately 300 [ 10 •• ] . Such data were generated using soluble Cdc42 . In vivo , where Cdc42 is prenylated and membrane - localized , the high effective concentration of Cdc42 and PIP2 at membrane sites may yield an even higher apparent cooperativity factor . . N - WASP approximates an AND gate only at low input concentrations N - WASP is not an absolute AND gate . In fact , both Cdc42 and PIP2 can fully activate model N - WASP constructs alone , albeit only when present at very high concentra - tions . However , at low concentrations ( below the apparent dissociation constant [ K d ] for each isolated activator ) N - WASP does approximate an AND gate . Under these conditions , each input alone is insufficient to induce significant activation . However , both inputs together , because they cooperatively bind and stabilize the open state , can yield potent activation . Thus , the behavior observed for this switch depends highly on the concentrations of the How signaling proteins integrate multiple inputs : a comparison of N - WASP and Cdk2 Prehoda and Lim 151 Figure 3 Model for N - WASP integration of Cdc42 ( GTP - bound ) and PIP2 inputs . N - WASP behaves as two - state ( ‘closed’ or ‘open’ ) system . The closed state is stabilized by auto - inhibitory interactions involving the B and GBD modules . These interactions inactivate the output VCA domain . The two inputs bind to these modules and thus individually stabilize the open state . However , binding of a single input is unfavorable in the absence of the other input because the initial binding ligand must disrupt the competing auto - inhibitory interactions . The number below each model indicates relative output activity ( i . e . actin polymerization rate ) . Dissociation constants ( K c , for Cdc42 ; K c ’ , for Cdc42 in the presence of saturating PIP2 ; K p , for PIP2 ; K p ’ , for PIP2 in the presence of saturating Cdc42 ) estimated for each reaction are also shown . Current Opinion in Cell Biology Open V C A N B G B D Arp2 / 3 Closed PIP 2 Arp2 / 3 V C A K p ′ = 0 . 02 µ M K c ′ = 0 . 008 µ M K p = 8 µ M K c = 3 µ M C d c 42 ~ 0x ~ 1 . 0x GBD B Arp2 / 3 V C A C d c 42 1 . 0x GBD B PIP 2 Arp2 / 3 V C A ~ 1 . 0x GBD B Figure 4 Model for Cdk2 integration of cyclin A and T - loop phosphorylation inputs . N - WASP behaves as multistate system . Each intermediate state is distinct and only gains partial activity far below maximal output , which is only observed when saturated with both inputs . The number below each model indicates relative output activity ( k cat ) . Dissociation constants ( K d ) , where known , are also shown . Current Opinion in Cell Biology K d = 50 nM K d = 50 nM Cdk2 Cdk2 cyclinA 1 . 0x 0 . 001x Cdk2 cyclinA > 0 . 000001x P 0 . 003x Cdk2 P inputs . At high concentrations ( greater than the K d for each isolated activator ) , little or no integration is observed ( effects are additive or less than additive ) . At low concen - trations ( below K d ) , however , high levels of integration are observed ( i . e . the effects are more than additive ) . The main driving force for integration in this case is the cooperativity of input binding . Cdk2 signal integration Cdk2 is a multistate switch Mechanistic and structural studies indicate that Cdk2 func - tions in a very different manner from N - WASP ( Figure 4 ) . Isolated Cdk2 has very low activity , for two apparent reasons : first , ATP is bound in a catalytically non - productive orientation ; and second , the T - loop segment occludes the Cdk2 substrate - binding site [ 16 •• ] . However , addition of each of the multiple positive inputs results in distinct kinase states , with incrementally increased kinase activity . Binding of one input , cyclin A , to Cdk increases kinase activity ( k cat ) by several orders of magnitude . ( Exact estimates are difficult , given the problems in detecting any activity for unbound Cdk . ) [ 17 • ] . Cyclin A binding leads to conformational changes that place ATP into a catalytically productive orientation [ 18 •• ] . In addition , the T loop moves and no longer occludes the substrate - binding site . 152 Cell regulation Figure 5 Input / output behavior of the general classes of two - input switches . Activity as a function of concentration of the two inputs ( A and B ) is calculated using the general equation given at the bottom of the figure . Each class differs in the relative activities ( Q n [ activity coefficient for state n ] ) of the different input bound states , and the degree of cooperativity ( C ) between inputs A and B . ( a ) A cooperative , two - state switch ( e . g . N - WASP ) integrates input effects based on cooperativity . One input increases sensitivity to the other but does not alter maximal output activity . ( b ) The multistate switch ( e . g . Cdk2 ) attains only minimal fractional activity when bound to either individual input ( Q a and Q b < > Q ab ) , and lacks input binding cooperativity . One input does not affect the other’s sensitivity but alters maximal output activity . This type of switch is ideal for generating stable intermediate activity levels . ( c ) A cooperative , multistate switch best approximates the all - or - none behavior of a digital AND gate . No significant activity is observed with a single input , but nearly maximal activity is attained with minimal concentrations of both inputs . Frac , fractional . Q a = 1 Q b = 1 K b C K a K b 1 . 0 0 . 5 0 . 0 [ A ] = 0 . 1 • Ka [ A ] = 0 . 1 • Ka [ A ] = 10 • K a [ A ] = 1 • K a [ A ] = 0 . 1 • K a [ A ] = 0 [ A ] = 10 • Ka [ A ] = 10 • Ka [ A ] = 1 • Ka [ A ] = 1 • Ka [ A ] = 0 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 1000 100 C = 300 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) A A B B [ A ] = 0 Q a • [ A ] K a Q a b + 1 + ) ) Frac . activity = Current Opinion in Cell Biology K a C K b C K a C Q ab = 1 Q o = 0 Q a = 0 . 001 Q b = 0 . 001 K b K a K b K a C = 1 A A B B Q ab = 1 Q o = 0 Q a = 0 . 001 Q b = 0 . 001 K a K b C = 300 A A B B Q ab = 1 Q o = 0 F r a c t i ona l a c t i v i t y 1 . 0 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 1000 100 F r a c t i ona l a c t i v i t y 1 . 0 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 1000 100 [ B ] K b [ B ] K b [ B ] K b F r a c t i ona l a c t i v i t y [ A ] K a + + [ B ] K b C • [ A ] [ B ] K a • K b Q b • [ B ] K b + Q ab • C • [ A ] [ B ] K a • K b For full activation of the Cdk2 – cyclin A complex , however , a second input is required : phosphorylation of Thr160 in the T loop by CAK . Phosphorylation of the T loop in the presence of cyclin A leads to subtle conformational shifts thought to increase peptide substrate affinity and orient the peptide to optimize phosphoryl transfer [ 19 •• , 20 • ] . This second input further increases maximal k cat around 1000 - fold [ 21 • ] . The increase in catalytic efficiency ( k cat / K M ) , however , is around 100 , 000 - fold [ 21 • ] . T - loop phosphorylation alone ( in the absence of cyclin A ) also appears to result in an incremental increase in kinase activity , comparable to that observed for cyclin binding alone [ 22 • ] . The activity of the phosphorylated - only inter - mediate state is ~ 300 - fold lower than the fully activated Cdk2 complex . T - loop phosphorylation alone results in increased affinity for both ATP and protein substrate [ 22 • ] . In summary , both individual inputs increase kinase activity to intermediate levels . The activity of these intermediate states is ~ 300 – 1000 - fold lower than that of the fully activated kinase . T - loop phosphorylation and cyclin A binding appear to be non - cooperative Recent biophysical studies estimate that cyclin A binds Cdk2 with a dissociation constant of ~ 50 nM [ 22 • ] , and this affinity appears to be unaffected by the phosphorylation state of Cdk2 . Thus , the two inputs — cyclin binding and T - loop phosphorylation — do not appear to be strongly linked thermodynamically ( in contrast to the strong coupling of the two inputs for N - WASP ) . It should be noted that this may not be true for all classes of Cdk – cyclin pairs [ 23 ] ; however , for Cdk2 and cyclin A at least , cooperativity between the two inputs does not appear to play a role in signal integration . Cdk2 approximates an AND gate under all conditions Cdk2 appears to more rigorously fit the definition of an AND gate than N - WASP . AND - gate - like behavior is independent of input levels ( i . e . cyclin A concentration or the degree of phosphorylation ) . Each input generates a separate intermediate state that , even under saturation conditions ( or full phosphorylation ) , has only minimal kinase activity ( 1000 - fold lower than fully activated ) . Thus under all conditions , both inputs must be present to achieve full activity . Cooperativity does not drive signal integration ; signal integration is driven by the requirement that both inputs be present to assemble a unique , fully active state , distinct from that stabilized by either input alone . Comparison of integration mechanisms These two integrating switches , N - WASP and Cdk2 , appear to represent two very different mechanism for achieving qualitatively similar signal - processing behavior . We have schematically modeled the behavior of these switches in Figure 5 . Here , for simplicity , we have treated phosphorylation as a binding event . On the basis of these models , we have also plotted activity as a function of the concentration of one input ( B ) , under conditions of different constant concentrations of the other input ( A ) . These results reveal subtle but important functional differences between these switches . Two - state cooperative switches allow tuning of input sensitivity This type of switch ( Figure 5a ) is not an absolute AND gate , since addition of high concentrations of the input B yields maximal activation , even in the absence of input A . However , it is clear that with increasing constant concen - trations of input A , the concentration of B required to trigger activation decreases . Thus , input A increases the sensitivity of the switch to input B , although it does not change the maximal output achievable by input B . At low concentrations of both inputs ( i . e . those lower than K d ) , however , the system will closely approximate an AND gate . The stronger the cooperativity , the more this AND - gate - like behavior will be accentuated . However , in all cases this behavior will be restricted to the low input concentration range . Multistate switches allow stable tuning of output levels A multistate switch such as Cdk2 more closely approxi - mates an absolute AND gate ( i . e . full activity requires both inputs ) . Figure 5b reveals that this type of switch can be used to tune effectively output levels — changing the con - centration of input A does not change the sensitivity of the switch to input B . Rather , it changes the maximal output level achievable by input B . Thus , this type of switch may control activity levels in a more robust and stable manner ( independent of small input - B concentration fluctuations ) . The tight , noise - free control of activity levels afforded by this type of switch may be required for a process such as cell - cycle regulation , for which consequences of incorrect activity levels could be dramatic . One cost for this kind of control , however , is that overall sensitivity is low compared with the cooperative two - state switch — either high amounts of input or high input affinities are required to reach maximal activity ( the curves in Figure 5b are shifted to the right compared with those in Figure 5a ) . Thus , unlike the above case , for a given concentration range of inputs , the required high - affinity interactions may yield a less dynamic and reversible switch . This type of switch therefore may be better suited for relatively slow time - scale processes , such as regulation of the cell cycle , but poorly suited for highly dynamic processes , such as actin - mediated cell motility . Covalent modification , such as phosphorylation , may be a particularly good input to control this type of switch . Phosphorylation is essentially an irreversible reaction ( infinite affinity ) that can be kinetically controlled by upstream kinases and phosphatases . Conclusions We have focused on two types of node proteins capable of positive signal integration . The two mechanisms for How signaling proteins integrate multiple inputs : a comparison of N - WASP and Cdk2 Prehoda and Lim 153 integration probably represent extreme cases , and other node proteins may use mechanisms that have aspects of both ( i . e . both cooperative and multistate properties ; Figure 5c ) . It is striking that two such different mecha - nisms can yield qualitatively similar behavior ; however , it is also clear that the different mechanism have critical quantitative differences in behavior . These different prop - erties lend themselves to particular biological situations , both with respect to the relevant input concentrations and fluctuations and to the required degree of output control . The differences between integrating nodes also demon - strates how critical it is to understand the quantitative behavior of these nodes . If we are to understand and model the behavior of complex signaling networks , we must understand the precise mechanism of signaling nodes and the relevant parameters that describe this integration . As such , researchers will need to study such proteins in a com - plete manner . It is insufficient to qualitatively state that two inputs show synergistic effects . It is critical to know how each input effects activity over a wide concentration range , up to and including saturation . It is critical to observe the quantitative degree of integration over a wide range of both input concentrations . It is also critical to know the biologically relevant concentrations of inputs . With this knowledge , we can then proceed to understand how ensembles of many such nodes can form networks capable of generating the sophisticated behavior of a cell . Acknowledgements We thank D Morgan and members of the Lim lab for insightful comments and suggestions . This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health , the Packard Foundation , The Searle Family Foundation and the Sandler Foundation . KE Prehoda was an National Institutes of Health NRSA postdoctoral fellow . References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest , published within the annual period of review , have been highlighted as : (cid:127) of special interest (cid:127)(cid:127) of outstanding interest 1 . Herschlag D , Johnson FB : Synergism in transcriptional activation : a kinetic view . Genes Dev 1993 , 7 : 173 - 179 . 2 . Ptashne M , Gann A : Transcriptional activation by recruitment . Nature 1997 , 386 : 569 - 577 . 3 . Lefstin JA , Yamamoto KR : Allosteric effects of DNA on transcriptional regulators . Nature 1998 , 392 : 885 - 888 . 4 . Naar AM , Lemon BD , Tjian R : Transcriptional coactivator complexes . Annu Rev Biochem 2001 , 70 : 475 - 501 . 5 . Higgs HN , Pollard TD : Regulation of actin polymerization by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . J Biol Chem 1999 , 274 : 32531 - 32534 . 6 . Carlier MF , Ducruix A , Pantaloni D : Signalling to actin : the Cdc42 – N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 connection . Chem Biol 1999 , 6 : R235 - R240 . 7 . Mullins RD , Machesky LM : Actin assembly mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP family proteins . Methods Enzymol 2000 , 325 : 214 - 237 . 8 . Rohatgi R , Ma L , Miki H , Lopez M , Kirchhausen T , Takenawa T , Kirschner MW : The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 1999 , 97 : 221 - 231 . 9 . Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW : Mechanism of N - WASP activation •• by Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Cell Biol 2000 , 150 : 1299 - 1310 . See annotation Prehoda et al . ( 2000 ) [ 10 •• ] . 10 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Mullins RD , Lim WA : Integration of multiple •• signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 2000 , 290 : 801 - 806 . These three papers [ 8 , 9 •• , 10 •• ] describe the synergistic activation of N - WASP by Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . This paper also illustrates the cooperative mechanism that underlies this behavior , and shows that the activity of the individually bound states is comparable to that of the dual - bound state . 11 . Carlier MF , Nioche P , Broutin - L’Hermite I , Boujemaa R , Le Clainche C , Egile C , Garbay C , Ducruix A , Sansonetti P , Pantaloni D : GRB2 links signaling to actin assembly by enhancing interaction of neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) with actin - related protein ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex . J Biol Chem 2000 , 275 : 21946 - 21952 . 12 . Rohatgi R , Nollau P , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Mayer BJ : Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 pathway . J Biol Chem 2001 , 276 : 26448 - 26452 . 13 . Fukuoka M , Suetsugu S , Miki H , Fukami K , Endo T , Takenawa T : A novel neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) binding protein , WISH , induces Arp2 / 3 complex activation independent of Cdc42 . J Cell Biol 2001 , 152 : 471 - 482 . 14 . Morgan DO : Cyclin - dependent kinases : engines , clocks , and microprocessors . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997 , 13 : 261 - 291 . 15 . Sherr CJ , Roberts JM : CDK inhibitors : positive and negative regulators of G1 - phase progression . Genes Dev 1999 , 13 : 1501 - 1512 . 16 . De Bondt HL , Rosenblatt J , Jancarik J , Jones HD , Morgan DO , •• Kim SH : Crystal structure of cyclin - dependent kinase 2 . Nature 1993 , 363 : 595 - 602 . See annotation Brown et al . ( 1999 ) [ 22 • ] . 17 . Connell - Crowley L , Solomon MJ , Wei N , Harper JW : Phosphorylation • independent activation of human cyclin - dependent kinase 2 by cyclin A in vitro . Mol Biol Cell 1993 , 4 : 79 - 92 . See annotation Brown et al . ( 1999 ) [ 22 • ] . 18 . Jeffrey PD , Russo AA , Polyak K , Gibbs E , Hurwitz J , Massague J , •• Pavletich NP : Mechanism of CDK activation revealed by the structure of a cyclin A – CDK2 complex . Nature 1995 , 376 : 313 - 320 . See annotation Brown et al . ( 1999 ) [ 22 • ] . 19 . Russo AA , Jeffrey PD , Pavletich NP : Structural basis of cyclin •• dependent kinase activation by phosphorylation . Nat Struct Biol 1996 , 3 : 696 - 700 . See annotation Brown et al . ( 1999 ) [ 22 • ] . 20 . Brown NR , Noble ME , Endicott JA , Johnson LN : The structural basis • for specificity of substrate and recruitment peptides for cyclin - dependent kinases . Nat Cell Biol 1999 , 1 : 438 - 443 . See annotation Brown et al . ( 1999 ) [ 22 • ] 21 . Hagopian JC , Kirtley MP , Stevenson LM , Gergis RM , Russo AA , • Pavletich NP , Parsons SM , Lew J : Kinetic basis for activation of CDK2 / cyclin A by phosphorylation . J Biol Chem 2001 , 276 : 275 - 280 . See annotation Brown et al . ( 1999 ) [ 22 • ] . 22 . Brown NR , Noble ME , Lawrie AM , Morris MC , Tunnah P , Divita G , • Johnson LN , Endicott JA : Effects of phosphorylation of threonine 160 on cyclin - dependent kinase 2 structure and activity . J Biol Chem 1999 , 274 : 8746 - 8756 . This paper , together with those by de Bondt et al . ( 1993 ) [ 16 •• ] , Connell - Crowley et al . ( 1993 ) [ 17 • ] , Jeffrey et al . ( 1995 ) [ 18 •• ] , Russo et al . ( 1996 ) [ 19 •• ] , Brown et al . ( 2001 ) [ 20 • ] and Hagopian et al . ( 2001 ) [ 21 • ] provide a highly comprehensive structural and energetic description of the various states of the Cdk2 – cyclin A complex . Papers [ 16 •• , 18 •• , 19 •• , 20 • , 22 • ] reveal the struc - tural changes in Cdk2 upon cyclin binding , cyclin binding and phosphorylation , substrate binding , and phosphorylation alone . These structures show that rather than stabilizing a common active state , cyclin A binding and phosphorylation lead to different intermediate states by making separate contributions to assem - bling the Cdk2 active site . Papers [ 17 • , 20 • , 21 • , 22 • ] describe the equilibrium and kinetic effects of cyclin A binding and / or T - loop phosphorylation on Cdk2 . The results support a model in which cyclin A binding and T - loop phosphoryla - tion lead to different levels of Cdk2 activity . There also appears to be little coupling between phosphorylation of Cdk2 and cyclin A binding . 23 . Desai D , Wessling HC , Fisher RP , Morgan DO : Effects of phosphorylation by CAK on cyclin binding by CDC2 and CDK2 . Mol Cell Biol 1995 , 15 : 345 - 350 . 154 Cell regulation