Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 1 – 15 Copyright © 2013 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 0364 - 0213 print / 1551 - 6709 online DOI : 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12099 Language Helps Children Succeed on a Classic Analogy Task Stella Christie , a Dedre Gentner b a Department of Psychology , Swarthmore College b Department of Psychology , Northwestern University Received 4 June 2012 ; received in revised form 1 April 2013 ; accepted 4 April 2013 Abstract Adult humans show exceptional relational ability relative to other species . In this research , we trace the development of this ability in young children . We used a task widely used in compara - tive research — the relational match - to - sample task , which requires participants to notice and match the identity relation : for example , AA should match BB instead of CD . Despite the simplicity of this relation , children under 4 years of age failed to pass this test ( Experiment 1 ) , and their perfor - mance did not improve even with initial feedback ( Experiment 2 ) . In Experiments 3 and 4 , we found that two kinds of symbolic - linguistic experience can facilitate relational reasoning in young children . Our ﬁndings suggest that children learn to become adept analogical thinkers , and that language fosters this learning in at least two distinct ways . Keywords : Analogy ; Language ; Cognitive development ; Learning 1 . Introduction Analogical reasoning — the ability to perceive and use relational similarity between two situations or events — is a fundamental aspect of human cognition . It is a core process central in scientiﬁc discovery and creative problem solving ( Gentner , 1983 ; Hofstadter , 2001 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 ) as well as in everyday categorization and reasoning ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Markman & Wisniewski , 1997 ) . Indeed , recent theory papers have argued that relational ability is the hallmark of human intellectual ability and the capacity that most sets us apart from other species ( Gentner , 2003 , 2010 ; Penn , Holy - oak , & Povinelli , 2008 ) . Correspondence should be sent to Stella Christie , Swarthmore College , 500 College Ave , Swarthmore , PA 19081 . E - mail : schrist3 @ swarthmore . edu There is little doubt that human adults greatly exceed other species — even our close relatives among the great apes — in relational ability . The question is how this large advantage comes about . One possibility is that there is an inherent qualitative difference in that humans possess relational ability and other primates do not ( Penn et al . , 2008 ) . However , another possibility is that the biological difference in relational ability between humans and chimpanzees is initially modest but becomes much larger through the inﬂu - ence of language and culture ( Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner & Christie , 2008 ) . On this account , although humans are born with considerable capacity for relational thought , this ability comes to full fruition through exposure to language and other cultural systems . In this work , we ask whether young children can succeed in a relational matching task that is widely used with non - human primates ; and if not , whether their performance will improve with language interventions . The “gold standard” in this arena is the Relational Match - to - Sample ( RMTS ) task : given AA , choose XX over YZ ; and given AB , choose YZ over XX ( Premack , 1983 ; Thompson & Oden , 2000 ) . This task probes participants’ judgment of relational similarity — a fundamental aspect of analogical reasoning . Though commonly used with non - human animals , the RMTS task has to our knowledge not been tested on young human children . In particular , no studies have looked at the effect of lan - guage on young children’s perception of relational similarity in the RMTS task . The RMTS task has considerable appeal as a test of early relational ability . It focuses on the ability to match the identity relation — arguably the simplest and most basic rela - tion . It has the advantage of being perceptually available to infants and young children ( Ferry , Hespos , & Gentner , unpublished data ; Smith , 1984 ) as well as to other species ( Fagot & Thompson , 2011 ; Flemming , Beran , & Washburn , 2007 ; Wright & Katz , 2006 ) . Another advantage is that the identity relation does not require speciﬁc experiential knowledge , such as causal knowledge . Furthermore , unlike many analogy tasks , the RMTS task involves no competing similarity choices . The ability to do this task grades steeply in non - human animals . In general , animals such as pigeons and even monkeys 1 are unable to pass this task ( Young & Wasserman , 1997 ; Washburn , Thompson , & Oden , 1997 ; see Thompson & Oden , 2000 for review ) . For exam - ple , rhesus macaques fail to pass this task , even when given prior experience with same – different tasks ( Flemming et al . , 2007 ) . In contrast , chimpanzees ( which are genetically far closer to humans than to monkeys ) have been shown to pass the RMTS task in as few as 32 trials — but only if they have had symbolic training ( Thompson , Oden , & Boysen , 1997 ) . The fact that chimpanzees perform qualitatively better on this task with symbolic training is in keeping with the claim that symbolic systems play a role in relational matching . In part because of the belief in human superiority , the general assumption has been that the RMTS task should present no difﬁculties for young children . We test this ( previ - ously unveriﬁed ) assumption by giving preschool children the RMTS task ( Experiment 1 ) and the RMTS task preceded by practice with feedback ( Experiment 2 ) . A ﬁnding that young children readily pass this task would be consistent with the view that relational reasoning is present from early in human development . However , if young children fail to pass the RMTS task , this leaves open the possibility that the acquisition of language contributes to this ability . In Experiment 3 , we test this proposal by asking whether 2 S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) symbolic training can improve performance on the RMTS task in children . In Experiment 4 , we further explore the effects of symbol systems on RMTS performance . 2 . Experiment 1 : The RMTS task in young children The ﬁrst study uses the RMTS task and asks whether young children can perceive rela - tional similarity between two instances of the identity relation . We tested only the same ( identity ) relation to avoid overloading children . 2 Preschoolers were given triads like that in Fig . 1 . Each triad had a standard depicting an identity match and two alternatives : one showing an identity match between two new shapes and one showing two distinct shapes . The non - relational ( non - identity ) alternative contained no object matches to the standard , so it should not be a salient competitor to the relational match . If perception of relational similarity is present from the start , children should be able to match the standard to the alternative that depicts an identity match . 2 . 1 . Methods 2 . 1 . 1 . Participants Fifty children participated : sixteen 2 - year - olds ( M = 29 months , range = 28 – 32 months ) , sixteen 3 - year - olds ( M = 39 months , range = 36 – 40 months ) , and eighteen Fig . 1 . Sample triad for the RMTS task ( all studies ) . S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 3 4 - year - olds ( M = 54 months , range = 52 – 60 months ) . Children were recruited from a participant pool covering the greater Chicago area and from local preschools . 2 . 1 . 2 . Materials There were eight triads , each consisting of three picture cards : a standard with two identical shapes ( e . g . , two squares ) and two alternatives : a relational match ( R : two iden - tical shapes , e . g . , two circles ) and a non - relational match ( NR : two non - identical shapes , e . g . a circle and a triangle ; see Fig . 2 ) . Each picture within the triad was composed of two geometric shapes . Left and right placement of the R and NR pictures was counterbal - anced . There were four predetermined randomized orders of the eight triads , counterbal - anced within each age group . In addition , as a check on whether children understood that the task was to choose the similar alternative , two high - similarity catch trials were given to the two youngest groups at the end of the sequence . In these triads , the standard and the relational alternative were extremely similar in objects as well as relations and the other alternative was different in both object and relation . For example , if the standard showed a yellow ﬂower in a vase , the relational alternative might be a red ﬂower in a vase and the other alternative , a cup on a plate . Children who failed to pass both catch trials were excluded from the study . No chil - dren were excluded in Experiment 1 . 2 . 1 . 3 . Procedure The child was seated across from the experimenter . For each trial , the experimenter showed the standard followed by the two alternatives , and asked , “Which of these two Fig . 2 . Mean proportion of relational matches selected in Experiment 1 ( No Label ) and Experiment 4 ( Novel Label ) . * indicates p < . 05 against chance ( 0 . 5 ) . 4 S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) pictures is more like this one ( the standard ) ? Which one matches this one ( the standard ) ? ” The child indicated her choice by pointing to one of the two alternatives . No feedback was given aside from general positive encouragement . 3 2 . 2 . Results The key question was whether children would choose the relational matches at signiﬁ - cantly above - chance ( 50 % ) rates . The two younger groups performed at chance ( M = 0 . 55 for 2 - year - olds and M = 0 . 56 for 3 - year - olds , both p ’s > . 05 ) . Only 4 - year - olds chose the relational match at above - chance rates ( M = 0 . 65 , SD = 0 . 26 , t ( 17 ) = 2 . 43 , p < . 05 , two - tailed , 4 d = 0 . 6 ) . ( The difference in performance across age did not reach signiﬁcance , F ( 2 , 47 ) = 0 . 88 , p = . 42 . ) To see whether children’s performance changed across the trials , we compared the ﬁrst three trials with the last three . Only the 3 - year - olds performed better across time ( M ﬁrst3 = . 42 , M last3 = . 69 , repeated measure ANOVA F ( 1 , 15 ) = 6 . 48 , p < . 05 ) ; however , their overall performance did not differ from chance . Two - and three - year - olds showed no change across trials . 2 . 3 . Discussion Two - and three - year - olds showed no evidence of noticing the match between two instances of the identity relation . Even 4 - year - olds chose the relational match only 65 % of the time . As there were no competing similarity matches , these ﬁndings sug - gest that even this basic similarity between identity relations is not initially apparent to children . But before drawing this conclusion , we must probe further into children’s understand - ing of the task . Because all children passed the high - similarity catch trials , we can infer that they understood that the task was a matching task . However , perhaps they did not realize that purely relational similarity should count as a match . In other words , perhaps they perceived relational similarity but did not understand that it was relevant to the task . In Experiment 2 , we addressed this concern by giving children practice trials with correc - tive feedback . 3 . Experiment 2 : RMTS task with feedback Experiment 2 asks whether feedback can improve performance on the RMTS task . A new group of thirteen 2 - year - olds 5 and thirteen 3 - year - olds was tested using the same RMTS task , but in addition , they received four initial RMTS trials with corrective feed - back . On each trial , if the child chose the correct relational alternative ( R ) , the experi - menter conﬁrmed it by saying , “That’s right , this one is the match ! This one ( pointing to R ) matches this one ( standard ) ! ” If the child chose wrongly , the experimenter said , “Oh , that one ( NR ) is nice , but this ( R ) is the matching one . See , this one ( R ) matches this S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 5 one ( standard ) ! ” There was no overlap between the ﬁgures used in the initial four trials and those used in the test trials . After the four feedback trials , children received eight relational matching trials plus two catch trials as in Experiment 1 . No corrective feedback was given at this stage . If part of the RMTS task’s difﬁculty lay in understanding the task , we should expect chil - dren’s performance to improve after receiving corrective feedback . 3 . 1 . Results and discussion We analyzed data from the eight RMTS trials as in Experiment 1 . Four trials of feed - back did not improve performance in the RMTS task : both 2 - year - olds ( M = 0 . 50 , SD = 0 . 11 ) and 3 - year - olds ( M = 0 . 56 , SD = 0 . 15 ) performed at chance . The results did not differ from those of Experiment 1 , in which children received no feedback trials , suggesting that failure to understand the task was not the limiting factor in perceiving relational match ( F ( 1 , 56 ) = 0 . 42 , p > . 05 ) . As in Experiment 1 , the 3 - year - olds showed an improvement across trials ( see Table 1 ) , suggesting a beneﬁt from multiple exposures to the identity relation . We return to this possibility in the General discussion . Even for the basic relation of identity , we found no evidence that young children can spontaneously perceive a relational match . Overall , the results of Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that the human superiority in relational reasoning is not apparent at the outset , but emerges rather gradually . We turn now to the question of whether our superior rela - tional ability results in part from cultural learning . Although many aspects of human cul - ture may serve to invite relational insight , we focus here on symbolic - linguistic experience . Prior evidence shows that such experience can improve relational perfor - mance in children . For example , Rattermann and Gentner ( 1998 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) found that children given a challenging mapping task performed better if they were given relational labels that conveyed the key relational commonality ( e . g . , Daddy / Mommy / Baby to convey monotonic change in size ) . Spatial relational language has also been shown to improve children’s performance in spatial tasks ( Dessalegn & Landau , 2008 ; Gentner , € Ozy € urek , Goldin - Meadow , & G € urcanli , in press ; Hermer - Vasquez , Moffet , Table 1 Relational choices : First three versus Last three 2 . 5 - year - olds 3 - year - olds 4 . 5 - year - olds M ﬁrst3 M last3 M ﬁrst3 M last3 M ﬁrst3 M last3 Exp . 1 : Baseline RMTS 0 . 60 0 . 48 0 . 42 0 . 69 a 0 . 59 0 . 67 Exp . 2 : RMTS with feedback 0 . 59 0 . 41 0 . 46 0 . 67 a Exp . 3 : RMTS + familiar label 0 . 46 0 . 56 0 . 72 0 . 64 Exp . 4 : RMTS + novel label 0 . 73 0 . 6 0 . 6 0 . 77 0 . 77 0 . 81 Note . Means of relational choices in the ﬁrst three versus last three trials ( total = eight trials ) for each experiment . a Indicates signiﬁcant differences between the ﬁrst three and last three trials , analyzed using within - subject repeated measures ANOVA . 6 S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) & Munkholm , 2001 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . Such ﬁndings suggest that learning relational language fosters a relational representation that supports perceiving and using the named relation . Prior ﬁndings in comparative research also indicate a beneﬁt from symbolic training . Speciﬁcally , researchers have found that chimpanzees taught symbols for same and differ - ent perform far better on the RMTS task than do other acculturated chimpanzees ( Pre - mack , 1983 ; Thompson & Oden , 2000 ; Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . For example , Thompson et al . ( 1997 ) tested four chimpanzees that had previously learned symbolic tokens for same and different , and a ﬁfth chimpanzee that had not received such training . The ani - mals were given identity - match trials ( e . g . , AA with alternatives AA vs . BC ) , on which they were rewarded for choosing correctly , and RMTS trials ( e . g . , AA with BB vs . CD ) , on which they received no differential feedback — they were rewarded on every trial regardless of whether they were correct or incorrect . This is analogous to our method with children : during the RMTS trials they received verbal encouragement regardless of their choice . The results with chimpanzees were quite striking : despite this lack of this informative feedback , all four of the symbolically trained animals reached a 75 % correct criterion on the RMTS trials in as few as 32 trials . In contrast , the control animal , which lacked symbolic training , failed to reach criterion after well over a hundred trials . Thomp - son et al . ( 1997 ) concluded that learning same and different symbols fosters a relational encoding that supports perceiving and matching unlike instances of these relations . Here , we ask whether parallel effects can be seen in children . 4 . Experiment 3 : Symbolic training and the RMTS task We tested whether symbolic training can improve young children’s performance in the RMTS task . Children were given an initial training session with the words “same” and “different , ” under the pretext of teaching a puppet these two words . Following this train - ing , children were given the RMTS task . Children were given corrective feedback during the symbol - learning trials , but ( as in Experiments 1 and 2 , and as in the Thompson et al . study ) not during the RMTS trials . That is , they received verbal encouragement regardless of their choice . If knowing the relational labels contributes to matching ability , then per - formance in the RMTS task should improve . 4 . 1 . Methods 4 . 1 . 1 . Participants Thirteen 2 - year - olds ( M = 29 months , range = 28 – 32 months ) and thirteen 3 - year - olds ( M = 38 months , range = 36 – 40 months ) participated . 4 . 1 . 2 . Materials For the RMTS task , we used the same eight triads as in Experiments 1 and 2 . For the initial training ( naming ) session , we created 12 same picture cards ( two identical objects ) S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 7 and 12 different picture cards ( two different objects ) . These contained either geometric shapes ( different from those used in the RMTS task ) or common objects such as balls , brushes , etc . 4 . 2 . Procedure 4 . 2 . 1 . Naming session Children were introduced to a puppet and told that they could help the puppet learn some words . The experimenter then brought a sample same card to the table ( two identi - cal balls ) , pointed out that the balls were the same , and explained that as the objects were the same , the child had to say “same” 6 so the puppet could learn the word . The child was asked to repeat the word . Following this , the experimenter showed a sample different card ( a red brush and a red bottle ) , gave a parallel explanation of “different , ” and again asked the child to repeat the word . Children then labeled a series of picture cards with “same” or “different . ” They were given corrective feedback ( e . g . , “See , these are the same , so for this card we say ‘same’ ! ” ) . Once they reached a criterion of ﬁve consecutive correct trials or a maximum of 24 trials , they proceeded to the RMTS task . 4 . 2 . 2 . RMTS task Children were congratulated for helping the puppet and told that they were going to play another game ( the RMTS task ) . This phase was identical to the baseline RMTS task ( Experiment 1 ) . The words “same” and “different” were not used during this phase . 4 . 3 . Results and discussion 4 . 3 . 1 . Naming session The 3 - year - olds needed an average of 11 trials ( range : 5 – 23 ) to meet criterion . Six of the 13 children mastered the words “same” and “different” from the very beginning , reaching criterion in the ﬁrst ﬁve trials . In contrast , only one of the thirteen 2 - year - olds reached criterion in the ﬁrst ﬁve trials . On average , 2 - year - olds required 19 trials ( range : 5 – 24 ) ; 46 % of them never reached criterion and had to complete all 24 naming trials . 4 . 3 . 2 . RMTS task Symbolic training appeared to beneﬁt 3 - year - olds : they chose the relational match at above - chance rates ( M = 0 . 69 , SD = 0 . 20 ; t ( 12 ) = 3 . 44 , p < . 05 , d = 0 . 95 ) . This con - trasts with the chance performance of 3 - year - olds in Experiments 1 and 2 . Indeed , 3 - year - olds in this experiment performed marginally better than those in Experiments 1 and 2 ( F ( 1 , 40 ) = 4 . 064 , p = . 051 ) . However , 2 - year - olds continued to perform at chance ( M = 0 . 53 , SD = 0 . 1 ; t ( 12 ) = 0 . 89 , p > . 05 ) . Neither age group showed a gain across trials ( see Table 1 ) . To gain further evidence on the role of relational labels , we separated 3 - year - olds by performance in the naming task ( seven or fewer trials to criterion vs . nine or more ) . We 8 S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) found that those who performed better in the naming task were also better at the RMTS task ( M < 7naming = . 83 vs . M > 9naming = . 57 , F ( 1 , 11 ) = 9 . 15 , p = . 01 , d = 1 . 67 . ( This analysis was not applicable to the 2 - year - olds , as so few reached criterion during the naming task . ) These ﬁndings support the hypothesis that relational labeling can aid children in matching the identity relation . It appears that ( at least by 3 years of age ) training children with relational labels for same and different makes the identity relation more salient , allowing them to perceive the commonality between two instances of this rela - tion . This effect did not hold for the 2 - year - olds , perhaps because the labels were not sufﬁciently entrenched . These ﬁndings parallel the pattern found for chimpanzees , as discussed above : Animals with prior training on symbols for same and different can pass the RMTS task without differential reinforcement , whereas chimpanzees lacking this training fail on this task even after hundreds of trials ( Oden et al . , 1990 ; Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . Experiment 4 tests another way in which symbolic - linguistic systems might contribute to relational insight : namely , by inviting comparison . Hearing a common label applied to two objects or events invites children to compare the two , and this in turn can highlight their relational commonalities ( Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner & Christie , 2010 ; Gentner & Med - ina , 1998 ; Gentner & Namy , 1999 ) . In Experiment 4 , we carry this logic a step further . During the RMTS task , children are given a novel label for the standard and asked to say which alternative “is also a truffet . ” Our hypothesis is that in attempting to apply the label , they will compare the standard with each alternative ; and this will prompt them to notice the common structure that the relational alternative shares with the standard . This prediction rests on evidence that even very young children believe that words refer to like kinds ( Markman , 1989 ; Waxman , 2002 ) . This kind of learning effect , which involves novel labels , is quite distinct from the symbol - training effects found in chimpanzees ( Premack , 1983 ; Thompson & Oden , 2000 ; Thompson et al . , 1997 ) and in our Experiment 3 , which depend on learning speciﬁc relational labels . An effect of novel labels would suggest a more general role for language than simply learning speciﬁc relational labels , and it would add force to the claim that symbolic - linguistic experience is instrumental in shaping humans’ rela - tional ability . 5 . Experiment 4 : Novel labels in the RMTS task Children were tested on the same basic RMTS task used in the baseline study ( Experi - ment 1 ) , with no pre - training . The only difference was that a novel label ( “truffet” ) was applied to the standard , and the child was asked which of the two alternatives was also a truffet . If this prompts the child to compare each alternative to the standard , the invited alignment process might allow them to discover the relational commonality between the standard and the relational match . S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 9 5 . 1 . Methods 5 . 1 . 1 . Participants Fifteen 2 - year - olds ( M = 30 months , range = 28 – 32 months ) , sixteen 3 - year - olds ( M = 38 months , range = 36 – 40 months ) , and sixteen 4 - year - olds ( M = 55 months , range = 52 – 60 months ) participated . 5 . 1 . 2 . Materials and procedure The materials and procedure were as in Experiment 1 , except that children heard a novel label for each standard and were asked to extend this label . On each trial , the experimenter ﬁrst showed a standard and said , “See this one ? This is a truffet ! Can you say truffet ? ” ( The same novel label was used throughout , as the relation referred to was always identity . ) Following this , the child saw the two choices and was asked , “Can you tell me which of these two is also a truffet ? ” As in previous experiments , there were eight RMTS trials . 5 . 2 . Results and discussion All age groups chose the correct relational match at above chance levels ( 2 - year - olds , M = 0 . 65 , SD = 0 . 18 , t ( 14 ) = 3 . 15 , p < . 05 , d = 0 . 83 ; 3 - year - olds , M = 0 . 71 , SD = 0 . 19 , t ( 15 ) = 4 . 04 , p < . 001 , d = 1 . 01 ; 4 - year - olds : M = 0 . 79 , SD = 0 . 21 , t ( 15 ) = 5 . 44 , p < . 001 , d = 1 . 38 ) . There was no main effect of age ( F ( 2 , 44 ) = 2 . 02 , p > . 05 ) . There was no difference between the ﬁrst three and last three trials ( F ( 1 , 44 ) = 0 . 30 , p > . 05 ; Table 1 ) . It appears that the task of applying a novel word led chil - dren to engage in a comparison process that revealed the common relational structure . A comparison of these results to those of Experiment 1 ( Baseline RMTS ) is shown in Fig . 2 . Overall , children who heard a novel label applied to the standard performed better than those in Experiment 1 ; a 2 ( experiment ) 9 3 ( age ) ANOVA revealed a main effect of experiment ( F ( 1 , 91 ) = 8 . 29 , p < . 05 ) . There was no main effect of age ( F ( 2 , 91 ) = 2 . 67 , p > . 05 ) , nor a signiﬁcant interaction between experiment and age ( F ( 2 , 91 ) = 0 . 11 , p > . 05 ) . This language beneﬁt is quite remarkable considering that the label applied to the stan - dard was a novel word , and that children received no training or practice trials . These results are consistent with prior ﬁndings indicating that application of common words is a highly effective means of inviting comparison , and that this in turn results in relational learning ( Gentner , Anggoro , & Klibanoff , 2011 ; Namy & Gentner , 2001 ) . 6 . General discussion We began by noting that humans vastly exceed other species in relational ability . Our goal in these studies was to investigate the determinants of this superiority . Speciﬁcally , we explored the role of symbolic - linguistic experience in the development of relational 10 S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) insight . To do so , we gave children Premack’s classic RMTS task , which has been widely tested on non - human animals . We chose this task because ( a ) it is simple , yet clearly challenging for non - human primates ( Flemming et al . , 2007 ; Washburn et al . , 1997 ) ; and ( b ) it can readily be passed by chimpanzees , but only if they have symbolic training ( Pre - mack , 1983 ; Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . To our knowledge , the RMTS task with symbolic training has never been tested with young children . We found , ﬁrst , that 2 - and 3 - year - old children fail this task : Children do not spontane - ously match two instances of the identity relation until 4 years of age ( Experiment 1 ) , even when given corrective feedback ( Experiment 2 ) . We then asked whether young chil - dren could learn to perceive and match the identity relation . In Experiment 3 , we found that 3 - year - olds ( but not 2 - year - olds ) could pass the RMTS task if given prior symbolic training with same and different relations , analogous to the training given to chimpanzees who then pass the RMTS task ( Premack , 1983 ; Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . That is , children can pass the RMTS task a full year earlier when pre - trained on the relevant relational label . This is consistent with the claim that human relational matching ability is supported by the acquisition of linguistic labels denoting relational concepts ( Gentner , 2010 ; Gent - ner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . The results of Experiment 3 show that prior knowledge of the relevant relational terms ( same and different ) can help children succeed in the RMTS task , even if the terms are not used during the task itself . In Experiment 4 , we tested a different way in which lan - guage may support relational matching : by inviting comparison . When children were given a novel label for the standard and asked to extend it to one of the alternatives , both 2 - and 3 - year - old children succeeded in the RMTS task . It is striking that the use of a novel label was so effective for 2 - year - olds — more effective , apparently , than pre - training on the labels ( “same” and “different” ) . We suggest that the novel label task invited com - parison . This is consistent with the claim that common labels invite comparison ( Christie & Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner & Medina , 1998 ; Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Gentner et al . , 2011 ) as well as with the general ﬁnding that even very young children have formed the assump - tion that common labels refer to like kinds ( Markman , 1989 ) . Thus , the task of ﬁnding the other “truffet” led children to compare the standard with each of the alternatives , and thereby to discover the relational commonality between the standard and the relational match . ( Note that this differs from the method in Experiment 3 , in which children learned the terms same and different before the task and did not hear the terms during the task . ) The assumption that common labels signal common meanings offers a powerful route by which human language can support relational abstraction in young learners . Preschool chil - dren clearly make this assumption ( Markman , 1989 ; Waxman , 2002 ) , but there is no evi - dence of other primates having formed it . It seems likely that this assumption requires having a symbolic system ( rather than just a few isolated symbols ) . It is an open question whether this kind of insight will be available to non - human primates . It might seem implausible that children could fail to perceive the identity relation — perhaps the simplest possible perceptual relation — especially given that there were no competing object matches . Could children’s failure to pass the RMTS task have resulted simply from failure to understand the task ? We think this explanation is unlikely for three S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 11 reasons : ﬁrst , across all three studies , all but two children ( whose data were omitted ) passed the check trials ; second , even after receiving corrective feedback , children still failed the task ( Experiment 2 ) ; and third , after an initial naming session using a different procedure , 3 - year - olds readily passed the basic RMTS task ( Experiment 3 ) — suggesting that their problem lay in perceiving the relational commonality rather than in understand - ing the task instructions . To be clear , we are not maintaining that language is the only route by which human culture supports relational learning . Other kinds of symbols , such as maps and diagrams , and other kinds of cultural practices — such as participating in activities in which different objects play similar roles — may invite children to think about common relational struc - ture . However , we suggest that language plays a major role , for three reasons . First , there is abundant evidence that common labels invite children to seek conceptual commonali - ties ; second , once children have entered into the linguistic community , the use of com - mon overt symbols may be more noticeable than other indicators of common relational content ; and , third , the ubiquity of language in human experience means that children have many opportunities to gain the insights it provides . 6 . 1 . Implications for cross - species comparisons These ﬁndings bear on the question of whether our species’ striking superiority in rela - tional reasoning stems from an inherent qualitative difference in mental faculties between humans and all other species , or whether it instead results from cultural and linguistic learning that expands an initially modest human advantage . Although the present results cannot deﬁnitively settle this question , they are more consistent with the latter possibility : that there is a quantitative rather than qualitative difference in inherent relational ability between humans and ( at least ) chimpanzees . Without symbolic support , children did not show evidence of matching the identity relation until 4 years of age , even in a task with no competing similarity or association matches . This conclusion is also supported by work with 7 - and 9 - month - old infants that shows that sensitivity to same and different relations is not present at the outset but can be acquired over trials ( Ferry et al . , unpub - lished data ) ; and further , that infants’ performance shows the same signatures of rela - tional learning that are found with older children , including interference from salient objects . It appears that even for this very simple relational match , humans beneﬁt from cultural and linguistic support . Support for the claim of a gradient in relational ability within the great apes , rather than an all - or - nothing difference , also comes from studies showing that chimpanzees are able to pass a relational matching task involving spatial – causal relations ( Haun & Call , 2009 ) , as well as from studies showing success in the RMTS task for chimpanzees trained on same and different symbols ( Premack , 1983 ; Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . Indeed , the parallel between this latter ﬁnding and our ﬁndings for human children ( Experiment 3 ) further supports the claim that the immense relational advantage shown by adult humans is in part the product of cultural / linguistic experience , and not simply the result of a ﬁxed biological gulf . 12 S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 7 . Conclusions These ﬁndings underline the importance of symbolic - linguistic experience in support - ing human relational thinking . Across our studies , the availability of symbols made a dra - matic difference in the age at which children could match the identity relation — from 4 years of age without symbolic support to 2 ½ years with such support . We conclude that humans become paragons of relational ability not only through biological endowment but through cultural experience , with language being a major contributor . Acknowledgments This research was supported by National Science Foundation Science of Learning Center Grant SBE - 0541957 awarded to the Spatial Intelligence Learning Center . Notes 1 . An exception to this generalization is baboons , which have recently been shown to pass the RMTS task . However , only 6 of the 28 baboons tested were able to pass this task , and only after 15 , 400 – 32 , 100 trials ( Fagot & Thompson , 2011 ) . 2 . Prior studies have either shown no developmental difference or superior perfor - mance of same over different relations ( Ferry et al . , unpublished data ) or have shown superior performance on same over different relations ( Oden , Thompson , & Premack , 1990 ) ; so testing the same relation is unlikely to lead to underestimating children’s competence . 3 . We used verbal instructions to convey the idea of a matching task . As described later , studies of RMTS performance with chimpanzees have used blocks of identity matches to convey this idea ( Thompson et al . , 1997 ) . These studies employed non - differential reward during the RMTS task . Similarly , here we gave non - differential verbal encouragement . 4 . All t - tests are two - tailed unless noted . 5 . One 2 - year - old failed to pass both catch trials and was replaced . 6 . In pilot testing we tried other words that capture the relation same , such as “twin” or “double . ” All these words were comprehended less well than same by 2 - year - olds . References Christie , S . , & Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Where hypotheses come from : Learning new relations by structural alignment . Journal of Cognition and Development , 11 ( 3 ) , 356 – 373 . Dessalegn , B . , & Landau , B . ( 2008 ) . More than meets the eye : The role of language in binding visual properties . Psychological Science , 19 ( 2 ) , 189 – 195 . S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 13 Fagot , J . , & Thompson , R . K . R . ( 2011 ) . Generalized relational matching by Guinea baboons ( Papio papio ) in two - by - two - item analogy problems . Psychological Science , 22 ( 10 ) , 1304 – 1309 . Flemming , T . M . , Beran , M . J . , & Washburn , D . A . ( 2007 ) . Disconnect in concept learning by rhesus monkeys ( Macaca mulatta ) : Judgment of relations and relations - between - relations . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 33 ( 1 ) , 55 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science : A Multidisciplinary Journal , 7 ( 2 ) , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Why we’re so smart . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) , Language in mind : Advances in the study of language and thought ( pp . 195 – 235 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Bootstrapping children’s learning : Analogical processes and symbol systems . Cognitive Science , 34 ( 5 ) , 752 – 775 . Gentner , D . , Anggoro , F . K . , & Klibanoff , R . S . ( 2011 ) . Structure - mapping and relational language support children’s learning of relational categories . Child Development , 82 ( 4 ) , 1173 – 1188 . Gentner , D . , & Christie , S . ( 2008 ) . Relational language supports relational cognition in humans and apes . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 31 ( 2 ) . Gentner , D . , & Christie , S . ( 2010 ) . Mutual bootstrapping between language and analogical processing . Language and Cognition , 2 ( 2 ) , 261 – 283 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 ( 1 ) , 45 – 56 . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1998 ) . Similarity and the development of rules . Cognition , 65 ( 2 ) , 263 – 297 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . L . ( 1999 ) . Comparison in the development of categories . Cognitive Development , 14 , 487 – 513 . Gentner , D . , Ozyurek , A . , Gurcanli , O . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2013 ) Spatial language facilitates spatial cognition : Evidence from children who lack language input . Cognition , 127 ( 3 ) , 318 – 330 . Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on thought and language : Interrelations in development . London : Cambridge University Press . Haun , D . , & Call , J . ( 2009 ) . Great apes’ capacities to recognize relational similarity . Cognition , 110 ( 2 ) , 147 – 159 . Hermer - Vasquez , L . , Moffet , A . , & Munkholm , P . ( 2001 ) . Language , space , and the development of cognitive ﬂexibility in humans : The case of two spatial memory tasks . Cognition , 79 , 263 – 299 . Hofstadter , D . R . ( 2001 ) . Epilogue : Analogy as the core of cognition . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science ( pp . 499 – 538 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 , 295 – 355 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . Relational language and the development of relational mapping . Cognitive Psychology , 50 ( 4 ) , 315 – 353 . Markman , E . M . ( 1989 ) . Categorization and naming in children : Problems of induction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Markman , A . B . , & Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1997 ) . Similar and different : The differentiation of basic - level categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology Learning Memory and Cognition , 23 , 54 – 70 . Namy , L . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Making a silk purse out of two sow’s ears : young children’s use of comparison in category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 131 ( 1 ) , 5 . Oden , D . L . , Thompson , R . K . , & Premack , D . ( 1990 ) . Infant chimpanzees spontaneously perceive both concrete and abstract same / different relations . Child Development , 61 ( 3 ) , 621 – 631 . Penn , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Povinelli , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Darwin’s mistake : Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 31 ( 02 ) , 109 – 130 . Premack , D . ( 1983 ) . The codes of man and beasts . Behavioral & Brain Sciences , 6 , 125 – 167 . 14 S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . The effect of language on similarity : The use of relational labels improves young children’s performance in a mapping task . In K . Holyoak , D . Gentner , & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in analogy research : Integration of theory & data from the cognitive , computational , and neural sciences . Sophia : New Bulgarian University . Smith , L . B . ( 1984 ) . Young children’s understanding of attributes and dimensions : A comparison of conceptual and linguistic measures . Child Development , 55 , 363 – 380 . Thompson , R . K . R . , & Oden , D . L . ( 2000 ) . Categorical perception and conceptual judgments by nonhuman primates : The paleological monkey and the analogical ape . Cognitive Science , 24 , 363 – 396 . Thompson , R . K . R . , Oden , D . L . , & Boysen , S . T . ( 1997 ) . Language - naive chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ) judge relations between relations in a conceptual matching - to - sample task . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 23 , 31 – 43 . Washburn , D . A . , Thompson , R . K . R . , & Oden , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Monkeys trained with same / different symbols do not match relations . Paper presented at the 38th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society , Philadelphia , PA , 1997 . Waxman , S . R . ( 2002 ) . Links between object categorization and naming : Origins and emergence in human infants . In D . H . Rakison & L . M . Oakes ( Eds . ) , Early category and concept development : Making sense of the blooming , buzzing confusion ( pp . 213 – 241 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Wright , A . A . , & Katz , J . S . ( 2006 ) . Mechanisms of same / different concept learning in primates and avians . Behavioural Processes , 72 , 234 – 254 . Young , M . E . , & Wasserman , E . A . ( 1997 ) . Entropy detection by pigeons : Response to mixed visual displays after same - different discrimination training . Journal of Experimental Psychology Animal Behavior Processes , 23 , 157 – 170 . S . Christie , D . Gentner / Cognitive Science ( 2013 ) 15