Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 022 - 00642 - 5 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework Andres Felipe Cortes · Andreea N . Kiss Accepted : 21 April 2022 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2022 Plain English Summary Do small business man - agers pursue strategic initiatives more freely than those in larger firms ? Our study suggests that the answer is not as simple . While prior research argues that executives in small businesses objectively face reduced constraints to devise and enact strategies , we suggest that important limits to managerial discre - tion may arise from executives’ subjective interpreta - tions of various firm conditions . Specifically , while the flatter organizational structures specific to small firms may allow managers to perceive a greater range of available strategic choices , higher resource avail - ability may limit such perceptions . In turn , higher resource availability may allow managers to perceive a greater ability to implement strategic actions , but such perception might be more limited in firms with flat - ter organizational structures . Furthermore , ownership concentration acts as a contingency of these relation - ships . We suggest a revision of assumptions in schol - arly work on managerial discretion in small firms and an increased firm and governmental oversight body awareness of executive discretion perceptions , which may lead to a calibration of structural design , owner - ship , and resource allocation interventions . Keywords Managerial discretion · Small businesses · Strategic leadership · Upper echelons · Information processing · Family firms JEL Classification M12 · M10 · L21 · L25 Abstract A significant body of research assumes that managerial discretion is high in small firms . However , this assertion is based on simplified explanations link - ing specific firm characteristics , particularly resource , structural , and ownership characteristics , with a unilat - eral and objective view of managerial discretion . Adopt - ing a perceptual and multidimensional conceptualization of discretion , and employing an information processing perspective , we challenge this assumption and build a theoretical framework that explains how these key firm characteristics shape executives’ perceptions of strate - gic choice availability ( latitude of actions ) and strategy implementation ability ( latitude of objectives ) . We con - tribute to the theoretical development of the manage - rial discretion construct by providing a more nuanced perspective on the relationship between firm size and managerial discretion . We also point to the importance of incorporating perceptions of managerial discretion in research exploring opportunity recognition , entrepre - neurial orientation , and strategy formation and imple - mentation in small firms and family businesses . A . F . Cortes ( * ) Jack Welch College of Business & Technology , Sacred Heart University , 5151 Park Avenue , Fairfield , CT 06825 , USAe - mail : cortesortiza @ sacredheart . edu A . N . Kiss College of Business , Lehigh University , 621 Taylor Street , Bethlehem , PA 18015 , USA e - mail : ank518 @ lehigh . edu Small Bus Econ ( 2023 ) 60 : 157 – 172 / Published online : 5 (cid:40)uly 2022 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) 1 Introduction Managerial , and more specifically executive discre - tion , is a widely mentioned concept in upper echelons and strategic leadership research ( for a review , see Wangrow et al . , 2015 ) . Scholars often refer to discre - tion as executives’ latitude of action , i . e . , the freedom executives have in pursuing different strategies , and thus the extent to which their decisions and behaviors are reflected in important organizational outcomes ( Hambrick & Finkelstein , 1987 ) . In contexts of high discretion , executives may choose from a wide range of strategic options and display their skills and expe - riences in strategic decision - making to a larger extent , whereas in contexts of low discretion , executives’ strategic options and impact on the firm may be lim - ited ( Shen & Cho , 2005 ) . Within the expanding lit - erature on executive discretion , a common assertion is that executives have greater influence over organi - zational outcomes in small firms compared to large firms ( Tomczyk et al . , 2013 ; Wallace et al . , 2010 ) . Established explanations for this increased discre - tion are related to small firms’ reduced resource availability , flatter organizational structures , and to some extent reduced ownership - management sepa - ration ( i . e . , high ownership concentration by execu - tives ) . Specifically , research suggests that executives in small firms compensate resource and process deficiencies with their skills and abilities ( Alexiev et al . , 2010 ) , play both strategic and operational roles ( Lubatkin et al . , 2006 ) , have more direct contact with organizational members due to reduced hierarchy ( Freel , 2000 ; Ling et al . , 2008 ) , face reduced board monitoring and oversight ( Arzubiaga et al . , 2018 ; de Bakker & den Hond , 2008 ) , and may have mitigated agency conflicts due to higher levels of ownership ( Robson & Bennett , 2000 ; Zahra et al . , 2000 ) . These explanations assume that executives of small firms objectively enjoy high levels of discretion , and there - fore that they select and implement strategic actions without the challenges and constraints faced by their peers operating in large firms . However , executives in small firms can only exer - cise their discretion to the extent that they perceive such discretion ( Carpenter & Golden , 1997 ; Parker et al . , 2019 ) . Anecdotal evidence suggests that this may not always be the case in small firms . A large sur - vey of small business owners conducted in New Zea - land found that nearly half of them had no clear plan to guide their strategic actions ( NZ Business , 2011 ) . Relatedly , small business consultants often highlight that executives get overwhelmed identifying the right path and goals for their small business ( Beets , 2011 ) , and lack of vision and difficulties finding appropri - ate strategic choices are often listed as main causes of failure in small businesses ( Forbes , 2019 ) . Manag - ers of small businesses also face challenges gauging their firm’s abilities to implement promising strategic actions . Eddi Martucci , cofounder of Akili Interac - tive Labs , expressed the tension between developing a video game to treat patients with attention disorders and ensuring its implementation and release , stating the challenges and uncertainties of prototyping and actually distributing and launching the product ( Chu et al . , 2016 ) . Christopher Archer , CEO of LookLive , which identifies items of clothing worn by celebrities and offers purchase suggestions , similarly highlighted in an interview the important technical challenges that needed to be addressed to implement their offerings successfully ( Chu et al . , 2016 ) . Taken together , such evidence suggests that even if small business execu - tives have some objective decision - making latitude , their discretion may be limited if they do not identify available courses of action or if they perceive that their firm’s ability to implement strategies is limited . Moreover , some established theories and frame - works in entrepreneurship research are also grounded in an assumption of higher managerial discretion in small firms . For example , entrepreneurial orienta - tion research suggests that small firms tend to be more proactive in the pursuit of innovative and risky opportunities and achieve high levels of performance ( Covin & Lumpkin , 2011 ; Lechner & Gudmundsson , 2014 ) . However , the importance of these organiza - tional efforts may be limited if executives of small businesses do not perceive a wide range of strategic options available to pursue . Similarly , opportunity recognition theory often focuses on the superior abilities of some individuals to uncover competitive imperfections in an industry and design offerings to address them ( e . g . , Alvarez et al . , 2013 ) . However , the process of recognizing opportunities may be obscured by the possibility that small business man - agers perceive limits in the firm’s ability to act upon and implement such opportunities . In order to move past this assumption of high managerial discretion in small firms , we build on two important developments of the managerial discretion 158 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework 1 3 Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) construct . First , we follow the premise that execu - tives can exercise discretion and shape organizational outcomes as long as they perceive such discretion ( Carpenter & Golden , 1997 ) . This implies that execu - tives operating in similar ( small ) organizations can interpret the scope of their actions differently ( Lauto et al . , 2020 ) . Second , we follow a two - dimensional conceptualization of discretion as latitude of actions and latitude of objectives ( Parker et al . , 2019 ; Shen & Cho , 2005 ) . Latitude of objectives refers to the range of organizational outcomes executives perceive they can target , whereas latitude of actions refers to the range of strategic behaviors executives perceive they can exhibit ( Parker et al . , 2019 ) . Our framework draws upon this recent conceptualization to suggest that executive discretion depends not only on a per - ceived availability of strategic actions ( i . e . , execu - tives must perceive that they have multiple strategic choices in order to have latitude of action ) , but also on a perceived ability to implement strategic objec - tives ( i . e . , executives must perceive that they can implement strategic objectives in order to have lati - tude of objectives ) . Relying on this multidimensional and percep - tual view of discretion , we challenge the notion that executive discretion is always higher in small firms by developing a theoretical framework that explains how organizational characteristics previously assumed to increase managerial discretion in small firms may in fact shape executives’ perceptions of their latitude of actions and latitude of objectives in divergent ways . We employ an information processing perspective ( Daft & Weick , 1984 ) and theorize how resource availability and organizational structure hierarchy ( flatness ) , two key characteristics associated with firm size ( Josefy et al . , 2015 ) , influence executives’ search , evaluation , and interpretation of information related to various strategic choices and their implementa - tion . This theoretical lens is particularly appropriate for our study as small firms are often run by small teams and rely on the information processing abilities and discretion exercised by one individual ( Kiss & Barr , 2015 ; Nadkarni & Barr , 2008 ) . We suggest that greater resource availability may reduce executives’ information search efforts and focus their attention on established courses of action , thus decreasing execu - tives’ perceived availability of strategic choices . How - ever , greater resource availability may prompt execu - tives to engage in faster and local information search that is often relevant to anticipate and address strate - gic action implementation challenges , thus increasing executives’ perceived ability to implement strategies . Furthermore , we suggest that flatter organizational structures limit executives’ reliance on established routines and encourage extensive information search and combination of diverse referents to inform deci - sions , thus increasing executives’ perceived avail - ability of strategic choices . However , we argue that flatter organizational structures may lead to incom - plete information evaluation activities in relation to firm objectives , potentially decreasing executives’ perceived ability to implement strategies . Finally , we suggest that ownership concentration , with its asso - ciated implications for experienced power , acts as a contingency of these relationships and further influ - ences executives’ information processing activities and discretion perceptions . By providing a more elaborated , theoretically grounded understanding of the relationship between firm size and executive discretion , we contribute to the theoretical development of the managerial discre - tion construct , an important component of strategic leadership research ( Finkelstein et al . , 2009 ; Parker et al . , 2019 ; Samimi et al . , 2020 ; Wangrow et al . , 2015 ) , and push forward emerging research on the role and latitude of executives in strategy formation in small as well as nascent firms ( Furr et al . , 2012 ; Kiss & Barr , 2015 ; Ott et al . , 2017 ) . By exploring how two key organizational characteristics are asso - ciated with different discretion perceptions , our study underscores the importance of departing from objec - tive conceptualizations of managerial discretion and explicitly considering discretion perceptions in stud - ies aimed at explaining heterogeneity in small firm management . By using ownership concentration as a contingency of the relationships between resource availability and structural hierarchy and managerial discretion , we also contribute to research exploring governance and strategic decision - making in family firms . Furthermore , our framework can help address conflicting findings related to the implications of key firm characteristics such as resource availability for the selection and implementation of innovation and internationalization strategies in small firm settings . Finally , a perceptual lens on managerial discretion in small firms also points to a need to further refine the type , range , and magnitude of policy and oversight body interventions and support . 159 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) 2 Overview of managerial discretion Hambrick and Finkelstein ( 1987 ) introduced the concept of managerial discretion to bridge opposing views on the implications of executives for organiza - tional outcomes . Strategic choice scholars argued that managers were crucial determinants of organizational outcomes through their strategic choices ( Child , 1972 ; Hambrick & Mason , 1984 ) while organizational ecol - ogy scholars contended that organizations are con - strained by inertial forces , which leave managers with limited ability to choose strategic actions ( Hannan & Freeman , 1977 ) . With the concept of managerial dis - cretion , Hambrick and Finkelstein ( 1987 ) advanced that managers differ in their latitude of action , shift - ing the conversation to exploring the conditions under which managers matter and suggesting that discretion is a function of the task environment ( e . g . , industry structure , market growth ) , organizational characteris - tics ( e . g . , firm size or age ) , and individual ( manage - rial ) characteristics ( e . g . , aspiration level , tolerance for ambiguity , cognitive complexity ) . Empirical research on discretion builds on these ideas and mainly focuses on how organizational and environmental sources of discretion shape executives’ influence over firm - level outcomes ( Wangrow et al . , 2015 ) . Examining environmental sources of discretion , early work employed quali - tative assessments of discretion and found that concentrated industries with strict regulations and strong positions from competitors , buyers , or sup - pliers restrict executives’ latitude of actions while industries with volatile demand where product and service characteristics vary across competi - tors provide executives with more opportunities to devise actions ( Finkelstein & Hambrick , 1990 ) . More recently , scholars have taken quantitative approaches to measure discretion across indus - tries and countries further supporting these initial assertions ( Crossland & Hambrick , 2011 ; Ham - brick & Quigley , 2014 ; Keegan & Kabanoff , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2019 ) . In turn , research exploring organizational ante - cedents of executive discretion focuses on the extent to which firms are amenable to various courses of action and empower the CEO to take such actions . For example , the presence of standardized routines and formalized processes may place constraints on executives who seek to make strategic changes ( Li & Tang , 2010 ) . CEOs who occupy the position of chair - person of their board ( i . e . , CEO duality ) have reduced board monitoring and therefore more discretion than CEOs who do not occupy such role ( Lewellyn & Fainshmidt , 2017 ) . Additional studies point towards the role of a firm’s strategic orientation and resource pool as relevant organizational determinants of dis - cretion ( Boyd & Salamin , 2001 ; Garciá - Sánchez et al . , 2019 ) . While discretion has continued to be studied based on Hambrick and Finkelstein’s ( 1987 ) original con - ceptualization , Shen and Cho ( 2005 ) expanded the discretion concept to fit differences in how discretion was conceptualized in economics versus manage - ment research . They noted that research in economics referred to discretion as the freedom managers have in pursuing personal objectives rather than performance maximization , whereas research in management fol - lowed Hambrick and Finkelstein’s ( 1987 ) view of the latitude that managers have over the course of strate - gic actions . Bringing the two perspectives together , Shen and Cho ( 2005 ) separated managerial discretion into two dimensions , latitude of actions and latitude of objectives . This insightful update to the conceptu - alization of discretion is particularly relevant for our study because it suggests that the two dimensions of discretion may be affected differently by organiza - tional , managerial , and environmental conditions . Shen and Cho’s ( 2005 ) conceptualization of execu - tive discretion was mainly focused on executive suc - cession and agency conflicts . However , in a timely update , Parker et al . ( 2019 ) adapted Shen and Cho’s ( 2005 ) framework to the broader context of manage - rial perceptions of discretion for strategic decision - making . Building on the core idea that perception is reality in the context of managerial discretion ( Car - penter & Golden , 1997 ) , Parker et al . , ( 2019 : 260 ) defined latitude of actions as the “range of strategic behaviors managers believe they are able to exhibit , ” and latitude of objectives as “the range of organiza - tional outcomes managers believe they are able to target . ” Based on this conceptualization , we suggest that executives cannot have latitude of action if they only perceive limited strategic actions to pursue . With a greater range of perceived strategic actions that are potentially available to pursue , executives should have a greater perception of their latitude of action . 160 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework 1 3 Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Furthermore , we also suggest that executives can - not have perceived latitude of objectives if they do not perceive that they can accomplish or implement strategic objectives . With a greater perceived ability to implement conceived strategies , executives should have a greater perception of their latitude of objec - tives . We draw on this conceptualization in the theory we develop in the next sections of our paper . 3 Managerial discretion and small firms Consistent with frameworks highlighting the impli - cations of firm size for organizational outcomes ( for a detailed review , see Josefy et al . , 2015 ) , research on strategic leadership in small firms has primar - ily explained high levels of managerial discretion emphasizing the role of resources , organizational structure , and ownership concentration ( e . g . , Bang - høj et al . , 2010 ; Ling et al . , 2008 ; Lubatkin et al . , 2006 ) . First , research has argued that contrary to their large counterparts , which tend to accumulate slack resources usually due to high sales volumes as well as high assets and performance expectations that can be leveraged to acquire new resources ( Fuentelsaz et al . , 2002 ; Nason et al . , 2015 ) , small firms typically face resource scarcity and are therefore more cautious in how they deploy those resources ( Guo et al . , 2020 ) . The derived implication for managerial discretion in small firms is that executives may have a more prominent role ( more discretion ) in firms with lim - ited resources because such firms must rely on their executives to bring the required experiences , abilities , and skills to overcome resource deficiencies ( Alexiev et al . , 2010 ; Friedman et al . , 2016 ) . Second , prior work has argued that large firms implement increasingly complex and hierarchical structures and procedures to facilitate management of employees and promote decision - making stand - ardization and specialization ( Joseph & Gaba , 2020 ; Sutton & Dobbin , 1996 ) . In turn , small firms have reduced hierarchy and generally lack formal or estab - lished processes , potentially gaining flexibility and adaptability to environmental demands ( Dean et al . , 1998 ; Josefy et al . , 2015 ) . The derived implication for managerial discretion in small firms is that executives have a stronger influence ( more discretion ) over stra - tegic actions because leaders in these conditions do not face the bureaucratic and institutional forces that impede change and actions ( Chang & Hughes , 2012 ; Kets de Vries & Miller , 1984 ) . Additionally , execu - tives in small firms would have closer contact with all employees in the firm and may participate actively in decisions at various levels ( Cortes - Mejia et al . , 2021 ; Ling et al . , 2008 ) . Although insightful , this work is based on the premise that executives in small firms have increased leeway in taking actions because these two organizational characteristics can objectively reduce constraints on strategic goals and their implementation . However , for discretion to exist , executives must be aware of and perceive that that they can implement multiple objectives and courses of action ( Carpenter & Golden , 1997 ; Finkelstein et al . , 2009 ; Parker et al . , 2019 ) . Furthermore , differences in how executives perceive the decisional consequences of resources and structures may reflect in differences in their perceived discretion . In particular , the different information processing behaviors ( scanning , search , evaluation , and interpretation ) triggered by resource availability and organizational structure ( Daft & Weick , 1984 ; Joseph & Gaba , 2020 ) may lead to differences in latitude of actions and latitudes of objectives . Furthermore , additional firm level contingen - cies may further shape executives’ information processing behaviors and therefore the relation - ships between resource availability and organiza - tional structure hierarchy and managerial discre - tion . Although ownership concentration does not always change based on firm size , there may be strong associations between a firm’s ownership structure and managerial discretion . More specifi - cally , small firms , and family firms in particular , tend to have controlling shareholders as managers and other minority shareholders , including fam - ily members , as block holders ( Cole & Mehran , 2016 ) . Executives in these small firms tend to be owner - managers ( Banghøj et al . , 2010 ) and / or have symbolic boards of directors comprised of manag - ers with dual roles ( Cole & Mehran , 2016 ) , which may denote that strategic initiatives receive less monitoring and oversight and executives decide on courses of action and objectives more freely . We explore the more specific implications of these firm characteristics below . 161 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) 4 Linking resources and structure to perceptions of discretion : an information processing perspective To explore the implications of resource availability , organizational structure , and ownership concentration on perceptions of discretion , we adopt an information processing perspective ( Daft & Weick , 1984 ) . Infor - mation processing has been used to explain execu - tive’s influence on firm strategic actions and out - comes ( e . g . , Barr et al . , 1992 ; Elsbach et al . , 2005 ; Nadkarni & Barr , 2008 ) , including new and small firm action and performance ( e . g . , Kiss & Barr , 2015 ) . The information processing perspective builds on the key assumptions that executives are the key information processors ( including scanning , search , filtering , and interpreting information ) for their organizations , and that their information processing activities are strongly influenced by the organiza - tional and environmental contexts in which they are situated , and further influence organizational choices and outcomes ( Daft & Weick , 1984 ; Joseph & Gaba , 2020 ; Shepherd et al . , 2017 ) . This makes it a particu - larly useful lens for our study . 4 . 1 Resource availability Perceptions of limited resource availability , typically associated with small firms , may act as a trigger for executive information search , including external and internal information search behaviors , aimed at uncovering opportunities that leverage resources at hand ( Baker & Nelson , 2005 ; Bradley et al . , 2011 ; Marcel et al . , 2011 ) . Executives who perceive lim - ited resources may engage in such search behav - iors because they may be motivated to try to secure new resources or maintain their existing resources . They may focus their attention and elicit informa - tion from external industry contacts regarding previ - ously untapped resource pools and / or solicit feedback from internal members for alternative , creative ways to bootstrap their current resources . An increase in information search behaviors may enhance execu - tives’ associational processes , allow them to engage in counterfactual thinking , consider multiple strate - gic avenues , and may be positively associated with identification of additional strategic opportunities or strategic actions ( Faraj & Yan , 2009 ; Gielnik et al . , 2012 ; Nielsen & Nielsen , 2013 ; Shah et al . , 2012 ) . For example , Kimberly Foss , president and founder of Empyrion Wealth Management , explained in a short story how the global pandemic brought enor - mous difficulties for her firm to reach and serve her clients because most of them were elderly and had no experience with virtual meeting software . Kimberly explained how these challenging conditions actually stimulated her to search for new alternatives on how to interact with customers and resulted in a range of opportunities that she is planning to continue to pur - sue and reinforce in the post - pandemic world ( Foss , 2021 ) . In contrast , executives who perceive high resource availability may become more complacent with their current positions , reduce their cognitive effort by engaging in less environmental scanning and infor - mation search , focus their attention on established courses of action , or avoid in - depth evaluation of stra - tegic alternatives ( Daft & Weick , 1984 ; Marcel et al . , 2011 ) . The limited information processing activities may be more likely to result in a narrow range of per - ceived strategic actions , typically actions that previ - ously provided positive results ( Bradley et al . , 2011 ; Parker et al . , 2019 ) . For example , using data from a sample of Norwegian start - ups to study how resource availability influences profitability , Hvide and Moen ( 2010 ) suggested that greater resource availabil - ity may reduce managers’ vigilance and lower their threshold of acceptable outcomes when searching for alternative actions . Although high resource availability may limit exec - utives’ perceived range of choices , it may increase their latitude of objectives . The perceived availability of resources is likely to increase executives’ percep - tion that firms can deal with setbacks when imple - menting a variety of strategies ( George , 2005 ; Tabesh et al . , 2019 ) . This may prompt executives to engage in faster , local information search behaviors focused on securing information that can immediately be used to address implementation challenges ( Kiss & Barr , 2017 ; Kiss et al . , 2021 ) . In contrast , executives who perceive resource scarcity , and thus a decreased abil - ity to deal with unexpected setbacks , may be more cautious in their selection of strategies to implement and seek to acquire more information about alterna - tives before committing to an objective . For exam - ple , research focused on speed of innovation imple - mentation suggests that when executives search for alternative sources of information , the speed of new 162 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework 1 3 Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) product - related decisions is reduced and alternative courses of actions are also considered ( Kiss & Barr , 2017 ) . Thus , executives perceiving resource - scarce conditions may perceive less latitude of objectives . More formally : Proposition ( P1a ) . Resource availability decreases executives’ per - ceived range of available strategic choices , thus decreasing their discretion through latitude of action . Proposition ( P1b ) . Resource availability increases executives’ per - ceived ability to implement strategic objectives , thus increasing their discretion through latitude of objectives . 4 . 2 Organizational structure In organizations with flatter structures , such as those typically encountered in small firms , where hierar - chies , procedures , and routines are less likely to exist , executives are more likely to engage in extensive information search activities and rely on a combina - tion of referents and relationships to inform decision - making and identify new strategic alternatives to pur - sue ( Vera & Crossan , 2005 ) . Furthermore , executives in these organizations may be “closer” to generated ideas and participate in the evaluation and screening of those ideas ( Keum & See , 2017 ) , making it more likely that they avoid possible transmission errors or rejection at other levels ( Sah & Stiglitz , 1986 ) . This suggests that executives in firms with flatter organi - zational structures may perceive a higher number of available strategic choices . For example , Michael Feuer , investor and recognized speaker on entrepre - neurship , explained for Smart Business Network that many valuable ideas come from employees who deal with the specific areas of the business , and therefore how executives who communicate and interact with them directly can access that information and uncover opportunities ( Feuer , 2011 ) . Accordingly , managers of small businesses in Hong Kong stated in a survey that the flat structure of their organizations was con - ducive to communication , interpersonal interaction , and promoted knowledge and information sharing ( Chan & Chao , 2008 ) . In turn , routines and procedures typically asso - ciated with hierarchical organizational structures aggregate relevant information flows within the organization and provide guidelines for executives to conduct activities in consistent ways ( Csaszar & Eggers , 2013 ) . Such guidelines and procedures may facilitate information processing and assist decision - making by reducing executives’ need to search exten - sively for information before reaching decisions ( Dobrajska et al . , 2015 ) . However , increased hierar - chy can be detrimental for uncovering new alterna - tives and may lead to errors of omission due to dis - carded ideas ( Christensen & Knudsen , 2010 ; Reitzig & Maciejovsky , 2015 ) . Executives in firms with increased hierarchy may not only engage in reduced information search due to their firms’ established procedures , but also have limited access to new and potential strategic opportunities to develop ( Broe - kaert et al . , 2016 ) . Thus , considering that latitude of action reflects executives’ perceptions of their range of actions ( Parker et al . , 2019 ) , executives in condi - tions of increased hierarchy may be less likely to identify and perceive a high number of available stra - tegic choices . However , hierarchical organizational structures may increase executives’ perceptions of their ability to implement strategies . Executives are likely to per - ceive guidelines and routines as effective information processing tools for strategy implementation because these represent primary means to accomplish activi - ties , organize work , assign accountability , develop expertise , and exercise authority ( Feldman & Pent - land , 2003 ) . Routines can therefore serve to execu - tives as stable sources of information on how to dis - tribute and manage sequences of required activities ( Becker , 2004 ) and unload executives’ processing requirements for strategic objectives . Furthermore , increased hierarchy may allow problems of greater abstraction to travel upwards while lower levels may handle problems that match their specialization ( Joseph & Gaba , 2020 ) . Overall , this may increase CEO’s perceived ability to implement strategies , i . e . , latitude of objectives . In contrast , executives in organizations with flatter organizational structures may face increased uncer - tainty when evaluating strategic actions because they cannot easily anticipate how their organization can accomplish required activities and may not have the information processing support of additional organi - zational members situated at other levels ( Liu & Xi , 2021 ) . Instead , executives may perceive that required 163 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) activities and solutions to problems will have to be designed and adapted as the firm attempts to pursue new objectives . This increased uncertainty on imple - mentation processes is likely to reduce executives’ perceptions of their latitude of objectives . For exam - ple , a story about Ben Chestnut , cofounder and CEO of MailChimp , highlights the importance of hierar - chy to bring order and structure for his small busi - ness , and how this hierarchy impeded disorganization and set the stage to plan and successfully implement future growth opportunities ( Feifer , 2018 ) . We there - fore suggest that : Proposition ( P2a ) . Flatter organizational structures increase execu - tives’ perceived range of available strategic choices , thus increasing their discretion through latitude of action . Proposition ( P2b ) . Flatter organizational structures decrease execu - tives’ perceived ability to implement strategic objectives , thus decreasing their discretion through latitude of objectives . 4 . 3 The moderating role of ownership concentration Ownership concentration , and is associated implica - tions for the experience of power , can play an impor - tant role in how executives process information ( Fin - kelstein et al . , 2009 ) and may further influence the relationships between perceived resource availability and organizational structure and discretion . Research suggests that reduced oversight and monitoring brought by executives’ ownership concentration may allow CEOs more authority or power to define and pursue their agendas with little restrictions ( Elsayed , 2007 ; Finkelstein & D’Aveni , 1994 ) . In turn , execu - tives who have a cognitive experience of power 1 brought by reduced monitoring and increased owner - ship would be in a psychological state associated with perceived control , which can cause various cognitive and behavioral changes ( Galinsky et al . , 2003 , 2006 ) . Specifically , we suggest that ownership concentration shapes how executives evaluate strategic choices and how they process the challenges associated with strat - egy implementation . First , experienced power may increase automatic information processing , meaning that individuals may engage in rapid and effortless evaluation of informa - tion as well as rely on heuristics to make judgements ( Keltner et al . , 2003 ) . This is typically associated with less accurate judgements about other individuals or situations as well as a tendency to process the envi - ronment in automatic and simplistic ways ( Keltner et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , experiencing power may prompt executives to engage in more rapid information pro - cessing about the firm’s internal environment , for example , its resource pool , when evaluating avail - able strategic options . Experienced power may also prompt executives to process selective information that focuses on goals they deem relevant for their set agendas and disregard others ( Haynes & Hillman , 2010 ) . Thus , in conditions where executives have increased levels of ownership ( i . e . , a high owner - ship concentration ) , they may not engage in a careful and thorough evaluation of their available courses of action . This implies that the potentially limited stra - tegic options associated with greater resource avail - ability would not be evaluated thoroughly in condi - tions of high ownership concentration , potentially resulting in a narrower range of perceived strategic choices . Similarly , the higher number of strategic choices associated with flatter organizational struc - tures would receive less consideration and evaluation in conditions of high ownership concentration , and may weaken the executives’ perceived range of per - ceived strategic choices . We suggest that : Proposition ( P3a ) . Ownership concentration strengthens the nega - tive relationship between resource availability and executives’ perceived range of available strategic choices . Proposition ( P3b ) . Ownership concentration weakens the positive relationship between flatter organizational struc - tures and executives’ perceived range of available strategic choices . Second , the experience of power associated with ownership concentration may facilitate sustained attention , focus , and fast information processing on 1 Experienced or perceived power refers to an individual’s belief that they can influence others ( Galinsky et al . , 2006 ) . Thus , it is different from perceiving available and pursuable organizational strategies . 164 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework 1 3 Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) the pursuit of desired objectives or strategies , which facilitates strategic action implementation . For exam - ple , executives with high ownership concentration , who experience power , may focus on information selectively and suppress peripheral information that is not relevant for the goal or strategy they intend to pursue , despite not necessarily having defined or pro - cessed how to accomplish their intended goal ( Gui - note , 2017 ) . Accordingly , executives experiencing power may be overly focused on and process infor - mation that pertains to the relevance of their choices , while also dismissing information that signals poten - tial losses or threats associated with those choices ( Fast et al . , 2012 ; Inesi , 2010 ) . These executives may also process information in a more superordinate and inclusive manner ( Miyamoto & Ji , 2011 ) , potentially ignoring challenges and risks associated with the pur - suit of certain strategies but moving faster towards a resolution and therefore implementation . Thus , executives’ increased perceived ability to implement strategies brought by resource availability may be stronger in conditions of high ownership concentra - tion , whereas executives’ reduced perceived ability to implement strategies brought by flatter organizational structures may be weaker in conditions of high own - ership concentration . We suggest that : Proposition ( P4a ) . Ownership concentration strengthens the posi - tive relationship between resource availability and executives’ perceived ability to implement strategic objectives . Proposition ( P4b ) . Ownership concentration weakens the negative relationship between flatter organizational struc - tures and executives’ perceived ability to imple - ment strategic objectives . 5 Discussion A significant body of research contends that execu - tives of small firms enjoy higher levels of discretion due to resource , structural , and ownership character - istics of their firms . However , we suggest that small business executives often face challenges uncover - ing suitable firm strategies and implementing them , which may be partly driven by differences in how executives interpret the organizational contexts in which they are situated , and that discretion in small businesses may not always be high . We challenge assumptions of high managerial discretion in small firms by employing a subjective , perceptual lens of managerial discretion that distinguishes between latitude of action ( strategic choice availability ) and latitude of objectives ( strategy implementation abil - ity ) ( Finkelstein et al . , 2009 ; Parker et al . , 2019 ) and develop a framework grounded in an information processing perspective that links key organizational characteristics to executives’ perceived discretion . Our conceptual framework highlights that while some firm characteristics associated with small firms may increase executives’ perceived discretion , other char - acteristics may reduce such perceptions . We elaborate on the implications of our framework for research on entrepreneurship , small business management , and family firms below . 5 . 1 Theoretical implications First , our study provides important insights for entre - preneurship research , particularly for established the - ories on entrepreneurial orientation and opportunity recognition that often build on the unilateral assump - tion of high discretion in small firms . More specifi - cally , entrepreneurial orientation research posits that small firms have higher entrepreneurial orientation and may even attain higher levels of performance and growth due to an increased willingness to inno - vate , assume risks with uncertain offerings , and be proactive ( Lechner & Gudmundsson , 2014 ; Wiklund & Shepherd , 2005 ) . Furthermore , most theories of opportunity recognition emphasize the process by which entrepreneurs identify opportunities by rec - ognizing gaps in the marketplace and providing new solutions ( e . g . , Alvarez et al . , 2013 ; Shane & Venka - taraman , 2000 ) . Importantly , these extensive streams of work rest on the key premise that early in their existence , and while their firms are still small , entre - preneurs have high discretion to pursue such oppor - tunities . Our framework suggests that when small business executives perceive poor latitude of action as driven by perceptions of high resource availabil - ity , their firms may be unlikely to develop or maintain an entrepreneurial orientation and may in fact follow more conservative courses of actions . This relation - ship may be even more pronounced if the executive has a high ownership concentration because they 165 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) would tend to engage in even more rapid and effort - less evaluation of information that limits the range of choices they may perceive . Analogously , if flatter organizational structures limit executives’ perceived ability to implement strategies because of limited information processing support and greater expecta - tions of implementation challenges , previously identi - fied opportunities are unlikely to move forward into the market and limit small firms’ innovative poten - tial . However , increased ownership concentration may weaken this effect by prompting CEOs to ignore information that presents challenges and process - ing stimuli that is relevant for their intended strategy . In summary , our framework suggests that discretion perceptions and theoretical perspectives anchored in a cognitive , information processing lens should be considered more explicitly in future entrepreneurship studies theorizing beyond the opportunity identifica - tion stage ( c . f . , Gregoire et al . , 2011 ) at the oppor - tunity evaluation and exploitation levels because they may play a key role in how opportunities are exploited in small firms and the type of strategies that small firms pursue . Second , and related to our first point , our frame - work may also help further address conflicting find - ings and expand existing knowledge related to the evaluation and implementation of key strategies in small firms , such as innovation and internationali - zation , and their associated outcomes . For example , prior work has suggested that high resource availabil - ity allows small firms to engage in innovation initia - tives by facilitating experimentation and investments in uncertain initiatives ( Tognazzo et al . , 2016 ) . How - ever , available resources might also limit innovation in small firms by increasing managerial risk aver - sion and prompting managers to view the capitali - zation of known competencies more favorable than the exploration of new opportunities ( Nason et al . , 2015 ) . This has led scholars to conclude that resource availability has a complex relationship with inno - vation in small firms that needs to be studied with greater detail ( Parida & Örtqvist , 2015 ; Kiss et al . , 2018 ) . By explicitly considering managerial percep - tions of discretion and employing our framework , this relationship may gain precision . For example , innovation could be hampered in firms with avail - able resources because executives’ reduced latitude of action might lead to poor idea generation and selection processes that fail to uncover and develop creative opportunities . In turn , innovation could be stimulated in firms with available resources because executives’ increased latitude of objectives might lead to the promotion of championing and implementation processes that address the challenges of pushing inno - vation initiatives forward . Research on firm internationalization often high - lights the growth and performance benefits of cross - ing national boundaries , particularly for small firms at an early age ( Williams & Crook , 2021 ) . How - ever , small firms might often not pursue this strategy because of executives’ perceptions of deficiencies in their firms’ resources ( Xie & Suh , 2014 ) . Further - more , small firms may not reap internationalization benefits due to the rising complexities , including structural and resource related considerations , that executives must process and manage after the initial internationalization stage ( Reuber & Fischer , 2002 ) . Explicitly incorporating discretion perceptions in this research may further advance knowledge on the obstacles and challenges of small firm internationali - zation . For example , executives of small firms con - templating internationalization may face their great - est obstacle with their perceived ability to implement this decision successfully , potentially because limited resources place important information processing demands that the executive may not feel equipped to handle . Third , our study also has implications for research on family businesses . Prior work has highlighted that family ownership decreases conflicts of inter - est between owners and non - family managers and increases monitoring of managerial decisions ( Mar - tinez Ferrero et al . , 2016 ) . Although increased moni - toring can be important for agency conflicts and managerial opportunistic behavior , it may have addi - tional implications for strategy implementation . More specifically , our work suggests that a non - family manager with low levels of ownership may engage in more peripheral information processing that might be irrelevant for a strategic initiative , devoting more cognitive resources to potential future challenges and potentially perceiving a reduced ability to implement strategies . In turn , managers with controlling interests may move faster towards implementation of strategic actions regardless of their resource or structural con - tingencies . It is therefore important for future research on formulation and implementation of strategies in family firms to consider how managers with varying 166 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework 1 3 Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) levels of ownership perceive organizational character - istics and make and implement strategic decisions , as well as the managerial discretion trade - offs associated with using stock options as a form of compensation . On a more general level , our study has implica - tions for research on the genesis of strategy in new firms , which tend to start small and rely on founder - CEOs for devising and implementing strategies . This process is characterized by sequences of decisions that managers undertake with considerable differ - ences ( Delmar & Shane , 2004 ; Furr et al . , 2012 ; Kiss & Barr , 2015 ; Ott et al . , 2017 ) and leads to varying survival outcomes ( Wennberg et al . , 2016 ) . Although recent research has argued for the importance of a holistic view that incorporates managers’ interpreta - tions of their firm environments when examining new firm strategy formation ( e . g . , Kiss & Barr , 2015 ; Ott et al . , 2017 ) , most research continues to take a deter - ministic perspective . We argue for the need to explic - itly discern among the various firm characteristics , in particular resource and structural characteristics , that shape managerial discretion perceptions and incorpo - rate them in research aimed at explaining variation in new firm strategy . As we highlight in our framework , organizational conditions shape discretion percep - tions in consequential ways and firm characteristics such as resource availability and structural flatness that are frequently assumed to have unequivocal posi - tive effects on managerial discretion ( Alexiev et al . , 2010 ; Lubatkin et al . , 2006 ) , and have divergent effects on perceived availability of choices and abil - ity to implement firm strategic actions . Taking this explicit approach and adopting a perceptual lens to managerial discretion may bring us closer to under - standing the genesis and evolution of strategy in new , small firms . 5 . 2 Future research To gain a more complete perspective on how execu - tives’ discretion perceptions are formed , it is impor - tant for scholars to study and integrate the role of additional predictors of latitude of actions and objec - tives in future discretion frameworks . Early work on discretion highlights that objective discretion is shaped by individual , organizational , and environmen - tal characteristics ( Hambrick & Finkelstein , 1987 ) . Future research could therefore devote more investiga - tion to how managers process information depending on those attributes at different levels of analysis and form perceptions of latitude of action and objectives . For example , although recent work mentions relation - ships between CEO extraversion , CEO narcissism , and discretion ( Gupta et al . , 2019 ) , scholars have not explored links between managerial personality attrib - utes and the development of discretion perceptions in small firms ( c . f . , Wangrow et al . , 2015 ) . Additional characteristics about the executive position may also influence discretion perceptions in small firms . For example , executives’ compen - sation structure and family and wealth aspirations , particularly for executives of small firms who have high levels of firm ownership , or operating in fam - ily businesses , may have interesting implications for how executive search for available courses of action and the type of stimuli and information they process in order to accomplish their goals . Furthermore , inter - actions between executive compensation and manage - rial values ( e . g . , political , religious , family oriented ) and their implications for managerial discretion in different cultural settings have not received sufficient scholarly attention . We envision additional lines of research in the realm of family businesses and managerial discre - tion . For example , existing work suggests that mana - gerial discretion may be important for organizational longevity when the family business is undergoing a family succession process ( Mitchell et al . , 2009 ) . Our work suggests that even if incumbents transfer control to the successor to formulate and enact future plans , it may be equally important for the successor to per - ceive that they have available choices and ability to implement objectives . We encourage in - depth quali - tative studies that explore how discretion perceptions are shaped during succession processes , particularly tensions associated with transfers that involve same family members . From a methodological perspective , we further emphasize the importance of capturing discretion perceptions explicitly ( cf . , Parker et al . , 2019 ) , par - ticularly in research focused on small businesses . This represents an empirical challenge that has been recog - nized since the introduction of the concept by Ham - brick and Finkelstein ( 1987 ) ( Wangrow et al . , 2015 ) . However , separating the managerial discretion con - struct into its key components and measuring them by employing survey instruments , content analyses techniques , and interviews would allow researchers to 167 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) tap into managers’ perceived latitude of actions and objectives . 5 . 3 Practical implications An awareness of a perceptual , subjective lens on man - agerial discretion may better inform the range , timing , and magnitude of interventions undertaken by policy makers . Small businesses are heterogeneous ( Small Business Administration , 2016 ) and include micro - firms , firms with more than 100 employees , family businesses with specific ownership structures , high - technology small firms , born - global firms , or small firms operating in a business - to - business context . Despite this heterogeneity , governmental programs typically target small firms in a unilateral mode focus - ing primarily on the provision of financial resources . However , some small businesses such as high - tech - nology firms may enjoy higher resource availability than micro - firms . Our framework suggests that small business managers with available resources perceive greater ability to implement strategies but may per - ceive a reduced number of available strategic choices , which may prompt them to select strategies similar to those of their competitors and ultimately hurt the industry’s overall performance . Furthermore , while board of directors may push for greater separation of ownership and control in family - owned firms to encourage the pursuit of exploratory innovation activ - ities ( Li et al . , 2020 ; Zahra et al . , 2000 ) , this may have important implications for how executives perceive their discretion based on resources or structural char - acteristics . Finding exploratory innovation oppor - tunities may require the search and consideration of a wide range of strategic choices , which executives might be more likely to uncover under conditions of limited resources and may be further enhanced by reduced ownership . Taken together , these insights suggest the need for a multi - faceted approach to inter - ventions in small firms that considers both managers’ discretion perceptions and intended firm and industry level outcomes such as growth , innovation , interna - tionalization , and social responsibility . 6 Conclusion Existing research has suggested that certain organi - zational characteristics associated with small firms are associated with increased managerial discretion . However , this assumption comes from an objective and unilateral conceptualization of managerial discre - tion . By adopting an information processing perspec - tive , focusing on discretion perceptions , and building on a dual conceptualization of managerial discretion as latitude of actions and latitude of objectives , we advance a more nuanced perspective on the relation - ship between firm size and managerial discretion . We hope to encourage additional theoretical and empiri - cal investigations on this topic . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Professors Pol Herrmann and Haemin Dennis Park for their valuable feedback on this study . References Alexiev , A . S . , Jansen , J . J . , Van den Bosch , F . A . , & Volberda , H . W . ( 2010 ) . Top management team advice seeking and exploratory innovation : The moderating role of TMT heterogeneity . Journal of Management Studies , 47 ( 7 ) , 1343 – 1364 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 6486 . 2010 . 00919 . x Alvarez , S . A . , Barney , J . B . , & Anderson , P . ( 2013 ) . Form - ing and exploiting opportunities : The implications of discovery and creation processes for entrepreneurial and organizational research . Organization Science , 24 ( 1 ) , 301 – 317 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1110 . 0727 Arzubiaga , U . , Kotlar , J . , De Massis , A . , Maseda , A . , & Itur - ralde , T . ( 2018 ) . Entrepreneurial orientation and innova - tion in family SMEs : Unveiling the ( actual ) impact of the board of directors . Journal of Business Venturing , 33 ( 4 ) , 455 – 469 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusv ent . 2018 . 03 . 002 Baker , T . , & Nelson , R . E . ( 2005 ) . Creating something from nothing : Resource construction through entrepreneurial bricolage . Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 ( 3 ) , 329 – 366 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2189 / asqu . 2005 . 50 . 3 . 329 Banghøj , J . , Gabrielsen , G . , Petersen , C . , & Plenborg , T . ( 2010 ) . Determinants of executive compensation in pri - vately held firms . Accounting & Finance , 50 ( 3 ) , 481 – 510 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 629X . 2009 . 00335 . x Barr , P . S . , Stimpert , J . L . , & Huff , A . S . ( 1992 ) . Cognitive change , strategic action , and organizational renewal . Strategic Management Journal , 13 ( S1 ) , 15 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 42501 31004 Becker , M . C . ( 2004 ) . Organizational routines : A review of the literature . Industrial and Corporate Change , 13 ( 4 ) , 643 – 678 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / icc / dth026 Beets , L . M . ( 2011 ) . Moving on . Smart Business Columbus , 19 ( 11 ) , 32 . Boyd , B . K . , & Salamin , A . ( 2001 ) . Strategic reward systems : A contingency model of pay system design . Strategic Management Journal , 22 ( 8 ) , 777 – 792 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 170 168 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework 1 3 Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Bradley , S . W . , Wiklund , J . , & Shepherd , D . A . ( 2011 ) . Swing - ing a double - edged sword : The effect of slack on entre - preneurial management and growth . Journal of Business Venturing , 26 ( 5 ) , 537 – 554 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusv ent . 2010 . 03 . 002 Broekaert , W . , Andries , P . , & Debackere , K . ( 2016 ) . Innova - tion processes in family firms : The relevance of organi - zational flexibility . Small Business Economics , 47 ( 3 ) , 771 – 785 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 016 - 9760 - 7 Carpenter , M . A . , & Golden , B . R . ( 1997 ) . Perceived mana - gerial discretion : A study of cause and effect . Strategic Management Journal , 18 ( 3 ) , 187 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0266 ( 199703 ) 18 : 3 % 3C187 : : AID - SMJ861 % 3E3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - U Chan , I . , & Chao , C . K . ( 2008 ) . Knowledge management in small and medium - sized enterprises . Communications of the ACM , 51 ( 4 ) , 83 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 13303 11 . 13303 28 Chang , Y . Y . , & Hughes , M . ( 2012 ) . Drivers of innovation ambidexterity in small - to medium - sized firms . European Management Journal , 30 ( 1 ) , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . emj . 2011 . 08 . 003 Child , J . ( 1972 ) . Organizational structure , environment , and performance : The role of strategic choice . S ociology , 6 ( 1 ) , 1 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 00380 38572 00600 101 Christensen , M . , & Knudsen , T . ( 2010 ) . Design of decision - making organizations . Management Science , 56 ( 1 ) , 71 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1090 . 1096 Chu , J . , Rockwood , K . , Rhodes , M . , & Schomer , S . ( 2016 ) . The 100 brilliant companies . ( cover story ) . Entrepreneur , 44 ( 6 ) , 22 – 44 . Cole , R . A . , & Mehran , H . ( 2016 ) . What do we know about executive compensation at small privately held firms ? Small Business Economics , 46 ( 2 ) , 215 – 237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 015 - 9689 - 2 Cortes - Mejia , S . , Cortes , A . F . , & Herrmann , P . ( 2021 ) . Shar - ing strategic decisions : CEO humility , TMT decentrali - zation , and ethical culture . Journal of Business Ethics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 021 - 04766 - 8 Covin , J . G . , & Lumpkin , G . T . ( 2011 ) . Entrepreneurial ori - entation theory and research : Reflections on a needed construct . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35 ( 5 ) , 855 – 872 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2011 . 00482 . x Crossland , C . , & Hambrick , D . C . ( 2011 ) . Differences in mana - gerial discretion across countries : How nation - level insti - tutions affect the degree to which CEOs matter . Strategic Management Journal , 32 ( 8 ) , 797 – 819 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 913 Csaszar , F . A . , & Eggers , J . P . ( 2013 ) . Organizational decision making : An information aggregation view . Management Science , 59 ( 10 ) , 2257 – 2277 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1120 . 1698 Daft , R . L . , & Weick , K . E . ( 1984 ) . Toward a model of organizations as interpretation systems . Academy of Management Review , 9 ( 2 ) , 284 – 295 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 1984 . 42776 57 de Bakker , F . G . , & den Hond , F . ( 2008 ) . Introducing the pol - itics of stakeholder influence : A review essay . Business & Society , 47 ( 1 ) , 8 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 00076 50307 306637 Dean , T . J . , Brown , R . L . , & Bamford , C . E . ( 1998 ) . Differ - ences in large and small firm responses to environmen - tal context : Strategic implications from a comparative analysis of business formations . Strategic Management Journal , 19 ( 8 ) , 709 – 728 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0266 ( 199808 ) 19 : 8 % 3C709 : : AID - SMJ966 % 3E3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - 9 Delmar , F . , & Shane , S . ( 2004 ) . Legitimating first : Organizing activities and the survival of new ventures . Journal of Business Venturing , 19 ( 3 ) , 385 – 410 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0883 - 9026 ( 03 ) 00037 - 5 Dobrajska , M . , Billinger , S . , & Karim , S . ( 2015 ) . Delegation within hierarchies : How information processing and knowledge characteristics influence the allocation of for - mal and real decision authority . Organization Science , 26 ( 3 ) , 687 – 704 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2014 . 0954 Elsayed , K . ( 2007 ) . Does CEO duality really affect corporate performance ? Corporate Governance : An International Review , 15 ( 6 ) , 1203 – 1214 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8683 . 2007 . 00641 . x Elsbach , K . D . , Barr , P . S . , & Hargadon , A . B . ( 2005 ) . Identify - ing situated cognition in organizations . Organization Sci - ence , 16 ( 4 ) , 422 – 433 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1050 . 0138 Faraj , S . , & Yan , A . ( 2009 ) . Boundary work in knowledge teams . Journal of Applied Psychology , 94 ( 3 ) , 604 – 617 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0014 367 Fast , N . J . , Sivanathan , N . , Mayer , N . D . , & Galinsky , A . D . ( 2012 ) . Power and overconfident decision - making . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro - cesses , 117 ( 2 ) , 249 – 260 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2011 . 11 . 009 Feifer , J . ( 2018 ) . How “structure” saved MailChimp . Entrepre - neur , 46 ( 6 ) , 31 . Feldman , M . S . , & Pentland , B . T . ( 2003 ) . Reconceptualiz - ing organizational routines as a source of flexibility and change . Administrative Science Quarterly , 48 ( 1 ) , 94 – 118 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 35566 20 Feuer , M . ( 2011 ) . An exaggerated sense of your own impor - tance can stifle new ideas . Smart Business Chicago , 8 ( 6 ) , 30 . Available at https : / / www . sbnon line . com / artic le / an - exagg erated - sense - of - your - own - impor tance - can - stifle - new - ideas / Finkelstein , S . , & D’Aveni , R . A . ( 1994 ) . CEO duality as a double - edged sword : How boards of directors balance entrenchment avoidance and unity of command . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 37 ( 5 ) , 1079 – 1108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / 256667 Finkelstein , S . , & Hambrick , D . C . ( 1990 ) . Top - management - team tenure and organizational outcomes : The moderat - ing role of managerial discretion . Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 35 ( 3 ) , 484 – 503 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 23933 14 Finkelstein , S . , Hambrick , D . C . , & Cannella , A . A . ( 2009 ) . Strategic leadership : Theory and research on executives , top management teams , and boards . Oxford University Press . Forbes . ( 2019 ) . Eight common reasons small businesses fail . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / ellev ate / 2019 / 10 / 24 / 169 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) eight - common - reaso ns - small - busin esses - fail / ? sh = 30064 b94fb b5 Foss , K . ( 2021 ) . Going “full curbside” during coronavirus to attract premium clients . Financial - Planning . Com . Retrieved from https : / / www . finan cial - plann ing . com / opini on / finan cial - advis ors - attra ct - new - clien ts - during - coron avirus Freel , M . S . ( 2000 ) . Strategy and structure in innovative manu - facturing SMEs : The case of an English region . Small Business Economics , 15 ( 1 ) , 27 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 10120 87912 632 Friedman , Y . , Carmeli , A . , & Tishler , A . ( 2016 ) . How CEOs and TMTs build adaptive capacity in small entrepre - neurial firms . Journal of Management Studies , 53 ( 6 ) , 996 – 1018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / joms . 12184 Fuentelsaz , L . , Gomez , J . , & Polo , Y . ( 2002 ) . Followers’ entry timing : Evidence from the Spanish banking sector after deregulation . Strategic Management Journal , 23 ( 3 ) , 245 – 264 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 222 Furr , N . R . , Cavarretta , F . , & Garg , S . ( 2012 ) . Who changes course ? The role of domain knowledge and novel fram - ing in making technology changes . Strategic Entrepre - neurship Journal , 6 ( 3 ) , 236 – 256 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sej . 1137 Galinsky , A . D . , Gruenfeld , D . H . , & Magee , J . C . ( 2003 ) . From power to action . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 ( 3 ) , 453 – 466 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 85 . 3 . 453 Galinsky , A . D . , Magee , J . C . , Inesi , M . E . , & Gruenfeld , D . H . ( 2006 ) . Power and perspectives not taken . Psychological Science , 17 ( 12 ) , 1068 – 1074 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2006 . 01824 . x García - Sánchez , I . M . , Martínez - Ferrero , J . , & Garcia - Benau , M . A . ( 2019 ) . Integrated reporting : The mediating role of the board of directors and investor protection on mana - gerial discretion in munificent environments . Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management , 26 ( 1 ) , 29 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / csr . 1655 George , G . ( 2005 ) . Slack resources and the performance of privately held firms . Academy of Management Journal , 48 ( 4 ) , 661 – 676 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2005 . 17843 944 Gielnik , M . M . , Frese , M . , Graf , J . M . , & Kampschulte , A . ( 2012 ) . Creativity in the opportunity identification pro - cess and the moderating effect of diversity of informa - tion . Journal of Business Venturing , 27 ( 5 ) , 559 – 576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusv ent . 2011 . 10 . 003 Grégoire , D . A . , Corbett , A . C . , & McMullen , J . S . ( 2011 ) . The cognitive perspective in entrepreneurship : An agenda for future research . Journal of Management Studies , 48 ( 6 ) , 1443 – 1477 . Guinote , A . ( 2017 ) . How power affects people : Activat - ing , wanting , and goal seeking . Annual Review of Psy - chology , 68 , 353 – 381 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annur ev - psych - 010416 - 044153 Guo , F . , Zou , B . , Zhang , X . , Bo , Q . , & Li , K . ( 2020 ) . Finan - cial slack and firm performance of SMMEs in China : Moderating effects of government subsidies and mar - ket - supporting institutions . International Journal of Production Economics , 223 , 107530 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijpe . 2019 . 107530 Gupta , A . , Nadkarni , S . , & Mariam , M . ( 2019 ) . Dispositional sources of managerial discretion : CEO ideology , CEO personality , and firm strategies . Administrative Science Quarterly , 64 ( 4 ) , 855 – 893 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 00018 39218 793128 Hambrick , D . C . , & Finkelstein , S . 1987 . Managerial discre - tion : A bridge between polar views on organizations . In L . L . Cummings & B . M . Staw ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior , vol . 9 : 369 – 406 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Hambrick , D . C . , & Mason , P . A . ( 1984 ) . Upper echelons : The organization as a reflection of its top manag - ers . Academy of Management Review , 9 ( 2 ) , 193 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 1984 . 42776 28 Hambrick , D . C . , & Quigley , T . J . ( 2014 ) . Toward more accurate contextualization of the CEO effect on firm performance . Strategic Management Journal , 35 ( 4 ) , 473 – 491 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 2108 Hannan , M . T . , & Freeman , J . ( 1977 ) . The population ecol - ogy of organizations . American Journal of Sociology , 82 ( 5 ) , 929 – 964 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 226424 Haynes , K . T . , & Hillman , A . ( 2010 ) . The effect of board capital and CEO power on strategic change . Strategic Management Journal , 31 ( 11 ) , 1145 – 1163 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 859 Hvide , H . K . , & Møen , J . ( 2010 ) . Lean and hungry or fat and content ? Entrepreneurs’ wealth and start - up per - formance . Management Science , 56 ( 8 ) , 1242 – 1258 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1100 . 1177 Inesi , M . E . ( 2010 ) . Power and loss aversion . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 112 ( 1 ) , 58 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2010 . 01 . 001 Josefy , M . , Kuban , S . , Ireland , R . D . , & Hitt , M . A . ( 2015 ) . All things great and small : Organizational size , bound - aries of the firm , and a changing environment . Acad - emy of Management Annals , 9 ( 1 ) , 715 – 802 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / 19416 520 . 2015 . 10270 86 Joseph , J . , & Gaba , V . ( 2020 ) . Organizational structure , information processing , and decision - making : A retro - spective and road map for research . Academy of Man - agement Annals , 14 ( 1 ) , 267 – 302 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / annals . 2017 . 0103 Keegan , J . , & Kabanoff , B . ( 2008 ) . Indirect industry - and subindustry - level managerial discretion measurement . Organizational Research Methods , 11 ( 4 ) , 682 – 694 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 10944 28107 308897 Keltner , D . , Gruenfeld , D . H . , & Anderson , C . ( 2003 ) . Power , approach , and inhibition . Psychological Review , 110 ( 2 ) , 265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 110 . 2 . 265 Kets De Vries , M . F . R . , & Miller , D . ( 1984 ) . The neurotic organization : Diagnosing and changing counterproduc - tive styles of management . Jossey - Bass . Keum , D . D . , & See , K . E . ( 2017 ) . The influence of hierarchy on idea generation and selection in the innovation pro - cess . Organization Science , 28 ( 4 ) , 653 – 669 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2017 . 1142 Kiss , A . N . , & Barr , P . S . ( 2015 ) . New venture strategic adapta - tion : The interplay of belief structures and industry con - text . Strategic Management Journal , 36 ( 8 ) , 1245 – 1263 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 2285 170 Is managerial discretion high in small firms ? A theoretical framework 1 3 Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Kiss , A . N . , & Barr , P . S . ( 2017 ) . New product development strategy implementation duration and new venture per - formance : A contingency - based perspective . Journal of Management , 43 ( 4 ) , 1185 – 1210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01492 06314 549251 Kiss , A . N . , Cortes , A . F . , & Herrmann , P . ( 2021 ) . CEO proac - tiveness , innovation , and firm performance . The Leader - ship Quarterly , 101545 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . leaqua . 2021 . 101545 Kiss , A . N . , Fernhaber , S . , & McDougall – Covin , P . P . ( 2018 ) . Slack , innovation , and export intensity : Implications for small – and medium – sized enterprises . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 42 ( 5 ) , 671 – 697 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 10422 58718 795318 Lauto , G . , Pittino , D . , & Visintin , F . ( 2020 ) . Satisfaction of entrepreneurs : A comparison between founders and fam - ily business successors . Journal of Small Business Man - agement , 58 ( 3 ) , 474 – 510 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00472 778 . 2019 . 16609 37 Lechner , C . , & Gudmundsson , S . V . ( 2014 ) . Entrepreneurial orientation , firm strategy and small firm performance . International Small Business Journal , 32 ( 1 ) , 36 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 02662 42612 455034 Lewellyn , K . B . , & Fainshmidt , S . ( 2017 ) . Effectiveness of CEO power bundles and discretion context : Unpacking the ‘fuzziness’ of the CEO duality puzzle . Organization Studies , 38 ( 11 ) , 1603 – 1624 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01708 40616 685364 Li , J . , & Tang , Y . I . ( 2010 ) . CEO hubris and firm risk taking in China : The moderating role of managerial discretion . Academy of Management Journal , 53 ( 1 ) , 45 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2010 . 48036 912 Li , H . , Terjesen , S . , & Umans , T . ( 2020 ) . Corporate govern - ance in entrepreneurial firms : A systematic review and research agenda . Small Business Economics , 54 ( 1 ) , 43 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 018 - 0118 - 1 Ling , Y . A . N . , Simsek , Z . , Lubatkin , M . H . , & Veiga , J . F . ( 2008 ) . Transformational leadership’s role in promoting corporate entrepreneurship : Examining the CEO - TMT interface . Academy of Management Journal , 51 ( 3 ) , 557 – 576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2008 . 32626 023 Liu , Y . , & Xi , M . ( 2021 ) . Linking CEO entrepreneurial orien - tation to firm performance : The perspective of middle managers’ cognition . Entrepreneurship Theory and Prac - tice . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 10422 58721 10335 71 Lubatkin , M . H . , Simsek , Z . , Ling , Y . , & Veiga , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Ambidexterity and performance in small - to medium - sized firms : The pivotal role of top management team behavioral integration . Journal of Management , 32 ( 5 ) , 646 – 672 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01492 06306 290712 Marcel , J . J . , Barr , P . S . , & Duhaime , I . M . ( 2011 ) . The influ - ence of executive cognition on competitive dynamics . Strategic Management Journal , 32 ( 2 ) , 115 – 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 870 Martinez Ferrero , J . , Rodríguez - Ariza , L . and Bermejo - Sánchez , M . ( 2016 ) . Is family ownership of a firm associated with the control of managerial discretion and corporate decisions ? Journal of Family Business Management , 6 ( 1 ) , 23 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JFBM - 06 - 2015 - 0022 Mitchell , J . R . , Hart , T . A . , Valcea , S . , & Townsend , D . M . ( 2009 ) . Becoming the boss : Discretion and postsucces - sion success in family firms . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 33 ( 6 ) , 1201 – 1218 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2009 . 00341 . x Miyamoto , Y . , & Ji , L . J . ( 2011 ) . Power fosters context - inde - pendent , analytic cognition . Personality and Social Psy - chology Bulletin , 37 ( 11 ) , 1449 – 1458 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01461 67211 411485 Nadkarni , S . , & Barr , P . S . ( 2008 ) . Environmental context , managerial cognition , and strategic action : An integrated view . Strategic Management Journal , 29 ( 13 ) , 1395 – 1427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 717 Nason , R . S . , McKelvie , A . , & Lumpkin , G . T . ( 2015 ) . The role of organizational size in the heterogeneous nature of corporate entrepreneurship . Small Business Eco - nomics , 45 ( 2 ) , 279 – 304 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11187 - 015 - 9632 - 6 Nielsen , B . B . , & Nielsen , S . ( 2013 ) . Top management team nationality diversity and firm performance : A multilevel study . Strategic Management Journal , 34 ( 3 ) , 373 – 382 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 2021 Business , N . Z . ( 2011 ) . A bright future , but where are the plans ? NZ Business , 25 ( 9 ) , 8 . Ott , T . E . , Eisenhardt , K . M . , & Bingham , C . B . ( 2017 ) . Strat - egy formation in entrepreneurial settings : Past insights and future directions . Strategic Entrepreneurship Jour - nal , 11 ( 3 ) , 306 – 325 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sej . 1257 Parida , V . , & Örtqvist , D . ( 2015 ) . Interactive effects of network capability , ICT capability , and financial slack on technol - ogy - based small firm innovation performance . Journal of Small Business Management , 53 ( S1 ) , 278 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jsbm . 12191 Parker , O . , Krause , R . , & Devers , C . E . ( 2019 ) . How firm reputation shapes managerial discretion . Academy of Management Review , 44 ( 2 ) , 254 – 278 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2016 . 0542 Reitzig , M . , & Maciejovsky , B . ( 2015 ) . Corporate hierarchy and vertical information flow inside the firm—A behav - ioral view . Strategic Management Journal , 36 ( 13 ) , 1979 – 1999 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 2334 Reuber , A . R . , & Fischer , E . ( 2002 ) . Foreign sales and small firm growth : The moderating role of the management team . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 27 ( 1 ) , 29 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1540 - 8520 . 271002 Robson , P . J . , & Bennett , R . J . ( 2000 ) . SME growth : The rela - tionship with business advice and external collaboration . Small Business Economics , 15 ( 3 ) , 193 – 208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 10081 29012 953 Sah , R . K . , & Stiglitz , J . E . ( 1986 ) . The architecture of eco - nomic systems : Hierarchies and polyarchies . The Ameri - can Economic Review , 76 ( 4 ) , 716 – 727 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3386 / w1334 Samimi , M . , Cortes , A . F . , Anderson , M . H . , & Herrmann , P . ( 2020 ) . What is strategic leadership ? Developing a framework for future research . The Leadership Quar - terly . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . leaqua . 2019 . 101353 Shah , A . K . , Mullainathan , S . , & Shafir , E . ( 2012 ) . Some con - sequences of having too little . Science , 338 ( 6107 ) , 682 – 685 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . 12224 26 171 A . F . Cortes , A . N . Kiss 1 3 Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) Shane , S . , & Venkataraman , S . ( 2000 ) . The promise of entre - preneurship as a field of research . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 25 ( 1 ) , 217 – 226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2000 . 27916 11 Shen , W . , & Cho , T . S . ( 2005 ) . Exploring involuntary execu - tive turnover through a managerial discretion frame - work . Academy of Management Review , 30 ( 4 ) , 843 – 854 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2005 . 18378 881 Shepherd , D . A . , McMullen , J . S . , & Ocasio , W . ( 2017 ) . Is that an opportunity ? An attention model of top manag - ers’ opportunity beliefs for strategic action . Strategic Management Journal , 38 ( 3 ) , 626 – 644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 2499 Sutton , J . R . , & Dobbin , F . ( 1996 ) . The two faces of govern - ance : Responses to legal uncertainty in US firms , 1955 to 1985 . American Sociological Review , 61 ( 5 ) , 794 – 811 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 20964 54 Tabesh , P . , Vera , D . , & Keller , R . T . ( 2019 ) . Unabsorbed slack resource deployment and exploratory and exploitative innovation : How much does CEO expertise matter ? Jour - nal of Business Research , 94 , 65 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusr es . 2018 . 08 . 023 Tognazzo , A . , Gubitta , P . , & Favaron , S . D . ( 2016 ) . Does slack always affect resilience ? A study of quasi - medium - sized Italian firms . Entrepreneurship & Regional Develop - ment , 28 ( 9 – 10 ) , 768 – 790 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 08985 626 . 2016 . 12508 20 Tomczyk , D . , Lee , J . , & Winslow , E . ( 2013 ) . Entrepreneurs’ personal values , compensation , and high growth firm performance . Journal of Small Business Management , 51 ( 1 ) , 66 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 627X . 2012 . 00374 . x U . S . Small Business Administration . ( 2016 ) . Office of advo - cacy : Frequently asked questions . https : / / www . sba . gov / sites / defau lt / files / advoc acy / SB - FAQ - 2016 _ WEB . pdf Vera , D . , & Crossan , M . ( 2005 ) . Improvisation and innovative performance in teams . Organization Science , 16 ( 3 ) , 203 – 224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1050 . 0126 Wallace , J . C . , Little , L . M . , Hill , A . D . , & Ridge , J . W . ( 2010 ) . CEO regulatory foci , environmental dynamism , and small firm performance . Journal of Small Business Management , 48 ( 4 ) , 580 – 604 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 627X . 2010 . 00309 . x Wang , G . , DeGhetto , K . , Ellen , B . P . , & Lamont , B . T . ( 2019 ) . Board antecedents of CEO duality and the moderating role of country - level managerial discretion : A meta - analytic investigation . Journal of Management Studies , 56 ( 1 ) , 172 – 202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / joms . 12408 Wangrow , D . B . , Schepker , D . J . , & Barker III , V . L . ( 2015 ) . Managerial discretion : An empirical review and focus on future research directions . Journal of Management , 41 ( 1 ) , 99 – 135 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01492 06314 554214 Wennberg , K . , Delmar , F . , & McKelvie , A . ( 2016 ) . Variable risk preferences in new firm growth and survival . Jour - nal of Business Venturing , 31 ( 4 ) , 408 – 427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusv ent . 2016 . 05 . 001 Wiklund , J . , & Shepherd , D . ( 2005 ) . Entrepreneurial orienta - tion and small business performance : A configurational approach . Journal of Business Venturing , 20 ( 1 ) , 71 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusv ent . 2004 . 01 . 001 Williams , D . W . , & Crook , T . R . ( 2021 ) . Unpacking the age at initial internationalization - performance relationship : A meta - analytic investigation . Journal of Business Ventur - ing Insights , 15 , e00210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbvi . 2020 . e00210 Xie , Y . H . , & Suh , T . ( 2014 ) . Perceived resource deficiency and internationalization of small - and medium - sized firms . Journal of International Entrepreneurship , 12 ( 3 ) , 207 – 229 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10843 - 014 - 0121 - 9 Zahra , S . A . , Neubaum , D . O . , & Huse , M . ( 2000 ) . Entre - preneurship in medium - size companies : Exploring the effects of ownership and governance systems . Journal of Management , 26 ( 5 ) , 947 – 976 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0149 - 2063 ( 00 ) 00064 - 7 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 172