Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) The Journal of Technology Transfer ( 2021 ) 46 : 1949 – 1972 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10961 - 020 - 09835 - 0 1 3 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies ( USOs ) in the West Midlands Peter Jelfs 1 · Helen Lawton Smith 2 , 3 Accepted : 21 November 2020 / Published online : 2 January 2021 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Science + Business Media , LLC part of Springer Nature 2021 Abstract Doubts remain over the true impact of university spin - offs ( USOs ) , particularly those cre - ated outside elite research universities . This paper examines the financial performance of USOs from a single UK post - industrial region , the West Midlands within the framework of signalling theory . It adds to the existing literature on USO performance at company level , a currently under - represented topic , despite the attention and funding devoted to USOs by UK policymakers . By considering a single region , it brings new insight into the regional context of USOs . Key results of the study are a correlation between research strength of a university and ability of its USOs to attract external finance , but a lack of successful exits across the whole region . Keywords University spin - offs · Financial performance · Survival · Regional development · Signalling theory · UK JEL Classification O18 · O31 · O32 · O33 · O34 1 Introduction University spin - offs ( USOs ) have become a significant feature of the UK’s higher edu - cation landscape since the late 1990s . During the 1980s , in line with the pioneering US Bayh - Dole Act of 1980 , 1 legislation was enacted allowing UK universities to retain the intellectual property rights ( IPR ) arising from publicly funded research ( Richards * Helen Lawton Smith h . lawton - smith @ bbk . ac . uk ; Helen . lawtonsmith @ geog . ox . ac . uk Peter Jelfs peter . jelfs @ googlemail . com 1 Department of Management , CIMR , Birkbeck , University of London , Malet St , London WC1E 7HX , UK 2 Department of Management , Birkbeck , University of London , Malet St , London WC1E 7HX , UK 3 Oxfordshire Economic Observatory , School of Geography and the Environment , South Parks Road , Oxford OX1 3QY , UK 1 https : / / autm . net / about - tech - trans fer / advoc acy / legis latio n / bayh - dole - act accessed May 7 2020 . 1950 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 2009 ) . The UK government released significant public funds—University Challenge Funds ( UCFs ) —from 1999 , to help universities create USOs . Numbers of USOs formed each year in the UK increased from fewer than 10 in 1994 to over 100 by 2001 ( Mueller 2010 ) . Some were able to attract private investment sector funding , implying that com - mercialisable technologies were being discovered and developed . These patterns were also observed elsewhere following the US lead ( Wennberg et al . 2010 ) . However , once initial UK USO creation rates slowed , some commentators , e . g . Lam - bert ( 2003 ) called for reviews of the USOs’ financial performance . Critics of the USO agenda have focused on whether it generated quantity rather than quality ( Fini et al . 2017 ) , and whether it ignored more challenging performance measures such as third party finance attracted ( Guthrie 2004 ) . A picture was painted of many small USOs not justifying the investments and hype surrounding them , as noted in other countries ( Iaco - bucci et al . 2011 ; Civera et al . 2020 ) . Harrison and Leitch ( 2010 ) described the phe - nomenon of USOs as a ‘voodoo institution’ where evidence for claims of success was lacking . A complication in assessing performance is that there is no universally accepted defini - tion of a USO in the academic literature . Most follow the principles of Djokovic and Soui - taris ( 2008 ) that the definition USO should specify three key elements , namely : the ‘out - come’ of the spinout process , the essential ‘parties’ involved and the ‘core elements’ that are transferred ( spun - out ) . In this study a USO is a company formed with some university equity ownership , based on technology developed at that university . This study adds to knowledge of the conditions under which USOs perform because only a few studies have investigated the financial performance of USOs at company level ( see Wennberg et al . 2011 ; Colombo et al . 2019 ; Clarysse et al . 2011 ; Civera et al . 2020 ) . At first glance this may be surprising as there are a large number of USOs , created over a significant period , providing a potentially suitable dataset . In addition , many countries spend significant sums of money targeting university - based entrepreneurship ( Wright et al . 2008 ) . This only makes sense if such entrepreneurhip is an effective way of establishing companies with high growth potential . However , attempts to conduct studies meet a num - ber of practical difficulties , which have led to the repeated observation of a lack of a suf - ficiently high standard financial data relevant to USOs ( Zhang 2009 ) . Rasmussen et al . ( 2012 ) note that most studies on the impact of USOs have used simple measures often driven by data availability . It is therefore important , from a public policy as well as an academic perspective , to study the financial performance of USOs , not least because significant public money has been invested in support programmes ( Wright et al . 2008 ) . In addition , such studies are needed to evaluate the policy that USO creation is appropriate for a significant number of universities across many regions , to deliver regional financial benefits , rather than just for elite universities with strong scientific and technological research pedigrees . Moreover , the regional perspective has not yet been explored in sufficient depth at company level . Two points are worth noting . First , no studies of a single UK region are known . This paper presents evidence from a ‘post - industrial’ region , the UK West Mid - lands . Second , the UK university sector has a research hierarchy ranging from elite inten - sive universities to less research intensive ones ( Trippl et al . 2015 ) . Previous studies have often focussed on elite research institutions such as Oxford ( Lawton Smith and Ho 2006 ) , Cambridge ( Garnsey and Heffernan 2005 ) , London Universities ( Holi et al . 2007 ; Lawton 1951 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 Smith et al . 2014 ) . These have strong , well - funded science and engineering departments , whence the majority of USOs traditionally originate . The West Midlands region contains a range of universities from research - intensive “Russell Group” universities 2 to newer universities with less research pedigree . Previous USO performance studies have tended to focus on a single university e . g . ETH Zurich ( Oskarsson and Schläpfer 2008 ) or a single country e . g . Mueller ( 2010 ) . Here overall USO regional performance is disaggregated by university , challenging assumptions that elite universities’ USOs generate positive regional economic outcomes . We suggest that a policy expectation that successful USOs play an important role in creating and commercialising new technologies , thereby halting regional decline through employment creation and pro - tection , may be over - optimistic . This study is UK - based but the context of policies to regenerate post - industrial regions , and the role of USOs , are of wider significance . Moreover , explanation is needed for observed patterns . In this paper , signalling theory is used to explore the interconnections between investment decisions , the financial performance of USOs , their survival , and the regional context . There are five further sections . The first reviews what is known from the literature about performance metrics and external investment ; the regional context ; and the relevance of signalling theory in explaining possible links to USOs’ performance . In the second , the West Midlands context is introduced and in the third the methodology is explained . Data analysis is in the fourth and in the last conclusions are drawn . 2 Understanding financial performance of USOs , signalling theory and the regional context Measurement of both quality and quantity of technology transfer from universities is com - plex ( Library House 2008 ) . Hence there is general agreement about the need for consensus about metrics used for determining performance in order for effective analysis . Standard indicators of financial and growth performance of USOs as well as survival are neces - sary to develop a complete picture ( Siegel and Wright 2015 ) . Some gaps are being filled by small but growing academic literature assessing the financial performance of USOs at company level . For example , Rasmussen et al . ( 2012 ) undertook an extensive literature review in this area on entrepreneurial firms including USOs . Missing from many studies is the regional context which is needed as there is the possibility of strong regional signals which may influence investment , performance and survival . 2 . 1 Performance metrics , external investment and survival Performance metrics may conveniently be grouped by nature of performance measure investigated as well as key measures ( Jelfs 2016 ) . There are descriptive performance meas - ures , growth - based performance measures , survival measurements and external investment measurements . These are summarised in Table 1 . Each has limitations . Amongst measures of absolute performance used in studies of USOs , employment or job creation is popular especially with policy makers in regional or national government . 2 https : / / russe llgro up . ac . uk / about / our - unive rsiti es / ( accessed May 15 2020 ) . 1952 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 While these measures indicate the scale of activity of the USO , and are easy to collect , they only provide a snapshot of performance ( Lawton Smith and Ho 2006 ) . They do not address whether USOs are performing effectively in relation to other start - up companies ( Zahra et al . 2007 ) or to the level of investment made . Growth - based performance measures are popular because growth is the most appro - priate measure of performance for new ventures , ( which are often loss - making ) ( Clarysse et al . 2011 ) . Turnover and employment are the two most popular measures of performance having the advantage over absolute performance measures of providing a more dynamic picture of the company over time and allowing for useful comparisons between USOs . These measures have limitations ( Tietz 2013 ) and inconsistencies . Firstly , they say nothing about the true financial value of the company ; a company may have developed very valuable technology but not yet achieved any sales . Employment data can be misleading or difficult to gather as many USOs initially use self - employed consult - ants rather than employees to avoid employment expenses and give flexibility to hire only when required . In addition , data can be distorted given that the USO will typically be start - ing from a very low base value on the growth measure . There is also a problem , in the UK and elsewhere , of limited publically available data . On first principles a company that does not survive is one that is unsuccessful : most companies , including USOs , fail within their first few years . Survival , which is a simple measure with easily available data ( Rasmussen et al . 2012 ) may be a more appropriate measure than metrics based on profitability ( Criaco et al . 2013 ) . However , a general finding in different countries and universities is that USOs tend to survive for longer than other start - ups ( Shane 2004 ; Tietz 2013 ) . Three possible explana - tions are that academic entrepreneurs have higher opportunity costs than non - academics ( more to lose if the USO fails ) , a tacit technology advantage arising from the USO’s uni - versity origins given the high quality of research at the institution , and finally the benefits of incubatory services provided by the university ( Zhang 2009 ) . Other , less positive rea - sons are that some USOs may be kept artificially alive by subsidies ( de Cleyn 2011 ) and that a number of other factors may be at stake . These include sector , university resources , Table 1 Metrics used in assessing USO performance Measures Indicators Examples Descriptive absolute performance meas - ures Company turnover EmployeesPatentsNet cash flow Lawton Smith and Ho ( 2006 ) Harrison and Leitch ( 2010 ) Lindholm Dahlstrand ( 1997 ) Ensley and Hmieleski ( 2005 ) Growth - based performance measures TurnoverEmployees Wennberg et al . ( 2011 ) Zahra et al . ( 2007 ) Clarysse et al . ( 2011 ) Lindholm Dahlstrand ( 1997 ) Clarysse et al . ( 2007 ) Survival Length of survival Wennberg et al . ( 2011 ) Oskarsson and Schläpfer ( 2008 ) Zhang ( 2009 ) Criaco et al . ( 2013 ) External invetsment measurements Obtaining venture capitalVenture capital acqui - sition and IPO value Soetanto and van Geenhuizen ( 2015 ) Shane and Stuart ( 2002 ) 1953 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 ownership structure , academic commitment , academic movement , and the relevant TTO’s attitude to survival ( Curran et al . 2016 ) . Moreover , growth of surviving USOs may stall leading to limited impacts ( Rasmussen et al . 2012 ) . Indeed most studies derive from data relating to successful companies and suf - fer from survival biases . Few studies have data that can separate USOs that fail from those bought or merged . Studies of external investment measurements include estimations of the amounts of investment a USO raises from third party venture capitalists and the percentage who made an IPO of shares ( Zhang 2009 ) . Lambert ( 2003 ) considered amounts of investment as a good measure of quality , given the stringent due diligence performed by private equity firms before investment . Lambert noted that UK USO creation had been driven largely by government - funded UCFs with only one third of new USOs in 2002 securing capital from private equity . Rasmussen et al . ( 2012 ) note that most USO performance studies rely on proxy rather than direct performance measures ; USOs often need significant development financing so obtaining external financing is considered a useful measure , given that exter - nal financiers will independently assess the USO’s potential and establish a value for their investment . Wright et al . ( 2006 ) argued that while VCs are reluctant to fund USOs at seed / start - up stage due principally to concerns over lack of management experience , nevertheless USOs are significantly more likely to obtain venture backing than the average small business , but at a later stage . Two performance metrics stand out as providing good evidence for the financial per - formance of a USO at company level , and can be evaluated given the current UK publicly available data . These are ( i ) survival and ( ii ) attraction of external investment . Both metrics are identified as important in the Library House ( 2008 ) study , and in the wider literature evaluation by Rasmussen et al . ( 2012 ) . These two metrics form the core of this study in terms of performance data collection and analysis . The ability or otherwise of USOs to reach an IPO or an exit for investors is a complementary metric , representing a specific scenario in obtaining external investment . Attracting external investment by a USO , while a key financial performance metric in its own right , may also a priori impact the survival or completion of an IPO or exit by reflecting the strength of the company and its attractive - ness to investors . A new company with more resources might be expected to survive for longer . 2 . 2 Signalling theory and USOs’ performance While metrics indicate patterns of USOs’ performance , to better understand the reasons signalling theory is a useful analytical tool in analysing all four strands in Table 1 . It has been used in a variety of strands of academic literature including entrepreneurship ( Ahlers et al . 2015 ) . It is concerned with the reduction in information asymmetry between two par - ties ( Spence 2002 ) . Information asymmetry has been described as occurring when ‘differ - ent people know different things’ ( Stiglitz 2002 ) , and arises where imperfect information exists . Stiglitz identifies two broad categories of information where asymmetry is important . These are information about quality , important where one party is not fully aware of the other’s characteristics , and information about intent , important where one party is con - cerned about the other’s behaviour ( Connelly et al . 2011 ) . 1954 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 Three key actors are the signaller , signal and receiver . The signaller is an insider who has information , positive or negative , not available to outsiders ( Spence 1973 ) . In the USO context this could include details of the company’s underlying technology . Entrepreneurship studies often focus on signallers as leaders of start - up or Initial Public Offering ( IPO ) firms e . g . Zimmerman ( 2008 ) . Studies using signalling theory generally focus on deliberate communication of positive information to convey positive attrib - utes ( Connelly et al . 2011 ) . To be effective , a signal must be observable to outsiders and costly to produce ( Bird and Smith 2005 ) , so signallers are viewed as well placed to absorb the cost . Effectiveness also means that an uninformed agent can distinguish between superior and inferior endowed firms ( Ndofor and Levitas 2004 ) . A wide range of signals of quality have been considered . One important approach considers signalling theory alongside institutional theory where firms strive for legiti - macy to survive , with typical signals being the quality of their directors , management or shareholders . For start - ups , founder share ownership can be a costly signal of quality given the need for them to invest their own resources . Arthurs et al . ( 2009 ) note , in the IPO context , that signals of quality include scientific capabilities ( Deeds et al . 1997 ) , venture capital backing ( Megginson and Weiss 1991 ) , prestigious underwriting ( Carter and Manaster 1990 ) and length of lockup agreement , to reduce current and potential investors’ doubts of going to IPO . Receivers are outsiders who lack but desire information about an organisation . For signalling to occur , the signaller should benefit by some action from the receiver that the receiver would not otherwise have done , often involving selection of the signaller from other alternatives ( Connelly et al . 2011 ) . In entrepreneurship literature , applicable to USOs , this often includes a decision over whether to invest ( Busenitz et al . 2005 ) , including at IPO stage ( Arthurs et al . 2009 ) . The relevance of signalling theory here is that USOs as signallers , along with other start - up companies created to exploit new technology , are obvious cases where potential investors lack information ( Gompers and Lerner 1999 ) . They have limited operating his - tory available for good external investment decisions . Audretsch et al . ( 2012 ) find that new ventures are particularly prone to financial constraints and that innovative new ven - tures usually rely on external finance . Information asymmetry is a particular problem given the lack of any company track record and uncertainty about the value of the new technologies . Similarly Cao and Hsu ( 2010 ) suggest that start - up firms are characterised by large intangible assets , negative cash flow , great technological uncertainty and low liquidation value . They rely on venture capital for finance which might mitigate infor - mation asymmetry through financing strategies . Signalling theory has been used in previous USO performance studies e . g . Mueller ( 2010 ) where USOs , along with other start - up companies created to exploit new tech - nology , are signallers . Attracting external investment is a key performance metric here . The theory has been identified by Mathisen and Rasmussen ( 2019 ) as one with potential in future studies . Signalling theory may have value when considering financial performance data from USOs from a specific university through its TTO . Williamson ( 1996 ) identifies three mechanisms reducing uncertainty surrounding any transaction , namely trust built up through multiple transactions , greater information disclosure , and bonding . There may be a link between the number of USOs formed by a TTO and the level of external fund - ing obtained , both of which may be relevant performance metrics . Bonding may include reputational capital of the TTO which would only seek to commercialise high qual - ity technologies , or the ownership of an equity stake in the USO . Arthurs et al . ( 2009 ) 1955 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 consider such a bond as a stronger form of signal than the above elements , since if the information provided is incorrect , the TTO itself will suffer financial or reputational loss . Signalling theory may be able to provide a framework against which to gauge consist - ency when considering the survival of USOs . Hsu and Ziedonis ( 2008 ) note that prior stud - ies identify two mechanisms where quality is signalled , namely entrepreneurial experience of management teams and knowledge and capability transfer from a parent ( Agarwal et al . 2004 ) which affects new ventures’ probability of survival . Finally , USOs , like other technology - based firms , require external capital investment in order to deliver products and services to market . Thus they or their agents ( usually TTOs ) need to signal that their firms are ‘investor ready’—a form of marketing signal ( Giones and Miralles 2015 ) . Information asymmetry ( Spence 1973 ; Papaionnou and Karagozoglu 2017 ) whereby investors cannot distinguish between high quality and low quality firms , requires proxies for USO quality . For technology entrepreneurs ( Giones and Miralles 2015 ) they need to signal quality . New technology - based ventures with no track record and untested technology might have to rely on symbolic elements to signal to their customers / investors . Signalling theory predicts that universities of greater research strength should generate more technologies with commercial potential . This leads to more USOs and more exter - nal funding being attracted given the strong signal of the university’s research reputation ( Meoli et al . 2013 ; Munari and Toschi 2010 ; Soetanto and van Geenhuizen 2015 ) . As a result , the USOs from such universities should survive longer ( Conceição and Faria 2014 ) and have more successful exits . 2 . 3 The regional context The application of signalling theory at regional level is threefold . First , there might be strong regional signals at work due to local knowledge held by investors about the strengths of the universities’ USOs’ potential . Second , there might be a collective regional effect of a density of universities and commercialisation activity . Third , signalling theory can be applied to the possibility of these attributes interacting with the evolving attributes of a region . Four factors influence the level of USO activity in a location and may imply signal - ling ( Shane 2004 ) . These are access to capital to develop proof of concept and prototypes to attract private sector investors ; property rights that reside with the university to mini - mise creating an anti - entrepreneurial culture , giving university expertise in company for - mation , spreading risk across the USOs associated with university and technologies ; less rigid labour markets to give inventors the ability to generate resources and take leave to start companies ; and increased mobility between universities and industry allowing flows of commercial knowledge . The last is predicated on the existence of managers , customers and suppliers . Thus both the financial performance of USOs and consequently economic value to the region are impacted ( Sternberg 2014 ; Civera et al . 2020 ) . Harrison and Leitch ( 2010 ) propose that the important position of universities in regions in the entrepreneurial system model ( Spilling 1996 ) provides symbolic signals which may attract investors . These include as an enhancer of human capital and as a source of knowledge capital which can stimulate entrepreneurial development through licensing , consulting , education and training , joint ventures and USOs . Breznitz ( 2011 ) notes that regional interactions between universities and other institutions influence the entrepreneur - ial nature of both the university and its USOs , thus increasing reputation . DiGregorio and 1956 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 Shane ( 2003 ) claimed that the geographic location of universities influences USO activ - ity because some economic , legal and cultural environments are more supportive of USOs than others . The networking capability of a USO ( the signaller ) has been shown to impact upon its performance ( Walter et al . 2006 ) . When taken into account by investors ( receivers ) these factors may further influence decisions on investment . It is noticeable that certain regions in the UK e . g . the ‘Golden Triangle’ of Oxford , Cambridge and London universities appear to have achieved financial success from tech - nology commercialisation . From a signalling theory perspective some of this may be attributed to the profile or branding of the region ; ‘a Matthew effect’ of reputation for qual - ity which signals the presence of desirable investment opportunities . There is also likely to be existing infrastructure providing a high quality business environment ( Holi et al . 2007 ; Lawton Smith et al . 2014 ) . In sum , signalling theory can be applied to explain why there is a regional dimension to levels of external investments in USOs , and why it can be used to understand how per - formance and survival relates to external investment . However , a drawback is the limited amount of data available to thoroughly test for associational effects . 3 The West Midlands context The West Midlands region is a typical example of a ‘post - industrial’ region in which tra - ditional industries which employed significant numbers of local people have radically changed in the face of lower - cost international manufacturing and the globalisation of sup - ply chains . Its heritage is largely represented by different forms of heavy industry such as ceramics in the Stoke region ; metalwork and manufacturing in the Birmingham region ; and automotive and supporting industries , which attract significant amounts of research from academia and industry in the Coventry and Warwickshire areas ( Amison and Bailey 2014 ) . Universities within the region provide a range of research intensities , have grown sig - nificantly over the last two decades and generate increasing wealth and employment for the region . In certain cases they have become key actors in undertaking basic research and development ( R & D ) , developing new technologies while the proportion of R & D under - taken on a national level by industry has declined . Such universities are prime candidates for generating USOs as they seek to commercialise their technologies and add to the over - all economic growth of the region , an effect encouraged by UK national and regional government . These characteristics make this good for applying signalling theory to explore perfor - mance of USOs . It might be expected that if there is a match of research in the universities and region , there would be significant numbers of USOs in those sectors . Such industries are still very much present in these traditional areas , but now employ far fewer people than previously with work largely undertaken in smaller industrial units employing more highly skilled workers . There are many similar regions in other developed nations and so the find - ings will have wider applicability . A study of this type of region also complements the cur - rent focus on the world’s elite research universities and their USOs . 1957 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 4 Hypotheses and methodology In this study while the unit of analysis is the USO , the relevant university and region are closely associated with the USO in the analysis . Three performance metrics investigated are ( 1 ) the attraction of external investment , ( 2 ) survival and ( 3 ) successful exit / IPO . In line with signalling theory , the following hypotheses were developed which link the quality of the university to the pattern of performance . The premise is that universities with greater research strength create more and broader technologies ( Clarysse et al . 2011 ) potentially capable of commercialisation . Significant amounts of high - quality underlying technology encourages TTOs to set up USOs and attract internal and external investment ( Di Gregorio and Shane 2003 ) . H1 Universities with greater research strength create more USOs . Universities with greater research strength create more USOs . Further , the university’s research strength is a positive signal for potential investors to support USOs since technologies created and developed are more likely to be of high qual - ity and successfully commercialised ( Colombo et al . 2019 ) . Signalling theory postulates that the possession of resources such as attractive technol - ogy will send strong positive signals to the potential investor ( Mueller 2010 ) . The work required to obtain investment often requires the construction of a university - led infra - structure of significant scale , including a TTO and associated functions . Signalling theory would support the observation that such research - focussed universities would attract fund - ing for significant numbers of their USOs , which in turn attract other investors , forming a virtuous circle . H2 USOs from universities with greater research strength will attract more external finance . H3 Such USOs will attract a wider range of investors . H4 Such USOs will be more likely to achieve a successful exit for the parent university . Following from H2 , such USOs are likely to attract more external investment and obtain the necessary resources further to develop their underlying technology . USOs with more financial resources will be able to meet their expenses incurred in commercialisation for longer , and survive for longer in line with findings of earlier studies e . g . Shane and Stuart ( 2002 ) , Nerkar and Shane ( 2003 ) . H5 USOs from stronger research universities will survive for longer . H6 USOs attracting more external finance will survive for longer . While the financial performance of USOs at company level is increasingly studied , there remain methodological difficulties , and as a result significant gaps in the literature . Key difficulties in conducting studies on USO financial performance include lack of publicly available data from sources independent of the company or university ( Lawton Smith and Ho 2006 ) , lack of clarity in the definition of a USO ( Zahra et al . 2007 ) and 1958 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 the difficulty in obtaining a complete population of USOs over a long period of time to avoid survivor bias ( Shane and Stuart 2002 ) . This study seeks to address these concerns by analysing a number of independent objective sources , using a focussed definition of a USO , to create a very accurate data set of USOs formed over a significant period . It then extracts a range of accounting information , building a narrative of the history of the company over time even after effective existence ends . Such a methodology over - comes the difficulties noted by Shane and Stuart ( 2002 ) that many studies suffer from significant survivor bias as USOs that fail are often omitted . This study also avoids the problem of under - recording company histories as companies are traced from incorpora - tion to grave . Once an accurate data set of USOs is created from this time - intensive process , it is easier to make comparisons of performance between companies and universities and be confident that trends observed can be fairly compared and contrasted . In this study , the data collected are mainly secondary in nature i . e . obtained from existing data sources . The universities in the region were identified and an initial case study performed on the University of Birmingham to confirm that the proposed methodology and data sources were viable ( Jelfs 2016 ) . The case study was then undertaken for all other universities within the region . Data was collected between March 2014 and March 2015 . Throughout the financial data collection , informal conversations were held with TTO staff at Warwick and Birmingham universities , and a number of founders , directors and employees of still trading USOs across the universities . These discussions served to inform subsequent analysis and provided potential justifications for trends in data , ensuring that such analysis was not solely the authors’ value judgements . USOs for each university were identified by combining data from four separate independent sources , chosen for the accessibility and quality of data . The first is the university’s published accounts . Most UK universities are constituted as charities , thus required by law to prepare and file detailed financial accounts avail - able in the public domain , prepared under relevant accounting standards and statements of practice , with the Charity Commission . A requirement is that the accounts give full details of companies wherein the university has an equity investment stake . This disclo - sure captures all USOs generated by the parent university and is available over a number of years . It also includes companies that are not USOs such as property management companies , and so other sources are needed to avoid non - USOs inclusion . It is not known whether this source of data has ever been previously explicitly used . but it is a particularly useful source as it tracks annually USOs as they are created and subsequently dissolved . The university’s statutory accounts are also prepared by a finance team completely independent from the TTO , and are audited by an independent firm of chartered accountants with no connection to the university’s knowledge com - mercialisation activities . Thus the source is therefore extensive , independent and objec - tive , especially when accessed through the Charity Commission’s website . The second is the university’s TTO , primarily responsible for overseeing and facili - tating the process of forming USOs and transferring technology derived into the USO . It will need to maintain records of all USOs created and so is an obvious and poten - tially easiest place whence to obtain data on the financial performance of USOs . This is reflected in many studies to date in this field of academic literature . e . g . Oskarsson and Schläpfer ( 2008 ) . There are some difficulties in thus obtaining the data particularly if not cross - checked against other sources . TTOs rarely maintain historic data on failed USOs , giving rise to the danger of survivor bias ( Shane and Stuart 2002 ) . Furthermore , detailed financial 1959 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 records in a consistent format over time are not always kept due to resource constraints . Changes of TTO personnel can lead to difficulties with loss of expertise and knowledge relating to USOs ( Lawton Smith and Ho 2006 ) . There may also be legal constraints on sharing USO financial data with external third parties . Accordingly data from this source was treated with caution and cross - checked thor - oughly against other sources . The TTO website and other published material were used as well as other relevant public domain data to provide a further list of potential USOs . The third is commercial databases . Although there are issues with the quality and accessibility of company data from Companies’ House this remains the major source of publicly - available UK company financial performance data . All UK companies are obliged by law to file accounts with Companies’ House and the data contained therein is collected by a number of commercial databases , often for the purpose of providing a credit score for a company . During the course of this work two such databases were used : Experian Corpfin UK and Market IQ . As well as providing the basic balance sheet accounting data from filed company accounts , other documents such as annual returns and liquidation docu - ments may be accessed which help build up a picture of the activity of the company over time . Changes in ownership and details of third party external investment can be obtained from such documents . The accessing and use of these supplementary documents to create a long term pic - ture of the company has not previously been used in USO performance studies , par - ticularly in obtaining details of third party external investment . Such data has been dif - ficult to obtain os previous studies have usually resorted to asking the company itself . Both commercial databases used have a search function that allows searches by share - holder name . This is a useful tool for identifying potential USOs as the name of the relevant university can be used as a search term to identify companies where it held an equity stake . While not all such companies are USOs , it provides another independent source of companies for cross checking . The last is a specialist database , Spinouts UK , maintained by Young Company Finance , which attempts to list all UK USOs . It uses a variety of data sources ( not publicly disclosed ) although much of the data is thought to be derived directly from the universities / TTOs . Again , this provides one more data source for cross - checking . Once a population of potential USOs for a university had been collected from each source , they were correlated between sources and anomalies resolved through detailed analysis of all available sources and other public sources of information , including the company’s website . Where potential USOs did not meet the chosen definition of a USO , they were discarded from the database and a reason for exclusion noted . Basic classification data for each confirmed USO was then collected , usually from the commercial databases , and in line with the three key performance metrics : • Survival data was collected mainly from the commercial database to determine dates of incorporation and dissolution . • External investment data was collected from all the sources although the company accounting information from sets of annual accounts held on the commercial data - bases was the key source . The share premium account in the USO’s balance sheet was the key source for investment received . Investment data collected included investor’s identity , amount of investment and date of investment . • Where USOs achieved a successful exit for the university , a brief case study of their lifecycle was collected from a variety of sources , including news websites . 1960 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 5 Results and analysis The results are divided into two sections . The first is the USO performance ( number and survival ) and thence their contribution to regional economic development . The second is investment attracted into the spin - offs . 5 . 1 Population of USOs In the region as a whole , only two universities , both research intensive ( Russell Group ) ( Warwick and Birmingham ) generated a significant number of USOs ( 43 and 29 respec - tively ) , and attracted external investment . Half of the region’s universities did not create any USOs , in line with Pressman ( 2002 ) who reports that 36 % of US academic institu - tions did not generate any USOs , and Benneworth and Charles ( 2005 ) who identified uneven distribution amongst UK universities . The non active universities are all Post - 92 s and rarely have significant research in those academic areas which historically lead - ing to most UK USOs . Other universities that created USOs were Aston ( 7 ) , Coventry ( 11 ) , Keele ( 6 ) and Staffordshire ( 6 ) . The data therefore support Hypothesis 1 . The results suggest that the relationship between the nature , quality and heritage of research performed at a university and the quantity of USOs generated is not necessar - ily simple ; a range of factors may be needed for determining a convincing explanation of trends ( Rasmussen and Borch 2010 ; RSC 2005 ) . Some non - Russell Group universi - ties in the region have traditions of scientific - related disciplines . Aston was founded as a College of Advanced Technology ( CAT ) has significant research in science and technology and an early history of commercialisation . However , the number of USOs it generated is low and fewer than some newer universities . This may illustrate that some universities remain unconvinced that USOs are the best way to achieve commercialisa - tion ( Fig . 1 ) . Fig . 1 USO numbers by university 1961 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 5 . 2 External investment into USOs Figure 2 shows the percentage of USOs at each university able to attract external third party funding . There is wide variation between universities in their USOs attracting external fund - ing , in line with prior studies e . g . Wright et al . ( 2006 ) . This is a different result from the survival metric where results are more consistent across the region . This may therefore be a more accurate reflection of success of the USO or university . Birmingham and Warwick are responsible for about 70 % of the region’s USOs and show levels of attracting finance close to the region’s mean of 53 % . However , their rate of attracting funding is lower than of Aston’s , suggesting that some of their larger num - ber of USOs were not attractive to investors , and highlighting that the signalling rela - tionship between university research strength and USO funding is not straightforward . Aston shows a particularly high rate ( 86 % ) which ties in with its observed behaviour of forming relatively few USOs that own commercialisable technology and hence are attractive to potential investors . Keele , a 1960s university , also has a high rate of attract - ing finance ( 67 % ) but less relevant research strength . Amongst the Post - 92 universi - ties , Coventry has a lower rate of attracting finance ( 36 % ) and Staffordshire significantly lower ( 17 % . ) . Hypothesis 2 is therefore only partially supported on this measure . Figure 3 shows the total amount of third party external USO funding received by each university . USOs attracted funding from a number of third parties including the regional UCF ( Mercia Fund ) , other private equity or venture capitalists , limited compa - nies and individual investors . Warwick has attracted significantly more external third - party funding than all other universities combined . The difference cannot be explained simply by the number of USOs ( 43 out of 102 ) . Possible explanations are that Warwick USOs have more under - lying technologies e . g . in engineering , which are more attractive to potential investors , or alternatively that Warwick has a vastly superior infrastructure . There is likely to be a Fig . 2 USOs gaining 3rd party financing ( % ) 1962 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 cumulative effect , in line with the predictions of signalling theory in relation to signal - lers and signalling . Clearly Warwick has significant resource in place to attract funding including wide net - works with potential investors especially in specialised areas . However , the low amounts of funding obtained by other research - intensive universities , particularly Birmingham , casts some doubt on this interpretation ; if the number of USOs generated by a university be a valid proxy for its enthusiasm and desire to obtain funding for its underlying research , such Fig . 3 Total 3rd party funding in USOs ( £m ) Fig . 4 Total 3rd party funding per USO ( £ ) 1963 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 significant discrepancy would not be expected . It is likely that other factors are at play , pos - sibly including pre - entry experience of the USO ( Curran et al . 2016 ) , area of the underly - ing technology , TTO performance and the identity and risk appetite of investors . Hypothesis 2 is again only partially supported . While the amount of funding obtained does follow the university’s research strength in terms of ranking i . e . the Russell Group obtain more funding than 1960s universities which in turn outperform Post - 92 , Warwick’s performance demonstrates that other factors are involved . Figure 4 shows for each univer - sity the amount of external third party funding obtained per USO generated . Warwick is still significantly ahead although the difference is less pronounced . An inter - esting feature is the relatively low amount of funding secured per USO by Birmingham . This suggests USO quantity was more important than quality , a key accusation levelled by Lambert ( 2003 ) and others , assuming that external third party funding is a good proxy for USO success . Again , signalling theory would not predict such a low result but this finding may relate to subject mix . Of the 1960s universities , Aston and Keele score highly , suggesting that they pursue a small number of potentially high quality USOs with underlying technologies of interest to potential investors . Hypothesis 2 is therefore again partly supported . Figure 5 shows the types of investors . It was not possible to obtain further details of the investments such as the amount invested by each party or the number of funding rounds because consistent data was not available . Some funding rounds predated public domain information . Each university obtained external USO funding from a range of sources in line with earlier studies ( Shane and Stuart 2002 ) . In terms of government UCF funding , Aston and Coventry did not receive any whereas the Russell Group universities took full advantage . However , it is noticeable that no university relied solely on UCF money . Warwick was particularly active in securing significant private investments . Warwick also had a wide range of different private equity funders , suggesting strong social net - works with the private equity community . In line with signalling theory , the existence Fig . 5 Types of investor 1964 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 of other investors ( Diamond 1991 ) and many USOs sends strong signals to investors . Hypothesis 3 is therefore supported . The final investment metric is successful exits from a USO by its parent university . An important financial metric is the amount of money which a university realises in a controlled exit such as a placement of shares , merger or trade sale ( Bonardo et al . 2011 ) . The data show that the financial impact for the sponsoring universities has not been positive . Figure 6 demonstrates that the number of successful exits is extremely low . No USO from the West Midlands achieved a stock market listing in any form , a particularly unfavourable comparison with the US ( Zhang 2009 ) , and with other UK universities such as Oxford and Cambridge ( Holi et al . 2007 ) . Only the three more established universities ( ( Aston , Birmingham and Warwick ) have had any success . Aston continues to reinforce the theme that a few USOs con - tain commercialisable technologies which ultimately lead to successful exits . Warwick , despite creating many USOs and achieving significant external investment into them , has fared no better than Aston in achieving successful exit . Birmingham’s record falls between Aston and Warwick . Signalling theory has limitations . For example , an exit is essentially a special form of external investment , so it would be expected that Warwick would have significantly more exits than other the universities given its attraction of external investment . This is not the case . The conclusion is that information asymmetry remains a significant factor for investors , even where a university has a strong research pedigree . While the three strongest research universities were the only ones to obtain any exits this does not explain the lack of exits seen across the region . Hypothesis 4 is therefore not supported : no clear link between external investment attracted and exit is found . Figure 7 shows the actual cash received on exit by the universities through disposal of their equity stakes . The most successful university is Birmingham ( Jelfs 2016 ) largely based on the sale of its stake in one USO , Entice Technology Limited . This USO did not secure external financing : the underlying technology was the key resource behind Fig . 6 Number of USO successful exits 1965 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 financial success . This company was effectively the only financially successful USO in the whole region during the observed 30 year period . While there are other programme success factors , the failure to match the significant sums raised by US and other USOs is a major disappointment . It supports previous studies sceptical of return from USOs e . g . Harrison and Leitch ( 2010 ) . It is unlikely that the sums shown above even covered the running costs of the various university TTO operations , sup - porting previous findings e . g . Siegel and Wright ( 2015 ) . Fig . 7 Cash returned to university on sale of USO stakes ( £’000 ) Fig . 8 Aggregate failure rate ( % ) 1966 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 5 . 3 Survival rates Figure 8 shows the aggregate failure rate for each university obtained by dividing the number of USOs that failed for each university ( defined as formally dissolved ) by the total number of USOs founded . It makes no allowance for time profile effects—newer USOs are less likely to have had time to fail . However , it does have value as previous studies have highlighted the relatively long survival times of USOs without attempting to control in this manner e . g . Shane ( 2004 ) . The aggregate failure rate is relatively consistent between universities . Aston appears to show a high failure rate but two USOs were over twenty years old before being removed . By contrast , USOs of Keele and Staffordshire are relatively recent and have had less time to fail . However , given that USO formation was extremely low in the region before 2000 , meaningful comparisons can be made . The uniformity of failure rates is notable . This may imply that the universities’ TTOs have taken a consistent view in allowing USOs to fail across a wide range of timescales and population sizes . Given that the financial resources of USOs vary considerably by university , this would go against previous find - ings that more financial resource increases the likelihood of survival ( Shane and Stuart 2002 ) . The data also show that the universities ( with the exception of Aston ) show a very tight band for the average time it takes a USO to fail ( 78 months to 87 months ) although these quantities mask significant variations at company - level at each university ) . This finding would not necessarily be anticipated given the wide range of factors impacting survival . Hypothesis 5 is therefore not supported . The mean lifetime of a USO is significantly longer than for a start - up company in the private sector . Cressy ( 2006 ) finds that several start - up studies show that about half fail within the first two and a half years . Survival gives only a partial picture of how invested funds are deployed . Fig . 9 Twilight USOs—aggregate rate ( % ) 1967 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 There is a category of USO designated ‘twilight USOs’—USOs that are not dissolved but have effectively ceased any significant level of activity . These have been described else - where as the ‘living dead’ ( Ruhnka et al . 1992 ) . Where the USO has received external funding , a significant gap is needed between last funding and twilight designation . While some judgment was necessary to designate a USO as such , careful analysis of financial records gave a reasonable level of assurance that the twilight designation is correct . Fig - ure 9 gives the aggregate twilight USO rate by university . The data show a rate consistently between 20 and 30 % . This consistency is of interest as no allowance is made for the age of the USOs . In addition , the policy of universities towards USO formation has already been noted to be diverse , so the same is likely so for the identification and management of twilight USOs . Staffordshire is an outlier with a rate of twilight formation of 50 % , although there are only 6 USOs . A high rate may be indicative of a desire not to dissolve companies for fear of ‘losing face’ ( de Cleyn 2011 ) . This significant level of twilight USOs may lead to the conclusion that survival is a poor performance metric . A higher rate of twilight USOs may also be observed when a university secures little external funding , as such third parties may on first principles be less concerned about striking a company off where it is clear that the underlying technology will not be commercialisable . Twilight USOs contribute towards providing a fuller and more accurate picture of true survival rates of USOs . By combining the aggregate failure rates of twilight and dis - solved USOs , a clearer picture is obtained . The data show a reasonably consistent range of twilight and dissolved USOs for the universities across the region of between 60 and 70 % . Hypothesis 5 is therefore not supported . This consistency is of interest because no allowance is made for the USO age or quality , which signalling theory would predict to be linked , in that stronger research universities should produce longer - living USOs ( Ziedonis 2007 ) . These numbers are significantly higher than those obtained in previous studies and provide an explanation of the long - held view that USOs survive longer than other start - up companies . Significantly in relation to signalling theory and firm performance , the data show a relationship between the lifetime of each USO that failed , and the external funding that it obtained . In general , companies with more funding survive longer . However , the majority of USOs obtained very little external funding . Several USOs with little funding survived for a long time , presumably because their technology could be commercialised at an early stage and generated sufficient income to enable the company to survive . The above sample is a small one , so observations must be made with care , and the relationship is unlikely to be straightforward , in line with Manigart et al . ( 2002 ) . Hypothesis 6 is therefore partially supported . 6 Conclusion and discussion The results and analyses provide insight into the ability of signalling theory to rationalise and explain the financial performance data of a region’s USOs . While some results are in line with expectations , others are not and demonstrate the complexity in attempting to explain the data , and the need to consider wider data sets and more explanatory factors , as well as extending the timescale of the study to catch subsequent exits e . g . Beauhurst ( 2019 ) . 1968 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 Universities with a strong research pedigree generated the most USOs in line with the - ory ; the Russell Group universities’ USOs had at first glance the dominant influence on the economy of the region , although this finding is not in line with some earlier studies e . g . Tornatzky and Bauman ( 1997 ) . Universities have different policies with regard to USO formation , for instance Aston , with good research credentials , creating a low number of USOs . The formation of USOs in the period under observation is heavily dependent upon the availability of UCF funding provided by the UK government . The data relating to USO survival are more difficult to rationalise and lead to a tentative conclusion that this is not a useful performance metric , despite previous use . In line with previous studies , USOs survive for longer than other start - up companies e . g . Zhang ( 2009 ) . This study highlights the existence of ‘twilight USOs’ , backing up the findings of de Cleyn ( 2011 ) , who identified that many European universities adopted policies to keep underper - forming USOs alive ; this therefore indicates that survival times say little about underly - ing USO quality ( Agarwal et al . 2004 ) . Findings on ‘twilight USOs’ from this study are important as they explain why USOs appear to survive for longer than other start - ups , and further study as to whether they received proportionately more funding would be interest - ing . In addition , a number of the survival measures show a degree of consistency between universities , which would not be expected under the theoretical framework , as USOs from stronger research universities would be expected to survive for longer ( Conceição and Faria 2014 ) . In line with previous studies e . g . Shane and Stuart ( 2002 ) , and theoretical expecta - tions , USOs with external funding tend to survive longer , although some USOs with little or no funding survive a long time . Data on external funding appear to be partially in line with prior studies e . g . Shane ( 2004 ) , Colombo et al . ( 2019 ) and the theoretical framework in that total funding obtained by a university is positively correlated to its research strength . However , at a more granular level , by reviewing the amount obtained per USO , the picture is more mixed , with both the 1960s universities of Aston and Keele outperforming Russell Group Birmingham , imply - ing a more focussed approach in creating USOs , and showing clearly that other factors than the research strength of the parent university are in play . This finding is an interesting addi - tion to the literature . Finally , the data on exits demonstrates consistent inability to generate financially suc - cessful exits . This is not in line previous studies e . g . Shane and Stuart ( 2002 ) . From a regional perspective , it is clear that the strategy of creating and funding USOs had little material effect upon the prosperity of the region or impact upon the reduction in traditional industries , despite the significant sector - specific knowledge remaining within the West Midlands . This is an important finding for policymakers in that incentivising the creation of USOs does not lead to financial success for all types of region . The region explored , as a post - industrial one , is more typical worldwide than those which contain elite research universities and the results here will be relevant internationally . At a theoretical level , the study confirms that signalling theory is of value as a frame - work within which to conduct research on USO financial performance . It is clear that not all of its predictions are reflected in the data , and this is maybe to be expected , given the complexity and range of potential factors that influence a newly - formed company’s subse - quent financial performance . However , it offers a reasonable framework within which to discuss and analyse the results obtained , which backs up its use in prior studies of USOs e . g . Mueller ( 2010 ) , where new companies and their signals are analysed by external par - ties to overcome information asymmetry and uncertainty . This study is therefore able to add to the literature by the granularity of data col - lected clearly illustrating the different behaviours of universities with respect to USO 1969 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 programmes , a feature that has not previously been given prominence . Through considera - tion of a range of performance metrics , this study builds up a detailed picture of how differ - ent universities within the same geographical region have approached their “third mission” of developing academic entrepreneurship . The West Midlands region contains a range of universities and behaviours . An important example is the contrast between two universi - ties : Aston appears to have focussed on creating a small number of high quality USOs while Warwick has instead maximised its use of government UCF funding to create a large number of USOs and attract a considerable external third party funding , yet in terms of exits and financial benefits the results are very similar . This is an important finding for regional policymakers about how best to target support for USO programmes . This study also adds to the literature with its methodology involving obtaining the accu - racy and completeness of the USO population . The creation of the USO database is signifi - cant and replicable internationally . It appears likely that the impact of this can be seen in the difference in some of the performance results obtained when compared with those from previous studies , particularly with the metric of survival of USOs which appears previ - ously to have been consistently overstated , as USOs that failed some years before any study have often been omitted from the population . Finally , the study provides a useful assessment of the value of different performance metrics in assessing USO financial performance . Of the metrics selected , the number of USOs generated is a poor proxy for their financial success . Survival also proves to be a poor metric , given the surprising consistency across companies . External investment attraction is of some value , but there is little correlation in the West Midlands region with successful exits , which may be said on the current work to be the best metric in assessing the true success of a USO from a financial perspective . The study contains a number of limitations and provides opportunities for further work . The data only covers a single UK region , and the study’s conclusions should be tested against larger USO samples , both in the UK and internationally . Additional qualitative data might provide deeper insights into issues such as the actions of different universities in promoting USOs , and unpicking the motives for creating ‘twilight’ USOs . While the timeframe across which data were collected is significant , it would also be interesting to repeat the work for the region considering subsequent years , to see in particular whether any USOs of more recent creation gave successful exits and whether those responsible for USO creation and development have learned any lessons . 3 Acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge John Slater for his kind contribution to an earlier version of this paper . References Agarwal , R . , Echambadi , R . , Franco , A . , & Sarkar , M . ( 2004 ) . Knowledge transfer through inheritance : Spin - out generation , development , and survival . Academy of Management Journal , 47 ( 4 ) , 501 – 522 . Ahlers , G . , Cumming , D . , Günther , C . , & Schweizer , D . ( 2015 ) . Signaling in equity crowdfunding . Entre - preneurship Theory and Practice , 39 ( 4 ) , 955 – 980 . 3 Warwick is known to have had a trade sale and IPO accredited to two of its USOs some time after the data collection finished in this paper , although it is not known to what extent the university benefited finan - cially ( Beauhurst 2019 ) . 1970 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 Amison , P . , & Bailey , D . ( 2014 ) . Phoenix industries and open innovation ? The Midlands advanced automo - tive manufacturing and engineering industry . Cambridge Journal of Regions , Economy and Society , 7 ( 3 ) , 397 – 411 . Arthurs , J . , Busenitz , L . , Hoskisson , R . , & Johnson , R . ( 2009 ) . Signaling and initial public offerings : The use and impact of the lockup period . Journal of Business Venturing , 24 ( 4 ) , 360 – 372 . Audretsch , D . , Hülsbeck , M . , & Lehmann , E . ( 2012 ) . Regional competitiveness , university spillovers , and entrepreneurial activity . Small Business Economics , 39 ( 3 ) , 587 – 601 . Beauhurst . ( 2019 ) . Spinouts UK Quarterly Journal 31 , June 2019 . Benneworth , P . , & Charles , D . ( 2005 ) . University spin - off policies and economic development in less successful regions : Learning from two decades of policy practice . European Planning Studies , 13 ( 4 ) , 537 – 557 . Bird , R . B . , & Smith , E . A . ( 2005 ) . Signaling theory , strategic interaction , and symbolic capital . Current Anthropology , 46 , 221 – 248 . Bonardo , D . , Paleari , S . , & Vismara , S . ( 2011 ) . Valuing university - based firms : The effects of academic affiliation on IPO performance . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35 ( 4 ) , 755 – 776 . Breznitz , S . ( 2011 ) . Improving or impairing ? Following technology transfer changes at the University of Cambridge . Regional Studies , 45 ( 4 ) , 463 – 478 . Busenitz , L . , Fiet , J . , & Moesel , D . ( 2005 ) . Signaling in venture capitalist—new venture team funding decisions : Does it indicate long - term venture outcomes ? Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 29 ( 1 ) , 1 – 12 . Cao , J . , & Hsu , P . ( 2010 ) . Patent signaling , entrepreneurial performance , and venture capital financing . Singapore Management University and University of Connecticut Working Paper . Carter , R . , & Manaster , S . ( 1990 ) . Initial public offerings and underwriter reputation . The Journal of Finance , 45 ( 4 ) , 1045 – 1067 . Civera , A . , Meoli , M . , & Vismara , S . ( 2020 ) . Engagement of academics in university technology trans - fer : Opportunity and necessity academic entrepreneurship . European Economic Review , 123 , 103376 . Clarysse , B . , Wright , M . , Lockett , A . , Mustar , P . , & Knockaert , M . ( 2007 ) . Academic spin - offs , formal technology transfer and capital raising . Industrial and Corporate Change , 16 ( 4 ) , 609 – 640 . Clarysse , B . , Wright , M . , & Van de Velde , E . ( 2011 ) . Entrepreneurial origin , technological knowledge , and the growth of spin - off companies . Journal of Management Studies , 48 ( 6 ) , 1420 – 1442 . Colombo , M . , Meoli , M . , & Vismara , S . ( 2019 ) . Signaling in science - based IPOs : The combined effect of affiliation with prestigious universities , underwriters , and venture capitalists . Journal of Business Venturing , 34 ( 1 ) , 141 – 177 . Conceição , O . , & Faria , A . ( 2014 ) . Determinants of research - based spin - offs survival . NIPE Working Paper Series , 21 , 1 – 26 . Connelly , B . , Certo , T . , Ireland , R . , & Reutzel , C . ( 2011 ) . Signaling theory : A review and assessment . Journal of Management , 37 ( 1 ) , 39 – 67 . Cressy , R . ( 2006 ) . Why do most firms die young ? Small Business Economics , 26 ( 2 ) , 103 – 116 . Criaco , G . , Minola , T . , Migliorini , P . , & Serarols - Tarrés , C . ( 2013 ) . “To have and have not” : Founders’ human capital and university start - up survival . The Journal of Technology Transfer , 39 ( 4 ) , 567 – 593 . Curran , D . , van Egeraat , C . , & O’Gorman , C . ( 2016 ) . Inherited competence and spin - off performance . European Planning Studies , 24 ( 3 ) , 443 – 462 . de Cleyn , S . ( 2011 ) . The early development of academic spin - offs : A holistic study on the survival of 185 European product - oriented ventures using a resource - based perspective : Proefschrift . UA , Fac - ulteit TEW . Deeds , D . , Decarolis , D . , & Coombs , J . ( 1997 ) . The impact of firm - specific capabilities on the amount of capital raised in an initial public offering : Evidence from the biotechnology industry . Journal of Business Venturing , 12 ( 1 ) , 31 – 46 . Diamond , D . ( 1991 ) . Monitoring and reputation : The choice between bank loans and directly placed debt . Journal of Political Economy , 99 ( 4 ) , 689 – 721 . Di Gregorio , D . , & Shane , S . ( 2003 ) . Why do some universities generate more start - ups than others ? Research Policy , 32 ( 2 ) , 209 – 227 . Djokovic , D . , & Souitaris , V . ( 2008 ) . Spinouts from academic institutions : A literature review with sug - gestions for further research . The Journal of Technology Transfer , 33 ( 3 ) , 225 – 247 . Ensley , M . , & Hmieleski , K . ( 2005 ) . A comparative study of new venture top management team com - position , dynamics and performance between university - based and independent start - ups . Research Policy , 34 ( 7 ) , 1091 – 1105 . 1971 Financial performance studies of university spin‑off companies… 1 3 Fini , R . , Fu , K . , Mathisen , M . , Rasmussen , E . , & Wright , M . ( 2017 ) . Institutional determinants of uni - versity spin - off quantity and quality : A longitudinal , multilevel , cross - country study . Small Busi - ness Economics , 48 ( 2 ) , 361 – 391 . Garnsey , E . , & Heffernan , P . ( 2005 ) . High - technology clustering through spin - out and attraction : The Cambridge case . Regional Studies , 39 ( 8 ) , 1127 – 1144 . Giones , F . , & Miralles , F . ( 2015 ) . Do actions matter more than resources ? A signalling theory perspective on the technology entrepreneurship process . Technology Innovation Management Review , 5 ( 3 ) : 39 – 45 . http : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22215 / timre view / 880 Gompers , P . , & Lerner , J . ( 1999 ) . What drives venture capital fundraising ? ( No . w6906 ) . National Bureau of Economic Research . Guthrie , J . ( 2004 ) . Why university spin - outs are spinning out of control ? Financial times ( London ) , 11 May ( p . 13 ) . Harrison , R . , & Leitch , C . ( 2010 ) . Voodoo institution or entrepreneurial university ? Spin - off companies , the entrepreneurial system and regional development in the UK . Regional Studies , 44 ( 9 ) , 1241 – 1262 . Holi , M . , Franklin , R . , Hugo , E . , & Lapinski , J . ( 2007 ) . An analysis of UK university technology and knowl - edge transfer activities . Library House , 1 , 1 – 2 . Hsu , D . H . , & Ziedonis , R . H . ( 2008 ) . Patents as quality signals for entrepreneurial ventures . In Academy of management proceedings ( vol . 2008 , No . 1 , pp . 1 – 6 ) . Briarcliff Manor , NY 10510 : Academy of Management . Iacobucci , D . , Iacopini , A . , Micozzi , A . , & Orsini , S . ( 2011 ) . Fostering entrepreneurship in academic spin - offs . International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business , 12 ( 4 ) , 513 – 533 . Jelfs , P . ( 2016 ) . Financial performance analysis of spin - off companies from a UK “regional” university : A case study of the University of Birmingham . International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business , 29 ( 2 ) , 271 – 286 . Lambert , R . ( 2003 ) . Lambert review of business - university collaboration : Final report . Retrieved Novem - ber 6 , 2020 , from https : / / dera . ioe . ac . uk / 16532 / 1 / Lambe rt % 20Rev iew % 20of % 20Bus iness - Unive rsity % 20Col labor ation . pdf . Lawton Smith , H . , Chapman , D . , Wood , P . , Barnes , T . , & Romeo , S . ( 2014 ) . Entrepreneurial academics and regional innovation systems : The case of spin - offs from London’s universities . Environment and Plan - ning C : Government and Policy , 32 ( 2 ) , 341 – 359 . Lawton Smith , H . , & Ho , K . ( 2006 ) . Measuring the performance of Oxford University , Oxford Brookes University and the government laboratories’ spin - off companies . Research Policy , 35 ( 10 ) , 1554 – 1568 . Library House . ( 2008 ) . An analysis of UK university technology and knowledge transfer activities , London . Lindholm Dahlstrand , Å . ( 1997 ) . Growth and inventiveness in technology - based spin - off firms . Research Policy , 26 ( 3 ) , 331 – 344 . Manigart , S . , Baeyens , K . , & Van Hyfte , W . ( 2002 ) . The survival of venture capital backed companies . Ven - ture Capital : An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance , 4 ( 2 ) , 103 – 124 . Mathisen , M . , & Rasmussen , E . ( 2019 ) . The development , growth and performance of university spin - offs : A critical review . The Journal of Technology Transfer , 44 ( 6 ) , 1891 – 1938 . Megginson , W . , & Weiss , K . ( 1991 ) . Venture capitalist certification in initial public offerings . The Journal of Finance , 46 ( 3 ) , 879 – 903 . Meoli , M . , Paleari , S . , & Vismara , S . ( 2013 ) . Completing the technology transfer process : M & As of sci - ence - based IPOs . Small Business Economics , 40 ( 2 ) , 227 – 248 . Mueller , C . ( 2010 ) . Resources and signalling to attract venture capital : University spin - outs in the UK , Dur - ham theses , Durham University . Available at Durham E - Theses Online : http : / / ethes es . dur . ac . uk / 297 / Munari , F . , & Toschi , L . ( 2010 ) . Do venture capitalists have a bias against investment in academic spin - offs ? Evidence from the micro - and nanotechnology sector in the UK . Industrial and Corporate Change , 20 ( 2 ) , 397 – 432 . Nerkar , A . , & Shane , S . ( 2003 ) . When do start - ups that exploit patented academic knowledge survive ? Inter - national Journal of Industrial Organization , 21 ( 9 ) , 1391 – 1410 . Ndofor , H . , & Levitas , E . ( 2004 ) . Signaling the strategic value of knowledge . Journal of Management , 30 ( 5 ) , 685 – 702 . Oskarsson , I . , & Schläpfer , A . ( 2008 ) . The performance of spin - off companies at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich : Thesis for the Masters in Finance Program ( MSc Finance ) at London Business School . ETH - Transfer . Papaionnou , G . , & Karagozoglu , A . ( 2017 ) . Underwriting services and the new issues market . London : Academic Press . Pressman , L . ( Ed . ) . ( 2002 ) . AUTM licensing survey : FY 2001 . Northbrook : Association of University Tech - nology Managers . 1972 P . Jelfs , H . Lawton Smith 1 3 Rasmussen , E . , & Borch , O . ( 2010 ) . University capabilities in facilitating entrepreneurship : A longitudinal study of spin - off ventures at mid - range universities . Research Policy , 39 ( 5 ) , 602 – 612 . Rasmussen , E . , Bulanova , O . , Jensen , A . , & Clausen , T . ( 2012 ) . The impact of science - based entrepreneur - ial firms—a literature review and policy synthesis . Richards , W . ( 2009 ) . Spin - outs : Creating businesses from university intellectual property . New York : Har - riman House Limited . RSC ( Royal Society of Chemistry ) . ( 2005 ) . Chemical science spin - outs from UK universities—review of critical success factors . Ruhnka , J . , Feldman , H . , & Dean , T . ( 1992 ) . The “living dead” phenomenon in venture capital investments . Journal of Business Venturing , 7 ( 2 ) , 137 – 155 . Shane , S . ( 2004 ) . Academic entrepreneurship : University spinoffs and wealth creation . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar Publishing . Shane , S . , & Stuart , T . ( 2002 ) . Organizational endowments and the performance of university start - ups . Management Science , 48 ( 1 ) , 154 – 170 . Siegel , D . , & Wright , M . ( 2015 ) . Academic entrepreneurship : Time for a rethink ? British Journal of Man - agement , 26 ( 4 ) , 582 – 595 . Soetanto , D . , & van Geenhuizen , M . ( 2015 ) . Getting the right balance : University networks’ influence on spin - offs’ attraction of funding for innovation . Technovation , 36 , 26 – 38 . Spence , M . ( 1973 ) . Job market signaling . The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 87 ( 3 ) , 355 – 374 . Spence , M . ( 2002 ) . Signaling in retrospect and the informational structure of markets . American Economic Review , 92 ( 3 ) , 434 – 459 . Spilling , O . ( 1996 ) . The entrepreneurial system : On entrepreneurship in the context of a mega - event . Jour - nal of Business Research , 36 ( 1 ) , 91 – 103 . Sternberg , R . ( 2014 ) . Success factors of university - spin - offs : Regional government support programs versus regional environment . Technovation , 34 ( 3 ) , 137 – 148 . Stiglitz , J . ( 2002 ) . Information and the change in the paradigm in economics . American Economic Review , 92 ( 3 ) , 460 – 501 . Tietz , R . ( 2013 ) . Executive teams in research - based spin - off companies : An empirical analysis of executive team characteristics , strategy , and performance . Berlin : Springer . Tornatzky , L . , & Bauman , J . ( 1997 ) . Outlaws or heroes ? Issues of faculty rewards , organizational culture , and university - industry technology transfer . Southern Technology Council . Trippl , M . , Sinozic , T . , & Lawton Smith , H . ( 2015 ) . The role of universities in regional development : Con - ceptual models and policy institutions in the UK Sweden and Austria . European Planning Studies , 23 ( 9 ) , 1722 – 1740 . Walter , A . , Auer , M . , & Ritter , T . ( 2006 ) . The impact of network capabilities and entrepreneurial orientation on university spin - off performance . Journal of Business Venturing , 21 ( 4 ) , 541 – 567 . Wennberg , K . , Wiklund , J . , DeTienne , D . , & Cardon , M . ( 2010 ) . Reconceptualizing entrepreneurial exit : Divergent exit routes and their drivers . Journal of Business Venturing , 25 ( 4 ) , 361 – 375 . Wennberg , K . , Wiklund , J . , & Wright , M . ( 2011 ) . The effectiveness of university knowledge spillovers : Performance differences between university spinoffs and corporate spinoffs . Research Policy , 40 ( 8 ) , 1128 – 1143 . Williamson , O . ( 1996 ) . Transaction cost economics and the Carnegie connection . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 31 ( 2 ) , 149 – 155 . Wright , M . , Lockett , A . , Clarysse , B . , & Binks , M . ( 2006 ) . University spin - out companies and venture capi - tal . Research Policy , 35 ( 4 ) , 481 – 501 . Wright , M . , Clarysse , B . , Lockett , A . , & Knockaert , M . ( 2008 ) . Mid - range universities’ linkages with indus - try : Knowledge types and the role of intermediaries . Research Policy , 37 ( 8 ) , 1205 – 1223 . Zahra , S . , Van de Velde , E . , & Larraneta , B . ( 2007 ) . Knowledge conversion capability and the performance of corporate and university spin - offs . Industrial and Corporate Change , 16 ( 4 ) , 569 – 608 . Zhang , J . ( 2009 ) . The performance of university spin - offs : An exploratory analysis using venture capital data . The Journal of Technology Transfer , 34 ( 3 ) , 255 – 285 . Ziedonis , A . ( 2007 ) . Real options in technology licensing . Management Science , 53 ( 10 ) , 1618 – 1633 . Zimmerman , M . ( 2008 ) . The influence of top management team heterogeneity on the capital raised through an initial public offering . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 32 ( 3 ) , 391 – 414 . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .