Article Proﬁlin Interaction with Actin Filament Barbed End Controls Dynamic Instability , Capping , Branching , and Motility Graphical Abstract Highlights d The binding of proﬁlin to barbed ends accounts for its effects on cell migration d Proﬁlin enhances length ﬂuctuations of actin ﬁlaments by destabilizing barbed ends d Proﬁlin competes with capping protein at ﬁlament barbed ends d Proﬁlin competes with polymerases and ﬁlament branching machineries at barbed ends Authors Julien Pernier , Shashank Shekhar , Antoine Jegou , Be´renge ` re Guichard , Marie - France Carlier Correspondence marie - france . carlier @ i2bc . paris - saclay . fr In Brief Pernier et al . demonstrate how the binding of proﬁlin to actin ﬁlament barbed ends affects actin homeostasis during cell migration . Proﬁlin competes with and coordinates the function of barbed end regulators including Capping Protein , polymerases such as formin or VASP , and WASP - Arp2 / 3 ﬁlament branching machineries . Pernier et al . , 2016 , Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 12 . 024 Developmental Cell Article Proﬁlin Interaction with Actin Filament Barbed End Controls Dynamic Instability , Capping , Branching , and Motility Julien Pernier , 1 , 2 Shashank Shekhar , 1 , 2 Antoine Jegou , 1 , 3 Be´renge ` re Guichard , 1 , 3 and Marie - France Carlier 1 , * 1 Cytoskeleton Dynamics and Motility Group , I2BC , CNRS , Gif - sur - Yvette 91198 , France 2 Co - ﬁrst author 3 Present address : Regulation of Actin Assembly Dynamics Group , Institut Jacques Monod , Universite´ Paris - Diderot , Paris 75205 , France * Correspondence : marie - france . carlier @ i2bc . paris - saclay . fr http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 12 . 024 This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . SUMMARY Cell motility and actin homeostasis depend on the control of polarized growth of actin ﬁlaments . Proﬁ - lin , an abundant regulator of actin dynamics , sup - ports ﬁlament assembly at barbed ends by binding G - actin . Here , we demonstrate how , by binding and destabilizing ﬁlament barbed ends at physiological concentrations , proﬁlin also controls motility , cell migration , and actin homeostasis . Proﬁlin enhances ﬁlament length ﬂuctuations . Proﬁlin competes with Capping Protein at barbed ends , which generates a lower amount of proﬁlin - actin than expected if barbed ends were tightly capped . Proﬁlin competes with barbed end polymerases , such as formins and VopF , and inhibits ﬁlament branching by WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex by competition for ﬁlament barbed ends , accounting for its as - yet - unknown effects on motility and metastatic cell migration observed in this concentration range . In conclusion , proﬁlin is a major coordinator of polarized growth of actin ﬁla - ments , controlled by competition between barbed end cappers , trackers , destabilizers , and ﬁlament branching machineries . INTRODUCTION Motile and morphogenetic processes are driven by polarized assembly of actin ﬁlaments , which generates protrusive or compressive forces against cellular membranes . Filament growth rate is controlled by the concentration of polymerizable monomericactinthatassociatestobarbedendsandbytheactiv - ityof regulatory proteins at barbed ends ( Carlier et al . , 2015 ) . Pro - ﬁlin , anessentialactin - bindingproteinpresentincellsintherange 10 – 80 m M ( dosRemedioset al . , 2003 ; Witke etal . , 2001 ) , isacen - tral player in actin - based motility , because proﬁlin - actin complex feeds ﬁlament assembly selectively at barbed ends ( Pollard and Cooper , 1984 ) and supports formin - mediated rapid processive barbed end assembly ( Kovar et al . , 2003 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , like free G - actin , proﬁlin - actin is in dynamic equilibrium with F - actin at barbed ends . This is in contrast with b - thymosin , which forms non - polymerizing complexes with actin that are in rapid equilibrium with G - actin but not with F - actin . While the cellular function of proﬁlin is thought to be linked to its binding G - actin , elusive effects of proﬁlin in motile and meta - static processes cannot easily be explained within this simple view . Injection of proﬁlin inhibits lamellipodium motility and for - mation of the lamellipodial branched ﬁlaments ( Cao et al . , 1992 ; Rotty et al . , 2015 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . Consistently , proﬁlin is downregulated in invasive metastatic breast cancer cells ( Joy et al . , 2014 ; Lorente et al . , 2014 ) and its overexpression reduces their migration ( Roy and Jacobson , 2004 ) . These counterintuitive facts prompted us to take a new look at proﬁlin . Proﬁlin associates with the barbed face of actin , which is exposed on both G - actin and F - actin at the ﬁlament barbed end . Proﬁlin binds G - actin with high afﬁnity ( K G = 0 . 1 m M ) , and barbed end F - actin with relatively lower afﬁnity ( K F = 20 m M ) , pro - moting enhanced ﬁlament disassembly ( Bubb et al . , 2003 ; Cour - temanche and Pollard , 2013 ; Jegou et al . , 2011 ; Kinosian et al . , 2002 ) . The consequences of proﬁlin’s interaction with barbed ends on ﬁlament assembly dynamics and proﬁlin’s resulting competition with other barbed end regulators are explored here . We ﬁnd that proﬁlin enhances ﬂuctuations in the length of ﬁla - ments . The extensive disassembly events are balanced by an increased amount of proﬁlin - actin feeding barbed ends at steady state . We next reveal that proﬁlin controls actin homeosta - sis by competing with Capping Protein ( CP ) at barbed ends , with formin and with WH2 - domain - containing barbed end trackers such as VopF . Finally , proﬁlin binding to barbed ends inhibits ﬁla - mentbranchingbyWASPproteinsandArp2 / 3complexandresult - ing actin - based motility . Proteins that track barbed ends such as VopF , VASP , formins , similarlyinhibitﬁlamentbarbedendbranch - ing by Arp2 / 3 complex . The reported ‘‘anti - capping’’ and ‘‘anti - branching’’activitiesofproﬁlin , whichaffectmotility , areexplained by competitive interplay of regulators at barbed ends . RESULTS Proﬁlin Enhances Length Fluctuations of Actin Filaments in ATP Actin ﬁlaments , like microtubules , use nucleotide hydrolysis associated with assembly to generate metastable dynamic poly - mers . Rapid disassembly of the ADP / GDP subunits in the core of Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors 201 the polymer is prevented by a stable ATP / GTP cap at the growing plus / barbed end ( Carlier et al . , 1984 ) . Dynamic insta - bility is milder in actin than in microtubules ( Hill , 1986 ; Ranjith et al . , 2009 ; Stukalin and Kolomeisky , 2006 ; Vavylonis et al . , 2005 ) . Yet , ﬂuctuations in the length of individual ﬁlaments , exceeding the low ‘‘length diffusivity’’ of reversible polymeriza - tion , have been detected ( Fujiwara et al . , 2002 ; Kuhn and Pollard , 2005 ) . Proﬁlin was predicted to enhance length ﬂuctuations by pro - moting faster ﬁlament disassembly ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) . To measure length ﬂuctuations in the region of the monomer con - Figure 1 . Proﬁlin Promotes Mild Dynamic Instability of Actin Filaments ( A ) Effect of proﬁlin on the rate of barbed end growth as a function of MgATP - G - actin , monitored using the pyrene ﬂuorescence assay . See Sup - plemental Experimental Procedures for details . ( B ) Effect of proﬁlin on the rate of barbed end growth of single ﬁlaments initiated from immobi - lized spectrin - actin seeds ( open symbols ) . Lines : numerical simulations , using the kinetic parame - ters in Table S1 . Inset : individual ﬁlaments observed in microﬂuidics - assisted microscopy . ( CandE ) Lengthofindividualﬁlamentsversustime , without ( black ) or with ( red ) 30 m M proﬁlin were measured ( C ) or simulated numerically ( E ) with the same parameters as in Figure 1B . Actin concen - trations are adjusted to obtain mean elongation ratesof (cid:1) 1 . 6 , (cid:1) 0 . 25 , and0 . 8subunits / s ( C ) and (cid:1) 2 , 0 . 3 and 2 subunits / s ( E ) . Curves are shifted verti - cally for readability . ( D and F ) 1D diffusion coefﬁcient D , from experi - mental ( D ) or numerical ( F ) data , for mean growth rates around null ( vertical gray line ) with or without proﬁlin as indicated . Error bars are SDs . centration C SS at which the net rate of ﬁla - ment barbed end growth is null , we ﬁrst examined how the rate of barbed end elongation , J , at varied G - actin concentra - tions ( C ) is affected by proﬁlin ( Figure 1A ) . Only barbed ends contribute in J ( C ) since pointed ends do not interact with proﬁlin and disassemble extremely slowly . The dual activity of proﬁlin is revealed by the data . In a range of proﬁlin concentrations sufﬁcient to convert G - actin into proﬁlin - actin , barbed end growth proceeds equally well from proﬁlin - actin or G - actin . At a range of higher concentrations ( 10 – 100 m M ) , proﬁlin - enhanced dissociation from barbed ends promotes an increase in C SS ( J ( C SS ) = 0 ) from 0 . 1 m M up to 1 m M at 50 m M proﬁlin , and 1 . 3 m M proﬁ - lin - actin at 100 m M proﬁlin . This means that an enhanced ﬂux of proﬁlin - actin association to barbed ends balances enhanced disassembly at steady state . The increase in C SS is the signature of the destabilization of ﬁlament barbed ends by proﬁlin . In measurements of F - actin at steady state described later ( Figures 4C , 4D , and 5E ) , the same values of C SS are found for proﬁlin - actin co - existing at steady state with F - actin . Single - ﬁlament kinetics using microﬂuidics - assisted micro - scopy of ﬁlaments immobilized at their pointed ends by spec - trin - actin seeds conﬁrmed the destabilization of barbed ends by proﬁlin seen in bulk solution measurements ( Figure 1B , sym - bols ) . Computed rates of ﬁlament growth using parameters for proﬁlin binding to ATP - bound barbed ends ( Table S1 ) conﬁrm the experimental data ( Figure 1B ) . 202 Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors We then compared ﬂuctuations in length in the absence and presence of free proﬁlin in the vicinity of C SS ( from Figures 1A and 1B ) at a range of growth rates of (cid:1) 2 to + 2 subunits / s ( Figures 1C and 1D ) . The diffusion coefﬁcient D was 10 ± 2 subunits 2 / s for non - capped ﬁlaments at steady state in the absence of proﬁlin , one order of magnitude higher than for capped ﬁlaments ( 0 . 31 ± 0 . 2 subunits 2 / s , the detection limit ) . Over a wide range of elongation rates , ﬂuctuations are enhanced by proﬁlin , most extensively below C SS , as predicted ( Vavylonis et al . , 2005 ) , where the maximal value of D was increased up to 5 - fold at 30 m M proﬁlin ( Figure 2B ) . These features are reproduced in simulated kinetics of growth of individual ﬁlaments ( Figures 1E and 1F ) , using the same parameters as in Figure 1B ( Table S1 ; see Supplemental Experimental Procedures , Equation 1 ) . In conclusion , proﬁlin promotes a mild form of ‘‘dynamic insta - bility’’ in actin , by amplifying the effects of catastrophes above the critical concentration , and of rescues below the critical concentration . The ﬁlament monomer - polymer exchanges are largely dominated by proﬁlin - actin exchanges at barbed ends exclusively . Effect of Proﬁlin on Barbed End Assembly from ATP - , ADP - , and AMPPNP - Actin Proﬁlin affects barbed end assembly differently depending on the nature of the actin - bound nucleotide ( Figure 2A ) . While pro - ﬁlin slowed down barbed end assembly at 3 m M ATP - G - actin , consistent with the results in Figure 1A , it inhibited assembly at 3 m M ADP - G - actin , eventually causing barbed end disassembly at the same rate as in the absence of actin . Thus , ﬁlaments are unable to elongate from proﬁlin - ADP - actin . This was conﬁrmed in single - ﬁlament assays ( Figure 2B ) . Finally , proﬁlin inhibited ﬁlament growth from AMPPNP - actin . However , the barbed Figure 2 . Nucleotide Dependence of the Effect of Proﬁlin ( A ) Effect of proﬁlin on the rate of ﬁlament elongation in ATP , AMPPNP , and ADP . Conditions as in Figure 1A , with 3 m M G - actin . Dark green curve : in ADP , no G - actin . ( B ) Singleﬁlamentexperimentsat5 m MADP - actin . DatapointsfromJegouetal . ( 2011 ) . ThesolidlineiscomputedusingparametersfromTableS1 , assumingthat the barbed end on - rate constant for proﬁlin - ADP - actin is the same as for ADP - actin ( 2 . 6 m M (cid:1) 1 s (cid:1) 1 ) . Error bars are standard deviations . ( C ) Effect of proﬁlin on barbed end assembly in ADP ( C ) and AMPPNP ( D ) . Blue curves , no proﬁlin ; red curves , 100 m M proﬁlin . Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors 203 ends remained blocked by proﬁlin - AMPPNP - actin and no depo - lymerization of AMPPNP - F - actin was observed at high proﬁlin . In the absence of proﬁlin , J ( C ) plots obtained in ADP and AMPPNP were linear as expected , with critical concentration values of 1 . 5 m M and 0 . 14 m M , respectively ( Figures 2C and 2D ) . In the presence of 100 m M proﬁlin , ADP - F - actin depolymer - ized at a high rate ( 55 subunits / s ) independent of ADP - G - actin , consistent with Figure 2A . In contrast , AMPPNP - F - actin depoly - merized at a 10 - fold enhanced rate in the absence of actin , in agreement with Courtemanche and Pollard ( 2013 ) , but the addi - tion of AMPPNP - G - actin gradually led to total blockage of barbed ends , consistent with Figure 2A . In conclusion , proﬁlin binds G - actin and barbed ends in various bound nucleotide states , but only proﬁlin - MgATP - actin supports barbed end assembly . Capping Protein and Proﬁlin Compete at Filament Barbed Ends : Implication in the Control of the F - Actin / G - Actin Ratio and Free Proﬁlin Concentration In live cells , most proﬁlin is thought to be bound to G - actin ( Kai - ser et al . , 1999 ) . This view is based on the implicit assumption that barbed ends are fully capped in the bulk cytoplasm , which prevents the participation of proﬁlin - actin in barbed end growth . In these conditions , proﬁlin is now in equilibrium with G - actin only at the critical concentration for pointed end assembly , lead - ing to 88 % of total proﬁlin being present in proﬁlin - actin complex ( Equation 2 , Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . Typically , in a cell containing 50 m M proﬁlin , 43 m M proﬁlin - actin would be present ( Sirotkin et al . , 2010 ) , which would support transient barbed end growth of newly formed ﬁlaments at a rate of 1 m m / s , and formin - bound barbed ends at 5 – 10 m m / s . These rates are much higher than those observed so far , which sug - gests that the amount of proﬁlin - actin is lower than predicted by strong capping . How does the interaction of proﬁlin with barbed ends interfere with the function of CP , the most ubiquitous and abundant barbed end capper ? CP is required in motile processes such as lamellipodia ( Edwards et al . , 2014 ) . CP binds terminal actin subunits with a K d of 0 . 1 nM ( Wear et al . , 2003 ) . Tuning the extent of barbed end capping in the cytoplasm is essential . Over 90 % of ﬁlaments must be capped to maintain a high concentration of actin monomers available for transient localized barbed end as - sembly in motility ( Carlier and Pantaloni , 1997 ; Hug et al . , 1995 ; Walsh et al . , 1984 ) . However , capping of 100 % barbed ends in - hibits all actin - based movements . Clearly , the potential compe - tition between proﬁlin and CP and its consequences in motility have to be addressed . Binding of CP ( 1 nM ) to the growing barbed ends of single ﬁlaments was slowed down by proﬁlin ( Figure 3A ) , consistent with proﬁlin binding to terminal ATP - F - actin ( K F = 29 . 3 ± 1 . 7 m M ) , in competition with CP ( Table S1 ) . Similarly , proﬁlin slowed down binding of CP in ADP - F - actin depolymerization assays ( Figure S1A ) . In contrast , depolymerization of CP - cap - ped ﬁlaments was unaffected by up to 100 m M proﬁlin ( Fig - ure S1B ) . Hence , proﬁlin inhibits CP association to barbed ends but does not uncap CP from barbed ends , in agreement with Bubb et al . ( 2003 ) . These effects are observed in a physi - ologically relevant range of concentrations of proﬁlin ( dos Re - medios et al . , 2003 ) and of free CP , since the major fraction of cellular CP ( total concentration 1 – 2 m M ) is sequestered by myotrophin / V1 ( see Discussion ) . How does the competition between proﬁlin and CP affect the distribution of the ﬁlament population between the capped ( blocked ) and non - capped ( dynamic ) state ? To address this issue , we measured the steady state amount of F - actin at different concentrations of CP and proﬁlin in the range 0 – 10 m M ( Figures 3B and S1C ) . In the absence of proﬁlin , CP caused partial depolymerization of 0 . 5 m M F - actin , correspond - ing to the increase in the critical concentration from 0 . 1 to 0 . 6 m M , its value for pointed end assembly ( Figure 3B inset , blue symbols ) . The major change in critical concentration ( Walsh et al . , 1984 ) occurs between 90 % capping ( 1 nM CP ) and 99 % capping ( 10 nM CP ) . Addition of increasing amounts of proﬁlin to ﬁlaments containing between 10 and 100 nM CP did not pro - mote a linear decrease in F - actin leading to complete disas - sembly , as observed when barbed ends are strongly capped by gelsolin ( orange triangles in Figure 3B ; Equation 2 , Supple - mental Experimental Procedures ) . Strikingly , only partial F - actin disassembly was recorded ( Figures 3B and S1C ) . A stationary level of proﬁlin - actin , which increased with CP , was established at 10 m M proﬁlin in dynamic equilibrium with the remaining F - actin ( Figure 3B inset , red symbols ) . In conclusion , by antago - nizing capping of barbed ends by CP , proﬁlin maintains active monomer - polymer exchange at a fraction of barbed ends . The thermodynamic data thus agree with the kinetic data . These results were corroborated by sedimentation assays . SDS - PAGE analysis and pyrenyl - ﬂuorescence measurements of proﬁlin - actin in the supernatants of F - actin ( 20 m M ) capped by either CP or gelsolin , ( Figure 3C ) conﬁrm that proﬁlin ( 50 m M ) promotes complete depolymerization of gelsolin - cap - ped ﬁlaments but only partial depolymerization in the presence of CP , leaving 80 % proﬁlin free . To conﬁrm that the difference in behavior of proﬁlin with CP - capped and gelsolin - capped ﬁlaments results speciﬁcally from its ability to interact with barbed ends , we used thymosin b 4 as a passive G - actin sequesterer that does not interact with actin ﬁl - aments . In contrast with proﬁlin , thymosin b 4 caused identical depolymerization of F - actin when ﬁlaments were capped by either CP or gelsolin ( Figure 3D ) . In conclusion , the ability of proﬁlin to compete with CP lowers the fraction of proﬁlin in the actin - bound state and imposes a higher amount of free proﬁlin than expected in conventional views . Free proﬁlin can thus compete effectively with other barbed end binding proteins . A diagram summarizing the distri - butions of F - actin , free proﬁlin , and proﬁlin - actin in various states of barbed ends and at physiologically relevant concentrations of all proteins is shown as an illustration ( Figure 3E ) . Proﬁlin Competes with Barbed End Tracking Proteins and Formin How does proﬁlin also compete with polymerases that track barbed ends ? Potential candidates include formins ( Goode and Eck , 2007 ) and multimeric WH2 domain proteins such as VopF and VASP ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ; Pernier et al . , 2013 ) . The FH2 domain of formins and the WH2 domains display steric clashes with proﬁlin binding to the barbed face of terminal F - actin ( Carlier et al . , 2015 ) . On the other hand , association of proﬁlin - actin to the FH1 domain of formin is 204 Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors essential for rapid processive assembly by formins ( Kovar et al . , 2006 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , the effects of proﬁlin on formin function are potentially complex . Excess of free proﬁlin inhibits processive elongation of ﬁlaments by formin ( Kovar et al . , 2006 ) . Proﬁlin also inhibits FH2 ( Higgs , 2005 ; Scott et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , inhibition of formin by proﬁlin may not be due only to displacement of proﬁlin - actin from the FH1 domain . How proﬁlin affects the kinetics of FH1 - FH2 of mDia1 associ - ation to barbed ends was addressed in microﬂuidics - assisted total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy assays ( Figure 4A ) . The free barbed end of spectrin - actin initiated ﬁla - Figure 3 . Proﬁlin Competes with CP at Barbed Ends ( A ) Time course of the fraction of individual ﬁla - ments that get capped for the ﬁrst time , in the presence of 1 nM CP and 0 , 20 , or 60 m M proﬁlin , and G - actin at concentrations ensuring a growth rate of 10 subunits / s ( see Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures ) . Inset : Pseudo ﬁrst - order rate constant for CP binding versus proﬁlin , repre - senting binding of proﬁlin to ATP - bound barbed ends ( K d = 29 . 25 ± 1 . 75 ) m M ) . ( B ) F - actin assembled at steady state ( 2 . 3 m M F - actin , 2 % pyrenyl labeled ) in the absence and thepresenceofCP , andproﬁlinasindicated . Inset : concentration of actin monomers at steady state versusCP , intheabsence ( bluesigmoidalcurve ) or the presence of 5 m M proﬁlin ( red curve ) . Data derived from main frame . Orange triangles , gel - solin in place of CP . ( C ) Proﬁlin - actin complex in the supernatants of F - actin assembled at 20 m M in the presence of either 100 nM CP ( blue symbols ) or gelsolin at a 1 : 300 ratio to actin ( red symbols ) . Closed and open symbols represent values derived from pyr - ene ﬂuorescence and SDS - PAGE ( top panel ) , respectively . ( D ) Unassembled actin in supernatants of F - actin assembled in the presence of thymosin b 4 or proﬁlin , and CP or gelsolin . Note that in contrast to proﬁlin , thymosin b 4 sequesters actin identically when ﬁlaments are capped by CP or by gelsolin . Top panel : SDS - PAGE of the samples . ( E ) Distribution of F - actin , proﬁlin - actin , and free proﬁlin in a medium containing 50 m M total actin and 50 m M total proﬁlin , with various states of barbed ends . ments was exposed brieﬂy to FH1 - FH2 in the presence of varying concentrations of proﬁlin , before being exposed to proﬁ - lin - actin only . Free and formin - bound barbed ends were discriminated by their rate of barbed end growth in proﬁlin - actin ( Figure S2A ) . Proﬁlin inhibited binding of formin to barbed ends in a saturation fashion , consistent with a mutually exclu - sive binding scheme and a binding con - stant of proﬁlin of 34 m M for barbed ends . The effect of proﬁlin on the kinetics of processive assembly was analyzed . Whether formin was ( Figure S2B ) or was not anchored ( Figure 4B ) , a bell - shaped dependence of the rate of processive assembly on proﬁlin was observed . Effective proc - essive depolymerization was observed at high proﬁlin . In the absence of actin , proﬁlin enhanced depolymerization of FH1 - FH2 bound ﬁlaments , in agreement with data obtained with anchored formin ( Jegou et al . , 2013 ) . Controls run in comparison with free barbed ends are shown . Together , the data demon - strate that proﬁlin destabilizes the barbed ends without displac - ing FH1 - FH2 . Remarkably , while formin ‘‘protects’’ barbed ends from destabilization by proﬁlin in the presence of actin , it ampliﬁes proﬁlin - induced destabilization in the absence of actin . Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors 205 The above kinetic data are conﬁrmed by the thermodynamic data . Formin , VopF , and VASP all maintain a low critical concen - tration ( high stability ) of barbed ends ( Pernier et al . , 2013 ; Ro - mero et al . , 2004 ) . Here we show that formin ( Figure 4C ) as well as VopF ( Figure 4D ) similarly antagonize the destabilizing ef - fect of proﬁlin at barbed ends by increasing the amount of F - actin ( Experimental Procedures ) . The general view that reactivity of barbed ends is controlled by competitive binding is not new . VopF uncaps CP from barbed ends using its WH2 domains , the dissociation of CP being enhanced by VopF via a transient low - afﬁnity ternary complex with barbed ends ( Pernier et al . , 2013 ) . Formin uncaps CP using the same molecular mechanism ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . Proﬁlin Binding to Barbed Ends Inhibits Filament Branching by N - WASP with Arp2 / 3 Complex and Actin - Based Motility The intriguing effects of proﬁlin on cell motility reported earlier cannot be explained merely by its competition with barbed end trackers . In particular , the selective inhibition of lamellipodium ( Cao et al . , 1992 ) , the disappearance of the WAVE - Arp2 / 3 branched ﬁlament array at 40 m M proﬁlin ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ) , and the inhibition of reconstituted propulsion of Listeria in the range of 10 – 50 m M proﬁlin ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) correlate with the inhibition of ﬁlament branching by proﬁlin ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 2003 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . This effect required proﬁlin’s ability to bind actin , its binding to poly - L - proline being dispensable ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . However , only binding of proﬁlin to G - actin was considered in previous works . We explored how proﬁlin affects in vitro propulsion of N - WASP coated beads . Upon increasing proﬁlin , the length of the actin tails decreased ( Figure 5A ) and branching density declined ( Fig - ures 5A and 5B ) . At 50 m M proﬁlin , 60 % of the beads moved only 2 - fold slower than at 10 m M proﬁlin ( Figure S3A ) . Alexa 488 - labeled Arp2 / 3 bound to N - WASP - coated beads identically at 3 or 50 m M proﬁlin , testifying that only Arp2 / 3 incorporation in the tail is inhibited . Increasing the concentration of CP from 10 to 30 nM increased bead velocity by 22 % at 20 m M proﬁlin without restoring the original tail morphology . In summary , proﬁ - lin inhibits ﬁlament branching by N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 , corroborating recent reports ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . Proﬁlin also inhibited ﬁlament branching in spectrin - actin seeded polymerization assays with soluble VCA - Arp2 / 3 , corrob - orating early ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ) and recent ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) observations ( Figure 5C ) . While 60 m M proﬁlin slows down free barbed end growth by 2 . 2 - fold , in the presence of Arp2 / 3 inhibition was much stronger than expected if only barbed end growth was inhibited ( computed dashed curve in Figure 5C ) . The possibility that proﬁlin competes with the WH2 domain of VCA for binding G - actin has been proposed ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . Within this hypothesis , increasing VCA should bal - ance out this effect . No reversal of the effect of 30 m M proﬁlin was seen even by increasing the amount of VCA up to 10 - fold ( Figure S3B ) . Suarez et al . ( 2015 ) proposed that the direct competition between proﬁlin and VCA for binding G - actin Figure 4 . Competition between Proﬁlin and Formin or VopF for Barbed Ends ( A ) Proﬁlin inhibits FH1 - FH2 association to barbed ends : Filaments elongated from coverslip - immo - bilized spectrin - actin seeds and exposing free barbed ends ( B ) were ﬁrst incubated with 10 nM FH1 - FH2 ( F ) and 0 m M ( black ) , 25 m M ( red ) , 75 m M ( blue ) , or 100 m M proﬁlin ( magenta ) ( and no actin ) for various periods of time ( Figure S2A ) , then immediately exposedtoaﬂowofproﬁlin - actin . The fraction of ﬁlaments in BF ( fast growth ) and B ( slow growth ) states was measured ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . Symbols : data points for 5 , 10 , 20 , and 30 s exposure time . Lines : exponential ﬁts . Inset : Pseudo ﬁrst - order rate constant for formin binding versus proﬁlin , representing the saturation of ATP - bound barbed ends by proﬁlin ( K d = 36 . 52 ± 4 . 1 m M ) . At least 150 ﬁlaments were observed for each combination of exposure time and proﬁlin concentration . ( B ) Proﬁlin ﬁrst assists , then inhibits formin - based rapid elongation at high proﬁlin concentration . Fil - aments initiated from immobilized spectrin - actin seeds with free ( red ) or formin - bound ( black ) bar - bed ends are exposed to a ﬂow containing proﬁlin only ( open symbols ) or proﬁlin with 0 . 5 m M G - actin ( closed symbols ) . Barbed end elongation rates are monitored , N = 40 – 50 ﬁlaments . Error bars are SEM . ( C ) Proﬁlin and formin antagonize in controlling the steady - state of actin assembly . Amount of F - actin at steady state ( 2 m M actin ) as a function of proﬁlin in the absence and the presence of 44 nM FH1 - FH2 . Inset : effect of FH1 - FH2 on F - actin at 80 m M proﬁlin . ( D ) ProﬁlinandVopFantagonizeincontrollingthesteady - stateofactinassembly . AmountofF - actinatsteadystateintheabsenceandthepresenceofVopF ( red , 50 nM ; orange , 70 nM ) and proﬁlin . Inset : Effect of VopF on F - actin at 52 m M proﬁlin . 206 Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors accounted for the inhibition of branching competing directly with VCA for binding G - actin , but they actually found a 5 - fold decrease in afﬁnity of VCA for G - actin under conditions ( 1 m M actin , 20 m M proﬁlin ) where a 200 - fold decrease was predicted by a mutually exclusive binding scheme . In conclusion , both our and Suarez et al . ’s data exclude that proﬁlin inhibits branch - ing only by displacing G - actin from VCA . Proﬁlin also inhibited ﬁlament branching in single - ﬁlament assays ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) ( Figure 5D ) . Inhibition of Arp2 / 3 - mediated dendritic meshworks , irrespec - tive of the nature of the branching protein ( WAVE , N - WASP , VCA , ActA ) , takes place in a concentration range ( 5 – 100 m M ) at which proﬁlin binds to ﬁlament barbed ends , suggesting that proﬁlin inhibits ﬁlament branching at barbed ends ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) . However , proﬁlin might also bind and inhibit Arp2 / 3 complex ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) , a possibility weakened Figure 5 . Proﬁlin Inhibits Filament Branching by Arp2 / 3 Complex and Resulting Actin - Based Motility ( A ) Double ﬂuorescence ( Alexa 594 - actin and Alexa 488 - Arp2 / 3 ) images of N - WASP - coated beads pro - pelling in the reconstituted motility assay in the presence of proﬁlin . ( B ) Branching density ratio derived from integrated ﬂuorescence intensity of Arp2 / 3 and actin along the comet tail . ( C ) Effect of 60 m M proﬁlin on barbed end growth initiated by 0 . 3 nM spectrin - actin seeds in the presenceof3 m MMgATP - G - actinand0 . 16 m MVCA , in the absence and the presence of 46 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . Controls ( no proﬁlin ) in dimmer colors . Dashed lines are calculated using a model ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) in which ﬁlament branching is unaffected by proﬁlin and ﬁla - ments grow at the standard growth rate ( dim red ) and at a rate 55 % lowered by proﬁlin ( bright red ) . ( D ) Images of ﬁlaments branched with VCA and Arp2 / 3 complex at different concentrations of pro - ﬁlin after 1 , 000 s . Red dots , branch junctions . ( E ) Destabilization of ﬁlaments by proﬁlin is relieved by VCA - Arp2 / 3 . Assembled F - actin in the presence of proﬁlin and 50 nM VCA , with or without 30 nM Arp2 / 3 . Inset : Increase in F - actin upon addition of Arp2 / 3 complex ( 30 nM ) to F - actin pre - assembled with VCA and without ( blue ) or with ( red ) 60 m M proﬁlin . by the absence of proﬁlin in large com - plexes in subcellular fractionation experi - ments ( Kaiser et al . , 1999 ) . To distinguish between the two possibilities , we ﬁgured that if proﬁlin simply inhibits Arp2 / 3 , the destabilization of barbed ends by proﬁlin at steady state should be unaffected by VCA - Arp2 / 3 . In contrast , we ﬁnd that the presence of VCA and Arp2 / 3 restores a higher level of F - actin ( lower monomer con - centration ) in the presence of high amounts of proﬁlin ( Figure 5E ) . Thus , VCA and Arp2 / 3 , like formin or VopF ( Figures 4C and 4D ) , antagonize barbed end destabili - zation induced by proﬁlin , supporting the view that ﬁlament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 takes place at barbed ends , at vari - ance with the proposed side - branching model ( Amann and Pollard , 2001a ; Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ) . Live TIRF Microscopy Analysis of Assembly of Branched Filaments Reveals that Barbed End Branching Prevails over Side Branching The side - branching model was tempered by the conspicuous observation that branching was favored in the region that ap - peared close to the barbed end where ADP - Pi subunits were thought to facilitate side branching ( Amann and Pollard , 2001b ) . However , no experimental evidence has established a role of bound nucleotide in branching . This hypothesis , which had been discarded previously ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ) , was further disproved , as no massive increase in branching activity Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors 207 was measured on F - ADP - Pi ﬁlaments ( Le Clainche et al . , 2003 ) or in the presence of BeF 3 (cid:1) ( here , Figure S4 ) . However , several reports showed clear evidence of side branching off F - ADP ﬁla - ments ( Smith et al . , 2013 ; Risca et al . , 2012 ) , with a very low frequency of 3 3 10 (cid:1) 5 m M (cid:1) 1 s (cid:1) 1 ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) . How two mechanisms of branching could co - exist is not understood from available data . We reasoned that different morphologies of individual den - dritic structures initiated from a single nucleus would be obtained within the ‘‘side - branching only’’ versus the ‘‘end - branching only’’ mechanisms . While end branching generates a dichotomic fractal morphology , side branching increases the branching density on older , longer exposed regions of the ﬁla - ments , generating a more bushy morphology ( Figure 6A ) . Because ﬁlaments are helical , ﬁlament branching develops 3D arborescent structures . Observation of ﬁlament branching in a Figure 6 . Filaments Branch upon Interaction of VCA - Arp2 / 3 Complex with Barbed Ends ( A ) Sketch of morphologies of branched ﬁlaments initiated from a single nucleus and undergoing side branching only ( left ) or barbed end branching only ( right ) . Rainbow color coding is used to indicate the time course of assembly . ( B ) Time - lapse images of single ﬁlaments growing and branching with 0 . 9 m M actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 50 nM VCA , and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 . See also Movie S1 . ( C ) Distribution of branching distances d 0 , d 1 , d 2 , d 3 between consecutive branching points . See text for details : Inset : average values of d 0 , d 1 , d 2 , d 3 . See also Movie S2 . ( D ) Left : Time - lapse images of side branching of ﬁlaments . Pre - assembled green ﬁlaments branch - ing inthe presence of red G - actin , VCA , and Arp2 / 3 . Right : Frequency ofsidebranchingderived fromthe linear time dependence of side - branching events . See also Movie S3 . constrained 2D geometry introduces biases and limits the rotational freedom of ﬁlaments ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . To optimize the comparison of kinetic information derived from bulk so - lution and single - ﬁlament TIRF measure - ments of ﬁlament branching , we analyzed TIRF recordings of the spontaneous as - sembly of G - actin into non - anchored ﬁlaments branching and growing at a constant rate ( see Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures ) . The following obser - vations were made ( Figure 6B ) . The ﬁrst branching event B 0 occurs very early following nucleation , at a distance d 0 from the mother ﬁlament pointed end of less than 0 . 8 m m , leading to a large number of symmetric V - shaped structures ( Figure 6B ; Movies S1 and S2 ) . Notably , if branching occurred mainly from the side of ﬁlaments , the branching frequency derived from the value of d 0 would generate such densely branched ﬁlaments that individual branches would be unresolvable in TIRF . In contrast , the next branching event B 1 on the mother ﬁlament takes place at a 3 - fold larger distance d 1 from B 0 ( Figure 6C ) . Moreover , the distances d 1 , d 2 , and d 3 between consecutive branching points B 0 , B 1 , B 2 , and B 3 along the same mother ﬁlaments ( see Supple - mental Experimental Procedures ) had the same value of 2 . 5 ± 0 . 3 m m ( 925 ± 100 subunits ) ( N = 250 , 150 , and 50 for d 1 , d 2 , and d 3 respectively ( Figure 6C ) . Most branching events occurring in the plane of observation generated mother and daughter ﬁlaments of equal length ( Movies S1 and S2 ) . Branching at an angle from the plane gener - ated bright dots often leading to late emergence of already long ﬁlaments ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . Rare side - branching events were identiﬁed ( arrows in Figure 6B bot - tom panel and Movie S1 , right panel ) , so that the distance d 1 208 Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors appeared essentially conserved , within the SD , over 200 s following the appearance of B 1 . Note that monitoring of sponta - neous assembly from G - actin facilitates the evidence for barbed end branching in the early steps of assembly when little F - actin has assembled . The probability of side branching increases as F - actin accumulates . These data support the view that branching occurs mainly at barbed ends at a constant frequency as the ﬁlament is growing at constant rate . The contribution of side - branching events is too small to bias the evidence for the main process in the period of time investigated . The value of the frequency of barbed end branching , k bb = 0 . 9 ± 0 . 1 m M (cid:1) 1 s (cid:1) 1 was derived from the measured ﬁlament growth rate ( 9 subunits / s ) and the average distance between branching points ( 925 subunits ) , Figure 7 . Barbed End Trackers Formin , VopF , and VASP and Destabilizer Proﬁlin Compete with Filament Branching at Barbed Ends ( A ) VopF inhibits ﬁlament branching by VCA and Arp2 / 3 . Conditions as in Figure 5C . Spectrin - actin seeds 0 . 3 nM ; actin ( 2 m M , 10 % pyrenyl labeled ) , 3 m M proﬁlin , 160 nM VCA , 40 nM Arp2 / 3 in the presence and the absence of VopF . ( B ) Time - lapseimagesofﬁlamentsbranchinginthe presence of 0 . 9 m M actin and 3 m M proﬁlin , without or with 200 nM VopF , 15 nM FH1 - FH2 mDia1 , or 80 m M proﬁlin . Red dots , branched junctions . See also Movie S4 . ( C ) Number of side - branching events as a function oft 2 inthepresence ofVopF , FH1 - FH2 , and proﬁlin ( data from B ) . ( D ) Time - lapse phase contrast images of ActA - coated beads in a reconstituted motility assay ( 7 m M F - actin , 2 m M proﬁlin , 100 nM Arp2 / 3 , 3 . 5 m M ADF , and 200 nM gelsolin ) in the absence ( top ) or the presence ( bottom ) of 100 nM VASP . See also Movie S5 . and assuming all the Arp2 / 3 ( 12 . 5 nM ) to be in an active complex with VCA . The small value of d 0 compared with d 1 , d 2 , and d 3 suggests that barbed end branch - ing of very short ﬁlaments prevents their loss by total disassembly . The frequency of side branching was evaluated using a two - color ﬂuorescence assay ( Movie S3 ) . Pre - assembled Alexa 488 - actin ﬁlaments ( green actin ) were ﬂushed in the chamber together with Alexa 594 - G - actin ( red actin ) , VCA , and Arp2 / 3 . The frequency of side branching , k sb , derived from the linear time depen - dence of the side branching of red ﬁla - ments off the side of green ﬁlaments ( Figure 6D and Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures , Equation 3 ) was 10 . 5 3 10 (cid:1) 5 m M (cid:1) 1 s (cid:1) 1 , in satisfactory agreement with Smith et al . ( 2013 ) and with Figure 2D in Risca et al . ( 2012 ) . Newly initiated red ﬁlaments branched in arbo - rescent structures displaying the same morphology as in Fig - ure 6B . Note that if only side branching was imposed to accommodate the data in Figure 6B , producing one branching event every 925 subunits on average , the frequency of side branching would have to be 1 . 08 3 10 (cid:1) 3 m M (cid:1) 1 s (cid:1) 1 , that is , 10 - fold higher than the actual value measured for k sb . The Arp2 / 3 Branching Machinery Competes with Proteins Tracking Barbed Ends If ﬁlaments branch at barbed ends , proteins tracking or capping barbed ends should also compete with VCA - Arp2 / 3 . This was actually observed . In a bulk solution assay , VopF inhibited ﬁla - ment branching , like proﬁlin ( Figure 7A ) . In TIRF assays , ﬁla - ments elongating in the presence of barbed end - bound VopF Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors 209 or FH1 - FH2 of mDia1 failed to branch at barbed ends ( Movie S4 ) . The time course of F - actin assembly and the general pattern of branched ﬁlaments were dramatically different from the densely branched patterns observed in the absence of barbed end bind - ing reagents . Only side branching occurred with the expected t 2 dependence due to the fact that the amount of F - actin exposed to side branching increases as ﬁlaments grow ( Figures 7B and 7C and Equation 4 , Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . Finally , in the presence of 80 m M proﬁlin , barbed end branching vanished and side branching supported the rare remaining branching events ( Figures 7B and 7C ) . The same value of k sb was derived from analysis of the samples containing either for - min or VopF or proﬁlin as in Figure 6D . The barbed end polymerase VASP harbors ‘‘anti - capping’’ properties ( Bear et al . , 2002 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) using its WH2 domains , as VopF does . VASP was also suggested to be an ‘‘anti - branching’’ factor ( Bear et al . , 2002 ; Skoble et al . , 2001 ) . To get mechanistic insight into this behavior of VASP , we reconstituted actin - based propul - sion of beads coated with the Listeria protein ActA , a functional homolog of N - WASP ( Boujemaa - Paterski et al . , 2001 ; Skoble et al . , 2000 ) . VASP binds FPPPP repeats in ActA ( Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ) and enhances Listeria motility by an unknown mech - anism ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Loisel et al . , 1999 ; Smith et al . , 1996 ) . ActA - coated beads propelled by sustained assembly of dense Arp2 / 3 - branched actin tails . Addition of VASP in the medium promoted a dramatic change in the morphology of tails into long linear unbranched actin bundles strikingly similar to for - min - induced tails ( Benanti et al . , 2015 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) and propulsion was 3 - fold faster , indicating that VASP inhibits ﬁlament branching by ActA - Arp2 / 3 by tracking ﬁlament barbed ends ( Figure 7D and Movie S5 ) . DISCUSSION This work reveals a new face of proﬁlin : Its interaction with actin ﬁlament barbed ends has profound effects on assembly dy - namics , actin homeostasis , and resulting motility . Proﬁlin pro - motes large ﬂuctuations of ﬁlament length that evoke mild dynamic instability . Proﬁlin stands as a major competitor of barbed end regulators such as CP , formins , WH2 domain pro - teins that track barbed ends , or the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 ﬁlament branching machinery . Filament branching takes place mainly via association of WASP - Arp2 / 3 with terminal barbed end sub - units , explaining the persistent polarity of the lamellipodial network . Proﬁlin appears as a major coordinator of actin ﬁlament polarized growth in cell migration and developmental processes . Finally , our results clarify the still elusive aspects of ‘‘anti - capping’’ and ‘‘anti - branching’’ regulation of actin ﬁlament dy - namics ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ) . Proﬁlin Enhances Filament Barbed End Dynamics and Resulting Length Fluctuations At the steady state of actin assembly , length ﬂuctuations result - ing from the different dynamics of ADP - Pi and ADP - actin are enhanced by proﬁlin by a factor of (cid:3) 5 – 10 . This mild dynamic instability affects the length distribution of ﬁlaments , by promot - ing total disassembly of short ﬁlaments . In our simulations , at an average growth rate of 1 subunit / s , more than 60 % of nucleated ﬁlaments disappear in a few minutes at 30 m M proﬁlin due to length ﬂuctuations , versus less than 30 % in the absence of proﬁlin . Filament Assembly from Proﬁlin - Actin Requires MgATP While actin assembles well in ﬁlaments regardless of the nature of the bound nucleotide ( ATP , ADP , or AMPPNP ) and associ - ated divalent metal ion ( Mg 2 + or Ca 2 + ) , barbed end growth is observed only from proﬁlin - MgATP - actin . Filament elongation from proﬁlin - actin requires a drop in afﬁnity of proﬁlin following association of each proﬁlin - actin to the barbed end . Proﬁlin has a low afﬁnity for terminal AMPPNP - F - actin , yet barbed end growth from proﬁlin - AMPPNP - actin fails to proceed . Consis - tently , the isoenergetic square describing association of actin and proﬁlin at barbed ends ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ; Yar - mola and Bubb , 2006 ) is satisﬁed in AMPPNP but not in MgATP . Perhaps cleavage of the g - phosphoester bond of ATP on the terminal or penultimate subunit facilitates the structural change leading to dissociation of proﬁlin from the barbed end . Physiological Relevance of the Competition between Proﬁlin and Barbed End Binding Proteins CP is the major capping protein in cells . We ﬁnd that in a concen - tration range of 10 – 100 m M proﬁlin and 1 – 100 nM CP , competi - tion between proﬁlin and CP at barbed ends results in a lower amount of proﬁlin - actin co - existing with F - actin and CP than in conventional views based on strong capping . In turn , the fraction of proﬁlin in the free state is higher than expected . Do these re - sults have physiological signiﬁcance given the abundance and much higher afﬁnity of CP than proﬁlin for barbed ends ? We believe they do , ﬁrst because active CP is present at a few nano - molar , since 98 % of the total amount of CP ( 1 m M ) is maintained inactive in a high - afﬁnity complex ( K D = 7 nM ) with myotrophin / V1 , present at 3 m M ( Edwards et al . , 2014 ; Fujiwara et al . , 2014 ; Takeda et al . , 2010 ) . Second , in the range of 90 – 100 % capped ﬁlaments , a drop of only a few percent promotes a massive change in the steady state of actin assembly ( Walsh et al . , 1984 ; Pernier et al . , 2013 ) . Estimates can be found for the amount of unassembled actin monomers in cells , but the concentrations of ( polymerizable ) proﬁlin - actin and free proﬁlin are not well known ( Moseley and Goode , 2006 ; Sirotkin et al . , 2010 ) . Nevertheless , the measured rates of transient ﬁlament growth in motile processes match a concentration of a few micromolar proﬁlin - actin , consistent with our proposed scenario in which proﬁlin competes with CP at barbed ends . Competition may be expected as well between proﬁlin and CPs such as Eps8 , IQGAP1 , or CapG , which bind barbed ends with afﬁnities in the nanomolar range . Kinetic and steady state F - actin measurements show that , at high concentration , proﬁlin inhibits binding of formin or VopF to barbed ends . We conﬁrm and build on observations of inhibition of ﬁlament branching by proﬁlin made by Machesky et al . ( 1999 ) , Rotty et al . ( 2015 ) , and Suarez et al . ( 2015 ) to show that it is by binding to barbed ends that proﬁlin inhibits ﬁlament branching by VCA , N - WASP , and ActA with Arp2 / 3 complex . The modest proﬁlin - induced decrease in afﬁnity of VCA for actin ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) suggests that an active ternary complex forms be - tween proﬁlin , actin , and VCA , as reported for proﬁlin , actin , 210 Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors and b - thymosin / WH2 domains ( Xue et al . , 2014 ; Yarmola and Bubb , 2004 ) . Inhibition of branching by binding of proﬁlin to barbed ends is consistent with early observations ( Cao et al . , 1992 ) that , upon injection in cells , proﬁlin in contrast with stan - dard sequestering agents promotes selective disassembly of lamellipodial arrays . Our data support the view that injection of proﬁlin abrogates barbed end branching at the leading edge , leading to loss of sustained formation of new ﬁlaments , loss of contacts between the membrane and the cytoskeleton , and subsequent pointed end disassembly of the array . Increasing proﬁlin should also lower the extent of barbed end capping , which synergizes in slowing down migration . The facts that excess proﬁlin slows down the motility of cancer cells ( Roy and Jacobson , 2004 ) and abrogates a lamellipodial network in control cells while increasing F - actin in Arpc2 (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ) are consistent with our data . Our results support the following mechanistic view . In live cells , the concentration of polymerizable actin monomers results from the regulated cycles of assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments ( Carlier et al . , 2015 ; Danuser et al . , 2013 ; Xue and Rob - inson , 2013 ) . The pools of capped , free , and tracker - bound barbed ends , free G - actin , proﬁlin - actin , and free proﬁlin are in a complex dynamic equilibrium . The pool of polymerizable monomeric actin is replenished , i . e . , non - ﬁnite , and proﬁlin or - chestrates actin homeostasis . This view differs from the one in which several ﬁlament assembly machineries compete for a ﬁnite pool of actin monomers ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . Filament Branching Occurs Mainly via Association of VCA - Arp2 / 3 to Filament Barbed Ends Evidence for barbed end branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 is provided by the inhibition of branching by proﬁlin and proteins that track ﬁlament barbed ends ( formin , VopF , VASP ) , and by thermody - namic data showing that the destabilization of ﬁlament barbed ends by proﬁlin is antagonized by VCA - Arp2 / 3 . Consistently , capping of barbed ends is energetically more costly in the pres - ence of VCA - Arp2 / 3 ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) and gelsolin - capped ﬁlaments fail to stimulate branching ( Figure 4 in Boujemaa - Pater - ski et al . , 2001 ) . Other reported inhibitors of branching may also act at barbed ends . Our analysis of live imaging of ﬁlament branching clarify conﬂicting views regarding barbed end branch - ing and side - branching mechanisms in providing estimates of the frequency of each process . Analyses of ﬁlament branching were derived from ﬂuores - cence microscopy of ﬁxed ﬁlaments , branched in the presence of phalloidin ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ) or from electron microscopy images of short branched ﬁlaments ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) . Often , ﬁlaments were tethered to the coverslip while being exposed to VCA and Arp2 / 3 ( Amann and Pollard , 2001b ; Risca et al . , 2012 ; Smith et al . , 2013 ) . Most studies concentrated on analysis of side - branching events , favored when barbed ends were capped ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) . Yet , in Figure 1D of Risca et al . ( 2012 ) , 20 % of surface - tethered red ﬁlaments display iden - tiﬁable barbed end branching , consistent with a very low fre - quency k bb of 0 . 06 – 0 . 11 m M (cid:1) 1 s (cid:1) 1 ( branching occurred at a distance of one - quarter of the length of green ﬁlaments assem - bled over 70 – 120 s ) . In our experiments , in contrast , ﬁlaments are not tethered to the coverslip while being exposed to VCA and Arp2 / 3 . The rota - tional freedom of the nucleating and growing barbed ends is therefore closer to a situation in which ﬁlaments branch in 3D in solution , e . g . , in pyrene - actin ﬂuorescence assays of branched ﬁlament assembly . Hence , inhibition of branching by VopF or proﬁlin is recorded both in bulk solution kinetics and in live ﬂuorescence microscopy ( compare Figures 7A and 7C , 5C and 7C , respectively ) , consistent with the view that barbed end branching is the predominant pathway . We ﬁnd that immobilization of ﬁlaments by a streptavidin - biotin link appreciably impairs barbed end reactivity , slowing down both the growth rate and the branching frequency ( Figure S5 and Movie S6 ) . Presumably , the same structural organization of the Arp2 / 3 subunits at the branched junction is built via either end branch - ing or side branching . How can the same protein - protein con - tacts be eventually established via each pathway ? One possibility is that the observed structural change of several actin subunits of the mother ﬁlament at the branch junction ( Rouiller et al . , 2008 ) is facilitated in barbed end branching . Another possibility is that the WH2 domain of VCA uses its abil - ity to capture barbed ends ( Co et al . , 2007 ) in the branching re - action . The plasticity of the ﬁlament ( Galkin et al . , 2010 ) might allow side branching via insertion of the WH2 domain into the core of the ﬁlament , as WH2 domain proteins such as Spire or Cobl do ( Carlier et al . , 2013 ) . The preferential side branching on the convex face of curved ﬁlaments ( Risca et al . , 2012 ) is suggestive of such a possibility . Further biochemical and struc - tural experimentation and modeling are required to test this hypothesis . In vivo , ﬁlament branching is catalyzed by small - size WASP proteins that localize at membranes in protrusive , compressive , or adhesive processes or at the surface of a pathogen where ﬁla - ment barbed ends abut . Barbed end branching ensures the persistence of polarized dendritic arrays and allows the growth of mother and daughter branches to equally contribute to pro - duction of force . Assuming a barbed end branching frequency of 1 m M (cid:1) 1 s (cid:1) 1 , and cellular concentrations of 1 – 5 m M proﬁlin - actin and 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 m M Arp2 / 3 , the branching distance would be between 0 . 1 and 0 . 5 m m , in satisfactory agreement with mea - surements in lamellipodia ( Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ) . Our conclu - sions have profound implications regarding the molecular mechanism by which dendritic structures are formed in numerous processes dependent on WASP family proteins and Arp2 / 3 complex and on the associated physical mechanism of force production . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Proteins Actin from rabbit muscle was isolated in G form , pyrenyl labeled on cysteine 374 , and Alexa 488 - , Alexa 594 - , or biotin - labeled on lysines ( Thermo Scienti - ﬁc ) . Arp2 / 3 was puriﬁed from ovine brain . Recombinant mouse proﬁlin 1 , N - WASP VCA , CP , gelsolin , VopF ( Pernier et al . , 2013 ) , recombinant VASP ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ) , ActA ( Cicchetti et al . , 1999 ) , mDia1 FH1 - FH2 ( Romero et al . , 2004 ) , and biotinylated SNAP - tagged FH1 - FH2 ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) were used . Kinetic Measurements of Filament Barbed End Growth Initial rates of ﬁlament barbed end growth or disassembly were monitored us - ing the change in pyrenyl - actin ﬂuorescence in a Safas Xenius spectroﬂuorim - eter ( Safas ) . For details see Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors 211 Measurements of Assembled and Unassembled F - Actin at Steady State F - Actin ( labeled with2 % pyrenyl ) wasincubated overnight at4 (cid:4) C inthedark in thepresenceofregulatoryproteins . Fluorescenceintensitywasconvertedinto F - actin amounts using standards . The concentration of unassembled actin re - ﬂected the thermodynamic stability of F - actin in the presence of effectors acting antagonistically at barbed ends . For details , see Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures . TIRF Microscopy of Single Filaments Microﬂuidics - assisted TIRF microscopy was used to monitor the kinetics of ﬁlament growth or depolymerization using an Olympus IX71 microscope with a 60 3 oil objective and a CascadeII EMCCD ( Photometrics ) camera ( Je - gou et al . , 2011 , 2013 ) . Filament assembly was initiated from spectrin - actin functionalized glass coverslips or from anchored formins ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . A standard open chamber TIRF method was used to monitor the ki - netics of individual ﬁlament branching and growth in the presence of actin , VCA , and Arp2 / 3 complex . For details , see Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Numerical Simulations of Filament Elongation Simulations were performed with a program written in C ( free Bloodshed - DevC + + software ) following a Gillespie algorithm . The length of individual ﬁla - ments was computed over time for a population of at least 50 ﬁlaments for a given set of kinetic parameters . The same analysis of length ﬂuctuations was performed on simulated and experimental data . See Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures for details . Bead Motility Assay Experiments were conducted as described previously ( Wiesner et al . , 2003 ) , except for CP replacing gelsolin . For details , see Supplemental Experimental Procedures . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , ﬁve ﬁgures , one table , and six movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 12 . 024 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS M . F . C . designed the project , performed bulk solution experiments , and wrote the paper ; J . P . performed and analyzed bulk solution and single - ﬁlament ex - periments ; S . S . performed and analyzed single - ﬁlament and motility assays ; A . J . performed and analyzed length ﬂuctuations measurements ; B . G . pro - vided technical help and performed bulk solution measurements . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge support from ERC ( advanced grant # 249982 ) and EC FP7 # 241548 . We thank Emmanuele Helfer for Movie S5 . We thank Guillaume Romet - Lemonne for simulations ( Figures 1B , 1E , and 1F ) , computed curves ( Figures 2B and 5C ) , and data ( Figure 3A ) . Received : September 1 , 2015 Revised : December 9 , 2015 Accepted : December 22 , 2015 Published : January 25 , 2016 REFERENCES Amann , K . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001a ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin ﬁlament branches from the sides of pre - existing ﬁlaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 306 – 310 . Amann , K . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001b ) . Direct real - time observation of actin ﬁlament branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex using total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 15009 – 15013 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism betweenEna / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . Benanti , E . L . , Nguyen , C . M . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2015 ) . Virulent Burkholderia species mimic host actin polymerases to drive actin - based motility . Cell 161 , 348 – 360 . Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . , Higgs , H . N . , Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Direct observation of dendritic actin ﬁlament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 , 1007 – 1011 . Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Gouin , E . , Hansen , G . , Samarin , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Dehoux , P . , Cossart , P . , Kocks , C . , Carlier , M . F . , et al . ( 2001 ) . ListeriaproteinActAmimicsWASpfamilyproteins : itactivatesﬁlamentbarbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochemistry 40 , 11390 – 11404 . Breitsprecher , D . , Kiesewetter , A . K . , Linkner , J . , Urbanke , C . , Resch , G . P . , Small , J . V . , and Faix , J . ( 2008 ) . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin ﬁlament elongation . EMBO J . 27 , 2943 – 2954 . Bubb , M . R . , Yarmola , E . G . , Gibson , B . G . , and Southwick , F . S . ( 2003 ) . Depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments by proﬁlin . Effects of proﬁlin on capping protein function . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 24629 – 24635 . Cao , L . G . , Babcock , G . G . , Rubenstein , P . A . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 1992 ) . Effects of proﬁlin and proﬁlactin on actin structure and function inliving cells . J . CellBiol . 117 , 1023 – 1029 . Carlier , M . F . , andPantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Controlofactindynamicsincellmotility . J . Mol . Biol . 269 , 459 – 467 . Carlier , M . F . , Pantaloni , D . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1984 ) . Evidence for an ATP cap at theendsofactinﬁlamentsanditsregulationoftheF - actinsteadystate . J . Biol . Chem . 259 , 9983 – 9986 . Carlier , M . F . , Pernier , J . , and Avvaru , B . S . ( 2013 ) . Control of actin ﬁlament dy - namics at barbed ends by WH2 domains : from capping to permissive and processive assembly . Cytoskeleton 70 , 540 – 549 . Carlier , M . F . , Pernier , J . , Montaville , P . , Shekhar , S . , and Kuhn , S . ( 2015 ) . Control of polarized assembly of actin ﬁlaments in cell motility . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 72 , 3051 – 3067 . Cicchetti , G . , Maurer , P . , Wagener , P . , and Kocks , C . ( 1999 ) . Actin and phos - phoinositide binding by the ActA protein of the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 33616 – 33626 . Co , C . , Wong , D . T . , Gierke , S . , Chang , V . , and Taunton , J . ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 , 901 – 913 . Courtemanche , N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2013 ) . Interaction of proﬁlin with the barbed end of actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 52 , 6456 – 6466 . Danuser , G . , Allard , J . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2013 ) . Mathematical modeling of eu - karyoticcellmigration : insightsbeyondexperiments . Annu . Rev . CellDev . Biol . 29 , 501 – 528 . dos Remedios , C . G . , Chhabra , D . , Kekic , M . , Dedova , I . V . , Tsubakihara , M . , Berry , D . A . , and Nosworthy , N . J . ( 2003 ) . Actin binding proteins : regulation of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 433 – 473 . Edwards , M . , Zwolak , A . , Schafer , D . A . , Sept , D . , Dominguez , R . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2014 ) . Capping protein regulators ﬁne - tune actin assembly dynamics . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 677 – 689 . Fujiwara , I . , Takahashi , S . , Tadakuma , H . , Funatsu , T . , and Ishiwata , S . ( 2002 ) . Microscopic analysis of polymerization dynamics with individual actin ﬁla - ments . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 666 – 673 . Fujiwara , I . , Remmert , K . , Piszczek , G . , andHammer , J . A . ( 2014 ) . Cappingpro - tein regulatory cycle driven by CARMIL and V - 1 may promote actin network assembly at protruding edges . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , E1970 – E1979 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Schroder , G . F . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2010 ) . Structural polymorphism in F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1318 – 1323 . Goode , B . L . , and Eck , M . J . ( 2007 ) . Mechanism and function of formins in the control of actin assembly . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 76 , 593 – 627 . 212 Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors Hansen , S . D . , andMullins , R . D . ( 2010 ) . VASP isaprocessive actinpolymerase that requires monomeric actin for barbed end association . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 571 – 584 . Higgs , H . N . ( 2005 ) . Formin proteins : a domain - based approach . Trends . Biochem . Sci . 30 , 342 – 353 . Hill , T . L . ( 1986 ) . Theoretical study of a model for the ATP cap at the end of an actin ﬁlament . Biophys . J . 49 , 981 – 986 . Hug , C . , Jay , P . Y . , Reddy , I . , McNally , J . G . , Bridgman , P . C . , Elson , E . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Capping protein levels inﬂuence actin assembly and cell motility in dictyostelium . Cell 81 , 591 – 600 . Iwasa , J . H . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2007 ) . Spatial and temporal relationships be - tween actin - ﬁlament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr . Biol . 17 , 395 – 406 . Jegou , A . , Niedermayer , T . , Orban , J . , Didry , D . , Lipowsky , R . , Carlier , M . F . , and Romet - Lemonne , G . ( 2011 ) . Individual actin ﬁlaments in a microﬂuidic ﬂow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the proper - ties of proﬁlin . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001161 . Jegou , A . , Carlier , M . F . , and Romet - Lemonne , G . ( 2013 ) . Formin mDia1 senses and generates mechanical forces on actin ﬁlaments . Nat . Commun . 4 , 1883 . Joy , M . E . , Vollmer , L . L . , Hulkower , K . , Stern , A . M . , Peterson , C . K . , Boltz , R . C . , Roy , P . , and Vogt , A . ( 2014 ) . A high - content , multiplexed screen in human breast cancer cells identiﬁes proﬁlin - 1 inducers with anti - migratory activities . PLoS One 9 , e88350 . Kaiser , D . A . , Vinson , V . K . , Murphy , D . B . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Proﬁlin is predominantly associated with monomeric actin in Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3779 – 3790 . Kinosian , H . J . , Selden , L . A . , Gershman , L . C . , and Estes , J . E . ( 2002 ) . Actin ﬁla - ment barbed end elongation with nonmuscle MgATP - actin and MgADP - actin in the presence of proﬁlin . Biochemistry 41 , 6734 – 6743 . Kovar , D . R . , Kuhn , J . R . , Tichy , A . L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2003 ) . The ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis formin Cdc12p is a barbed end actin ﬁlament capping protein gated by proﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 875 – 887 . Kovar , D . R . , Harris , E . S . , Mahaffy , R . , Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 , 423 – 435 . Kuhn , J . R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) . Real - timemeasurementsof actin ﬁlament polymerization by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . Biophys . J . 88 , 1387 – 1402 . Laurent , V . , Loisel , T . P . , Harbeck , B . , Wehman , A . , Grobe , L . , Jockusch , B . M . , Wehland , J . , Gertler , F . B . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Roleof proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1245 – 1258 . Le Clainche , C . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2003 ) . ATP hydrolysis on actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex causes debranching of dendritic actin ar - rays . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6337 – 6342 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure pro - teins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . Lorente , G . , Syriani , E . , and Morales , M . ( 2014 ) . Actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge of cancer cells are characterized by a high mobile fraction and turnover regulation by proﬁlin I . PLoS One 9 , e85817 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a WASp - related protein , acti - vates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 – 3744 . Moseley , J . B . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2006 ) . The yeast actin cytoskeleton : from cellular function to biochemical mechanism . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 , 605 – 645 . Mullins , R . D . , Kelleher , J . F . , Xu , J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex from Acanthamoeba binds proﬁlin and cross - links actin ﬁlaments . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 841 – 852 . Niebuhr , K . , Ebel , F . , Frank , R . , Reinhard , M . , Domann , E . , Carl , U . D . , Walter , U . , Gertler , F . B . , Wehland , J . , and Chakraborty , T . ( 1997 ) . A novel proline - rich motif present in ActA of Listeria monocytogenes and cytoskeletal proteins is the ligand for the EVH1 domain , a protein module present in the Ena / VASP family . EMBO J . 16 , 5433 – 5444 . Pantaloni , D . , andCarlier , M . F . ( 1993 ) . Howproﬁlinpromotesactinﬁlamentas - sembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell 75 , 1007 – 1014 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 385 – 391 . Pernier , J . , Orban , J . , Avvaru , B . S . , Jegou , A . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Guichard , B . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2013 ) . Dimeric WH2 domains in Vibrio VopF promote actin ﬁlament barbed - end uncapping and assisted elongation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 , 1069 – 1076 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1984 ) . Quantitative analysis of the effect of Acanthamoeba proﬁlin on actin ﬁlament nucleation and elongation . Biochemistry 23 , 6631 – 6641 . Ranjith , P . , Lacoste , D . , Mallick , K . , and Joanny , J . F . ( 2009 ) . Nonequilibrium self - assembly of a ﬁlament coupled to ATP / GTP hydrolysis . Biophys . J . 96 , 2146 – 2159 . Risca , V . I . , Wang , E . B . , Chaudhuri , O . , Chia , J . J . , Geissler , P . L . , and Fletcher , D . A . ( 2012 ) . Actin ﬁlament curvature biases branching direction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 2913 – 2918 . Rodal , A . A . , Manning , A . L . , Goode , B . L . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Negative regulation of yeast WASp by two SH3 domain - containing proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1000 – 1008 . Romero , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . - F . ( 2004 ) . Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP . Hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 – 429 . Rotty , J . D . , Wu , C . , Haynes , E . M . , Suarez , C . , Winkelman , J . D . , Johnson , H . E . , Haugh , J . M . , Kovar , D . R . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2015 ) . Proﬁlin - 1 serves as a gate - keeper for actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 - dependent and - independent pathways . Dev . Cell 32 , 54 – 67 . Rouiller , I . , Xu , X . P . , Amann , K . J . , Egile , C . , Nickell , S . , Nicastro , D . , Li , R . , Pollard , T . D . , Volkmann , N . , andHanein , D . ( 2008 ) . Thestructuralbasisofactin ﬁlament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 887 – 895 . Roy , P . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2004 ) . Overexpression of proﬁlin reduces the migration of invasive breast cancer cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 57 , 84 – 95 . Scott , B . J . , Neidt , E . M . , andKovar , D . R . ( 2011 ) . Thefunctionallydistinctﬁssion yeast formins have speciﬁc actin - assembly properties . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 3826 – 3839 . Shekhar , S . , Kerleau , M . , Kuhn , S . , Pernier , J . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Jegou , A . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2015 ) . Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin ﬁlament in a menage a trois . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8730 . Sirotkin , V . , Berro , J . , Macmillan , K . , Zhao , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2010 ) . Quantitative analysis of the mechanism of endocytic actin patch assembly and disassembly in ﬁssion yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 2894 – 2904 . Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2000 ) . Three regions within ActA promote Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation and Listeria monocyto - genes motility . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 527 – 538 . Skoble , J . , Auerbuch , V . , Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes motility . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 89 – 100 . Smith , G . A . , Theriot , J . A . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1996 ) . The tandem repeat domain in the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein controls the rate of actin - based motility , the percentage of moving bacteria , and the localization of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein and proﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 647 – 660 . Smith , B . A . , Daugherty - Clarke , K . , Goode , B . L . , andGelles , J . ( 2013 ) . Pathway ofactinﬁlamentbranchformationbyArp2 / 3complexrevealedbysingle - mole - cule imaging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 1285 – 1290 . Stukalin , E . B . , and Kolomeisky , A . B . ( 2006 ) . ATP hydrolysis stimulates large length ﬂuctuations in single actin ﬁlaments . Biophys . J . 90 , 2673 – 2685 . Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors 213 Suarez , C . , Carroll , R . T . , Burke , T . A . , Christensen , J . R . , Bestul , A . J . , Sees , J . A . , James , M . L . , Sirotkin , V . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2015 ) . Proﬁlin regulates F - actin network homeostasis by favoring formin over Arp2 / 3 complex . Dev . Cell 32 , 43 – 53 . Takeda , S . , Minakata , S . , Koike , R . , Kawahata , I . , Narita , A . , Kitazawa , M . , Ota , M . , Yamakuni , T . , Maeda , Y . , and Nitanai , Y . ( 2010 ) . Two distinct mechanisms for actin capping protein regulation – steric and allosteric inhibition . PLoS Biol . 8 , e1000416 . Vavylonis , D . , Yang , Q . , and O’Shaughnessy , B . ( 2005 ) . Actin polymerization kinetics , cap structure , and ﬂuctuations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 8543 – 8548 . Walsh , T . P . , Weber , A . , Higgins , J . , Bonder , E . M . , and Mooseker , M . S . ( 1984 ) . Effect of villin on the kinetics of actin polymerization . Biochemistry 23 , 2613 – 2621 . Wear , M . A . , Yamashita , A . , Kim , K . , Maeda , Y . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . How capping protein binds the barbed end of the actin ﬁlament . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1531 – 1537 . Wiesner , S . , Helfer , E . , Didry , D . , Ducouret , G . , Lafuma , F . , Carlier , M . - F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 2003 ) . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 387 – 398 . Witke , W . , Sutherland , J . D . , Sharpe , A . , Arai , M . , andKwiatkowski , D . J . ( 2001 ) . Proﬁlin I is essential for cell survival and cell division in early mouse develop - ment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 3832 – 3836 . Xue , B . , and Robinson , R . C . ( 2013 ) . Guardians of the actin monomer . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 92 , 316 – 332 . Xue , B . , Leyrat , C . , Grimes , J . M . , andRobinson , R . C . ( 2014 ) . Structuralbasisof thymosin - beta4 / proﬁlin exchange leading to actin ﬁlament polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , E4596 – E4605 . Yarmola , E . G . , and Bubb , M . R . ( 2004 ) . Effects of proﬁlin and thymosin beta4 on the critical concentration of actin demonstrated in vitro and in cell extracts with a novel direct assay . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 33519 – 33527 . Yarmola , E . G . , and Bubb , M . R . ( 2006 ) . Proﬁlin : emerging concepts and lingering misconceptions . Trends . Biochem . Sci . 31 , 197 – 205 . 214 Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 , January 25 , 2016 ª 2016 The Authors Developmental Cell , Volume 36 Supplemental Information Pro ﬁ lin Interaction with Actin Filament Barbed End Controls Dynamic Instability , Capping , Branching , and Motility Julien Pernier , Shashank Shekhar , Antoine Jegou , Bérengère Guichard , and Marie - France Carlier Supplemental Information Profilin interaction with actin filament barbed end controls dynamic instability , capping , branching and motility Julien Pernier , Shashank Shekhar , Antoine Jegou , Bérengère Guichard and Marie - France Carlier Supplemental Figures Figure S1 . Profilin competes with CP for barbed end binding but does not uncap CP , related to Figure 3 . A . Time course of dilution - induced depolymerization of 2 % labeled pyrenyl - labeled F - actin in F buffer containing indicated amounts of CP alone ( left panel ) or CP + 100 µM profilin ( right panel ) . B . Time course of dilution - induced depolymerization of 2 % labeled pyrenyl - labeled , CP - capped , F - actin in F buffer containing the indicated amounts of profilin . Traces are shifted vertically for readability . C . Measurements of F - actin ( 2 . 15 µM total actin , 2 % pyrenyl - labeled ) at steady state in absence ( blue ) and presence of CP at 4 nM ( red ) and 50 nM ( green ) . The pyrenyl - actin fluorescence intensities are converted into mass amount of F - actin . A B C Figure S2 . Competition between profilin and formin , related to Figure 4 . A . Kymographs of filaments corresponding to Figure 4A . Filaments were grown off immobilized spectrin - actin seeds in the presence of profilin - actin and exposed to formin in the presence of 50 µM profilin for 10s , followed by profilin - actin only . Left panel shows a filament that has not bound formin during the short exposure period and resumes slow growth following removal of formin . Right panel shows a filament that has bound formin as appears from the fast growth following removal of formin . Note that during exposure to formin + profilin , the two filaments depolymerize to different extents , which is also an indication of whether formin is ( fast depolymerization , right panel ) or is not bound ( slower depolymerization , left panel ) B . Biphasic effect of profilin on formin . Profilin increases , then decreases the rate of processive elongation without causing dissociation of the filament from formin . The growth rate of filaments initiated from anchored formins was measured at 0 . 5 µM actin and profilin as indicated . Data are comparable to those obtained with filaments initiated from immobilized spectrin - actin seeds ( Figure 4B ) . Error bars are S . E . M . A B Figure S3 . Inhibition of filament branching by profilin , related to Figure 5 . A . Average velocity of N - WASP coated beads ( closed circles , left axis ) and fraction of motile beads ( open squares , right axis ) as a function of profilin ( conditions as in Figure 5A ) . Error bars are standard deviations . B . Inhibition of filament branching by profilin is not relieved by increasing amounts of VCA . Spectrin - actin seeded barbed end growth was monitored in the presence of 2 . 78 µM actin ( 2 % pyrenyl - labeled ) and 0 . 2 µM VCA and the following additions : none ( dim blue ) ; 32 µM profilin ( dim red ) ; 25 nM Arp2 / 3 ( dark blue without profilin , bright red with 32 µM profilin ; pale and dark green with 32 µM profilin and 0 . 1 or 1 µM VCA respectively ) . Changes in VCA did not affect growth rate in the presence of 32 µM profilin . A B Figure S4 . Filament branching is not facilitated off F - ADP - Pi , related to Figure 6 . Spontaneous assembly of actin in branched filaments is monitored using the pyrenyl - actin fluorescence assay , with or without 100 µM BeF 3 - . The time course of branched filament assembly is not modified by BeF 3 - , a structural analog of Pi . Note the 17 % lower fluorescence of pyrenyl - ADP - BeF 3 - - F - actin as compared to pyrenyl - ADP - F - actin ( Combeau and Carlier , 1989 ) . Normalization of the BeF3 curve restores a curve identical to the control in absence of BeF3 - , demonstrating that an identical number of branching events have occurred in both assays . Figure S5 . The barbed ends of filaments growing in a coverslip - tethered state via a streptavidin - biotin link display reduced reactivity and branching frequency , related to Figure 6 . Time lapse images of assembly of branched filaments with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 - labeled ) without ( A ) and with ( B ) 7 . 5 % biotinylated actin , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . Coverslips in A and B were identically treated with biotin - PEG - silane and streptavidin ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . Filaments grow at 9 su / s ( A ) and 6 su / s ( B ) . B A Supplemental Movies Movie S1 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex , related to Figure 6B . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 - labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( corresponding to Figure 6B ) . Scale bar 2 µm . Time in s . Movie S2 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex , related to Figure 6C . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( analysis in Figure 6C ) Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Movie S3 . Filament side branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex , related to Figure 6D . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) . At t = 0 , 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 594 labeled ) was flown into the reaction chamber together with 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 . The boxed area is shown in Figure 6D . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Movie S4 . Effect of barbed - end interacting proteins on filament branching , related to Figure 7 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex in the presence of 3 µM profilin . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 200 nM VCA and 50 nM Arp2 / 3 in presence of 3 µM profilin . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by VopF . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 3 µM profilin , 200 nM VCA , 50 nM Arp2 / 3 , 200 nM VopF . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by formin . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 3 µM profilin , 200 nM VCA , 50 nM Arp2 / 3 and 15 nM FH1 - FH2 mDia1 . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by 80 µM profilin . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 200 nM VCA , 50 nM Arp2 / 3 and 80 µM profilin . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Movie S5 . VASP competes with filament branching at barbed ends , related to Figure 7 . Phase contrast movies of ActA - coated beads in a reconstituted motility assay containing 7 µM F - actin , 2 µM profilin , 100 nM Arp2 / 3 , 3 . 5 µM ADF and 200 nM gelsolin , in absence or presence of 100 nM VASP . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7D . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in min . Movie S6 . Effect of filament anchoring on barbed end branching , related to Figure 6 and S5 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex using biotin - PEG passivation . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( corresponding to Figure S5A ) Scale bar 2 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by filaments anchoring . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 and 7 . 5 % labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( corresponding to Figure S5B ) Scale bar 2 µm . Time in s . Supplemental Table Table S1 . Parameters used in numerical simulations , related to Figure 1 . Rate Constant Value Unit Reference k onATP - actin 10 μM - 1 s - 1 ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) k offATP - actin 1 s - 1 ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) k offADP - Pi - actin 0 . 2 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k offADP - actin 5 . 8 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) K Dprof - ATP - BE 29 . 25 µM this paper K Dprof - ADP - Pi - BE 5 . 9 µM ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) K Dprof - ADP - BE 28 . 1 µM ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k offprof - ATP - actin 5 s - 1 this paper k offprof - ADP - Pi - actin 4 . 7 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k offprof - ADP - actin 51 . 6 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k cleave 0 . 3 s - 1 ( Blanchoin and Pollard , 2002 ) k BEcleave ≤ 0 . 3 s - 1 this paper k BE profcleave ≤ 0 . 3 s - 1 this paper k Pi release 0 . 007 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k BEPi release 1 . 8 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k BE profPi release 6 . 8 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) Supplemental Experimental Procedures Kinetic measurements of barbed end growth rate and J ( C ) plots A filament solution ( 2 . 5 µM F - actin ) used as seeds was diluted into F buffer containing various concentrations of G - actin and profilin . The same 2 % pyrenyl - labeled actin solution was used to prepare the G - actin and the F - actin solution used as seeds ( Carlier et al . , 1984 ) . This low fraction of pyrenyl - actin reduced the bias in the interpretation of the fluorescence changes in terms of amounts of F - actin , which results from the low affinity of profilin for G - actin in which cysteine 374 is modified ( ( Malm , 1984 ) ) . As noted by Bubb et al . ( Bubb et al . , 2003 ) , the error is negligible in the depolymerization assays . Stock solutions of 10 µM MgATP - G - actin were prepared by addition of 20 µM MgCl 2 and 0 . 2 mM EGTA to CaATP - G - actin , and kept on ice for a few hours . MgADP - G - actin was prepared by adding 0 . 2 mM ADP , 20 µM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM EGTA , 1 mM glucose , 1 µM Ap 5 A and 15 U / ml hexokinase to a solution of 10 µM CaATP - G - actin 1 : 1 complex freed from ATP by two consecutive Dowex - 1 treatments ( Mockrin and Korn , 1980 ) . MgAMPPNP - G - actin was prepared similarly except without Ap 5 A and replacing ADP by 1 mM AMPPNP . Hexokinase and glucose were maintained in all AMPPNP - containing G and F buffers to eliminate traces of ATP ( Motojima and Yoshida , 2003 ) , ( Montaville et al . , 2014 ) . Trace amounts of ATP in AMPPNP cause transient ATP - like behavior in bulk solution studies of actin assembly ( Romero et al . , 2004 ) , and are likely to introduce long term ATP effects in TIRF assays , in which the very low number of filaments fails to exhaust ATP rapidly . F - AMPPNP - actin seeds were prepared by adding 0 . 1 M KCl and 1 mM MgCl 2 to a 10 µM MgAMPPNP - G - actin solution . Single filament microscope observations using microfluidics Filament barbed end growth was initiated from immobilized spectrin - actin seeds , by flowing in 15 % Alexa - 488 labeled 1µM MgATP - G - actin in order to reach filaments of ~ 5µm in length . Filaments were then exposed to a solution of various actin , CP , formin and profilin concentrations for 5 minutes before the image acquisition is started in TIRF . Alternatively , filaments were initiated from immobilized biotinylated SNAP - tagged formin ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . For length fluctuations measurements , images were acquired every 30 seconds in epifluorescence exposing anchored filaments for 27 seconds to a solution of a defined actin and profilin concentrations , using 15 % labeled actin , and for 3 seconds to a solution of identical actin and profilin concentrations but using unlabeled actin . Images are acquired during exposure to unlabeled actin , at maximum flow rate to ensure proper alignment of the filament relative to the glass surface and minimize background noise . Fluorescence exposure time is set to 500ms . Images are processed using ImageJ and the KymoToolbox plugin ( available upon request to fabrice . cordelieres @ u - bordeaux . fr ) to obtain length versus time kymographs . Filament length variations were measured by fitting the pixel intensity profile close to the barbed - end by Gaussian survival function ( 8 , 9 ) . Only filaments traces that last more than 5 consecutives images are kept for analysis . Using numpy / python , the mean square displacement is then computed MSD ( ∆t ) = < ( x ( t + ∆t ) - x ( t ) ) ^ 2 > and fitted by ( a * ∆t ) ^ 2 + 2 * b * ∆t + c , where a is the mean elongation rate , b the diffusion coefficient and c a constant that emerge from the experimental noise ( mainly from signal to noise ratio ( originating from actin labeling fraction of actin and background noise ) and unfocusing ) . We ensure that no drift of the setup that would artificially add - up to the mean elongation rate is present , by tracking the position of the pointed end . To analyze the inhibition of CP association to barbed ends by profilin , the elongation of filaments was monitored in epifluorescence using the method described above , exposing filaments to a solution of labeled actin , profilin , and Capping Protein , and to a solution of identical protein content but with unlabeled actin . Filament contrast was improved with KymoToolbox , and a kymograph was generated for each filament using MultipleKymograph in ImageJ . For each filament , the time of the first pausing event was observed directly on the kymograph . The actin concentrations varied , in order to have an elongation rate of approximately 10 subunit / second ( in the non - capped state ) , regardless of the profilin concentration . In the absence of profilin , the rate of capping at 1nM CP was found to be independent of the observed elongation rate ( comprised between 0 . 6 and 1 . 4 subunit / second , using different actin concentrations ) . Numerical simulations Simulations were performed using a Gillespie algorithm , which can be summarized as follows . Based on the simulated filament’s composition , and the nucleotide - state of its barbed end , all possible events ( addition / loss of subunit , cleavage of ATP , etc . ) are listed and their probabilities are computed according to their reaction rate constants . The time of occurrence of the next event is determined following the generation of a random number by the computer program , and the nature of the event that occurs is subsequently determined , following the generation of another random number . The composition of the filament is modified accordingly , and the process is then repeated . For each simulated filament , the total concentrations of profilin and ATP - actin are fixed , and the concentrations of profilin - actin , free actin and free profilin are computed analytically ( using K D = 0 . 1 µM for profilin - MgATP - G - actin ) . The effective reaction rate constants that depend on these concentrations are also computed , assuming that profilin is in rapid equilibrium with the barbed end ( Jégou et al . 2011 ) . For example , the effective ADP - actin off rate constant is v offADP - actin = k offADP - actin + ( k offprof - ADP - actin - k offADP - actin ) [ profilin ] / ( [ profilin ] + K Dprof - ADP - BE ) ( equation 1 ) where k offADP - actin is the barbed end off - rate constant for ADP - actin , k offprof - ADP - actin is the barbed end off - rate constant for profilin - ADP - actin , and K Dprof - ADP - BE is the dissociation constant for profilin at an ADP barbed end . The possible events that can occur are the following . The terminal subunit can dissociate from the barbed end . ATP - G - actin can bind to the barbed end . Profilin - ATP - G - actin can bind to the barbed end . If the terminal subunit is ATP - actin , it can cleave its ATP . If the terminal subunit is ADP - Pi - actin , it can release its Pi . All ATP - actin subunits within the filament can cleave their ATP . All ADP - Pi - actin subunits within the filament can release their Pi . The program keeps track of the nucleotide state of each subunit in the filament , throughout the simulation . Only barbed end dynamics were considered . The initial filament state in our simulations was an ADP - filament with 3 terminal ATP - subunits at the barbed end . In all the conditions that we have used in this article , steady - state was reached within a few seconds . The average elongation rates ( Fig . 1B ) were computed on a population of 50 filaments , for profilin concentrations multiple of 0 . 5 µM . For length fluctuations ( Fig . 2D ) the MSD analysis was applied to a population of 200 filaments , with the same time step as for experimental data . Measurements of unassembled actin at steady state as a probe of the regulated state of barbed end dynamics : barbed end capping , tracking and destabilization . In a physiological ionic strength solution containing ATP , actin is assembled at a steady state in which F - actin co - exists with G - actin . The steady state concentration of G - actin ( often called critical concentration ) is determined by monomer - polymer exchanges at the barbed end pointed ends , which in pure actin are dominated by barbed end dynamics . The concentration of G - actin at steady state is regulated in various ways .  Capping of barbed ends and resulting enhanced sequestration of G - actin Strong barbed end capping proteins like gelsolin bind very tightly to filament barbed ends ( K D lower than 10 - 10 M ) . The total blockage of barbed end dynamics leaves only pointed ends free for monomer - polymer exchanges . The concentration of G - actin co - existing with F - actin thus equals the critical concentration for actin assembly at the pointed end = 0 . 6 to 0 . 7 µM . Sequestration of G - actin ( non - polymerizable monomeric actin ) is determined by the equilibrium between free G - actin and the added sequestering protein . At a total concentration of sequestering agent [ S 0 ] , the amount of sequestered actin [ SA ] is expressed by : [ SA ] = [ S 0 ] . [ A SS ] / ( [ A SS ] + K S ) equation 2 where [ A SS ] represents the concentration of free G - actin at steady state , which itself is determined by monomer - polymer exchanges , and K S is the equilibrium dissociation constant for the SA complex ( K S = [ S ] . [ A ] / [ SA ] ) . The value of K S being generally in the submicromolar to micromolar range , the amount of sequestered actin varies with the value of [ A SS ] . Typically , the amount of sequestered actin increases upon capping the barbed ends . Profilin makes a complex with G - actin that participates in barbed end assembly but not in pointed end assembly . As a result , when barbed ends are not capped , profilin promotes a decrease in the contribution of free G - actin in monomer - polymer exchanges at barbed ends ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ) , while when 100 % barbed ends are strongly capped , it sequesters G - actin as described by equation 2 .  Destabilization of barbed ends by profilin Profilin at high concentration ( 10 to 100 µM ) binds and destabilizes barbed ends by increasing the dissociation rate of terminal actin subunits . As a result , profilin establishes a high steady state level of polymerizable profilin - actin monomers , and lowers the steady state level of F - actin ( this paper ) .  Barbed end tracking by formins and multimerized WH2 domains in Ena / VASP or VopF / VopL Barbed end trackers like formin and VopF change the kinetics of barbed end assembly - disassembly but by themselves do not affect the steady - state G - actin concentration which remains the same as for free barbed ends ( Pernier et al . , 2013 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) .  Changes in the steady state level of actin assembly probe the competitive binding of regulators to barbed ends When two proteins that bind barbed ends in a competitive fashion and regulate monomer - polymer exchanges with different specific effects are present together with F - actin , the level of monomeric actin reached at steady state depends on the fraction of barbed ends bound to each protein , that is on the amount of each protein and on their respective affinities for the barbed end . Consistently , measuring how the steady state level of unassembled actin imposed by known barbed end regulator R1 varies upon addition of another R2 provides insight into competitive binding of R1 and R2 to barbed ends . This test is used in this work to analyze how profilin competes at barbed ends with Capping Protein , formins , VopF and VCA - Arp2 / 3 branching machinery . Modeling of polymerization in branched filaments and effect of profilin ( Figure 5C ) The amount of F - actin is computed numerically , for time increments of 0 . 2 seconds . The initial barbed end concentration is that of spectrin - actin seeds . Branching is modeled by considering a constant rate of formation of new barbed ends , per concentration of F - actin , and per concentration of G - actin . To illustrate what would be the effect of profilin on elongation alone , the rate of formation of new barbed ends was left unchanged , and the elongation rate was decreased by 55 % . Photobleaching was taken into account by considering a constant decrease of the pyrene fluorescence efficiency per unit of time and per concentration of F - actin . Analysis of live TIRF recordings of assembly of branched filaments with VCA and Arp2 / 3 complex . The kinetics of single filament assembly in branched structures was monitored by TIRF microscopy ( Olympus IX71 inverted microscope , 60X TIRF objective , cascade II EMCCD camera ) . Coverslips and glass slides were sequentially cleaned by sonication with H 2 O , ethanol , acetone , 1M KOH , H 2 O for 20 min . Flow chambers were assembled and passivated with mPEG - silane - or biotin - PEG - silane in Figure S5 ( Laysan Bio , Inc . ) . To anchor filaments for experiments with biotin - labeled actin ( Figure S5 ) , chambers were washed with G Buffer 0 . 1 % BSA and incubated 30 min with 1 mg / mL streptavidin ( Thermo Scientific ) . In all experiments , following passivation chambers were sequentially washed with G Buffer 0 . 1 % BSA , Fluo F buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl - pH 7 . 8 , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM EGTA , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 10 mM DTT , 1 mM DABCO , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 ) . Assays were performed in Fluo F buffer supplemented with 0 . 3 % methylcellulose ( Sigma ) and with actin ( 10 % Alexa488 or Alexa594 , or 7 . 5 % Biotin labeled ) Arp2 / 3 , VCA , profilin , VopF , and formin at indicated concentrations . The filament being a chiral helical polymer , daughter filament growth following consecutive branching events develops in 3D . Evanescent wave microscopy provides a biased measurement of branching filaments in 2D . Only a minority of branches that grow within the 250 nm distance from the coverslip are fully seen . Filament observation has often been facilitated by anchoring using coverslips sparsely coated with myosin or using a biotin - streptavidin link to biotinylated actin . In this geometry , the rotational freedom and reactivity of barbed ends may be impaired , the growth of daughter filaments that point toward the glass surface is hampered and those that point away from the TIRF plane are not seen . To minimize these drawbacks , and optimize the rotational freedom of barbed ends , the coverslip surface was thoroughly passivated to avoid any adsorption of filaments . Addition of methylcellulose ( 0 . 32 % ) avoided the diffusion of filaments away from the observation plane without inducing detectable bundling . Spontaneous assembly of actin in branched filaments was recorded at 1 µM G - actin ( 5 to10 % Alexa488 - labeled ) , 5 - 10 nM Arp2 / 3 and 50 nM VCA , at 1 frame every 5 or 10 s . The growth and branching of individual filaments into dendritic structures was monitored . It was verified that the rate of filament growth remained constant during the whole recording , testifying that the concentration of actively polymerizing monomeric actin did not decline during the experiment . Due to brownian motion , some branches growing away from the plane of observation often flap down and become visible already with appreciable length at frame n , while only the branch junction was detectable as a bright dot or a kink on the mother filament at frame n - 1 , n - 2 …The bright dot at the origin of these branches was visible early in the closest visible vicinity of the barbed end ( Movie S2 ) . Conversely , sometimes visible daughter branches suddenly disappear due to rotation of the mother filament and re - appear later . These difficulties , linked to the phenomenology of the 3D - dendritic array , preclude an automatic quantitative analysis of the frequency of branching along the filament , and restrict the number of manually accessible parameters describing time dependent branching and growth . Therefore , the mechanisms of filament side branching and barbed end branching were tentatively discriminated using the following parameters ( see text for rationale ) . All movies were inspected frame by frame over periods of 10 min following assembly of the chamber to obtain reliable measurements of distances between consecutive branch junctions on the same mother filament as individual dendritic arrays develop from one filament nucleus . Due to the 2D geometry of observation of 3D branched filaments in TIRF , the ends of the growing filaments often fluctuate off the region of observation , making measurements of the lengths of mother and daughter branches unreliable , while this method was useful in EM observation of samples of branched filaments assembled in 3D in a test tube ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) . We opted for measurements of distances between consecutive branching points as a more reliable parameter . We used Image J to measure first the distance d 0 from the pointed end at which the first branching event B 0 occurred on each primary , so - called « ancestor » mother filament . We similarly measured the distances d i between the consecutive branching points B i - B i + 1 ( i = 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 ) on each mother filament , when multiply branched structures have been formed . As dendritic arborescences develop , each daughter filament becomes a mother filament upon branching , and so on . The distance d 1 thus included i ) the distance between the first ( B 0 ) and the second ( B 1 ) branch junctions on the « ancestor » mother filament ; ii ) the distance between B 0 and the first branch junction ( B’ 1 ) on the first generation daughter filament following its initiation from the ancestor mother filament , the distance between B’ 1 and the first branch junction ( B’’ 1 ) on the second generation daughter filament , and so forth . Most measurements were performed on the first , second and third generation of branches , since the field of view later on became too crowded to extract reliable data . For the same reason , only values of d i ( i = 1 to 3 , sometimes 4 ) corresponding to four ( sometimes five ) consecutive branching events on a given mother filament could be collected with reasonable confidence . Statistical significance of the data was met by cumulating the measurements extracted from five movies of identical samples performed consecutively with the same proteins the same day . Distributions of distances d i collected in each movie ( 35 to 50 measurements of d1 in each movie ) were consistent with each other . The number of collected data declined from d 1 ( N = 200 to 250 ) to d 4 ( N = 40 to 50 ) . We finally measured , monitoring each individual filament frame by frame , how the value of d 1 varied between the time it was first recorded ( upon B1 event ) and the latest time it could be clearly observed before the field of view was obscured by too many branched filaments growing from neighboring arborescent structures ( generally between 7 and 10 min ) . At least 20 measurements of d 1 couples were recorded . These measurements had to be performed manually on a large number of movies ( 5 movies , see Movie S2 for example ) . Measured distances in pixels were converted in nm ( one pixel = 260 nm without zoom , and 162 nm with zoom ) . The three series of data obtained for d 0 , d 1 at early and late times and the d i values were used to discriminate between side - branching and barbed end branching ( see text for details ) . To evaluate the frequency of side branching only , two methods were used . In the first method , filaments pre - assembled from Alexa - 488 - G - actin ( green filaments ) were introduced in the flow cell together with VCA Arp2 / 3 and Alexa 594 - actin ( Red actin ) . For simplicity , the side branching reaction is described as a single step in which association of VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex with the side of a filament generates a branched junction . The frequency of side branching k sb was thus derived from the slope of the linear time dependence of the number of red filaments FY ( t ) initiated from the side of green filaments , using the following kinetic scheme : F + Y  FY d [ FY ] / dt = k sb . [ F ] . [ Y ] equation 3 where [ F ] represents the number of green F - actin subunits , derived from the total length of green filaments , [ Y ] represents the concentration of branching VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex and [ FY ( t ) ] the number of red filaments emerging from green filaments . [ F ] and [ Y ] are constant during the measurement period , hence [ FY ( t ) ] = k sb . [ F ] . [ Y ] t . The fact that the experimental data [ FY ( t ) ] varied linearly with time validates the proposed description of side branching . In the second method , filaments were assembled in the presence of either VopF or formin FH1 - FH2 from mDia1 , which both track barbed ends , and profilin - actin ( 1 µM 10 % Alexa 594 - labeled actin , 3 µM profilin ) , VCA and Arp2 / 3 . In this case filaments branch only from the side of growing filaments . The rate of barbed end growth of filaments d [ F ] / dt = k + B . ( C - Cc ) was measured and was constant , thus ( [ F ( t ) ] =  t , where  = k + B . ( C - Cc ) . Note that k + B differs with VopF and FH1 - FH2 . The number of side branching events was recorded and analyzed as above ( equation 3 ) , but taking into account the linear increase of [ F ] with time , which leads to a quadratic time dependence of [ FY ] . [ FY ( t ) ] = ( ½ ) .  k sb . [ Y ] t 2 equation 4 The value of k sb was derived from the slope of [ FY ( t ) ] versus t 2 . Again the linear experimental t 2 dependence validates the proposed description of side branching . Bead motility assays N - WASP - coated 2µm diameter polystyrene beads ( Wiesner et al . , 2003 ) ( ) are introduced in a motility chamber that contains 7µM F - actin , 50nM Arp2 / 3 , 10nM CP , 5µM ADF and varied amount of profilin . Bead movement is recorded for 40 minutes in phase contrast microscopy taking 1 frame every 20 seconds using Metamorph ( Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA ) . To reconstitute bead trajectories and extract bead mean velocities , bead positions in movies were automatically tracked using ImageJ plugin 2D Particle Tracker from the MOSAIC group ( 10 ) . Only tracked trajectories that last for more than 10 consecutives images were kept for analysis . Beads that display an elongation rate lower than 0 . 1 µm / minute were considered as non - propelled beads . The same protocol was used with ActA - coated beads ( Boujemaa - Paterski et al . , 2001 ; Cicchetti et al . , 1999 ) . For double fluorescence experiments , images were acquired in Epi - fluorescence of motility assays with Alexa594 - Actin and Alexa488 - Arp2 / 3 . The images were processed in ImageJ using the rolling ball background subtraction algorithm to subtract the fluorescence background . The actin and Arp2 / 3 intensity profile was then measured along individual comets ( Wiesner et al . , 2003 ) . Branching density was calculated as a ratio of Arp2 / 3 and Actin along the comet length . For each condition , branching density was averaged over at least 10 comets . SDS - PAGE Analysis Quantitative analysis of amount of monomeric actin in supernatants in various biochemical conditions was quantified via ImageJ plugin for Gel Analysis and appropriate actin standards . Supplemental References Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2002 ) . Hydrolysis of ATP by polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not profilin . Biochemistry 41 , 597 - 602 . Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Gouin , E . , Hansen , G . , Samarin , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Dehoux , P . , Cossart , P . , Kocks , C . , Carlier , M . F . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Listeria protein ActA mimics WASp family proteins : it activates filament barbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochemistry 40 , 11390 - 11404 . Bubb , M . R . , Yarmola , E . G . , Gibson , B . G . , and Southwick , F . S . ( 2003 ) . Depolymerization of actin filaments by profilin . Effects of profilin on capping protein function . J Biol Chem 278 , 24629 - 24635 . Carlier , M . F . , Pantaloni , D . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1984 ) . Evidence for an ATP cap at the ends of actin filaments and its regulation of the F - actin steady state . J Biol Chem 259 , 9983 - 9986 . Cicchetti , G . , Maurer , P . , Wagener , P . , and Kocks , C . ( 1999 ) . Actin and phosphoinositide binding by the ActA protein of the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes . J Biol Chem 274 , 33616 - 33626 . Combeau , C . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1989 ) . Characterization of the aluminum and beryllium fluoride species bound to F - actin and microtubules at the site of the gamma - phosphate of the nucleotide . J Biol Chem 264 , 19017 - 19021 . Jegou , A . , Niedermayer , T . , Orban , J . , Didry , D . , Lipowsky , R . , Carlier , M . F . , and Romet - Lemonne , G . ( 2011 ) . Individual actin filaments in a microfluidic flow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the properties of profilin . PLoS Biol 9 , e1001161 . Malm , B . ( 1984 ) . Chemical modification of Cys - 374 of actin interferes with the formation of the profilactin complex . FEBS Lett 173 , 399 - 402 . Mockrin , S . C . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1980 ) . Acanthamoeba profilin interacts with G - actin to increase the rate of exchange of actin - bound adenosine 5 ' - triphosphate . Biochemistry 19 , 5359 - 5362 . Montaville , P . , Jegou , A . , Pernier , J . , Compper , C . , Guichard , B . , Mogessie , B . , Schuh , M . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2014 ) . Spire and Formin 2 synergize and antagonize in regulating actin assembly in meiosis by a ping - pong mechanism . PLoS Biol 12 , e1001795 . Motojima , F . , and Yoshida , M . ( 2003 ) . Discrimination of ATP , ADP , and AMPPNP by chaperonin GroEL : hexokinase treatment revealed the exclusive role of ATP . J Biol Chem 278 , 26648 - 26654 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nature cell biology 2 , 385 - 391 . Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1993 ) . How profilin promotes actin filament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell 75 , 1007 - 1014 . Pernier , J . , Orban , J . , Avvaru , B . S . , Jegou , A . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Guichard , B . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2013 ) . Dimeric WH2 domains in Vibrio VopF promote actin filament barbed - end uncapping and assisted elongation . Nature structural & molecular biology 20 , 1069 - 1076 . Romero , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . - F . ( 2004 ) . Formin Is a Processive Motor that Requires Profilin to Accelerate Actin Assembly and Associated ATP Hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 - 429 . Shekhar , S . , Kerleau , M . , Kuhn , S . , Pernier , J . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Jegou , A . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2015 ) . Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin filament in a menage a trois . Nat Commun 6 , 8730 . Wiesner , S . , Helfer , E . , Didry , D . , Ducouret , G . , Lafuma , F . , Carlier , M . - F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 2003 ) . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 160 , 387 - 398 .