UC Berkeley UC Berkeley Previously Published Works Title My part : Personal , portable , accurate airborne particle counting Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 5x93g1qz ISBN 9781450333627 Authors Tian , R Dierk , C Myers , C et al . Publication Date 2016 - 05 - 07 DOI 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858571 License CC BY - NC - SA 4 . 0 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California MyPart : Personal , Portable , Accurate Airborne Particle Counting Rundong Tian Christine Dierk Christopher Myers Eric Paulos Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences University of California , Berkeley { rutian , cdierk , chrismyers , paulos } @ berkeley . edu ABSTRACT In 2012 , air pollution in both cities and rural areas was esti - mated to have caused 3 . 7 million premature deaths , 88 % of those in at - risk communities . The primary pollutant was small airborne particulate matter of 10 microns or less in diameter , which led to the development of cardiovascular and respiratory diseases . In response , we developed MyPart , the ﬁrst personal , portable , and accurate particle sensor under $ 50 capable of distinguishing and counting differently sized particles . We demonstrate how MyPart offers substantial enhancements over most existing air particle sensors by simultaneously improving accessibility , ﬂexibility , portability , and accuracy . We de - scribe the evolution and implementation of the sensor design , demonstrate its performance across twenty everyday urban environments versus a calibrated instrument , and conduct a preliminary user study to report on the overall user experience of MyPart . We also present a novel smart - phone visualization interface and a series of simple form factor adaptations of our design . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous Author Keywords Citizen Science ; Air Quality ; Environmental Sensors ; DIY . INTRODUCTION Airborne particles affect more people than any other pollu - tant , and by far the most health - damaging particles are those with a diameter of 10 microns or less ( PM10 ) . These parti - cles can penetrate and lodge themselves deep inside the lungs , contributing to the development of cardiovascular and respira - tory diseases including lung cancer [ 1 , 2 , 21 ] , not to mention these pollutants’ role in global climate change . In most coun - tries , government environmental agencies ( the EPA in the US ) typically report concentrations of PM10 particles in terms of Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . CHI’16 , May 07 - 12 , 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3362 - 7 / 16 / 05 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858571 Figure 1 . The small wrist - worn MyPart sensor and optional accompany - ing smartphone visualization and data logging app . mass per cubic meter of air volume ( µ g / m 3 ) , which maps into a more human readable Air Quality Index ( AQI ) value . However , these air quality measurements reported by the gov - ernment ( 1 ) use expensive calibrated equipment , ( 2 ) operate at ﬁxed locations , ( 3 ) are sparsely and strategically distributed for regulatory enforcement rather than situated to provide over - all neighborhood coverage for human health , and ( 4 ) do not afford a personal experience in terms of data reporting , data collection , or device interaction . While there are “air quality” sensors even less expensive than our MyPart system , many of them either attempt to “measure” a pollutant that is not the primary health concern , such as mixtures of various gasses ( carbon monoxide or ozone ) , or they do not measure small particles accurately at all and simply report “dust” . As we move towards more personal and crowdsourced en - vironmental monitoring systems , there are numerous HCI research questions - the sensor and hardware design , its us - ability , accuracy , form factor , expressiveness , visual legibility , interpretation , sharing , and acting on data , privacy , society and community engagement , and long term usage models . In this paper , we focus our contribution on the design of a novel , low - cost , accurate , usable air quality sensor that measures the most critical pollutant affecting human health and well being - airborne particles . Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1338 Through an extensive engineering and HCI iterative design cycle , we have developed a system that for the ﬁrst time satis - ﬁes four primary design equirements when compared to other air quality measurement systems - MyPart is more accessi - ble due to its low cost which makes it available to a much wider demographic ; more ﬂexible due to its ease of fabrication and adaptation across a wide range of context speciﬁc forms factors ( i . e . easily embedded into watches , strollers , carabin - ers , toys , bicycle attachments , etc ) ; more accurate than any previous air quality system of similar cost ; and smaller and more portable than comparable systems . There are air quality sensing systems that may satisfy some of these requirements , but none that satisfy all of these requirements simultaneously - low - cost , accurate , ﬂexible design , and wearable , portable size . Most often it is the accuracy that suffers . This is an extremely critical component of the overall design since by sacriﬁcing accuracy , the overall reliability and usability of the data from such system is , at best , called into question and , at worst , unusable . In this paper we will demonstrate the novelty of our approach in engineering a solution that is comparable to air quality systems costing thousands of US dollars more than the $ 50 MyPart . We address many of these issues in more detail later in the paper . As HCI practitioners , we were motivated to design a low - cost , accurate , portable , and personal particle counter whose design can be readily adapted into a range of form fac - tors , including a small wrist worn device , in order to expand the design space . MyPart is the culmination of that effort ( Figure 1 ) . While accurate measurements are critical to our design , we wanted to develop a new mobile phone interface that would provide a compelling real - time visualization that in - vites curiosity into a deeper exploration of personally collected particle datasets . In this paper we describe a range of prior work , outline our iterative design process , describe the technical components of our system , report accuracy measurements , explain our mobile interface , describe the results of a preliminary user study , and discuss alternative form factors for our system . RELATED WORK In this section , we provide an overview of other technologies that sense air quality and HCI work in air quality monitoring . Consumer Air Quality Sensing Technologies There are a number of different techniques for measuring air quality . In this section we detail each and highlight the tradeoffs across various designs . Thermal Based Gas Sensors Low - cost air quality sensing devices often consists of some form of gas sensor . These systems typically use a thermal con - ductivity based detector tuned to respond to carbon monoxide , ozone , nitrogen oxides , or other gases . However , these devices do a poor job of accurately measuring the actual gas concen - trations due to sensor response selectivity and gas interaction problems with the sensor . Furthermore , these gas sensors are high - power due to their thermal heating requirements . Most Figure 2 . Design iterations , from initial cardboard mock - up to cur - rent 3D printed wrist worn prototype . The large commercial Dylos & MetOne are shown for comparison . importantly , these gas sensors do not measure airborne par - ticles , the primary air pollutant in regards to human health [ 19 ] . Low Cost LED and Photodiode Based Sensors For air quality monitoring of particles at the personal scale , one low - cost solution is LED infrared emitter / detector based sensors such as those produced by Sharp 1 , Shinyei 2 , and Samy - oung 3 . The majority of air quality sensing products , startups , and personal devices also embed this form of sensor . These include the Air . Air ! 4 , Speck [ 22 ] , and Airbeam 5 . While in - frared LED based sensors are inexpensive ( typically $ 10 - $ 30 US ) and small ( the Sharp sensor is 46 . 0 x 30 . 0 17 . 6 mm ) , they often give extremely unreliable readings , especially at lower particle concentrations [ 5 ] . Many of these systems were engineered to be incorporated into a feedback control circuit for air puriﬁers , not as general purpose air particle counters 6 . In addition , many of these low cost sensors rely on a heating element to generate ﬂow , which puts strict limitations on the orientation of the sensor , response rate , and battery life when used in a mobile device . Laser and Photodiode Based Sensors A second class of consumer - level sensors are those that in - corporate a laser , such as the Dylos Indoor Air Quality Mon - itor 7 ( $ 300 US ) ( Figure 2 ) . While the Dylos performs well against standard commercial instruments [ 14 ] , it is limited by its large , inﬂexible size ( 7 in x 4 . 5 in x 3 in ) , cost , user inter - face , and external computer requirements for data acquisition . More importantly , the Dylos is designed to operate indoors only , meaning it lacks the portability of our everyday mobile 1 www . sharpsme . com / optoelectronics / sensors / air - sensors / GP2Y1010AU0F 2 http : / / www . sca - shinyei . com / particlesensor 3 http : / / www . samyoungsnc . com / products / 3 % 20Specification % 20DSM501 . pdf 4 http : / / www . airair . info 5 http : / / aircasting . org / 6 Samyoung’s own product literature lists air conditioners and air cleaners as the primary applications . 7 http : / / www . dylosproducts . com Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1339 Figure 3 . Smoke is injected into an earlier prototype to qualitatively examine the air ﬂow over the photodiode . devices , severely limiting its ability to truly be on - the - go with people . To emphasize the point , because both the LED / Laser and photodiode systems , by design , respond to light , they perform poorly outdoors since they suffer signiﬁcantly from ambient light leakage . This restricts the context of their usabil - ity to indoors only - the Dylos product literature calls out this limitation directly by warning that it should “not be operated in direct sunlight or other bright light source as this could affect count accuracy” . HCI Research in Air Quality sensing As environmental monitoring , in particular air quality , be - comes more accessible through low - cost components , we have seen its adaption into many HCI and ubiquitous computing projects . It has been truly remarkable to see such a wide range of impressive research into personal air quality sensing across a wide range of contexts - cars [ 4 , 6 , 16 ] , municipal vehicles [ 3 , 8 ] , bikes [ 15 ] , balloons [ 11 ] , clothing [ 10 ] , and handheld devices [ 7 , 12 , 24 ] to name a few . Much of this research has made signiﬁcant contributions towards understanding the de - sign of such sensing tools for interpreting and sharing data , privacy , activism , community engagement , and long term us - age models . Because many of these previous studies focused on these important research questions , there was less consid - eration given to the actual sensor selection , integration , and design . Most incorporated available , off - the - shelf hardware for measuring air quality into their system . As we pointed out earlier , many of these devices contain signiﬁcant design problems that make them unsuitable for adaption into such HCI applications . In fact , this rich body of prior work has directly inspired us to design and evaluate MyPart . What if a new more accurate , affordable , accessible , low - cost ﬂexi - ble , portable design could be developed and shared with this community ? How could such a system encourage a broader landscape of designs , form - factors , applications , and partic - ipation all while improving accuracy ? MyPart is , in part , a starting point in this research conversation . SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION The design of the MyPart borrows elements from traditional laser based photodiode systems with several notable improve - Figure 4 . MyPart conﬁgured as a wrist worn device ( 40x55x23mm ) with LED particle count display illumniated . ments : ( 1 ) engineered airﬂow to remove ambient light leakage while maintaining consistent airﬂow across the photodiode , ( 2 ) dense system integration of structural design and circuity to enable wrist worn form factor with ambient visualization , ( 3 ) integrated BLE transceiver for low - power networking with mobile devices , and ( 4 ) a mobile phone app for visualizing collected data . In MyPart , a laser and photodiode are arranged orthogonally such that the focal point of the laser is located directly above the photodiode ( Figure 5 ) . Air is drawn through the system across the photodiode using a small , low - power , 3 volt , cen - trifugal fan . Particles in the air stream that intersect the path of the laser scatter light onto the photodiode , and the resulting voltage signal is ampliﬁed by an operational ampliﬁer circuit and sampled by a micro - controller . The resulting waveform is analyzed for peaks , which correspond to particle detection . Our ﬁnal system is able to identify and count particles of 2 dif - ferent size ranges . The measured values are visualized through a scattered array of eight individually controlled LEDs embed - ded into the top of the sensor ( Figure 4 ) . The MyPart system also has an onboard temperature and humidity sensor to further improve particle readings under high humidity conditions . As pointed out previously , our innovation is not the use of lasers to count particles . In fact , this technique is used in both high ( MET - ONE HHPC - 6 at $ 4 , 000 USD ) and low ( Dylos DC1100 at $ 300 USD ) end systems . Rather , MyPart is a result of an iterative design process ( Figure 2 ) and engineering efforts ( described below ) to lower the cost , reduce the overall size , and provide a ﬂexible design platform for easy integration into other form factors - all while maintaining the overall accuracy of the system . We were particularly motivated to lower the cost in order to increase the accessibility of personal air quality monitoring for at - risk , low - income communities and developing regions where health concerns and air quality are most contentious and misrepresented . The ﬁnal costs of parts for MyPart is under $ 50 US . Mechanical Design : Air Flow and Ambient Light The design of the airﬂow channel geometry is constrained by two main factors . First , the ﬂow of air over the photodiode Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1340 Figure 5 . An exploded drawing of the MyPart Design detailing the air - ﬂow and laser placement . must be constant and free of eddies and turbulence , charac - teristics which introduce unstable ﬂow velocities and particle recirculation that decrease the responsiveness and accuracy of the sensor . Second , ambient light must be shielded from the photodiode such that changing light conditions do not affect the calibration of the sensor . These two criteria often impose conﬂicting design constraints . For example , a more complex ﬂow geometry designed to reduce ambient light sensitivity can negatively affect the quality of the air ﬂow , introducing eddies and turbulence . No existing consumer sensor has addressed both of these issues simultaneously . This is a signiﬁcant limi - tation for air particle monitors if they are to be portable and functional across a wide range of environments where people go , including outdoors . To maximize the ambient light rejection of our device , the air channels leading to and from the photodiode were designed with multiple turns that prevent ambient light from directly illuminating the photodiode ( Figure 5 ) . In addition , a centrifu - gal fan and bafﬂes at the outlet were used to further discourage light from directly entering the system ( Figure 5 ) . Meanwhile , the air ﬂow channel leading up to the sensor region is a gen - tle curve designed using cubic splines . At each bend , ﬁllets were used to minimize the formation of turbulence at these transitions . A similar effect for reducing the amount of ambi - ent light entering the system can be achieved by decreasing the cross - sectional size of the inlet and outlet . However , this method reduces the air ﬂow rate and the responsiveness of the sensor since it samples less air per unit of time . Because of the complex channel geometry , qualitative smoke tests were conducted after each major design revision ( Figure 3 ) . High speed videos were used to analyze and conﬁrm the absence of undesirable air ﬂow characteristics . Counting and Sizing Particles When light is scattered onto the photodiode by incoming par - ticles , a current is induced in the photodiode which is then converted into a voltage through a high gain transimpedance ( current to voltage ) ampliﬁer . This analog signal is then high - pass ﬁltered , then low - pass ﬁltered to reduce electrical noise as well as shape the characteristics of the pulse waveform . In particular , choosing a higher cutoff frequency for the high - pass ﬁlter decreased the pulse width seen by the analog - to - digital converter ( ADC ) which prevent successive pulses from over - lapping and distorting the measured amplitude for each pulse . The rise time of the resulting pulses in our current conﬁgura - tion is approximately 50 microseconds . The analog signal is sampled at 88kHz using an external 12 - bit ADC driven by a low power system - on - a - chip with a micro - controller and Bluetooth transceiver ( Nordic NRF51822 ) . A simple thresholding algorithm is used to detect peaks of var - ious amplitudes , and can be calculated in the time between successive ADC captures . Our algorithm is most similar to a hardware comparator with hysteresis and measures the number of times the thresholds are crossed . Though this algorithm is very simple , it yields good results that will be discussed later . More complex algorithms that consider the pulse width , or the maximum amplitude of the pulses can be designed to further increase sensor accuracy . Electromechanical Design Evolution The mechanical design of our sensor has evolved signiﬁcantly ( Figure 2 ) , from initial laser cut prototype to our ﬁnal 3D printed wrist watch form factor . We began with several laser cut designs for rapid fabrication and iteration speed . However , as the requirements for the ﬂow channel were recognized , the complexity of the required ﬂow channel necessitated the use of 3D printing . Our ﬁnal mechanical enclosure is optimized to be easily 3D printed , as the overall geometry is partitioned in a way that eliminates overhangs . In addition , the consistent wall thickness and minimal undercuts throughout the entire design make it easily adaptable for injection molding . The laser is mounted onto the PCB with a piece of 3D printed plastic that also has a series of apertures to prevent stray laser light from illuminating the photodiode ( Figure 5 ) . For optimal optical performance , the aperture should be metal to block the stray light entirely , and thin to minimize reﬂection at the inside diameter of the aperture . We used this method at ﬁrst , Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1341 and constructed apertures out of milled pieces of 0 . 005 inch thick steel . Though effective , this added an additional degree of complexity to the fabrication of our device . Ultimately , we found that comparable performance can be achieved by using successive thin pieces of plastic , which were then integrated into the component for ﬁxturing the laser . More than one aperture is needed for plastic because the thin pieces become slightly transparent . In earlier designs , we used off - the - shelf photodiodes with inte - grated transimpedance ampliﬁers , such as the TSL12 produced by AMS , and the OPT101 produced by Texas Instruments . Us - ing these off the shelf sensors decreases the complexity of the electronics , as the high gain transimpedance ampliﬁers can be difﬁcult to design and be sensitive to noise . However , the mechanical size of these sensors were not suitable for the small form factor we were pursuing and limited the geometry of the the ﬂow channel , as well as the overall device . A device as small as the current version of the MyPart requires tight integration between the electronics and the mechanical enclo - sure , and the photodiode is the key interface between these two elements of the design . By using a low proﬁle photodi - ode soldered directly to the PCB , various mechanical design constraints around the interface between the electronics and enclosure were loosened . Because of the power limitations of a battery powered device , substantial effort was placed to reduce the power consumption of the device , especially in sleep mode . For example , to mini - mize digital noise affecting the high gain analog circuitry , two separate voltage regulators are used . Conveniently , the entire analog voltage regulator can then be shut down by the micro - controller when samples are not being taken . Cumulatively , these efforts reduce the power consumption in sleep mode to less than 100 micro - Amps . Our most current design ﬁles , as well as a more detailed expla - nation of the design , is all available open source . These ﬁles can be found online at http : / / hybrid - ecologies . org / projects / mypart . User Interaction Flow The device is normally in a sleep mode , in which the micro - controller and other components in the circuits are pro - grammed to be in a low power state . The device is conﬁgured to wake up from a button press , but can also be activated at a timed interval , or by any peripheral that can generate a hardware interrupt . When the device wakes up from sleep mode , onboard LEDs , embedded within the top of the device ﬂash and then fade to intimate to the user that an air sample is being taken ( Figure 4 ) . The micro - controller turns on all peripheral devices including the fan . After waiting 500ms for the airﬂow to stabilize , My - Part begins counting particles by size . As particles are counted , the onboard visualization is updated in real - time . Throughout the ﬁfteen second sampling period , the visualization updates as more particle are counted . After the sampling period , the data is broadcast using Bluetooth , and is also displayed on the LEDs of the physical sensor itself ( Figure 4 ) . To conserve energy , the broadcast and LEDs stop after 10 seconds , after Figure 6 . The MyPart smartphone application has an ambient animated particles view ( A ) , stacked column view for visual comparisons ( B ) , and a historical view ( C ) with numerical values revealed from user interaction with the data ( D ) . which the device returns to the sleep mode . However , the data can easily be logged and visualized on another device such as as mobile smartphone ( Figure 6 ) . In this conﬁguration , the sampling period consumes an average of 75 mA . Using a 400 mAh LiPo battery , our sensor can conservatively take 250 readings before needing to be recharged . Our wristwatch form factor ( Figure 1 ) uses this battery which gives very rea - sonable sensor coverage over a full day without the need for recharging . Visualizing Air Quality While MyPart can operate standalone and log data , its usage is more persuasive and compelling when its data is experienced in real - time through a mobile phone interface . Using BLE , live particle count data is transmitted to an iOS application ( Figure 6 ) . Building off a suite of inspirational related work on air quality visualization [ 9 , 13 , 18 , 23 ] , the MyPart smartphone interface was designed to support scaffolding a user into the data - from a compelling real - time visualization that invites curiosity , to a deeper exploration of the rich particle dataset with time and location patterns . The actual smartphone app design was intended to augment the overall experience of the MyPart system , not be the primary design contribution . Therefore , we focus on describing the design goals and ﬁnal app design rather than the intermediate prototypes . There were several initial design goals motivating the visual and interactive design of our smartphone app . First , it was important that users could access the real data from the sensor . We did not want to obscure or abstract the data in such a way that users would have difﬁculty visualizing the actual sensor data . At the same time , we felt that by offering exclusively numbers and charts , the users would become disengaged with the overall experience we desired . We wanted to deliver an experience with the data that would feel more alive , invite curiosity , and perhaps even feel playful as a means to draw in and retain user interest in the system . We also wanted our design to accommodate quick ( 1 - 2 second ) engagements through a glanceable interface that would require little to no interaction with the phone . Next , we expected that exploring Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1342 related contextual information such as time and location along with the MyPart data would be valuable in engaging users and helping them conduct their own sensemaking . Finally , it was important that there was some visual design language elements linking the smartphone app to the physical MyPart sensing hardware device . We iterated through several prototype designs that each fore - ground various elements of our design goals . However , the challenge was to arrive at a smartphone app design that struck the proper balance across all of our design goals and was us - able for eliciting feedback with users when operating the entire MyPart system . The ﬁnal design we arrived at is composed of three screens : ( 1 ) an animated , ambient display that allows users to easily visualize the air quality , ( 2 ) a bar graph view that communicates precise particle counts and corresponding health related information , and ( 3 ) an interactive graph view that displays historical readings across time and location . The initial screen of the application displays particle counts as colorful , animated circles that move and interact in a particle simulation system ( Figure 6A ) . The two sizes of particles are distinguished by their color ( blue / purple ) , size , and movement ( fast / slow ) . Updates to this screen are deliberate , with particles slowly fading in and out such that the user is made aware of changing air quality conditions . This screen is unique in that it is factual , yet playfully aesthetic . In fact , we envision such a display as a compelling element in ambient situations such as a phone lock screen or smartwatch face since its is both easily glanceable and presents an abstract aesthetic visualization [ 20 ] . To explore the data more concretely , the user swipes down to access a bar graph view . From the ambient view , the individ - ual particles quickly animate to form two stacked columns , allowing easy interpretation of the quantity of differently sized particles ( Figure 6B ) . The precise count for each particle size is displayed at the top of the stack . When the user clicks on a particular stack of particles , more information is displayed : the size ranges for each particle category , common origins of such particles , and health concerns associated with the current air quality conditions . A third view is provided when a user swipes up on either screen . This historical view ( Figure 6C ) displays past read - ings over time . On this screen , there are three separate graphs displaying three datasets for large particle counts , small parti - cle counts , and total particle counts . This view is interactive - when the user touches any of the graphs , all three graphs are activated and the relevant particle count information is displayed ( Figure 6D ) . VALIDATION STUDIES Throughout our design process , we knew that if the resulting particle counts reported by the sensor were inaccurate , we would not have a usable system . To really have impact , pro - vide actionable data , and be convincing , our system would have to maintain a high degree of accuracy with regards to particle counts . This is a step that is often overlooked or at best partially addressed in most HCI air quality crowdsourcing studies . Our aim here was to be able to develop a system that would hopefully be used in further studies by ourselves , other researchers , and the general public and that in those deploy - ments an improved level of accuracy would be provided . Laboratory Calibration and Comparison Studies In the analog signal from the ampliﬁed photodiode , the ampli - tude of the pulses correspond to the intensity of light seen by the photodiode . Though there are other factors at play , such as the location at which the particle crosses the laser beam and the optical properties of the particle , the amplitude of the pulses can be used as an approximate metric for the size of the particles detected . As a ﬁrst approximation for correlating the response of the analog circuitry to the size of particle detected , we expose our sensor to particles of known size ranges , such as smoke and household dust . The pulses in the raw analog signal are analyzed , and approximate cuttoffs for large and small parti - cles are chosen . Though approximate , the cutoffs determined using this method resulted in very strong correlations against a calibrated instrument costing $ 4000 US . In future work , our sensor can be tested with particles of precisely known sizes , such as mono - dispersed polystyrene latex beads to further increase accuracy . Real World Performance Studies While laboratory and bench top studies are important to char - acterizing the response of our system , it is important that we study the performance of MyPart in real world everyday con - text of use . We conducted a validation study across a series of real - world indoor and outdoor locations to test our sensor with naturally occurring particles in various lighting conditions . For our reference monitor , we chose the Met - One HPPC - 6 ( $ 4000 US ) , a laser based optical detector similar in principle to our sensor . The Met - One HHPC - 6 is a professional , indus - trial grade handheld particle counter that offers six particle counting channels ( 0 . 3 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 7 , 1 . 0 , 2 . 0 , and 5 . 0 micron ) with built - in relative humidity and temperature sensors . It is suit - able for use in clean ofﬁce settings as well as harsh industrial workplaces , construction and environmental sites , and other outdoor applications . The Met - One provides highly calibrated , independent , ground truth measurements of airborne particles to compare the performance accuracy of our MyPart system . Our sensor was tested against the Met - One across these indoor and outdoor locations . Twenty locations were tested , and two consecutive data points were taken by each sensor at each location . Locations were chosen to adequately represent a broad range of everyday contexts . They included both indoor and outdoor locations such as parking lots , parks , bus stops , downtown urban areas , ofﬁce workspaces , and indoor cafes to name a few . We summed the total particle count on the Met - One from its 0 . 5 , 0 . 7 , and 1 . 0 micron channel measurements as “small particles” . Similarly we used the 2 . 0 micron and 5 . 0 micron count as “large particles” . We used these small and large sizes as comparison against the MyPart sensor’s small and large size particle counts . The results of this study are shown in Figure 7 and demonstrate high correlation in signals for both small ( r 2 = 0 . 96 ) and large ( r 2 = 0 . 91 ) particle counts . These results Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1343 Figure 7 . Graphs demonstrating the performance of MyPart ( $ 50 US ) in correlation with the calibrated Met - One HHPC6 ( $ 4000 US ) . demonstrate the sustained accuracy of the MyPart system in contexts outside of the laboratory setting and in everyday landscapes of typical expected usage . Calibration to Air Quality Index The Environmental Protection Agency in the United States reports air quality using an Air Quality Index ( AQI ) for PM2 . 5 and PM10 . PM2 . 5 refers to airborne particles smaller than 2 . 5 micrometers ( 100 times thinner than a human hair ) while PM10 refers to particles smaller than 10 micrometers in di - ameter , the smaller particles pose the greatest health risk to humans [ 19 ] . Environmental statistics for clean air ( the AQI ) is calculated from mass concentrations per volume using linear interpolation [ 1 ] . Since our system , as well as most others , is unable to measure the mass or exact chemical composition of the particles we are measuring , we cannot directly map the particle counts from our system onto an EPA equivalency for “healthy” or “unhealthy” scale . Instead , we report out the particle counts for large and small sized particles approximating the PM2 . 5 and PM10 particle measurements . This approach is commonly used and provides good correlation with the mass values as measured by the EPA . PRELIMINARY USER STUDY In addition to validating the sensor’s accuracy , we were in - terested in evaluating the system with users . In our study , participants were introduced to MyPart and asked to perform a predetermined walking tour of a series of locations with our system . Interviews were conducted before and after the walk - ing tour and focused on perceptions of air quality , feedback on the design and user experience of MyPart , and reactions to MyPart and how it affected air quality awareness . Study Participants We recruited 6 participants ( 3 male , 3 female ) through targeted email - lists for a local community center , a homeschooling parents group , and college students . Our study included repre - sentation from all of these demographics and across a broad age range ( 18 to 59 years old ) . All participants were paid $ 50 US . Procedure The user study consisted of three parts : ( 1 ) an initial interview , ( 2 ) a “walkabout” , and ( 3 ) a followup interview . During the initial interview , we asked participants general questions about air quality to gauge their understanding about the topic . Par - ticipants were then introduced to MyPart and shown how to operate the device with the accompanying app . A phone was provided to participants to avoid having to load the custom MyPart app onto their personal phones . The participants then took readings at the interview location in order to verify their understanding of the system . For the walkabout portion of our user study , users took a pre - speciﬁed walking route through a range of locations around a college campus and the surrounding urban areas . We provided a map marked with the suggested route and eight speciﬁc locations , and did not accompany them on the walk . The participants were asked to take a reading at each of the eight locations . The locations were selected to represent broad range of environments and situations , in order to prompt the participants to think about their locations in relation to the air quality . These locations included a bus stop , a grove of trees , a library , a coffee shop , and a construction site . Participants were also told that they were free to take other readings at any time through the walk . The walk was designed to take roughly 40 minutes over a 2 . 7 km distance . All six participants completed the full study , including the walkabout which lasted from 25 minutes to 38 minutes to complete . When participants returned from the walk about , we showed them their data and conducted an interview . In this interview , we asked more directly about their experience of using the MyPart system , the visualization , and the legibility of the data . We prompted each participant to discuss how , where , and why ( or why not ) they would potentially use this system . We also asked them to comment on the the form - factor , comfort , and wearability of the sensor system . Discussion We examined our interview data using thematic analysis to reveal patterns across users . These themes become the cate - Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1344 gories for analysis and are discussed in the subsections that follow . Lack of General Knowledge About Air Quality Consistent with previous studies , many of our participants had little understanding of air quality , where it was measured , by whom , and how it was measured and reported . In the initial interview , three participants admitted to not understanding air quality in their area very well and only one participant thought that they understood local air quality and how it affects them . Engagement and Personal Curiosity While not required in the study , nearly all of our participants took additional sensor measurements with the system . Five out of our six participants took extra readings for a total of eight additional readings . Participant P4 , who did not take additional readings , said that he did not take extra readings because of the weather , but would have taken additional readings given more time . These additional readings came from locations including a building that P1 spent a lot of time in , an indoor space after using a vaporizer ( P2 ) , a building vent ( P5 ) , a grassy area on campus ( P6 ) , and an outdoor exercise class ( P5 ) . During the ﬁnal interview , when participants were asked to discuss additional locations they would use MyPart , all participants listed additional locations that they would like to test including their homes ( all participants ) , their workplaces ( P1 , P4 , P5 ) , higher altitudes ( P2 , P3 , P4 ) , inside of cars ( P5 ) , and down by a major highway ( P4 ) . Several participants also expressed interest in taking the same readings but at different times , on different days , or during different weather conditions ( P4 , P6 ) . Overall , we observed that participants easily engaged with MyPart . Many used it to take additional measurements and all had clear ideas of desired future usage , indicating that the MyPart device and visualization were legible and easily understood by participants . MyPart as part of a larger conversation about air quality Initially , several participants made assumptions on air quality based on smell ( P2 , P3 , and P6 ) or other visual cues such as smoke ( P3 ) . With our system , participants experienced ﬁrst hand that these cues do not always accurately reﬂect air quality . Participants P1 and P6 stated that their perception of air quality had changed in that it is imperceptible and appreciated MyPart as a way to make air quality visible . Use of the Mobile Phone Data Visualization Participants noted that the initial ambient display on the mo - bile application was playful and easy to read ( P2 and P4 ) . This view provides a low ﬂoor for participants to easily interact with the application and engage with air quality readings , with - out prior knowledge and experience with the subject . When initiating richer interactions with data , participants preferred the bar graph and chart views ( P1 , P3 , P4 , and P5 ) , which allowed the users to associate readings with time , location , weather , and other related factors . MyPart as a Carryable , rather than a Wearable Our user study allowed participants to experience MyPart in a unique wristwatch form factor ( 40x55x23 mm ) . However , while we found that this form factor was compelling , it was not always desired in all contexts . While participants found the device comfortable and lightweight ( P3 , P4 , and P6 ) , they thought that the device should be much smaller if kept in watch form ( P1 , P4 ) . This was expected since we have not pushed the system integration to the level that an industrial corporation would for a real product . As such , participants were reacting to the size , which although extremely small , was not close enough to being a usable wristwatch form factor for everyday use . We envision such applications and appropriately sized air quality sensing devices in the near future , however . As such , we were interested in initiating the exploration and un - derstanding of this body location for air quality sensing in our design and studies . Several participants suggested attaching the sensor to a backpack , a briefcase , or another accessory ( P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 ) . A few participants wished the sensor could be physically embedded within their mobile device ( P1 , P5 , P6 ) . Overall , participants thought that the device would be most useful if it could be attached to everyday things that the user is already accustomed to carrying ( P3 , P4 , P6 ) . Participant P4 argued that the device should be embedded in a “crucial piece of technology” in order to truly make it ubiquitous . All of these comments strengthen our argument for a small design that can be ﬂexibly adapted into a range of everyday objects and experiences . Limitations of MyPart Several participants noted that that the readings are only use - ful when compared to each other ( P3 , P4 ) . Participants also expressed interest in knowing exactly what the particles were , rather than just particle sizes ( P1 , P2 ) . While most of our participants were surprised by one reading or another , two of our six participants thought that using our device consistently would not inﬂuence their behavior ( P3 , P5 ) . One of these participants stated , “day to day I take [ the subway ] , there’s not much that I could do to avoid that” ( P3 ) . Two other partici - pants thought that they would only change their behavior in very speciﬁc situations : cleaning the house if it were messy and contributing to poor air quality , and exercising indoors rather than outdoors if the air quality was particularly poor ( P2 , P4 ) . Finally , two participants argued that knowing particle counts might stress a person out more so than inﬂuence their behavior ( P3 , P4 ) . For example , if there is consistently a high particle count in the area that a person lives and they do not have the resources to relocate . Several other broad themes emerged from our user study . When using on body glance - able interfaces , people were more likely to explore locations other than the ones we speciﬁed . This was likely due to the lower activation energy required for taking a sample since there is no need to take out a phone to engage with the technology . In all of our users , we observed increasing awareness and concerns for air quality after using the MyPart system . Overall , the user study helped us validate several of the design elements as well as understand the usage limitations . FLEXIBLE DESIGN EXPLORATION As we mentioned earlier , one of the central elements of our design was to develop an easily extensible platform that is accurate , but easily adaptable by others into a variety of appli - cation speciﬁc form factors . To do this , we engineered all of Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1345 Figure 8 . Highlighting the ﬂexibility of the MyPart design form factor by demonstrating the ease of adapting it to function as ( from left to right ) : a carabiner , a backpack strap , a wristwatch , and even embedded into a toy airplane the electronics to be on a single PCB ( Figure 5 ) . This includes the power management , microcontroller , photodiode , analog ampliﬁcation circuit , led driver , temperature / humidity sensor , and BLE radio . We envision this component being either mass produced , sold as a kit , or published publicly . The top and bottom housing are then simply distributed as open - source 3D model ﬁles suitable for printing on any 3D printer . However , we lock the internal geometry , since it contains the tested , calibrated , and accurate design for the airﬂow and particle measurement , and allow free form designs of the remaining model . Again , because we have pushed the engineering efforts to an extremely small form factor , we have enabled what we believe is a range of interesting potential artifacts into which the MyPart design can be embedded . For example , the core design can be used to embed and achieve accurate air quality measurements into watches , strollers , carabiners , toys , bicycle attachments , etc . Though the geometry of the ﬂow channel is constrained , there are many other opportunities for modiﬁcation and customiza - tion . For example , the default wire loop design ( Figure 4 ) that is currently used to hold the watch strap can be replaced with any other geometry of 1 / 16 inch diameter wire , allowing for rapid exploration of other body worn and carried form factors . With minor changes , the mounting for the wire loop can be modiﬁed to become general mounting points for fasteners , al - lowing for its integration within other objects - from domestic Internet of Things devices to urban landscape installations . Because of the small size of our sensor , fewer geometric con - straints are imposed on the range of potential form factors . In addition , the battery compartment can be easily enlarged to accommodate higher capacity batteries , opening up even more possibilities for remote data - logging . Several such alternative form factor designs are showcased in Figure 8 . We detail some of these designs below : Carabiner / Clip On - With changes in the exterior loop , this application enables air quality measurements from book - bags , purses , etc . Bike and Stroller - MyPart can take on a familiar water bot - tle like form factor , allowing it to be easily integrated into activities with bikes and strollers . Children’s Toy - We have also prototyped the integration of MyPart into a children’s toy airplane [ 17 ] . The fuselage allows for easy integration of our sensor in its current form and enables a new culture of participation into sensing by children . In this variation , an e - ink display has been added for facial expressions . We believe that the ease of appropriation and redesign of MyPart into a wide range of everyday objects and contexts is a powerful element of its overall design . Our hope is that by explicitly calling out this feature and providing a direct mechanism to encourage such redesign of MyPart , broader participation of air quality measurements and context will emerge . Specially , those that are more culturally or context appropriate in order to further usage and meaning . CONCLUSION Effective personal air monitoring necessitates the combina - tion of accuracy , low cost , and portability into a single design . Lacking an existing solution , we developed MyPart to address this need as well as provide opportunities to redesign and re - imagine alternative form factors . In addition to correlating strongly with calibrated commercial instrumentation , the de - sign of our system remains ﬂexible in terms of both shape and size , enabling a variety of personal designs and context speciﬁc applications . A mobile phone app was designed to complement the physical hardware , and a preliminary user study was conducted to evaluate the experience of using the overall system . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We appreciate the valuable input of our anonymous reviewers . We would also like to thank Ethan Chiou for his help conduct - ing user studies and automating ﬁeld tests . This research was funded by NSF IIS - 1211047 and IIS - 1451465 . REFERENCES 1 . 2013 . Technical Assistance Document for the Reporting of Daily Air Quality . ( 2013 ) . http : / / www3 . epa . gov / airnow / aqi - technical - assistance - document - dec2013 . pdf 2 . 2014 . WHO Ambient ( outdoor ) air quality and health . ( 2014 ) . http : / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheets / fs313 / en / Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1346 3 . Paul M . Aoki , R . J . Honicky , Alan Mainwaring , Chris Myers , Eric Paulos , Sushmita Subramanian , and Allison Woodruff . A vehicle for research : using street sweepers to explore the landscape of environmental community action . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2009 ) . ACM , 375 – 384 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1518762 4 . E . Bales , N . Nikzad , N . Quick , C . Ziftci , K . Patrick , and W . Griswold . Citisense : Mobile air quality sensing for individuals and communities Design and deployment of the Citisense mobile air - quality system . In 2012 6th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare ( PervasiveHealth ) ( 2012 - 05 ) . 155 – 158 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4108 / icst . pervasivehealth . 2012 . 248724 5 . Matthias Budde , Mathias Busse , and Michael Beigl . Investigating the use of commodity dust sensors for the embedded measurement of particulate matter . In Networked Sensing Systems ( INSS ) , 2012 Ninth International Conference on ( 2012 ) . 6 . Jeffrey A . Burke , D . Estrin , Mark Hansen , Andrew Parker , Nithya Ramanathan , Sasank Reddy , and Mani B . Srivastava . 2006 . Participatory sensing . Center for Embedded Network Sensing ( 2006 ) . http : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 19h777qd 7 . Carl DiSalvo , Illah Nourbakhsh , David Holstius , Ayça Akin , and Marti Louw . The Neighborhood Networks project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( 2008 ) . Indiana University , 41 – 50 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1795241 8 . David Hasenfratz , Olga Saukh , Christoph Walser , Christoph Hueglin , Martin Fierz , Tabita Arn , Jan Beutel , and Lothar Thiele . 2015 . Deriving high - resolution urban air pollution maps using mobile sensor nodes . Pervasive and Mobile Computing 16 , Part B ( 2015 ) , 268 – 285 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pmcj . 2014 . 11 . 008 Selected Papers from the Twelfth Annual { IEEE } International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications ( PerCom 2014 ) . 9 . Sunyoung Kim and Eric Paulos . inAir : Measuring and Visualizing Indoor Air Quality . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( 2009 ) ( UbiComp ’09 ) . ACM , 81 – 84 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1620545 . 1620557 10 . Sunyoung Kim , Eric Paulos , and Mark D . Gross . WearAir : expressive t - shirts for air quality sensing . In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on Tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction ( 2010 ) . ACM , 295 – 296 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1709949 11 . Stacey Kuznetsov , George Noel Davis , Eric Paulos , Mark D . Gross , and Jian Chiu Cheung . Red balloon , green balloon , sensors in the sky . In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on Ubiquitous computing ( 2011 ) . ACM , 237 – 246 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2030145 12 . N . D . Lane , E . Miluzzo , Hong Lu , D . Peebles , T . Choudhury , and A . T . Campbell . 2010 . A survey of mobile phone sensing . Communications Magazine , IEEE 48 , 9 ( Sept 2010 ) , 140 – 150 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCOM . 2010 . 5560598 13 . Nima Nikzad , Nakul Verma , Celal Ziftci , Elizabeth Bales , Nichole Quick , Piero Zappi , Kevin Patrick , Sanjoy Dasgupta , Ingolf Krueger , Tajana Šimuni ´ c Rosing , and others . CitiSense : improving geospatial environmental assessment of air quality using a wireless personal exposure monitoring system . In Proceedings of the conference on Wireless Health ( 2012 ) . ACM , 11 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2448107 14 . Amanda L . Northcross , Rufus J . Edwards , Michael A . Johnson , Zhong - Min Wang , Kunning Zhu , Tracy Allen , and Kirk R . Smith . 2013 . A low - cost particle counter as a realtime ﬁne - particle mass monitor . Environ . Sci . : Processes Impacts 15 ( 2013 ) , 433 – 439 . Issue 2 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1039 / C2EM30568B 15 . Christine Outram , Carlo Ratti , and Assaf Biderman . The Copenhagen Wheel : An innovative electric bicycle system that harnesses the power of real - time information and crowd sourcing . In EVER Monaco International Exhibition & Conference on Ecologic Vehicles & Renewable Energies ( 2010 ) . 16 . Eric Paulos , R . Honicky , and Ben Hooker . 2008 . Citizen science : Enabling participatory urbanism . Urban Informatics : Community Integration and Implementation ( 2008 ) , 414 – 436 . 17 . Eric Paulos , Chris Myers , Rundong Tian , and Paxton Paulos . Sensory Triptych : Here , Near , out There . In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( 2014 ) ( UIST ’14 ) . ACM , 491 – 496 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2642918 . 2647410 18 . Sameera Poduri , Anoop Nimkar , and Gaurav S . Sukhatme . 2010 . Visibility monitoring using mobile phones . Annual Report : Center for Embedded Networked Sensing ( 2010 ) , 125 – 127 . http : / / robotics . usc . edu / ~ mobilesensing / visibility / MobileAirQualitySensing . pdf 19 . C . Arden Pope , Majid Ezzati , and Douglas W . Dockery . 2009 . Fine - Particulate Air Pollution and Life Expectancy in the United States . New England Journal of Medicine 360 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 376 – 386 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1056 / NEJMsa0805646 20 . Tobias Skog , Sara Ljungblad , and Lars Erik Holmquist . Between aesthetics and utility : designing ambient information visualizations . In Information Visualization , 2003 . INFOVIS 2003 . IEEE Symposium on ( 2003 ) . IEEE , 233 – 240 . http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / xpls / abs _ all . jsp ? arnumber = 1249031 Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1347 21 . J . Sundell . 2004 . On the history of indoor air quality and health . Indoor Air 14 ( 2004 ) , 51 – 58 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0668 . 2004 . 00273 . x 22 . M . D . Taylor and I . R . Nourbakhsh . 2015 . A low - cost particle counter and signal processing method for indoor air pollution . Air Pollution XXIII 198 ( 2015 ) , 337 – 348 . 23 . Sean White and Steven Feiner . SiteLens : Situated Visualization Techniques for Urban Site Visits . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2009 ) ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , 1117 – 1120 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518871 24 . Yu Zheng , Furui Liu , and Hsun - Ping Hsieh . U - Air : When urban air quality inference meets big data . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining ( 2013 ) . ACM , 1436 – 1444 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2488188 Sustainability , Design and Environmental Sensibilities # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 1348