370 Communication Research Volume 33 Number 5 October 2006 370 - 390 © 2006 Sage Publications 10 . 1177 / 0093650206291481 http : / / crx . sagepub . com hosted at http : / / online . sagepub . com Information Exchange With Shared Databases as a Social Dilemma The Effect of Metaknowledge , Bonus Systems , and Costs Ulrike Cress University of Tuebingen Joachim Kimmerle Friedrich W . Hesse Knowledge Media Research Center , Tuebingen , Germany When group members exchange information via shared databases people are often reluc - tant to contribute information they possess . This is explained by the fact that this kind of information exchange represents a social dilemma . This article applies critical concepts of dilemma theory to the interpretation of database information exchange as a social dilemma and tests their effects experimentally . A prestudy with the experimental task ensures that people perceive database information exchange as a social dilemma , and two experiments investigate three factors influencing this dilemma : ( a ) a person’s meta - knowledge about the importance of his information for the other group members , ( b ) a use - related bonus system that rewards contribution of important information , and ( c ) costs incurred by the contribution of important or less important information . As dependent variables people’s contribution behavior as well as their subjective perception of the dilemma structure are considered . The results show that metaknowledge enhances the quality of contributions , especially in combination with a use - related bonus system , whereas increased contribution costs influence the contribution behavior negatively . Keywords : social dilemma ; information exchange ; metaknowledge ; reward systems ; payoff structure ; public good ; costs ; knowledge management I n collaborative work , the importance of information exchange for achieving high performance is obvious . In most situations where people work together , they do not share all the information that is available to them . Instead the information is mostly distributed across the group members in such a way that some group members have information others might need . So for many group tasks , effective information exchange within the group is considered an important predictor of successful coop - eration ( Collins , Brown , & Newman , 1989 ; Hinds & Kiesler , 2002 ; Johnson & Johnson , 1989 ) . One tool for enabling information exchange in large groups and organizations Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 371 is the use of shared databases as information repositories or collective repositories ( Yuan et al . , 2005 ) . They serve as technical tools to collect information that is distrib - uted across the members of an organization ; they save information permanently and make it accessible and searchable for all members of a group or organization . Thus , shared databases seem to be an effective tool for enhancing information exchange in groups . Nevertheless , many organizations that have implemented shared databases have observed that people use the databases to search for information , but they are reluctant to enter their own information into it ( Ardichvili , Page , & Wentling , 2003 ; Huber , 2001 ; Orliskowski , 1993 ) . But a problem would arise if all coworkers withheld their information , for then the database files would be empty and nobody would derive any benefit from having access to the repository . Thus , some authors have already pointed out that information exchange via shared databases presents a social dilemma ( Bonacich & Schneider , 1992 ; Cabrera & Cabrera , 2002 ; Connolly , Thorn , & Heminger , 1992 ; Cress , Barquero , Buder , & Hesse , 2005 ; Fulk , Flanagin , Kalman , Monge , & Ryan , 1996 ; Hollingshead , Fulk , & Monge , 2002 ; Kalman , Monge , Fulk , & Heino , 2002 ; Rafaeli & LaRose , 1993 ; Yuan et al . , 2005 ) . To motivate people in this dilemma to contribute their own information , organizations often establish some sorts of incentive systems , which reward the group members for their contributions ( American Productivity & Quality Center [ APQC ] , 2001 ; Ba , Stallaert , & Whinston , 2001 ; d’Aspremont , Bhattacharya , & Gerard - Varet , 1998 ; Sundaresan & Zhang , 2004 ) . But it has not been systematically proven if this strategy has the desired effect and is able to stimulate contribution . Our aim in this article is to solidify the interpretation of information exchange as a social dilemma . We therefore identify the important factors of exchanging information via shared databases and link them to main concepts in social - dilemma research . We do this by describing the typical payoff function of an information - exchange dilemma , and we consider a reward system as a variation of this payoff function . We then pre - sent an experimental task where information exchange represents a social dilemma . In a prestudy , we analyze how people perceive the payoff function of this situation , and in two experiments we study the influence of metaknowledge , of a bonus system , and of costs on the perceived payoff function and on people’s contributing behavior . Information Exchange as a Social Dilemma Kautz and Mahnke ( 2003 ) describe a typical example where conditions for the withholding of information are likely to occur . In their analysis of a large global con - sultant company , employees were requested to submit their reports on finished projects to a shared database . Here this distributed information was to be collected , stored , and made accessible for their coworkers . The available information was to be reused for accomplishing further projects and would serve as input for further developments . But an explorative study revealed that only 52 % of the employees submitted something to this database , and 41 % of them did this only one to five times a year . The employees’ behavior can be understood if their decision to withhold informa - tion is considered in terms of cost - benefit analysis . For a person who contributes infor - mation to the shared database , different kinds of costs arise ( Cress & Hesse , 2006 ; Bonacich & Schneider , 1992 ; Hollingshead et al . , 2002 ; Markus & Connolly , 1990 ; Rafaeli & LaRose , 1993 ; Thorn & Connolly , 1987 ) . For example , owning information is often interpreted as a kind of power within organizations . As a result , the contribu - tion of information is sometimes perceived as a loss of individual power and reduced social influence , especially in a highly anonymous situation in which a contributor cannot expect to gain recognition for his contributions . Other costs can be related to the communication act itself : It requires time and effort to write down the information and contribute it to a shared database ( Reid , Malinek , Stott , & Evans , 1996 ) . This extra effort competes with the primary daily work a person has to do . Consequently , the trade - off between expending resources for achieving individual goals and expending them for communicating information that would help others causes a situation where employees save time and other costs if they do not contribute anything at all . Thus , information exchange via shared databases meets the criteria of a social dilemma , which Dawes ( 2000 ) defines as follows : A social dilemma is a situation “in which each member of a group has a clear and unambiguous incentive to make a choice that— when made by all members—provides poorer outcomes for all than they would have received if none had made the choice” ( p . 111 ) . So the decision that is optimal on the individual level is unfavorable on the group level . In terms of game theory and dilemma research , contributing information to a shared database can be interpreted as cooperation , whereas withholding information can be interpreted as defection , free riding ( Kerr , 1983 ) , or social loafing ( Karau & Williams , 1993 ; Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ; Williams , Jackson , & Karau , 1995 ) . According to the classification of social dilemmas ( Dawes , 1980 ; Heckathorn , 1996 ; Kollock , 1998 ) , exchanging information represents a public - goods dilemma . In this kind of dilemma , people establish a shared resource by contributing private resources to a public pool . Such a public - goods dilemma is structurally identical to a n - person prisoners’ dilemma ( n - PDG ) , which is defined by a specific order of the pay - offs that are determined by a person’s and his group mates’behavior . In a n - PDG a per - son achieves the highest payoff by defecting while all other group members cooperate ( D i | C ) . The next highest payoff is the situation where the person cooperates , and all others cooperate , too ( C i | C ) . It is followed by the situation where the person defects , while all others defect , too ( D i | D ) . A person achieves the lowest payoff by cooperating while all others defect ( C i | D ) . Thus a public - goods dilemma is defined by the order of payoffs showed in Equation 1 : P ( D i | C ) > P ( C i | C ) > P ( D i | D ) > P ( C i | D ) . ( 1 ) 372 Communication Research Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 373 Public goods are characterized by nonexcludability ( Head , 1972 ) and jointness of supply ( Barry & Hardin , 1982 ; Olson , 1965 ) . Nonexcludability means that the whole content of the database is in principle accessible to all members . Thus , nobody can be prevented from using the database—even if a person contributes nothing . Jointness of supply ( also called nonrivalry of consumption ) means that the amount and value of information in a database ( as a kind of public good ) is not reduced for the other group members if one uses the information . However , a special feature justifies the consideration of the information - exchange dilemma as a stand - alone social dilemma : A person has no individual benefit from contributing at all because he or she already owns the information , whether contributing it or not . This circumstance aggravates the dilemma . This structural difference to other public - goods dilemmas can be formally described by the “marginal per capita return” ( MPCR ) . The MPCR was defined by Isaac , Walker , and Thomas ( 1984 ) and describes the proportion of value a person gets from each contribution to the common pool . In most dilemmas , the MPCR value is independent of the person who contributed a specific unit . In con - trast , in the information - exchange dilemma , the MPCR of a person varies depending on whether the person is the contributor or not : The individual MPCR for one’s own contributions is always zero because the information is already available to the indi - vidual , and there is no discernible benefit from contributing it to the shared database . Variations of the Dilemma Strength The payoff structure described in Equation 1 determines the strength of the dilemma . The bigger the differences between the four payoffs of this equation are , the stronger the dilemma becomes . This is because the different payoffs have more influ - ence on the decision to defect or contribute , for the person himself and for the others . Messick and Brewer ( 1983 ) distinguish between individual and structural solutions of a social dilemma . Individual solutions try to manipulate the individuals’ decisions by changing their subjective perceptions of the situation , their motives , or their indi - vidual preferences , without necessarily changing the payoff structure itself ( Komorita & Ellis , 1995 ) . By contrast , structural solutions change the payoff structure directly . In this article we will focus on structural solutions and their effect on the perceived payoff situation as well as on behavior . In the information - exchange dilemma there are three possibilities to manipulate the payoff structure : • The dilemma strength can be reduced by increasing the efficiency that a cooperative act has for the whole group . If the two differences P ( D i | C ) – P ( D i | D ) and P ( C i | C ) – P ( C i | D ) are increased then an individual has a higher benefit from a cooperative act of the group mates—independently of the own behavior . In the information - exchange dilemma , the group’s benefit from a contribution varies , for example , with the impor - tance of the contributed information . Important contributions are needed by many other group members , and for the owner of important information—with the group’s benefit in mind—it is worth more to take on the contribution costs for important infor - mation than for information that is only needed by few others . Thus , a higher impor - tance of information makes the decision to cooperate more attractive . But even with highly important information the dilemma still remains , because for each person , withholding is still more effective than contributing . • The dilemma strength can also be reduced by decreasing the difference between the individual payoff a person receives by withholding and the individual payoff by contributing the own information ( reducing the two differences P ( D i | D ) – P ( C i | D ) and P ( D i | C ) – P ( C i | C ) ) . In the information - exchange dilemma , this can be done by reducing the contribution costs ( time , effort , etc . ) . With lower contribution costs , the individual loses less than with high costs . This relation between costs and individ - ual payoff is linear . • The difference between the individual payoff a person receives by withholding and the individual payoff by contributing his or her own information can also be reduced if a contributor receives external rewards for contributions ( Komorita & Barth , 1985 ; McCusker & Carnevale , 1995 ; Parks , 2000 ) . Formally seen , they can solve the dilemma on the individual level if the reward exactly compensates for the individual contribution costs . In such a case , the MPCR for individual contributions would be 1 . The database bonus system we will regard in the studies described here is a use - related bonus system as it is often used in organizations ( Sundaresan & Zhang , 2004 ; Van Alstyne , Brynjolfsson , & Madnick , 1995 ) . With such a reward system , contrib - utors get a bonus for the reusability of their contributions . They , for example , can receive a bonus each time one of the other group members retrieves one of their con - tributions , or the usability of their contribution can be additionally assessed through a peer - rating mechanism . So with a use - related bonus system , contributors get more of a bonus the more other group members need their contributions . This kind of bonus system is used because it is supposed to improve the quality of a database’s information by motivating each person to contribute mainly important information that could be useful for others ( Connolly & Thorn , 1990 ; Kalman et al . , 2002 ) . But does this bonus achieve the desired effect ? To answer this question we first have a look at results of experimental studies in social - dilemma research . As far as we know , no studies exist that used a bonus sim - ilar to the use - related bonus in information exchange . But there are some studies where the MPCR of a public - goods dilemma situation was systematically varied . In his review , Ledyard ( 1995 ) confirms the expectation that increasing the MPCR enhances the cooperation rates . Nevertheless , the efficacy of this kind of structural solution could be restrained by some psychological mechanisms , as Saijo and Nakamura ( 1995 ) mention . In their experiments , about 25 % to 50 % of the partici - pants defected in situations where the MPCR was higher than 1 . That is , participants defected even though payoff for cooperation was greater than for defection . The authors explain this high defection rate in two ways : First , individual motives such 374 Communication Research Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 375 as spite or competitiveness cause individuals not only to perform as well as possible , but also make it a priority to perform better than others . In the extreme case this means that people sometimes even accept suboptimal outcomes for themselves if this maxi - mizes the difference between their own outcomes and the outcomes of others ( Van Lange , Otten , De Bruin , & Joireman , 1997 ) . Second , the efficacy of enhancing the MPCR is modified by the transparency of the payoff . This argument is based on the finding that the structural solution was more effective if participants got detailed information about their own payoff and the payoff of the others . In these experiments people got a table showing in detail their own payoff for all behavioral options they had . Thus , this experiment showed that people realized that cooperation would ensure their highest payoff only when they were able to compare their outcomes for defection and cooperation directly with the aid of a table . They did not always real - ize the benefits of cooperation if they first had to calculate and compare costs and benefits separately on their own . Applying this interpretation to information exchange via shared databases makes the assumption plausible that the variation of the payoff function will not totally pre - vent people from withholding information . In an information - exchange dilemma , the situation is extremely complex and the payoff a person receives is highly intranspar - ent . In a typical information - exchange situation , persons have some information they know that others could benefit from , but they feel that they would have to bear the costs of contributions : Out of these vague expectations persons cannot exactly esti - mate what the resulting outcome might be ; if they receive a bonus , they cannot easily compare it to their costs and benefits . Consequently , we assume that a bonus system can only motivate people to contribute information to a shared database if they per - ceive the bonus as a possibility to enhance their individual payoff . This sounds quite trivial , but as far as we know , this has not been shown in an experimental setting , yet . Experimental Setting for Creating an Information - Exchange Dilemma In an experimental setting , we apply these critical concepts of dilemma theory to test how the payoff structure of the dilemma influences people’s perception of the situation and their contribution behavior in the information - exchange dilemma ( cf . Cress , 2005 ) . The experiment provides participants with a task that is divided into two time - limited phases . Their interplay creates the dilemma . Each participant works in a ( faked ) team of six persons and has to calculate salaries of fictitious salespeople . Each salary has two component values : A base salary that is calculated in the first phase and the total salary , which is calculated in the second phase . First phase : Each group member has to calculate the base salaries of as many salespeople as possible . Participants are told that each of them has to calculate base salaries that are distributed at random among the participants . They know that there is only a small overlap of base salaries , which means that some base salaries are cal - culated by more than one participant . A participant is paid 25 cents for each base salary he or she manages to calculate during this phase . Each calculation takes about 45 seconds . After each calculation , a participant has to decide whether he or she wants to contribute a result to the shared database or not . The transfer of the base salary to the database takes 15 seconds , and the contributor cannot continue the cal - culations during this time . The first phase is time limited and lasts 9 minutes . This ensures that each participant can calculate ( and consequently earn ) more , the less information he or she contributes . Second phase : Each group member has to calculate the total salaries of as many salespeople as possible . In this phase , a participant is paid 30 cents for every total salary he or she calculates . But for calculating a salesperson’s total salary , the appropri - ate base salary is needed . In some cases , this result is already available to a participant because he or she calculated it in the first phase . In other cases , the base salary is in the database because at least one of the other group members ostensibly calculated it and contributed it to the database . Then the person can get this result without any loss of time . But in some cases , no base salary is available ( because it is neither in the data - base nor did the participant calculate it in the first phase ) . Then the participant has to calculate it during this second phase . This takes time to do , and he or she cannot earn any money during that time . This second phase lasts 12 minutes . A person can calculate more total salaries—and therefore earns more—the more base salaries there are avail - able in the database . For controlling variations of behavior over time , the described task ( containing the first and second phases ) was repeated three times . Participants started with an empty database each time . The underlying payoff function was P ( 0 | 1 ) = 22 . 59 € , P ( 1 | 1 ) = 20 . 06 € , P ( 0 | 0 ) = 18 . 39 € , and P ( 1 | 0 ) = 15 . 76 € . These four payoffs show the extreme payoffs that a person can receive if he or she and his or her teammates fully defect ( do not contribute any base salary ) or fully cooperate ( contribute each calculated base salary ) . Of course each person can also contribute any ratio of the base salaries he or she calculated . Then the earning lies between these values . Prestudy Within this experimental environment , a prestudy was conducted to test if partic - ipants subjectively perceived the situation as a dilemma : Were they able to relate their earnings to their own database decisions and to those of their group mates ? Beyond that , were they able to estimate the payoff function validly—based only on their practical experience with the task but without explicit knowledge of the under - lying payoff function ? More concretely we ask if participants perceive the informa - tion exchange via shared database as a public - goods dilemma , with a payoff structure as described in Equation 1 . 376 Communication Research Participants and procedure . Eighty - one students of a German university took part in this prestudy ( 45 women and 36 men , mean age = 23 . 8 years ) . Students of psychology were not allowed to take part in this and the following studies because of their prior knowledge about social dilemmas . Participants worked in groups of six in a room with six computer workstations in cubical workplaces . The group members could not communicate or see each other’s display . The instructions made them believe that the group worked with one shared database , whereas in actuality , the partici - pants worked independently of each other . After the three trials , the participants had to complete a questionnaire . An introduc - tory text explained that they had to estimate the earning of a fictitious person , Peter , and his group mates , who took part in the same experiment as the participants . It was explained that in a previous experiment , Peter and each of his group mates contributed 50 % of their calculated base salaries and each of them earned 20 Euro . With the fol - lowing four items , participants had to estimate how much Peter earned if Peter contributes 0 % , his teammates 0 % , P ( 0 | 0 ) Peter contributes 100 % , his teammates 100 % , P ( 1 | 1 ) Peter contributes 100 % , his teammates 0 % , P ( 1 | 0 ) Peter contributes 0 % , his teammates 100 % , P ( 0 | 1 ) Results . Table 1 shows the mean estimations of the participants and the true val - ues resulting from the underlying payoff function of the experiment . The four esti - mated means differed significantly from each other , F ( 3 , 240 ) = 122 . 91 , p < . 001 . Post hoc tests confirm ( all p < . 001 ) that the participants did perceive the situation as a public - goods dilemma : P ( 0 | 1 ) > P ( 1 | 1 ) > P ( 0 | 0 ) > P ( 1 | 0 ) . Comparisons between the estimations and the true values show that the partici - pants overestimated P ( 0 | 1 ) , t ( 80 ) = 4 . 38 , p < . 001 , and P ( 1 | 1 ) , t ( 80 ) = 6 . 28 , p < . 001 , and underestimated P ( 0 | 0 ) , t ( 80 ) = 4 . 46 , p < . 001 , and P ( 1 | 0 ) , t ( 80 ) = 4 . 49 , p < . 001 . To examine the strength of the perceived dilemma further comparisons were done . The differences between P ( 0 | 0 ) and P ( 0 | 1 ) and between P ( 1 | 0 ) and P ( 1 | 1 ) show how strongly people estimated a person’s dependency on the teammates’ behavior . Compared to the true values both estimated differences were overestimated , t ( 80 ) = 7 . 61 , p < . 001 , which shows that participants overestimated the interdepen - dency of the group members . The two differences between P ( 0 | 0 ) and P ( 1 | 0 ) on one hand and between P ( 0 | 1 ) and P ( 1 | 1 ) on the other hand show how strongly people estimated the influence a person has on the own payoff . Thus , it measures a kind of perceived self - efficacy . Both estimated differences did not differ significantly from the true differences , t ( 80 ) = 0 . 76 , p > . 05 , ns . This shows that people had a reliable estimation of their own influence on their personal payoff : Although the underlying Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 377 378 Communication Research payoff function was not explicitly explained to the participants , they subjectively perceived the experimental task as a social dilemma and in some extent even over - estimated its severity . One possible explanation for that result is the unfavorable individual MPCR for one’s own contributions , which we elucidated above . Study 1 The aim of this first study was to investigate the effect of a use - related bonus system . Such a bonus system should motivate people to contribute mainly those pieces of information that are important for others , because only then do they receive the bonus . Thus , a use - related bonus system is based on the fact that in information - exchange situations , people have at least some metaknowledge about the importance of their information for others . In most information - exchange situations people do not definitely know how important a piece of information is for others , but they often have at least a subjective impression if a piece of information could be important for others or not . We do not expect that people are mainly motivated by spite or competitiveness because it could cause individual suboptimal payoffs when people intend to maximize the difference between their own and the others’ outcomes . Instead , we do expect that people use this metaknowledge for deciding which information they will con - tribute . How important one’s own information might be to others is an indication to the owner what benefit the group mates will have from its contribution . Thus , this kind of Table 1 Mean Estimations of the Outcomes of a Fictitious Person Peter and His Group Mates Participants’ Estimation of Peter’s Outcome M ( SD ) True Value Peter contributes 0 % , his teammates 0 % . P ( 0 | 0 ) 16 . 25 ( 4 . 33 ) 18 . 39 Peter contributes 100 % , his teammates 100 % . P ( 1 | 1 ) 23 . 75 ( 5 . 30 ) 20 . 06 Peter contributes 100 % , his teammates 0 % . P ( 1 | 0 ) 14 . 07 ( 3 . 38 ) 15 . 76 Peter contributes 0 % , his teammates 100 % . P ( 0 | 1 ) 26 . 04 ( 7 . 08 ) 22 . 59 metaknowledge provides a person with a further possibility of having influence on the teammates’ payoffs . This should motivate a person to contribute mainly important information . Experimental studies of Costa - Gomes , Crawford , and Broseta ( 2001 ) as well as Messick and Brewer ( 1983 ) showed that people in a social dilemma do not only act with the goal of maximizing their own payoff , they also consider the payoff of the others . If in a decision situation people have the choice between two alternatives that cause the same costs but provide the teammates with different amounts of benefits , they choose the alternative from which the teammates benefit the most . If we transfer this result to the information - exchange dilemma , we can hypothesize the following assumption : Hypothesis 1 ( H1 ) : People contribute more pieces of important information than of less important information . With a use - related bonus system , people only receive the bonus if their contribu - tions are used by others . Consequently , we presume that a use - related bonus system increases this choice of contributing important information . With such a bonus system , people will contribute even more pieces of important information but will abstain from contributing less important information . H2 : Therefore , we expect an interaction between bonus - system and importance of information . Method Participants . Participants of this study were 42 students of a German university ( 24 women and 18 men , mean age = 23 . 8 years ) . Design and procedure . The experiment represented a 2 × 2 factorial design with bonus system ( without bonus vs . bonus ) as between - factor and importance of infor - mation ( important vs . less important ) as within - factor . The procedure was the same as in the prestudy and an additional feature was implemented . In the experiment , two different kinds of base salaries were defined : 50 % of all base salaries were labeled as highly important and the other 50 % as less important . Participants were informed that the important salaries had to be calcu - lated first in the second phase . Therefore , a person knew that others would need an important base salary with higher probability than a nonimportant one . Thus , the group’s benefit for contributing important information was higher than for less important information . For studying the effect of a use - related bonus system , two different bonus levels were compared in this study : In one condition no bonus was given at all ( participants Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 379 only received feedback about how often their contributed information was retrieved ) , and in the other condition a bonus was provided in addition to the feedback . With the bonus , the dilemma situation is reversed with regard to the payoff situation . In this case , contributing all important information becomes the most effective strategy on the individual level , too . In the bonus condition , the participants knew that a contributor would receive 10 cents whenever one of the other group members retrieved one of his or her contributions . This bonus would be added to their other earnings . After the experiment , participants in all conditions had to complete a questionnaire , which measured participants’ sub - jective perceptions of the payoff structure . They had to estimate transfer time and the amount of bonus per contributed salary , which would exactly compensate for the costs ( “estimated compensating bonus” ) . At the end of the session , participants were paid according to the number of base and total salaries they had calculated during the three trials . Participants of the bonus condition additionally received the bonus they earned through the ( faked ) use by others of their contributions . Results A total of 23 participants took part in the no - bonus condition and 19 in the bonus condition . None of the participants noticed that the groups were faked . The quotient of contributed and totally calculated base salaries ( contribution rate ) served as the main dependent variable . This ratio represents best the participants’ preparedness to cooperate because it takes their different calculating speeds into consideration . Results from the objective behavioral data ( contribution rate ) are followed by the results of the subjective ( questionnaire ) data . The results of the ANOVA of the contribution rate are presented in Table 2 . As expected in H1 , the within - factor “importance” was significant : The contribution rate was M important = . 61 ( SD = 0 . 33 ) for important base salaries , but only M less important = 0 . 24 ( SD = 0 . 31 ) for less important ones . With respect to the between - factor “bonus system” there was no significant effect . Thus , a use - related bonus system did not increase the number of contributions in general . However , consistent with H2 , the interaction between bonus system and importance reached significance . Figure 1 presents the contribution rates of important and less important base salaries in the two conditions . It shows that individuals in the condition without bonus system con - tribute more base salaries of less importance ( M no bonus , less important = 0 . 28 , SD = 0 . 33 ) than in the bonus condition ( M bonus , less important = 0 . 18 , SD = 0 . 27 ) but comparatively fewer salaries of higher importance ( M no bonus , important = 0 . 53 , SD = 0 . 38 ) than in the bonus condition ( M bonus , important = 0 . 72 , SD = 0 . 25 ) . This indicates that participants not receiving a use - related bonus tended to select their contributions with less attention 380 Communication Research Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 381 to importance than participants in the bonus condition . But even in the no - bonus condition participants contributed more important than less important information : t ( 22 ) = 3 . 26 , p < . 01 . The questionnaire items shed light on the subjective foundation of behavioral data , as they show how the participants perceived the dilemma : On average they estimated Table 2 Results of the Multivariate Analysis of Variances for the Contribution Rate Source df F p Tests of between - subject effects Bonus 1 0 . 40 . 53 Error 40 ( 0 . 14 ) Tests involving importance within - subject effect Importance 1 52 . 99 * * < . 01 Importance × Bonus 6 . 80 * . 01 Error 40 ( 0 . 06 ) Note : Values enclosed in parentheses represent mean square errors . * p < . 05 . * * p < 01 . 0 0 , 2 0 , 4 0 , 6 0 , 8 less important more important base salaries c on t r i b u t i on r a t e bonus no bonus Figure 1 Contribution Rates for Important and Less Important Information With and Without a Bonus the transfer time at M = 10 . 63 seconds ( SD = 4 . 80 ) , and the estimated compensating bonus at M = 14 . 19 cents ( SD = 9 . 62 ) . The two conditions ( without bonus vs . bonus ) did not differ in these estimations , t ( 38 ) = 1 . 45 , p > . 05 , ns ; t ( 39 ) = 1 . 30 , p > . 05 , ns . But the estimations in both conditions differed significantly from the true values . People significantly underestimated the transfer time , M no bonus = 9 . 60 ( SD = 4 . 41 ) ; M bonus = 11 . 76 ( SD = 5 . 07 ) ; true value = 15 ; one - sample t tests : t ( 20 ) = 5 . 62 , p < . 01 ; t ( 18 ) = 2 . 78 , p < . 01 , whereas they significantly overestimated the bonus that would have been necessary to compensate for the time of waiting , M no bonus = 12 . 40 ( SD = 10 . 49 ) ; M bonus = 16 . 26 ( SD = 8 . 30 ) , true value : 7 . 5 ; one - sample t tests : t ( 21 ) = 2 . 19 , p < . 05 ; t ( 18 ) = 4 . 60 , p < . 001 . Discussion When the true values resulting from the real underlying payoff function are com - pared with the participants’ estimation of the transfer costs and their perceived com - pensating bonus level , a conclusion becomes obvious : Participants underestimated the time costs , while at the same time they extremely overestimated the money they could have earned during this time instead of contributing ( estimated compensating bonus ) . This shows that participants in both conditions perceived the dilemma as much stronger than it really was . This replicates the results of the prestudy . In the bonus group the bonus level was clearly below the subjective threshold of 14 . 19 cents , which amount the participants perceived as compensating . Thus , the participants did not perceive the bonus as high enough to compensate for their costs . Also in the condition with the bonus , the perceived MPCR was lower than 1 , which shows that participants in both of these experimental conditions perceived a dilemma , even if there was none . However , although participants interpreted contributions as costly in both condi - tions , they contributed a respectable proportion of their calculated base salaries . They on average chose a mixed strategy , neither behaving fully selfishly , nor fully cooperatively . By choosing this “happy medium” they selectively contributed infor - mation that could be important for others . This is accordant with many other public - goods experiments where people also contributed 30 % to 50 % of their resources ( for review , see Ledyard , 1995 ) . The experiment also confirmed the expectation that people did not consider only their individual benefit . Instead , they used their metaknowledge about the importance of the information and also tried to maximize the benefit to the others . Participants in the no - bonus condition contributed much more information , which was important for others than less important information . Providing a use - related bonus enhanced this selective behavior even further . For the information - exchange dilemma , it can be con - cluded that the implementation of a use - related bonus system can achieve the hoped - for effect . This bonus system can improve the quality of information that is contributed 382 Communication Research to a database . Nevertheless , the subjective data showed that participants did not inter - pret the bonus as a compensation for their contribution costs . They perceived the bonus level as much lower than it in fact was—compared to the costs they perceived having for contribution . But we should perhaps not be too sure about the transfer of these results to real field settings . In our experiment , people had metaknowledge about the importance of their information for others , but their contribution costs for contribution of more important and less important pieces of information were the same . This often is not the case in real information - exchange situations . For example , a piece of informa - tion becomes more useful for others the more time a contributor invests in editing it . Thus , in real settings , contributing important information is often related with higher costs than contributing less important information . The question remains whether people will stick to the selective behavior they exhibited when contribution costs become higher for important information , as it often is the case in everyday life . In experimental gaming , many studies show that people are highly sensitive to varying costs , and high costs decrease contribution rates ( Connolly et al . , 1992 ) . But these studies only varied the cooperation costs in general—they did not differentiate among resources of different utility for others . As we know , no study exists where people have to trade off their own costs for the ben - efits of others . So it is not yet clear if people finding themselves in a social dilemma would contribute resources that would enhance the payoff for others , when to do so would be very costly to them , reducing strongly their own benefit . Study 2 A second study was conducted to answer this question . In this study , we presume that the significant difference between the contribution rates of important and less important information we found in the first study will be reduced , if the transfer costs for important information are clearly higher than for less important information . Therefore , we expect an interaction effect of cost variability and importance ( H3 ) . Method Participants . Participants of this study were 46 university students ( 21 women and 25 men , mean age = 24 . 7 years ) . They were evenly assigned to the two conditions . Design and procedure . The prediction was tested in a 2 ( Cost Variability ) × 2 ( Importance ) factorial design . Cost variability was induced as a between - factor . One group had equal costs for both kinds of information ( 15 seconds for contributing an important or less important base salary ) , whereas the other group had a cost level Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 383 384 Communication Research varying with the importance of information ( 10 seconds for contributing a less impor - tant base salary , 20 seconds for contributing an important base salary ) . Importance was the same within - factor as in the first experiment . The bonus level was constant across both conditions ( 5 cents ) . The same questionnaire as in the first study was used , but in the varying cost - level group the questionnaire asked for the estimated transfer time and estimated compensating bonus for the important and less important base salaries separately . In addition , participants had to rate their satisfaction with the received bonus with a 7 - point Likert - type rating scale ( 1 = very low ; 7 = very high ) . Results The results of the ANOVA of the contribution rate are presented in Table 3 . Here the same significant within - effects appeared as in the first study : The contribution rate of important salaries was significantly higher than for less important ones , M important = 0 . 52 ( SD = 0 . 35 ) vs . M less important = 0 . 35 ( SD = 0 . 28 ) . The interaction of cost variability and importance supports our third hypothesis . Figure 2 presents the contribution rates of important and less important base salaries in both experimental groups . Post hoc tests ( Scheffé ) show that with the varying costs the contribution rates of important and less important base salaries did not differ : M varying costs , important = 0 . 32 ( SD = 0 . 32 ) vs . M varying costs , less important = 0 . 45 ( SD = 0 . 21 ) , p > . 05 , ns . But with equal costs for both kinds of information the contribution rates of important and less important base salaries differed significantly : M equal costs , important = 0 . 71 ( SD = 0 . 27 ) vs . M equal costs , less important = 0 . 25 ( SD = 0 . 31 ) , p < . 001 . In the condition with varying costs , the questionnaire data reveal that both esti - mations ( for the transfer time and for the estimated compensating bonus ) differed Table 3 Results of the Multivariate Analysis of Variances for the Contribution Rate Source df F p Tests of between - subject effects Cost variability 1 2 . 28 . 14 Error 44 ( 0 . 07 ) Tests involving importance within - subject effect Importance 1 9 . 32 * * < . 01 Importance × Cost Variability 1 30 . 98 * * < . 01 Error 44 ( 0 . 09 ) Note : Values enclosed in parentheses represent mean square errors . * p < . 05 . * * p < . 01 . Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 385 significantly for the important and less important base salaries : The participants on aver - age estimated the transfer time for the less important information at M less important = 8 . 00 sec . ( SD = 4 . 04 ) , and for the more important information at M important = 11 . 74 sec . ( SD = 4 . 86 ) , t ( 18 ) = 5 . 13 , p < . 001 . These differences serve as treatment check , as they show that participants of the varying - costs condition realized that the contribution of less important base salaries needed less time than the contribution of the more impor - tant base salaries . In the varying - costs condition , the estimated cost - compensating bonus was M less importan t = 15 . 50 cents ( SD = 11 . 77 ) for less important base salaries and M important = 18 . 88 cents ( SD = 13 . 12 ) for important base salaries , t ( 20 ) = 3 . 11 , p < . 01 . So for both kinds of information , participants overestimated the money they could have earned during the transfer time for important information , t ( 22 ) = 3 . 08 , p < . 01 ( 11 . 11 cents ) , and for less important t ( 20 ) = 3 . 87 , p < . 001 , information ( true value : 5 . 56 cents ) . In the condition with equal costs the participants showed the same pattern of answers as in the first study . Discussion The questionnaire data showed that analogous to the previous experiment , partic - ipants underestimated the actual transfer time , but extremely overestimated the level 0 0 , 2 0 , 4 0 , 6 0 , 8 less important more important base salaries c on t r i bu t i on r a t e varying costs equal costs Figure 2 Contribution Rates for Important and Less Important Information Depending on Cost Variability ( costs are equal for both kinds of information vs . costs are subject to the importance of information ) a cost - compensating bonus should have . Consequently , also in this experiment par - ticipants perceived the dilemma as much stronger than it really was . This means that they regarded withholding as strategically more reasonable than it actually was . The questionnaire data show another interesting aspect : The different estimations of the transfer times for less and more important contributions in the condition with varying costs revealed that the participants were aware that the contribution of important base salaries took more time , and thus was more costly , than the contri - bution of less important base salaries . This had an influence on the contribution rates . Accordant with our third hypothesis , the contribution rates showed that with different costs for contributing more and less important information , the preference for contributing important information was reduced ( the post hoc tests even showed that it fully disappeared ) and the participants behaved more selfishly . Thus , if people consider the tradeoff between the benefit of their group members versus their own costs , they decide in favor of their own benefit over that of the group members . General Discussion With two experiments we investigated the contribution of information in an information - exchange dilemma . We shed light on the way metaknowledge about the importance of information and on the way a use - related bonus system can change the underlying payoff function of the dilemma . The experiments revealed the influ - ences these factors had on participants’ perception of the payoff and on their behav - ior . Objectively—which means according to the payoff function—the bonus given in the first study in fact solved the dilemma . It did so because it undermined the dom - inance of the strategy of withholding information and made cooperation the most efficient strategy . However , the results showed that although the bonus was more than compensatory for the costs , the participants perceived the bonus level as too low to solve the dilemma and to turn cooperation into a dominant strategy . So , even when the bonus was objectively higher than the costs arising for the contribution , the bonus was subjectively perceived as too small to make contributing really attractive . At the same time , the experiments show that even if the participants believed that withholding was strategically efficient , they still contributed about 43 % of their results . This shows that people do not behave only selfishly and focus on maximiz - ing their own payoff as the model of the “homo economicus” would predict . A second finding is that the participants contributed very selectively : Considering the well - being of the group , they used their metaknowledge and contributed much more important than less important information . So , if participants shared informa - tion , they chose to provide such information that was most useful for others . In this sense they behaved quite cooperatively . Furthermore , the first experiment showed that a use - related bonus system could even enhance this selective behavior . Although participants did not perceive a bonus as a solution of the dilemma , it positively influ - enced their contributing behavior . So it seems that a use - related bonus system in fact 386 Communication Research Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 387 is able to enhance not only the contribution of useful information , but also—as a consequence—the quality of the shared database . Our second experiment showed that the preference for contributing more important information completely diminished if the contribution costs for important information were higher than for less important information . As long as participants do not have to bear any additional costs it seems they consider it adequate to support others by con - tributing rather important information than less important information . But as soon as there are additional costs to pay for such a contribution behavior , they stop it and reduce the contribution of important information . In case of doubt , participants obvi - ously prefer a strategy that does not impair themselves : Charity seems to begin at home . For any use of bonus systems in practice this is an important finding because the costs for contributing more and less important information are different in most real - life situations : When persons exchange their information via databases , they often are free to decide how much effort and time they will invest in their contributions . Often it is the case that the contributed information can be more useful for others if a person invests more time and effort in preparing and formatting it . To compile a detailed report that is intelligible to all takes much more time than generating a brief one . But of course such a detailed report is more important for others than one that was prepared quickly . However , these results cannot be generalized completely because it is possible that the effect does not occur in a situation where the difference in the cost level between important and less important information is only very small . In sum , we assume that different contribution costs for important and less important information can lead to more selfish behavior in a sense that people withhold important informa - tion . And we guess that this cost difference is the normal course of organizational life . So the question remains how to deal with this . Unfortunately , there is not a simple solu - tion for this problem . One might recommend that the bonus level should be adapted to the cost level , and a contributor gets more of a bonus the more costs he or she has . But in the strict sense this is what the use - related bonus system in our experiment already does . However , people seem not to realize this due to a bias that makes them overesti - mate the dilemma . Thus , a solution that objectively influences the payoff structure is not what is needed here . The experiments show that the subjective perspective is cru - cial . One reason for the differential perceptions of costs and bonuses might be the fact that costs appear instantly whereas a use - related bonus is effective in the future . So , what might help to overcome the bias is to make it more salient and thus more con - scious . Unfortunately , there has not yet been much research into the relationship between the objective payoff function and its subjective perception in experimental settings . The results of the studies presented here suggest that it would be worthwhile to have a closer look at this relationship and the underlying cognitive processes . Note 1 . The authors would like to thank Michael E . Roloff and two anonymous reviewers for their com - ments on earlier versions of this article . The authors also would like to thank Beatriz Barquero , Stephan 388 Communication Research Schwan , Jürgen Buder , and Stefan Martin for their support . This work was supported by a fellowship of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) awarded to Friedrich W . Hesse and Ulrike Cress . The pro - ject is part of the Special Priority Program “Net - based Knowledge Communication in Groups . ” References American Productivity & Quality Center . ( 2001 ) . Developing reward and recognition for knowledge sharing . Retrieved from http : / / www . apqc . org / portal / apqc / ksn / Rewards % 20and % 20Recognition . pdf ? paf _ gear _ id = contentgearhome & paf _ dm = full & pageselect = contentitem & docid = 106982 Ardichvili , A . , Page , V . , & Wentling , T . ( 2003 ) . Motivation and barriers to participation in virtual knowledge - sharing communities of practice . Journal of Knowledge Management , 7 ( 1 ) , 64 - 77 . Ba , S . , Stallaert , J . , & Whinston , A . B . ( 2001 ) . Research commentary : Introducing a third dimension in infor - mation systems design—the case for incentive alignment . Information Systems Research , 12 ( 3 ) , 225 - 239 . Barry , B . , & Hardin , R . ( 1982 ) . Rational man and irrational society . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Bonacich , P . , & Schneider , S . ( 1992 ) . Communication networks and collective action . In W . B . G . Liebrand , D . M . Messick , & H . A . M . Wilke ( Eds . ) , Social dilemmas : Theoretical issues and research findings ( pp . 225 - 245 ) . Oxford , UK : Pergamon . Cabrera , A . , & Cabrera , E . F . ( 2002 ) . Knowledge - sharing dilemmas . Organization Studies , 23 ( 5 ) , 687 - 710 . Collins , A . , Brown , J . S . , & Newman , S . E . ( 1989 ) . Cognitive apprenticeship : Teaching the crafts of read - ing , writing , and mathematics . In L . B . Resnick ( Ed . ) , Knowing , learning , and instruction : Essays in honor of Robert Glaser ( pp . 453 - 494 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Connolly , T . , & Thorn , B . K . ( 1990 ) . Discretionary databases : Theory , data , and implications . In J . Fulk & C . W . Steinfield ( Eds . ) , Organizations and communication technology ( pp . 219 - 233 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Connolly , T . , Thorn , B . K . , & Heminger , A . ( 1992 ) . Discretionary databases as social dilemmas . In W . B . G . Liebrand , D . M . Messick , & H . A . M . Wilke ( Eds . ) , Social dilemmas : Theoretical issues and research findings ( pp . 199 - 208 ) . Oxford , UK : Pergamon . Costa - Gomes , M . , Crawford , V . P . , & Broseta , B . ( 2001 ) . Cognition and behavior in normal - form games : An experimental study . Econometrica , 69 , 1193 - 1235 . Cress , U . ( 2005 ) . Ambivalent effect of member portraits in virtual groups . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 21 , 281 - 291 . Cress , U . , Barquero , B . , Buder , J . , & Hesse , F . W . ( 2005 ) . Social dilemmas in knowledge communication via shared databases . In R . Bromme , F . W . Hesse , & H . Spada ( Eds . ) , Barriers and biases in computer - mediated knowledge communication—And how they may be overcome ( pp . 143 - 167 ) . Berlin : Springer . Cress , U . , & Hesse , F . W . ( 2006 ) . The social complexity in establishing and sharing information resources . In J . Elen & R . E . Clark ( Eds . ) , Handling complexity in learning environments : Research and theory ( pp . 67 - 87 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . d’Aspremont , C . , Bhattacharya , S . , & Gerard - Varet , L . - A . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge as a public good : Efficient sharing and incentives for development effort . Journal of Mathematical Economics , 30 , 389 - 404 . Dawes , R . M . ( 1980 ) . Social dilemmas . Annual Review of Psychology , 31 , 169 - 193 . Dawes , R . M . ( 2000 ) . Social dilemmas . International Journal of Psychology , 35 , 111 - 116 . Fulk , J . , Flanagin , A . J . , Kalman , M . E . , Monge , P . R . , & Ryan , T . ( 1996 ) . Connective and communal public goods in interactive communication systems . Communication Theory , 6 , 60 - 87 . Heckathorn , D . D . ( 1996 ) . The dynamics and dilemmas of collective action . American Sociological Review , 61 , 250 - 277 . Head , J . G . ( 1972 ) . Public goods : The polar case . In R . M . Bird & J . G . Head ( Eds . ) , Modern fiscal issues : Essays in honour of Carl S . Shoup ( pp . 7 - 16 ) . Toronto , Ontario : University of Toronto Press . Hinds , P . , & Kiesler , S . ( 2002 ) . Distributed work . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Cress et al . / Information - Exchange Dilemma 389 Hollingshead , A . B . , Fulk , J . , & Monge , P . ( 2002 ) . Fostering intranet knowledge sharing : An integration of transactive memory and public goods approaches . In P . Hinds & S . Kiesler ( Eds . ) , Distributed work ( pp . 335 - 355 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Huber , G . P . ( 2001 ) . Transfer of knowledge in knowledge management systems : Unexplored issues and suggested studies . European Journal of Information Systems , 10 , 72 - 79 . Isaac , R . M . , Walker , J . , & Thomas , S . ( 1984 ) . Divergent evidence on free riding : An experimental exam - ination of possible explanations . Public Choice , 43 , 113 - 149 . Johnson , D . W . , & Johnson , R . T . ( 1989 ) . Leading the cooperative school . Edina , MN : Interaction Book Company . Kalman , M . E . , Monge , P . , Fulk , J . , & Heino , R . ( 2002 ) . Motivations to resolve communication dilemmas in database - mediated collaboration . Communication Research , 29 , 125 - 154 . Karau , S . J . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1993 ) . Social Loafing : A meta - analytic review and theoretical integra - tion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 , 681 - 706 . Kautz , K . , & Mahnke , V . ( 2003 ) . Value creating through IT - supported knowledge management ? The uti - lization of a knowledge management system in a global consulting company . Informing Science , 6 , 75 - 88 . Kerr , N . L . ( 1983 ) . Motivation losses in small groups : A social dilemma analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 , 819 - 828 . Kerr , N . L . , & Bruun , S . E . ( 1983 ) . Dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses : Free rider effects . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 44 , 78 - 94 . Kollock , P . ( 1998 ) . Social dilemmas : The anatomy of cooperation . Annual Review of Sociology , 24 , 183 - 214 . Komorita , S . S . , & Barth , J . M . ( 1985 ) . Components of reward in social dilemmas . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 , 364 - 373 . Komorita , S . S . , & Ellis , A . L . ( 1995 ) . Reward structure and cooperation in the n - person prisoner’s dilemma . In D . A . Schroeder ( Ed . ) , Social dilemmas ( pp . 15 - 30 ) . Westport , CT : Praeger . Ledyard , J . O . ( 1995 ) . Public goods : A survey of experimental research . In J . H . Kagel & A . E . Roth ( Eds . ) , The handbook of experimental economics ( pp . 111 - 181 ) . Princeton , NJ : University Press . Markus , M . L . , & Connolly , T . ( 1990 , October 7 - 10 ) . Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the adop - tion of interdependent work tools . Paper presented at CSCW ’90 . Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Los Angeles . McCusker , C . , & Carnevale , P . J . ( 1995 ) . Framing in resource dilemmas : Loss aversion and the moderat - ing effect of sanctions . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 61 , 190 - 201 . Messick , D . M . , & Brewer , M . B . ( 1983 ) . Solving social dilemmas : A review . In L . Wheeler & P . Shaver ( Eds . ) , Review of personality and social psychology , 4 ( pp . 11 - 44 ) . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Olson , M . ( 1965 ) . The logic of collective action . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Orliskowski , W . ( 1993 ) . Learning from notes : Organizational issues in groupware implementation . Decision Support Systems , 15 , 267 - 284 . Parks , C . D . ( 2000 ) . Testing various types of cooperation rewards in social dilemmas . Group Processes and Intergroup Relations , 3 , 339 - 350 . Rafaeli , S . , & LaRose , R . J . ( 1993 ) . Electronic bulletin boards and “public goods” explanations of col - laborative mass media . Communication Research , 20 , 277 - 297 . Reid , F . J . M . , Malinek , V . , Stott , C . J . T . , & Evans , J . B . T . ( 1996 ) . The messaging threshold in computer - mediated communication . Ergonomics , 39 , 1017 - 1037 . Saijo , T . , & Nakamura , H . ( 1995 ) . The “spite” dilemma in voluntary contribution mechanism experi - ments . Journal of Conflict Resolution , 39 , 535 - 560 . Sundaresan , S . , & Zhang , Z . ( 2004 ) . Facilitating knowledge transfer in organizations through incentive alignment and IT investment . Abstract Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . Retrieved from http : / / csdl2 . computer . org / comp / proceedings / hicss / 2004 / 2056 / 08 / 205680249b . pdf Thorn , B . K . , & Connolly , T . ( 1987 ) . Discretionary data bases : A theory and some experimental findings . Communication Research , 14 ( 5 ) , 512 - 528 . Van Alstyne , M . , Brynjolfsson , E . , & Madnick , S . ( 1995 ) . Why not one big database ? Ownership princi - ples for database design . Decision Support Systems , 15 , 267 - 284 . Van Lange , P . V . M . , Otten , W . , De Bruin , E . M . N . , & Joireman , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Development of prosocial , individualistic , and competitive orientations : Theory and preliminary evidence . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 , 733 - 746 . Williams , K . D . , Jackson , M . , & Karau , S . J . ( 1995 ) . Collective hedonism : A social loafing analysis of social dilemmas . In D . P . Schroeder ( Ed . ) , Social dilemmas : Perspectives on individuals and groups ( pp . 117 - 142 ) . Westport , CT : Praeger . Yuan , Y . , Fulk , J . , Shumate , M . , Monge , P . R . , Bryant , J . A . , & Matsaganis , M . ( 2005 ) . Individual partic - ipation in organizational information commons : The impact of team level social influence and technology - specific competence . Human Communication Research , 31 , 212 - 240 . Ulrike Cress ( Dr . rer . soc . , University of Tuebingen ) is an assistant professor at the University of Tuebingen’s Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology . Her work focuses on knowledge management , e - learning , and Web - based communication . Joachim Kimmerle ( Dipl . - Psych . , University of Tuebingen ) is a research associate at the Knowledge Media Research Center . He works primarily in the areas of net - based knowledge communication and knowledge management . Friedrich W . Hesse ( Dr . phil . , RWTH Aachen ; Dr . rer . nat . habil . , University of Goettingen ) is head of the University of Tuebingen’s Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology and director of the Knowledge Media Research Center . His research interests are knowledge communication and learning with knowledge media . 390 Communication Research