Endotoxin Priming of Neutrophils Requires Endocytosis and NADPH Oxidase - dependent Endosomal Reactive Oxygen Species * Receivedforpublication , September21 , 2011 , andinrevisedform , December13 , 2011 Published , JBCPapersinPress , January10 , 2012 , DOI10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 306530 Fred S . Lamb ‡ , Jessica S . Hook ‡ § , Brieanna M . Hilkin ‡ § , Jody N . Huber ‡ § , A . Paige Davis Volk ‡ § , and Jessica G . Moreland ‡ § 1 From the ‡ Division of Critical Care , Department of Pediatrics and the § Inflammation Program , The University of Iowa , Iowa City , Iowa 52242 Background : Endotoxin priming of neutrophils requires NADPH oxidase - derived reactive oxygen species , but localization of oxidant generation is unknown . Results : NADPH oxidase is assembled and active on an endosomal compartment , and endocytosis is required for priming . Conclusion : Intracellular oxidant signaling provides critical regulatory switch for neutrophil inflammatory state . Significance : Modification of neutrophil activation may be advantageous to control host inflammation . NADPH oxidase 2 ( Nox2 ) - generated reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) are critical for neutrophil ( polymorphonuclear leukocyte ( PMN ) ) microbicidal function . Nox2 also plays a role in intra - cellularsignaling , butthesiteofoxidaseassemblyisunknown . It has been proposed to occur on secondary granules . We previ - ously demonstrated that intracellular NADPH oxidase - derived ROS production is required for endotoxin priming . We hypoth - esized that endotoxin drives Nox2 assembly on endosomes . Endotoxin induced ROS generation within an endosomal com - partment as quantified by flow cytometry ( dihydrorhodamine 123 and Oxyburst Green ) . Inhibition of endocytosis by the dynamin - II inhibitor Dynasore blocked endocytosis of dextran , intracellular generation of ROS , and priming of PMN by endo - toxin . Confocal microscopy demonstrated a ROS - containing endosomalcompartmentthatco - labeledwithgp91 phox , p40 phox , p67 phox , and Rab5 , but not with the secondary granule marker CD66b . To further characterize this compartment , PMNs were fractionated by nitrogen cavitation and differential centrifuga - tion , followed by free flow electrophoresis . Specific subfractions made superoxide in the presence of NADPH by cell - free assay ( cytochrome c ) . Subfraction content of membrane and cytosolic subunits of Nox2 correlated with ROS production . Following priming , there was a shift in the light membrane subfractions where ROS production was highest . CD66b was not mobilized from the secondary granule compartment . These data demon - strateanovel , nonphagosomalintracellularsiteforNox2assem - bly . This compartment is endocytic in origin and is required for PMN priming by endotoxin . Priming of polymorphonuclear leukocytes ( PMN ) 2 in response to either host or foreign stimuli elicits an intermediate state of activation that alters subsequent responsiveness in terms of timing and intensity . The phenomenon of PMN prim - ing is not purely an in vitro event but occurs in vivo in a number of clinical settings including during sepsis ( 1 ) and acute respi - ratory distress syndrome ( 2 ) and following traumatic injury ( 3 ) . Although initial descriptions of neutrophil priming defined it as a preactivation state lacking NADPH oxidase 2 ( Nox2 ) activity ( 4 , 5 ) , we ( 6 , 7 ) and others ( 8 – 10 ) have demonstrated that low levels of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) are generated in response to priming stimuli . Moreover , our data demonstrate that priming responses initiated by endotoxin and TNF - (cid:1) are oxygen - dependent processes . Furthermore , these “priming” ROS are Nox2 - derived and are required to elicit downstream primed responses . The precise location where these signaling ROS are generated has not been clearly defined . The long - standing paradigm of Nox2 assembly and activa - tion suggested that intracellular ROS were only generated in response to endocytosis of a particulate stimulus into the pha - gosome . However , there is growing acceptance that the phago - cyte oxidase also generates low level ROS into a nonphago - somal compartment in response to certain stimuli and conditions ( reviewed in Ref . 11 ) . The nature of this compart - ment is still under investigation but has been suggested to be the secondary or specific granule ( 12 ) , a reservoir for the major - ity of flavocytochrome b 558 ( cyt b 558 ) stores in unstimulated PMN . Possible alternatives that are discussed are the secretory vesicle compartment or a subset of these endocytic structures . Although phagocytosis has been studied extensively , other forms of endocytosis have not been well characterized in PMN . Both fluid phase pinocytosis and clathrin - mediated uptake occur ( 13 , 14 ) , and the initiation of clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis by neutrophil priming agents has been characterized pre - viously in response to platelet - activating factor ( 15 ) . Further - more , during priming of PMN by platelet - activating factor , * Thisworkwassupported , inwholeorinpart , byNationalInstitutesofHealth GrantsRO1AI073872 ( toJ . G . M . ) , AI079445 ( toA . P . D . V . ) , RO1HL62483 ( to F . S . L . ) , and 2P01A104462011 ( to J . G . M . ) . 1 Towhomcorrespondencemaybeaddressed : DivisionofCriticalCare , Dept . of Pediatrics , The University of Iowa , 200 Hawkins Dr . , Iowa City , IA 52242 . Tel . : 319 - 467 - 5042 ; Fax : 319 - 356 - 8443 ; E - mail : jessica - moreland @ uiowa . edu . 2 The abbreviations used are : PMN , polymorphonuclear leukocyte ; Nox2 , NADPHoxidase2 ; ROS , reactiveoxygenspecies ; FFE , freeflowelectropho - resis , cyt b 558 , flavocytochrome b 558 ; Oxyburst , OxyBURST Green (cid:1) H 2 HFF BSA ; TR , Texas Red ; LOS , lipooligosaccharide ; TLR4 - MD2 , Toll - like receptor 4 - lymphocyte antigen 96 ; LUC - CL , lucigenin - enhanced chemilumines - cence ; fMLF , formyl - Met - Leu - Phe ; sCD14 , solubleCD14 ; GTP (cid:2) S , guanosine 5 (cid:1) - 3 - O - ( thio ) triphosphate . THEJOURNALOFBIOLOGICALCHEMISTRY VOL . 287 , NO . 15 , pp . 12395 – 12404 , April6 , 2012 ©2012byTheAmericanSocietyforBiochemistryandMolecularBiology , Inc . PublishedintheU . S . A . APRIL 6 , 2012• VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 12395 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m assembly of a group of signaling proteins on the endosome is necessary for the primed phenotype to be generated ( 16 ) . Endo - cytosis elicited during neutrophil priming by endotoxin has not been studied ; however , in monocytes , lipopolysaccharide elicits formation of tubular invaginations and uptake of endotoxin occurs by both clathrin and non - clathrin - mediated pathways ( 17 ) . Our previous data demonstrating a requirement for Nox2 - derived ROS in priming suggested that the signaling ROS were generated intracellularly ( 6 ) , and in the current study we sought to define the compartment where this occurs . Here , we dem - onstrate that endotoxin priming stimulates Nox2 assembly and activation on an endocytic vesicular structure in a subset of stimulated cells . This compartment is not distinct from the compartment that has been referred to as the secretory vesicles compartment but likely represents a subset of secretory vesi - cles . Moreover , endocytosis is required for generation of the primed phenotype . The process of priming alters the properties of the endocytic compartment in neutrophils as determined by free flow electrophoresis ( FFE ) separation of the light mem - branes . Although a small fraction of the secondary granule compartment is mobilized to the cell surface by endotoxin priming , this granule is not the site of intracellular ROS generation . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Materials —Hanks’ balanced salt solution was obtained from Mediatech ( Manassas , VA ) , human serum albumin was from Talecris Biotherapeutics ( Durham , NC ) , paraformaldehyde was from Electron Microscopy Sciences ( Hatfield , PA ) , Percoll and normal goat serum were from MP Biomedicals ( Solon , OH ) , Ficoll - Paque was from GE Healthcare ( Piscataway , NJ ) , dextran was from Pharmacosmos ( Holbaek , Denmark ) , sucrose was from Fisher , and arachidonic acid was from Nu Chek Prep ( Elysian , MN ) . Antibodies included anti - CD11b from Pharmin - gen ( San Diego , CA ) , anti - CD66b from Abcam ( Cambridge , MA ) or Serotec ( Raleigh , NC ) , anti - lactoferrin from Sigma , anti - p40 phox from Epitomics ( Burlingame , CA ) , anti - p67 phox from BD Biosciences ( San Jose , CA ) , anti - clathrin heavy chain from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , CA ) , and anti - gp91 phox ( clone 7D5 ) from MBL International ( Woburn , MA ) . Antibodies to p47 phox and the gp91 phox component of the cyt b 558 ( clone 54 . 1 ) were gifts from Dr . William Nauseef . Second - ary antibodies were from Bio - Rad for immunoblotting , Invitro - gen for confocal , and Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ( West Grove , PA ) for flow cytometry . OxyBURST (cid:2) Green H 2 HFF BSA ( Oxyburst ) , Alexa Fluor (cid:2) 647 dextran , and Texas Red ( TR ) dextran were from Invitrogen . Lipooligosaccharide ( LOS ) purified from Neisseria meningitides was a gift from Dr . Jerrold Weiss . Additional reagents were obtained from Sigma . All of the buffers and reagents were strictly endotoxin - free . Priming —As the stimulus for priming , a highly purified meningococcal endotoxin , LOS , in monomeric complex with soluble CD14 ( cluster of differentiation 14 ) , LOS - sCD14 , was generated by the laboratory of Dr . Jerrold Weiss and used in our studies ( 18 , 19 ) . This complex allows specific cell activation via Toll - like receptor 4 - lymphocyte antigen 96 ( TLR4 - MD2 ) to study the effect of endotoxin on cell activation . Human PMN Purification —Human PMN were isolated according to standard techniques from heparin anti - coagulated venous blood from healthy consenting adults in accordance with a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board for Human Subjects at the University of Iowa . PMN were isolated using dextran sedimentation and Ficoll - Paque density - gradient separation , followed by hypotonic lysis of erythrocytes as pre - viously described ( 20 ) . Measurement of Intracellular ROS by Flow Cytometry — Freshly isolated PMN stimulated with LOS - sCD14 ( 10 ng / ml ) or no agonist were incubated for 0 – 60 min in suspension at 37 °C in the presence of dihydrorhodamine 123 ( 130 (cid:3) M ) . Immediately following the specified time points , the cells were placed on ice and analyzed by flow cytometry . In some experi - ments , the non - membrane - permeable Oxyburst ( 100 (cid:3) g / ml ) was used instead of dihydrorhodamine 123 to detect ROS pres - ent in endocytic compartments . Measurement of Endocytosis of Texas Red Dextran by Flow Cytometry —PMN stimulated with LOS - sCD14 ( 10 ng / ml ) or no agonist were incubated for 0 – 60 min in suspension at 37 °C in the presence of TR dextran ( molecular weight , 10 , 000 ) ( 25 (cid:3) g / ml ) . Immediately following the specified time points , the cells were placed on ice and washed to remove extracellular dextran prior to analysis by flow cytometry . In some experi - ments , the cells were pretreated with the dynamin - II inhibitor Dynasore ( 100 – 300 (cid:3) M ) . In separate experiments , the cells were pretreated with chlorpromazine ( 40 (cid:3) M for 30 min at room temperature ) or sucrose ( 225 m M for 10 min at room temperature ) as inhibitors of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( 14 ) . There was no alteration in PMN viability after treatment with these inhibitors . Confocal Microscopy —PMN were incubated with LOS - sCD14 ( 10 ng / ml ) or no agonist for 30 min in the presence of Oxyburst (cid:2) fluorescently labeled dextran either in suspension or after adhering to autologous serum - coated glass coverslips . The cells were then fixed in either ice - cold 4 % paraformalde - hyde for cells in suspension or in 10 % formalin for adherent cells . The cells were viewed on a Zeiss LSM 510 Meta confocal microscope using a Plan - Apochromat 63 (cid:3) / 1 . 4 oil DIC objec - tive at room temperature with Zeiss Immersol 518 F halogen free / fluorescence free imaging medium . Oxyburst , Alexa Fluor 647 , and TR fluorochromes were used for confocal microscopy . Pictures were taken with an AxioCam HR digital camera , and images were acquired with LSM 510 acquisition software . The images were processed with ImageJ . Measurement of Nox2 Activity by Chemiluminescence — Lucigenin - enhanced chemiluminescence ( LUC - CL ) assays of Nox2 activity were performed in a 96 - well plate using the FLUOstar Omega ( BMG Labtech ) . 200 (cid:3) l of a PMN suspension containing 2 . 5 (cid:3) 10 6 PMN / ml in Hanks’ balanced salt solution with 1 % human serum albumin and 0 . 1 % dextrose was added to each well with a final lucigenin concentration of 100 (cid:3) M . The cells were stimulated by addition of LOS - sCD14 ( 10 ng / ml ) (cid:2) formyl - Met - Leu - Phe ( fMLF ) , as specified . Chemiluminescence was quantitated as relative luminescence units using a kinetic assay . For some experiments , the cells were pretreated with Dynasore ( 300 (cid:3) M ) , chlorpromazine ( 40 (cid:3) M ) , or sucrose ( 225 m M ) . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN 12396 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15• APRIL 6 , 2012 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Analysis of Mobilization of Intracellular Protein Stores by Flow Cytometry —PMN at a concentration of 1 (cid:3) 10 6 / ml were analyzed using a FACScan flow cytometer ( Becton - Dickinson ) . PMN were incubated in buffer or LOS - sCD14 as specified . Fol - lowing incubation , PMN were resuspended in blocking buffer containing phosphate - buffered saline with 2 % nonfat dry milk and 4 % normal goat serum for 20 min on ice . Primary antibod - ies were added , including mouse IgG 1 control , anti CD11b , anti - gp91 phox , or anti - CD66b , all at final concentrations of 10 (cid:3) g / ml , and incubated fo r 1 h onice . The cells were centrifuged and resuspended in FITC - conjugated goat anti - mouse second - ary antibody diluted 1 : 1000 . Subcellular Fractionation of Human PMN —Freshly isolated PMN were treated with the serine protease inhibitor diisopro - pyl fluorophosphate ( 1 m M ) for 20 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 200 (cid:3) g for 5 min at 4 °C . The cells were then incubated with LOS - sCD14 ( 10 ng / ml ) or no agonist for 30 min in a 37 °C / 5 % CO 2 incubator followed by centrifugation at 200 (cid:3) g for 5 min at 4 °C . The cells were resuspended in relax - ation buffer ( 10 m M PIPES , 100 m M KCl , 3 m M NaCl , 3 . 5 m M MgCl 2 , 1 . 25 m M ethyleneglycoltetraacetic acid ) with 1 m M PMSF . The cells were placed in an ice - cold cell disruption vessel ( Parr Instruments , Moline , IL ) and closed tightly . The vessel was pressurized to 350 p . s . i . with nitrogen gas and allowed to equilibrate for 20 min at 4 °C . Cavitates were expelled dropwise into a tube containing ethyleneglycoltetraacetic acid ( 1 . 25 m M ) and then centrifuged 200 (cid:3) g for 10 min to remove unbroken cells and nuclei . Postnuclear supernatants were placed on top of two - layer Percoll gradients made as described ( 21 ) and centri - fuged at 48 , 400 (cid:3) g for 15 min at 4 °C in a Beckman Avanti J - 25 centrifuge with low deceleration . Subcellular fractions were carefully removed from the gradient , and Percoll was removed by centrifugation . Sample buffer ( 62 . 5 m M Tris - HCl , pH 6 . 8 , 5 % (cid:4) - mercaptoethanol , 2 . 3 % SDS , 5 % glycerol ) was added to sam - ples , which were then heated at 103 °C for 3 min prior to SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis . High Voltage Free Flow Electrophoresis —FFE was used to sep - arate the light membrane fractions into component parts using the (cid:2) - fraction isolated by two - layer Percoll density centrifuga - tion as starting material ( 22 ) . To reduce the surface charge on vesicles , the (cid:2) - fraction was treated with neuraminidase for 30 min at 37 °C at a final concentration of 0 . 2 units / ml by mixing 15 times with a 21 - gauge needle . Following neuraminidase treatment , the samples were centrifuged at 184 , 000 (cid:3) g for 15 min at 4 °C and resuspended in 750 (cid:3) l of cold media buffer ( 6 m M triethanolamine and 6 m M glacial acetic acid , pH 7 . 4 , with 270 m M sucrose and conductivity adjusted to 420 (cid:3) S / cm ) . The electrode buffer consisted of 50 m M triethanolamine and 50 m M glacial acetic acid , pH 7 . 4 . FFE was performed on a Becton - Dickinson free flow electrophoresis system ( Sparks , MD ) at 5 °C using a media flow rate of 300 ml / h and a sample flow rate of 3 . 5 ml / h . High voltage settings were 160 W , 1600 V , and 100 milliAmp to give constant amperage . Following separation by FFE , alkaline phosphatase activity assay was used to identify the orientation of light membrane vesicles within the 96 FFE frac - tions and thus to distinguish between plasma membrane vesi - cles and secretory vesicles ( 22 ) . Briefly , 100 (cid:3) l of each fraction collected by FFE was plated into duplicate 96 - well microplates . 25 (cid:3) l of 2 % Triton X - 100 was added to each well of one plate and incubated for 15 min at room temperature . 150 (cid:3) l of 2 . 5 mg / ml p - nitrophenyl phosphate was added to each well and incubated for 30 min in the dark followed by reading on FLUO - star Omega at 405 nm . The 96 fractions collected by FFE were pooled into 12 groups consisting of 8 fractions each and con - centrated to be used for further biochemical and functional analysis . Sample buffer was added to a portion of each fraction and heated prior to SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , as above . Protein Electrophoresis and Immunoblotting —Samples were resolved in an 8 % gel by SDS - PAGE and then transferred to nitrocellulose . Immunoblots were processed using antibodies specific for the protein ( s ) of interest and species specific horse - radish peroxidase - labeled secondary antibodies followed by enhanced chemiluminescence detection ( Super Signal Sub - strate ; Pierce ) . Immunoblots were scanned using the ImageQuant LAS - 4000 imager ( GE Healthcare ) , and relative abundances were quantitated using ImageQuant software . Cell - free Assay of Nox2 Activity —1 . 5 (cid:3) 10 7 cell equivalents of each FFE fraction were combined with fresh cytosol in a micro - plate well containing relaxation buffer , 100 (cid:3) M cytochrome c , 55 (cid:3) g / ml ATP , 50 (cid:3) M GTP (cid:2) S , and 100 (cid:3) M arachidonic acid and mixed five times with a multichannel pipette . After a 4 - min incubation at 37 °C , NADPH was added to a final concentration of 130 (cid:3) g / ml , and the production of O 2 . was measured contin - uously at 550 n M for 20 min as the reduction of ferricytochrome c using the FLUOstar Omega ( BMG Labtech ) . RESULTS Endotoxin Priming Elicits Intracellular ROS Production — Our initial manuscript demonstrating a requirement for Nox2 - derived ROS for endotoxin priming included indirect evidence that these critical ROS were intracellular in location . We sought direct evidence for this contention using flow cytometry - based detection of the ROS - sensitive probe dihydrorhodamine 123 . PMN in suspension displayed time - dependent acquisition of intracellular fluorescence that was significantly enhanced by incubation with priming concentrations of endotoxin ( Fig . 1 A ) . Although these data provide convincing evidence that intracel - lular ROS are elicited , the probe utilized is freely permeable and thus gives no evidence about the nature of the compartment . We hypothesized that the endosome was a likely location for nonphagosomal intracellular ROS generation and therefore repeated these flow cytometry - based experiments using the Oxyburst reagent conjugated to BSA . This probe cannot diffuse across membranes and thus must be actively taken up by endo - cytosis . In unstimulated PMN we saw minimal Oxyburst signal . However , we demonstrated time - dependent enhanced fluores - cence in a subset of PMN with a significantly greater percentage of endotoxin - primed PMN acquiring Oxyburst positivity ( Fig . 1 , B and C ) . At 60 min , 81 (cid:2) 18 . 8 % of endotoxin primed PMN had an Oxyburst - positive compartment . Visualization of Intracellular ROS by Confocal Microscopy — To confirm our flow cytometry findings , we analyzed PMN for Oxyburst fluorescence by confocal microscopy . PMN were stimulated with LOS - sCD14 for 30 min in the presence of Oxy - burst and also TR dextran to label the endocytic compartment . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN APRIL 6 , 2012• VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 12397 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m By confocal microscopy , the majority of cells had endosomes filled with TR - dextran after 30 min . A subset of cells also dem - onstrated co - localization of Oxyburst and TR - dextran in a vesicular compartment ( Fig . 1 , D – F ) . The number of cells con - taining Oxyburst - positive vesicles increased over time and was similar to the quantitative flow cytometry data . These Oxy - burst - positive PMN endosomes were easily distinguishable from the autofluorescent granules seen in eosinophils . Evaluation of and Requirement for Endocytic Pathway in Endotoxin Priming —In view of the confocal microscopy find - ings , we next sought to quantitatively evaluate endocytosis in endotoxin - primed PMN . Using flow cytometry analysis of TR - dextran , time - dependent acquisition of intracellular dextran was noted in unstimulated cells , and dextran acquisition was significantly enhanced by priming with endotoxin at all time points from 15 to 60 min ( Fig . 2 A ) . To investigate the require - ment for endocytosis in the priming process , we tested the dynamin - II inhibitor Dynasore for its ability to block TR - dex - tran endocytosis under both constitutive and endotoxin - primed conditions . In preliminary studies , we tested a range of concentrations of the inhibitor based on the wide range utilized in the literature ( 23 , 24 ) . We found that 100 (cid:3) M Dynasore was sufficient to block the constitutive endocytosis seen in unstimulated PMN , and higher concentrations were required to block the endotoxin - mediated enhancement of dextran endocytosis ( data not shown ) . At the 30 - and 60 - min time points , Dynasore ( 300 (cid:3) M ) significantly inhibited endocytosis of dextran in unstimulated PMN as well as endotoxin - stimu - lated conditions ( Fig . 2 B ) . Using this concentration of Dyna - sore , we studied priming of the respiratory burst in response to fMLF . Because this dynamin - II inhibitor is fully reversible , we treated cells with Dynasore during the priming period and then washed cells to remove the inhibitor prior to analysis of primed Nox2 activity . Under these conditions , Dynasore - pretreated cells displayed markedly reduced priming of the fMLF - elicited respiratory burst with an average 1 . 9 - fold reduction in the peak Nox2 activity to fMLF ( Fig . 2 C ) but had normal responsiveness to PMA . We next investigated the effect of two inhibitors of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , chlorpromazine , and sucrose . Preincubation with either agent significantly inhibited endo - toxin - mediated endocytosis but had no significant effect on constitutive endocytosis ( data not shown , n (cid:4) 8 ) . There was no FIGURE1 . EndotoxinprimingelicitsintracellularROSproduction . A , intracellularROSweremeasuredbyflowcytometryusingthecellpermeableDHR123 fluorescent ROS - sensitive probe . LOS : sCD14 10 ng / ml , elicited a time - dependent increase in intracellular ROS as compared to control . Control cells at time 0 , immediately following addition of the probe , are set to a value of 1 , and data are presented as fold - increase with respect to this value , * (cid:4) p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , n (cid:4) 10 . B , usingOxybursttomeasureintracellularROSinendocyticcompartments , LOS : sCD14 - primedPMNsdisplayedasignificantly greater percentage of Oxyburst positive cells than did control PMN , * (cid:4) p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , n (cid:4) 6 . C , representative histogram from compiled data in B . D – F , confocal microscopy demonstrated Oxyburst positive vesicular compartments in a subset of cells . Representative confocal image of PMN after 30 min of priming with LOS : sCD14 demonstrating Oxyburst positive , ROS - containing vesicles ( D ) , colocalizing with TR - dextran containing vesicles ( E ) , and merged image ( F ) . FIGURE 2 . Endotoxin priming elicits endocytosis , and endocytosis is requiredforprimingoftherespiratoryburst . A , flowcytometryanalysisof endocytosis of TR - dextran in control versus LOS : sCD14 - treated PMN demon - strates a significant increase in endocytosis in response to priming . Fold increasepresentedwithrespecttocontrolcellsattime0 , * (cid:4) p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , n (cid:4) 5 . B , effectofthedynamin - IIinhibitorDynasoreonendocytosisofTRdextranin control versus LOS : sCD14PMNs . Dynasore ( Dyn , 300 (cid:3) M ) significantlyinhibits constitutive endocytosis in unstimulated PMNs . Dynasore also blocked LOS : sCD14 - mediated enhancement of TR - dextran endocytosis , * (cid:4) p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , n (cid:4) 6 . C , PMN were primed with LOS : sCD14 in the absence or presence of Dynasore for 30 min before washing twice and then stimulating with fMLF . Primed NADPH oxidase activity , as measured by LUC - CL , in response to fMLF was markedly inhibited in the cells primed in the presence of Dynasore , rep - resentative tracing , n (cid:4) 8 . D , both chlorpromazine ( 40 (cid:3) M ) and sucrose ( 225 m M ) significantly inhibited LOS : sCD14 - primed NADPH oxidase activity , as measuredbyLUC - CL , inresponsetofMLF . * * (cid:4) p (cid:5) 0 . 05sucrosecomparedto LOS : sCD14 without inhibitor , * (cid:4) p (cid:5) 0 . 05 for chlorpromazine compared to no inhibitor , n (cid:4) 8 . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN 12398 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15• APRIL 6 , 2012 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m effect on PMN viability at the concentrations utilized . Pretreat - ment of PMNs with either chlorpromazine or sucrose pro - foundly inhibited endotoxin priming of the fMLF - elicited res - piratory burst ( Fig . 2 D ) . Considered in combination , these data provide evidence that endotoxin priming enhances dynamin - II - dependent and clathrin - mediated endocytosis and that endocytosis is necessary for PMN to develop the primed phenotype . Further Characterization of Endosomal ROS - containing Compartment —Next we focused on demonstrating the pres - ence of Nox2 components on these endosomal ROS containing vesicles . Using confocal microscopy we noted that gp91 phox co - localized on many vesicles that were Oxyburst - positive , in addi - tion to being seen in a wide distribution throughout the cell . Many ROS containing vesicles also displayed p40 phox , which was expected in view of recent data demonstrating a specific role for p40 phox in intracellular ROS generation ( Fig . 3 , A – D ) ( 25 ) . p67 phox was also present on the ROS - positive , dextran - containing endocytic vesicles under investigation ( Fig . 3 , E – H ) . Although markers of the endocytic pathway have not been fully characterized in PMN , we looked for co - localization of Rab5 , a well described early endosomal protein , with the Nox2 - posi - tive , ROS - containing vesicles . Rab5 was noted to be overlap - ping strongly with dextran - containing endocytic vesicles ( data not shown ) and co - localized with gp91 phox and Oxyburst in the subset of vesicles that were ROS - positive ( Fig . 3 , I – L ) . Because it has been suggested previously that the secondary granule is the site of intracellular Nox2 assembly and ROS gen - eration ( 8 , 12 , 26 ) , we explored the effect of endotoxin priming on specific or secondary granule exocytosis using CD66b as a membrane marker for secondary granules . Using flow cytom - etry of live cells , we initially sought to determine whether there is mobilization / exocytosis of this granule population in response to the priming stimulus alone . In response to endo - toxin , PMN demonstrated a significant increase in CD66b lev - els on the cell surface at 30 min ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) , suggesting that this granule population is partially mobilized in response to endotoxin alone . Next , using confocal microscopy , we utilized two markers of secondary granules : CD66b as the membrane marker and lactoferrin as a soluble protein . We investigated whether CD66b and lactoferrin are present on the endosomal ROS - containing compartment under investigation . Although there was robust and overlapping staining for CD66b and lacto - ferrin in unstimulated PMNs ( data not shown ) , there was no evidence of any co - localization of either CD66b or lactoferrin with the ROS - containing endosomes where Nox2 was assem - bled ( Fig . 4 , C – F ) . Taken together , these data suggest that endo - toxin priming stimulates assembly and activation of the Nox2 on a vesicular compartment with characteristics of an early endosome rather than on a secondary granule . Biochemical Analysis of Endosomal Vesicle Population —We have previously used nitrogen cavitation , followed by Percoll density gradient centrifugation to isolate purified subcellular fractions from unstimulated PMN to characterize the localiza - tion of proteins within the PMN ( 28 ) . We hypothesized that if either the endosomal compartment or the secondary granule was the location of Nox2 assembly , then we could reliably sep - arate these subfractions and study mobilization of the cytosolic subunits of the oxidase to this subfraction . Consistent with pre - viously published reports ( 21 ) we found that 72 . 1 (cid:2) 3 . 1 % ( n (cid:4) 6 ) of the total cellular gp91 phox was in the secondary granule frac - tion in resting cells , with the remainder in the light membrane fraction , which includes both plasma membrane vesicles and secretory vesicles ( or endosomes ) . The compartmental local - ization of gp91 phox was not significantly altered following endo - FIGURE 3 . Confocal microscopy analysis of endotoxin primed PMN dis - plays ROS - containing vesicles that colocalize with NADPH oxidase com - ponents and early endosomal markers . PMNs were incubated for 30 min with LOS : sCD14 ( 10 ng / ml ) in the presence of the ROS - sensitive probe , Oxy - burst , and Alexa Fluor 647 dextran . Oxyburst positive , ROS - containing vesi - cles are seen in green ( A , E , I ) and colocalize with gp91 phox in blue ( B , J ) , Alexa Fluor 647 dextran in blue ( F ) , p40 phox ( C ) , p67 phox ( G ) , and rab5 ( K ) , all in red . D , H , L , representative merged images . FIGURE 4 . Endotoxin priming elicits low - level mobilization of secondary granules to the cell surface , but ROS - containing endosomes do not express secondary granule markers . A , cell surface levels of CD66b are sig - nificantly enhanced by priming with LOS : sCD14 , 10 ng / ml , as compared to control conditions , * (cid:4) p (cid:5) 0 . 05 , n (cid:4) 9 . B , representative flow cytometry histogram of CD66b . C – F , confocal microscopy of endotoxin primed PMNs displayOxyburstpositive , ROS - containingvesicles ( C ) . Robuststainingforthe secondarygranulemarkers ( D ) CD66b ( blue ) , and ( E ) lactoferrin ( red ) ispresent in all cells , but there is no colocalization of ROS - positive vesicles with either CD66borlactoferrin ( F ) . Representativemergedimageisfrom4independent experiments . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN APRIL 6 , 2012• VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 12399 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m toxin priming with 77 . 9 (cid:2) 3 . 5 % in the secondary granule frac - tion and 22 . 1 (cid:2) 3 . 5 % in the light membrane fraction . Because gp91 phox is one of the membrane components of the oxidase , these results were expected . We next studied the control versus endotoxin - primed subcellular fractions for biochemical evi - dence of localization of the cytosolic subunits , p67 phox , p47 phox , and p40 phox , as had been seen by confocal microscopy . Approx - imately 95 % of the membrane - associated p47 phox was found associated with the light membranes , whereas minimal p47 phox was detected in association with the secondary granule fraction . A similar pattern was seen for p40 phox and p67 phox . Following 30 min of endotoxin priming , there was no significant change in the relative proportion of cytosolic subunit proteins associated with the secondary granule versus light membrane subfrac - tions . These data provide additional evidence that the second - ary granules are not the site of Nox2 assembly under endotoxin - priming conditions ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . The vast majority of total cellular stores of the Nox2 cytosolic subunits remained in the cytosol , thus making it very difficult to discern whether endo - toxin priming had mobilized a greater amount from the cyto - solic compartment to the light membranes , as compared with localization in nonprimed cells . We went on to study the CD66b content of these fractions and found that (cid:6) 95 % of total cellular CD66b was retained in the secondary granule fraction following endotoxin priming , indicating that the increased sur - face expression demonstrated by flow cytometry ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) represented a very small proportion of the total cellular CD66b ( Fig . 5 , C and D ) . Additionally , we analyzed these frac - tions for clathrin content , because the light membrane fraction was expected to contain endosomes generated by clathrin - me - diated endocytosis . The light membrane fraction of both con - trol and endotoxin - primed PMN had clathrin protein detecta - ble by immunoblotting , whereas clathrin was virtually undetectable in the secondary granule fraction ( Fig . 5 , C and D ) . Although these immunoblotting analyses demonstrated the presence of many expected proteins in the light membrane sub - fraction , there were no detectable differences between control and endotoxin - primed vesicles . We elected to purify the light membrane fraction further using high voltage FFE , which sep - arates the light membranes into 96 subfractions based on size and charge . This approach has been extensively described and characterized as a method to separate PMN plasma membrane vesicles from secretory vesicles by performing an alkaline phos - phatase assay on the isolated FFE fractions ( 21 , 22 ) . Under con - trol conditions , plasma membrane vesicles ( generated outside - out by cavitation ) are identified by alkaline phosphatase enzyme positivity on the extravesicular surface , i . e . without any further permeabilization . In contrast , secretory vesicles ( out - side - in endosomes ) have “latent” alkaline phosphatase activity that is observed only following permeabilization with Triton X - 100 . In view of our data demonstrating marked enhancement of PMN endocytosis in response to endotoxin , we postulated that priming would alter the characteristics of these subcellular vesicular populations . We isolated 96 fractions as described from control versus endotoxin - primed PMN and analyzed the expression of alkaline phosphatase on these vesicle subfrac - tions . The distribution of alkaline phosphatase activity in the post FFE subfractions were clearly shifted in response to endo - toxin priming ( Fig . 6 A ) . This indicates alterations in the size , charge , or surface properties of the primed endosomal popula - tion . This shift in fraction properties was highly reproducible across multiple experiments . We elected to pool groups of these 96 fractions for further functional and biochemical analysis and generated 12 groups of eight fractions from each FFE sample . We again analyzed these subfractions for expression of membrane and cytosolic compo - nents of the Nox2 complex . In control PMN , gp91 phox was pres - ent predominantly in pooled subfractions 3 – 5 with a peak in fraction 4 . However , following endotoxin priming , the gp91 phox was shifted toward fraction 5 ( Fig . 6 , B and C ) . Minimal protein was detected in subfractions 9 – 12 , so immunoblots demon - strate only the first eight pooled fractions . Immunoblot analysis of the Nox2 cytosolic subunits within the pooled subfractions paralleled our findings with gp91 phox with a significant shift following endotoxin priming . This shift was more pronounced for p40 phox and p67 phox than for p47 phox ( Fig . 6 , D – G ) . Interest - ingly , there was no shift in the clathrin band across subfractions between control and endotoxin - primed PMN , suggesting that the shift was not due to a global alteration in the migration of subcellular vesicles during FFE following endotoxin priming , but rather a specific compositional change in the subset of endosomes containing the Nox2 , i . e . redistribution of Nox2 within the compartment as a result of priming ( Fig . 6 , H and I ) . Functional Analysis of Endosomal Vesicles after Priming — The isolated light membrane subfraction has been utilized by many laboratories ( 29 – 31 ) to study the function of the Nox2 using a cell - free assay of superoxide production . We postulated that the pooled subfractions generated following separation by FIGURE5 . NADPHoxidasecytosolicsubunitsareassociatedwiththelight membrane ( LM ) fraction , but not the secondary granule ( 2° G ) fraction , isolated from both control and endotoxin - primed PMN . A – B , control and LOS : sCD14 - primed ( 10 ng / ml ) PMN were subjected to cavitation and Percoll densitygradientcentrifugationwithisolationofeachofthegranulefractions . LM and 2° G subfractions were immunoblotted for p40 phox ( grey - filled bars ) , p47 phox ( open bars ) , and p67 phox ( black bars ) . Greater than 90 % of the Nox2 cytosolic subunit proteins , which were membrane - associated , were found associated with the LM fraction . There was no increase in cytosolic subunit abundanceassociatedwiththeLMsubfractionfollowingendotoxinpriming . Data were compiled from n (cid:4) 5 – 6 individual experiments . B , representative immunoblot displaying p67 phox and p40 phox . C , immunoblotting for the 2° G markerCD66b ( openbars ) displayedminimalmobilizationfromthe2°Gfrac - tion to the LM fraction after priming with LOS : sCD14 . Immunoblotting for clathrin heavy chain ( grey - filled bars ) demonstrated significant association of clathrinwiththeLMfractionbutnoneassociatedwiththe2°Gcompartment , n (cid:4) 4 . D , representative immunoblot displaying clathrin HC and CD66b . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN 12400 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15• APRIL 6 , 2012 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m FFE would retain this functional capacity . Furthermore , we hypothesized that the shift in Nox2 subunit proteins detected by immunoblotting after endotoxin priming would be mirrored in the superoxide - generating activity of each pool . Using equal amounts of membrane fraction from each of the first eight pooled subfractions , we analyzed the reduction of ferricyto - chrome c as a measure of Nox2 activity . Following FFE , the isolated vesicles were functionally active using the cell - free sys - tem . Compared with control PMN fractions , following endo - toxin - priming , there was a clear shift in the fractions with the greatest levels of Nox2 activity as measured by superoxide gen - eration ( Fig . 7 ) . These data provided functional confirmation that endotoxin priming alters the Nox2 activity of PMN endo - somal vesicles . DISCUSSION Nox2 - dependent generation of superoxide into the PMN phagosome following ingestion of microbes or other particulate stimuli has been extensively studied and characterized . Simi - larly , assembly and activation of the Nox2 complex at the neu - trophil plasma membrane in response to a soluble agonist has been described in detail . However , despite solid evidence that other members of the Nox family generate ROS into intracel - lular vesicular compartments ( 32 , 33 ) , there has been only lim - ited investigation of the possibility that the Nox2 assembles on an intracellular , nonphagosomal membrane for ROS genera - tion . We became interested in Nox2 - derived ROS signaling in PMN after demonstrating that endotoxin priming of neutro - phils is an oxygen - dependent process and specifically requires Nox2 - derived ROS ( 6 ) . In the current investigation , we provide evidence for two novel findings related to the function of the PMN Nox2 . First , the Nox2 complex is assembled on endosomes in response to priming concentrations of endotoxin and is activated to gener - ate intraendosomal ROS . Second , endocytosis is a required ele - ment of priming for PMN development of the primed pheno - type . To our knowledge , this is the first description of assembly and activation of Nox2 on an endosome . Our data support the contention that this endosomal compartment is a subset of the compartments that have been broadly termed secretory vesi - cles within the PMN literature . Initial descriptions of nonpha - gosomal intracellular ROS generation in PMN were generally focused on cellular responses to the phorbol ester PMA and identified the secondary granule as the likely compartment of assembly ( 8 , 12 , 26 ) . More recently , assembly of the PMN oxi - dase has been described on a vesicular “prephagosomal” com - partment during Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis ( 34 ) . This compartment subsequently fused with the phagosome . The functional significance of this compartment is not entirely clear , but interesting questions about spatial delivery of redox signaling were raised . Herein , using several complementary assays , we demonstrate that intracellular , endosomal Nox2 - de - pendent generation of ROS is initiated by cell stimulation with endotoxin , requires endocytosis , and does not involve the sec - ondary granule membrane . FIGURE 6 . Endotoxin priming of PMN elicits an alteration in the properties of the light membrane subfractions . A , alkaline phosphatase activity assay performed on the FFE subfractions from control and endotoxin - primed , 10 ng / ml LOS : sCD14 . PMN demonstrates a shift in the fractions displaying alkaline phosphatase activity post - Triton X - 100 permeabilization , representative activity assay , from n (cid:4) 5 individual experiments . FFE subfractions were pooled into groups of 8 for further biochemical analysis . B – C , gp91 phox protein was detected primarily in pooled subfractions 3 , 4 , and 5 from control PMNs , but shifted to fractions 4 , 5 , and 6 following endotoxin priming . B , compiled data from n (cid:4) 5 separate FFE runs . C , representative immunoblot for gp91 phox . D – F , cytosolic subunits of the oxidase were also associated with light membrane pooled subfractions isolated by FFE . p40 phox ( D ) and p67 phox ( F ) displayed similar shifts by immunoblotting as seen with gp91 phox , whereas p47 phox ( E ) had only a minor shift following priming , n (cid:4) 5 . G , representative immunoblot for control versus LOS : sCD14 primed PMNs for cytosolic subunits of Nox2 . H – I , there was no shift in the clathrin heavy chain protein content of FFE subfractions following endotoxin priming , n (cid:4) 5 . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN APRIL 6 , 2012• VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 12401 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m From a mechanistic perspective , alterations in localization and phosphorylation status of subunits of the oxidase complex have been described to play a role in the development of the primed state . Phosphorylation of p47 phox has been extensively studied in response to both priming and activating stimuli , and sequential phosphorylation events appear to occur ( 35 ) during the course of assembly and activation . Phosphorylation of Ser - 345 on p47 phox is a necessary event in priming of neutrophils by TNF - (cid:1) and GM - CSF ( 36 , 37 ) . During endotoxin priming , par - tial phosphorylation of p47 phox has been reported , although the specific residues have not been identified ( 38 ) , and transloca - tion of this subunit to the plasma membrane also occurs . Endo - toxin priming elicits a quantitative increase in intracellular endosomal ROS . Although the properties of the light mem - brane compartment were clearly altered , we observed no quan - titative difference in the percentage of the cytosolic subunits that localized there . These data suggest a qualitative alteration in the oxidase assembled in the primed cells . The relative phos - phorylation state of each of the relevant subunits is currently under investigation in isolated light membranes of endotoxin - primed versus control PMN . Moreover , our data provide solid evidence that endotoxin priming does not mobilize additional stores of cyt b 558 from the secondary granule compartment to the light membrane com - partment . Based on our method of differential centrifugation , our data would also exclude mobilization of additional cyt b 558 from the gelatinase - positive tertiary granule compartment , as has been described for priming by G - CSF ( 39 ) . Rather , endo - toxin elicits a functional reorganization of the membrane Nox2 that is present initially in the light membranes ( plasma mem - brane and secretory vesicles ) . From the early work of Borre - gaard and co - workers , later confirmed by others , it is apparent that 80 – 85 % of the PMN cyt b 558 exists in the secondary gran - ule compartment , with the remainder in light membrane com - partment of resting cells , divided between secretory vesicles and the plasma membrane ( 21 , 22 ) . We demonstrated a similar distribution between secondary granules and light membranes in our control PMN population . This distribution was not altered by endotoxin priming . We speculate that by eliciting endocytosis , endotoxin shifts cyt b 558 out of the plasma mem - brane into vesicles having a distinct lipid composition . How - ever , these endosomes remain within the light membrane frac - tion , thus preventing a change in the overall distribution of the cytochrome . In addition , endotoxin stimulation likely produces quantitative and qualitative changes in the signaling proteins that are incorporated into endosomes . These two factors may explain the altered distribution of the physical properties of the light membrane vesicle populations as assessed by electrophoresis . In broad terms , it is not clear exactly which form ( s ) of endo - cytosis is / are necessary for the priming of neutrophils to pro - ceed . We utilized a low molecular weight dextran that would be easily taken up during clathrin - mediated endocytosis , and this is the described mechanism for uptake of endotoxin bound to the TLR4 - MD2 complex ( 40 ) . Although not studied to date in neutrophils , uptake of endotoxin - TLR4 - MD2 into an endocytic compartment has been described extensively in many cell types , including monocytes ( 41 ) and macrophages ( 42 ) . Endo - cytosis of the complex was initially characterized as a mecha - nism for termination or deactivation of endotoxin signaling and targeting for ubiquitination ( 40 ) . More recently , there has been evidence that TLR4 signaling via MyD88 occurs at the plasma membrane , whereas MyD88 - independent ( IRF3 pathway ) sig - naling occurs in an endosomal location ( 43 ) . There are few data on proximal endotoxin signaling in PMN , with a single study suggesting that the IRF3 pathway is not activated by endotoxin ( 44 ) . Although we did not specifically explore the uptake of endotoxin in the current study , we speculate that the endocytic ROS - containing compartment identified will contain endo - toxin bound to TLR4 - MD2 . We are actively investigating the uptake and processing of endotoxin in PMN , with a specific focus on the question of whether the mode of presentation of endotoxin impacts the compartment and signaling elicited . The mechanisms and regulation of neutrophil priming by both bacterial and host products have been a focal area for our laboratory in recent years . Considered in combination with our recently published studies on TNF - (cid:1) - mediated neutrophil sig - naling ( 7 ) , the data presented here suggest a new role for Nox2 in intracellular signaling . The relevance of understanding the mechanisms of PMN priming in relationship to human disease processes has been progressively delineated . Many years ago , in vivo primed neutrophils were identified in patients with the acute respiratory distress syndrome ( 2 ) , sepsis ( 1 ) , and follow - ing traumatic injury ( 3 ) , although these early reports failed to identify a causal link between priming and outcome . More recently , priming of neutrophils in the peripheral blood of patients with chronic inflammatory diseases , including rheu - matoid arthritis , chronic kidney disease , and inflammatory bowel disease ( 45 – 47 ) , has been identified . These findings sug - gest that therapeutic control of neutrophil priming might pro - FIGURE 7 . Cell - free NAPDH oxidase assay for measurement of superoxide production using the reduction of ferricytochrome c displays a shift in the superoxide generating fractions following endotoxin priming . A , in control PMN , pooled subfractions 3 and 4 generated the greatest amount of super - oxidefollowingadditionofNADPH , whereaspeaksuperoxidegeneratingactivityshiftedtosubfractions4and5followingendotoxinpriming ( B ) . C , compiled data for superoxide generation by subfractions from n (cid:4) 3 FFE experiments comparing control versus endotoxin - primed PMN displays a full fraction shift in peak superoxide generating activity . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN 12402 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15• APRIL 6 , 2012 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m vide a new approach to the management of chronic inflammation . In summary , the current manuscript describes and charac - terizes a novel compartment for Nox2 assembly that is neces - sary for PMN priming . We hypothesize that the endosomal localization of these Nox2 - derived ROS provides a regulated delivery system whereby oxidant sensitive proteins can be mod - ified in a spatially and temporally segregated manner without damaging effects on the rest of the cell . Our long - standing interest in the interaction between the anion - proton anti - porter , ClC - 3 , and the NADPH oxidase ( 6 , 27 ) may be explained by events specific to the endosome but not relevant at the pha - gosomal or plasma membrane . These endosomally specific ROS are required for PMN priming and represent a target area for therapeutic intervention , potentially via targeted inhibition of ClC - 3 . Acknowledgments—We thank Dr . Jerrold Weiss and Dr . Theresa Gio - annini for generously providing the endotoxin - sCD14 complex used for priming and Dr . William Nauseef for antibodies to subunits of Nox2 . REFERENCES 1 . Bass , D . A . , Olbrantz , P . , Szejda , P . , Seeds , M . C . , and McCall , C . E . ( 1986 ) Subpopulations of neutrophils with increased oxidative product forma - tion in blood of patients with infection . J . Immunol . 136 , 860 – 866 2 . Chollet - Martin , S . , Montravers , P . , Gibert , C . , Elbim , C . , Desmonts , J . M . , Fagon , J . Y . , and Gougerot - Pocidalo , M . A . ( 1992 ) Subpopulation of hy - perresponsive polymorphonuclear neutrophils in patients with adult res - piratory distress syndrome . Role of cytokine production . Am . Rev . Respir . Dis . 146 , 990 – 996 3 . Ogura , H . , Tanaka , H . , Koh , T . , Hashiguchi , N . , Kuwagata , Y . , Hosotsubo , H . , Shimazu , T . , and Sugimoto , H . ( 1999 ) Priming , second - hit priming , and apoptosis in leukocytes from trauma patients . J . Trauma 46 , 774 – 783 4 . Condliffe , A . M . , Kitchen , E . , and Chilvers , E . R . ( 1998 ) Neutrophil prim - ing . Pathophysiological consequences and underlying mechanisms . Clin . Sci . 94 , 461 – 471 5 . Swain , S . D . , Rohn , T . T . , and Quinn , M . T . ( 2002 ) Neutrophil priming in hostdefense . Roleofoxidantsasprimingagents . Antioxid . RedoxSignal . 4 , 69 – 83 6 . Moreland , J . G . , Davis , A . P . , Matsuda , J . J . , Hook , J . S . , Bailey , G . , Nauseef , W . M . , and Lamb , F . S . ( 2007 ) Endotoxin priming of neutrophils requires NADPH oxidase - generated oxidants and is regulated by the anion trans - porter ClC - 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 33958 – 33967 7 . Volk , A . P . , Barber , B . M . , Goss , K . L . , Ruff , J . G . , Heise , C . K . , Hook , J . S . , and Moreland , J . G . ( 2011 ) Priming of neutrophils and differentiated PLB - 985 cells by pathophysiological concentrations of TNF - (cid:1) is partially oxy - gen dependent . J . Innate Immun . 3 , 298 – 314 8 . Kobayashi , T . , Robinson , J . M . , and Seguchi , H . ( 1998 ) Identification of intracellular sites of superoxide production in stimulated neutrophils . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 81 – 91 9 . Brown , G . E . , Stewart , M . Q . , Liu , H . , Ha , V . L . , and Yaffe , M . B . ( 2003 ) A novel assay system implicates PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , PtdIns ( 3 ) P , and PKC (cid:5) in in - tracellular production of reactive oxygen species by the NADPH oxidase . Mol . Cell 11 , 35 – 47 10 . Ambruso , D . R . , Cusack , N . , and Thurman , G . ( 2004 ) NADPH oxidase activity of neutrophil specific granules . Requirements for cytosolic com - ponents and evidence of assembly during cell activation . Mol . Genet . Metab . 81 , 313 – 321 11 . Bylund , J . , Brown , K . L . , Movitz , C . , Dahlgren , C . , and Karlsson , A . ( 2010 ) Intracellular generation of superoxide by the phagocyte NADPH oxidase . How , where , and what for ? Free Radic . Biol . Med . 49 , 1834 – 1845 12 . Karlsson , A . , and Dahlgren , C . ( 2002 ) Assembly and activation of the neu - trophilNADPHoxidaseingranulemembranes . Antioxid . RedoxSignal . 4 , 49 – 60 13 . Eckels , P . C . , Banerjee , A . , Moore , E . E . , McLaughlin , N . J . , Gries , L . M . , Kelher , M . R . , England , K . M . , Gamboni - Robertson , F . , Khan , S . Y . , and Silliman , C . C . ( 2009 ) Amantadine inhibits platelet - activating factor in - duced clathrin - mediated endocytosis in human neutrophils . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 297 , C886 – C897 14 . Uriarte , S . M . , Jog , N . R . , Luerman , G . C . , Bhimani , S . , Ward , R . A . , and McLeish , K . R . ( 2009 ) Counterregulation of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis by the actin and microtubular cytoskeleton in human neutrophils . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 296 , C857 – C867 15 . McLaughlin , N . J . , Banerjee , A . , Kelher , M . R . , Gamboni - Robertson , F . , Hamiel , C . , Sheppard , F . R . , Moore , E . E . , and Silliman , C . C . ( 2006 ) Plate - let - activating factor - induced clathrin - mediated endocytosis requires (cid:4) - arrestin - 1 recruitment and activation of the p38 MAPK signalosome at the plasma membrane for actin bundle formation . J . Immunol . 176 , 7039 – 7050 16 . McLaughlin , N . J . , Banerjee , A . , Khan , S . Y . , Lieber , J . L . , Kelher , M . R . , Gamboni - Robertson , F . , Sheppard , F . R . , Moore , E . E . , Mierau , G . W . , Elzi , D . J . , and Silliman , C . C . ( 2008 ) Platelet - activating factor - mediated endo - some formation causes membrane translocation of p67 phox and p40 phox that requires recruitment and activation of p38 MAPK , Rab5a , and phos - phatidylinositol 3 - kinase in human neutrophils . J . Immunol . 180 , 8192 – 8203 17 . Kitchens , R . L . , Wang , P . , and Munford , R . S . ( 1998 ) Bacterial lipopolysac - charide can enter monocytes via two CD14 - dependent pathways . J . Im - munol . 161 , 5534 – 5545 18 . Gioannini , T . L . , Teghanemt , A . , Zarember , K . A . , and Weiss , J . P . ( 2003 ) Regulationofinteractionsofendotoxinwithhostcells . J . EndotoxinRes . 9 , 401 – 408 19 . Gioannini , T . L . , Zhang , D . , Teghanemt , A . , and Weiss , J . P . ( 2002 ) An essential role for albumin in the interaction of endotoxin with lipopoly - saccharide - bindingproteinandsCD14andresultantcellactivation . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 47818 – 47825 20 . Boyum , A . ( 1968 ) Scandinavian journal of clinical and laboratory investi - gation . 97 , 77 – 89 21 . Borregaard , N . , Heiple , J . M . , Simons , E . R . , and Clark , R . A . ( 1983 ) Sub - cellular localization of the b - cytochrome component of the human neu - trophil microbicidal oxidase . Translocation during activation . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 52 – 61 22 . Sengeløv , H . , Nielsen , M . H . , and Borregaard , N . ( 1992 ) Separation of human neutrophil plasma membrane from intracellular vesicles contain - ing alkaline phosphatase and NADPH oxidase activity by free flow elec - trophoresis . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 14912 – 14917 23 . Huang , Y . W . , Su , P . , Liu , G . Y . , Crow , M . R . , Chaukos , D . , Yan , H . , and Robinson , L . A . ( 2009 ) Constitutive endocytosis of the chemokine CX3CL1 prevents its degradation by cell surface metalloproteases . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 29644 – 29653 24 . Yamada , H . , Abe , T . , Li , S . A . , Masuoka , Y . , Isoda , M . , Watanabe , M . , Nasu , Y . , Kumon , H . , Asai , A . , and Takei , K . ( 2009 ) Dynasore , a dynamin inhib - itor , suppresses lamellipodia formation and cancer cell invasion by desta - bilizing actin filaments . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 390 , 1142 – 1148 25 . Matute , J . D . , Arias , A . A . , Wright , N . A . , Wrobel , I . , Waterhouse , C . C . , Li , X . J . , Marchal , C . C . , Stull , N . D . , Lewis , D . B . , Steele , M . , Kellner , J . D . , Yu , W . , Meroueh , S . O . , Nauseef , W . M . , and Dinauer , M . C . ( 2009 ) A new geneticsubgroupofchronicgranulomatousdiseasewithautosomalreces - sive mutations in p40 phox and selective defects in neutrophil NADPH ox - idase activity . Blood 114 , 3309 – 3315 26 . Vaissiere , C . , Le Cabec , V . , and Maridonneau - Parini , I . ( 1999 ) NADPH oxidase is functionally assembled in specific granules during activation of human neutrophils . J . Leukocyte Biol . 65 , 629 – 634 27 . Matsuda , J . J . , Filali , M . S . , Moreland , J . G . , Miller , F . J . , and Lamb , F . S . ( 2010 ) Activationofswelling - activatedchloridecurrentbytumornecrosis factor - alpha requires ClC - 3 - dependent endosomal reactive oxygen pro - duction . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 22864 – 22873 28 . Moreland , J . G . , Davis , A . P . , Bailey , G . , Nauseef , W . M . , and Lamb , F . S . ( 2006 ) Anion channels , including ClC - 3 , are required for normal neutro - phil oxidative function , phagocytosis , and transendothelial migration . Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN APRIL 6 , 2012• VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 12403 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 12277 – 12288 29 . McPhail , L . C . , Shirley , P . S . , Clayton , C . C . , and Snyderman , R . ( 1985 ) Activation of the respiratory burst enzyme from human neutrophils in a cell - free system . Evidence for a soluble cofactor . J . Clin . Invest . 75 , 1735 – 1739 30 . Curnutte , J . T . ( 1985 ) Activation of human neutrophil nicotinamide ade - ninedinucleotidephosphate , reduced ( triphosphopyridinenucleotide , re - duced ) oxidase by arachidonic acid in a cell - free system . J . Clin . Invest . 75 , 1740 – 1743 31 . Pick , E . , Bromberg , Y . , Shpungin , S . , andGadba , R . ( 1987 ) Activationofthe superoxide forming NADPH oxidase in a cell - free system by sodium do - decyl sulfate . Characterization of the membrane - associated component . J . Biol . Chem . 262 , 16476 – 16483 32 . Miller , F . J . , Jr . , Chu , X . , Stanic , B . , Tian , X . , Sharma , R . V . , Davisson , R . L . , and Lamb , F . S . ( 2010 ) A differential role for endocytosis in receptor - mediated activation of Nox1 . Antioxid . Redox Signal . 12 , 583 – 593 33 . Lassègue , B . , and Griendling , K . K . ( 2010 ) NADPH oxidases . Functions and pathologies in the vasculature . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 30 , 653 – 661 34 . Anderson , K . E . , Chessa , T . A . , Davidson , K . , Henderson , R . B . , Walker , S . , Tolmachova , T . , Grys , K . , Rausch , O . , Seabra , M . C . , Tybulewicz , V . L . , Stephens , L . R . , and Hawkins , P . T . ( 2010 ) PtdIns3P and Rac direct the assembly of the NADPH oxidase on a novel , pre - phagosomal compart - ment during FcR - mediated phagocytosis in primary mouse neutrophils . Blood 116 , 4978 – 4989 35 . El - Benna , J . , Dang , P . M . , and Gougerot - Pocidalo , M . A . ( 2008 ) Priming of the neutrophil NADPH oxidase activation . Role of p47 phox phosphoryla - tion and NOX2 mobilization to the plasma membrane . Semin . Immuno - pathol . 30 , 279 – 289 36 . Dewas , C . , Dang , P . M . , Gougerot - Pocidalo , M . A . , and El - Benna , J . ( 2003 ) TNF - (cid:1) induces phosphorylation of p47 phox in human neutrophils . Partial phosphorylation of p47 phox is a common event of priming of human neu - trophils by TNF - (cid:1) and granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating fac - tor . J . Immunol . 171 , 4392 – 4398 37 . Dang , P . M . , Stensballe , A . , Boussetta , T . , Raad , H . , Dewas , C . , Kroviarski , Y . , Hayem , G . , Jensen , O . N . , Gougerot - Pocidalo , M . A . , and El - Benna , J . ( 2006 ) A specific p47 phox serine phosphorylated by convergent MAPKs mediates neutrophil NADPH oxidase priming at inflammatory sites . J . Clin . Invest . 116 , 2033 – 2043 38 . DeLeo , F . R . , Renee , J . , McCormick , S . , Nakamura , M . , Apicella , M . , Weiss , J . P . , and Nauseef , W . M . ( 1998 ) Neutrophils exposed to bacterial lipopo - lysaccharide upregulate NADPH oxidase assembly . J . Clin . Invest . 101 , 455 – 463 39 . Mansfield , P . J . , Hinkovska - Galcheva , V . , Shayman , J . A . , and Boxer , L . A . ( 2002 ) Granulocyte colony - stimulating factor primes NADPH oxidase in neutrophils through translocation of cytochrome b 558 by gelatinase - gran - ule release . J . Lab . Clin . Med . 140 , 9 – 16 40 . Saitoh , S . ( 2009 ) Chaperones and transport proteins regulate TLR4 traf - ficking and activation . Immunobiology 214 , 594 – 600 41 . Husebye , H . , Halaas , Ø . , Stenmark , H . , Tunheim , G . , Sandanger , Ø . , Bo - gen , B . , Brech , A . , Latz , E . , and Espevik , T . ( 2006 ) Endocytic pathways regulate Toll - like receptor 4 signaling and link innate and adaptive immu - nity . EMBO J . 25 , 683 – 692 42 . Bruscia , E . M . , Zhang , P . X . , Satoh , A . , Caputo , C . , Medzhitov , R . , Shenoy , A . , Egan , M . E . , and Krause , D . S . ( 2011 ) Abnormal trafficking and degra - dation of TLR4 underlie the elevated inflammatory response in cystic fibrosis . J . Immunol . 186 , 6990 – 6998 43 . McGettrick , A . F . , and O’Neill , L . A . ( 2010 ) Localisation and trafficking of Toll - like receptors . An important mode of regulation . Curr . Opin . Immu - nol . 22 , 20 – 27 44 . Tamassia , N . , LeMoigne , V . , Calzetti , F . , Donini , M . , Gasperini , S . , Ear , T . , Cloutier , A . , Martinez , F . O . , Fabbri , M . , Locati , M . , Mantovani , A . , Mc - Donald , P . P . , andCassatella , M . A . ( 2007 ) TheMyD88 - independentpath - way is not mobilized in human neutrophils stimulated via TLR4 . J . Immu - nol . 178 , 7344 – 7356 45 . Inaba , M . , Takahashi , T . , Kumeda , Y . , Kato , T . , Hato , F . , Yutani , Y . , Goto , H . , Nishizawa , Y . , and Kitagawa , S . ( 2008 ) Increased basal phosphoryla - tion of mitogen - activated protein kinases and reduced responsiveness to inflammatory cytokines in neutrophils from patients with rheumatoid ar - thritis . Clin . Exp . Rheumatol . 26 , 52 – 60 46 . Sela , S . , Shurtz - Swirski , R . , Cohen - Mazor , M . , Mazor , R . , Chezar , J . , Sha - piro , G . , Hassan , K . , Shkolnik , G . , Geron , R . , and Kristal , B . ( 2005 ) Primed peripheral polymorphonuclear leukocyte . A culprit underlying chronic low - grade inflammation and systemic oxidative stress in chronic kidney disease . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 16 , 2431 – 2438 47 . Suematsu , M . , Suzuki , M . , Kitahora , T . , Miura , S . , Suzuki , K . , Hibi , T . , Watanabe , M . , Nagata , H . , Asakura , H . , andTsuchiya , M . ( 1987 ) Increased respiratory burst of leukocytes in inflammatory bowel diseases . The anal - ysis of free radical generation by using chemiluminescence probe . J . Clin . Lab . Immunol . 24 , 125 – 128 Endocytosis Required for Endotoxin Priming of PMN 12404 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 287•NUMBER 15• APRIL 6 , 2012 a t D A L H O U S I E UN I V , on D e c e m be r 20 , 201 2 www . j b c . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m