J . Krumm et al . ( Eds . ) : UbiComp 2007 , LNCS 4717 , pp . 127 – 144 , 2007 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 How Smart Homes Learn : The Evolution of the Networked Home and Household Marshini Chetty , Ja - Young Sung , and Rebecca E . Grinter GVU Center & School of Interactive Computing College of Computing , Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , USA 30308 { marshini , jsung , beki } @ cc . gatech . edu Abstract . Despite a growing desire to create smart homes , we know little about how networked technologies interact with a house’s infrastructure . In this paper , we begin to close this gap by presenting findings from a study that examined the relationship between home networking and the house itself—and the work that results for householders as a consequence of this interaction . We discuss four themes that emerged : an ambiguity in understanding the virtual boundaries created by wireless networks , the home network control paradox , a new home network access paradox , and the relationship between increased responsibilities and the possibilities of wireless networking . Keywords : home networking , smart home , infrastructure . 1 Introduction As computing has migrated into the home , research exploring the implications of domestic technology has grown [ 2 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 14 , 29 ] . To date most research focuses on individual devices , although recently a few studies on networked systems have emerged [ 13 , 17 , 27 ] . However , home networking remains under - explored , and in particular , the question of how these networks interact with the home’s infrastructure has not been addressed . This omission seems problematic , given that domestic ubiquitous computing research typically relies on home networking . This home network is oft assumed to be seamlessly integrated into the home’s infrastructure—the physical structure and services ( e . g . , cable and electricity ) and all those involved in their establishment and maintenance . In this paper , we report on empirical research that sought to determine whether these assumptions held true . We found that householders’ home infra - structures do not readily enable home networking and we identify some of the challenges that the Ubicomp community will need to overcome if domestic ubiquitous computing applications are going to become widespread in people’s homes . We begin by reviewing domestic technology research . Then we describe our methods and participants and present the framework ( based on [ 23 ] ) used to organize our results . We conclude by discussing four themes that emerged : an ambiguity in understanding the virtual boundaries created by wireless networks , the home network control paradox , a new home network access paradox , and the relationship between increased responsibilities and the possibilities of wireless networking . 128 M . Chetty , J . Sung , and R . E . Grinter 2 Background : Domestic Technologies and Home Networking In the last decade , empirical studies of domestic technologies have surfaced a variety of themes . One set of studies has opened up the idea of “home” for investigation , and shows how householder’s routines structure domestic life [ 2 , 6 , 29 ] . These studies have also shown that rooms—part of the home infrastructure—play a role in establishing and maintaining routines . Other studies have explored the use of technologies such as set - top boxes [ 20 ] and VCRs [ 26 ] . These studies illustrate how users’ adoption is a product of the interaction with the device . They also highlight how adoption is situated within broader contexts of the home ( e . g . , routines and divisions of labor ) [ 3 ] . Further , these studies comment on space use in the home , but also pick up on some of the complexities associated with the technical infrastructure required to manage devices . Another category of studies has focused on the Internet , and its influence on domestic activities . Early studies , dominated by telecommuting , focused on the blurring of boundaries between employment and leisure , showing that work at home was negotiated as spaces changed to support the creation of home offices [ 30 ] . As Internet applications have evolved , studies have continued to report the evolving domestic uses of the network at home [ 7 ] . Finally , some studies of domestic technologies have deployed systems in the home . For example , systems such as CareNet , an ambient display for elderly health care , involved making a technological intervention within the home [ 5 ] . In these studies , home infrastructure comes up in the context of how and where the technologies are used , and also in deployment challenges . While studies of domestic technologies have surfaced questions of home infrastructure—of which networking is a part—this has not been a primary focus . Smart home research , by contrast , has solved the problems associated with infrastructure through controlling the building of physical and computational infrastructure [ 14 - 16 ] . Yet , these living laboratories—often held up as a solution— also serve as testaments to the complexity of home networking because of the significant commitment required to make the problems “go away” [ 10 ] . Further , these smart homes exhibit an interesting duality , in that many of them serve as “offices” where researchers explore the possibilities of their technologies , and where the infrastructure itself might share some advantages of its office counterpart—the presence of administrative support . Yet , even in the office , reports of difficulties in encounters with infrastructure exist , particularly when it breaks [ 28 ] . More obviously , smart homes serve as a means by which to compare most housing stock . While smart homes have built in networks , most householders find themselves needing to retrofit their existing homes to accommodate new technologies ( or decide whether or not to do this [ 19 ] ) . Relatively little research reports on the challenges associated with using the home’s existing infrastructure for networked applications , but what does exist suggests difficulties [ 13 , 17 , 27 ] . Kiesler et al . [ 17 ] found that householders relied on family and friends , as well as service providers , to make their home infrastructure accommodate a networked device . More recently , Grinter et al . [ 13 ] identified problems with home networking including learning that householders relied on 3 - 7 companies to provide infrastructure support ( e . g . : Internet Service Providers , cable , phone ) on top of the work they did