Sketching and Ideation Activities for Situated Visualization Design Nathalie Bressa 1 , Kendra Wannamaker 2 , Henrik Korsgaard 1 , Wesley Willett 2 , Jo Vermeulen 1 1 Aarhus University , Denmark • (cid:8) nathalie . bressa , korsgaard , jo . vermeulen (cid:9) @ cs . au . dk 2 University of Calgary , Canada • (cid:8) kawannam , wesley . willett (cid:9) @ ucalgary . ca Figure 1 . Sketching materials from our seven design workshops . ( a ) Whiteboard sheets in different form factors from W1 ( Food Bank ) , ( b ) sketches on whiteboard sheets from W2 ( Ofﬁce Climate ) , ( c ) whiteboard tile from W3 ( Tiles at Ofﬁce ) , ( d ) whiteboard tiles from W4 ( Tiles at Home ) , ( e ) photo with annotation from W6 ( Photo Annotation ) , ( f ) paper cutouts from W7 ( Self - Tracker ) , ( g ) sticky note sketch from W5 ( Agriculture ) . ABSTRACT We report on ﬁndings from seven design workshops that used ideation and sketching activities to prototype new situated visualizations —representations of data that are displayed in proximity to the physical referents ( such as people , objects , and locations ) to which the data is related . Designing situ - ated visualizations requires a ﬁne - grained understanding of the context in which the visualizations are placed , as well as an ex - ploration of different options for placement and form factors , which existing methods for visualization design do not account for . Focusing on small displays as a target platform , we reﬂect on our experiences of using a diverse range of sketching activ - ities , materials , and prompts . Based on these observations , we identify challenges and opportunities for sketching and ideat - ing situated visualizations . We also outline the space of design activities for situated visualization and highlight promising methods for both designers and researchers . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’19 , June 24 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5850 - 7 / 19 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322326 Author Keywords Situated Visualization ; Information Visualization ; Design Workshops ; Small Displays ; Ideation ; Sketching CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Interface design proto - typing ; Visualization design and evaluation methods ; INTRODUCTION Situated visualization [ 43 , 44 ] is an emerging research area in information visualization that focuses on placing data visu - alizations in physical spaces to support in - situ data analysis . To this end , data visualizations are displayed in proximity to physical referents that the data is related and relevant to , such as people , locations , or objects . This promising approach has the potential to support data - driven interaction and reﬂection in a variety of settings beyond those traditionally served by vi - sualization systems . Research has identiﬁed application areas such as public visualization [ 5 , 40 ] , wearable visualization [ 35 , 31 ] , and task support in workplaces [ 18 , 21 , 41 ] . Advances in low - cost , embedded systems such as small wireless screens and head - mounted or handheld augmented reality displays are also creating opportunities for situated visualizations in new environments . In retail in stores and warehouses , in particular , small displays are becoming increasingly common . These kinds of displays can make it easy to deploy situated visual - izations without substantial new infrastructure , encouraging collective awareness of site - and task - speciﬁc data . All of Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 173 this makes situated visualizations extremely relevant both in civic [ 4 ] and workplace [ 21 , 41 ] contexts . Designing new situated visualizations is complicated by their nuanced relationship with their surroundings . Beyond under - standing the environment and the context where the visual - izations will be deployed , designers must identify other prac - tical requirements including appropriate form factors , place - ments , representations , and levels of detail . Contemporary visualization design exercises , including Roberts et al . ’s Five Design - Sheet Method [ 36 ] and McKenna et al . ’s visualiza - tion worksheets [ 32 ] still focus on supporting the creation of more traditional desktop and mobile applications . However , these techniques do not address the unique challenges inher - ent in designing situated visualizations . In particular , they do not consider the opportunities and constraints posed by the visualization’s physical referents [ 44 ] or how to integrate visualizations into existing physical environments and tasks . In this paper , we report ﬁndings from seven workshops ex - amining situated visualization design : six workshops with researchers and one with end users . Across the workshops , we examined different sketching materials and ideation activities . Our workshops focused primarily on designing situated visu - alizations that use small physical displays , both because they represent an increasingly practical hardware platform for ubiq - uitous visualization and because the scenarios we considered were set in workplaces and social environments . We detail our workshop activities and categorize the workshops based on their focus ( hardware , ideation , and task ) to outline the space of design activities for situated visualizations . Finally , we reﬂect on the workshop ﬁndings and identify opportunities and challenges for researchers and designers . RELATED WORK Situated visualization is still an emerging topic with a small catalogue of examples ( including [ 4 , 25 , 33 , 43 ] ) . Most visu - alizations are still designed to support specialists performing data analysis on desktop computers or to enable public con - sumption on the web and mobile devices . Because of this , common visualization design exercises do not speciﬁcally ac - count for the challenges and opportunities associated with integrating visualizations into existing physical environments , activities , and work practices . We provide an overview of prior ideation methods for designing and sketching visualizations , the role of sketching for design and Human - Computer Inter - action ( HCI ) , and existing examples of ideation and design activities for situated visualization . Designing and Sketching with Data We take inspiration from several works that discuss working with data as a “design material” to aid in visualization ideation for both designers and end users . A number of workshop formats speciﬁcally focus on novices and teaching data visu - alization design [ 12 , 17 , 19 ] . VizItCards [ 17 ] introduces a card game mechanic into a design workshop format . Good - win et al . [ 11 ] examine the potential for introducing different creativity techniques as part of a workshop focusing on devel - oping design concepts for energy analysts . Meanwhile , Dove & Jones [ 10 ] use information visualizations as creative stim - uli in design workshops , focusing on how domain - relevant data and ambiguity in the information visualizations inﬂuence the quality of the generated concepts . They ﬁnd that domain - speciﬁc data help participants generate appropriate concepts but that ambiguity can have a negative impact on their quality . Combining this insight from Dove & Jones with inspiration from VizitCards [ 17 ] , we provided data cards in one of our workshops ( Figure 3c ) and a sample dataset in another one ( Figure 3d ) . Notably , Kerzner et al . [ 23 ] provide a framework for creative visualization opportunities workshops , based on a meta - analysis of their collective experience and research out - puts from conducting 17 such workshops in different contexts . For all of our workshops , we follow Kerzner et al . ’s suggestion of having participants create physical and visual artifacts to externalize ideas and support later documentation and analysis of the generated ideas ( see also [ 9 ] ) . Our workshops are also inspired by prior work on the poten - tial of sketching for visualization design . Walny et al . [ 42 ] examined different approaches to sketching data visualizations based on a speciﬁc dataset , suggesting that data sketching has the potential to foster deeper understandings of the particular data and produce less common representations . However , com - mon visualization design sketching exercises such as Roberts et al . ’s Five Design - Sheet Method [ 36 ] and McKenna et al . ’s visualization worksheets [ 32 ] do not account for the unique challenges of designing situated visualizations . As a notable exception , Keefe et al . ’s VR painting interfaces for designing scientiﬁc visualizations [ 22 ] highlight the potential for more expressive and spatialized approaches for visualization pro - totyping . However , outside of this work , mixed - reality ( MR ) and virtual - reality ( VR ) interfaces for visualization ideation and design remain largely unexplored . This is due in part to the fact that contemporary VR / MR systems lack the precise in - put and output necessary to explore small - scale embedded and situated visualizations , particularly those that rely on small displays integrated into physical environments . Sketching in HCI Sketching serves multiple roles in HCI design activities and is frequently used to support the design process [ 3 , 13 , 30 , 29 , 38 ] . Dix and Gongora [ 9 ] discuss sketching ( and sketches ) as informational , formational , transformational , and transcenden - tal . Sketching can help designers capture and communicate ideas , shape and give form to vague or abstract concepts , aid thinking through externalization , and enable practitioners to see existing ideas from a new perspective . Tohidi et al . also report on the value of sketching for user feedback [ 39 ] . We follow Greenberg et al . ’s [ 13 ] model of using hybrid sketches to focus attention on a given context . Like Greenberg et al . , we also use sketching in and on physical device mock - ups to explore different visualization form factors ( Figure 1 ) . Ideation and Design Activities for Situated Visualization Although a number of examples of situated visualizations have been deployed [ 1 , 4 , 6 , 25 , 33 , 43 ] , details of their ideation and design process are rarely documented or discussed in de - tail . Several works on urban community visualizations involve engaging with community members in local spaces [ 8 , 24 , 25 , 37 ] . Work by Taylor et al . [ 37 ] and Coulson et al . [ 8 ] exem - plify projects that invite citizens to engage with data as a mode Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 174 of understanding communal aspects of data ( data - in - place ) and empower citizens to take action on matters of common con - cern . Both projects describe community meetings , workshops , data collection , and mapping exercises . These examples take a high - level view of situating design activities and predomi - nantly do so via engagement with community members , rather than speciﬁcally focusing on visualization design . Exceptions include Koeman et al . [ 24 ] and Claes & Van de Moere [ 6 ] . Koeman et al . created initial sketches of visualizations and discussed them with local community groups to ensure easy interpretability . With Street Infographics , Claes & Van de Moere [ 6 ] discuss ﬁrst testing their public visualization street signs in an outdoor context to assess robustness against harsh weather conditions . A few cases provide more detailed insights in terms of ideation and design activities for situated visualization . Claes et al . [ 4 ] designed spatially distributed displays and placed them over several residential home facades with the goal of conveying civic issues . They discuss organizing several co - design ses - sions on the street where they showed participants mock - ups of the small displays . Participants were asked how they would present a particular local civic cause on the mocked - up public visualization displays , with ideas recorded on sticky notes and attached next to the mock - up displays . Similarly , Vermeulen et al . [ 41 ] organized a one - day workshop with caregivers at a psychogeriatrics ward to investigate design considerations for situated glyphs [ 21 ] , small displays presenting visualiza - tions of task - related information for healthcare professionals . The workshop consisted of demonstrating prototypes of the small displays as a technology probe [ 20 ] and inquiring about caregivers’ information needs in their daily work activities . Afterwards , the authors ran a sketching activity where partic - ipants sketched how they would represent and visualize this information on the small displays . In domains like health care , where it can be difﬁcult to gain access to the sites where visualizations will ultimately be deployed , several researchers have suggested design strategies for designing at a distance . These include using cultural probes to collect rich descriptions and map the homes of elderly citizens [ 28 ] or using blueprints and small - scale card - board personas to develop scenarios for buildings under construction [ 16 ] . In developing design proposals for a media facade for a metro station still under construction , Korsgaard et al . [ 26 ] propose several strategies for situating design activities when an actual site is unavailable . These include identifying and visiting existing spaces with similar properties , exploring 3D models of buildings in a 3D cinema , and sketching design proposals by superimposing 3D models on top of a whiteboard . This relates to the notion of employing facsimiles as stand - ins for the original physical referent ( s ) [ 44 ] , which may be a valuable approach for facilitating situated visualization design . While this prior work suggests some potential activities for situated visualization design , our reﬂections on seven work - shops employing a variety of sketching activities , materials , and prompts help outline a richer overall design space and highlight new opportunities and challenges for practitioners . W4 . Tiles at Home TASK - CENTERED HARDWARE - CENTERED IDEATION - CENTERED W6 . Photo Annotation W7 . Self - Tracker W1 . Food Bank W5 . Agriculture W3 . Tiles at Office W2 . Office Climate Figure 2 . Our design activities organized based on their ideation - , task - , or hardware - centeredness . DESIGN ACTIVITIES FOR SITUATED VISUALIZATION As part of our effort to explore new situated visualization designs , we conducted seven workshops ( W1 – W7 ) in which we tested a diverse range of sketching activities , materials , and prompts ( Table 1 ) . We focused each of the seven workshops around a set of sketching exercises intended to elicit design ideas and requirements for site - speciﬁc situated visualizations . The workshops used a variety of different sketching media , including sticky notes and printed images , as well as several types of magnetic whiteboard materials . These workshops also gave us the chance to examine situated visualization design across a variety of settings , datasets , and application domains . We explored different strategies in each of the workshops , including conducting the activities in the target environment ( W1 – W5 ) and asking participants to sketch using templates that replicated the size ( W1 , W2 , W7 ) and tactility ( W3 , W4 ) of possible situated displays . We also used sketching activi - ties to explore the design of augmented reality visualizations , both on - location ( W5 ) and remotely using a photo - sketching approach ( W6 ) . Inspired by Coenen et al . ’s [ 7 ] step - by - step methodology for their Citizen Dialogue Kit ( a set of tools for information and polling displays ) , we provide details on the materials and procedures we used for each workshop in our supplementary material and on Github 1 . Activities and Objectives The set of workshops that we conducted spanned several phases of early - stage design , including open - ended ideation as well as more targeted task - centered and hardware - centered activities ( see Figure 2 ) . Ideation - Centered Our ideation - centered design workshops were characterized by open - ended idea generation , and focused on facilitating the rapid and iterative production of new potential designs and applications for situated visualizations . In these activities , we encouraged open - ended design sketching in the context of a speciﬁc physical environment with less emphasis on datasets , tasks , or hardware conﬁgurations . 1 https : / / github . com / hci - au - dk / situated - vis - sketching Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 175 W o r k s h o p P a r t i c i p a n t s B a c k g r o u n d s D a t a A c t i v i t y L o c a t i o n D u r a t i o n S k e t c h i n g M e d i u m T a r g e t m e d i u m W1 Food Bank 4 Food bank employees + volunteers Logistics + managementdata Warehouse 2 hrs Whiteboard sheets ( A4 to 2 cm × 2 cm ) Small displays W2 Ofﬁce Climate 3 Vis and HCI researchers Environmental data Ofﬁce setting 1 . 5 hrs Whiteboard sheets ( A4 to 2 cm × 2 cm ) Small displays W3 Tiles at Ofﬁce 15 Vis and HCI researchers Participant - generated Ofﬁce setting + Fablab 1 hr Whiteboard tiles ( 5 cm × 5 cm , 5 cm × 10 cm ) Small displays W4 Tiles at Home 5 Vis and HCI researchers Participant - generated Participant’shomes 1 week Whiteboard tiles ( 5 cm × 5 cm , 5 cm × 10 cm ) Small displays W5 Agriculture 15 Vis and HCI researchers Unspeciﬁed Farm 2 hrs Sticky notes Small / large displays + AR W6 Photo Annotation 15 Vis and HCI researchers Unspeciﬁed Meeting room 1 hr Photos of physical environments ( A4 ) Small / large displays + AR W7 Self - Tracker 12 Vis students + researchers Participant - generated Meeting room 1 . 5 hrs Paper display cutouts ( 4 cm × 4 cm ) Small e - paper displays Table 1 . Details of the seven design workshops we conducted . Task - Centered Meanwhile , our task - centered design workshops focused on examining the design of situated visualizations to support spe - ciﬁc tasks . In these cases , we emphasized design activities as a mechanism for requirements elicitation , and asked participants to actively consider the relationship between potential situated visualizations and real - world tasks , routines , environments , and datasets . Hardware - Centered Finally , our more hardware - centered activities examined the design of situated visualizations based on the physical con - straints of a more speciﬁc hardware platform . Here , we encour - aged participants to generate concepts that were compatible with the form factor , display technology , and interaction capa - bilities of particular kinds of systems . We focused in particular on designing situated visualizations for small , low - power e - paper and LED displays with limited input capabilities which could be integrated into a variety of different domestic and workplace settings . As Figure 2 highlights , many of our workshops combined these approaches . Several ( W2 , W5 ) encouraged open - ended ideation in the context of a speciﬁc application domain . Mean - while , others ( W4 ) encouraged free - form ideation with more concrete hardware constraints or combined elements of all three approaches ( W3 ) . Sketching Media To help participants more easily prototype situated visualiza - tions for small displays , we tested several different types of sketching media across the workshops . In particular , we ex - plored a variety of different kinds of magnetic whiteboard sheets and tiles ( Figure 1 ) , which served as alternatives to more traditional paper and sticky notes . Using whiteboard material provides several advantages over paper , permitting participants to erase , update , reuse , and repo - sition sketches throughout an exercise . These sheets and tiles can more accurately simulate the size , weight , and form factor of small lightweight displays—one of the most promising plat - forms for situated visualizations [ 4 , 14 , 41 ] . Participants can also use integrated magnets or adhesive putty to attach these sheets and tiles to physical objects as well as architectural features like walls , windows , and doors . This ﬂexibility makes it possible to move and reconﬁgure sketches over the course of an activity , exploring what new visualizations might look like at different locations in the environment . We also explored sketching activities that used printed pho - tographs as a medium for sketching . This approach allows participants to quickly imagine how visualizations could be situated across a diverse range of environments . Moreover , it provides opportunities for sketching augmented and mixed reality visualizations which can be difﬁcult to prototype using other kinds of sketching media . Prompts In a number of workshops we provided additional mate - rial to prompt ideation during the activities . In W1 and W7 , we used technology probes [ 20 ] to help participants better understand the target display technology for their de - signs . In W1 , we provided three e - paper displays in different sizes—2 . 7 " ( 3 . 8 cm × 5 . 7 cm ) , 2 " ( 2 . 2 cm × 4 . 6 cm ) , 1 . 44 " ( 2 . 2 cm × 2 . 9 cm ) —that displayed simple visualizations to demonstrate the capabilities of the small displays ( Figure 3b ) . In W7 , we showed participants a low - ﬁdelity prototype of the target device ( Figure 3a ) which included an e - ink screen and working inputs in a cardboard housing . We also explored using sample data to encourage ideation . In W1 , we used two - sided data cards with a database class on Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 176 Figure 3 . Prompts . ( a ) Low - ﬁdelity prototype from W7 ( Self - Tracker ) , ( b ) e - paper displays from W1 ( Food Bank ) , ( c ) data cards from W1 ( Food Bank ) , ( d ) sample data sheet from W2 ( Ofﬁce Climate ) . one side and a list of data attributes on the other ( Figure 3c ) . In W2 , we provided a sample data sheet to help prime partici - pants ( Figure 3d ) . Similarly , in W7 , we prompted participants to design using various kinds of personal data . SITUATED VISUALIZATION WORKSHOPS The seven workshops ( Figure 4 ) were conducted by two teams of researchers who independently explored design activities for situated visualization . The connection between the two initiatives occurred mid - stream as part of conversations about how to involve people in the ideation and design of situated visualizations . The design of the interventions was not initially coordinated across the two teams . However , during the analy - sis process , all authors collaborated closely , sharing materials and considerations from each of the workshops . We elaborate on this analysis when we discuss our observations and ﬁndings in the Reﬂection and Recommendations section . W1 . Food Bank We conducted this workshop at a local non - proﬁt food bank in Aarhus , Denmark which distributes surplus food to social organizations . The aim of the workshop was to explore how situated visualizations can be used to make logistics and inter - nal management data available in the food bank’s warehouse to support the volunteers’ and employees’ work activities . The Food Bank workshop was task - centered , focused on sketching visualizations that support speciﬁc work - related tasks . We provided whiteboard sheets for sketching in sizes representing a variety of small displays , but did not focus on a speciﬁc hard - ware platform . The workshop was also driven by real - world considerations of the workers rather than open - ended ideation . The workshop took place in the warehouse at the food bank where goods are stored , received , and packed for distribution routes . Four participants including two volunteers and two full - time employees from the food bank took part . Before the workshop , we conducted a site survey at the warehouse to gain an overview of the workplace and observed the participants both on one of the food distribution routes and in the ware - house where they scanned and sorted goods . We provided data cards ( Figure 3c ) of management data of the food bank based on a prior workshop and a survey of their database . During the workshop , we asked participants to sketch with colored markers on magnetic whiteboard sheets in eight dif - ferent form factors that were based on common display sizes ( Figure 1a ) including : an A4 sheet ( 21 cm × 29 . 7 cm ) , 8 . 9 " tablet ( 12 cm × 19 . 2 cm ) , 5 " smartphone ( 6 . 2 cm × 11 . 1 cm ) , 2 . 7 " ( 3 . 8 cm × 5 . 7 cm ) e - paper display , 2 " ( 2 . 2 cm × 4 . 6 cm ) e - paper display , 3 . 5 cm × 3 . 5 cm square smartwatch , (cid:31) 3 . 5 cm round smartwatch , and 2 cm × 2 cm square tile . The partici - pants could attach the whiteboard sheets to magnetic surfaces or place them anywhere else in the warehouse using adhe - sive putty . We also provided three small e - paper displays ( Figure 3b ) as examples . During the two - hour workshop , we visited several pre - selected locations based on our prior observations . At each location , we asked the participants to select whichever whiteboard sheets they preferred and create sketches of information that they would like to see during their work routines . Participants then placed the sketches in the environment wherever they wanted to have them available . Participants ﬁrst ideated individually , then presented their concepts to the group for discussion . To wrap up , we summarized and discussed the ideas together with the participants who voted to select their preferred ideas . After the workshop , we coded the transcript of the workshop , sorted the photos based on ideas , analyzed the use of different form factors in participants’ sketches , and ﬁnally created a summary of all ﬁndings with relevant quotes from the transcripts . W2 . Ofﬁce Climate We held this workshop as a pilot before the workshop at the food bank with the goal of evaluating the workshop format . The workshop procedure was the same as for W1 and we pro - vided the same sketching materials . The workshop was task - centered and ideation - centered . It was set within the bounds of an ofﬁce environment and people’s work practices . In contrast with the food bank workshop , the ideation was open - ended to gather ideas freely without real - world constraints . The workshop took place in ofﬁce rooms and the hallway of our department at Aarhus University . Three participants , all HCI researchers , took part in the workshop . Before the work - shop , we selected the different locations where the brainstorm - ing and sketching sessions took place . We used a ﬁctional dataset that consisted of environmental data ( light , electricity , temperature , air quality , and noise ) for every ofﬁce . We pro - vided a sample data sheet ( Figure 3d ) so that the participants could get an impression of the data . We also allowed partici - pants to ideate using other data sources of their choosing . In a 1 . 5 hour workshop , we visited three pre - selected locations at the ofﬁce : inside an ofﬁce room , outside an ofﬁce , and inside a communal meeting room . We asked participants to generate ideas for visualizing the environmental data at each of those locations . After the workshop , we evaluated the workshop procedure and analyzed participants’ sketches as well as their use of the different sketching materials . Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 177 Figure 4 . The workshops activities . ( a ) W1 Food Bank ( participants who did not give consent for the use of their pictures are anonymized ) , ( b ) W2 Ofﬁce Climate , ( c ) W3 Tiles at Ofﬁce * , ( d ) W4 Tiles at Home * , ( e ) W6 Photo Annotation * , ( f ) W7 Self - Tracker * , ( g ) W5 Agriculture . * Photo recreations . W3 . Tiles at Ofﬁce We conducted this workshop to explore opportunities for sit - uated visualization research in a more general set of univer - sity ofﬁce environments . Participants used tangible magnetic whiteboard tiles as sketching materials . This material re - stricted participants’ ideation to small situated devices , but the capabilities of the device were left up to each participant’s imagination . This workshop considered a semi - deﬁned form factor and a semi - restricted set of tasks in which we primed participants to both ideate and consider their current context and its restrictions . As such , we categorized this workshop as being in the intersection of the three focuses we have deﬁned ( hardware , task , and ideation ) . We held the workshop in a large research laboratory building with multiple different areas including ofﬁce spaces , collabo - rative meeting rooms , hallways , fabrication labs , and a coffee area . Fifteen participants took part , all of whom were visu - alization or HCI researchers . Before the activity , we gave the participants an introduction to situated visualization . We prompted the participants to explore data they would ﬁnd useful throughout their activities in the ofﬁce . We provided magnetic whiteboard tiles and ﬁne - tipped dry - erase makers to the participants . These tiles ( Figure 1c , d ) came in two sizes ( 5 cm × 5 cm × 0 . 5 cm and 5 cm × 10 cm × 0 . 5 cm ) and had the weight and feel of an electronic display of that size . The workshop lasted approximately one hour . We instructed teams of three to walk around the available space and consider the different tasks they complete in their environments , what information would be helpful to them , and how it should be displayed . The teams then sketched their designs on the white - board tiles and took pictures of each tile in - context . After the workshop , the participants took part in an informal discussion where they shared the ideas they generated and the different insights and challenges they discovered . W4 . Tiles at Home We held this workshop to explore the opportunities for situated visualization research in a home environment . We prompted the participants to explore data they would like to see in their home and aimed to generate a wide range of ideas . Like in W3 , the sketching material restricted the kinds of hardware participants could imagine . As such , we categorized this work - shop to be at the intersection between hardware - centered and ideation - centered approaches . Participants met for an introduction to the activity , then con - tinued it individually at home . We included ﬁve participants , all of which had visualization research experience and were employed as researchers at a university . We did not brief the participants on situated visualization , but spent approximately 30 minutes brainstorming possible uses for the tiles together prior to the at - home portion of the activity . We prompted the participants to explore data they would ﬁnd useful throughout their activities at home . Besides this prompt , we left the data that could be considered relatively undeﬁned , as exploring this component was part of the activity . Each participant received a set of several tiles ( with the same characteristics as those in W3 ) and colored dry - erase makers . Once at home , participants used these to create visualizations tailored to various domestic locations and datasets . Through - out the week , participants updated their visualizations and moved the tiles to support different tasks . In a follow - up meet - ing 7 days later , participants shared and discussed their photos and ideas as a group . W5 . Agriculture This workshop aimed at exploring situated visualizations in an outdoor environment on a pick - your - own farm . The workshop was both task - centered and ideation - centered —focusing on a speciﬁc task domain but encouraging open - ended ideation . We allowed participants to sketch using sticky notes rather than dictating a speciﬁc form factor . This more neutral sketching medium allowed them to imagine many different technologies that might enable visualizations in an outdoor setting . We ran the workshop at a large pick - your - own farm , which included ﬁelds of seasonal crops ( ﬂowers , fruits , and veg - etables ) , barns for livestock , stands selling pre - picked items , Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 178 and a medium - sized grocery store . Fifteen participants took part , all of whom were either researchers or students with expertise in visualization and / or HCI . The participants had varying levels of experience with farms , including some who had grown up on a farm and others who had never visited one . We prompted the participants to explore data they would ﬁnd useful at the farm—with some participants taking on the role of a farm employee and others imagining the customer or visitor experience . Beyond this prompt , we did not stipulate any speciﬁc datasets . Each participant had a sticky note pad , a writing utensil , and a mobile device for capturing images of their sketches in - context . The participants self - selected into two groups , one of which examined the barns and the store while the other explored the ﬁelds and produce stand . The groups worked for 2 hours , completing and documenting sketches as they went . Later , the entire group worked together to integrate all of the sketches into an afﬁnity diagram to distill the most interesting themes and visualization designs . W6 . Photo Annotation The aim of this workshop was to explore a more diverse set of situated visualization forms across a wider range of locations by sketching on photographs . While we limited each partici - pant to a small set of prompts during the sketching stage—the workshop as a whole was very ideation - centered and aimed to explore a wide range of tasks , environments , datasets , and potential technologies . Notably , we did not situate this activity in the target environ - ment . Instead , participants sketched in a large meeting room , using a variety of photographs ( containing scenes from bath - rooms to dirt bike races ) printed on 8 12 " × 11 " paper . Again , ﬁfteen participants took part , all of whom were researchers or students . We prompted participants to consider speciﬁc technologies ( mobile devices , small / large embedded screens , augmented reality , etc . ) and motivations ( recollection , reﬂec - tion , decision making , etc . ) . Before the activity , we primed participants’ level - of - detail by showing them an example scene we had sketched beforehand . We did not specify a dataset and allowed participants to generate their own . Each participant received a printed photo , two prompts , and a set of colored pens . Participants sketched for 10 minutes , then transitioned to small group discussions to further develop their sketches and ideas . Afterward , the entire group shared and discussed their designs , ideas , and insights while integrating all of the sketches into an afﬁnity diagram . W7 . Self - Tracker We conducted this workshop to examine the design of situated tracking tools for personal informatics . This workshop was hardware - centered and focused speciﬁcally on situated visual - izations for small e - paper displays . The prompts explored a wide range of tasks and data . As in W6 , we conducted this workshop in an ofﬁce meeting room , rather than in the target environment . Twelve partici - pants took part in the activity , all of whom were either students or researchers with visualization experience . Before starting , we introduced participants to the concept of situated visual - ization and demonstrated a low - ﬁdelity prototype of the target hardware . This prototype ( Figure 3a ) consisted of an e - paper display and physical buttons inside a cardboard housing . We distributed paper cutouts with the same dimensions as the e - paper displays ( 4 cm × 4 cm ) to all participants , along with two colored pencils in the same colors supported by the target display . To begin the activity , we handed out a random example use case to each participant . We created the set of examples to cover a wide range of possible self - tracking applications . Participants had two minutes to sketch a design for each prompt , and repeated this step several times with additional prompts . After these initial design rounds , we held a round table discussion in which the participants shared their designs . We then asked participants to design again , this time considering their own personal data . This stage of the activity was more free - form , and we gave participants 15 minutes to generate as many designs as they wanted . After the workshop , we analyzed the designs that participants had generated , sorting them based on recurring design elements and organizing them to reﬂect emergent design dimensions . REFLECTION AND RECOMMENDATIONS Through conducting these seven design workshops , we ex - plored a range of different activities , materials , and prompts for situated visualization design . Each of these speciﬁc work - shop formats uncovered particular strengths and limitations of the employed methods , as well as opportunities for further research . In this section , we summarize our observations from conducting the workshops , and identify key challenges and beneﬁts of these design activities for situated visualization design . We structure our reﬂections using the three genres of activities ( ideation - centric , task - centric , and hardware - centric ) that we examined in our workshops . We distilled these reﬂections based on iterative analysis of photographs , participants’ sketches , and researchers’ notes , as well as transcriptions and translations of audio recordings ( when available ) from the workshops . The researchers directly involved in each workshop ﬁrst analyzed the qualitative data and artifacts from their individual activities . All authors then iteratively integrated ﬁndings from all seven workshops to produce a ﬁnal set of opportunities , challenges , and reﬂections . Ideation - Centered Activities Flexibility of Whiteboard Sheets & Tiles The magnetic whiteboard sheets and tiles we used in work - shops ( W1 – W4 ) proved popular with participants and resulted in a variety of visualization designs that integrated with ex - isting objects and infrastructure . In workshops W1 and W2 , where we provided a variety of whiteboard sheet sizes and shapes ( Figure 1 ) , participants were free to select sheets to suit their personal preference . Participants in the Food Bank workshop ( W1 ) mostly used larger , rectangular display sizes that simulated tablets and smartphones ( the most used form factor was the 8 . 9 " tablet size ) . In the Ofﬁce Climate work - shop ( W2 ) , meanwhile , participants used a more diverse set of display sizes , and gravitated strongly towards the 3 . 5 cm round sheets . We speculate that this difference may be related to Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 179 Figure 5 . Whiteboard tiles and sheets . ( a ) Tile from workshop W2 ( Tiles at Ofﬁce ) on a magnetic surface , ( b ) sheet from W2 ( Ofﬁce Climate ) on a wall with adhesive putty , ( c ) tile from W3 Tiles at Home leaning on an object , ( d ) sheets from W1 ( Food Bank ) on a magnetic surface . participants’ level of prior experience with various devices and interfaces , a phenomenon known as legacy bias [ 34 ] . Some participants in W1 also mentioned choosing the larger sizes when they were unsure of what they wanted to draw and how large it would be . In the Food Bank and Ofﬁce Climate workshops ( W1 , W2 ) , we combined the whiteboard sheets with adhesive putty to allow participants to place the sheets on non - magnetic sur - faces . For instance , in the Ofﬁce Climate workshop ( W2 ) , participants used the adhesive putty to place sketched displays around a wall clock ( Figure 4b ) as well as attach them to walls ( Figure 5b ) and objects like plants . In the two workshops in which we did not provide adhesive putty ( W3 , W4 ) , we noticed that the need for magnetic back - ing limited the locations that participants considered . Some participants gravitated towards metal surfaces and restrained themselves to placing sketches in those locations , rather than exploring potential alternatives . In general , we found that using whiteboard sheets and tiles had a number of beneﬁts when compared to more traditional sticky notes . The whiteboard sheets made it easier to update sketches , since participants could erase or alter subsets of the designs without starting over . Meanwhile , drawing on paper led to sketches that were rarely changed or updated . In the Agriculture workshop ( W5 ) , our one activity that involved the use of sticky notes , we observed that sketches tended to be more simplistic , relied more heavily on text , and were unlikely to be updated . In contrast , participants using the whiteboard sheets and tiles in workshops ( W2 , W3 , W4 ) ( and to a lesser extent in W1 ) often updated their sketches multiple times and remained engaged with each sketch longer . Inspiration from the Environment Conducting workshops in the same environment in which the visualizations are likely to be deployed can guide design activ - ities and help to generate new ideas . For instance , participants in W2 were inspired by a variety of objects in the ofﬁce and explored ways in which situated visualizations could com - plement them . This included positioning sketched displays next to a power outlet ( Figure 5b ) and alongside the ofﬁce nameplates in a hallway . We also observed that participants’ familiarity with a space had an impact on the types of ideas they generated . In W4 , when participants created ideas in their own homes , the ideas were more speciﬁc , personal , and unique to their daily tasks . In contrast , many participants in W3 ( while familiar with similar ofﬁce environments ) were visitors , and their ideas focused more on generic uses of the space . We observed a similar phenomenon in W6 , where par - ticipants sketched on top of generic photographs of common environments . Again , their ideas tended to focus on general use - cases for those kinds of spaces , rather than speciﬁc ones . Speciﬁcity and Constraints We explicitly varied the speciﬁcity of the design prompts across several of the design activities . We provided more open - ended directions in workshops ( W2 – W6 ) , but framed W1 around existing tasks in the food bank and constrained participants in W7 to design for a speciﬁc self - tracking device and speciﬁc kinds of data . We observed that when we pro - vided participants with speciﬁc prompts they generated more concepts and established a stronger sense of initiative that led them to build on past ideas , iterate , and explore . This meant that even when these constraints were later lifted ( as in W7 , where participants were eventually freed to imagine a wide va - riety of data types ) , the quality and quantity of ideas appeared to be much higher than when we did not provide prompts . This aligns with past suggestions that applying “decisive con - straints” , which force decisions and instigate creative turning points early in the design process , may help accelerate ideation and encourage innovative solutions [ 2 ] . We also observed a similar effect in the Photo Annotation workshop ( W6 ) , where the participants who imagined very speciﬁc use - cases in their scene and focused their design considerations on them tended to generate more fruitful and diverse visualization concepts . Task - Centered Activities Unfamiliarity with Sketching or Ideation Practices We observed that participants’ prior exposure to and conﬁ - dence with sketching and ideation activities inﬂuenced their ability to translate ideas into detailed sketches . Our workshops showed large contrasts between participants who had a back - ground in HCI and visualization research and those that did not ( including domain experts like the volunteers and employ - ees at the food bank in W1 ) . Researchers tend to be used to participating in such workshops and may have prior sketching experience . The inﬂuence of familiarity with ideation and creativity methods and processes is a common challenge in such workshops , as also noted by Halskov & Dalsgaard [ 15 ] . In the workshops we conducted with HCI and visualization researchers ( W2 – W7 ) , we observed that participants with this background had no difﬁculty generating many different ideas and translating their ideas into detailed sketches ( Figure 6a ) . In contrast , participants at the food bank ( W1 ) often had difﬁ - culty translating their idea into a visual form , and as a result , reverted to describing their ideas as text notes rather than Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 180 Figure 6 . Level of detail of sketches . ( a ) Recreation of a detailed sketch from W4 ( Tiles at Home ) , ( b ) Text - based sketch from W1 ( Food Bank ) . sketches ( Figure 6b ) . While we repeatedly encouraged partici - pants to draw what they would like to see , the set of concepts that participants ultimately generated was much less visual and less detailed than in the other workshops—including W2 which used the same materials , prompts , and overall procedure . We suspect that this uncertainty may have also affected the form factors that participants at the food bank selected . Often , these participants would pick the largest whiteboard sheets available because they had difﬁcultly determining how much space a visualization was likely to take , or because they wanted additional space for taking notes . At the Ofﬁce Climate work - shop ( W2 ) , which included trained researchers , this was not an issue . We observed similar behavior in W4 , where teams with less visualizations experience tended to generate more text - based “visualizations” while teams with greater experience in visualizations generated more and richer variations . Possible approaches for overcoming this lack of familiarity with ideation and sketching activities could include starting with a warm - up exercise before the workshop , to get people acquainted with sketching and brainstorming [ 13 ] . Employing a mix of researchers with a visualization background together with domain experts may also prove fruitful , although there is a risk of having the researchers dominate the ideation process . Practical Concerns Hinder Task - Centered Ideation Holding the sketching and ideation activities at the location in which visualizations are likely to be deployed can increase generation of ideas relevant to those spaces . However , we ob - served that it could sometimes also restrict ideation , especially when participants were reminded of the limitations posed by existing infrastructure , rules , and work practices . For example , in the Food Bank workshop ( W1 ) , participants’ concerns about the potential cost and robustness of displays caused them to quickly eliminate some possible display locations , such as on pallets in the warehouse . A related consideration is how much the experimenters restrict the ideation process to the actual data that is currently available . In all workshops , we allowed participants to use both data that we provided ( such as the data cards and sheets in W1 and W2 ) as well as other useful data participants imagined could be collected . While we cannot compare with activities that constrained the data participants could use , our ﬁndings suggest that being ﬂexible in what data can be used facilitated idea generation . Situating Design Without Domain Expertise In the Agriculture workshop ( W5 ) , we explored the task do - main of a farm with a set of participants who were all visual - ization researchers , but had varying levels of domain expertise . While a few had existing connections to agriculture , such as growing up on a farm or frequenting pick - your - own farms , many had no connection to the domain . This difference in domain expertise translated into a very wide spread of design ideas , tailored to the participants’ respective experiences . Par - ticipants with a deeper background in agriculture designed visualizations that supported routine farming tasks like irriga - tion management and pest - tracking . Meanwhile , those with less expertise sketched visualizations tailored to visitors and non - experts , including situated maps and views for identifying different plant varietals . This divergence highlights the tendency for participants in situ - ated design tasks to focus on designing for their own personal experiences of a space , rather than the experiences of others . As such , including participants with a wide range of experi - ences may help produce more diverse application concepts during early - stage ideation . However , including participants who represent the perspective of the ultimate users of a system or who have a deep understanding of the target domain is likely to be critical in task - and hardware - centered activities . Information Visualization or Just Information ? In more task - oriented activities like W1 , we noticed a tendency for participants to produce designs that revealed small amounts of information via text labels and color , rather than via more complex visualizations . These included designs that displayed expiration dates on a box of goods , used a speciﬁc color to indicate that the content of a box should be distributed to schools , or provided visual instructions for new volunteers . One participant in W1 speciﬁcally requested that displays not show too much information , providing quick snapshots of the data rather than supporting detailed data analysis . While these simpler designs may have been a byproduct of participants’ limited visualization expertise , a similar theme also emerged in W7 , in which participants were familiar with visualization design . Again , many of the designs they created showed data via very simple representations ( counts , times - tamps , ratios , etc . ) . Follow - up discussions made clear that this trend was deliberate . Participants stressed that small displays should be used to show simple information that viewers could parse at - a - glance and felt that more complicated visualizations of the data would be better served by more feature - rich mobile or web - based applications . These examples highlight the advantages of situated displays that use clear , minimalist , and glanceable encodings to commu - nicate task - related information while minimizing complexity . As such , we suspect visualization designers should be cautious not to bias participants too strongly with complex visualiza - tion designs prior to sketching , particularly when considering situated tasks that are not analytic in nature . Proximity to Physical Referents Results from the workshops showcase how placing situated visualizations close to their physical referents ( and thus re - Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 181 ducing spatial indirection [ 44 ] ) may not always be the most practical or desirable solution . For example , in the Food Bank workshop ( W1 ) , participants noted that placing a visualization showing frozen food items inside the freezer room where they were stored would have been problematic because workers spent only short amounts of time in that cold environment . Meanwhile , in the Self - Tracker workshop ( W7 ) , participants debated where to position displays to prompt behavior changes like exercising more , eating more healthily , or meditating reg - ularly . Often , participants concluded that displays should be placed in highly visible locations where they would be seen regularly , rather than in the locations where the activity ( ex - ercise , eating , meditation ) would take place . For example , a person who hoped to cycle more might place a visualization of their cycling activity near their car rather than near their bike , providing a reminder and opportunity to reﬂect each time they chose to drive . Hardware - Centered Activities Limitations for Prototyping Interaction or Advanced Features While the sketching media that we used in our workshops were useful for generating visualization designs , they were all limited in their ability to simulate interactions and dynamic behavior . Although these aspects can be explored in later phases of the design process with high - ﬁdelity prototypes , the static nature of the sketching media may reinforce the notion that the small displays are static or non - interactive . As a result , these media may discourage participants from brainstorming dynamic , interactive , or context - aware visualizations . For instance , during the Food Bank workshop ( W1 ) , participants never considered the possibility that displays could be mobile or that they might adapt to changes in time , location , or activity . In contrast , participants in W7—which used a combination of paper cutouts and a low - ﬁdelity prototype of an display with physical buttons ( Figure 4a ) , generated almost exclusively interactive designs . Interesting future opportunities for situated prototyping in - clude using live video prototyping tools such as Montage [ 27 ] , as well as digital sketching tools that could permit participants to draw directly on top of active devices and small displays . Considerable potential also exists for workshops that examine the intersection of hardware - and task - centered design , which we did not examine in any of our activities ( Figure 2 ) . For example , examining a speciﬁc high - ﬁdelity hardware platform ( such as 2 . 7 " interactive color e - paper displays ) within a task domain like a food bank or warehouse could help encourage more concrete yet practical design ideas . Sketching Mixed and Augmented Reality Visualizations While our workshops focused primarily on situated visual - izations that use small displays as a target platform , other hardware platforms exist for situated visualization . White - board tiles and sheets work well for ideation and prototyping of situated visualizations with small displays , but do not scale well to other platforms such as media facades , projection - mapping displays or mixed and augmented reality systems . Moreover , immersive visualization designs created on physical sketching media like these can be difﬁcult to photograph and document in - context—a challenge that was especially evident in the outdoor environments in W5 ( Figures 1g and 4g ) . There are a number of possible sketching and design activities for these hardware platforms that could be interesting avenues for future research . For instance , sketching on glass , acrylic , and other transparent surfaces could help participants explore visualization designs that overlay visualizations on top of ob - jects and environments . By using camera - and stylus - equipped tablets , participants could also capture images of their envi - ronment and then sketch on top of them in situ , leveraging context and details from their surroundings while still sketch - ing creatively . We observed several emergent examples of this behavior in W3 , where some participants took photos using an iPad and then annotated them on - location using a note - taking app . This allowed them to explore AR / MR visualizations that layered data on top of existing items and spaces , including soft and amorphous objects like plants . CONCLUSION This paper represents a ﬁrst step towards a collection of design methods tailored to the unique challenges of creating situated visualizations . Our experiences suggest beneﬁts and trade - offs of these workshop formats and highlight opportunities for sketching activities to support richer ideation , needs elicita - tion , and hardware - centered design for situated visualizations . So far , we have primarily used these activities , materials , and prompts in the early phases of the design process . However , many of the same concerns faced during early - stage design— including understanding the relationships between situated vi - sualizations and real - world objects and environments—remain similarly challenging throughout the broader design and pro - totyping cycle . We look forward to extending this initial set of design methods and hope that this work encourages others to use these kinds of activities to further explore the space of potential situated visualization designs . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This project has received funding from the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme ( grant agreement No 740548 ) and from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re - search Council of Canada ( NSERC ) [ RGPIN - 2016 - 04564 ] . We thank all of our participants , as well as Ida Larsen - Ledet and Lora Oehlberg for proofreading and valuable discussions . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Jon Bird and Yvonne Rogers . 2010 . The Pulse of Tidy Street : Measuring and Publicly Displaying Domestic Electricity Consumption . In Workshop on Energy Awareness and Conservation through Pervasive Applications ( Pervasive 2010 ) . [ 2 ] Michael Mose Biskjær and Kim Halskov . 2014 . Decisive constraints as a creative resource in interaction design . Digital Creativity 25 ( 2014 ) , 27 – 61 . Issue 1 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14626268 . 2013 . 855239 [ 3 ] Bill Buxton . 2007 . Sketching User Experiences : Getting the Design Right and the Right Design . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . , San Francisco , CA , USA . Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 182 [ 4 ] Sandy Claes , Jorgos Coenen , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2018 . Conveying a Civic Issue Through Data via Spatially Distributed Public Visualization and Polling Displays . In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( NordiCHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 597 – 608 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240167 . 3240206 [ 5 ] Sandy Claes and Andrew Vande Moere . 2013a . Street Infographics : Raising Awareness of Local Issues Through a Situated Urban Visualization . In Proceedings of the 2Nd ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays ( PerDis ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 133 – 138 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2491568 . 2491597 [ 6 ] Sandy Claes and Andrew Vande Moere . 2013b . Street Infographics : Raising Awareness of Local Issues Through a Situated Urban Visualization . In Proceedings of the 2Nd ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays ( PerDis ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 133 – 138 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2491568 . 2491597 [ 7 ] Jorgos Coenen , Maarten Houben , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2018 . Citizen Dialogue Kit : The Situated Visualization of Open and Citizen Science Data on Public Displays . In CityVis Workshop at IEEE VIS’18 . [ 8 ] Saskia Coulson , Mel Woods , Michelle Scott , Drew Hemment , and Mara Balestrini . 2018 . Stop the Noise ! Enhancing Meaningfulness in Participatory Sensing with Community Level Indicators . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1183 – 1192 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196762 [ 9 ] Alan Dix and Layda Gongora . 2011 . Externalisation and Design . In Procedings of the Second Conference on Creativity and Innovation in Design ( DESIRE ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 31 – 42 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2079216 . 2079220 [ 10 ] Graham Dove and Sara Jones . 2014 . Using Data to Stimulate Creative Thinking in the Design of New Products and Services . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 443 – 452 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598564 [ 11 ] S . Goodwin , J . Dykes , S . Jones , I . Dillingham , G . Dove , A . Duffy , A . Kachkaev , A . Slingsby , and J . Wood . 2013 . Creative User - Centered Visualization Design for Energy Analysts and Modelers . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 19 , 12 ( Dec 2013 ) , 2516 – 2525 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2013 . 145 [ 12 ] L . Grammel , M . Tory , and M . Storey . 2010 . How Information Visualization Novices Construct Visualizations . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16 , 6 ( Nov 2010 ) , 943 – 952 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2010 . 164 [ 13 ] Saul Greenberg , Sheelagh Carpendale , Nicolai Marquardt , and Bill Buxton . 2011 . Sketching user experiences : The workbook . Elsevier . [ 14 ] Tobias Grosse - Puppendahl , Steve Hodges , Nicholas Chen , John Helmes , Stuart Taylor , James Scott , Josh Fromm , and David Sweeney . 2016 . Exploring the Design Space for Energy - Harvesting Situated Displays . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 41 – 48 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2984511 . 2984513 [ 15 ] Kim Halskov and Peter Dalsgård . 2006 . Inspiration Card Workshops . In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2 – 11 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1142405 . 1142409 [ 16 ] Nicolai Brodersen Hansen and Peter Dalsgaard . 2012 . The Productive Role of Material Design Artefacts in Participatory Design Events . In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through Design ( NordiCHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 665 – 674 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2399016 . 2399117 [ 17 ] S . He and E . Adar . 2017 . VizItCards : A Card - Based Toolkit for Infovis Design Education . IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics 23 , 1 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 561 – 570 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2016 . 2599338 [ 18 ] Clint Heyer . 2010 . Investigations of Ubicomp in the Oil and Gas Industry . In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 61 – 64 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1864349 . 1864360 [ 19 ] Samuel Huron , Sheelagh Carpendale , Jeremy Boy , and Jean - Daniel Fekete . 2016 . Using VisKit : A Manual for Running a Constructive Visualization Workshop . In Pedagogy of Data Visualization Workshop at IEEE VIS 2016 . Baltimore , MD , United States . https : / / hal . inria . fr / hal - 01384388 [ 20 ] Hilary Hutchinson , Wendy Mackay , Bo Westerlund , Benjamin B . Bederson , Allison Druin , Catherine Plaisant , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Stéphane Conversy , Helen Evans , Heiko Hansen , Nicolas Roussel , and Björn Eiderbäck . 2003 . Technology Probes : Inspiring Design for and with Families . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’03 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 – 24 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 642611 . 642616 [ 21 ] Fahim Kawsar , Jo Vermeulen , Kevin Smith , Kris Luyten , and Gerd Kortuem . 2011 . Exploring the Design Space for Situated Glyphs to Support Dynamic Work Environments . In Pervasive Computing , Kent Lyons , Jeffrey Hightower , and Elaine M . Huang ( Eds . ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 70 – 78 . Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 183 [ 22 ] Daniel F . Keefe , Daniel Acevedo , Jadrian Miles , Fritz Drury , Sharon M . Swartz , and David H . Laidlaw . 2008 . Scientiﬁc Sketching for Collaborative VR Visualization Design . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14 , 4 ( July 2008 ) , 835 – 847 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2008 . 31 [ 23 ] Ethan Kerzner , Sarah Goodwin , Jason Dykes , Sara Jones , and Miriah D . Meyer . 2019 . A Framework for Creative Visualization - Opportunities Workshops . IEEE Trans . Vis . Comput . Graph . 25 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 748 – 758 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2018 . 2865241 [ 24 ] Lisa Koeman , Vaiva Kalnikaité , and Yvonne Rogers . 2015 . " Everyone Is Talking About It ! " : A Distributed Approach to Urban Voting Technology and Visualisations . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3127 – 3136 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702263 [ 25 ] Lisa Koeman , Vaiva Kalnikait ˙ e , Yvonne Rogers , and Jon Bird . 2014 . What Chalk and Tape Can Tell Us : Lessons Learnt for Next Generation Urban Displays . In Proceedings of The International Symposium on Pervasive Displays ( PerDis ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 130 , 6 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2611009 . 2611018 [ 26 ] Henrik Korsgaard , Nicolai Brodersen Hansen , Ditte Basballe , Peter Dalsgaard , and Kim Halskov . 2012 . Odenplan : A Media FaÇAde Design Process . In Proceedings of the 4th Media Architecture Biennale Conference : Participation ( MAB ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 23 – 32 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2421076 . 2421081 [ 27 ] Germán Leiva and Michel Beaudouin - Lafon . 2018 . Montage : A Video Prototyping System to Reduce Re - Shooting and Increase Re - Usability . In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 675 – 682 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3242587 . 3242613 [ 28 ] Chiara Leonardi , Claudio Mennecozzi , Elena Not , Fabio Pianesi , Massimo Zancanaro , Francesca Gennai , and Antonio Cristoforetti . 2009 . Knocking on Elders’ Door : Investigating the Functional and Emotional Geography of Their Domestic Space . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1703 – 1712 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518963 [ 29 ] Makayla Lewis , Miriam Sturdee , Jason Alexander , Jelle Van Dijk , Majken Kirkegård Rasmussen , and Thuong Hoang . 2017 . SketchingDIS : Hand - drawn Sketching in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’17 Companion ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 356 – 359 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064857 . 3064863 [ 30 ] Makayla Lewis , Miriam Sturdee , Nicolai Marquardt , and Thuong Hoang . 2018 . SketCHI : Hands - On Special Interest Group on Sketching in HCI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article SIG09 , 4 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3185366 [ 31 ] Matthew Mauriello , Michael Gubbels , and Jon E . Froehlich . 2014 . Social Fabric Fitness : The Design and Evaluation of Wearable E - textile Displays to Support Group Running . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2833 – 2842 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557299 [ 32 ] Sean McKenna , Alexander Lex , and Miriah D . Meyer . 2017 . Worksheets for Guiding Novices through the Visualization Design Process . CoRR abs / 1709 . 05723 ( 2017 ) . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1709 . 05723 [ 33 ] Andrew Vande Moere and Dan Hill . 2012 . Designing for the Situated and Public Visualization of Urban Data . Journal of Urban Technology 19 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 25 – 46 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10630732 . 2012 . 698065 [ 34 ] Meredith Ringel Morris , Andreea Danielescu , Steven Drucker , Danyel Fisher , Bongshin Lee , m . c . schraefel , and Jacob O . Wobbrock . 2014 . Reducing Legacy Bias in Gesture Elicitation Studies . interactions 21 , 3 ( May 2014 ) , 40 – 45 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2591689 [ 35 ] Leyla Norooz , Matthew Louis Mauriello , Anita Jorgensen , Brenna McNally , and Jon E . Froehlich . 2015 . BodyVis : A New Approach to Body Learning Through Wearable Sensing and Visualization . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1025 – 1034 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702299 [ 36 ] Jonathan C . Roberts , Christopher J . Headleand , and Panagiotis D . Ritsos . 2017 . Five Design - Sheets : Creative Design and Sketching for Computing and Visualisation ( 1st ed . ) . Springer Publishing Company , Incorporated . [ 37 ] Alex S . Taylor , Siân Lindley , Tim Regan , David Sweeney , Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Lillie Grainger , and Jessica Lingel . 2015 . Data - in - Place : Thinking Through the Relations Between Data and Community . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2863 – 2872 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702558 [ 38 ] Jakob Tholander , Klas Karlgren , Robert Ramberg , and Per Sökjer . 2008 . Where All the Interaction is : Sketching in Interaction Design As an Embodied Practice . In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 445 – 454 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1394445 . 1394493 Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 184 [ 39 ] Maryam Tohidi , William Buxton , Ronald Baecker , and Abigail Sellen . 2006 . User Sketches : A Quick , Inexpensive , and Effective Way to Elicit More Reﬂective User Feedback . In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic Conference on Human - computer Interaction : Changing Roles ( NordiCHI ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 105 – 114 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1182475 . 1182487 [ 40 ] Nina Valkanova , Sergi Jorda , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2015 . Public Visualization Displays of Citizen Data . Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . 81 , C ( Sept . 2015 ) , 4 – 16 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2015 . 02 . 005 [ 41 ] Jo Vermeulen , Fahim Kawsar , Adalberto Lafcadio Simeone , Gerd Kortuem , Kris Luyten , and Karin Coninx . 2012 . Informing the design of situated glyphs for a care facility . In 2012 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human - Centric Computing , VL / HCC 2012 , Innsbruck , Austria , September 30 - October 4 , 2012 . 89 – 96 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / VLHCC . 2012 . 6344490 [ 42 ] Jagoda Walny , Samuel Huron , and Sheelagh Carpendale . 2015 . An exploratory study of data sketching for visual representation . In Computer Graphics Forum , Vol . 34 . Wiley Online Library , 231 – 240 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cgf . 12635 [ 43 ] Sean White and Steven Feiner . 2009 . SiteLens : Situated Visualization Techniques for Urban Site Visits . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1117 – 1120 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518871 [ 44 ] Wesley Willett , Yvonne Jansen , and Pierre Dragicevic . 2017 . Embedded Data Representations . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 23 , 1 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 461 – 470 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2016 . 2598608 Design Method DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 185