ASSOCIATION FOR CONSUMER RESEARCH Labovitz School of Business & Economics , University of Minnesota Duluth , 11 E . Superior Street , Suite 210 , Duluth , MN 55802 The Brand Anchoring Effect : a Judgment Bias Resulting From Brand Awareness and Temporary Accessibility Franz - Rudolf Esch , Justus Liebig University Giessen , Germany Bernd H . Schmitt , Columbia Business School New York , USA Joern Redler , Madeleine Mode , Germany Tobias Langner , Justus Liebig University Giessen , Germany Following the Selective Activation , Reconstruction , and Anchoring ( SARA ) and consumer - based brand equity models , we predict a brand anchoring effect in which high awareness brands are used as anchors in forming impressions of co - branded entities . Comparing the brand personality profiles of fictitious brand alliances with high and low awareness brands , we find a brand anchoring effect in studies 1 and 2 . Moreover , in study 3 we show that the effect generalizes to specific brand characteristics ; we also demonstrate that the effect is driven by making brand - related information more available . Future research on brand awareness and on anchoring effects is discussed . [ to cite ] : Franz - Rudolf Esch , Bernd H . Schmitt , Joern Redler , and Tobias Langner ( 2007 ) , " The Brand Anchoring Effect : a Judgment Bias Resulting From Brand Awareness and Temporary Accessibility " , in NA - Advances in Consumer Research Volume 34 , eds . Gavan Fitzsimons and Vicki Morwitz , Duluth , MN : Association for Consumer Research , Pages : 498 - 499 . [ url ] : http : / / www . acrwebsite . org / volumes / 12660 / volumes / v34 / NA - 34 [ copyright notice ] : This work is copyrighted by The Association for Consumer Research . For permission to copy or use this work in whole or in part , please contact the Copyright Clearance Center at http : / / www . copyright . com / . 498 Advances in Consumer Research Volume 34 , © 2007 The Brand Anchoring Effect : A Judgment Bias Resulting from Brand Awareness and Temporary Accessibility Franz - Rudolf Esch , Justus Liebig University Giessen , Germany Bernd H . Schmitt , Columbia Business School , USA Joern Redler , Madeleine Mode , Germany Tobias Langner , Justus Liebig University Giessen , Germany EXTENDED ABSTRACT Introduction Anchoring refers to a biased judgment on a stimulus based on the initial assessment of another stimulus and the insufficient adjustment away from that initial assessment . Previous research indicates that anchoring seems to be a general phenomenon , under - lying a wide variety of processing strategies ( Epley and Gilovich 2001 ; Johnson and Puto 1987 ; Tversky and Kahnemann 1974 ) . Every time when individuals form an impression or an image about a stimulus while another stimulus is present , these impressions may be subject to anchoring effects . Consumers regularly form images about brands and compare brands to other brands . We therefore propose that there will be an anchoring effect in image impressions about brands – a phenom - enon that we will refer as “the brand anchoring effect . ” The brand anchoring effect can be investigated , for example , in the context of co - branded identities ( e . g . , cellular phones offered by the brand alliance Sony Ericsson ) . We propose that in these co - branding cases , one constituent stimulus ( Sony or Ericsson ) may serve as an anchor and affect the image structure of the co - branded identity ( Sony Ericsson ) as a whole . We test the brand anchoring effect in three studies , identifying characteristics of the co - branded entities that lead to one of the constituent entities to become the anchor . We derive our hypotheses on the basis of the Selective Activation , Reconstruction , and Anchoring ( SARA ) model ( Pohl , Eisenhauer , and Hardt 2003 ) , which is specifically designed to explain anchor - ing effects , and the customer - based brand equity model ( Keller 1993 , 2003 ) . Theoretical Background The SARA model assumes that when individuals are asked a question that requires a judgment ( e . g . , what is the brand personal - ity of the co - branded identity ? ) , they utilize available images about the “information units” in long term memory ( such as an image of the brand associations of a constituent brand ) . Each judgment is associated with a number of images of the brands and the SARA model specifies which “information units” are chosen as an anchor . Specifically , the selection of the anchor and the direction of the judgment bias depend on distinct characteristics of internally rep - resented brand knowledge . Once a brand has been selected as an anchor , it will bias the co - branded identity in such a way that its knowledge structure will be closer to the anchor brand than the other constituent brand . Consistently with the SARA model , it has been shown in a wide range of domains , such as information integration theory ( e . g . , Fazio and Williams 1986 ) , the accessibility - diagnosticity frame - work ( e . g . , Feldman and Lynch 1988 ) , brand alliances ( e . g . , Simonin and Ruth 1998 ) , and in research on priming , that the accessibility of information has a strong influence on judgments . In the context of branding , Keller ( 1993 ) identifies brand awareness as one of the most important factors for retrieval of information about the brand . Thus , following the SARA model and the brand alliance study by Simonin and Ruth ( 1998 ) , we predict that brands with a high level of awareness in a co - branded identity are more likely to be anchors than those with low awareness . Method To test our hypothesis about the brand anchoring effect , we conducted three studies ( each n = 80 ) with fictitious brand alliances of existing brands from three different product categories . In studies 1 and 2 , respondents evaluated the alliances and the con - stituent brands on Aaker’s ( 1997 ) brand personality scale . We conclude that an anchoring effect was present or not , based on standard similarity measures ( D , X , and q correlation ) that compare the profiles of constituent brands with the brand alliance . Study 1 In study 1 , we tested two brand alliances that either consisted of two toothpaste brands with different levels of unaided awareness ( high / low ) or similar levels of awareness . The results support our assumption : The judgment of the brand alliance was based on the brands with the higher level of brand awareness . In contrast , in the similar - brand - awareness condition , none of the brands served as an anchor . Study 2 Study 2 was designed to replicate the brand anchoring effect of high vs . low awareness for a new product category ( chocolate ) . In addition , we tested whether or not we would observe anchoring effects for strong image brands ( relative to weak image brands ) when the awareness levels of both brands in the alliance are at comparable high levels . Our results provided a replication of the brand anchoring effect of high ( vs . low ) awareness brands . However , when both alliance constituents have high awareness , independent of brand strength , none of the brands served as an anchor . Study 3 In study 3 , we addressed the key question of how brand awareness creates a brand anchoring effect . Following the SARA model , it is available information that provides retrieval cues , and therefore for awareness to produce anchoring effects , brand aware - ness should make information more available . Thus , we manipu - lated brand awareness and the availability resulting from it , rather than just measuring it ( as in the previous two studies ) . Respondents were exposed to two different packaging designs for the brand alliance Milka Uncle Ben’s , offering a crispy rice chocolate cereal . The package design either provided predominantly Milka related brand elements ( e . g . , color ) or predominantly Uncle Ben’s related design elements . As expected , the profile in the Milka focused design was closer to Milka than Uncle Ben’s whereas the profile of the Uncle Ben’s focused design was closer to Uncle Ben’s . These results confirmed that the packaging design made Milka brand - related information more available when the design first brought to mind Milka . In contrast , it made Uncle Ben’s brand - related information more available when the design first brought to mind Uncle Ben’s . Advances in Consumer Research ( Volume 34 ) / 499 Conclusion Taken together , the results of the three studies confirm our overall prediction : brand - related information , once made available , can result in a brand anchoring effect in the judgment of a co - branded entity . Brand - related information may be permanently more available in high awareness brands ; alternatively , it can be made more available temporarily by presenting the co - branded entity in a particular way . Future research should examine possible moderators of the brand anchoring effect , such as brand name order in the alliance or product category fit , and how these factors influence the selection of the brand anchor . References Aaker , Jennifer L . ( 1997 ) , “Dimensions of Brand Personality , ” Journal of Marketing Research , 34 ( August ) , 347 - 56 . Cronbach , Lee J . and Goldine C . Gleser ( 1953 ) , “Assessing Similarity between Profiles , ” Psychological Bulletin , 50 ( 6 ) , 456 - 73 . Davis , Harry L . , Stephen J . Hoch , and E . K . Easton Ragsdale ( 2001 ) , “An Anchoring and Adjustment Model of Spousal Predictions , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 13 ( June ) , 25 - 37 . Edwards , Jeffrey R . ( 1993 ) , “Problems with the Use of Profile Similarity Indices in the Study of Congruence in Organiza - tional Research , ” Personnel Psychology , 46 , 641 - 65 . Epley , Nicholas and Thomas Gilovich ( 2001 ) , “Putting Adjust - ment Back in the Anchoring and Adjustment Heuristic : Differential Processing of Self - Generated and Experimenter - Provided Anchors , ” Psychological Science , 12 ( September ) , 391 - 96 . Fazio , Russell H . and Carol J . Williams ( 1986 ) , “Attitude Accessibility as a Moderator of the Attitude - Perception and Attitude - Behaviour Relations : An Investigation of the 1984 Presidential Election , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 ( 3 ) , 505 - 14 . Feldman , Jack M . and John G . Jr . Lynch ( 1988 ) , “Self - Gener - ated Validity and Other Effects of Measurement on Belief , Attitude , Intention , and Behavior , ” Journal of Applied Psychology , 73 ( 3 ) , 421 - 35 . Johnson , Michael D . and Christopher P . Puto ( 1987 ) , “A Review of Consumer Judgment and Choice , ” in Review of Marketing , ed . Michael J . Houston , Chicago : American Marketing Association , 236 - 92 . Keller , Kevin L . ( 1993 ) , “Conceptualizing , Measuring , and Managing Customer - Based Brand Equity , ” Journal of Marketing , 57 ( January ) , 1 - 22 . ( 2003 ) , Building , Measuring , and Managing Brand Equity , 2 nd ed . , Upper Saddle River : Prentice Hall . Orbell , John and Robyn Dawes ( 1991 ) , “A ‘Cognitive Miser’ Theory of Cooperators’ Advantage , ” American Political Science Review , June , 515 - 28 . Park , C . Whan , Sung Youl Jun , and Allan D . Shocker ( 1996 ) , “Composite Branding Alliances : An Investigation of Extension and Feedback Effects , ” Journal of Marketing Research , 33 ( November ) , 453 - 66 . Pohl , Rüdiger F . , Markus Eisenhauer , and Oliver Hardt ( 2003 ) , “SARA : A Cognitive Processing Model to Stimulate the Anchoring Effect and Hindsight Bias , ” Memory , 11 ( 4 / 5 ) , 337 - 56 . Simonin , Bernard L . and Julie A . Ruth ( 1998 ) , “Is a Company Known by the Company It Keeps ? Assessing the Spillover Effects of Brand Alliances on Consumer Brand Attitudes , ” Journal of Marketing Research , 35 , 30 - 42 . Tetlock , Philip E . ( 1979 ) , “Accountability : The Neglected Social Context of Judgment and Choice , ” Research in Organiza - tional Behavior , 7 , 297 - 332 . Tversky , Amos and Daniel Kahnemann ( 1974 ) , “Judgment under Uncertainty – Heuristics and Biases , ” Science , 185 , 1124 - 30 . Wyer , Robert S . ( 2002 ) , “Language and Advertising Effective - ness : Mediating Influences of Comprehension and Cognitive Elaboration” , Psychology & Marketing , 19 ( July / August ) , 693 - 712 . Yadav , Manjit , S . ( 1994 ) , “How Buyers Evaluate Product Bundles : A Model of Anchoring and Adjustment , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 21 ( September ) , 342 - 53 .