Is Coordination a Means to Collaboration ? Chris Weaver The GeoVISTA Center and Department of Geography , Penn State University cweaver @ psu . edu Abstract Coordinated multiple view ( CMV ) approaches have be - come commonplace in the development of visual tools for information visualization and visual analytics . However , research and development in CMV has focused almost ex - clusively on the exploratory and analytic needs of indi - vidual users working in traditional interactive desktop en - vironments . Current understanding of collaboration in terms of perception , interaction , conceptualization , and social organization begs for integrated approaches to ex - ploration and analysis that support visualization of infor - mation in multiple coordinated views by multiple actors working across time and space in multiple roles and envi - ronments . This statement outlines two key aspects of a pos - sible strategy for achieving acquisition , exploration , com - munication , and management of information in a collabo - rative exploratory visualization environment built on top of a solid foundation of well - established CMV techniques . Keywords — Collaboration , coordination , multiple views , exploratory visualization , metavisualization . 1 Heterogeneous Collaborative Visualiza - tion Coordinated multiple views ( CMV ) techniques in ex - ploratory visualization systems and toolkits such as the In - foVis Toolkit [ 3 ] and prefuse [ 5 ] are typically intended for individual interaction . By contrast , collaborative visual - ization interfaces generally have been limited to custom implementations that target particular knowledge domains and analysis scenarios [ 4 ] . Perhaps the most difﬁcult prob - lem in collaborative visualization is helping users maintain visual “common ground” during group analysis [ 2 ] , partic - ularly when it involves geospatial information [ 7 ] . To solve these and other current and future problems in visual analytics , it will be necessary to develop visual - ization hardware and software architectures that embrace heterogeneity in terms of display ( input capabilities , out - put devices ) , information ( access , processing , delivery ) , lo - cation ( distance , environmental conditions ) , roles ( needs , skills , responsibilities , clearance ) , and organization ( man - agement / command , tech support , oversight ) . The demands of working in such a rich visual milieu can be reasonably expected to drive the need for heterogeneity in interaction as well . Evolving coordination into a means for collabora - tion might be one way to satisfy this need , complementing frameworks under development for collaborative visual an - alytics that focus on single - view interfaces with rich repre - sentations but limited shared interaction ( e . g . [ 1 ] ) . Heterogeneous collaborative visualization would ex - tend current exploratory visualization tools to multiple users of varying skill using different equipment in a range of environments . Potential beneﬁts of heterogeneous col - laborative visualization include : • concurrent visualization by multiple users for emer - gency response , intelligence analysis , mission sup - port , and scientiﬁc collaboratories , • group visual exploration and analysis by mixed - role teams of users ( responders / analysts ) , designers ( tech support ) , and managers ( command ) , and • ultra - rapid direction , development and deployment of exploratory visualization tools in emergencies , inves - tigations , and other time - critical situations . The coordination and visual abstraction models imple - mented in well - known visualization systems and toolk - its appear to be well - suited for extension to hetero - geneous collaboration ( ﬁgure 1 , bottom ) . Contempo - rary graphic user interface development typically involves object - oriented , event - based interaction schemes that fol - low a ﬁne - grained notiﬁcation and update protocol in which views act as independent producers and consumers of interactive parameter changes . Moreover , most of these protocols can be modiﬁed for asynchronous event handling in a straightforward manner , thereby enabling support for multiple simultaneous channels of input even in a single - user environment . Because remote coordination would ef - fectively become functionally the same as local coordina - tion , implementing collaborative visualization could entail nothing more than a straightforward extension of coordi - nated multiview visualization to allow multiple users to share a distributed coordination graph and data model . Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization ( CMV 2007 ) 0 - 7695 - 2903 - 8 / 07 $ 25 . 00 © 2007 Multi - user CoordinationGraph Metavisualizing Collaboration WebGeo TextVideoAudio Heterogeneous Collaborative Visualization Δ User 1 Command , Support , Oversight User 2 User 3 User 1 User 2 User 3 Datalog Vertical + Horizontal Collaboration Remote Sharing of Combinable Views Group Awareness Multi - user CoordinationGraph . . . T 1 T N . . . V 1 V M L i E M j . . . I 1 I P Figure 1 : Model of heterogeneous collaborative visualization , with integrated metavisualization of the entire collabora - tive process . Each user would interact with coordinated views ( V ) of data sources ( T ) relevant to their role , in a hard - ware + software interface available in and appropriate to their environment . Users with organizational responsibilities could interact with additional metaviews ( M ) , overlaid lenses ( L ) , and graphics embedded directly into the views of the primary visualization ( E ) in order to direct or dissect the structure and dynamics of the collaborative visual analysis process itself . 2 Metavisualizing Collaboration Conceptualizing the interactive structure of visualiza - tion tools is critical for successful exploration and anal - ysis . As the prominence of multiple coordinated views in visualization increases , better understanding of coordi - nation becomes more and more important for developing improved coordination models that lead to farther reach - ing applications of coordination . Current metavisualiza - tion techniques [ 9 , 10 ] focus on a tiny fraction of possible scenarios in which metavisual exploration and analysis fo - cuses on a few current or past interactive states in a local visualization interface controlled by a single user . Metavi - sualization could be extended to support visual communi - cation , training , management and oversight of the entire collaborative visual analytics process ( ﬁgure 1 , top ) . Such a collaborative metavisualization system could serve to : • model the entire collaborative social process as a liv - ing , persistent information source , • instrument the collaborative visualization system for continuous logging of all events , • allow real - time and time - shifted visualization of the complete collaboration record , • support rapid scrubbing of reconstructed , fully inter - active interface states over multiple users , and • integrate directly into the primary collaborative visu - alization system . Potential beneﬁts of metavisualizing collaboration in - clude economical reuse of visual analytics infrastructure for self - analysis ( much as integrated metavisualization can both build on and introspect on existing coordination mod - els and implementations ) , real - time visual management of the collaborative visual analytics process , and a visually immersive record for evaluation , training , and oversight . Promising applications include analysis of spatial patterns of collaborative interaction , whether between individuals in traditional desktop environments [ 6 ] or within a group of users sharing a large - scale , high - resolution display [ 11 ] . 3 Implications for One System : Improvise The strategy for achieving collaborative visualization outlined above could capitalize on the multiview coordi - nation architecture implemented in the Improvise [ 8 ] ex - ploratory visualization system . In Improvise , users rapidly Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization ( CMV 2007 ) 0 - 7695 - 2903 - 8 / 07 $ 25 . 00 © 2007 design and interact with multiple interconnected views of their data . Improvise signiﬁcantly improves upon previous architectures by coupling data queries with coordination , giving visualization designers precise control over how spatial navigation and item selection affects the appearance and behavior of information across multiple views . Integrated metavisualization extends visualization to in - clude exploration of interactive structure in situ , directly within the user interface of a running visualization . The ex - isting metavisualization capabilities of Improvise could be applied to capturing and visualizing the evolving , dynamic structure of the collaborative visual analytics process itself . Moreover , the same visual techniques that are being de - veloped for making sense of space - time - event - person rela - tionships in domains such as intelligence analysis and cri - sis management—including concept maps , social network graphs , and semantic searching—can be brought to bear in metavisualization . As such , metavisualization is poten - tially applicable to local and global social function at all levels of visual analytics infrastructure—including train - ing , evaluation , management , and oversight—as well as a means to facilitate visualization design locally . Heterogeneous collaborative visualization seeks to ex - tend multiview coordination to multiple users across mul - tiple roles , environments , analysis tools , and display de - vices . Although currently limited to a single screen , mul - tiview coordination in Improvise is indirect and asyn - chronous . Distributing the coordination architecture would give collaborating users ﬁne - grain control over individual navigation and selection parameters in a shared informa - tion space . Each user could explore this space in a multi - view visualization customized to their analysis , response , support , management , or policy - making role , as well as to their skills , environment , and equipment . Technicians could live - design visualizations to adapt to new informa - tion and evolving scenarios . Users could share ideas , artic - ulate arguments and propose plans by dynamic trading of live interface fragments . Coupled with metavisualization , commanders could monitor ( and interact with ) live copies of multiple responders’ visualizations on a zoomable dis - play . Because Improvise uses a simple shared - object coor - dination architecture , a full running record of all collabo - rative events could be recorded for metavisual playback in support of ongoing analysis and decision - making . References [ 1 ] Susan E . Brennan , Klaus Mueller , Greg Zelinsky , IV Ramakrishnan , David S . Warren , and Arie Kaufman . Toward a multi - analyst , collaborative framework for visual analytics . In Proceedings of the IEEE Sym - posium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology ( VAST ) , pages 129 – 136 , Baltimore , MD , October 31 – November 2 2006 . IEEE . [ 2 ] Mei C . Chuah and Steven F . Roth . Visualizing com - mon ground . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV ) , vol - ume Seventh , pages 365 – 372 , London , UK , July 2003 . [ 3 ] Jean - Daniel Fekete . The infovis toolkit . In Proceed - ings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visual - ization , pages 167 – 174 , Austin , TX , October 2004 . IEEE . [ 4 ] Ian J . Grimstead , David W . Walker , and Nick J . Avis . Collaborative visualization : A review and taxonomy . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposium on Distributed Simulation and Real - Time Applica - tions , pages 61 – 69 . IEEE , October 2005 . [ 5 ] Jeffrey Heer , Stuart K . Card , and James A . Landay . prefuse : A toolkit for interactive information visual - ization . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) , pages 421 – 430 , Portland , OR , April 2005 . ACM Press . [ 6 ] Paul E . Keel . Collaborative visual analytics : Infer - ring from the spatial organization and collaborative use of information . In Proceedings of the IEEE Sym - posium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology ( VAST ) , pages 137 – 144 , Baltimore , MD , October 31 – November 2 2006 . IEEE . [ 7 ] Wendy A . Schafer , Craig H . Ganoe , Lu Xiao , Gabriel Coch , and John M . Carroll . Designing the next gener - ation of distributed geocollaborative tools . Cartogra - phy and Geographic Information Science , 32 ( 2 ) : 81 – 100 , April 2005 . [ 8 ] Chris Weaver . Building highly - coordinated visualiza - tions in Improvise . In Proceedings of the IEEE Sym - posium on Information Visualization , pages 159 – 166 , Austin , TX , October 2004 . IEEE Computer Society . [ 9 ] Chris Weaver . Visualizing coordination in situ . In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization , pages 165 – 172 , Minneapolis , MN , Oc - tober 2005 . IEEE Computer Society . [ 10 ] Chris Weaver . Metavisual exploration and analysis of DEVise coordination in Improvise . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Coordinated & Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization ( CMV ) , pages 79 – 90 , London , UK , July 2006 . IEEE Com - puter Society . [ 11 ] Beth Yost and Chris North . The perceptual scal - ability of visualization . IEEE Transactions on Vi - sualization and Computer Graphics , 12 ( 5 ) : 837 – 844 , September / October 2006 . Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization ( CMV 2007 ) 0 - 7695 - 2903 - 8 / 07 $ 25 . 00 © 2007