Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation ☆ Anu Wadhwa a , ⁎ , Corey Phelps b , 1 , Suresh Kotha c , 2 a Imperial College , Imperial College Business School , London , South Kensington , London SW7 2AZ , United Kingdom b Desautels Faculty of Management , McGill University , Montreal , Canada c Foster School of Business , University of Washington , Seattle , WA 98185 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history : Received 18 May 2014 Received inrevised form 30 April 2015 Accepted 30 April 2015 Available online xxxx Field Editor : D . Shepherd This study examines the conditions under which portfolios of corporate venture capital ( CVC ) relationships in ﬂ uence corporate investor innovation performance . We investigate this question using longitudinal data on CVC investment portfolios of 40 telecommunications equipment manufacturers . We ﬁ nd an inverted U - shaped effect of portfolio diversity on corporate investor innovation performance . We also ﬁ nd that the effect of diversity depends on the depth of knowl - edge resources available in the portfolio . These results contribute to the interorganizational learn - ing , corporate venture capital and open innovation literatures by showing how the breadth and depthofknowledgeresourcesavailableinaportfolioofexternalpartnershipswithyoungventures interact to in ﬂ uence ﬁ rm innovation . © 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Exploratory innovation Interorganizational portfolios Corporate venture capital 1 . Executive summary Because innovation is critical to organizational performance and longevity , ﬁ rms often form collaborative knowledge - sharing rela - tionships with one another to improve their innovation performance . A growing stream of research has examined how characteristics of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolioof such relationships in ﬂ uence its learning and innovation . Althoughrecent studies highlight the importance of port - folio diversity — the extent to which a ﬁ rm ' s partners represent diverse sources of knowledge - evidence on whether portfolio diversity is bene ﬁ cial or harmful for ﬁ rm innovation is mixed and inconclusive . Accordingly , several scholars have adopted a contingency perspec - tivebyexamininghowthein ﬂ uenceofportfoliodiversitydependsonotherfactors , suchasfeaturesofa ﬁ rm ' scompetitiveenvironment . A potentially important contingency that prior research has overlooked is how the depth of knowledge available to a ﬁ rm in its portfolio of partnerships in ﬂ uences the relationship between portfolio diversity and innovation . In this study , we address this gap by drawing on the recombinatory search literature and examining whether and how the in ﬂ u - ence of portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm innovation depends on the depth of knowledge resources that partners possess or have access to . Our baseline hypothesis is that portfolio diversity has an inverted U - shaped effect on ﬁ rm innovation : initial increases in diversity are bene ﬁ cial forinnovation , butultimately turn negative beyondmoderatelevels . We also posit thatthedepthof knowledge available to a ﬁ rm in its portfolio of partnerships , as re ﬂ ected by the technological and social capital of its partners , will positively moderate the impact of portfolio diversity on innovative performance . Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx ☆ We would like to thank Gautam Ahuja , Kevin Steensma , and Chris Tucci for their helpful comments and suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper . We are also grateful to Simon Rodan for his assistance with the data and variable computations . ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 44 ( 0 ) 20 7594 5926 . E - mail addresses : a . wadhwa @ imperial . ac . uk ( A . Wadhwa ) , corey . phelps @ mcgill . ca ( C . Phelps ) , skotha @ u . washington . edu ( S . Kotha ) . 1 Tel . : + 1 514 398 4007 . 2 Tel . : + 1 206 543 4466 . JBV - 05753 ; No of Pages 18 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 0883 - 9026 / © 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Business Venturing Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 To test our model , we use longitudinal data on the corporate venture capital ( CVC ) investment portfolios of 40 global telecommu - nication equipment manufacturers . Corporate venture capital — direct minority equity investments made by established ﬁ rms in pri - vately held entrepreneurial ventures — is an increasingly important and prevalent means by which ﬁ rms pursue interorganizational learning . Ourresultsareconsistentwithourtheoreticalexpectations . We ﬁ ndthatcorporateinvestorsmaximizetheirinnovationper - formance when they investin moderately diverseportfolios of startups . More importantly , our results show the relationship between portfolio diversity and ﬁ rm innovation is enhanced as the partners ' stocks of patented technologies and alliance partners increase . Our study makes several contributions . First , we contribute to research on portfolios of inter - organizational relationships and ﬁ rm innovation by using a network based measure of portfolio diversity that captures both the differences among a focal ﬁ rm ' s partners and the differences between it and its partners . Our results show that increases in both of these aspects of portfolio diversity impact ﬁ rminnovation . Ourresultsalsohelp us understand how thedepthof partners ' technological knowledge and theextent of their social capital can help a ﬁ rm reduce the costs and enhance the bene ﬁ ts of portfolio diversity for innovation . Third , we contribute to research on corporateentrepreneurship by providingempirical evidence thatportfoliosof CVC relationships provide strategicbene ﬁ tsto acor - porate investor by improving its innovation . Finally , we contribute to open innovation research by identifying when and how portfo - lios of corporate venture capital relationships , an important tool of open innovation , in ﬂ uence investor innovation . 2 . Introduction The creation and commercial exploitationof technological knowledge ( i . e . , innovation ) , often in theformof new products and ser - vices , is central to the sustained economic performance of ﬁ rms ( Roberts , 1999 ) and their survival ( Ce ﬁ s and Marsili , 2005 ) . To im - prove innovation performance , ﬁ rms often form collaborative , interorganizational knowledge sharing relationships ( Hagedoorn and Narula , 1996 ) . As these arrangements have grown in popularity across industries and throughout the world ( Hagedoorn , 2002 ) , researchexploringtheir in ﬂ uence on organizational learningand innovation has also blossomed ( Ahuja et al . , 2008 ) . Although most studies have focused on characteristics of individual collaborative relationships ( e . g . , Sampson , 2007 ) , research has recently begun to examine characteristics of anorganization ' s collection of interorganizational relationships and the in ﬂ uence these portfolios have on learning , innovation and other aspects of organizational performance ( Hoffmann , 2007 ; Lavie , 2007 ; Ozcan and Eisenhardt , 2009 ; Sarkar et al . , 2009 ; Wassmer , 2010 ) . Portfolios of inter ﬁ rmrelationships matter becauseties within a portfolio can complement or con ﬂ ict with one another , thereby in ﬂ uencing whether the value organizations derive from their portfolios is more or less than the sum of the values of the individual ties ( Vassolo et al . , 2004 ; Wassmer , 2010 ) . Recent research has explored how the diversity of ties within a portfolio in ﬂ uences the nature and degree of interdependencies among them and their contribution to portfolio value ( Lin and Lee , 2011 ; Yang et al . , 2014 ) . In particular , many studies have examined the in ﬂ uence of portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm innovation ( Phelpsetal . , 2012 ) . Despitethisgrowinginterest , researchinvestigatinghowandwhenportfoliodiversityin ﬂ uences ﬁ rminnovation is limited in at least one important respect . Prior research has yielded con ﬂ icting and thus inconclusive results regarding the in ﬂ uence of partnership portfolio diversity on ﬁ rminnovationperformance ( Leeetal . , 2014 ; WuytsandDutta , 2012 ) . Whilesomestudies ﬁ ndportfoliodiversityhasapositiveeffect on ﬁ rm innovation ( de Leeuw et al . , 2014 ; Phelps , 2010 ; Srivastava and Gnyawali , 2011 ; Wuyts et al . , 2004 ) , others have found sup - port for a non - linear , inverted - U shaped effect ( de Leeuw et al . , 2014 ; Duysters and Lokshin , 2011 ; Luo and Deng , 2009 ; Van de Vrande , 2013 ; Vasudeva and Anand , 2011 ) as well as a U - shaped effect ( Wuyts and Dutta , 2012 ) . Thus , it is unclear when portfolio diversity is bene ﬁ cial or detrimental for ﬁ rm innovation . Rather than look for a generalizable main effect , an alternative approach to understanding the in ﬂ uence of portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm innovation would be to adopt a contingency perspective . Indeed , examining moderators is a principle strategy of unpacking and understanding con ﬂ icting main effect results . Several studies that have done so have found that not all ﬁ rms bene ﬁ t equally from the same level of diversity in their portfolio of inter ﬁ rm relationships . This research has examined the moderating in ﬂ uence of focal ﬁ rm characteristics ( Cui and O ' Connor , 2012 ; Koka and Prescott , 2008 ; Luo and Deng , 2009 ; Srivastava and Gnyawali , 2011 ; Wuyts and Dutta , 2012 ; Wuyts et al . , 2004 ) , the competitive environment ( Cui and O ' Connor , 2012 ; Koka and Prescott , 2008 ; Luo and Deng , 2009 ) , and the technological distance between a focal ﬁ rm and its partners ( Vasudeva and Anand , 2011 ) . This research has not , however , explored whether the impact of portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm innovation depends on portfolio characteristics , suchas thedepth of knowledge that portfoliopartners possess orhave accessto . This is surprisingbecause workon innovation search suggests the depth of knowledge to which a ﬁ rm has access in its search space conditions the costs and bene ﬁ ts it experiences in searching diverse knowledge sources ( Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ) . We address this limitation by examining theconditions under which the diversity of knowledge resources available to a ﬁ rm in its portfolio of collaborative interorganizational relationships in ﬂ uences its innovation performance . First , we predict and test a baseline hypothesis that the diversity of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of partners has aninverted U - shaped effecton its innovation performance . We argue the contribution of a partnership to a ﬁ rm ' s innovation performance cannot be assessed independent of the diversity in the ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of partnerships because diversity will in ﬂ uence the costs and bene ﬁ ts of each relationship . We identify how portfolio diver - sity generates both complementary and substitutive effects across relationships within a portfolio and when these interactions yield super - or sub - additive effects at the portfolio level for a ﬁ rm ' s innovation performance . Second , we posit that two characteristics of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of partners will moderate the impact of portfolio diversity on its innovative performance : ( 1 ) technological capital ( i . e . , thestock of technological knowledge possessed by the partners ) , and ( 2 ) socialcapital ( i . e . , the collaborative , interorganizational knowledge - sharing relationships in which the partners participate ) . Both the technological knowledge stock and social capital of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of partners re ﬂ ect knowledge resources that are accessible by the portfolio partners ( Ahuja , 2000 ; Phelps et al . , 2012 ) . 2 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 We test ourhypotheses usinglongitudinal data onthe corporateventure capital ( CVC ) portfolios of 40 telecommunicationsequip - ment manufacturers during the period 1989 – 2000 . Corporate venture capital — direct minority equity investments made by established ﬁ rmsinprivatelyheldentrepreneurialventures — isanincreasinglyimportantandprevalentmeansbywhich ﬁ rmspursue interorganizational learning ( Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2006 ) . After controlling for ﬁ xed ﬁ rm and time period effects and alternative knowledge sources including alliances and acquisitions , we ﬁ nd that ﬁ rms maximize their innovation performance when they invest in moderately diverse portfolios of startups , and that this relationship is enhanced as the technological and social capital of the ven - tures in the portfolio increase . This studycontributes to researchon interorganizational learningand ﬁ rminnovation byshowinghow the depth of knowledge available in a portfolio of partners , either from the knowledge partners already possess or have access to as result of their other inter ﬁ rm partnerships , moderates the in ﬂ uence of portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm innovation . Prior research has not examined either of these contingent effects . Moreover , we contribute to research on corporate venture capital and open innovation by identifying the conditions under which portfolios of CVC relationships , an important tool of open innovation , in ﬂ uence investor innovation . 3 . Empirical context A particularly appropriate setting in which to explore our question is corporate venture capital ( CVC ) portfolios — the collection of direct minority equity investments established ﬁ rms make and maintain in privately - held entrepreneurial ventures ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) . Established companies across many industries often maintain CVC portfolios as a result of investing in multiple startups ( Basu et al . , 2011 ) . This setting is an appropriate context to explore our research question for several reasons . First , CVC relationships representanimportantsourceofknowledgeforCVCinvestorsbyestablishingboundaryspanningtieswithnewventures , whichoften pursuenoveltechnologies ( DushnitskyandLenox , 2005 ) . FirmsmostoftenundertakeCVCinvestingtolearnaboutnoveltechnologies ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) . CVCtiescanin ﬂ uenceaninvesting ﬁ rm ' sinnovationperformancebyincreasingtheamountandvarietyofknowl - edge ﬂ ows available to an investing ﬁ rm ' s innovation efforts ( Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2005 ; Wadhwa and Kotha , 2006 ) . These ﬂ ows are promoted by the investor ' s evaluation and monitoring of , and collaboration with , its portfolio of ventures ( Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2005 ) . Second , this context lends itself to an investigation of how portfolio diversity in ﬂ uences interdependencies across part - ners within a portfolio . Prior research suggests that portfolios of minority equity relationships exhibit interdependencies that in ﬂ u - ence their overall value ( Lin and Lee , 2011 ; Vassolo et al . , 2004 ) . Research also shows that CVC investors exhibit substantial variation in the diversity of their portfolios ( Basu et al . , 2011 ; Lin and Lee , 2011 ) , which will help in estimating the effect of diversity on investor innovation . Third , this setting has methodological advantages . Because a CVC investment provides an endorsement effect that sends a positive signal of a startup ' s quality to current and potential stakeholders ( Stuart et al . , 1999 ) , entrepreneurs have strong incentives to publicly disclose such investments . Moreover , the vast majority of CVC investments are syndicated with independent venture capitalists ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) and these investors systematically self - report their investments to data collection organiza - tionsandtradeassociations . Consequently , informationaboutacorporateinvestor ' s entireportfolioof CVCrelationships ismorelikely to be available than similar information about a ﬁ rm ' s alliance portfolio . Additionally , CVC investments also represent an important and distinct class of inter ﬁ rm relationships ( Dushnitsky and Lavie , 2010 ) that allow us to examine the effect of portfolio diversity based on portfolio partner attributes by holding the type of relationship and type of partner constant . Finally , this setting is important in its own right . CVC ties are typically formed by investors to access and learn about new technol - ogies ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) . Yet , existing CVC research provides little insight into the conditions under which investors actually derive learning bene ﬁ ts from such relationships ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) . Investigating how a ﬁ rm ' s CVC portfolio impacts its innovation perfor - mance will help ﬁ ll this gap . Although recentevidence shows that interdependenciesamongventureswithin CVC portfolios in ﬂ uence growth and value creation for the corporate investor ( Lin and Lee , 2011 ; Yang et al . , 2014 ) , CVC research has largely overlooked whether and when the diversity of resources possessed by an investor ' s portfolio of venture partners in ﬂ uences its innovation . Addi - tionally , prior CVC research has not examined whether the impact of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of CVC ties on its innovation performance de - pends on thedepth of technological knowledge possessed or accessible by its portfolio ventures . This omission is noteworthy because researchhasshownthatthedepthofknowledgetowhicha ﬁ rmhasaccess initsinnovationsearchmoderatesthecostsandbene ﬁ tsit experiences from searching diverse sources of knowledge ( Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ) . In summary , prior research provides little insight into the conditions under which portfolios of CVC investments in ﬂ uence a corporate investor ' s innovation performance . 4 . Theory and hypotheses Innovation is a problem - solving process in which solutions to economically valuable problems are discovered via a costly process of search ( Dosi , 1988 ) . Search processes leading to the creation of new knowledge , often embodied in patents and new products , in - volve the novel recombination of existing knowledge elements ( Fleming , 2001 ) , or the recon ﬁ guration of how knowledge elements are linked ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . While ﬁ rms typically pursue recombinatory search by drawing on local knowledge found within their boundaries ( Katila , 2000 ; Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ) , they may also pursue recombinations of distant knowledge residing in other ﬁ rms ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal , 1998 ) . Because knowledge is widely and heterogeneously distributed across ﬁ rms ( von Hayek , 1945 ) , knowledge exchange is often necessary for recombination ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal , 1998 ) . Inter ﬁ rm ties , a key mecha - nismfor searchaswell asa mediumof knowledgetransfer ( Ingram , 2002 ) , allow ﬁ rmsto access and exchangefamiliar and unfamiliar knowledge . Firmsthatareabletosearchforandidentifypotentiallyusefulknowledge , conceiveofhowitcanbefruitfullyrecombined , andeffectivelyaccessandassimilatethisknowledgeincreasetheirchances ofinnovation ( GalunicandRodan , 1998 ) . Inter ﬁ rmtiesare 3 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 thus important for recombination . Moreover , such ties constitute a form of social capital because they are formalized social relation - ships between collectives through which instrumentally valuable resources are accessible ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal , 1998 ) . CVC investments are formalized inter ﬁ rm relationships that can provide partners with access to each other ' s resources ( Dushnitsky and Shaver , 2009 ) . Such access helps increase the amount and variety of knowledge ﬂ ows available to a ﬁ rm ' s recombi - nation efforts , potentially resulting in increased innovation . Many aspects of a CVC relationship facilitate access to a startup ' s knowl - edge . First , before investing , corporate investors typically conduct due diligence on various aspects of a venture including its management team , business plan , ﬁ nancials , target markets , products , and technology ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) . Often , personnel from the investor ' s R & D group and a relevant business unit are involved in assessing the technology and products ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) , which provide useful learning opportunities and help establish relationships with venture personnel for an on - going information ex - change ( Basu et al . , 2011 ) . Second , upon investment , corporate investors generally obtain either a board seat or board - observer rights with experienced business unit managers or R & D personnel often ﬁ lling such board roles . These individuals act as conduits through which useful information about the venture ' s strategic activities and technology is channeled back to the investor organization . These individuals also facilitate the development of mutually bene ﬁ cial learning relationships between venture personnel and the investor ( Basu et al . , 2011 ) . Intensive social interaction between an investor and portfolio ﬁ rm increases their interorganizational learning ( Maula et al . , 2009 ) . Finally , corporate investors typically undertake frequent and systematic meetings with portfolio ﬁ rms in order to evaluate technology development and other performance indicators . In summary , research shows that CVC investing can enhance a corporate investor ' s innovativeness ( Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2005 ; Keil et al . , 2008 ; Wadhwa and Kotha , 2006 ) . A ﬁ rm that invests in multiple startups over time develops a portfolio of ventures and gains access to a search space comprised of their knowledge . We argue that the nature of knowledge embedded in an investor ' s portfolio of startups has implications for its recombination by the investor and thus itsinnovation performance . The recombinatory searchliterature has emphasized theimportanceof two dimen - sionsof asearchspace for successful recombinations — breadth anddepth ( Fleming , 2001 ; Katilaand Ahuja , 2002 ; Schillingand Green , 2011 ) . While breadth ( or “ scope ” ) refers to the diversity of different topical domains of knowledge an actor searches , depth refers to theaccumulatedstockof knowledge in a particulardomain accessible in anactor ' s search efforts ( Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ; Laursen and Salter , 2006 ) . Weconsiderthein ﬂ uenceof boththediversityanddepthofknowledgeaccessiblebyacorporateinvestorinitsportfolio of CVC relationships on its innovation performance . In examining the in ﬂ uence of knowledge depth , we build on prior research and focus on both thestocks of knowledge partners possessand the depth of knowledge spillovers to whichthey have access as a result of their own inter ﬁ rm ties ( Ahuja , 2000 ; Phelps et al . , 2012 ) . Increasing compositional diversity of a ﬁ rm ' s partners provides it with greater access to diverse knowledge beyond its boundaries ( Baumet al . , 2000 ) . As such , increasingportfolio diversity presents both increasingbene ﬁ tsand challenges to ﬁ rm innovation ( Phelps et al . , 2012 ) . Extant researchinvestigatingthein ﬂ uence ofportfoliodiversity on ﬁ rminnovationperformanceprovidescon ﬂ ictingand inconsistent results . Specifying the conditions under which the bene ﬁ ts of portfolio diversity for ﬁ rm innovation outweigh the costs and vice versa may help untangle these con ﬂ icting results . Consequently , the examination of potential moderators is warranted . We sought to identify potential moderators of the in ﬂ uence of increasing search scope by examining the innovation search literature ( Ahuja et al . , 2008 ; Laursen , 2012 ) . This literature suggests that the bene ﬁ ts and costs of searching increasingly diverse sources of knowledge are conditioned by the depth of knowledge in the search space ( Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ) . Research shows that the depth of partners ' technological knowledge stocks increases inter ﬁ rm learning and ﬁ rm innovation performance by increasing the volume and richness of knowledge available for recombination ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Stuart , 2000 ) . In addition , interorganizational net - work researchshows that a ﬁ rm ' s innovationperformance increases as thevolumeofknowledge spillovers its partners haveaccess to as a result of their own inter ﬁ rm ties increases ( Ahuja , 2000 ) . A focal ﬁ rm bene ﬁ ts not only from the depth of its partners ' knowledge stocksbutalsofromthedepthofexternalknowledgetowhichtheportfolio ﬁ rmshaveaccess . Increasingsearchbreadthfacilitates the identi ﬁ cation of promising knowledge elements for recombination , while increasing depth allows the searcher to investigate more deeply and better understand the different knowledge domains , thereby increasing the ability of the searcher to integrate and com - bine the knowledge with its own ( Gavetti and Levinthal , 2000 ; Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ) . We ﬁ rst develop a baseline hypothesis relating the diversity of portfolio ﬁ rms to the innovation performance of CVC investors . Next , we argue that this relationship is conditioned by two important characteristics of the ventures in a portfolio — the depth of the knowledge base of the ventures and the knowledge to which the ventures have access through their other inter ﬁ rm partnerships . 4 . 1 . Portfolio diversity Diversity refers to the extent to which a system consists of uniquely different elements , the frequency distribution of these ele - ments , and the degree of difference among them ( Stirling , 2007 ) . Accordingly , following other studies ( Phelps , 2010 ; Rodan and Galunic , 2004 ) , we conceptualize a focal investor and its portfolio ﬁ rms as a system and de ﬁ ne portfolio diversity as the extent to which the resources and capabilities , including technological knowledge , of startups in a portfolio differ from each other and from those of the investor . Portfolio diversity impacts innovation performance in four ways . First , portfoliodiversityaffectstherelativenoveltyofknowledgeavailableinaportfolio . Anincreaseinportfoliodiversityincreases the extent to which a CVC investor ' s startups are dissimilar from it and from each other , increasing the investor ' s access to relatively novel knowledge that is necessary for innovation ( Greve , 2007 ) . Access to diverse , non - redundant knowledge increases the number and variety of possible combinations , thereby increasing the potential for novel solutions ( Fleming , 2001 ) , challenges existing cogni - tive structures and beliefs about cause – effect relationships , which can promote new associations and lead to novel insights and solu - tions ( Simonton , 1999 ) , allowing ﬁ rms to develop multiple conceptualizations of problems and solutions and to potentially apply 4 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 solutionsfrom one domain toproblemsinanother ( Hargadon and Sutton , 1997 ) . Itcan alsostimulateintensive experimentation with new combinations , leading to highly novel innovations ( Ahuja and Lampert , 2001 ) . Second , portfoliodiversityaffectspartners ' willingnesstoshareknowledgeandreducespartnerprotectiveness . When ﬁ rmsdevel - op similar domains of expertise their knowledge bases may become substitutable ( Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ) . When a CVC investor ' s portfolio consists of startups with similar ( i . e . , non - diverse ) and thus substitutable knowledge stocks , competitive concerns among investors and startups can lead to increased incentives to protect and / or distort their knowledge ( Dushnitsky and Shaver , 2009 ) . Thus , decreasing portfolio diversity leads to a negative interaction across ties in the portfolio by reducing the amount and ﬁ delity of knowledge ﬂ ows . In contrast , an increase in portfolio diversity will have a complementary effect by increasing the incentives for partners to share knowledge because they will be less concerned that knowledge will leak to other substitutive startups in the port - folio via a common investor ( Khanna et al . , 1998 ) or that the investor is pursuing substitutive R & D ( Dushnitsky and Shaver , 2009 ) . Third , portfolio diversity also in ﬂ uences a corporate investor ' s relative absorptive capacity . A ﬁ rm must expend greater effort and resources to understand and integrate dissimilar knowledge ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . Cognitive capacity constraints and limited experiencewithdiverseknowledgedomainsreducesa ﬁ rms ' abilitytoattendtoandcomprehendtheinteractionsamongincreasingly dissimilar knowledge components ( Fleming and Sorenson , 2001 ) . Moreover , integrating novel knowledge from dissimilar sources often requires changing existing patterns of communication , which is dif ﬁ cult for established organizations ( Kogut and Zander , 1992 ) . As the dissimilarity between partners increases , their ability to recognize , assimilate , and apply each other ' s knowledge de - clines ( Lubatkin et al . , 2001 ) , thus increasing the costs of recombinatory innovation ( Weitzman , 1998 ) . These costs can be mitigated to the extent that a corporate investor has invested in dissimilar startups which are themselves similar to each other because relationship - speci ﬁ cinvestmentsincooperatingwith , andlearningfrom , oneportfolioventurecanbeef ﬁ cientlyleveragedinlearning from other portfolio ventures ( Vassolo et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , sunk cost investments in improving an investor ' s relative absorptive capac - itywithdissimilarstartups are complementary ( i . e . , super - additive ) acrosspartnerships when startupspursuethe sameindustries . In contrast , the costs of innovation for a CVC investor due to diminished absorptive capacity will be greatest when its portfolio startups differ greatly from both the investor and from each other . In this case the investor incurs the cost of absorbing highly diverse knowl - edge without any compensatory bene ﬁ t of being able to exploit learning from startup - speci ﬁ c investments across partnerships . Finally , portfolio diversity affects the resource constraints an investor faces in managing its relationships . Interdependencies in a portfolio arise as a result of capacity constraints in the resources a ﬁ rm contributes to its portfolio ( Anand et al . , 2007 ) . Portfolio ﬁ rms that possess similar resources and capabilities are substitutive and compete for access to the same investor resources . Because ﬁ rms experience capacity constraints in the short run use of many of their resources ( Levinthal and Wu , 2010 ) , a portfolio focused on relationshipswithsimilarpartnershasanincreasedpotentialforcon ﬂ ictsandcongestionamongtheresourcesaninvestorcommitsto these relationships . Speci ﬁ cally , the cognitive resources of investor personnel working in a particular technology or product domain are limited ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . Because these resources are primarily engaged in internal ﬁ rm activities , they have limited availability for externalcollaborations . As aresult , thespeci ﬁ ccognitive resourcesrequired for , andusedin , onecollaborativerelation - ship may be pre - empted from being used in additional relationships with similar partners or may be thinly spread across such rela - tionships , both of which will reduce the ﬁ rm ' s ability to learn from these similar relationships . Thus , resource constraints increase the potential for sub - additive portfolio effects related to a ﬁ rm ' s innovation when there is little portfolio diversity . These resource con - straint problems decline as portfolio diversity increases . Given these bene ﬁ ts and costs of portfolio diversity , we expect it will have an inverted U - shaped effect on a CVC investor ' s inno - vation . On the one hand , low levels of diversity provide little complementarity across relationships and thus have limited portfolio - level synergistic bene ﬁ ts for innovation . Even when an investor has a high degree of absorptive capacity with its portfolio ﬁ rms and may be able to ef ﬁ ciently leverage investments in such absorptive capacity across partnerships , the knowledge to which the in - vestor has access will contain little relative novelty and little value for innovation . This problem is exacerbated when portfolio ﬁ rms aredisinclined tosharetheirknowledge , orwhenportfolios consist of similarpartners , whichincreases resourcecongestionproblems for investors . On the other hand , high levels of portfolio diversity lead to absorptive capacity problems , which can outweigh the ben - e ﬁ ts of access to a wide variety of novel knowledge and low partner protectiveness , generating a sub - additive portfolio effect . Al - though greater diversity increases opportunities to generate novel recombinations and reduces resource congestion problems , a principallimitingfactorinproducinginnovationsisanorganization ' sabilitytotransformpotentiallynovelrecombinationsintousable innovations ( Weitzman , 1998 ) . Also , cognitive and informational overload and diseconomies of scale arising from a diverse portfolio can limit the ease with which ﬁ rms can recognize , evaluate , and utilize the external knowledge elements ( Ahuja and Lampert , 2001 ) . As knowledge elements becomediverse , the probability of their successful recombination declines , with excessive diversity negative - ly affecting innovation ( Fleming and Sorenson , 2001 ) . An investor ' s innovation efforts will bene ﬁ t from a balance of access to a mod - erate degree of novel knowledge , moderately ef ﬁ cient and effective relative absorptive capacity , moderately protective partners , and limited resource congestion . Hypothesis1 ( H1 ) . The diversity of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolioof new ventureswill have aninverted U - shaped relationship with its innovation performance . 4 . 2 . Portfolio depth Successful recombinations typically involve knowledge components that are salient , accessible , and well understood ( Fleming , 2001 ) . Therefore , recombining knowledge elements across ﬁ rm boundaries from a portfolio of young ventures can be challenging . 5 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 The technological knowledge possessed by startups may not be suf ﬁ ciently well developed or embedded in routines due to thelack of formal processes that is the hallmark of entrepreneurial ﬁ rms ( Stinchcombe , 1965 ) . Thus , an investor may be unable to detect which elements of a startup ' s knowledge will yield useful recombinations . The inability to evaluate the recombinatorial potential of a startup ' stechnological knowledge can decrease aninvestor ' s incentive to collaborate in learning from thestartup because an increase in the depth of a ﬁ rm ' s knowledge reduces potential recipients ' uncertainty about its quality , making it a more attractive knowledge source ( Tallman and Phene , 2007 ) . Even when an investor is able to identify promising knowledge elements for recombination , the investor ' s ability to transfer and assimilate this knowledge is contingent upon the depth of a partner ' s knowledge ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Stuart , 2000 ) . Thedeeperthetechnologicalknowledgeofa ﬁ rm , thebetterisitsabilitytoarticulate , communicate , andillustrate how its knowledge can be utilized , increasing its capacity to transfer knowledge ( Zhao and Anand , 2009 ) . Thus , ﬁ rms with deeper knowledge may be more effective at transferring it and may be a richer source of knowledge . Prior research shows that when ﬁ rms access knowledge from sources with deeper knowledge bases they are better able to transfer and recombine it ( Almeida and Phene , 2004 ; Baum et al . , 2000 ; Salomon and Martin , 2008 ; Stuart , 2000 ) . The depth of knowledge in a CVC investor ' s portfolio will mitigate some of the costs and amplify some of the bene ﬁ ts of diversity , thereby positively moderating diversity ' s effect on innovation . Speci ﬁ cally , increasing depth of portfolio ﬁ rms ' technological knowl - edge should enhance an investor ' s relative absorptive capacity and complement its ability to bene ﬁ t from diverse partner knowledge by increasing the effective detection , transfer and assimilation of this knowledge . Thus , ﬁ rms with deeper technological knowledge may be more effective at transferring their knowledge and may be a richer source of knowledge . This also increases the bene ﬁ t of re - duced protectiveness associated with increasingportfolio diversitybecauseventureswith deeper knowledge bases should have more to teach , bebetter teachers , and be more willingto teach . This is particularly important intheCVCcontextin whichventures that pur - sue similar and substitutive technologies relative to corporate investors are typically unwillingtoshare their technological knowledge with investors due to concerns of expropriation ( Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2006 ) . Increasing diversity diminishes these concerns , thus increasingcooperation , while increasingdepthimproves an investor ' sability to learn from diverseventures . Furthermore , the costs of diversity are diminished because technologically - richer ventures are able to share the cognitive load and actively participate in help - ing the investing ﬁ rm understand their technology , thereby facilitating its combination with the investor ' s knowledge ( Gavetti and Levinthal , 2000 ; Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ) . Insummary , deeperpartner knowledge increases a ﬁ rm ' sabilityto bene ﬁ t from increasingly diverse partners , enhancing the positive effect and diminishing the negative effect of portfolio diversity on its innovation performance . Hypothesis 2 ( H2 ) . The depth of technological knowledge in a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of new ventures will moderate the inverted U - shaped relationshipbetweenportfoliodiversityandinnovationperformance . Speci ﬁ cally , increasingportfoliodepthwillimprovethepositive effects of diversity , increase the amplitude of the effects of diversity , and reduce the negative effects of diversity on ﬁ rm innovation performance . 4 . 3 . Portfolio ﬁ rms ' partners Beyond the internal knowledge resources of its portfolio of ventures , a focal investor can also bene ﬁ t from the knowledge spillovers to which the ventures have access . In addition to the relationship it maintains with a focal investor , a venture may also maintain collab - orativerelationshipswithother ﬁ rms ( Stuartetal . , 1999 ; WadhwaandKotha , 2006 ) . Priorresearchshowsthatanimportantmechanism through which resource - constrained ventures are able to access complementary external knowledge resources and build their internal knowledge bases is the network of alliances they form ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Shan et al . , 1994 ) . Ventures with a larger number of alliance partnersareprivytomoreinformationandknow - howthanventureswithfeweralliancepartners ( Powelletal . , 1996 ) . Alliancepartners can also provide ﬁ rms with valuable know - how about how to effectively exchange knowledge and information across ﬁ rm boundaries and bene ﬁ t from knowledge spillovers ( Dyer and Singh , 1998 ; Kale et al . , 2000 ; Lavie and Rosenkopf , 2006 ) . An investor ' s direct CVC ties with its portfolio ventures can thus provide it with access to the knowledge spillovers derived from the ventures ' other alliance partners ( Ahuja , 2000 ) . An increase in such spillovers provides an investing ﬁ rm with access to a greater depth of knowledge in its portfolio . Indeed , a primary insight from research on networks of interorganizational relationships is that such ties serve as pipes through which information , know - how and other resources ﬂ ow and ﬁ rms that are more connected , both di - rectly and indirectly , to others have greater and timelier access to such resources ( Phelps et al . , 2012 ) . Indirect ties enable a ﬁ rm to potentially gather greater information about technological trajectories and the success and failure of other ﬁ rms ' research efforts and act as an information processing and screening mechanism ( Leonard - Barton , 1995 ) , thereby focusing the attention of the focal ﬁ rm on those knowledge elements that are more relevant and likely to lead to successful recombinations ( Ahuja , 2000 ) . Consistent with these arguments , prior research ﬁ nds a positive relationship between a ﬁ rm ' s indirect knowledge sharing relationships and its innovation performance ( Phelps et al . , 2012 ) . The depthof knowledgespillovers towhicha CVC investor has accessvia its indirect links to its portfolio ventures ' partners should moderatethein ﬂ uenceofportfoliodiversityoninvestorinnovationbyconditioningdiversity ' scostsandbene ﬁ ts . Thebene ﬁ tsofport - folio diversity are enhanced because the knowledge spillovers from the ventures ' partners deepens the knowledge available in the portfolio , allowing the investor to investigate more deeply and better understand the different knowledge domains , thereby increas - ing its ability to integrate and combine the knowledge with its own ( Gavetti and Levinthal , 2000 ; Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ) . The in - creased richness of knowledge in a portfolio that results from the ventures ' increased connectedness increases the potential for diverse knowledge to be recombined in novel ways . In addition , the bene ﬁ t of reduced protectiveness associated with increasing 6 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 portfolio diversity is enhanced because portfolio ventures with more partners also acquire valuable collaborative experience that enables them to exchange and transfer their knowledge more ef ﬁ ciently and effectively with the focal investor . As portfolio ventures become better at forming and maintaining alliances with their other partners , they also help mitigate the costs associated with a diverse portfolio by compensating for the cognitive overload experienced by the corporate investor . In summary , access to a portfolio with a highly connected portfolio of ventures can enhance the ability of the corporate investor to learn from an increasingly diverse portfolio . Hypothesis 3 ( H3 ) . The combined number of alliance partners of ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of new ventures will moderate the inverted U shaped relationship between portfolio diversity and ﬁ rm innovation performance . Speci ﬁ cally , more portfolio partners will improve the positive effects of diversity , increase the amplitude of the effects of diversity , and reduce the negative effects of diversity on ﬁ rm innovation performance . 5 . Methods We chose the global telecommunications equipment industry ( SIC 366 : “ Communications Equipment ” ) as the setting for this study for two reasons . First , in the last three decades this industry experienced substantial technological and competitive changes ( Amesse et al . , 2004 ) , which resulted in growing CVC investing by incumbents ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) . Second , because we use patent data ( as explained below ) , we chose an industry where ﬁ rms routinely and systematically patent their inventions ( Hagedoorn and Cloodt , 2003 ) . Focusing on one industry allows us to control for industry - speci ﬁ c intellectual property regimes , which in ﬂ uence ﬁ rm innovation ( Lavie et al . , 2010 ) . Many practical considerations in ﬂ uenced our sample construction . To control for unobserved differences in ﬁ rms ' innovation per - formance , we needed suf ﬁ cient time varying data on the same ﬁ rms . We chose the period 1989 – 2000 . We chose 1989 as the initial year because : ( 1 ) it coincides with the beginning of a wave of increasing CVC investment among telecom ﬁ rms ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) and ( 2 ) ﬁ nancial data on many non - U . S . sample ﬁ rms were unavailable prior to this period . Given the lag between the application date of a patent and its granting , we ended the sample in 2000 . Nearly 99 % of all patent applications are decided upon by the USPTO within 5 years of application ( Hall et al . , 2001 ) , essentially eliminating the risk that our patent data are right - censored . Given the 1 - year lag between independent and dependent variables , 1999 is the last year we observed investments . We excluded the year 2000 because it exhibited a major spike in VC investments that could bias our results . To ensure availability and reliability of ﬁ nancial data , we limited the sample frame to public ﬁ rms . Following prior research ( e . g . , Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2005 ; Keil et al . , 2008 ) , we used the VentureXpert database , the of ﬁ cial database of the National Venture Capital Association ( NVCA ) , to construct our sample of corporate investors . Corporate investors are de ﬁ ned as non - ﬁ nancial public ﬁ rms who directly invested capital in private , entrepreneurial ﬁ rms . We identi ﬁ ed those corporate investors who had made at least one CVC investment during the sample period . Our ﬁ nal sample consists of an unbalanced panel of 40 publicly traded telecom - equipment manufacturers headquartered in 11 countries and 417 ﬁ rm - year observations . 5 . 1 . Data and measures We used patents toassess investor innovation becausepatents are valid and robust indicators of knowledge creation ( Trajtenberg , 1987 ) . Onewayknowledgecreationis instantiated isintheformofinventions ( Griliches , 1990 ) . Whileinventionscanbeusedtotrace an organization ' s knowledge creation , patents offer a measure of novel invention that is externally validated through the patent ex - amination process ( Griliches , 1990 ) . A patent application represents a positive expectation by an inventor of the economic signi ﬁ cance of the invention because obtaining such protection is costly ( Griliches , 1990 ) . Thus , patents re ﬂ ect the output of a ﬁ rm ' s innovationprocess . Whilepatents measureacodi ﬁ ableportionof a ﬁ rm ' s technologicalknowledge , theycorrelatewithmeasuresthat incorporate tacit knowledge and are a good measure of innovation in the telecom equipment industry ( Hagedoorn and Cloodt , 2003 ) . We obtained U . S . patents from the Delphion database belonging to Thomson Reuters . Using patents from one country maintains consistency , reliability and comparability across ﬁ rms ( Griliches , 1990 ) . U . S . patents are a good data source because of the rigor and procedural fairness used in granting them , ﬁ rms ' strong incentives to gain patent protection in the world ' s largest market , the high quality of services provided by the USPTO , and the U . S . ' s reputation for providing effective IP protection ( Pavitt , 1988 ) . Although many of the sample ﬁ rms are headquartered outside the U . S . , all have established a substantial presence in the U . S . telecommunica - tions equipment market . Schmoch and Schnoring ( 1994 ) showed that the major multinational telecommunications equipment man - ufacturers from Japan and Europe , all of which are in our sample , actively pursued U . S . patent protection in the late 1980s . We used the application date to assign granted patents to ﬁ rms because it captures the timing of knowledge creation ( Griliches , 1990 ) . Because patents are often assigned to subsidiaries , which may change names or merge , we carefully aggregated patents to the ﬁ rm level . We identi ﬁ ed all divisions , subsidiaries , and joint ventures of each sample ﬁ rm as of 1980 using Who Owns Whom and Directory of Corporate Af ﬁ liations and then traced each ﬁ rm ' s history to account for name changes , division names , divestments , acquisitions , and JVs . We used this master list of entities to assign patents to sample ﬁ rms . We collected CVC data from the VentureXpert database and obtained investor ﬁ rm ﬁ nancial data from Compustat , annual reports , SEC ﬁ lings , the Japan Company Handbook , Worldscope , and Global Vantage . Investor acquisition data and investor and target alliance data were obtained through systematic searches of the SDC M & A database , SDC alliance database , Factiva , Lexis - Nexis , and Dialog . 7 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 5 . 1 . 1 . Dependent variable Followingpriorresearch ( Lahiri , 2010 ; Trajtenberg , 1990 ; Yangetal . , 2010 ; Ziedonis , 2007 ) , wemeasuredinvestorinnovationper - formance using forward citation - weighted patent counts . Citations received by a patent re ﬂ ect the intellectual lineage of the patent and the impact that the patent has on subsequent technological development ( Ketchen et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , forward citations that a ﬁ rm ' s patents receive from subsequent patents have been acknowledged as a valid measure of technological importance , and there - fore , the quality and economic value of the underlying invention ( Hall et al . , 2005 ; Ketchen et al . , 2013 ; Trajtenberg , 1990 ) . We ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed the set of all patents applied for ( and subsequently granted ) by investor i in year t . We then identi ﬁ ed all the forward cita - tions received by this set of patents in the next 7 years , as well as until the end of 2013 . We excluded self - citations by eliminating all forward citations that belonged to the same ﬁ rm i . Innovation performance was operationalized as the total number of forward cita - tions that a ﬁ rm i ' s patents applied for in year t received in the next 7 years . We also computed the total number of forward citations that a ﬁ rm i ' s patents applied for in year t received until the end of 2013 . 5 . 1 . 2 . Explanatory variables Following Wassmer ' s ( 2010 ) recommendation , we include only existing partnerships in our portfolio measures . In constructing these measures , we include all startups in which a ﬁ rm invested during the 4 years prior to and including the focal year . With the ex - ception of publicly reported eventssuch asanIPO or acquisition , it is often dif ﬁ culttoobserve when a venture exits aninvestor ' s port - folio . We assumed that ventures remain in a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio for 4 years from the date of initial investment for two reasons . First , we exhaustively searched a variety of data sources such as Lexis Nexis , Factiva , Internet archives , company websites , SEC documents , and IPO and acquisition databases and were able to identify the actual exit dates for 82 of the 353 portfolio ﬁ rms in the sample and found that the average timebetween initialCVCinvestmentand portfolio exit for these 82 ﬁ rms was nearly 4 years . Second , research on the in ﬂ uence of inter ﬁ rm relationships , such as alliances and acquisitions , has found that the effect of these relationships on ﬁ rm innova - tion endures for 3 to 5 years ( Ahuja and Katila , 2001 ; Stuart , 2000 ) . Assuming a 4 - year duration for an inter - organizational relation - ship is in line with standard practice in inter - organizational research given the substantial dif ﬁ culties in identifying termination / exit from secondary sources . Tomeasure portfoliodiversity , weadapted Rodanand Galunic ' s ( 2004 ) measureof knowledge heterogeneity , ameasurethatincor - porates information on the knowledge distance between a focal actor and each of its partners and the distance among the partners . Although patent data would have been ideal to compute knowledge distance , we are unable to use patents because more than 50 % of our sample ventures do not hold patents at the time they received investments from corporate investors . Following other studies that faced the same dilemma ( Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2005 ; Jiang et al . , 2010 ; Keil et al . , 2008 ; Lin and Lee , 2011 ) , we use SIC codes to capture the knowledge similarity between ﬁ rm pairs as this information was consistently available for all the startups in our sample . To assess diversity of an investor ' s portfolio ﬁ rms , we collected the four - digit standard industry classi ﬁ cation ( SIC ) codes in which the corporate investors and startups were active during the period of study . Consistent with prior research , we assume that different industries re ﬂ ect different characteristic bundles of ﬁ rm resources and capabilities ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Goerzen and Beamish , 2005 ; Jiang et al . , 2010 ; Lin and Lee , 2011 ) . We began at the dyad - level and measured the distance between a pair of ﬁ rms by adapting an index developed by Jaffe ( 1986 ) . For each ﬁ rm - year , we identi ﬁ ed the four - digit SIC codes from the Compustat database in which the investor ﬁ rm was active . Because privately held ventures are not allocated SIC codes until they go public , we used VentureXpert ' s concordance mapping each venture ' s industry to an SIC code . A similar approach has been used for private ventures in the past ( Dushnitsky and Shaver , 2009 ) . This distribution locates each ﬁ rm in a multidimensional space based on four - digit SICs , captured by a K - dimensional vector f i = ( f i1 , … , f ik ) , where f ik represents the fraction of all of ﬁ rm i ' s four - digit SICs in industry class k . Consistent with Bryce and Winter ( 2009 ) , this approach assumes that each four - digit SIC deploys a different technology and thus the distribution of a ﬁ rm ' s four - digit SICs re ﬂ ects the distribution of its technical knowledge . The subscript it − 1 below indicates that the independent variables for ﬁ rm i are lagged 1 year relative to the dependent variable . The distance , d , between investor ﬁ rm i and portfolio ﬁ rm j in year t was calculated as : d ijt ¼ 1 − X K k ¼ 1 f ik f jk , X K k ¼ 1 f ik 2 ! 1 = 2 X K k ¼ 1 f jk 2 ! 1 = 2 " # where : f ik = fraction of all of investor i ' s four - digit SICs in industry class k , f jk = fraction of all of venture j ' s four - digit SICs in industry class k , and K = total number of SIC classesthat theinvestor and venture were presentin . The distance , d , betweeninvestor ﬁ rm i and portfolio ﬁ rm j in year t , is bounded between 0 ( complete similarity ) and 1 ( complete dissimilarity ) , and is symmetric for the two ﬁ rms . We used these pairwise distance values to construct a distance matrix , D t , for each year t in the sample . These square and sym - metric matrices re ﬂ ect the SIC - based distances between all possible pairwise combinations of sample ﬁ rms ( i . e . , investors and ven - tures ) in a given year . To compute portfolio diversity , we ﬁ rst calculated a value of the uniqueness of each portfolio ﬁ rm j in corporate investor i ' s port - folio in year t − 1 . The uniqueness of a portfolio ﬁ rm , j , is a function of the uniquenessof all other venturespresent in investor i ' sport - foliointhatyear , andportfolio ﬁ rm j ' sdistancefromthem . FollowingRodanandGalunic ( 2004 ) , theuniquenessofaportfolio ﬁ rm j , u j , isde ﬁ nedas : λ u j ¼ ∑ k d jk (cid:2) u k . Doingsoyieldsarecursivesystemofequationswherebytheuniquenessofoneventureinaninvestor ' s portfolio depends recursively on the venture ' s distance from all other ventures in the investor ' s portfolio in that year . For example , consider an investor with three ventures X , Y , and Z in its portfolio : the extent to which the portfolio is diverse and exposes the inves - tor to a wider range of unique knowledge elements will not only depend on how different the knowledge resources of each of the 8 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 three ventures are from the investor but also on how different the knowledge resources of ventures X , Y , and Z are from each other . Thus , the uniqueness of each portfolio ﬁ rm is found in the solution of the eigen equation : λ U = DU , where D is the matrix of pairwise distances between the investor i and each of its portfolio ventures , U is an eigenvector of D and λ is its eigenvalue . 3 The elements of U are the uniqueness measures for investor i and its portfolio ventures . For a matrix D of size n × n , the solution contains n eigenvalues . We use the largest eigenvalue to ﬁ nd the eigenvector U . Following Rodan and Galunic ( 2004 ) and Phelps ( 2010 ) , we measure the di - versity available to investor i in its portfolio of ventures in year t − 1 as : Portfolio Diversity it − 1 ¼ 1 N X N j ¼ 1 d ij λ u j ; where d ij is the SIC - based distance of venture j from investor i and λ u j is j ' s uniqueness score computed for all of i ' s portfolio ﬁ rms . The 1 / N term compensates for the fact that lambda increases linearly with portfolio size . The measure captures the SIC - based distance be - tween the focal investor and each of its portfolio ﬁ rms as well as the SIC - based distances among the portfolio ﬁ rms . Portfolio diversity increases with the distance between investor i and its portfolio ventures and with the distance among the ventures . In order to com - pute the4 - year portfolio for eachfocal investor from1989 onwards , we started collectingdata ontheinvestor ' sSICcodes andits port - folio companies from 1986 onwards . Drawing on the innovation search and interorganizational learning literatures , we characterized a CVC investor ' s portfolio of ven - tures as an extramural knowledge search space to which the investor has access as a result of its investment relationships with the ventures . Knowledge depth refers to the accumulated stock of knowledge accessible by an actor in a particular search space ( Katila and Ahuja , 2002 ; Laursen and Salter , 2006 ) . Accordingly , we de ﬁ ne the depth of knowledge in a CVC portfolio as the accumulated stock of technological knowledge possessed by the ventures in the portfolio . Building on prior research ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Stuart , 2000 ; Tallman and Phene , 2007 ) , we use patent data to observe and quantify the depth of technical knowledge possessed by an investor ' s venture partners . Using USPTO data from the Delphion database , we operationalized Portfolio depth as the average number of patents owned by the ventures in which ﬁ rm i invested during the prior 4 years , including year t − 1 . For young ventures , patents are often considered as positive signals of their quality and technological competence ( Hsu and Ziedonis , 2013 ) . Because patents in - clude detailed explanations , employing well - understood , formal , and symbolic language , for a novel and valuable solution to a tech - nicalproblem , patentsindicatethata ﬁ rmhas , atleasttosomeextent , codi ﬁ editstechnologicalknowledgeandvalidatedthepotential utility of that knowledge ( Jensen et al . , 2007 ) . Becausethe cognitive effort made in codifyingknowledge results in a richer and deeper understandingof the knowledge and the creation of new knowledge ( Cowanet al . , 2000 ; Zollo and Winter , 2002 ) , ventures that have invested in patenting their knowledge should be a richer source of knowledge . In this way , patents are a credible signal of the quality of a ﬁ rm ' s codi ﬁ ed knowledge base ( Cohendet and Meyer - Krahmer , 2001 ) and “ convey information about the lines of research a ﬁ rm is conducting and how quickly the research is proceeding ” ( p . 646 , Long , 2002 ) . The extent to which a venture has patented its tech - nical inventions thus re ﬂ ects is depth of technological knowledge ( Griliches , 1990 ) . Portfolio ﬁ rms ' partners wascomputedastheaveragenumberofalliancepartners , includingrelationshipswithotherCVCinvestors , of the portfolio of all startups in which ﬁ rm i invested during the 4 years prior to and including year t − 1 . The number of alliance partners of a venture re ﬂ ect the indirect ties that the focal investor has access to through its relationship with the venture ( Ahuja , 2000 ) . The data were obtained from SDC alliances database , VentureXpert , and triangulated by searching the Lexis Nexis and Factiva databases , as well as company websites . 5 . 1 . 3 . Control variables We controlfor potentialconfoundingfactors . First , priorventuringexperience provides thebasis foraventuringcapability , whichcan result in improved learningfromportfolio ﬁ rms ( Keil , 2004 ) , and can capture otherwise unobserveddifferences inan investor ' s ability to bene ﬁ t from CVC investments . We control for investor i ' s CVC experience in year t − 1 as the log of the cumulative count of CVC invest - mentssinceits ﬁ rstinvestment , weightedbythetimesinceeachinvestmentwasmade . ThesedatawereobtainedfromtheVentureXpert database . Second , usingCompustat data , we controlforinvestor size , R & D , slackand agefor thefollowing respective reasons : ( a ) sizecan have negative and positive effects on ﬁ rm innovation ( Cohen and Levin , 1989 ) , ( b ) a ﬁ rm ' s R & D expenditures are investments in knowl - edge creation ( Griliches , 1990 ) and may increase its ability to absorb extramural knowledge ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) , ( c ) ﬁ rms with slack resources may participate in more exploratory search ( Greve , 2007 ) , which can increase innovation performance ( Nohria and Gulati , 1996 ) , and ( d ) as ﬁ rmsage , theytendtoexploittheirexistingtechnologicalcompetenciesratherthanexplorenewandunfamiliar technologies ( SorensenandStuart , 2000 ) . Fora ﬁ rm i inyear t − 1 , weoperationalize ﬁ rmsizeusingthenaturallogofsalesin $ USmillion ( Investor Sales ) ; wemeasure ﬁ rmR & Dusing R & DIntensity ( R & Dexpenditures / sales ) ; wefollowpriorresearch ( e . g . , BourgeoisandSingh , 1983 ) and measure a ﬁ rm ' s unabsorbed slack resources using its year end current ratio ( Investor Current Ratio ) ; and Investor Age as the number of years from the ﬁ rm ' s founding . Third , we control for Investor Alliances and Acquisitions because they represent alternative ex - tramural sources of knowledge that can in ﬂ uence ﬁ rm innovation ( Ahuja and Katila , 2001 ; Stuart , 2000 ) and because their use is corre - lated with the use of CVC ( van de Vrande et al . , 2009 ) . We control for the number of acquisitions made by ﬁ rm i and for the number of alliances ( excluding those involving portfolio ﬁ rms ) formed by ﬁ rm i during the 4 years prior to and including year t − 1 . We used straight - line depreciation to account for the declining in ﬂ uence of acquisitions and alliances over time . 3 Lambda ( λ ) , a constant , is required to obtain a nonzero solution . To ensure non - negative uniqueness values , the largest eigenvalue ( λ ) is used ( Bonacich , 1987 ) . 9 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 Next , we control for Investor Technological Diversity . Increasing technological diversity may increase the potential for innovation based on internal spillovers ( Garcia - Vega , 2006 ) , and may increase a ﬁ rm ' s ability to identify , evaluate , and absorb knowledge from external sources ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . We measure ﬁ rm i ' s technological diversity in year t − 1 using Hall ' s ( 2002 ) adjusted Her ﬁ ndahl index : Technological Diversity it − 1 ¼ 1 − X J j ¼ 1 N jit = N it (cid:2) (cid:3) 2 2 4 3 5 (cid:2) N it = N it − 1 ð Þ whereN it − 1 is thenumberofpatentsobtainedby ﬁ rm i inthe4 yearspriortoandincludingyear t − 1 . N jit isthenumberofpatentsin primary technology class j in ﬁ rm i ' s 4 year knowledge base . This variable may take on values between 0 ( no diversity ) to 1 ( max . di - versity ) . We also control for Investor TotalPatents — the number of patents that were applied for by ( and subsequently granted to ) CVC investor i in year t − 1 because ﬁ rmsthat patentmoreare atgreater riskof receivinga higher number of citations ( Trajtenberg , 1990 ) . Given the 1 year lag between the observation of our DV and our explanatory and control variables , the patents used to compute in - vestor patentsdonot overlapwiththepatents used to construct ourDV ( i . e . , thosepatents atriskof forward citation ) . Finally , we con - trol for Portfolio Size , operationalized as the number of ventures present in the CVC portfolio of investor i in year t − 1 . 5 . 2 . Model speci ﬁ cation and estimation Our dependent variable is a count variable , which exhibits signi ﬁ cant over - dispersion , and takes on only non - negative integer values . Thus , we use a negative binomial model , which is a generalization of the Poisson model and allows for overdispersion by in - corporatinganindividual , unobserved effectinto theconditional mean ( Hausman et al . , 1984 ) . The negative binomialpanel estimator accommodates explicit control of persistent individual unobserved effects through both ﬁ xed and random effects . In this study , unob - served heterogeneity may stem from unmeasured differences among observationally equivalent ﬁ rms that affect their innovation performance , or from unmeasured , systematic time period effects . Because unobserved heterogeneity can result in speci ﬁ cation error ( Heckman , 1979 ) , we employ two strategies to control for it . First , we include year ﬁ xed effects to control for systematic period effects that may affect all sampled ﬁ rms ' innovation performance , suchas year - to - year differences in environmentaldynamism , com - petitive intensity and macroeconomic conditions ( Lavie et al . , 2010 ) . Second , we employ ﬁ rm effects to control for unobserved ﬁ rm differencesininnovation , suchasthosecausedbydifferencesinCVCprogramstructuresandobjectives . 4 Tochecktheappropriateness of using random effects estimation , which assumes that unobserved ﬁ rm effect is not correlated with the regressors , we used the Hausman test ( 1978 ) , which did not converge . Therefore , we report results for the more conservative ﬁ xed effects estimation . We lag all covariates by 1 year to reduce concerns about reverse causality . 6 . Results Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and correlations . Investor CVC Experience , Investor Size and Portfolio Diversity were log transformed to reduce skewness and kurtosis . Table 2 displays the negative binomial panel regression results using ﬁ rm ﬁ xed effects . Because Hausman tests did not converge for all models , we report the more conservative results using ﬁ rm ﬁ xed effects after remov - ing the time invariant variables ( pre - sample and investor region ) from the models . The results using random effects were consistent in terms of signi ﬁ cance and signs and are available upon request . In Table 2 , Model 1 is the baseline model with control variables . Models 2 and 3 introduce portfolio diversity and its square . Totest the moderating effect of portfolio depth and portfolio ﬁ rms ' partners , each moderator variable was interacted with the linear and squared term of portfolio diversity . Model 4 introduces the two moderating variables without any interactions . Models 5 and 6 show these interaction effects entered separately . Model 7 is the full model with all interaction terms . The Log likelihood and Wald Tests indicate improvement in model ﬁ t relative to the baseline model and overall model ﬁ t , respectively . Although not reported , all models include year dummies . Hypothesis 1 predicted aninverted U - shaped relationship between portfolio diversity and ﬁ rm innovation performance . Evidence of an inverted U - shaped effect requires that the second order ( quadratic ) term be negative and signi ﬁ cant while the lower order ( lin - ear ) term does not need to be signi ﬁ cant ( pp . 65 – 67 , Aiken and West , 1991 ) . When portfolio diversity and its square are introduced together in Models 3 – 7 , portfolio diversity is positive and signi ﬁ cant and portfolio diversity squared is consistently negative and sig - ni ﬁ cant . Moreover , usingparameterestimatesfromthe ﬁ nalmodel ( Model7 , Table2 ) , themaximumvalueofinnovationoccurswhen the logged portfolio diversity is 0 . 407 , which is within the sample range of 0 . 00 – 1 . 89 . Thus , we ﬁ nd support for hypothesis 1 . Hypothesis 2 predicted that portfolio depth would moderate the relationship between portfolio diversity and investor innovation . In Models 5 and 7 , the interaction between portfolio diversity squared and portfolio depth is positive and signi ﬁ cant . To better 4 CVCprogramobjectivesdeterminetheintentofCVCinvestments interms of exploration orexploitation . That is , some ﬁ rms pursueexploitationintheirCVCpro - grams , while others pursue exploration and some pursue both ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ; Maula , 2007 ) . These program objectives are stable over long periods of time ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ; Dushnitsky and Shaver , 2009 ) . Consequently , ﬁ rm effects ( either random or ﬁ xed ) will capture the in ﬂ uence of unobserved differences in ﬁ rms ' CVCprogramobjectivesontheirexploratoryknowledgecreation . Wewereableto ﬁ ndadditionalinformationonobjectivesof13ofthe40investor ﬁ rmsbysearching archival sources and interviews we conducted with some CVC program managers . This data increases our con ﬁ dence that the vast majority of investments made for technology - related reasons and these program objectives remained stable over time . Consequently , our use of ﬁ rm effects effectively controls for unobserved differ - ences inCVC program objectives . 10 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 Table 1 Descriptive statistics and correlations ( N = 417 ) . Mean S . D . Min Max ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) ( 1 ) Innovation performance 2239 . 95 3259 . 56 0 . 00 23812 . 00 1 ( 2 ) Portfolio diversity , t − 1 0 . 23 0 . 41 0 . 00 1 . 89 0 . 048 1 ( 3 ) Portfolio depth , t − 1 1 . 47 4 . 96 0 . 00 48 . 00 0 . 122 0 . 086 1 ( 4 ) Portfolio partners , t − 1 0 . 48 1 . 41 0 . 00 16 . 00 0 . 058 0 . 244 0 . 128 1 ( 5 ) Investor patent Count , t − 1 384 . 90 502 . 51 0 . 00 2516 . 00 0 . 758 0 . 133 0 . 117 0 . 063 1 ( 6 ) Investor sales , t − 1 8 . 34 2 . 37 0 . 48 11 . 49 0 . 481 0 . 216 0 . 146 0 . 184 0 . 61 1 ( 7 ) R & D intensity , t − 1 0 . 10 0 . 20 0 . 00 3 . 30 − 0 . 091 − 0 . 043 − 0 . 015 − 0 . 042 − 0 . 102 − 0 . 388 1 ( 8 ) Investor current Ratio , t − 1 2 . 34 2 . 26 0 . 39 24 . 17 − 0 . 279 − 0 . 174 − 0 . 086 − 0 . 098 − 0 . 302 − 0 . 642 0 . 27 1 ( 9 ) Investor age , t − 1 50 . 22 38 . 30 2 . 00 153 . 00 0 . 305 0 . 127 − 0 . 015 0 . 091 0 . 515 0 . 58 − 0 . 156 − 0 . 319 1 ( 10 ) Investor M & A , t − 1 7 . 50 10 . 25 0 . 00 62 . 50 0 . 24 0 . 158 0 . 073 0 . 13 0 . 427 0 . 419 − 0 . 078 − 0 . 199 0 . 56 1 ( 11 ) Investor JV & alliances , t − 1 33 . 60 38 . 52 0 . 00 230 . 75 0 . 657 0 . 15 0 . 146 0 . 124 0 . 711 0 . 603 − 0 . 106 − 0 . 277 0 . 536 0 . 574 1 ( 12 ) Investor tech diversity , t − 1 0 . 84 0 . 25 0 . 00 1 . 00 0 . 318 0 . 136 0 . 115 0 . 108 0 . 368 0 . 598 − 0 . 205 − 0 . 399 0 . 461 0 . 286 0 . 324 1 ( 13 ) Portfolio size , t − 1 2 . 17 5 . 60 0 . 00 54 . 00 − 0 . 015 0 . 791 0 . 061 0 . 145 0 . 06 0 . 169 − 0 . 016 − 0 . 107 0 . 083 0 . 179 0 . 117 0 . 073 1 ( 14 ) Investor CVC experience , t − 1 2 . 09 1 . 72 0 . 00 5 . 48 − 0 . 074 0 . 398 0 . 208 0 . 125 0 . 072 0 . 25 − 0 . 091 − 0 . 14 0 . 2 0 . 236 0 . 103 0 . 29 0 . 329 1 11 A . W a d h w a e t a l . / J o u r n a l o f Bu s i n e ss V e n t u r i n g xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx P l e a s e c i t e t h i s a r t i c l e a s : W a d h w a , A . , e t a l . , C o r p o r a t e v e n t u r e c a p i t a l p o r t f o li o s a n d ﬁ r m i nn o v a t i o n , J . Bu s . V e n t u r i n g ( 2015 ) , h tt p : / / d x . d o i . o r g / 10 . 1016 / j . j b u s v e n t . 2015 . 04 . 006 Table 2 Fixed effects negative binomial panel regression . Dependent variable = Innovation Performance . Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Constant − 3 . 884 * * * − 3 . 889 * * * − 3 . 809 * * * − 3 . 951 * * * − 4 . 008 * * * − 4 . 073 * * * − 4 . 123 * * * [ 0 . 419 ] [ 0 . 420 ] [ 0 . 420 ] [ 0 . 432 ] [ 0 . 429 ] [ 0 . 435 ] [ 0 . 431 ] Portfolio diversity , t − 1 0 . 025 0 . 388 * 0 . 423 * 0 . 693 * * * 0 . 798 * * * 1 . 048 * * * [ 0 . 101 ] [ 0 . 177 ] [ 0 . 184 ] [ 0 . 202 ] [ 0 . 233 ] [ 0 . 244 ] Portfolio diversity squared , t − 1 − 0 . 534 * * − 0 . 548 * * − 0 . 862 * * * − 1 . 003 * * * − 1 . 286 * * * [ 0 . 216 ] [ 0 . 227 ] [ 0 . 254 ] [ 0 . 281 ] [ 0 . 299 ] Portfolio depth , t − 1 0 . 008 * 0 . 011 * * 0 . 009 * * 0 . 011 * * [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] Portfolio partners , t − 1 − 0 . 017 − 0 . 022 * − 0 . 012 − 0 . 014 [ 0 . 014 ] [ 0 . 013 ] [ 0 . 017 ] [ 0 . 017 ] Port . diversity × Port . depth − 0 . 101 * * − 0 . 096 * * [ 0 . 032 ] [ 0 . 032 ] Port . diversity sq . × Port . depth 0 . 107 * * 0 . 102 * * [ 0 . 038 ] [ 0 . 037 ] Port . diversity × Port . partners − 0 . 337 * * − 0 . 334 * * [ 0 . 132 ] [ 0 . 132 ] Port . diversity sq . × Port . partners 0 . 467 * * 0 . 450 * * [ 0 . 168 ] [ 0 . 168 ] Investor patent count , t − 1 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] Investor sales , t − 1 0 . 411 * * * 0 . 412 * * * 0 . 398 * * * 0 . 421 * * * 0 . 420 * * * 0 . 437 * * * 0 . 437 * * * [ 0 . 044 ] [ 0 . 044 ] [ 0 . 044 ] [ 0 . 046 ] [ 0 . 045 ] [ 0 . 046 ] [ 0 . 045 ] R & D intensity , t − 1 0 . 943 * * 0 . 940 * * 0 . 896 * 0 . 965 * * 0 . 938 * * 1 . 012 * * 0 . 994 * * [ 0 . 348 ] [ 0 . 349 ] [ 0 . 349 ] [ 0 . 349 ] [ 0 . 353 ] [ 0 . 350 ] [ 0 . 352 ] Investor current ratio , t − 1 − 0 . 030 − 0 . 030 − 0 . 032 − 0 . 033 − 0 . 025 − 0 . 031 − 0 . 023 [ 0 . 028 ] [ 0 . 028 ] [ 0 . 028 ] [ 0 . 029 ] [ 0 . 028 ] [ 0 . 028 ] [ 0 . 027 ] Investor age , t − 1 0 . 003 0 . 003 0 . 004 + 0 . 003 0 . 004 * 0 . 004 + 0 . 005 * [ 0 . 002 ] [ 0 . 002 ] [ 0 . 002 ] [ 0 . 002 ] [ 0 . 002 ] [ 0 . 002 ] [ 0 . 002 ] Investor M & A , t − 1 0 . 008 * * 0 . 008 * * 0 . 008 * * 0 . 009 * * 0 . 009 * * * 0 . 009 * * 0 . 009 * * * [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] Investor JV & alliances , t − 1 0 . 001 0 . 001 0 . 001 0 . 000 0 . 000 − 0 . 000 − 0 . 000 [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] Investor tech diversity , t − 1 1 . 620 * * * 1 . 623 * * * 1 . 607 * * * 1 . 618 * * * 1 . 605 * * * 1 . 610 * * * 1 . 584 * * * [ 0 . 360 ] [ 0 . 360 ] [ 0 . 357 ] [ 0 . 360 ] [ 0 . 361 ] [ 0 . 363 ] [ 0 . 363 ] Portfolio Size , t − 1 − 0 . 030 * * * − 0 . 032 * * * − 0 . 001 − 0 . 003 − 0 . 001 − 0 . 008 − 0 . 007 [ 0 . 005 ] [ 0 . 008 ] [ 0 . 014 ] [ 0 . 014 ] [ 0 . 014 ] [ 0 . 014 ] [ 0 . 014 ] Investor CVC experience , t − 1 − 0 . 055 − 0 . 058 − 0 . 058 − 0 . 065 + − 0 . 046 − 0 . 075 + − 0 . 058 [ 0 . 036 ] [ 0 . 038 ] [ 0 . 038 ] [ 0 . 039 ] [ 0 . 041 ] [ 0 . 039 ] [ 0 . 040 ] Firm dummies Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Time dummies Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 417 417 417 417 417 417 417 Degrees of freedom 20 21 22 24 26 26 28 Log likelihood − 2509 . 857 − 2509 . 826 − 2506 . 781 − 2504 . 013 − 2498 . 711 − 2499 . 964 − 2495 . 015 − 2 Log likelihood 0 . 062 6 . 152 11 . 688 22 . 292 19 . 786 29 . 684 Wald Chi 2 941 . 952 939 . 662 962 . 555 967 . 102 992 . 723 987 . 105 1013 . 496 Standard errors in brackets . * * * p b 0 . 001 , * * p b 0 . 01 , * p b 0 . 05 , + p b 0 . 1 . Two - tailed tests for control variables and one - tailed tests for hypothesized variables . Fig . 1 . Portfolio depth ( patents ) as moderator of portfolio diversity . 12 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 interpret the interaction term , we graphed the interaction effect using the procedure outlined in Aiken and West ( 1991 ) . Fig . 1 shows that , at low and high levels of portfolio diversity , higher levels of portfolio depth enhance the in ﬂ uence of portfolio diversity on inno - vation performance . At a low level of diversity , increasing portfolio depth increases the bene ﬁ ts of portfolio diversity for a corporate investor ' s innovation . Greater portfolio depth mitigates the deleterious effect of excessive portfolio diversity . Furthermore , the ampli - tude of innovation performance is higher for deeper portfolios at all levels of portfolio diversity . Thus , hypothesis 2 is supported . Hypothesis 3 predicted that number of portfolio ﬁ rms ' partners would moderate the relationship between portfolio diversity and investor innovation . In Models 6 and 7 , the interaction between portfolio diversity squared and portfolio partners is positive and sig - ni ﬁ cant . Wegraphedtheinteractioneffect ( Fig . 2 ) , whichshowsthatathigh ( low ) levelsofportfoliodiversity , greaternumberofport - folio partners enhances ( weakens ) the in ﬂ uence of portfolio diversity on innovation performance . Thus , more portfolio partners appear to mitigate the deleterious effect of excessive portfolio diversity only at higher levels of portfolio diversity . Thus , we ﬁ nd some support for hypothesis 3 . Multicollinearity may be a concern because we interact the square of portfolio diversity and its linear version multiple times with portfolio knowledge codi ﬁ cation and knowledge maturity . Collinearity increases the standard errors of parameter estimates and re - duces thelikelihood of ﬁ ndingstatistically signi ﬁ canteffects . Our results are conservative becausethe squared diversity term remains signi ﬁ cantinthefullmodelevenwhen multiple interactionsinvolvingitare entered . Becausecollinearitydoes notaffecttheprecision of the estimates of higher order ( i . e . , interaction ) variables ( Gujarati , 2003 ) , it should not adversely affect our results . We used the STATA command coldiag2 and veri ﬁ ed that the condition number and condition indices were well below the recommended cutoffs of 30 and 20 respectively ( Belsley et al . , 1980 ) . We found that in the presence of higher order and interaction terms , the condition number was 39 . 19 , which drops to 17 . 53 when the higher order terms and interaction terms are removed . 6 . 1 . Robustness analyses We conducted additional robustness analyses . First , we considered the potential in ﬂ uence of self - selection . Since we are unable to observe portfolio - related variables for those ﬁ rm - years in which a ﬁ rm did not make a CVC investment in the prior 4 years , these ob - servations are censored because investors have self - selected into and out of making CVC investments . This introduces the possibility of abiasdue toself - selection . To controlforthisbias , werestricted oursampletotheuncensoredobservations ( i . e . , those ﬁ rm - yearsin which ﬁ rm i made at least one CVC investment in the 4 years leading up to and including year t − 1 ) and reran our regressions ( Models 1A – 7A , Table 3 ) . The results reported in Models 1A - 7A are similar to and consistent with those presented in Models 1 – 7 of Table 2 . We graphed the relationship from Model 7A for a comparison with Model 7 ( Fig . 1 ) . The quadratic term of portfolio diver - sity is still strongly signi ﬁ cant , suggesting that the inverted - U relationship between portfolio diversity and investor innovation still holds . Second , we computed two additional measures of diversity — within - portfolio diversity ( which captures how different the in - dustries of portfolio ventures are from each other ) , and averaged - portfolio diversity ( which averages the differences between the in - dustry of each portfolio venture and the industry of the CVC investor ) . Results with the within - portfolio diversity are similar in sign and signi ﬁ cance to those we obtain with our single measure of diversity , while averaged - portfolio diversity does not show any effect on investor innovation . Finally , we reranall theregressions with random effects speci ﬁ cationand theresults areconsistentwiththose reported in Tables 2 and 3 . 7 . Contributions , limitations , and future research This study examined the in ﬂ uence of the resource composition of a corporate investor ' s portfolio of CVC investment relationships with startups on its innovation performance . Our results suggest that diversity in resources available to a focal corporate investor via itsportfolioof venturesaswellasthecharacteristicsof theknowledgeresources of theportfolioventures haveimportantimplications for the corporate investors ' ability to generate higher quality innovations . Speci ﬁ cally , we ﬁ nd that there is an inverse U - shaped rela - tionship between the diversity of resources available to a corporate investor in its portfolio of ventures and the investor ' s innovative performance . Thus , our results emphasize the bene ﬁ ts of moderate levels of portfolio diversity for investor innovation , and suggest that even though portfolio diversity is bene ﬁ cial for innovation , it can also have cost implications that must be considered . Going Fig . 2 . Portfolio partners as moderator of portfolio diversity . 13 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 beyondthis baselineresult , weexamineimportantpartner - speci ﬁ ccontingenciesthatpresentamorenuancedpictureoftheportfolio diversity – innovationrelationship . We ﬁ ndthatthebene ﬁ ts of portfoliodiversityare enhancedandthecosts ofportfolio diversitymit - igated when portfolio partners are rich in knowledge resources ; that is , when they possess deeper technological knowledge and are connectedtoexternalknowledgeresourcesviaalliances . Thesecontingenciessuggestthata ﬁ rm ' sinnovationperformanceisindirect - ly impacted by the resources directly available to it through its partners and by its partners ' access to resources via their other alliance relationships . While our results are consistent with our hypotheses , we found some interesting differences in how portfolio partners ' internal and external knowledge resources impact the portfolio diversity – innovation relationship . When we examine the graphs of the rela - tionships in Figs . 1 and 2 , we ﬁ nd that the technological depth of the portfolio partners has a predominantly positive effect across the entire range of portfolio diversity . At lower levels of diversity , portfolio depth strengthens the already positive diversity – innovation relationship , and at higher levels of diversity , depth reduces the effects of the negative diversity – innovation relationship . In contrast , eventhoughthenumberofalliancepartnersoftheportfoliohasapositiveeffectonthediversity – innovationrelationship , thiseffectis present mostly in the higher ranges of portfolio diversity ( that is , it reduces the negative effect of the diversity – innovation relation - ship ) . At lower levels of diversity , a greater number of alliance partners appears to reduce the positive diversity – innovation relation - ship . We can thinkof oneexplanation for this result . Itis possible thatwhen portfolio diversity is low , and each venture is less unique , Table 3 Fixed effects negative binomial panel regression with restricted sample . 6 Dependent variable = Innovation performance . Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Constant − 2 . 722 * * * − 2 . 763 * * * − 2 . 456 * * − 2 . 809 * * * − 2 . 791 * * * − 2 . 994 * * * − 3 . 000 * * * [ 0 . 748 ] [ 0 . 757 ] [ 0 . 751 ] [ 0 . 790 ] [ 0 . 797 ] [ 0 . 808 ] [ 0 . 815 ] Portfolio diversity , t − 1 0 . 042 0 . 479 * 0 . 505 * 0 . 726 * * 0 . 772 * * 1 . 006 * * * [ 0 . 109 ] [ 0 . 229 ] [ 0 . 227 ] [ 0 . 265 ] [ 0 . 273 ] [ 0 . 304 ] Portfolio diversity squared , t − 1 − 0 . 545 * − 0 . 521 * − 0 . 872 * * − 0 . 833 * * − 1 . 201 * * * [ 0 . 247 ] [ 0 . 245 ] [ 0 . 299 ] [ 0 . 299 ] [ 0 . 344 ] Portfolio depth , t − 1 0 . 010 * 0 . 011 * * 0 . 010 * * 0 . 011 * * [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] Portfolio partners , t − 1 − 0 . 009 − 0 . 015 − 0 . 011 − 0 . 009 [ 0 . 014 ] [ 0 . 015 ] [ 0 . 021 ] [ 0 . 020 ] Port . diversity × Port . depth − 0 . 065 * − 0 . 063 * [ 0 . 031 ] [ 0 . 031 ] Port . diversity Sq . × Port . depth 0 . 082 * 0 . 082 * * [ 0 . 036 ] [ 0 . 035 ] Port . diversity × Port . partners − 0 . 209 + − 0 . 248 * [ 0 . 131 ] [ 0 . 134 ] Port . diversity sq . × Port . partners 0 . 294 * 0 . 321 * * [ 0 . 159 ] [ 0 . 164 ] Investor patent count , t − 1 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * 0 . 001 * * * [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] [ 0 . 000 ] Investor sales , t − 1 0 . 202 * 0 . 206 * 0 . 155 0 . 217 * 0 . 207 * 0 . 243 * 0 . 237 * [ 0 . 092 ] [ 0 . 092 ] [ 0 . 096 ] [ 0 . 100 ] [ 0 . 102 ] [ 0 . 100 ] [ 0 . 102 ] R & D intensity , t − 1 − 0 . 259 − 0 . 263 − 0 . 353 − 0 . 180 − 0 . 198 − 0 . 104 − 0 . 106 [ 0 . 543 ] [ 0 . 549 ] [ 0 . 527 ] [ 0 . 554 ] [ 0 . 543 ] [ 0 . 567 ] [ 0 . 553 ] Investor current ratio , t − 1 0 . 043 0 . 045 0 . 036 0 . 044 0 . 041 0 . 048 0 . 045 [ 0 . 036 ] [ 0 . 036 ] [ 0 . 035 ] [ 0 . 037 ] [ 0 . 036 ] [ 0 . 037 ] [ 0 . 036 ] Investor age , t − 1 0 . 006 + 0 . 006 + 0 . 008 * 0 . 007 * 0 . 008 * 0 . 008 * 0 . 009 * * [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 003 ] [ 0 . 004 ] Investor M & A , t − 1 0 . 018 * * * 0 . 018 * * * 0 . 017 * * * 0 . 019 * * * 0 . 020 * * * 0 . 019 * * * 0 . 021 * * * [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] [ 0 . 004 ] Investor JV & alliances , t − 1 0 . 002 0 . 002 0 . 002 0 . 001 0 . 001 0 . 001 0 . 000 [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] [ 0 . 001 ] Investor tech diversity , t − 1 2 . 565 * * * 2 . 575 * * * 2 . 528 * * * 2 . 342 * * * 2 . 271 * * 2 . 360 * * * 2 . 281 * * [ 0 . 704 ] [ 0 . 707 ] [ 0 . 699 ] [ 0 . 704 ] [ 0 . 695 ] [ 0 . 705 ] [ 0 . 697 ] Portfolio size , t − 1 − 0 . 021 * * * − 0 . 023 * * 0 . 006 0 . 001 0 . 007 − 0 . 001 0 . 003 [ 0 . 006 ] [ 0 . 008 ] [ 0 . 015 ] [ 0 . 015 ] [ 0 . 015 ] [ 0 . 015 ] [ 0 . 015 ] Investor CVC experience , t − 1 − 0 . 112 + − 0 . 119 + − 0 . 111 + − 0 . 102 − 0 . 033 − 0 . 125 + − 0 . 060 [ 0 . 058 ] [ 0 . 062 ] [ 0 . 063 ] [ 0 . 066 ] [ 0 . 074 ] [ 0 . 067 ] [ 0 . 073 ] Firm dummies Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Fixed Time dummies Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 209 209 209 209 209 209 209 Degrees of freedom 20 . 000 21 . 000 22 . 000 24 . 000 26 . 000 26 . 000 28 . 000 Log likelihood − 1193 . 213 − 1193 . 139 − 1190 . 738 − 1188 . 474 − 1185 . 843 − 1186 . 616 − 1183 . 941 − 2 Log likelihood 0 . 148 4 . 95 9 . 478 14 . 74 13 . 194 18 . 544 Wald Chi 2 459 . 260 456 . 019 487 . 918 507 . 602 506 . 218 522 . 083 518 . 383 Standard errors in brackets ; * * * p b 0 . 001 , * * p b 0 . 01 , * p b 0 . 05 , + p b 0 . 1 . Two - tailed tests for control variables and one - tailed tests for hypothesized variables . 6 The restricted sample consists of those observations where the size of the investor ' s portfolio is greater than zero . 14 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 the portfolio ventures may also maintain alliances with technologically similar partners because of the propensity of ﬁ rms to form alliances with technologically similar others ( Stuart , 1998 ) . In this case , the informational advantages of the focal investor ' s indirect ties are diminished because of redundancies in the knowledge provided by its indirect ties . Additionally , because the ventures and their other alliance partners have greater similarity to a focal investor , they may be more protective of their own knowledge and that to which they have access . This is an intriguing possibility that requires further examination . 7 . 1 . Contributions Our results contribute to prior literature in three ways . First , we contribute to research on portfolios of inter ﬁ rm relationships by examining characteristics of portfolio partners . Interorganizational research has generally overlooked the types of interdependencies that can occur across relationships within a portfolio and the in ﬂ uence such interdependencies have on ﬁ rm performance ( Wassmer , 2010 ) . Research on collaborative inter ﬁ rm relationships has typically adopted a dyadic - level perspective , treating such ties as inde - pendent events rather than interdependent elements in a portfolio of relationships ( Lavie , 2007 ) . For example , dyadic - level research examines how differences between partners can affect ﬁ rm innovation ( Sampson , 2007 ) , but ignores the differences between a ﬁ rm and its partners and among the partners . Moreover , the few studies that have examined the composition of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of inter - ﬁ rmties have examined theindependent , and thusadditive , effectsof partners ' resources ( e . g . , Stuart , 2000 ) . We add tothe emerging body of work that emphasizes the importance of portfolios of relationships and examines the effect of portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm in - novative performance ( Goerzen and Beamish , 2005 ; Hoehn - Weiss and Karim , 2014 ; Jiang et al . , 2010 ; Mouri et al . , 2012 ; Sarkar et al . , 2009 ; Van de Vrande , 2013 ; Vassolo et al . , 2004 ; Vasudeva and Anand , 2011 ) . Most research that has examined the in ﬂ uence of inter - organizational portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm performance only considers the differences among a ﬁ rm ' s partners and not their dissimi - larity with the focal ﬁ rm ( Goerzen and Beamish , 2005 ; Hoehn - Weiss and Karim , 2014 ; Jiang et al . , 2010 ; Van de Vrande , 2013 ) . In contrast , using a network based measure of diversity , we studied the dissimilarities between a ﬁ rm and its partners and among the partners in the portfolio . This allowed us to evaluate the conditions under which relationships in a portfolio are complementary or substitutive and therefore yield super - additive or sub - additive effects at the portfolio level ( Vassolo et al . , 2004 ) . We found a curvilin - ear relationship between a ﬁ rm ' s innovation performance and its portfolio diversity . Moreover , in contrast to prior research , which overlooks how attributes of the resources possessed by a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of partners may moderate the portfolio ' s effect on ﬁ rm per - formance , we found the in ﬂ uence of portfolio diversity on ﬁ rm innovation depends on the quality of partners ' technological knowl - edge resources and the extent of their social capital . Our results contribute to an understanding of the desirable level of portfolio diversity and how ﬁ rms can reduce the costs and increase the bene ﬁ ts of diversity for innovation . Second , we contribute to CVC research and the broader corporate entrepreneurship literature by identifying conditions under whichCVCinvestingin ﬂ uencesinnovationinestablished ﬁ rms . Prior researchonCVC andinvestorinnovationperformancehas rarely examined whether or when interdependencies in portfolios of CVC investments contribute to investor innovation . Although some studies provide evidenceof theexistenceof interdependencies amongventures within CVC portfolios and how diversity in suchport - folios in ﬂ uences ﬁ rm ﬁ nancial value ( Lin and Lee , 2011 ; Yang et al . , 2014 ) , it has yet to explore how ventures within CVC portfolios interact to in ﬂ uence investor innovation . As such , we respond to the call by Dess et al . ( 2003 ) to study how corporate entrepreneur - ship initiatives in ﬂ uence learning and renewal . We found increasing portfolio diversity generated diminishing and ultimately negative returns to ﬁ rm innovation and that the extent of technological and social capital that inheres in a portfolio moderates the impact of its diversity on ﬁ rm innovation performance . Finally , our results have implications for research on open innovation . A fundamental focus of open innovation research is on un - derstanding how organizations explore and leverage knowledge from external partners to facilitate invention and innovation ( West and Bogers , 2014 ) . Corporate venture capital represents an increasingly important tool for open innovation ( Chesbrough , 2003 ; MacMillan et al . , 2008 ) because most ﬁ rms pursue CVC as a means to learn from innovative start - ups ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) . Despite this widespread goal , surprisingly little research has explored the in ﬂ uence of CVC on investor innovation . The few studies that have done so examined the in ﬂ uence of the amount of CVC activity ( Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2005 ; Wadhwa and Kotha , 2006 ) or have employed a dyadic perspective ( Schildt et al . , 2005 ; Smith and Shah , 2013 ) . Research examining the link between CVC and cor - porate investor innovation has not examined the in ﬂ uence of CVC portfolio diversity or how this in ﬂ uence is conditioned by other characteristics of the portfolio ﬁ rms . Our ﬁ nding of an inverted U - shaped effect of portfolio diversity on investor innovation is consis - tent with previous open innovation research that ﬁ nds a similar relationship between the breadth of external knowledge sources searched and ﬁ rm innovation ( Laursen and Salter , 2006 ) . Open innovation research has , however , largely ignored how the bene ﬁ ts and costs of external knowledge sources for ﬁ rm innovation are moderated , particularly by characteristics of the knowledge sources searched ( Westand Bogers , 2014 ) . Thus , ourresults advanceopeninnovationresearchbyidentifyingtheconditionsunderwhichCVC portfolios in ﬂ uence investor innovation . 7 . 2 . Limitations and future research Despite its contributions , this study has limitations . First , we were unable to observe actual knowledge ﬂ ows between CVC inves - tors and their portfolio ﬁ rms . Following researchon inter ﬁ rm relationships and ﬁ rm innovation , we infer such ﬂ ows based on partner ﬁ rms ' characteristics . While inter ﬁ rm learning research has used cross - citations between partners ' patents to observe knowledge ﬂ ows , we were unable to use this approach because roughly 50 % of our sample startups did not have patents upon investment . Sec - ond , theuseofpatentstoproxyforknowledgecreationhaslimitations . Ouruseofgrantedpatentslimitsourobservationtoinventions that have been validated by an impartial third party . Thus , we do not capture all knowledge creation by sample ﬁ rms . Firms may 15 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 patent valuable knowledge for unobserved reasons , such as in anticipation of partnering to appropriate the greater economic value associated with such novel inventions . While our ﬁ ndings may be in ﬂ uenced by such unobserved variation , our use of ﬁ rm effects , numerous control variables , and a 1 - year lag between investment and patenting help reduce the likelihood of such biases . Third , due to data limitations , we were unable to control for the size of the equity stake held by corporate investors in startups . While equity stake size may in ﬂ uence a corporate investor ' s ability to access knowledge in a venture , we believe our inability to observe equity stake size does not in ﬂ uence our results . CVC investors in the U . S . typically avoid acquiring more than 20 % of a venture to avoid the required use of equity accounting rules ( Basu et al . , 2011 ; Myrick , 1986 ) , which suggests our observed CVC ties do not vary substan - tially in equity stake size . Finally , the generalizability of the ﬁ ndings may be a concern . Because the useof patents differs across indus - tries ( Levin et al . , 1987 ) , we limited our study to a single high - tech industry . In high - technology industries with rapid technological change , few ﬁ rms are able to build new competences without using external knowledge ( Teece et al . , 1997 ) . Although this suggests our ﬁ ndings may apply to other high - tech settings , researchers should assess the generalizability of our results . Our results suggest some interesting opportunities for future research . This study examined only portfolios of CVC investments rather than the broader set of formal and informal external relationships that a ﬁ rm can engage in . Our choice was driven by the gaps in extant research on CVC investment , some methodological advantages that the CVC context provides , and important differ - ences between CVC investments and other external knowledge - sourcing initiatives such as alliances and M & A . Future research could examine how portfolios of different types of inter ﬁ rm relationships taken together impact ﬁ rm innovation and how aggregate resources , capabilities , and other attributes of a ﬁ rm ' s portfolio of partners affects its performance ( Lavie , 2007 ) . Second , although we show that portfolio diversity in ﬂ uences an investor ' s innovative performance , a lack of innovative outcomes need not imply a failure of the investor ' s CVC program and ﬁ rms may employ CVC investments as a successful , non - knowledge creating , investment strategy . Becausecorporate investors may sometimesinvestin ventures for reasons other than access to new technologies ( Dushnitsky , 2006 ) , they may obtain bene ﬁ ts independent of the effect of CVC portfolios on ﬁ rm innovation . For example , CVC investments may lead to strategic renewal for investors by providing valuable knowledge about new product - and geographic markets . Understanding the conditions under which this occurs is a valuable question for future research . References Ahuja , G . , 2000 . Collaboration networks , structural holes , and innovation : a longitudinal study . Adm . Sci . Q . 45 , 425 – 455 . Ahuja , G . , Katila , R . , 2001 . Technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of acquiring firms : a longitudinal study . Strateg . Manag . J . 22 , 197 – 220 . Ahuja , G . , Lampert , C . M . , 2001 . Entrepreneurship in the large corporation : a longitudinal study of how established firms create breakthrough inventions . Strateg . Manag . J . 22 , 521 – 543 . Ahuja , G . , Lampert , C . M . , Tandon , V . , 2008 . Moving beyond schumpeter : managerial research on the determinants of technological innovation . Acad . Manag . Ann . 2 , 1 – 98 . Aiken , L . S . , West , S . G . , 1991 . Multiple Regression : Testing and Interpreting Interactions . Sage , Newbury Park . Almeida , P . , Phene , A . , 2004 . Subsidiaries and knowledge creation : the influence of the MNC and host country on innovation . Strateg . Manag . J . 25 , 847 – 864 . Amesse , F . , Latour , R . , Rebolledo , C . , Séguin - Dulude , L . , 2004 . The telecommunications equipment industry in the 1990s : from alliances to mergers and acquisitions . Technovation 24 , 885 – 897 . Anand , J . , Oriani , R . , Vassolo , R . S . , 2007 . Managing a portfolio of real options . Adv . Strateg . Manag . 24 . Basu , S . , Phelps , C . , Kotha , S . , 2011 . Towards understanding who makes corporate venture capital investments and why . J . Bus . Ventur . 26 , 153 – 171 . Baum , J . A . C . , Calabrese , T . , Silverman , B . S . , 2000 . Don ' tgoitalone : alliancenetworkcompositionandstartups ' performanceinCanadianbiotechnology . Strateg . Manag . J . 21 , 267 – 294 . Belsley , D . A . , Kuh , E . , Welsch , R . E . , 1980 . Regression Diagnostics : Identifying Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity . John Wiley and Sons , New York . Bonacich , P . , 1987 . Power and centrality : a family of measures . Am . J . Sociol . 92 , 1170 – 1182 . Bourgeois , L . J . , Singh , J . V . , 1983 . Organizational slack and political behavior within top management teams . Acad . Manag . Proc . 43 – 47 . Bryce , D . J . , Winter , S . G . , 2009 . A general interindustry relatedness index . Manag . Sci . 55 , 1570 – 1585 . Cefis , E . , Marsili , O . , 2005 . A matter of life and death : innovation and firm survival . Ind . Corp . Chang . 14 , 1 – 26 . Chesbrough , H . , 2003 . Open Innovation : The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology . Harvard Business School Press , Boston . Cohen , W . M . , Levin , R . C . , 1989 . Innovation and market structure . In : Schmalensee , R . , Willig , R . ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Industrial Organization . Elsevier Science Pub . Co , New York , NY , pp . 1060 – 1107 . Cohen , W . M . , Levinthal , D . A . , 1990 . Absorptive capacity : a new perspective on learning and innovation . Adm . Sci . Q . 35 , 128 – 152 . Cohendet , P . , Meyer - Krahmer , F . , 2001 . The theoretical and policy implications of knowledge codification . Research Policy . 30 , 1563 – 1591 . Cowan , R . , David , P . , Foray , D . , 2000 . The explicit economics of knowledge codification and tacitness . Ind . Corp . Chang . 9 , 211 – 253 . Cui , A . , O ' Connor , G . C . , 2012 . Alliance portfolio resource diversity and firm innovation . J . Mark . Theory Pract . 76 , 24 – 43 . de Leeuw , T . , Lokshin , B . , Duysters , G . , 2014 . Returns to alliance portfolio diversity : the relative effects of partner diversity on firm ' s innovative performance and pro - ductivity . J . Bus . Res . 67 , 1839 – 1849 . Dess , G . G . , Ireland , R . D . , Zahra , S . A . , Floyd , S . W . , Janney , J . J . , Lane , P . J . , 2003 . Emerging issues in corporate entrepreneurship . J . Manag . 29 , 351 – 378 . Dosi , G . , 1988 . Sources , procedures and microeconomic effects of innovation . J . Econ . Lit . XXVI , 1120 – 1171 . Dushnitsky , G . , 2006 . Corporate venture capital : past evidence and future directions . In : Casson , M . , Yeung , B . , Basu , A . , Wadeson , N . ( Eds . ) , Oxford Handbook of En - trepreneurship . Oxford University Press , New York , pp . 387 – 431 . Dushnitsky , G . , Lavie , D . , 2010 . How alliance formation shapes corporate venture capital investment : a resource - based perspective . Strateg . Entrep . J . 4 , 22 – 48 . Dushnitsky , G . , Lenox , M . J . , 2005 . Whendoincumbentslearnfromentrepreneurialventures ? Corporateventurecapitalandinvestingfirminnovationrates . Res . Policy 34 , 615 – 639 . Dushnitsky , G . , Lenox , M . J . , 2006 . When does corporate venture capital investment create firm value ? J . Bus . Ventur . 21 , 753 – 772 . Dushnitsky , G . , Shaver , J . M . , 2009 . Limitationstointerorganizationalknowledgeacquisition : theparadoxofcorporateventurecapital . Strateg . Manag . J . 30 , 1045 – 1064 . Duysters , G . , Lokshin , B . , 2011 . Determinants of alliance portfolio complexity and its effect on innovative performance of companies * . J . Prod . Innov . Manag . 28 , 570 – 585 . Dyer , J . H . , Singh , H . , 1998 . The relational view : cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage . Acad . Manag . Rev . 23 , 660 – 679 . Fleming , L . , 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Manag . Sci . 47 , 117 – 132 . Fleming , L . , Sorenson , O . , 2001 . Technology as a complex adaptive system : evidence from patent data . Res . Policy 30 , 1019 – 1039 . Galunic , D . C . , Rodan , S . , 1998 . Resource recombinations in the firm : knowledge structures and the potential for Schumpeterian innovation . Strateg . Manag . J . 19 , 1193 – 1201 . Garcia - Vega , M . , 2006 . Does technological diversification promote innovation ? An empirical analysis for European firms . Res . Policy 35 , 230 – 246 . 16 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 Gavetti , G . , Levinthal , D . A . , 2000 . Looking forward and looking backward : cognitive and experiential search . Adm . Sci . Q . 45 , 113 – 137 . Goerzen , A . , Beamish , P . W . , 2005 . The effect of alliance network diversity on multinational enterprise performance . Strateg . Manag . J . 36 , 333 – 354 . Greve , H . R . , 2007 . Exploration and exploitation in product innovation . Ind . Corp . Chang . 16 , 945 – 975 . Griliches , Z . , 1990 . Patent statistics as economic indicators . J . Econ . Lit . 28 , 1661 – 1707 . Gujarati , D . N . , 2003 . Basic Econometrics . 4th ed . McGraw - Hill , New York . Hagedoorn , J . , 2002 . Inter - firm R & D partnerships : an overview of major trends and patterns since 1960 . Res . Policy 31 , 477 – 492 . Hagedoorn , J . , Cloodt , M . , 2003 . Measuring innovative performance : is there an advantage in using multiple indicators ? Res . Policy 32 , 1365 – 1379 . Hagedoorn , J . , Narula , R . , 1996 . Choosing organizational modes of strategic technology partnering : international and sectoral differences . J . Int . Bus . Stud . 27 , 265 . Hall , B . H . , 2002 . Anoteonthebiasinherfindahl - typemeasuresbasedoncountdata . In : Jaffe , A . B . , Trajtenberg , M . ( Eds . ) , Patents , Citations , andInnovations . MITPress , Cambridge , MA , pp . 149 – 156 . Hall , B . , Jaffe , A . B . , Trajtenberg , M . , 2001 . TheNBERPatentCitationsDatafile : Lessons , InsightsandMethodologicalTools . WorkingPaper ( http : / / wwwnberorg / papers / w8498 ) . Hall , B . H . , Jaffe , A . , Trajtenberg , M . , 2005 . Market value and patent citations . RAND J . Econ . 36 , 16 – 38 . Hargadon , A . , Sutton , R . I . , 1997 . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development firm . Adm . Sci . Q . 42 , 716 – 749 . Hausman , J . , Hall , B . , Griliches , Z . , 1984 . Econometric models for count data with and application to patents – R & D relationship . Econometrica 52 , 909 – 938 . Heckman , J . J . , 1979 . Sample selection bias as a specification error . Econometrica 47 , 153 – 161 . Henderson , R . , Clark , K . , 1990 . Architectural innovation : the reconfiguration of existing product technologies and failure of established firms . Adm . Sci . Q . 35 , 9 – 30 . Hoehn - Weiss , M . N . , Karim , S . , 2014 . Unpacking functional alliance portfolios : how signals of viability affect young firms ' outcomes . Strateg . Manag . J . 35 , 1364 – 1385 . Hoffmann , W . H . , 2007 . Strategies for managing a portfolio of alliances . Strateg . Manag . J . 28 , 827 – 856 . Hsu , D . H . , Ziedonis , R . H . , 2013 . Resources as dual sources of advantage : implications for valuing entrepreneurial - firm patents . Strateg . Manag . J . 34 , 761 – 781 . Ingram , P . , 2002 . Interorganizational Learning . In : Baum , J . A . C . ( Ed . ) , Companion to Organizations . Blackwell , New York , pp . 642 – 663 . Jaffe , A . B . , 1986 . TechnologicalOpportunityandSpilloversfromR & D : EvidencefromFirms ' Patents , ProfitsandMarketValue . TechnologicalOpportunityandSpillovers from R & D : Evidence from Firms ' Patents , Profits and Market Value . 76 pp . 984 – 1001 . Jensen , M . B . , Johnson , B . , Lorenz , E . , Lundvall , B . A . , 2007 . Forms of knowledge and modes of innovation . Res . Policy 36 , 680 – 693 . Jiang , R . J . , Tao , Q . T . , Santoro , M . D . , 2010 . Alliance portfolio diversity and firm performance . Strateg . Manag . J . 31 , 1136 – 1144 . Kale , P . , Singh , H . , Perlmutter , H . , 2000 . Learning and protection of proprietary assets in strategic alliances : building relational capital . Strateg . Manag . J . 21 , 217 – 237 . Katila , R . , 2000 . In Search of Innovation : Search Determinants of New Product Introductions . University of Texas , Austin , TX , PhD Dissertation . Katila , R . , Ahuja , G . , 2002 . Something old , something new : a longitudinal study of search behavior and new product introduction . Acad . Manag . J . 45 , 1183 – 1194 . Keil , T . , 2004 . Building external corporate venturing capability : initial conditions learning processes and knowledge management . J . Manag . Stud . 41 , 799 – 825 . Keil , T . , Maula , M . V . J . , Schildt , H . A . , Zahra , S . A . , 2008 . The effect of governance modes and relatedness of external business development activities on innovative per - formance . Strateg . Manag . J . 29 , 895 – 907 . Ketchen , D . J . , Ireland , R . D . , Baker , L . T . , 2013 . The use of archival proxies in strategic management studies : castles made of sand ? Organ . Res . Methods 16 , 32 – 42 . Khanna , T . , Gulati , R . , Nohria , N . , 1998 . The dynamics of learning alliances : competition , cooperation , and relative scope . Strateg . Manag . J . 19 , 193 – 210 . Kogut , B . , Zander , U . , 1992 . Knowledge of the firm , combinative capabilities , and the replication of technology . Organ . Sci . 3 , 383 – 397 . Koka , B . R . , Prescott , J . E . , 2008 . Designingalliancenetworks : theinteractingeffects ofenvironmentalchangeandfirmstrategyonallianceperformance . Strateg . Manag . J . 29 , 639 – 661 . Lahiri , N . , 2010 . Geographic distribution of R & D activity : how does it affect innovation quality ? Acad . Manag . J . 53 , 1194 – 1209 . Laursen , K . , 2012 . KeepSearchingandYou ' llFind : WhatDoWe KnowaboutVarietyCreationthroughFirms ' SearchActivitiesforInnovation ? IndustrialandCorporate Change Laursen , K . , Salter , A . , 2006 . Open for innovation : the role of openness in explaining innovative performance among UK manufacturing firms . Strateg . Manag . J . 27 , 131 – 150 . Lavie , D . , 2007 . Alliance portfolios and firm performance : a study of value creation and appropriation in the U . S . software industry . Strateg . Manag . J . 28 , 1187 – 1212 . Lavie , D . , Rosenkopf , R . , 2006 . Balancing exploration and exploitation in alliance formation . Acad . Manag . J . 49 , 797 – 818 . Lavie , D . , Stettner , U . , Tushman , M . L . , 2010 . Exploration and exploitation within and across organizations . Acad . Manag . Ann . 4 , 109 – 155 . Lee , D . , Kirkpatrick - Husk , K . , Madhavan , R . , 2014 . Diversity in alliance portfolios and performance outcomes : a meta - analysis . J . Manag . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0149206314556316 . Leonard - Barton , D . , 1995 . Wellsprings of Knowledge : Building and Sustaining the Sources of Innovation . HArvard Business School Press , Cambridge , MA . Levin , R . C . , Klevorick , A . K . , Nelson , R . R . , Winter , S . G . , 1987 . Appropriating the returns from industrial research and development . Brook . Pap . Econ . Act . 3 , 783 – 820 . Levinthal , D . A . , Wu , B . , 2010 . Opportunity costs and non - scale free capabilities : profit maximization , corporate scope , and profit margins . Strateg . Manag . J . 31 , 780 – 801 . Lin , S . - J . , Lee , J . - R . , 2011 . Configuringacorporateventuringportfoliotocreategrowthvalue : within - portfoliodiversityandstrategiclinkage . J . Bus . Ventur . 26 , 489 – 503 . Long , C . , 2002 . Patent signals . Univ . Chic . Law Rev . 69 , 625 – 679 . Lubatkin , M . , Florin , J . , Lane , P . , 2001 . Learning together and apart : a model of reciprocal interfirm learning . Hum . Relat . 54 , 1353 . Luo , X . , Deng , L . , 2009 . Do birds of a feather flock higher ? The effects of partner similarity on innovation in strategic alliances in knowledge - intensive industries . J . Manag . Stud . 46 , 1005 – 1030 . MacMillan , I . , Roberts , E . , Livada , V . , Wang , A . , 2008 . Corporate venture capital ( CVC ) : seeking innovation and strategic growth . National Institute of Standards and Technology . U . S . Department of Commerce ( NIST GCR 08 - 916 ) . Maula , M . , 2007 . Corporate venture capital as a strategic tool . In : Landstrom , H . ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Research on Venture Capital . Edward Elgar Publishing , UK ( pp . ) . Maula , M . V . J . , Autio , E . , Murray , G . C . , 2009 . Corporate venture capital and the balance of risks and rewards for portfolio companies . J . Bus . Ventur . 24 , 274 – 286 . Mouri , N . , Sarkar , M . B . , Frye , M . , 2012 . Allianceportfoliosandshareholdervalueinpost - IPOfirms : themoderatingrolesofportfoliostructureandfirm - leveluncertain - ty . J . Bus . Ventur . 27 , 355 – 371 . Myrick , T . , 1986 . Conflicting Guidance : Will Accounting Rules Impair Corporate Venture Capital ? FE : The Magazine for Financial Executives , pp . 34 – 36 Nahapiet , J . , Ghoshal , S . , 1998 . Social capital , intellectual capital and the organizational advantage . Acad . Manag . Rev . 23 , 242 – 266 . Nohria , N . , Gulati , R . , 1996 . Is slack good or bad for performance ? Acad . Manag . J . 39 , 1245 – 1264 . Ozcan , P . , Eisenhardt , K . M . , 2009 . Origin of alliance portfolios : entrepreneurs , network strategies , and firm performance . Acad . Manag . J . 52 , 246 – 279 . Pavitt , K . , 1988 . Uses and abuses of patent statistics . In : Raan , A . F . J . v . ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Quanitative Studies of Science and Technology . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 509 – 536 . Phelps , C . C . , 2010 . A longitudinal study of the influence of alliance network structure and composition on firm exploratory innovation . Acad . Manag . J . 53 , 890 – 913 . Phelps , C . , Heidl , R . , Wadhwa , A . , 2012 . Knowledge , networks , and knowledge networks : a review and research agenda . J . Manag . 38 , 1115 – 1166 . Powell , W . W . , Koput , K . W . , Smith - Doerr , L . , 1996 . Interorganizationalcollaborationandthelocusofinnovation : networksoflearninginbiotechnology . Adm . Sci . Q . 41 , 116 – 145 . Roberts , P . W . , 1999 . Product innovation , product - market competition and persistent profitability in the U . S . pharmaceutical industry . Strateg . Manag . J . 20 , 655 – 670 . Rodan , S . , Galunic , C . , 2004 . Morethannetworkstructure : howknowledgeheterogeneityinfluencesmanagerialperformanceandinnovativeness . Strateg . Manag . J . 25 , 541 – 556 . Salomon , R . , Martin , X . , 2008 . Learning , knowledgetransfer , andtechnologyimplementationperformance : astudyoftime - to - buildintheglobalsemiconductorindus - try . Manag . Sci . 54 , 1266 – 1280 . Sampson , R . C . , 2007 . R & D alliances and firm performance : the impact of technological diversity and alliance organization on innovation . Acad . Manag . J . 50 , 364 – 386 . Sarkar , M . , Aulakh , P . S . , Madhok , A . , 2009 . Process capabilities and value generation in alliance portfolios . Organ . Sci . 20 , 583 – 600 . Schildt , H . , Maula , M . V . J . , Keil , T . , 2005 . Explorative and exploitative learning from external corporate ventures . Enterp . Theory Pract . 29 , 493 – 515 . Schilling , M . A . , Green , E . , 2011 . Recombinant search and breakthrough idea generation : an analysis of high impact papers in the social sciences . Res . Policy 40 , 1321 – 1331 . 17 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006 Schmoch , U . , Schnoring , T . , 1994 . Technological strategies of telecommunications equipment manufacturers - A patent analysis . Telecommun . Policy 18 , 397 – 413 . Shan , W . , Walker , G . , Kogut , B . , 1994 . Interfirm cooperation and startup innovation in the biotechnology industry . Strateg . Manag . J . 15 , 387 – 394 . Simonton , D . K . , 1999 . Origins of genius . Oxford University Press , New York . Smith , S . W . , Shah , S . K . , 2013 . Do innovative users generate more useful insights ? Ananalysisof corporate venture capital investments in the medical device industry . Strateg . Entrep . J . 7 , 151 – 167 . Sorensen , J . B . , Stuart , T . E . , 2000 . Aging , obsolescence , and organizational innovation . Adm . Sci . Q . 45 , 81 – 112 . Srivastava , M . K . , Gnyawali , D . R . , 2011 . Whendorelationalresourcesmatter ? Leveragingportfoliotechnologicalresourcesforbreakthroughinnovation . Acad . Manag . J . 54 , 797 – 810 . Stinchcombe , A . L . , 1965 . Social structure and organizations . In : March , J . G . ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Organizations . Rand - McNally , Chicago , pp . 142 – 193 . Stirling , A . , 2007 . A general framework for analysing diversity in science , technology and society . J . R . Soc . Interface 4 , 707 – 719 . Stuart , T . E . , 1998 . Networkpositionsandpropensitiestocollaborate : aninvestigationofstrategicallianceformationinahigh - technologyindustry . Adm . Sci . Q . 43 , 668 . Stuart , T . E . , 2000 . Interorganizational alliances and the performance of firms : a study of growth and innovation rates in a high - technology industry . Strateg . Manag . J . 21 , 791 – 811 . Stuart , T . , Podolny , J . , 1996 . Local search and the evolution of technological capabilities . Strateg . Manag . J . 17 , 21 – 38 . Stuart , T . E . , Hoang , H . , Hybels , R . C . , 1999 . Interorganizational endorsements and the performance of entrepreneurial ventures . Adm . Sci . Q . 44 , 315 – 349 . Tallman , S . , Phene , A . , 2007 . Leveraging knowledge across geographic boundaries . Organ . Sci . 18 , 252 – 260 . Teece , D . J . , Pisano , G . , Shuen , A . , 1997 . Dynamic capabilities and strategic management . Strateg . Manag . J . 18 , 509 – 533 . Trajtenberg , M . , 1987 . Patents , citations , and innovations : tracing the links . Working paper no . 2457 . National Bureau of Economic Research , Washington , D . C . Trajtenberg , M . , 1990 . A penny for your quotes : patent citations and the value of innovations . RAND J . Econ . 21 , 172 – 187 . VandeVrande , V . , 2013 . Balancingyourtechnology - sourcingportfolio : howsourcingmodediversityenhancesinnovativeperformance . Strateg . Manag . J . 34 , 509 – 633 . vandeVrande , V . , Vanhaverbeke , W . , Duysters , G . , 2009 . External technologysourcing : theeffectofuncertainty on governance modechoice . J . Bus . Ventur . 24 , 62 – 80 . Vassolo , R . S . , Anand , J . , Folta , T . B . , 2004 . Portfolio effect in real options : the case of equity alliances in biotechnology . Strateg . Manag . J . 25 , 1045 – 1061 . Vasudeva , G . , Anand , J . , 2011 . Unpacking absorptive capacity : a study of knowledge utilization from alliance portfolios . Acad . Manag . J . 54 , 611 – 623 . vonHayek , F . , 1945 . Theuseofknowledgeinsociety . TechnologicalopportunityandspilloversfromR & D : evidencefromfirms ' patents , profitsandmarketvalue . xxxv pp . 519 – 530 . Wadhwa , A . , Kotha , S . B . , 2006 . Knowledge creation through external venturing : evidence from the telecommunications equipment manufacturing industry . Acad . Manag . J . 49 , 819 – 835 . Wassmer , U . , 2010 . Alliance portfolios : a review and research agenda . J . Manag . 36 , 141 – 171 . Weitzman , M . , 1998 . Recombinant growth . Q . J . Econ . 113 , 331 – 360 . West , J . , Bogers , M . , 2014 . Leveraging external sources of innovation : a review of research on open innovation . J . Prod . Innov . Manag . 31 , 814 – 831 . Wuyts , S . , Dutta , S . , 2012 . Benefiting from alliance portfolio diversity : the role of past internal knowledge creation strategy . J . Manag . 40 , 1653 – 1674 . Wuyts , S . , Dutta , S . , Stremersch , S . , 2004 . Portfoliosofinterfirmagreementsintechnology - intensivemarkets : consequencesforinnovationandprofitability . J . Mark . 68 , 88 – 100 . Yang , H . , Phelps , C . , Steensma , H . K . , 2010 . Learning from what others have learned from you : the effects of knowledge spillovers on originating firms . Acad . Manag . J . 53 , 371 – 389 . Yang , Y . , Narayanan , V . K . , DeCarolis , D . M . , 2014 . Therelationshipbetweenportfoliodiversificationandfirmvalue : theevidencefromcorporateventurecapitalactivity . Strateg . Manag . J . 35 1993 - 2011 . Zhao , Z . J . , Anand , J . , 2009 . A multilevel perspective on knowledge transfer : evidence from the Chinese automotive industry . Strateg . Manag . J . 30 , 959 – 983 . Ziedonis , A . , 2007 . Real options in technology licensing . Manag . Sci . 53 , 157 – 172 . Zollo , M . , Winter , S . G . , 2002 . Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities . Organ . Sci . 13 , 339 – 351 . 18 A . Wadhwa et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Wadhwa , A . , et al . , Corporate venture capital portfolios and ﬁ rm innovation , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2015 . 04 . 006