© 2017 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd . EFA6 regulates lumen formation through alpha - actinin 1 Julie Milanini 1 , Racha Fayad 1 , Mariagrazia Partisani 1 , Patrick Lecine 2 , 3 , Jean - Paul Borg 2 , Michel Franco 1 & Frédéric Luton 1 1 Université Côte d ' Azur , CNRS , Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire ( IPMC ) , Valbonne , France 2 Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille ( CRCM ) , " Cell Polarity , Cell Signalling and Cancer " , Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer , Inserm U1068 , Marseille , F - 13009 , France ; CNRS , UMR7258 , Marseille , F - 13009 , France ; Institut Paoli - Calmettes , Marseille , F - 13009 , France ; Aix - Marseille University , UM105 , Marseille , F - 13284 , France . 3 present address : BIOASTER , Lyon , France Corresponding author : luton @ ipmc . cnrs . fr Keywords : Epithelium , lumen , EFA6 , ACTN1 , contractility Summary statement : EFA6 , Exchange Factor for Arf6 , controls epithelial luminogenesis by recruiting ACTN1 and regulating acto - myosin contractility . In addition , the signaling pathway EFA6 / ACTN1 rescues the epithelial phenotype of mammary tumoral cells . Abstract A key step of epithelial morphogenesis is the creation of the lumen . Luminogenesis by hollowing proceeds through the fusion of apical vesicles at cell - cell contact . The small nascent lumens grow through extension , coalescence and enlargement coordinated with cell division to give rise to a single central lumen . Here , using MDCK cells grown in 3D - culture , we show that EFA6A participates in luminogenesis . EFA6A recruits  - actinin 1 ( ACTN1 ) through direct binding . In polarized cells , ACTN1 was found to be enriched at the tight junction where it acts as a primary effector of EFA6A for normal luminogenesis . Both proteins are essential for the lumen extension and enlargement , where they mediate their effect by regulating the cortical acto - myosin contractility . Finally , ACTN1 was also found to act as an effector for the isoform EFA6B in the human mammary tumoral MCF7 cell line . EFA6B restored the glandular morphology of this tumoral cell line in an ACTN1 - dependent manner . Thus , we identified new regulators of cyst luminogenesis essential for the proper maturation of a newly - formed lumen into a single central lumen . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t JCS Advance Online Article . Posted on 15 December 2017 Introduction During organogenesis , the coordinated establishment of the apico - basal polarity with the de novo formation of an apical luminal space is fundamental to the emergence of the different types of epithelia . In adult organisms , the aptitude of the internal organs , which are lined with epithelial tissues , to ensure specific functions relies on the preservation of these characteristics . The failure in doing so is associated with a large variety of diseases ( Blasky et al . , 2015 ; Datta et al . , 2011 ; Sigurbjornsdottir et al . , 2014 ) . In particular , these features are often compromised in carcinomas and tumors are formed of non - polarized cell aggregates incapable of collectively organizing a lumen ( Martin - Belmonte and Perez - Moreno , 2011 ; Tanos and Rodriguez - Boulan , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2012 ) . However , compelling tumoral cells to maintain their normal epithelial phenotype can help them override the power of oncogenes ( DuFort et al . , 2011 ; Weaver et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , it is important to decipher the molecular programs that instruct epithelial cells to collectively organize around lumens in order to maintain their physiological homeostasis . For most epithelial tissues , the de novo formation of a lumen is generated by hollowing . In this process , apical vesicles are delivered to a focal point of the cell - cell contact named AMIS ( apical membrane initiation site ) to give rise to the apical plasma membrane and a facing hollow the cavity . The nascent lumen appears first as a closed elongated space named PAP ( pre - apical patch ) limited by the tight junctions . The PAP will then open and expand by a combination of events : the delivery of vesicular membranes , the repulsion of the apposed membrane by highly charged molecules , the increase of hydrostatic pressure , the coalescence of mini - lumens , and eventually , expansion through cell division . This process is closely synchronized with a profound rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton into discrete structures essential for the attachment of structural and signaling apical proteins . These proteins will then yield a scaffold to shape the lumen and form an acto - myosin ring in support of the circumferential apical junctional complexes ( AJC ) , which are made of adherens junctions ( AJ ) and the apical tight junctions ( TJ ) that outline the luminal space ( Datta et al . , 2011 ; Sigurbjornsdottir et al . , 2014 ) . The organization and functions of the acto - myosin ring attached to the AJ have been extensively studied ( Arnold et al . , 2017 ; Braga , 2016 ; Grikscheit and Grosse , 2016 ; Lecuit and Yap , 2015 ) , however far less is known regarding the actin cytoskeleton associated to the TJ . Nevertheless , it is likely that both structures are somehow intermingled within the so - called apical perijunctional acto - myosin ring ( PAMR ) ( Ebrahim et al . , 2013 ; Sluysmans et al . , 2017 ) . The PAMR is described as a sarcomeric - like belt made of F - actin bundles containing myosin - II that confers contractile properties , and bundling proteins , such as the non - muscle alpha - actinins , that stiffen the J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t structure . The balance of both activities is believed to determine the flexibility of this belt , its mechanosensitivity , and the tension forces exerted on the cell surface ( Foley and Young , 2014 ; Martin and Goldstein , 2014 ; Murrell et al . , 2015 ; Roper , 2015 ) . The existence of a central apical acto - myosin network with radial contractility has also been reported ( Coravos and Martin , 2016 ) . The alpha - actinin ( ACTN ) family comprises four members , the muscle ACTN2 and ACTN3 and the non - muscle ACTN1 and ACTN4 expressed in most of the other cell types . They share a common primary structure with a N - terminal actin - binding domain ( ABD ) and a C - terminal calmodulin - like domain ( CAMD ) separated by a central repeat of four spectrin - like domains ( SRD ) . ACTN molecules form antiparallel dimers through their rigid SRD allowing for the cross - linking of actin filaments by the ABD positioned on either end . In comparison with the filamin proteins , which orthogonally cross - link actin filaments , non - muscle ACTNs form linear F - actin bundles which increase the stiffness ( Jahed et al . , 2014 ; Stossel et al . , 2001 ) . They are believed to contribute to myosin - II - driven contractility by facilitating force transmission ( Le Clainche and Carlier , 2008 ) . ACTN also acts as a mechanical linker between actin filaments and cell - cell and cell - ECM adhesion complexes . Besides its structural roles , ACTN could also serve to couple actin nucleation to assembly at cell - cell contacts ( Tang and Brieher , 2012 ) and contribute to the maturation of cell - ECM focal adhesion by transmitting mechanical forces ( Iskratsch et al . , 2014 ; Jahed et al . , 2014 ; Parsons et al . , 2010 ; Ye et al . , 2014 ) . Both ACTN1 and ACTN4 were found at the apical acto - myosin ring in association with the AJ ( Honda et al . , 1998 ; Tang and Brieher , 2012 ) , whereas a few studies suggested a link with the TJ ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Geiger et al . , 1979 ; Nakatsuji et al . , 2008 ) . Nevertheless , the repertoire of ACTN molecules associated to the various F - actin structures is poorly defined and is made even more complex by the existence of ACTN1 - ACTN4 heterodimers ( Foley and Young , 2013 ) . Moreover , it is not completely clear how ACTN is recruited to cell - cell contacts . Thus , much remains to be discovered about the role of ACTN at the AJC as well as its role during luminogenesis . Small G proteins of the Rho family and their partners are key regulators in the assembly and maintenance of the PAMR . In particular , RhoA contributes to the constitution of the contractile apical acto - myosin array through the localization and activation of the formin proteins and the activation of the motor protein myosin - II by its effector ROCK ( Rho - associated coiled - coil kinase ) ( Arnold et al . , 2017 ; Quiros and Nusrat , 2014 ; Sluysmans et al . , 2017 ; Takeichi , 2014 ) . Tension forces are necessary for the establishment and functioning of the AJC , as they support the changes in cell shape occurring during epithelial morphogenesis ( Coravos et al . , 2017 ; Lecuit and Yap , 2015 ; Takeichi , 2014 ) . Yet , how contractility and its regulators are impacting epithelial cell luminogenesis is an issue of ongoing debate . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Another small G protein that regulates the cortical cytoskeleton is the ADP - ribosylation Factor 6 ( Arf6 ) . It plays a pivotal role in a wide variety of cellular events including cell surface trafficking , phagocytosis , cell - cell adhesion , and tumor cell migration and invasion ( D ' Souza - Schorey and Chavrier , 2006 ; Gillingham and Munro , 2007 ; Jaworski , 2007 ; Sabe et al . , 2009 ; Schweitzer et al . , 2011 ) . In epithelia cells , Arf6 was initially shown to regulate vesicular trafficking to the apical pole of the cell ( Altschuler et al . , 1999 ) and later to impact the turnover of the AJ ( Palacios et al . , 2001 ; Palacios et al . , 2002 ; Palacios et al . , 2005 ) , the establishment of the TJ ( Klein et al . , 2008 ; Luton et al . , 2004 ) , the cyst morphogenesis ( Tushir et al . , 2010 ) and the HGF - induced tubulogenesis ( Tushir and D ' Souza - Schorey , 2007 ) . Consistent with these observations , the exchange factor for Arf6 ( EFA6 ) was found enriched at the apical pole and at the TJ in fully polarized MDCK cells ( Luton et al . , 2004 ) . During early epithelial polarization , EFA6 is recruited upon E - cadherin engagement at cell - cell contact where it contributes to the formation of the TJ by stabilizing the apical acto - myosin ring ( Theard et al . , 2010 ) . Expression of EFA6B in the mammary tumoral MCF7 cell line restored a normal glandular phenotype with the formation of lumens delineated by TJs . Conversely , knock - down of EFA6B expression drives various mammary cell lines into epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . In breast cancer patients , the loss of EF6AB expression is associated with the claudin - low subtype characterized by the loss of expression of all the TJ components and a poor prognosis ( Zangari et al . , 2014 ) . The EFA6 family consists of four isoforms ( EFA6A - D ) sharing a general structure that comprises a variable N - terminal domain , a catalytic Sec7 domain bearing the nucleotide exchange activity , a PH domain responsible for their plasma membrane localization and a conserved C - terminal region involved in actin cytoskeleton rearrangement ( Derrien et al . , 2002 ; Franco et al . , 1999 ; Sakagami , 2008 ; Sironi et al . , 2009 ) . In a previous study , we found that mutations that abolish the nucleotide exchange activity or delete the C - terminal domain abrogated the stimulatory effects of EFA6 indicating that both Arf6 activation and the C - terminal domain are necessary for epithelial polarization ( Luton et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , complementation experiments demonstrated a finely tuned cooperation between the two signaling pathways associated to the activated Arf6 and to the EFA6 C - terminus ( Klein et al . , 2008 ) . In this study , we aimed to determine the signaling pathway associated to EFA6 C - terminus that contributes to its action on epithelial morphogenesis . Our data showed that : 1 ) ACTN1 is a direct partner of EFA6A C - terminal domain , 2 ) EFA6A is a crucial regulator of luminogenesis for which J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ACTN1 is the major effector , 3 ) together , they stimulate the formation and enlargement of a single lumen with a proper round shape , 4 ) they act by regulating cortical acto - myosin contractility , and finally 5 ) ACTN1 is also a partner of the EFA6B isoform in the promotion of lumen formation in the mammary tumoral cells MCF7 . Results EFA6A binds directly to ACTN1 Looking for functional partners of EFA6A in epithelial cells , we performed a two - hybrid screen of an epithelial library using the carboxy - terminus ( Cter ) of EFA6A as a bait and identified ACTN1 as the major interacting protein . A similar result was found in a previous screen using a neuronal library by Sakagami et al . ( Sakagami et al . , 2007 ) . A pull - down assay was used to confirm that the Cter of EFA6A could bind the exogenously expressed ACTN1 - GFP ( Fig . 1A ) . We then further characterized this interaction by assessing whether the two proteins could bind directly . We found that both Gst - ACTN1 and Gst - ACTN4 could pull - down the full - length His - EFA6A ( Fig . 1B ) , and that the central spectrin repeats domain ( SRD ) of ACTN1 binds directly to His - EFA6A ( Fig . 1C ) . In BHK cells , GFP - EFA6A co - immunoprecipitated the endogenous ACTN1 ( Fig . 1D ) , and myc - EFA6A re - localized the endogenous ACTN1 to F - actin - enriched lamellipodia as well as to the cell surface microspikes induced by myc - EFA6A ( Fig . 1E , ( Derrien et al . , 2002 ; Macia et al . , 2008 ) . We concluded that in vitro ACTN and EFA6A can bind directly , through their respective spectrin and C - terminal domains , and that in vivo EFA6A can recruit the endogenous ACTN1 to cortical F - actin structures . In agreement with our previous reports ( Luton et al . , 2004 ; Theard et al . , 2010 ; Zangari et al . , 2014 ) , during lumen formation mRFP - EFA6A was transiently found enriched at the AMIS and opened PAP before its expression at the apical surface decreased to the low level found in mature cyst ( Fig . S1A ) . We also examined the localization of ACTN1 and ACTN4 in polarized cysts of MDCK cells . ACTN1 - GFP was diffused within the cytoplasm and enriched at the apex of cell - cell junctions ( Fig . S1A ) . Co - localization of ACTN1 - GFP with occludin ( Fig . 1F , a - a ' ' ) indicated its accumulation at the TJ . In contrast , ACTN4 - GFP was not consistently observed at the TJ above the level of the GFP control ( Fig . S1A and Fig . 1F , c - c ' ' ) . In addition , ACTN1 - GFP was found enriched at the nascent lumen formed in between two cells and its surrounding TJ ( Fig . 1F , b - b ' ' ) , whereas ACTN4 - GFP was found on the newly - formed luminal membrane and also enriched along the cell - cell contact ( Fig . 1F , d - d ' ' ) . Later , in mature cysts , ACTN4 - GFP appeared more enriched in AJ stained for E - cadherin ( Fig . S1B ) . Given the enrichment of ACTN1 at the TJ , we focused our study on the importance of its role as an effector of EFA6 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t EFA6A recruits ACTN1 in a regulated manner EFA6A and ACTN1 are cortical actin regulators and both partially localize to the TJ in polarized epithelial cells , we thus investigated the mechanism of their direct interaction . ACTN1 could serve as a receptor to recruit EFA6A to the TJ . However , EFA6A localization to the plasma membrane was shown to rely on its PIP2 - specific PH domain and its capacity to bind to F - actin ( Macia et al . , 2008 ) . Furthermore , the EFA6A mutant deleted of its C - terminus , which no longer binds ACTN1 , was shown to localize at the plasma membrane similarly to the full - length protein ( Franco et al . , 1999 ; Macia et al . , 2008 ) . In contrast , as shown above ( Fig . 1E ) ACTN1 was re - localized to myc - EFA6A - induced membrane ruffles suggesting that ACTN1 could be used as an effector of EFA6A to remodel the cortical actin cytoskeleton . To further analyze the binding of ACTN1 to EFA6A and its functional properties in living cells , we ectopically expressed EFA6A away from the plasma membrane . We fused EFA6A to the mitochondrial targeting peptide ActA and determined if EFA6A - ActA was capable of re - localizing the endogenous ACTN1 to the outer membrane of mitochondria from which it is normally absent . Since ACTN1 binds to the C - terminal domain of EFA6A we first studied the EFA6ACter fused to ActA named hereafter EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA . As previously observed by others , depending on the expression rate and construct used , in cells transfected with ActA chimeras the mitochondrial network tend to aggregate around the nucleus ( Bubeck et al . , 1997 ; Moeller et al . , 2004 ; Reinhard et al . , 1999 ; Zhang et al . , 2009 ) . Nevertheless , all constructs localized to the mitochondria as assessed by co - localization with the mitochondrial protein Hsp60 ( Fig . S2A ) . When expressed in BHK cells , EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA localized to the mitochondria ( Fig . S2A ) and recruited endogenous ACTN1 ( Fig . 2A and magnification Fig . S2B ) . In contrast , the control mRFP - ActA construct which also localized to the mitochondria ( Fig . S2A ) did not recruit ACTN1 ( Fig . 2A ) . Interestingly , the full - length EFA6A - mRFP - ActA localized to the mitochondria ( Fig . S2A ) but did not re - localize ACTN1 ( Fig . 2A ) . This observation suggests that in the full - length EFA6A the Cter was not available for ACTN1 binding . Our previous work indicates that EFA6A exists in a closed conformation where the Cter is folded back onto the PH domain preventing its association with the C - terminus of  - arrestin1 another EFA6ACter ligand ( Macia et al . , 2012 ) . To test whether the EFA6A - mRFP - ActA was in a locked conformation we co - expressed  - arrestin1 - Cter - GFP with EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA or the full - length EFA6A - mRFP - ActA constructs . Similarly to ACTN1 ,  - arrestin1 - Cter - GFP could only bind to EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA ( Fig . 2B ) indicating that the binding of ACTN1 to EFA6A is regulated , and requires the release of its C - terminal domain . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Some F - actin staining was observed co - localized together with EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA and the endogenous ACTN1 at the mitochondria ( Fig . 2A and magnification Fig . S2B ) . When the cells were treated with Latrunculin A , F - actin was absent from the mitochondria where the endogenous ACTN1 was still efficiently recruited by EFA6CterActA ( Fig . 2C ) . Thus , independently of the presence of F - actin , EFA6A can recruit directly ACTN1 which in turn might function as an effector to organize EFA6A - regulated actin - based structures . Depletion of ACTN1 inhibits EFA6A - induced normal luminogenesis We have previously shown that vsvg - EFA6A expression stimulates apical polarity development and TJ formation in MDCK cells ( Klein et al . , 2008 ; Luton et al . , 2004 ) . To assess the role of ACTN1 as an effector of EFA6A , we analyzed the effects of its down - regulation in cells grown in a 3D - culture system in Matrigel . Several siRNA against ACTN1 were tested for their efficiency to down - regulate its expression ( Fig . S3A ) . ACTN1 knock - down was carried out in MDCK - vsvg - EFA6A in which the expression of vsvg - EFA6A is under the control of the tetracycline - repressible transactivator ( Luton et al . , 2004 ) . Fig . 3A is a representative immunoblot analysis of ACTN1 depletion and vsvg - EFA6A expression in the presence or absence of doxycycline . We first examined whether EFA6A overexpression stimulated epithelial polarity of MDCK cells grown in Matrigel over three days . Cysts of homogenous size ( from 4 to 15 cells ) were analyzed for the formation of one or multiple lumens and for their shape . They were characterized for extension and expansion . Extension refers to the opening of the lumen to all the cells of the aggregates , while expansion refers to the enlargement of the luminal space . Upon vsvg - EFA6A expression ( - Dox . ) we observed an increase in the formation of cysts displaying a single central lumen ( SCL ) . In addition , the luminal space became more round with an almost doubling ( from 23 % to 40 % ) of SCL displaying a round shape upon vsvg - EFA6A expression ( Fig . 3B , shaded bars and upper right panel ) . In contrast , depletion of ACTN1 in control conditions ( + Dox . ) reduced the number of cysts with SCL and severely altered the shape of the lumen such that the lumens adopted an " octopus - like " shape with a small central opening from which closed or barely opened luminal extensions reached in between the cells ( Fig . 3B , shaded bars and lower left panel ) . Depletion of ACTN1 in cells expressing vsvg - EFA6A also impaired enlargement of the lumens although the opening was more visible ( Fig . 3B , shaded bars and bottom right panel ) . Thus , ACTN1 is required for the stimulatory effects found for EFA6A on the SCL formation and on the rounding of the luminal space of multicellular cysts . However , in all conditions the cells remained well polarized as indicated by the correct localization of the apical ( PDX ) and basolateral ( E - cadherin ) markers ( Fig . S3B ) , by the basal positioning of the nuclei , the general F - actin organization and the apical assembly of the TJ ( Fig . 3B ) . To control the fact that the siACTN1 - induced phenotypes were due to ACTN1 depletion we carried out a rescue experiment . MDCK cells J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t expressing an ACTN1 - GFP which is insensitive to the siACTN1 ( ACTN1S744 - GFP ) did not display any defect in lumen formation upon depletion of the endogenous ACTN1 ( Fig . 3C ) . The loss of cysts with SCL in the ACTN1 - depleted cells was counterbalanced by an increase of cell aggregates with multiple lumens and others with incomplete extension to all the cells ( Fig . 3D , see Materials and methods ) . In both cases , the lumens displayed the distorted octopus - like shape . The extension defect was further reflected by a strong increase in the number of aggregates displaying multiple lumens only opened in between two cells ( hereafter called mini - lumens ) that were often blocked at the PAP stage with no visible opening ( Fig . 3E ) , which suggests that ACTN1 depletion might favor the early formation of an initial lumen . Vsvg - EFA6A expression did not significantly alter the phenotypic changes imposed upon ACTN1 - depletion , however it stimulated the enlargement and rounding of the mini - lumens blocked at the two - cell stage ( Fig . 3E , right panel ) . Thus , in contrast to mature lumens EFA6A can stimulate the volumetric enlargement of nascent mini - lumens in an ACTN1 - independent manner . Altogether , these observations suggest that ACTN1 is dispensable for the formation of the initial lumen in between two cells but is required later on for its extension and enlargement ( see Discussion section for further comments ) . In summary , depletion of ACTN1 blocked both effects of vsvg - EFA6A on luminogenesis : the formation of fully extended SCL and their expansion as regular round lumen . It suggests that ACTN1 acts as an effector downstream of EFA6A important for luminogenesis . ACTN1 acts as an effector of EFA6A to promote normal luminogenesis If EFA6A controls luminogenesis and ACTN1 acts as an effector , then EFA6A depletion should hamper luminogenesis , and when combined with ACTN1 depletion there should have no additional effect . MDCK - vsvg - EFA6A grown in the absence or presence of doxycycline were submitted to siEFA6A - , siACTN1 - or simultaneous siEFA6A and siACTN1 - mediated depletion . The efficient knock - down of the indicated proteins and the induction of the expression of vsvg - EFA6A were analyzed by immunoblot ( Fig . 4A and Fig . S4 ) . Depletion of the endogenous EFA6A was accompanied by a reduction in the amount of cell aggregates with a SCL demonstrating that EFA6A is required for luminogenesis ( Fig . 4B ) . Expression of the exogenous human vsvg - EFA6A , which is insensitive to the canine specific siRNA , rescued the normal phenotype , thus controlling for the specificity of EFA6A knock - down ( Fig . 4B ) . As shown in Fig . 3 , ACTN1 depletion hampered luminogenesis and blocked the vsvg - EFA6A stimulation . However , ACTN1 depletion did not have any additional effect when the endogenous EFA6A was knocked - down ( Fig . 4B ) . Also , the exogenous expression of vsvg - EFA6A in the double knocked - down cells could not rescue the normal phenotype ( Fig . 4B ) . In addition , we analyzed the consequences on the lumen formation of expressing a mutant of EFA6A deleted of its C - terminus ( EFA6A  C ) which contains the J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ACTN1 binding site . Expression of vsvg - EFA6A  C impaired normal luminogenesis and caused the formation of lumens with an octopus - like shape ( Fig . 4C ) . Although the C - terminus of EFA6A likely interacts with other molecules , it is important to note that its truncation generated lumens with shapes similar to those observed in ACTN1 - depleted cells . Altogether , these observations indicate that EFA6A mediates luminogenesis in MDCK cells by which ACTN1 is a crucial effector . ACTN1 is an effector of EFA6B to induce luminogenesis in the breast cancer cells MCF7 We have reported that the EFA6B isoform is an antagonist to breast cancer development ( Zangari et al . , 2014 ) . The tumoral MCF7 cells grown in 3D - culture systems form compact aggregates with no lumen ( Han et al . , 2010 ; Kenny et al . , 2007 ) . The exogenous expression of vsvg - EFA6B in the tumoral MCF7 cells restores an epithelial phenotype characterized by the appearance of aggregates with extended lumens ( although not often SCL ) , delineated by functional TJs ( Zangari et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , we asked whether ACTN1 was required downstream of EFA6B to contribute to luminogenesis in MCF7 cells . We first verified that ACTN1 could also bind to the EFA6B isoform ( Fig . S5 ) . Next , we analyzed the effect of ACTN1 depletion in both control MCF7 and MCF7 - vsvg - EFA6B cells grown in Matrigel . The immunoblot analysis demonstrated the efficient knock - down of ACTN1 in both cell lines ( Fig . 5A ) . We quantified the number of aggregates with extended lumens opened to at least four cells , as opposed to mini - lumens opened only in between two cells . As previously reported , MCF7 control cells do not form cysts with lumens ( Han et al . , 2010 ; Kenny et al . , 2007 ; Zangari et al . , 2014 ) , whereas exogenous expression of vsvg - EFA6B induced the formation of cysts with extended lumens ( Fig . 5B and ( Zangari et al . , 2014 ) ) . We observed that ACTN1 depletion blocked the formation of extended lumens induced by EFA6B indicating that in MCF7 cells ACTN1 is also a crucial effector of EFA6B - induced lumen formation ( Fig . 5B ) . In addition , although control MCF7 cell aggregates did not form extended lumens , in about 20 % of the aggregates one or several mini - lumens were observed ( Fig . 5C , D ) . Upon ACTN1 depletion the number of these mini - lumens increased in both MCF7 cell lines . However , in vsvg - EFA6B aggregates the luminal space was enlarged while in MCF7 controls cells the mini - lumens were seen as PAPs ( Fig . 5C , D ) . Thus , similarly to what we had observed in MDCK cells , ACTN1 depletion facilitates the initial lumen formation in between two cells but then hampers both extension and enlargement . EFA6A and ACTN1 control apical contractility contributing to luminogenesis The PAMR and ventral stress fibers ( SF ) are sarcomere - like actin - based structures capable of contractility implicated in epithelial morphogenesis . Contractile actin - bundles are formed by aligned fibers cross - linked by a periodic distribution of ACTN that alternates with myosin - II ( Burridge and J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Wittchen , 2013 ; Sluysmans et al . , 2017 ) . RhoA and its effectors ( ROCK and mDia1 ) have been recognized as major regulators of the contractile properties of the acto - myosin cytoskeletons ( Arnold et al . , 2017 ; Quiros and Nusrat , 2014 ; Sluysmans et al . , 2017 ; Takeichi , 2014 ) . Thus , we tested the possibility that EFA6A and ACTN1 regulate luminogenesis by contributing to the PAMR contractility . First , we used an antibody directed against the phosphorylated MLC ( myosin regulatory light chain ) as a proxy to evaluate the tension forces in response to modulating EFA6A and ACTN1 expression . Fig . 6B is a representative immunoblot analysis of ACTN1 depletion and vsvg - EFA6A expression in the presence or absence of doxycycline . In control cells , the pMLC staining appeared as small intracellular dots as well as larger dots located in proximity to the apical membrane . Under conditions of EFA6A or ACTN1 depletion this apical staining disappeared and the pMLC distribution became more diffuse . Upon vsvg - EFA6A expression the proportion of apical pMLC was increased and its staining was evenly distributed all around the luminal cortex . In ACTN1 - depleted cells , the vsvg - EFA6A - induced apical accumulation of pMLC was abrogated ( Fig . 6A ) . These results suggest that EFA6A can modulate the apical tension forces in an ACTN1 - dependent manner . We investigated the contribution of ACTN1 by first analyzing the effect of its depletion on the RhoA - stimulated ventral SF in MDCK cells by expressing the NH 2 - terminal myc - tagged constitutively active mutant of RhoA ( myc - RhoAV14 ) under the control of the inducible Tet - off system . The levels of expression of the proteins in different conditions were analyzed by immunoblot ( Fig . 6C ) . We monitored the myc - RhoAV14 - induced SF contractility by immunofluorescence . We looked at the F - actin organization and the contractility status by following the distribution of pMLC and paxillin , a marker of the focal adhesions ( Fig . 6D ) . As expected , the expression of myc - RhoAV14 ( - Dox . ) stimulated the formation of SF that appeared as thick bundles of parallel F - actin going across the whole cell cluster ( Fig . 6D , b ) . In myc - RhoAV14 expressing cells , the pMLC was redistributed all along the SF ( Fig . 6D , b ' ) while in control cells pMLC was enriched at the periphery of the cell cluster and excluded from cell - cell contacts ( Fig . 6D , a ' ) . Concomitantly , paxillin was re - localized to the periphery of the cell cluster mostly decorating the focal adhesions at the extremity of the SF ( Fig . 6D , b ' ' ) . As previously observed by others ( Oakes et al . , 2012 ) , depletion of ACTN1 in control cells ( + Dox . ) led to the loss of bundles or shortening of radial F - actin bundles resembling transverse arcs ( Fig . 6D , c ) . These structures were stained for pMLC and remained absent from cell - cell contacts ( Fig . 6D , c ' ) . The paxillin signal increased but was still homogeneously distributed within each cell of the cluster similarly to control cells ( Fig . 6D , c ' ' ) . Depletion of ACTN1 blocked the effects of myc - RhoAV14 leading to cells displaying a phenotype comparable to the control cells with respect to all three markers ( Fig . 6D , d - d ' ' ) . We concluded that ACTN1 can balance the contractility status of RhoA - dependent SF in MDCK cells . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Interfering with the RhoA - ROCK - myosin - II contractility pathway has been shown to alter luminogenesis in MDCK cells ( Ferrari et al . , 2008 ; Kim et al . , 2015 ; Rodriguez - Fraticelli et al . , 2012 ) . In particular , under permissive conditions the constitutively active RhoAV14 mutant blocks the initial step of lumen formation ( Ferrari et al . , 2008 ) . We thus asked whether ACTN1 depletion could prevent the myc - RhoAV14 inhibitory effect on luminogenesis . In our 3D - cell culture conditions myc - RhoAV14 expression abrogated lumen formation . The cells became round and loosely attached forming aggregates almost exclusively without lumens and displaying an inverted polarity as judged by the peripheral localization of the apical PDX marker ( Fig . 6E , F ) . ACTN1 depletion partially rescued the formation of lumen ( Fig . 6E ) . We observed aggregates with multilumen or incomplete lumen essentially as mini - lumens ( Fig . 6E ) . The cells adopted a more cuboidal shape and formed more compact aggregates ( Fig . 6F ) . These results suggest that the knock - down of ACTN1 acts to reduce the strong contractility imposed by myc - RhoAV14 , thus allowing the initiation of lumen formation . This is in agreement with previous studies that show that reduction of the myosin - II contractility stimulates the initial early step of lumen opening at the two - cell stage ( Ferrari et al . , 2008 ; Rodriguez - Fraticelli et al . , 2012 ) . However , the extension and enlargement of the lumens , which we demonstrate to be dependent on ACTN1 , were both still compromised . Thus , our findings support a model whereby the initial stage of the lumen formation is facilitated by the absence of ACTN1 , followed by lumen maturation which is ACTN1 - dependent . Taken altogether , our data suggest that EFA6A and its effector ACTN1 contribute to SCL formation through the regulation of the cell surface tension forces within the cell aggregate . Discussion In this study , we aimed to define the role of EFA6 , a regulator of epithelial polarization , in lumen formation using a 3D epithelial cell culture system . Given the importance of the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton during cystogenesis , we were particularly interested in deciphering the signaling pathway associated to the EFA6 C - terminal domain capable of remodeling the cortical actin independently of EFA6 GEF activity . Searching for partners of EFA6ACter , we find that EFA6A binds directly to the non - muscular ACTN1 . We characterized this interaction in living cells by using a mitochondrial targeting system and observed that it is likely regulated by the structural conformation of the EFA6A C - terminus . This observation confirms our previous results obtained with another EFA6Cter ligand , the  - arrestin1 ( Macia et al . , 2012 ) , and implies the existence of a common regulatory mechanism whereby binding to EFA6ACter requires an opening signal . A possible candidate is Arf6GTP , the product of EFA6A Sec7 - dependent nucleotide exchange activity . ARN0 , another Sec7 family guanine nucleotide exchange J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t factor for Arf1 , was shown to adopt an auto - inhibited conformation where its short C - terminus downstream of the PH domain interferes with the catalytic Sec7 domain ( DiNitto et al . , 2007 ) . Arf6GTP binds to the PH domain of ARNO and stimulates in synergy with plasma membrane lipids the nucleotide exchange activity of ARNO on Arf1 ( Cohen et al . , 2007b ; Stalder et al . , 2011 ) . We found that Arf6GTP binds to the PH - Cterminus region of EFA6 ( Padovani et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , by analogy with ARNO one could speculate that Arf6GTP by binding to the PH domain of EFA6 could release the C - terminus and allow for ACTN1 binding . We had reported that EFA6A is present at and regulates the TJ ( Luton et al . , 2004 ; Theard et al . , 2010 ) where we now find ACTN1 . Our results support the hypothesis that it is EFA6A that recruits ACTN1 . The re - localization experiments performed in the presence of Latrunculin B indicate that the binding is independent of F - actin . However , F - actin is found around the mitochondria together with EFA6ACter - ActA and ACTN1 suggesting that the couple EFA6A / ACTN1 could organize actin filaments structures or even contribute to its nucleation as proposed for ACTN4 at the AJ ( Tang and Brieher , 2012 ) . ARNO was also found to bind directly to ACTN1 through its C - terminal extremity to modulate neurite extension suggesting that ACTN could be a general actor of Arf - regulated actin cytoskeleton ( Torii et al . , 2012 ) . Since EFA6A recruits ACTN1 we hypothesized that ACTN1 was acting as its effector . In the past , studying monolayers of MDCK cells , we had found that over - expression of EFA6A accelerates the general program of epithelial polarization including the assembly of functional TJs ( Klein et al . , 2008 ; Luton et al . , 2004 ) . Part of EFA6A contribution was attributed to its ability to stabilize the PAMR . Here , by using a 3D - cell culture system and siRNA - mediated depletion , we show that EFA6A is necessary for normal luminogenesis in MDCK cells . Conversely , over - expression of EFA6A increased the proportion of cysts with SCL and stimulated their enlargement . Thus , we asked whether ACTN1 was acting as an effector to transduce some of EFA6A effects on luminogenesis . Indeed , we observed that depletion of ACTN1 blocked the stimulatory effect of EFA6A on both the formation and enlargement of round SCL . In further support , depletion of ACTN1 had no additional disruptive impact on cells knocked - down for EFA6A . In addition , expression of a mutant of EFA6A deleted of its C - terminus which contains the ACTN1 binding site impaired normal luminogenesis . These results demonstrate that ACTN1 is a crucial effector of EFA6A whose function is to promote normal luminogenesis . To understand the roles of ACTN1 we analyzed in detail the defects induced upon its depletion . In the absence of ACTN1 , there was an increase in cysts with multiple lumens , mostly as mini - lumens formed between two cells , or cysts with lumens that failed to extend to all cells . We propose that in J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t the absence of ACTN1 the initial fusion event to form a PAP is facilitated , however the subsequent coalescence and extension of lumens to all cells of the aggregate is precluded . In addition , the volumetric growth of the lumens is impaired . In the ACTN1 knocked - down cells , the mini - lumens appeared essentially blocked at the PAP stage and in larger cysts the extended lumens and SCL adopted an octopus - like shape rather than a nice round hollow . Interestingly , in both MDCK and MCF7 cells , in the absence of ACTN1 , over - expression of EFA6A could rescue the enlargement of the mini - lumens , but not the one of the larger incomplete lumens or SCL . It implies that the enlargement of the luminal space relies on different molecular machinery along lumen formation . Thus , ACTN1 is dispensable at the initial stage to create the nascent lumens , but it is essential downstream of EFA6A at later stage for the coalescence , extension and enlargement of the lumens . ACTN1 is an actin - bundling protein known to regulate the contractility and stiffness of acto - myosin . It competes with myosin - II to bind F - actin in order to maintain a complementary periodicity which results in linear F - actin bundles with contractile properties . The ratio and distribution of these two proteins determines the overall contractility and rigidity of F - actin cytoskeletons including that of the PARM ( Arnold et al . , 2017 ; Ferrari et al . , 2008 ; Sluysmans et al . , 2017 ) . Thus , ACTN1 could act by regulating tension forces at the surface of the developing lumen . Several observations are in support of this hypothesis . First , EFA6A and ACTN1 depletion reduced the amount of apical pMLC , whilst EFA6A expression stimulated its accumulation at the apical pole in an ACTN1 - dependent manner . Second , in both MDCK and MCF7 cells , upon ACTN1 depletion we observed two defects : a ) a stimulatory effect on the initial formation of lumens indicated by the rapid accumulation of multiple mini - lumens and , b ) at later stage a defect of maturation ( e . g . coalescence and extension ) that leads to large cysts with several lumens or incomplete lumens . These results are consistent with a role for ACTN1 on contractility or stiffness . Indeed , several independent studies have shown that decreasing contractility using blebbistatin , ROCK inhibitors , or down - regulation of LKB1 , an upstream regulator of RhoA , stimulates the initial formation of lumen at the two - cell stage ( Cohen et al . , 2007a ; Ferrari et al . , 2008 ; Rodriguez - Fraticelli et al . , 2012 ; Taniguchi et al . , 2015 ) . Less appreciated is the impact of contractility at later stage . We found that similarly to ACTN1 depletion , blebbistatin leads to large cysts with multiple lumens ( our unpublished results ) . A similar observation was made by reducing contractility upon depletion of LKB1 which first stimulates the initial formation of lumens but then prevents their coalescence into a SCL ( Rodriguez - Fraticelli et al . , 2012 ) . Third , supplemental evidence for the role of ACTN1 on contractility came from its effects in RhoAV14 - expressing cells . The small G protein RhoA , through its action on the apical PAMR , is a general regulator of the assembly and maintenance of the AJ ( Lecuit and Yap , 2015 ) and TJ ( Terry et al . , 2010 ) . We showed that ACTN1 - depletion could counterbalance the RhoAV14 - mediated contractility . Then , we found that ACTN1 - J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t depletion rescued the initial formation of lumens inhibited by RhoAV14 expression . Altogether , these results indicate that luminogenesis is regulated by acto - myosin contractility and stiffness , which should be kept low for the initial formation of a mini - lumen , and then be increased to allow for their coalescence and extension to form a SCL in larger multicellular aggregates . The implementation of tension forces relies on molecular pickets , which are usually transmembrane proteins that anchor the acto - myosin structures . In polarized epithelial cells , the AJ and TJ are anchor points for the PAMR . It is noteworthy that neither EFA6A nor ACTN1 appeared to be essential for the assembly and positioning of the AJ and TJ , nor the establishment and maintenance of the asymmetry along the apico - basal axis . Thus , EFA6A and its effector ACTN1 modulate the contractility by affecting the activity and / or organization of the apical acto - myosin cytoskeleton and not the anchoring junctional complexes . Not all the functions of ACTN1 appeared mediated through regulating contractility . ACTN1 depletion prevented the luminal enlargement while the inhibition of contractility by inhibiting myosin - II or LKB1 depletion ( Rodriguez - Fraticelli et al . , 2012 ) did not affect the luminal enlargement . Enlargement has been proposed to depend on apical membrane transport involving the delivery of highly charged molecules , hydrostatic pressure mediated by ion channels and coalescence of multilumens . In ACTN1 - depleted cells , the surface of the apical membrane appears large enough to accommodate a bigger luminal volume . In addition , the highly charged PDX protein is properly delivered and coalescence is not relevant when considering SCLs with an octopus - like shape . However , ACTN1 could help retain ion channels at the apical surface . In fact , many ion channels have been shown to bind or to require ACTN to be retained at the cell surface ( Cukovic et al . , 2001 ; Lu et al . , 2009 ; Maruoka et al . , 2000 ; Sadeghi et al . , 2002 ; Schnizler et al . , 2009 ; Wyszynski et al . , 1997 ; Ziane et al . , 2010 ) , as well as polycystins implicated in intercellular mechanotransduction ( Li et al . , 2005 ; Wilson , 2001 ) . EFA6A was also shown to bind the ion channels TWIK1 and Kir3 . 4 ( Decressac et al . , 2004 ; Gong et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , it was reported that ACTN4 regulates the outwards water transport in a process called regulatory volume decrease in response to osmotic swelling ( Ando - Akatsuka et al . , 2012 ) . In summary , together with EFA6A , the recruitment of ACTN1 to the apical surface might help stabilize ion channels regulating fluid influx and consequently lumen enlargement . Alternatively , ACTN1 could serve to organize a non - contractile scaffold to help support the spherical architecture of the luminal membrane . To do so , ACTN1 could participate by bundling F - actin filaments into rigid structures and / or could serve to link or even nucleate actin filaments at the AJ or TJ to anchor the luminal actin cytoskeleton . Such a role has been proposed for ACTN4 at the level of the AJ ( Tang and Brieher , 2012 ) . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Finally , we examined the role of ACTN1 in the human tumoral mammary cell line MCF7 . When grown in 3D - culture , these cells fail to assemble TJ , form a lumen or polarize ( Han et al . , 2010 ; Kenny et al . , 2007 ; Zangari et al . , 2014 ) . Only a small fraction of cell aggregates display one or several mini - lumens . As shown in the past , EFA6B expression stimulated the formation of extended lumens and restored an epithelial - like phenotype . So , in contrast to MDCK cells , the formation of extended lumens in MCF7 is strictly dependent on the expression of vsvg - EFA6B . Thus , it was a good model to study the role of ACTN1 downstream of EFA6B . Indeed , ACTN1 depletion totally blocked lumen formation demonstrating that ACTN1 is a crucial effector for EFA6B to induce luminogenesis . Furthermore , ACTN1 - depletion in wild - type MCF7 cells stimulated the formation of multiple mini - lumens blocked at the PAP stage . EFA6B expression did not rescue the formation of extended lumen but did enlarge their volume . Thus , in agreement with our observations in MDCK cells , ACTN1 - depletion favors the initial formation of lumens in between two cells but prevents their coalescence and enlargement . In conclusion , we show that ACTN1 is an effector of EFA6A and EFA6B to promote luminogenesis in normal and tumoral cell models . We propose a scenario whereby at the onset of luminogenesis , the acto - myosin contractility and rigidity must be kept low to relax the sub - membranous actin cytoskeleton where vesicle fusion occurs at the AMIS . At this stage , EFA6 expression has a stimulatory effect on the formation and the enlargement of the mini - lumens suggesting that it acts through an effector other than ACTN1 ; perhaps through Arf6 , which has already been shown to be involved in luminogensis ( Tushir et al . , 2010 ; Zangari et al . , 2014 ) . At a later stage , EFA6 recruits ACTN1 to contribute to the coalescence of the mini - lumens , their extension to neighboring cells and enlargement . We do not exclude that EFA6 could recruit other effectors to mediate its effects . Nevertheless , ACTN1 is certainly a primary effector through which action on contractility of the acto - myosin ring might account for its effects on coalescence and extension by helping to pull the lumens together and breaking through the junctional complexes . Given these results , the EFA6A / ACTN1 pathway might be important for tubulogenesis occurring through the cord hollowing mechanism where multiple mini - lumens are formed along the tubular structure and are then subsequently fused to coalesce in a single lumen in a ROCK - myosin II - dependent manner ( Bernascone et al . , 2017 ; Kim et al . , 2015 ; Sigurbjornsdottir et al . , 2014 ) . In summary , we identified and characterized the role of two new regulators of luminogenesis : EFA6A and ACTN1 . ACTN1 behaves as an effector to transduce the stimulating effect of EFA6A on the formation of a single and well - expanded central lumen by facilitating the extension and enlargement J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t stages . The couple EFA6A / ACTN1 acts , at least in part , by balancing the contractility of the cortical acto - myosin cytoskeleton . In the tumoral MCF7 cells , this pathway has the capacity to restore the apico - basal polarization , TJ assembly , and collective cellular organization into a cyst with a central lumen pointing to new directions for cancer research and therapy . Materials and methods Cells , media and transfection BHK cells were grown in GMEM ( Invitrogen , Paris , France ) supplemented with 5 % heat decomplemented fetal calf serum ( Biowest - Abcys , Nuaillé , France ) and penicillin - streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) . Transient transfection was performed by lipofection using JETPEI ( Polyplus Transfection , Illkirck , France ) . MDCK clone II expressing vsvg - EFA6A and vsvg - EFA6A  C ( Luton et al . , 2004 ) or myc - RhoAV14 ( Jou and Nelson , 1998 ) under the control of the tetracycline - repressible transactivator were grown in MEM ( Sigma - Aldrich , Saint - Quentin - Fallavier , France ) , 5 % decomplemented FCS ( Biowest - Abcys ) , penicillin - streptomycin and 20 ng / ml doxycycline . Expression of EFA6A and RhoAV14 was induced upon removal of doxycycline . Plasmids and siRNA transfections were performed by nucleofection ( Nucleofector™ ; Lonza , Köln , Germany ) . For stable expression of ACTN1 - GFP , ACTN4 - GFP , ACTN1S744 - GFP , the cells were selected with geneticin ( Invitrogen ) two days after transfection . MCF7 and MCF7 - vsvg - EFA6B ( Zangari et al . , 2014 ) were grown in DMEM ( Sigma - Aldrich ) containing 10 % decomplemented FCS ( Hyclone™ , GE Healthcare , France ) , supplemented with insulin , transferrin , selenium , glutamine , sodium pyruvate , MEM non - essential amino - acids , penicillin - streptomycin all from Invitrogen . Transient transfection was performed by nucleofection . For 3D - cell culture , 1x10 4 cells were mixed with 20 µl of 5 mg / ml Matrigel ( BD Biosciences , Le Pont de Claix , France ) deposited as a drop on a 12 mm glass coverslip . The BHK and MCF7 cells were obtained from the ATCC and authenticated by short tandem repeat profiling by the vendor . The parental MDCK II cell line was from Dr . Mostov ( UCSF ) . MDCK and derived cell lines were tested for species specificity . Newly thawed cells from frozen stocks were tested for absence of mycoplasma contamination and used for 10 passages before replacement . Antibodies and reagents Rabbit polyclonal sera specific for EFA6B ( HPA034722 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , occludin ( 71 - 1500 , Invitrogen ) , phospho ( Thr18 / Ser19 ) myosin light chain 2 ( 3674 , Cell Signaling Technology , Leiden , The Netherlands ) , PI3K p85 regulatory subunit ( ABS234 , Millipore , Molsheim , France ) , Hsp60 ( Ab46798 , Abcam , Paris , France ) , Gst ( 27 - 4577 - 01 , GE Healthcare ) . Mouse monoclonal specific for J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t gp135 / podocalyxin ( 3B8 ; gift from G . Ojakian , State University of New York Downstate Medical Center ) , vsvg tag ( P5D4 ; Roche Diagnostics , Mannheim , Germany ) , actin ( AC - 40 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , E - cadherin ( 36 ; Invitrogen ) , paxillin ( 610052 , BD Biosciences ) , 6xhistidine tag ( HIS1 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , myc tag ( 9E10 and rat hybridoma 3F10 ; Roche Diagnostics ) , GFP ( 7 . 1 , Roche Diagnostics ) , ACTN1 ( BM75 . 2 ; Sigma - Aldrich and H - 2 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Heidelberg , Germany ) . The rabbit polyclonal anti - EFA6A was described elsewhere ( Sakagami et al . , 2007 ) . The HRP - coupled and fluorescent probes ( secondary antibodies , phalloidin , DAPI ) were from Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs ( Suffolk , UK ) and Molecular Probes ( Eugene , Oregon , USA ) , respectively . All other reagents and chemicals were from Sigma - Aldrich . DNA constructs and siRNA The following constructs have been described elsewhere : GFP - EFA6A ( Decressac et al . , 2004 ) , mRFP - EFA6A ( Theard et al . , 2010 ) , Gst - EFA6A , Gst - EFA6ACter ( Macia et al . , 2008 ) , ( 6xhis ) - EFA6A ( Macia et al . , 2008 ) ,  arrestin1 - Cter - GFP ( Scott et al . , 2002 ) , Gst - ABD ( aa 1 - 269 ) , Gst - SRD ( aa 218 - 749 ) and Gst - CAMD ( aa 713 - 887 ) ( Fraley et al . , JBC , 2003 ) , ACTN1 - GFP ( Rajfur et al , Nat . Cell Biol , 2002 ) , Gst - ACTN4 ( Khurana et al . , JBC , 2011 ) , ACTN4 - HA and ACTN4 - GFP ( Michaud et al . , . Kidney Int . 2006 ) . The Gst - ACTN1 construct was prepared by PCR amplification of full - length ACTN1 from pEGFP - ACTN1 and cloned into EcoR1 and Xho1 sites of the pGEX4T1 using the following primers : 5 ' - GATCGATCGAATTCATGGACCATTATGATTCTCAG - 3 ' and 5 ' - TGTATCACTCGAGTTAGAGGTCACTCTCGCCGTAC - 3 ' . The siRNA # 2225 insensitive ACTN1 - GFP was generated by introducing silent mutations at positions 2236 , 2237 and 2238 ( amico - acid Ser744 ) using the Quick Change mutagenesis kit ( Agilent Technologies , Courtabœuf , France ) using the following primers 5’ - GCCAAGGGCATCTCGCAGGAGCAGATGAATG - 3 ' and 5’ - CATTCATCTGCTCCTGCGAGATGCCCTTGGC - 3 ' . The resulting plasmid was termed ACTN1S744 - GFP . Full - length EFA6A and EFA6ACter were cloned into mRFP - N1 - ActA ( Benjamin et al . , JCB , 2010 ) by PCR amplification using EcoRI and SacII sites . Primers used to amplify and clone the full - length EFA6A were 5′ - GATCGATCGAATTCGCCGCCACCATGCCTCTCAAGTCACCTGTG - 3′ and 5′ - GATCGATCCCGCGGGGGCTTCCGCCGCCCACTGCC - 3′ , the EFA6ACter fragment were 5 ' - GATCGATCGAATTCGCCGCCACCATGTTCTCTGCGCCCCCCTTCC - 3 ' and 5 ' - GATCGATCCCGCGGGGGCTTCCGCCGCCCACTGCC - 3 ' . The resulting plasmids were termed EFA6A - mRFP - ActA and EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA . The specific and control siRNAs were designed and obtained from Eurogentec ( Angers , France ) and Sigma - Aldrich . The silencing efficiency of several siRNAs per target was assessed by immunoblot ( Fig . S3 and Fig . S4 ) . Extinction of canine EFA6A and ACTN1 expression in MDCK cells was carried out using the siRNA # 2661 ccuaucagaggcggagcua or # 1440 cucuuucaguuguguguuu and siRNA # 2225 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t gcaucagccaggagcaaau or # 594 ggacgacccacucacaaau , respectively . Extinction of human ACTN1 expression in MCF7 cells was carried out using the siRNA # 1789 ccucaggagaucaauggcaaa . Silencing specificity was verified with control siRNAs , rescue experiments ( Fig . 3C and Fig . 4B ) and additional independent siRNA ( Fig . S4 ) . Recombinant proteins , pull - down assay and immunoprecipitation The induction and purification of Gst constructs using glutathione - sepharose CL - 4B beads ( GE Healthcare ) was as previously described ( Macia et al . , 2008 ) . The N - terminal hexahistidine his - EFA6A was purified on Ni - NTA columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Qiagen , Courtabœuf , France ) . For the Gst - EFA6A pull - down from cell lysates , MDCK - ACTN1 - GFP cells were lysed at 4°C in 0 . 5 % Nonidet P - 40 , 20 mM Hepes pH7 . 4 , 125 mM NaCl , 1mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) and a cocktail of protease inhibitors ( Complete™ , Roche Diagnostics ) . The cleared lysates were incubated 4 hr at 4°C with 1 . 5 µM of the indicated Gst - fused proteins and 30 µl of glutathione - sepharose CL - 4B beads . After three washes in lysis buffer , the beads were boiled in Laemmli buffer , submitted to SDS - PAGE and the proteins revealed by immunoblot . For the Gst pull - down of purified His - EFA6A , 10 µM of the indicated Gst fusion proteins and 10 µM of His - EFA6A were incubated together for 2 hr at 4°C and the experiments carried on as described above . For all Gst pull - down experiments , an aliquot of the mixture was analyzed by SDS - PAGE followed by immunoblotting to estimate the total amount of the added proteins . For immunoprecipitation , cells were solubilized in ice - cold Triton X - 100 lysis buffer ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 20 mM Triethanolamine - HCl pH 8 . 1 , 1 mM PMSF ) . After centrifugation for 20 min at 16 , 000 g at 4°C , the supernatants were pre - cleared at 4°C for 10 min , centrifuged 10 min 16 , 000 x g and combined with protein A - sepharose and the indicated antibody overnight at 4°C . The beads were then washed three times in washing buffer ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 2 % SDS , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 8 % sucrose , 1 mM PMSF and the cocktail of protease inhibitors ) and washed once in washing buffer without detergent . The immunoprecipitates were then resuspended and boiled for 5 min in Laemmli buffer before SDS - PAGE and immunoblot analysis . Immunoblot Samples were resolved on SDS - PAGE and proteins transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane . Membrane blocking ( 30 min at room temperature ) and antibody dilutions were done in PBS 5 % non - fat dry milk . The membranes were incubated over - night at 4°C with the indicated antibody . The proteins were revealed by chemiluminescence ( ECL™ , Amersham , GE Healthcare ) using secondary antibodies directly coupled to HRP . The membranes were analyzed with the luminescent image analyzer LAS - 3000 ( Fujifilm , Saint - Quentin - en - Yvelines , France ) . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Immunofluorescence Cells were fixed in PFA 4 % , the samples processed as previously described ( Luton et al . , 2004 ) , imaged on a confocal microscope ( Leica TCS - SP5 , Nanterre , France and Zeiss LSM780 , Marly - le - Roi , France ) and images were processed for presentation using NIH Image and Adobe® Photoshop® CS2 software . Quantification of luminogenesis Unless specified , all quantifications were from cysts of 4 - 15 cells size obtained after 48 to 72 hr growth in Matrigel . Experiments were repeated at least three times in triplicate and a minimum of 100 cysts per monoplicate were analyzed . Each cell aggregates were scanned through by confocal microscopy to analyze the shape of the lumens and determine the presence of a single lumen or multiple lumens . Cysts were classified within five categories : cysts with a single central opened lumen ( SCL ) , two or more lumen regardless of their shape ( multilumen ) , with an opened lumen but not extended to all cells ( incomplete lumen ) , with an optically closed lumen ( otherwise named pre - apical patch , PAP ) and with no lumen . Within the SCL we discriminated those that were well enlarged from those that were barely opened and not expanded displaying an " octopus - like " shape ( see Fig . 3B ) . Note , that cysts with dividing cells or with lumen containing cells and / or nuclei were not included . In addition , a separate quantification was done for lumen opened only in between two cells ( mini - lumen ) as they fell in the multilumen , incomplete and optically closed lumen categories ( see Fig . 3E ) . Enlargement refers to the increase of the luminal volume . When enlargement was compromised one observed " octopus - like " lumen . Extension refers to the opening of a lumen ( in general starting in between two cells ) to all the cells of the cell aggregate or coalescence of multiple small lumens to eventually form a single lumen . When extension was compromised it led to incomplete lumen and / or to the presence of multiple lumens including mini - lumens ( see Fig . 3D , E ) . Statistics The experiments were performed at least three times in triplicate , and data from all experiments were combined . Values are mean ± SD . Statistical significance was calculated with a two - tailed Student ' s t - test . Non - significant difference ( N . S . ) p > 0 . 05 ; * p ≤0 . 05 ; * * p ≤0 . 01 ; * * * p ≤0 . 001 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Acknowledgements : We thank Drs . Hiroyuki Sakagami ( Kitasato University , Japan ) for the EFA6A specific anti - serum , James Nelson ( Stanford University , USA ) for the MDCK - RhoAV14 cells and the ActA - mRFP plasmid , Dr . Jeffery Greenwood ( Oregon State University , USA ) for the plasmids encoding the three fragments of Gst - ACTN1 and GFP - ACTN1 , Dr . Chris Kennedy ( University of Ottawa , Canada ) for HA - ACTN4 and GFP - ACTN4 , and Dr . Hung - Ying Kao ( Case Western Reserve University , USA ) for Gst - ACTN4 . We are grateful to K . L . Singer for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by the Fondation ARC . This work was supported by the French Government ( National Research Agency , ANR ) through the " Investments for the Future " LABEX SIGNALIFE : program reference ANR - 11 - LABX - 0028 - 01 and R . F . was the recipient of a PhD fellowship from the Labex SIGNALIFE . JPB is funded by La Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer , Cancéropôle PACA and SIRIC ( INCa - DGOS - Inserm 6038 ) . JPB is a scholar of Institut Universitaire de France . The authors declared no competing or financial interests . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t References Altschuler , Y . , Liu , S . - H . , Katz , L . , Tang , K . , Hardy , S . , Brodsky , F . , Apodaca , G . and Mostov , K . ( 1999 ) . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 and endocytosis at the apical surface of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 7 - 12 . Ando - Akatsuka , Y . , Shimizu , T . , Numata , T . and Okada , Y . ( 2012 ) . Involvements of the ABC protein ABCF2 and alpha - actinin - 4 in regulation of cell volume and anion channels in human epithelial cells . J Cell Physiol 227 , 3498 - 510 . Arnold , T . R . , Stephenson , R . E . and Miller , A . L . ( 2017 ) . Rho GTPases and actomyosin : Partners in regulating epithelial cell - cell junction structure and function . Exp Cell Res . Bernascone , I . , Hachimi , M . and Martin - Belmonte , F . ( 2017 ) . Signaling Networks in Epithelial Tube Formation . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . Blasky , A . J . , Mangan , A . and Prekeris , R . ( 2015 ) . Polarized protein transport and lumen formation during epithelial tissue morphogenesis . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 31 , 575 - 91 . Braga , V . ( 2016 ) . Spatial integration of E - cadherin adhesion , signalling and the epithelial cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Cell Biol 42 , 138 - 145 . Bubeck , P . , Pistor , S . , Wehland , J . and Jockusch , B . M . ( 1997 ) . Ligand recruitment by vinculin domains in transfected cells . J Cell Sci 110 ( Pt 12 ) , 1361 - 71 . Burridge , K . and Wittchen , E . S . ( 2013 ) . The tension mounts : stress fibers as force - generating mechanotransducers . J Cell Biol 200 , 9 - 19 . Chen , V . C . , Li , X . , Perreault , H . and Nagy , J . I . ( 2006 ) . Interaction of zonula occludens - 1 ( ZO - 1 ) with alpha - actinin - 4 : application of functional proteomics for identification of PDZ domain - associated proteins . J Proteome Res 5 , 2123 - 34 . Cohen , D . , Tian , Y . and Musch , A . ( 2007a ) . Par1b promotes hepatic - type lumen polarity in Madin Darby canine kidney cells via myosin II - and E - cadherin - dependent signaling . Mol Biol Cell 18 , 2203 - 15 . Cohen , L . A . , Honda , A . , Varnai , P . , Brown , F . D . , Balla , T . and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2007b ) . Active Arf6 recruits ARNO / cytohesin GEFs to the PM by binding their PH domains . Mol Biol Cell 18 , 2244 - 53 . Coravos , J . S . and Martin , A . C . ( 2016 ) . Apical Sarcomere - like Actomyosin Contracts Nonmuscle Drosophila Epithelial Cells . Dev Cell 39 , 346 - 358 . Coravos , J . S . , Mason , F . M . and Martin , A . C . ( 2017 ) . Actomyosin Pulsing in Tissue Integrity Maintenance during Morphogenesis . Trends Cell Biol 27 , 276 - 283 . Cukovic , D . , Lu , G . W . , Wible , B . , Steele , D . F . and Fedida , D . ( 2001 ) . A discrete amino terminal domain of Kv1 . 5 and Kv1 . 4 potassium channels interacts with the spectrin repeats of alpha - actinin - 2 . FEBS Lett 498 , 87 - 92 . D ' Souza - Schorey , C . and Chavrier , P . ( 2006 ) . ARF proteins : roles in membrane traffic and beyond . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 347 - 58 . Datta , A . , Bryant , D . M . and Mostov , K . E . ( 2011 ) . Molecular regulation of lumen morphogenesis . Curr Biol 21 , R126 - 36 . Decressac , S . , Franco , M . , Bendahhou , S . , Warth , R . , Knauer , S . , Barhanin , J . , Lazdunski , M . and Lesage , F . ( 2004 ) . ARF6 - dependent interaction of the TWIK1 K + channel with EFA6 , a GDP / GTP exchange factor for ARF6 . EMBO Rep 5 , 1171 - 5 . Derrien , V . , Couillault , C . , Franco , M . , Martineau , S . , Montcourrier , P . , Houlgatte , R . and Chavrier , P . ( 2002 ) . A conserved C - terminal domain of EFA6 - family ARF6 - guanine nucleotide exchange factors induces lengthening of microvilli - like membrane protrusions . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2867 - 2879 . DiNitto , J . P . , Delprato , A . , Gabe Lee , M . T . , Cronin , T . C . , Huang , S . , Guilherme , A . , Czech , M . P . and Lambright , D . G . ( 2007 ) . Structural basis and mechanism of autoregulation in 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent Grp1 family Arf GTPase exchange factors . Mol Cell 28 , 569 - 83 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t DuFort , C . C . , Paszek , M . J . and Weaver , V . M . ( 2011 ) . Balancing forces : architectural control of mechanotransduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 , 308 - 19 . Ebrahim , S . , Fujita , T . , Millis , B . A . , Kozin , E . , Ma , X . , Kawamoto , S . , Baird , M . A . , Davidson , M . , Yonemura , S . , Hisa , Y . et al . ( 2013 ) . NMII forms a contractile transcellular sarcomeric network to regulate apical cell junctions and tissue geometry . Curr Biol 23 , 731 - 6 . Ferrari , A . , Veligodskiy , A . , Berge , U . , Lucas , M . S . and Kroschewski , R . ( 2008 ) . ROCK - mediated contractility , tight junctions and channels contribute to the conversion of a preapical patch into apical surface during isochoric lumen initiation . J Cell Sci 121 , 3649 - 63 . Foley , K . S . and Young , P . W . ( 2013 ) . An analysis of splicing , actin - binding properties , heterodimerization and molecular interactions of the non - muscle alpha - actinins . Biochem J 452 , 477 - 88 . Foley , K . S . and Young , P . W . ( 2014 ) . The non - muscle functions of actinins : an update . Biochem J 459 , 1 - 13 . Franco , M . , Peters , P . J . , Boretto , J . , van Donselaar , E . , Neri , A . , D ' Souza - Schorey , C . and Chavrier , P . ( 1999 ) . EFA6 , a sec7 domain - containing exchange factor for ARF6 , coordinates membrane recycling and actin cytoskeleton organization . Embo J 18 , 1480 - 91 . Geiger , B . , Tokuyasu , K . T . and Singer , S . J . ( 1979 ) . Immunocytochemical localization of alpha - actinin in intestinal epithelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 76 , 2833 - 7 . Gillingham , A . K . and Munro , S . ( 2007 ) . The small G proteins of the Arf family and their regulators . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 23 , 579 - 611 . Gong , Q . , Weide , M . , Huntsman , C . , Xu , Z . , Jan , L . Y . and Ma , D . ( 2007 ) . Identification and characterization of a new class of trafficking motifs for controlling clathrin - independent internalization and recycling . J Biol Chem 282 , 13087 - 97 . Grikscheit , K . and Grosse , R . ( 2016 ) . Formins at the Junction . Trends Biochem Sci 41 , 148 - 59 . Han , J . , Chang , H . , Giricz , O . , Lee , G . Y . , Baehner , F . L . , Gray , J . W . , Bissell , M . J . , Kenny , P . A . and Parvin , B . ( 2010 ) . Molecular predictors of 3D morphogenesis by breast cancer cell lines in 3D culture . PLoS Comput Biol 6 , e1000684 . Honda , K . , Yamada , T . , Endo , R . , Ino , Y . , Gotoh , M . , Tsuda , H . , Yamada , Y . , Chiba , H . and Hirohashi , S . ( 1998 ) . Actinin - 4 , a novel actin - bundling protein associated with cell motility and cancer invasion . J Cell Biol 140 , 1383 - 93 . Iskratsch , T . , Wolfenson , H . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2014 ) . Appreciating force and shape - the rise of mechanotransduction in cell biology . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 825 - 33 . Jahed , Z . , Shams , H . , Mehrbod , M . and Mofrad , M . R . ( 2014 ) . Mechanotransduction pathways linking the extracellular matrix to the nucleus . Int Rev Cell Mol Biol 310 , 171 - 220 . Jaworski , J . ( 2007 ) . ARF6 in the nervous system . Eur J Cell Biol 86 , 513 - 24 . Jou , T . - S . and Nelson , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Effects of regulated expression of mutant RhoA and Rac1 small GTPases on the development of epithelial ( MDCK ) cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 85 - 100 . Kenny , P . A . , Lee , G . Y . , Myers , C . A . , Neve , R . M . , Semeiks , J . R . , Spellman , P . T . , Lorenz , K . , Lee , E . H . , Barcellos - Hoff , M . H . , Petersen , O . W . et al . ( 2007 ) . The morphologies of breast cancer cell lines in three - dimensional assays correlate with their profiles of gene expression . Mol Oncol 1 , 84 - 96 . Kim , M . , A , M . S . , Ewald , A . J . , Werb , Z . and Mostov , K . E . ( 2015 ) . p114RhoGEF governs cell motility and lumen formation during tubulogenesis through a ROCK - myosin - II pathway . J Cell Sci 128 , 4317 - 27 . Klein , S . , Partisani , M . , Franco , M . and Luton , F . ( 2008 ) . EFA6 facilitates the assembly of the tight junction by coordinating an Arf6 - dependent and - independent pathway . J Biol Chem 283 , 30129 - 38 . Le Clainche , C . and Carlier , M . F . ( 2008 ) . Regulation of actin assembly associated with protrusion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol Rev 88 , 489 - 513 . Lecuit , T . and Yap , A . S . ( 2015 ) . E - cadherin junctions as active mechanical integrators in tissue dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 533 - 9 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Li , Q . , Montalbetti , N . , Shen , P . Y . , Dai , X . Q . , Cheeseman , C . I . , Karpinski , E . , Wu , G . , Cantiello , H . F . and Chen , X . Z . ( 2005 ) . Alpha - actinin associates with polycystin - 2 and regulates its channel activity . Hum Mol Genet 14 , 1587 - 603 . Lu , L . , Timofeyev , V . , Li , N . , Rafizadeh , S . , Singapuri , A . , Harris , T . R . and Chiamvimonvat , N . ( 2009 ) . Alpha - actinin2 cytoskeletal protein is required for the functional membrane localization of a Ca2 + - activated K + channel ( SK2 channel ) . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 , 18402 - 7 . Luton , F . , Klein , S . , Chauvin , J . P . , Le Bivic , A . , Bourgoin , S . , Franco , M . and Chardin , P . ( 2004 ) . EFA6 , exchange factor for ARF6 , regulates the actin cytoskeleton and associated tight junction in response to E - cadherin engagement . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 1134 - 45 . Macia , E . , Partisani , M . , Favard , C . , Mortier , E . , Zimmermann , P . , Carlier , M . F . , Gounon , P . , Luton , F . and Franco , M . ( 2008 ) . The pleckstrin homology domain of the Arf6 - specific exchange factor EFA6 localizes to the plasma membrane by interacting with phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and F - actin . J Biol Chem 283 , 19836 - 44 . Macia , E . , Partisani , M . , Paleotti , O . , Luton , F . and Franco , M . ( 2012 ) . Arf6 negatively controls the rapid recycling of the beta2 adrenergic receptor . J Cell Sci 125 , 4026 - 35 . Martin - Belmonte , F . and Perez - Moreno , M . ( 2011 ) . Epithelial cell polarity , stem cells and cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 12 , 23 - 38 . Martin , A . C . and Goldstein , B . ( 2014 ) . Apical constriction : themes and variations on a cellular mechanism driving morphogenesis . Development 141 , 1987 - 98 . Maruoka , N . D . , Steele , D . F . , Au , B . P . , Dan , P . , Zhang , X . , Moore , E . D . and Fedida , D . ( 2000 ) . alpha - actinin - 2 couples to cardiac Kv1 . 5 channels , regulating current density and channel localization in HEK cells . FEBS Lett 473 , 188 - 94 . Moeller , M . J . , Soofi , A . , Braun , G . S . , Li , X . , Watzl , C . , Kriz , W . and Holzman , L . B . ( 2004 ) . Protocadherin FAT1 binds Ena / VASP proteins and is necessary for actin dynamics and cell polarization . EMBO J 23 , 3769 - 79 . Murrell , M . , Oakes , P . W . , Lenz , M . and Gardel , M . L . ( 2015 ) . Forcing cells into shape : the mechanics of actomyosin contractility . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 16 , 486 - 98 . Nakatsuji , H . , Nishimura , N . , Yamamura , R . , Kanayama , H . O . and Sasaki , T . ( 2008 ) . Involvement of actinin - 4 in the recruitment of JRAB / MICAL - L2 to cell - cell junctions and the formation of functional tight junctions . Mol Cell Biol 28 , 3324 - 35 . Oakes , P . W . , Beckham , Y . , Stricker , J . and Gardel , M . L . ( 2012 ) . Tension is required but not sufficient for focal adhesion maturation without a stress fiber template . J Cell Biol 196 , 363 - 74 . Padovani , D . , Folly - Klan , M . , Labarde , A . , Boulakirba , S . , Campanacci , V . , Franco , M . , Zeghouf , M . and Cherfils , J . ( 2014 ) . EFA6 controls Arf1 and Arf6 activation through a negative feedback loop . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 , 12378 - 83 . Palacios , F . , Price , L . , Schweitzer , J . , Collard , J . G . and D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2001 ) . An essential role for ARF6 - regulated membrane traffic in adherens junction turnover and epithelial cell migration . Embo J . 20 , 4973 - 86 . Palacios , F . , Schweitzer , J . K . , Boshans , R . L . and D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2002 ) . ARF6 - GTP recruits Nm23 - H1 to facilitate dynamin - mediated endocytosis during adherens junctions disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 11 . Palacios , F . , Tushir , J . S . , Fujita , Y . and D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2005 ) . Lysosomal targeting of E - cadherin : a unique mechanism for the down - regulation of cell - cell adhesion during epithelial to mesenchymal transitions . Mol Cell Biol 25 , 389 - 402 . Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . R . and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 633 - 43 . Quiros , M . and Nusrat , A . ( 2014 ) . RhoGTPases , actomyosin signaling and regulation of the epithelial Apical Junctional Complex . Semin Cell Dev Biol 36 , 194 - 203 . Reinhard , M . , Zumbrunn , J . , Jaquemar , D . , Kuhn , M . , Walter , U . and Trueb , B . ( 1999 ) . An alpha - actinin binding site of zyxin is essential for subcellular zyxin localization and alpha - actinin recruitment . J Biol Chem 274 , 13410 - 8 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Rodriguez - Fraticelli , A . E . , Auzan , M . , Alonso , M . A . , Bornens , M . and Martin - Belmonte , F . ( 2012 ) . Cell confinement controls centrosome positioning and lumen initiation during epithelial morphogenesis . J Cell Biol 198 , 1011 - 23 . Roper , K . ( 2015 ) . Integration of cell - cell adhesion and contractile actomyosin activity during morphogenesis . Curr Top Dev Biol 112 , 103 - 27 . Sabe , H . , Hashimoto , S . , Morishige , M . , Ogawa , E . , Hashimoto , A . , Nam , J . M . , Miura , K . , Yano , H . and Onodera , Y . ( 2009 ) . The EGFR - GEP100 - Arf6 - AMAP1 signaling pathway specific to breast cancer invasion and metastasis . Traffic 10 , 982 - 93 . Sadeghi , A . , Doyle , A . D . and Johnson , B . D . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of the cardiac L - type Ca2 + channel by the actin - binding proteins alpha - actinin and dystrophin . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 , C1502 - 11 . Sakagami , H . ( 2008 ) . The EFA6 family : guanine nucleotide exchange factors for ADP ribosylation factor 6 at neuronal synapses . Tohoku J Exp Med 214 , 191 - 8 . Sakagami , H . , Honma , T . , Sukegawa , J . , Owada , Y . , Yanagisawa , T . and Kondo , H . ( 2007 ) . Somatodendritic localization of EFA6A , a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP - ribosylation factor 6 , and its possible interaction with alpha - actinin in dendritic spines . Eur J Neurosci 25 , 618 - 28 . Schnizler , M . K . , Schnizler , K . , Zha , X . M . , Hall , D . D . , Wemmie , J . A . , Hell , J . W . and Welsh , M . J . ( 2009 ) . The cytoskeletal protein alpha - actinin regulates acid - sensing ion channel 1a through a C - terminal interaction . J Biol Chem 284 , 2697 - 705 . Schweitzer , J . K . , Sedgwick , A . E . and D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2011 ) . ARF6 - mediated endocytic recycling impacts cell movement , cell division and lipid homeostasis . Semin Cell Dev Biol 22 , 39 - 47 . Sigurbjornsdottir , S . , Mathew , R . and Leptin , M . ( 2014 ) . Molecular mechanisms of de novo lumen formation . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 665 - 76 . Sironi , C . , Teesalu , T . , Muggia , A . , Fontana , G . , Marino , F . , Savaresi , S . and Talarico , D . ( 2009 ) . EFA6A encodes two isoforms with distinct biological activities in neuronal cells . J Cell Sci 122 , 2108 - 18 . Sluysmans , S . , Vasileva , E . , Spadaro , D . , Shah , J . , Rouaud , F . and Citi , S . ( 2017 ) . The role of apical cell - cell junctions and associated cytoskeleton in mechanotransduction . Biol Cell 109 , 139 - 161 . Stalder , D . , Barelli , H . , Gautier , R . , Macia , E . , Jackson , C . L . and Antonny , B . ( 2011 ) . Kinetic studies of the Arf activator Arno on model membranes in the presence of Arf effectors suggest control by a positive feedback loop . J Biol Chem 286 , 3873 - 83 . Stossel , T . P . , Condeelis , J . , Cooley , L . , Hartwig , J . H . , Noegel , A . , Schleicher , M . and Shapiro , S . S . ( 2001 ) . Filamins as integrators of cell mechanics and signalling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 , 138 - 45 . Takeichi , M . ( 2014 ) . Dynamic contacts : rearranging adherens junctions to drive epithelial remodelling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 397 - 410 . Tang , V . W . and Brieher , W . M . ( 2012 ) . alpha - Actinin - 4 / FSGS1 is required for Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly at the adherens junction . J Cell Biol 196 , 115 - 30 . Taniguchi , K . , Shao , Y . , Townshend , R . F . , Tsai , Y . H . , DeLong , C . J . , Lopez , S . A . , Gayen , S . , Freddo , A . M . , Chue , D . J . , Thomas , D . J . et al . ( 2015 ) . Lumen Formation Is an Intrinsic Property of Isolated Human Pluripotent Stem Cells . Stem Cell Reports 5 , 954 - 62 . Tanos , B . and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 2008 ) . The epithelial polarity program : machineries involved and their hijacking by cancer . Oncogene 27 , 6939 - 57 . Terry , S . , Nie , M . , Matter , K . and Balda , M . S . ( 2010 ) . Rho signaling and tight junction functions . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 25 , 16 - 26 . Theard , D . , Labarrade , F . , Partisani , M . , Milanini , J . , Sakagami , H . , Fon , E . A . , Wood , S . A . , Franco , M . and Luton , F . ( 2010 ) . USP9x - mediated deubiquitination of EFA6 regulates de novo tight junction assembly . Embo J 29 , 1499 - 509 . Torii , T . , Miyamoto , Y . , Nakamura , K . , Maeda , M . , Yamauchi , J . and Tanoue , A . ( 2012 ) . Arf6 guanine - nucleotide exchange factor , cytohesin - 2 , interacts with actinin - 1 to regulate neurite extension . Cell Signal 24 , 1872 - 82 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Tushir , J . S . , Clancy , J . , Warren , A . , Wrobel , C . , Brugge , J . S . and D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2010 ) . Unregulated ARF6 activation in epithelial cysts generates hyperactive signaling endosomes and disrupts morphogenesis . Mol Biol Cell 21 , 2355 - 66 . Tushir , J . S . and D ' Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2007 ) . ARF6 - dependent activation of ERK and Rac1 modulates epithelial tubule development . Embo J 26 , 1806 - 19 . Wang , C . C . , Jamal , L . and Janes , K . A . ( 2012 ) . Normal morphogenesis of epithelial tissues and progression of epithelial tumors . Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 4 , 51 - 78 . Weaver , V . M . , Petersen , O . W . , Wang , F . , Larabell , C . A . , Briand , P . , Damsky , C . and Bissell , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Reversion of the malignant phenotype of human breast cells in three - dimensional culture and in vivo by integrin blocking antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 231 - 245 . Wilson , P . D . ( 2001 ) . Polycystin : new aspects of structure , function , and regulation . J Am Soc Nephrol 12 , 834 - 45 . Wyszynski , M . , Lin , J . , Rao , A . , Nigh , E . , Beggs , A . H . , Craig , A . M . and Sheng , M . ( 1997 ) . Competitive binding of alpha - actinin and calmodulin to the NMDA receptor . Nature 385 , 439 - 42 . Ye , N . , Verma , D . , Meng , F . , Davidson , M . W . , Suffoletto , K . and Hua , S . Z . ( 2014 ) . Direct observation of alpha - actinin tension and recruitment at focal adhesions during contact growth . Exp Cell Res 327 , 57 - 67 . Zangari , J . , Partisani , M . , Bertucci , F . , Milanini , J . , Bidaut , G . , Berruyer - Pouyet , C . , Finetti , P . , Long , E . , Brau , F . , Cabaud , O . et al . ( 2014 ) . EFA6B antagonizes breast cancer . Cancer Res 74 , 5493 - 506 . Zhang , L . , Li , L . , Liu , H . , Borowitz , J . L . and Isom , G . E . ( 2009 ) . BNIP3 mediates cell death by different pathways following localization to endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrion . FASEB J 23 , 3405 - 14 . Ziane , R . , Huang , H . , Moghadaszadeh , B . , Beggs , A . H . , Levesque , G . and Chahine , M . ( 2010 ) . Cell membrane expression of cardiac sodium channel Na ( v ) 1 . 5 is modulated by alpha - actinin - 2 interaction . Biochemistry 49 , 166 - 78 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figures Figure 1 . EFA6A binds directly to ACTN1 . A ) Lysate of MDCK cells expressing ACTN1 - GFP was reacted with Gst , Gst - EFA6A or Gst - EFA6ACter prebound to glutathione - sepharose beads . B ) Purified Gst , Gst - ACTN1 and Gst - ACTN4 prebound to glutathione - sepharose beads were reacted with purified ( 6xHis ) - EFA6A . C ) Purified Gst , Gst - ABD , Gst - SRD and Gst - CAMD prebound to glutathione - sepharose beads were reacted with purified ( 6xHis ) - EFA6A . * Main purification contaminant . A , B , C ) The input or whole lysate and bound proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . D ) GFP or GFP - EFA6A expressed in BHK cells were immunoprecipitated using an anti - GFP antibody and the co - precipitation of endogenous ACTN1 was assessed by immunoblot . E ) BHK cells expressing or not myc - EFA6A were processed for immunofluorescence and stained for myc ( blue ) , F - actin ( red ) and the endogenous ACTN1 ( ACTN1 endo . , green ) . Arrows point to EFA6A - induced lamellipodia where the endogenous ACTN1 is recruited . F ) MDCK cells expressing ACTN1 - GFP ( green ; a - b ' ' ) or ACTN4 - GFP ( green ; c - d ' ' ) were processed for immunofluorescence to label the endogenous occludin ( red ) in mature or nascent lumens . Scale bars 10  m . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 2 . EFA6A recruits ACTN1 in a regulated manner . A ) BHK cells expressing EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA , mRFP - ActA and EFA6A - mRFP - ActA were processed for immunofluorescence to label the endogenous ACTN1 and F - actin . In merge images , mRFP is colored red , ACTN1 blue and F - actin green . B ) BHK cells co - expressing  - arrestin1Cter - GFP ( green ) with EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA ( red ) or with the full - length EFA6A - mRFP - ActA ( red ) were processed for immunofluorescence to label the endogenous F - actin ( blue ) . C ) BHK cells expressing EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA were exposed to J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Latrunculin A ( 2  M ) for 2 hr . The cells were processed for immunofluorescence to label the endogenous ACTN1 ( green ) and F - actin ( blue ) . Scale bars 10  m . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 3 . Depletion of ACTN1 inhibits EFA6A - induced normal luminogenesis . A ) Inducible vsvg - EFA6A MDCK expressing cells were transfected with siRNA directed against ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) or control and grown with or without doxycycline ( Dox . ) . 48 hr post - transfection , the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of the indicated proteins was analyzed by immunoblot . The p85 regulatory subunit of PI3K served as a loading control . B ) Left : quantification of the percentage of cell aggregates with a SCL ( left y - axis ) . Shaded areas indicate the percentage of those SCL aggregates with a round lumen ( right y - axis ) . n = 5 . Right : representative images of the four cell types labeled for the nuclei ( blue ) , apical marker PDX ( green ) and F - actin ( red ) are shown . The insets display an image of the same lumens stained for F - actin ( red ) and the TJ marker occludin ( green ) . Arrows point to the TJ . C ) MDCK cells expressing ACTN1S744 - GFP were transfected with siRNA control or directed against ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) . Top panel : the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of the indicated proteins analyzed by immunoblot . Hsp60 served as a loading control . Bottom panel : quantification of the percentage of aggregates with a SCL . No significant difference was measured , n = 3 . D ) Quantification of the percentage of aggregates with multilumen or incomplete lumen , n = 5 . E ) Quantification of the percentage of aggregates with mini - lumens . Representative images of cells depleted in ACTN1 expressing or not vsvg - EFA6A and labeled for the nuclei ( blue ) , apical marker PDX ( green ) and F - actin ( red ) . The insets display an image of the same mini - lumens stained for F - actin ( red ) and the TJ marker occludin ( green ) . Arrows point to the TJ . B - E ) Statistical significance was J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t calculated using the Student ' s t - test . p - values of the main results discussed in the text are indicated on the graphs . Scale bars 10  m . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 4 . ACTN1 acts as an effector of EFA6A to promote normal luminogenesis . A ) Inducible vsvg - EFA6A MDCK expressing cells were transfected with siRNA control , directed against ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) or EFA6A ( # 2661 ) or both ACTN1 and EFA6A and then grown with or without doxycycline ( Dox . ) . 48 hr post - transfection the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of the indicated proteins analyzed by immunoblot . Hsp60 served as a loading control . B ) Quantification of the percentage of cell aggregates with a SCL , n = 4 . C ) Inducible vsvg - EFA6A  C MDCK expressing cells were grown with or without doxycycline . Top panel : 48 hr post - transfection the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of vsvg - EFA6A  C analyzed by immunoblot . Hsp60 served as a loading control . Middle panel : representative images of cell aggregates grown with or without doxycycline labeled for the nuclei ( blue ) , apical marker PDX ( green ) and F - actin ( red ) . Bottom panel : quantification of the percentage of cell aggregates with a SCL . Statistical significance was calculated using the Student ' s t - test . n = 3 , p < 0 . 001 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 5 . ACTN1 is an effector of EFA6B to induce luminogenesis in the breast cancer cells MCF7 . A ) Control and vsvg - EFA6B MCF7 expressing cells were transfected with siRNA control or directed against ACTN1 . 48 hr post - transfection the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of the indicated proteins analyzed by immunoblot . Actin served as a loading control . B ) Quantification of the percentage of the indicated cell aggregates with extended lumens . C ) Quantification of the percentage of the indicated cell aggregates with mini - lumens . B , C ) Statistical significance was calculated using the Student ' s t - test . n = 3 , p - values of the main results discussed in the text are indicated on the graphs . D ) Representative images of cells depleted or not for ACTN1 and expressing or not vsvg - EFA6B . The cell aggregates were processed for immunofluorescence labeling cytoskeletal F - actin with fluorescent phalloidin . Arrows point to PAPs . Scale bars 10  m . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 6 . EFA6A and ACTN1 control apical contractility contributing to luminogenesis . A , B ) Inducible vsvg - EFA6A MDCK expressing cells were transfected with siRNA control , or directed against ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) or EFA6A ( # 2661 ) and then grown with or without doxycycline ( Dox . ) . A ) Representative images of the aggregates labeled for pMLC , F - actin and the nuclei . Top panels : pMLC staining alone . Bottom panels show the corresponding merged images : pMLC is colored in green , F - actin in red and the nuclei in blue . Scale bars 10  m . B ) 48 hr post - transfection the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of the indicated proteins analyzed by immunoblot . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Hsp60 served as a loading control . C ) Inducible myc - RhoAV14 MDCK expressing cells were transfected with siRNA control or directed against ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) and grown with or without doxycycline . 48 hr post - transfection the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of the indicated proteins was analyzed by immunoblot . Hsp60 served as a loading control . D ) Inducible myc - RhoAV14 MDCK expressing cells were transfected with siRNA control or directed against ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) and grown coverslips with or without doxycycline . 48 hr post - transfection the cells were processed for immunofluorescence and labeled for F - actin ( a - d ) , pMLC ( a ' - d ' ) and the focal adhesion protein paxillin ( a ' ' - d ' ' ) . Scale bars 20  m . E ) Inducible myc - RhoAV14 MDCK expressing cells were transfected with siRNA control or directed against ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) and grown with or without doxycycline in Matrigel . Quantification of the indicated cell aggregates for SCL , multilumen and incomplete lumen or no lumen is reported in the bar graph . Statistical significance was calculated using the Student ' s t - test . n = 3 , p - values of the main results discussed in the text are indicated on the graphs . F ) Representative images of inducible myc - RhoAV14 MDCK cells depleted or not for ACTN1 ( # 2225 ) and grown for four days in Matrigel with or without doxycycline . The cell aggregates were processed for immunofluorescence and labeled for the nuclei ( blue ) , the apical marker PDX ( green ) and the F - actin ( red ) . Arrows point to PAPs and mini - lumens . Scale bars 10  m . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ACTN4 - GFP ACTN1 - GFP GFP a a’ a’’ b b’ b’’ ACTN1 - GFP E - cadherin Merge ACTN4 - GFP E - cadherin Merge Cyst PAP AMIS mRFP - EFA6A Merge A B C Figure S1 Figure S1 . Subcellular localization of mRFP - EFA6A , ACTN1 - GFP and ACTN4 - GFP . A ) MDCK cells expressing mRFP - EFA6A were grown in Matrigel and processed for immunofluorescence to label F - actin and the nuclei . The top panels show the mRFP - EFA6A staining alone and the bottom panels the corresponding merged images with mRFP - EFA6A colored in red , F - actin in green and the nuclei in blue . Scale bars 10  m . B ) MDCK cells expressing GFP , ACTN1 - GFP and ACTN4 - GFP were grown in Matrigel and processed for immunofluorescence . C ) MDCK cells expressing ACTN1 - GFP ( green ; a - a ' ' ) or ACTN4 - GFP ( green ; b - b ' ' ) were processed for immunofluorescence to label the endogenous E - cadherin ( red ) . Scale bars 10  m . Supplementary figure s J . Cell Sci . 131 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 209361 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u p p l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n B F - actin ACTN1 mRFP Merge EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA A mRFP - ActA EFA6A - mRFP - ActA EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA mRFP Merge Hsp60 Figure S2 Figure S2 . A ) The mRFP - ActA constructs localized to mitochondria . BHK cells expressing mRFP - ActA , EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA and the full - length EFA6A - mRFP - ActA were processed for immunofluorescence to label the endogenous mitochondrial protein Hsp60 . In merge images , mRFP is colored red and Hsp60 is colored green ; thus , yellow pixels indicate co - localization demonstrating that the fusion proteins are localized to the mitochondria . B ) Co - localization of EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA with the endogenous ACTN1 and F - actin . Magnified image of BHK cells expressing EFA6ACter - mRFP - ActA stained for the endogenous ACTN1 and F - actin . In the merge image , mRFP is colored red , ACTN1 is colored blue and F - actin is colored green . Overlap of expression appears white in the merge color image and indicates triple co - localization . Scale bars 10  m . J . Cell Sci . 131 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 209361 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n siCt + Dox . siCt - Dox . siACTN1 + Dox . siACTN1 - Dox . DAPI / E - cadherin / PDX Figure S3 A B s i C t s i 2225 s i 2235 s i 594 s i 1581 s i 1997 actin ACTN1 siCt + Dox . siCt - Dox . siACTN1 + Dox . siACTN1 - Dox . DAPI / PDX / Actin C E siACTN1 + Dox . siACTN1 - Dox . DAPI / PDX / Actin D % o f S i ng l e C e l n t r a l Lu m en s i C t s i A C T N 1 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 * * s i C t s i A C T N 1 GFP ACTN1 Hsp60 Figure S3 . A ) siRNA - mediated ACTN1 depletion . MDCK cells were transfected with siRNA control or siRNAs directed against ACTN1 . 48 hr post - transfection the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of ACTN1 analyzed by immunoblot . Actin served as a loading control . B ) ACTN1 depletion does not affect the apico - basal polarity . Inducible vsvg - EFA6A MDCK expressing cells were transfected with siRNA control or directed against ACTN1 and grown in the presence or absence of doxycycline . At day four , the cells were processed for immunofluorescence and labeled for the nuclei ( blue ) , the AJ marker E - cadherin ( green ) and the apical marker PDX ( red ) . Scale bars 10  m . C , D ) Uncropped images shown in Fig . 3B and Fig . 3E . E ) MDCK cells expressing GFP were transfected with siRNA control or directed against ACTN1 . Top panel : the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of the indicated proteins analyzed by immunoblot . Hsp60 served as a loading control . Bottom panel : quantification of the percentage of aggregates with a SCL . Statistical significance was calculated using the Student ' s t - test . n = 3 , p < 0 . 01 . J . Cell Sci . 131 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 209361 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n EFA6A hsp60 s i C t s i 1440 s i 2091 s i 2661 A Figure S4 + DoxsiCt DoxsiCt - + DoxsiACTN1 DoxsiACTN1 - 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 % o f agg r e ga t e s w i t h S C L * * * * * * * * * * N . S . Dox . Dox . - + s i C t s i E F A 6 A s i A C T N 1 + s i E F A 6 A s i A C T N 1 C % o f t o t a l agg r ega t e s 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Multilumen IncompleteLumen * * * * * % o f t o t a l agg r ega t e s 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Mini - lumen * * B s i C t s i E F A 6 A s i A C T N 1 + s i E F A 6 A s i A C T N 1 ACTN1 EFA6A hsp60 vsvg - EFA6A Dox . E D Figure S4 . siRNA - mediated EFA6A depletion . MDCK cells were transfected with siRNA control or siRNAs directed against EFA6A . 48 hr post - transfection the cells were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer and the expression of EFA6A analyzed by immunoblot . Hsp60 served as a loading control . B - E ) Experiments presented in Fig . 3A , B , D , E and Fig . 4A , B were repeated with alternate siRNAs directed against EFA6A ( # 1440 ) or ACTN1 ( # 594 ) . n = 3 , p - values of the main results discussed in the text are indicated on the graphs . J . Cell Sci . 131 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 209361 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Gst Gst - SRD 97 66 45 31 anti - Gst Input anti - EFA6B vsvg - EFA6B * Pull - down G s t G s t - S R D anti - EFA6B vsvg - EFA6B B Figure S5 Pull - down G s t anti - EFA6B vsvg - EFA6B G s t - A C T N 1 I npu t X * 97 66 45 31 Gst - ACTN1 Gst G s t G s t - A C T N 1 anti - Gst Input A Figure S5 . EFA6B binds to ACTN1 SRD . Lysate of MCF - 10 cells expressing vsvg - EFA6B was reacted with Gst - ACTN1 ( A ) and Gst - SRD ( B ) or control Gst ( A , B ) prebound to glutathione Sepharose 4B beads . The input , whole lysate and bound proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . * Main purification contaminant . J . Cell Sci . 131 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 209361 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u p p l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n