Работы по системной биологии – это . . . 0 1750 3500 5250 7000 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 « Это золотые гири ! Понимаете ? Гири из чистого золота ! » « А вдруг они не золотые ? - спросил любимый сын лейтенанта Шмидта » Проблемы с биологией . . . С системной ли ? Identify genes involved in response to radiation in model organisms Find human orthologs Test as biomarkers of radiation response / treatment success in humans . Mainly , data mining Analyzing the dose - dependence of the S . cerevisiae global transcriptional response to methyl methanesulfonate and ionizing radiation . Benton MG , et al . BMC Genomics . 2006 Dec 1 ; 7 : 305 Global protein expression profiling of budding yeast in response to DNA damage . Lee MW , Kim BJ , Choi HK , et al . Yeast . 2007 . . . and almost NONE change the sensitivity to radiation when mutated ~ 900 to 2000 genes are responsive to DNA damage only 157 proteins responsive to the DNA damage are identified , and 57 of them are NOT transcriptionally responsive Working with yeast data… Science . 2006 May 19 ; 312 : 1054 - 9 . A systems approach to mapping DNA damage response pathways . Workman CT , Mak HC , et al . about ~ 5000 DDR - related transcription factors binding sites identified on DNA Why Most Published Research Findings Are False ? John P . A . Ioannidis ? August 2005 | Volume 2 Issue 8 | e124 Publishers withdraw more than 120 gibberish papers … after scientist reveals that they were computer - generated . Richard Van Noorden Scientific world getting duped by computerized fake research papers Why Most Published Research Findings Are False ? John P . A . Ioannidis вероятность правильности найденного тем меньше . . . . . . чем больше количество проверяемых взаимоотношений . . . чем больше гибкости в постановке опытов , их анализе и интерпретации . . . чем больше финансовая заинтересованность . . . чем « горячее » поле исследований Why Most Published Research Findings Are False ? John P . A . Ioannidis a detailed mathematical proof that , assuming modest levels of researcher bias typically imperfect research techniques the well - known tendency to focus on exciting rather than highly plausible theories researchers will come up with wrong findings most of the time . cutoff p - value 2 . 2 0 . 08316 2 . 1 0 . 0273 2 0 . 0655 1 . 9 0 . 0265 1 . 8 0 . 1063 cutoff p - value 2 . 1 0 . 0273 https : / / nsaunders . wordpress . com / 2012 / 07 / 23 / we - really - dont - care - what - statistical - method - you - used / Update : as pointed out in the comments , the amusing error in this article has been “corrected” ( or at least , “edited away” ) . An integrative analysis of DNA methylation and RNA - Seq data for human heart , kidney and liver BMC Systems Biology 2011 , 5 ( Suppl 3 ) : S4 We really don’t care what statistical method you used Wo aber auf der Oberfläche der Zufall sein Spiel treibt , da wird er stets durch innre verborgne Gesetze beherrscht F . Engels . «Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen deutschen Philosophie» . Percent of research papers with positive results MB : Molecular Biology & Genetics Negative results are disappearing from most disciplines and countries Scientometrics ( 2012 ) 90 : 891 – 904 Open Journals are the answer ! • Online only • Peer - reviewed • Should be not afraid of publishing negative data • Directory of Open Access Journals ( DOAJ ) lists > 8000 journals Who ' s Afraid of Peer Review ? ▪ The goal was to create a credible but mundane scientific paper , one with such grave errors that a competent peer reviewer should easily identify it as flawed and unpublishable . ▪ Molecule X from lichen species Y inhibits the growth of cancer cell Z . ( a database of molecules , lichens , and cancer cell lines and a computer program to generate hundreds of unique papers was used . ▪ The fictitious authors are affiliated with fictitious African institutions . Authors’ names ( such as Ocorrafoo M . L . Cobange ) were generated by randomly permuting African first and last names harvested from online databases . ▪ For the affiliations , such as the Wassee Institute of Medicine , Swahili words and African names were randomly combined with generic institutional words and African capital cities . ▪ Paper was translated into French with Google Translate , and then translated the result back into English . After correcting the worst mistranslations , the result was a grammatically correct paper with the idiom of a non - native speaker . Science 4 October 2013 : Vol . 342 no . 6154 pp . 60 - 65 ▪ The papers describe a simple test of whether cancer cells grow more slowly in a test tube when treated with increasing concentrations of a molecule . In a second experiment , the cells were also treated with increasing doses of radiation to simulate cancer radiotherapy . The data are the same across papers , and so are the conclusions : The molecule is a powerful inhibitor of cancer cell growth , and it increases the sensitivity of cancer cells to radiotherapy . ▪ There are numerous red flags in the papers , with the most obvious in the first data plot . The graph ' s caption claims that it shows a " dose - dependent " effect on cell growth—the paper ' s linchpin result—but the data clearly show the opposite . The molecule is tested across a staggering five orders of magnitude of concentrations , all the way down to picomolar levels . And yet , the effect on the cells is modest and identical at every concentration . ▪ One glance at the paper ' s Materials & Methods section reveals the obvious explanation for this outlandish result . The molecule was dissolved in a buffer containing an unusually large amount of ethanol . The control group of cells should have been treated with the same buffer , but they were not . Thus , the molecule ' s observed " effect " on cell growth is nothing more than the well - known cytotoxic effect of alcohol . ▪ The second experiment is more outrageous . The control cells were not exposed to any radiation at all . So the observed " interactive effect " is nothing more than the standard inhibition of cell growth by radiation . Indeed , it would be impossible to conclude anything from this experiment . Who ' s Afraid of Peer Review ? • Only 36 of the 304 submissions generated review comments recognizing any of the paper ' s scientific problems . And 16 of those papers were accepted by the editors despite the damning reviews • Black list ( Beall’s ) : 82 % accepted the paper . • “Good” list : 45 % accepted the bogus paper . •In 2012 , Sage was named the Independent Publishers Guild Academic and Professional Publisher of the Year . The Sage’s Journal of International Medical Research , without asking for any changes to the paper ' s scientific content , sent an acceptance letter and an invoice for $ 3100 . Who ' s Afraid of Peer Review ? Chemical Genomics Identifies Small - Molecule MCL1 Repressors and BCL - xL as a Predictor of MCL1 Dependency Guo Wei , 1 , 2 , * Adam A . Margolin , 1 , 5 , * Leila Haery , 1 Emily Brown , 1 Lisa Cucolo , 1 Bina Julian , 1 Shyemaa Shehata , 3 Andrew L . Kung , 2 Rameen Beroukhim , 1 , 3 and Todd R . Golub 1 , 2 , 4 , # 5 - Year Impact Factor : 27 5 - Year Impact Factor : 35 5 - Year Impact Factor : 34 5 - Year Impact Factor : 42 5 - Year Impact Factor : 11 Golub TR [ Author ] Results : 1 to 20 of 200 Cancer Discov J Clin Invest Nat Genet . Nature 1 ) Cancer Program , The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard , Cambridge 2 ) Department of Pediatric Oncology , Dana Farber Cancer Institute , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 4 ) Howard Hughes Medical Institute TXNIP MCL1 Probe GeneChip Human Genome U133A 2 . 0 Array representing 14 , 500 well - characterized human genes Figure 1 F . Ectopic expression of physiological levels of FLAG - MCL1 rescued HMC - 1 - 8 cells from TR compounds , but not methotrexate , as measured by …cell viability at 24 hours ( F ) . Error bars indicate standard deviation of duplicate measurements . Figure 2 His model predicted , • in different fields of medical research , rates of wrongness roughly corresponding to the observed rates at which findings were later convincingly refuted : 80 % of non - randomized studies 25 % of gold - standard randomized trials 10 % of the platinum - standard large • are wrong • 45 claimed to have found effective interventions . • 34 had been retested • 14 of these , or 41 percent , had been convincingly shown to be wrong or significantly exaggerated . • If between a third and a half of the most acclaimed research in medicine was proving untrustworthy , the scope and impact of the problem are undeniable . Quality of our science ? 49 of the most highly regarded research findings in medicine over in the 13 years - journals were most widely cited - articles themselves were the most widely cited articles in these journals John P . A . Ioannidis Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 10 , 712 ( September 2011 ) Believe it or not : how much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets ? Reanalyzed 67 projects , most of them ( 47 ) from the field of oncology . This analysis revealed that only in ~ 20 – 25 % of the projects were the relevant published data completely in line with our in - house findings… •Our analysis revealed that the reproducibility of published data did not significantly correlate with journal impact factors , the number of publications on the respective target or the number of independent groups that authored the publications . • We wondered whether heterogeneous experimental conditions could be an explanation for the frequent inconsistencies . Interestingly , a transfer of the models — for example , by changes in the cell lines or assay formats — was not crucial for the discrepancies that were detected . Rather , either the results were reproducible and showed transferability in other models , or even a 1 : 1 reproduction of published experimental procedures revealed inconsistencies between published and in - house data ( Fig . 1d ) . Believe it or not : how much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets ? Our analysis revealed that the reproducibility of published data did not significantly correlate with journal impact factors , the number of publications on the respective target or the number of independent groups that authored the publications . Believe it or not : how much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets ? • Over the past decade , before pursuing a particular line of research , scientists in the haematology and oncology department at the biotechnology firm Amgen in Thousand Oaks , California , tried to confirm published findings related to that work . Fifty - three papers were deemed ' landmark ' studies Nevertheless , scientific findings were confirmed in only 6 ( 11 % ) cases . Even knowing the limitations of preclinical research , this was a shocking result . • The Amgen scientists approached the papers ' original authors to discuss findings and sometimes borrowed materials to repeat the experiments . In some cases , those authors required them to sign an agreement that they would not disclose their findings about specific papers . Begley and Ellis were therefore not free to identify the irreproducible papers Believe it or not : how much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets ? Journal impact factor Number of articles Mean number of citations of non - reproduced articles * Mean number of citations of reproduced articles * > 20 21 248 ( range 3 – 800 ) 231 ( range 82 – 519 ) 5 – 19 32 169 ( range 6 – 1 , 909 ) 13 ( range 3 – 24 ) Results from ten - year retrospective analysis of experiments performed prospectively . The term ' non - reproduced ' was assigned on the basis of findings not being sufficiently robust to drive a drug - development programme . Source of citations : Google Scholar , May 2011 . From Drug development : Raise standards for preclinical cancer research C . Glenn Begley & Lee M . Ellis Nature 483 , 531 – 533 ( 29 March 2012 ) Table 1 : Reproducibility of research findings Believe it or not : how much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets ? Home » The Scan » Price of Irreproducibility Price of Irreproducibility Price of Irreproducibility Jun 10 , 2015 The inability to reproduce research ﬁndings is a long - standing issue in the sciences , and a new paper appearing in PLOS Biology estimates that some $ 28 billion is spent each year on preclinical research that ' s not reproducible . A trio of researchers from the Global Biological Standards Institute and Boston University School of Management calculated that more than half of preclinical research isn ' t reproducible . They came up with this number by analyzing the four basic causes of irreproducibility : study design , biological reagents and reference materials , lab protocols , and data analysis and reporting . Based on past published error rates in those categories , errors in each of these categories lead all together to a between 18 percent and 88 . 5 percent irreproducibility rate , according to the researchers ' probability bounds approach . The midpoint of that range is about 53 percent . Note that the researchers caution that not all of that is money wasted . Some of these studies aren ' t reproducible because the methods were poorly described , not because the results aren ' t valid . https : / / www . genomeweb . com / scan / price - irreproducibility ? utm _ source = SilverpopMailing & utm _ medium = email & utm _ campaign = Scan % 20Blog : % 20Tim % 20Hunt , % 20This % 20Week % 20in % 20Nucleic % 20Acids % 20Research , % 20Cost % 20of % 20Irreproducible % 20Research , % 20more % 20 - % 2006 / 10 / 2015 % 2001 : 35 : 00 % 20PM Retraction Watch Tracking retractions as a window into the scientific process http : / / retractionwatch . com / 2015 / 02 / 18 / evidence - scientists - continue - cite - retracted - papers / 24 50 http : / / journals . plos . org / plosone / article ? id = 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0044118 The number of articles retracted per year increased by a factor of 19 . 06 from 2001 to 2010 almost nothing happens : nearly 40 % of scientists rarely ( 26 % ) or never ( 11 % ) checked for retractions So , the paper is retracted , and then ? . . • In studies for which findings could be reproduced , authors had paid close attention to controls , reagents , investigator bias and describing the complete data set . • For results that could not be reproduced , however , data were not routinely analysed by investigators blinded to the experimental versus control groups . Investigators frequently presented the results of one experiment , such as a single Western - blot analysis . They sometimes said they presented specific experiments that supported their underlying hypothesis , but that were not reflective of the entire data set . • There are no guidelines that require all data sets to be reported in a paper ; often , original data are removed during the peer review and publication process . Believe it or not : how much can we rely on published data on potential drug targets ? Кто виноват ? • Dr Bohannon’s sting was directed at the lower tier of academic journals . But in a classic 1998 study Fiona Godlee , editor of the prestigious British Medical Journal , sent an article containing eight deliberate mistakes in study design , analysis and interpretation to more than 200 of the BMJ’s regular reviewers . Not one picked out all the mistakes . On average , they reported fewer than two ; some did not spot any . • Another experiment at the BMJ showed that reviewers did no better when more clearly instructed on the problems they might encounter . They also seem to get worse with experience . Charles McCulloch and Michael Callaham , of the University of California , San Francisco , looked at how 1 , 500 referees were rated by editors at leading journals over a 14 - year period and found that 92 % showed a slow but steady drop in their scores . Что делать ? • PLoS ONE and Science Exchange have launched a programm called the Reproducibility Initiative through which life scientists can pay to have their work validated by an independent lab . • In October 2013 the initiative announced it had been given $ 1 . 3m by the Laura and John Arnold Foundation , a charity , to look at 50 of the highest - impact cancer findings published between 2010 and 2012 . • The journal Cortex started offering yet another means of improving reproducibility and reducing bias . The mechanism , termed a “Registered Report , ” involves peer review of an investigator ' s experimental design before data are collected . If the scientific question and methods are deemed sound , then authors are offered “in principle acceptance” of their article , irrespective of the study ' s outcome . Общие проблемы с работами в области системной биологии • изобилие положительных и недостаток отрицательных результатов • размытие ответственности авторов ( список авторов часто исчисляется десятками ) • большая часть данных находится в дополнительных материалах к статьям • возможности затруднить анализ , предоставляя неполные или избыточные данные • для проверки выводов требуется коллектив специалистов • для проверки выводов требуется огромное количество времени • воспроизвести результаты часто невозможно , не получив доступ к исходному оборудованию • использование альтернативных методик может привести к противоречивым выводам In this study , the salmon was shown images of people in social situations , either socially inclusive situations or socially exclusive situations . Salmon in the fMRI scanner “Neural Correlates of Interspecies Perspective Taking in the Post - Mortem Atlantic Salmon : An Argument For Proper Multiple Comparisons Correction” Brain activity detected …there’s a ton of information there , generally broken down into sections called voxels . Up 130 , 000 of them in a single study and contrast selection , looking at each one to see if it is ‘activated’ compared to the others… IgNobel Prize in Neuroscience 2012 Общие проблемы с работами в области системной биологии • использование альтернативных методик может привести к противоречивым выводам Pearson : 0 . 402 Pearson : 0 . 095 Транскриптомика на службе медицины Получение большого объёма молекулярных данных путём гибридизации образцов РНК больных на ДНК - микрочипе Обработка данных и построение модели Клинически важное решение ( классификация ) Транскриптомика на службе медицины Association of negative control signatures with overall survival . In plots A – C the NKI cohort was split into two groups using a signature of post - prandial laughter ( panel A ) , localization of skin fibroblasts ( panel B ) , social defeat in mice ( panel C ) . A – C , the fraction of patients alive ( overall survival , OS ) is shown as a function of time for both groups . D , The 1890 signatures examined in MSigDB c2 encompass all the fields of biomedical sciences , nevertheless we discovered that 67 % of them were associated with breast cancer outcome at p , 0 . 05 , 23 % at p = 10 - 5 Most random gene expression signatures are significantly associated with breast cancer outcome . Venet D et al . PLoS Comput Biol . ( 2011 ) • We next compared 47 published breast cancer outcome signatures to signatures made of random genes . Twenty - eight of them ( 60 % ) were not significantly better outcome predictors than random signatures of same size . • 11 ( 23 % ) were worse predictors than the median random signature . • More than 90 % of random signatures > 100 genes were significant outcome predictors . Транскриптомика на службе медицины CCLE vs CGP Cancer : Discrepancies in drug sensitivity John N . Weinstein & Philip L . Lorenzi Nature 504 , 381 – 383 ( December 2013 ) CCLE vs CGP • The pharmacological assay used by the CGP ( the CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay from Promega ) measures metabolic activity in terms of a reductase - enzyme product after a 72 - hour incubation of cells with a drug ; that used by the CCLE ( the CellTiter - Glo assay from Promega ) measures metabolic activity by assessing levels of the energy - transfer molecule ATP , after 72 – 84 hours of incubation . Both assays provide indices of the drug ' s activity against the cells , but they would not be expected to mirror each other across all cell and drug types , even if run in parallel ( and neither may be the best indicator of cell viability ) . • drug sensitivities can diverge if different batches of fetal bovine serum ( which varies in its content of cytokines and other biologically active molecules ) are used . • The time and conditions of the cells ' incubation before the drug is added , the coating on the plastic culture wells , intra - study batch or trend effects and other such arcane factors can all be influential . • Given the differences , which pharmacological assay represents the ' truth ' ? The probable answer is either both or neither , depending on one ' s purpose . If the aim is to predict clinical efficacy , then neither assay will be ' correct ' in most cases . The well - worn dictum “all models are wrong , some models are useful” applies with a vengeance in this context ; there are too many differences between cultured cells and patients , particularly in terms of the delicate balance between beneficial and toxic effects of anticancer drugs . • The more appropriate uses of cell - line pharmacological data are for hypothesis generation and for elaborating on existing hypotheses , rather than for formal statistical prediction . Cell line identities ? Genetic Profiling Reveals Cross - Contamination and Misidentification of 6 Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma Cell Lines : ACC2 , ACC3 , ACCM , ACCNS , ACCS and CAC2 Janyaporn Phuchareon , Yoshihito Ohta , Jonathan M . Woo , David W . Eisele , Osamu Tetsu We performed DNA fingerprint analysis on six ACC cell lines using short tandem repeat ( STR ) examinations and found that all six cell lines had been contaminated with other cells . ACC2 , ACC3 , and ACCM were determined to be cervical cancer cells ( HeLa cells ) , whereas the ACCS cell line was composed of T24 urinary bladder cancer cells . ACCNS and CAC2 cells were contaminated with cells derived from non - human mammalian species : the cells labeled ACCNS were mouse cells and the CAC2 cells were rat cells . Leuk Res . 2014 Aug ; 38 ( 8 ) : 999 - 1001 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . leukres . 2014 . 05 . 003 . Epub 2014 May 23 . Cell line cross - contamination : WSU - CLL is a known derivative of REH and is unsuitable as a model for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia . International Cell Line Authentication Committee ( ICLAC ) . Gynecol Oncol . 2012 Oct ; 127 ( 1 ) : 241 - 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ygyno . 2012 . 06 . 017 . Epub 2012 Jun 16 . DNA profiling analysis of endometrial and ovarian cell lines reveals misidentification , redundancy and contamination . Korch C 1 , Spillman MA , Jackson TA , Jacobsen BM , Murphy SK , Lessey BA , Jordan VC , Bradford AP . RESULTS : Fifty - one ovarian cancer lines were profiled with ten found to be redundant and five ( A2008 , OV2008 , C13 , SK - OV - 4 and SK - OV - 6 ) identified as cervical cancer cells . Ten endometrial cell lines were analyzed , with RL - 92 , HEC - 1A , HEC - 1B , HEC - 50 , KLE , and AN3CA all exhibiting unique , uncontaminated STR profiles . Multiple variants of Ishikawa and ECC - 1 endometrial cancer cell lines were genotyped and analyzed by sequencing of mutations in the p53 gene . The profile of ECC - 1 cells did not match the EnCa - 101 tumor , from which it was reportedly derived , and all ECC - 1 isolates were genotyped as Ishikawa cells , MCF - 7 breast cancer cells , or a combination thereof . Two normal , immortalized endometrial epithelial cell lines , HES cells and the hTERT - EEC line , were identified as HeLa cervical carcinoma and MCF - 7 breast cancer cells , respectively . 9 . 4 15 . 9 9 . 3 9 . 8 2 . 7 5 . 0 Cell line identities Name : Christopher Korch Christopher . Korch @ ucdenver . edu Division : Medical Oncology Title : The persistent and growing use of false cell lines in journal publications has a big impact ! Abstract : Cell lines are essential models for biomedical research . However , they also have a common problem that needs to be addressed . Cell lines can be misidentified , meaning that they no longer correspond to the donor from whom the cellswere first obtained . This problem may arise due to cross - contamination : the accidental introduction of cells from another culture . The contaminant , which is often a rapidly dividing cell line , will overgrow and replace the original culture . The end result is a misidentified cell line , also known as a false or imposter cell line . False cell lines may come from an entirely different species , tissue , or cell type than the original donor and result in unreliable and irreproducible results when used in scientific publications . HEp - 2 and Intestine 407 are false cell lines that are widely used in the scientific literature . They were shown to be cross - contaminated in 1967 , and have no known authentic stock . In this white paper , we examine the usage of HEp - 2 and Int estine 407 in journal publications . Analysis of several publication databases showed that HEp - 2 was used in 5798 published articles , and extensively described as laryngeal cancer rather than its true identity , cervical cancer ( HeLa ) . Intestine 407 was used in 1336 published articles , and is extensively described as normal intestine rather than cervical cancer ( HeLa ) . The problem is becoming more widespread and affects more than 1000 journals . Our analysis clearly shows the need for action on false cell lines . HEp - 2 Cell lines - creative - bioarray . com Ad www . creative - bioarray . com / ( 631 ) 626 - 9181 Stable Human HEp - 2 Cell lines . High Quality . 20 % OFF . Order Now ! " When you get a cell line , you have to look that gift horse in the mouth ? there ' s up to a 40 percent chance it ' s a Trojan horse , not what it says it is . " http : / / proceeds - lambent . blogspot . com / 2012 _ 06 _ 01 _ archive . html Misidentified and contaminated cell lines lead to faulty cancer science Christopher Korch , University of Colorado Cancer Center " Equi donati dentes non inspiciuntur . " St . Jerome The Letter to the Ephesians , circa AD 400 . http : / / www . theguardian . com / commentisfree / 2013 / dec / 09 / how - journals - nature - science - cell - damage - science https : / / theconversation . com / how - to - break - free - from - the - stifling - grip - of - luxury - journals - 21669 Randy Schekman says his lab will no longer send papers to Nature , Cell and Science as they distort scientific process Nobel winner declares boycott of top science journals Professor of Cell and Developmental Biology at University of California , Berkeley 2013 Nobel prize in physiology or medicine “…science must break the tyranny of the luxury journals . ” “These journals aggressively curate their brands , in ways more conducive to selling subscriptions than to stimulating the most important research . Like fashion designers who create limited - edition handbags or suits , they know scarcity stokes demand , so they artificially restrict the number of papers they accept . The exclusive brands are then marketed with a gimmick called " impact factor " – a score for each journal , measuring the number of times its papers are cited by subsequent research . Better papers , the theory goes , are cited more often , so better journals boast higher scores . Yet it is a deeply flawed measure , pursuing which has become an end in itself …” Maxam – Gilbert sequencing Research findings • Together with Allan Maxam , Gilbert developed a new DNA sequencing method , using chemical methods developed by Andrei Mirzabekov • Achieved the first synthesis of active insulin using recombinant DNA technology ( cloning ) • Gilbert first proposed the existence of introns and exons and explained the evolution of introns in a seminal 1978 " Nature " paper • In 1986 , Gilbert proposed the RNA world hypothesis for the origin of life Walter Gilbert Nobel Prize in 1980 in Chemistry September 23 2014 , 1 . 20am EDT Nobel Laureate : big data and full - genome analysis not all they’re cracked up to be http : / / theconversation . com / nobel - laureate - big - data - and - full - genome - analysis - not - all - theyre - cracked - up - to - be - 31992 What are your views on “big data” ? Big data promises to collect large sets of data and find associations between genes and diseases . There’s definitely something useful in the data collected , but the danger is that we have no clue how to interpret it . Also , you must remember that all statistically significant things are not biologically significant . So , it is definitely not a panacea . What problems does science face today ? Another major problem is the explosion in scientific manpower that has not necessarily led to the betterment of science , especially in biology . In fact , bad material that gets published has increased . In biology , the top journals – Cell , Science and Nature – have created a mess . They tell the authors “give me the headline , not the data” . What advice would you like to give to young scientists ? Do not blindly believe whatever you read . I often used to give my students papers that said opposite things and then tell them to explain to me how they were consistent , if at all . Скандал с клиническими испытаниями в медицинском центре Duke University • изучение профилей экспрессии генов позволило ( якобы ) оптимизировать лечение больных раком лёгких ( 2006 , Nature Medicine and NEJM ) • получено $ 10 500 000 на клинические испытания • 2007 – 2009 : независимой проверкой выявлены многочисленные ошибки и нарушения o в основной таблице все результаты были сдвинуты на одну строчку по сравнению с идентификаторами o положительный ответ был обозначен как отрицательный , и наоборот • 2011 : все клинические испытания ( 3 ) остановлены • отозвано 10 статей ( Nature Medicine , NEJM , JAMA , и другие престижные журналы ) • идёт судебное разбирательство ~ 2000 часов работы ! ! ! Что такое ! - - сказал вдруг Балаганов . . . - - Три часа уже пилю , а оно все еще не золотое . Home » The Scan » The Repercussions More responsibility ? https : / / www . genomeweb . com / scan / repercussions ? utm _ source = SilverpopMailing & utm _ medium = email & utm _ campaign = Scan % 20Blog : % 20Fraudster % 20Gets % 20Jail % 20Term , % 20This % 20Week ' s % 20Nature , % 20Americans ' % 20Views % 20of % 20Scientific % 20Issues , % 20more % 20 - % 2007 / 02 / 2015 % 2001 : 10 : 00 % 20PM The Repercussions Jul 02 , 2015 A former Iowa State University researcher has been sentenced to four and a half years in prison for making false statements in research reports , according to the Associated Press . Dong - Pyou Han must also pay $ 7 . 2 million back to the US National Institutes of Health . At the Des Moines Register , Retraction Watch ' s Adam Marcus and Ivan Oransky note that prosecution for research misconduct is quite rare and say that Han isn ' t even one of the worst offenders . Still , they argue that " if Han ' s stiff sentence serves to deter future would - be fraudsters , that would be an example worth setting . " NCI Sets Rules For Omics Studies • Availability and quality of appropriate clinical specimens • Requirements for the analytical performance of the omics assay • Methods for omics data pre - processing • Development of the mathematical predictor model and assessment of its performance • Clinical interpretation of the test result • Design of the clinical trial • Ethical , legal , and regulatory issues Правила проведения широкомасштабных ( “ - omics” ) исследований • Доступность и качество соответствующих клинических образцов • Требования к качеству соответствующих аналитических процедур ( omics assay ) • Методы обработки данных широкомасштабных экспериментов • Построение математической модели и оценку её предсказующей способности • Клиническую интерпретацию результатов тестов • Принципы организации клинических испытаний • Этические , юридические , и административные правила Руководство из 30 пунктов , регулирующее : NIH Presses Journals to Focus on Reproducibility of Studies June 6 , 2014 By Paul Basken ▪ A group of leading medical - journal editors , convened by the National Institutes of Health , this week endorsed a set of guidelines intended to tackle the widespread problem of scientific findings that cannot be replicated . ▪ About 40 editors , representing journals that include Science and Nature , reached a " general agreement " about what they must accept as their responsibility for ensuring the reproducibility of their published findings , the NIH director , Francis S . Collins , said on Thursday . ▪ Dr . Collins , addressing a semiannual session of his advisory committee at the agency’s headquarters , in Bethesda , Md . , gave only limited details of the agreement , and the NIH did not release a copy of the text . Officials atScience declined to authorize a release , saying the principles were still regarded as a draft . ▪ As one element , however , Dr . Collins said the journals discussed the need to publish articles that identify reproducibility problems with studies they previously published . IN OUT =