Leishmaniasis is one of the most significant of the neglected tropical diseases , with 350 million people in 88 countries worldwide living at risk of developing one of the many forms of the disease 1 . It is caused by infection with one of several different species of protozoan para - sites of the genus Leishmania , which maintain their life cycle through transmission between an insect ( sandfly ) and a mammalian host . The flagellated , motile forms of Leishmania spp . are called promastigotes . They are found within the sandfly and progress through various morphologically distinct stages of differentiation to ulti - mately become the non - dividing , infectious ‘metacyclic’ promastigotes that are transmitted during a sandfly bite . Amastigotes do not have an exteriorized flagellum and live as intracellular parasites in a variety of mammalian cells , most notably within professional phagocytes such as macrophages ( FIG . 1 ) . Some Leishmania spp . cause chronic , slow - to - heal diseases that are known as cutane - ous , mucocutaneous or diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis . In these diseases , the symptoms remain localized to the skin or mucosal surfaces . Other Leishmania spp . dissemi - nate to internal organs such as the liver , spleen and bone marrow to cause visceral leishmaniasis , which accounts for most of the ~ 70 , 000 deaths per year that are due to leishmaniasis 1 . Importantly , the clinical presentation of leishmaniasis is dependent upon both the parasite species and the host’s immune response . For example , Leishmania major , Leishmania mexicana , Leishmania amazonensis and Leishmania braziliensis primarily cause cutaneous lesions , whereas Leishmania donovani and Leishmania infantum ( known as Leishmania chagasi in South America ) cause visceral leishmaniasis ( TABLE 1 ) . Similarly to other intra - cellular pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Mycobacterium leprae , the same micro organism can cause a range of diseases depending upon the host’s immune response , including subclinical infections , self - resolving lesions and chronic disseminated disease . Recent years have seen major advances in our under - standing of leishmanial biology : the genomes of several Leishmania spp . have been sequenced 2 ; post - genomic analysis of these parasites and the host response is pro - ceeding rapidly 3 ; sexual recombination between para - sites has been shown to occur 4 ; and the intricacies of life within an insect vector 5 , 6 and of natural transmission 7 are beginning to be understood . In this Review , we focus on some of the major advances from the past few years in our understanding of the immunology and cell biology of the interactions between the host and Leishmania spp . , and highlight some of the differences in immune regu - lation that have been uncovered from studies of vari - ous Leishmania spp . in animal models and in humans . Although this Review is not completely comprehensive , we aim to provide a picture of the complexity that under - pins the host response to these parasites , and hence to highlight the potential pitfalls that are associated with developing one simple model for leishmaniasis pathogen - esis . To what extent this complexity derives from intrinsic differences in the parasites themselves , from differences in human versus mouse host cell responses or from subtle - ties of experimental design remains largely unknown , as few truly comparative studies have been performed . Nevertheless , understanding diversity in host – parasite interactions in models , and ultimately in humans , should help to determine whether new tools for leishmaniasis control can be truly broad spectrum or whether they will require specific tailoring to each form of the disease . * Centre for Immunology and Infection , Department of Biology and Hull York Medical School , University of York , Wentworth Way , York YO10 5YW , UK . ‡ Penn Institute for Immunology , Department of Pathobiology , School of Veterinary Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104‑4539 , USA . Correspondence to P . K . e‑mail : paul . kaye @ york . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2608 Published online 11 July 2011 Leishmaniasis : complexity at the host – pathogen interface Paul Kaye * and Phillip Scott ‡ Abstract | Leishmania is a genus of protozoan parasites that are transmitted by the bite of phlebotomine sandflies and give rise to a range of diseases ( collectively known as leishmaniases ) that affect over 150 million people worldwide . Cellular immune mechanisms have a major role in the control of infections with all Leishmania spp . However , as discussed in this Review , recent evidence suggests that each host – pathogen combination evokes different solutions to the problems of parasite establishment , survival and persistence . Understanding the extent of this diversity will be increasingly important in ensuring the development of broadly applicable vaccines , drugs and immunotherapeutic interventions . R E V I E W S 604 | AUGUST 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Uptake Attachment Phagocyte Phagolysosome Intracellular amastigote Proliferation Lysis Reinvasion Sandﬂy bite Sandﬂy bite Amastigotes Procyclicpromastigotes Proliferation in the midgut Metacyclicpromastigotes Two - photon intravital imaging A fluorescent - laser - based microscopy technique that allows real - time imaging of cells that are deep within the tissues of live animals . Chemokines A family of small ( ~ 8 – 10 kDa ) chemotactic cytokines that regulate cell migration and function . Different chemokine families are defined by the presence of specific motifs known as C , CC , CXC and CX 3 C . Host cells for Leishmania parasites Leishmania spp . had been widely regarded as fastidious , obligate intracellular pathogens of macrophages , but recent studies have confirmed that these parasites have a far greater degree of promiscuity in host cell range than previously thought . Infections of multiple cell types , both in vitro and in vivo , have been reported , including for haematopoietic cells that arise from a common myeloid precursor ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 2 ) , and for non - haematopoietic cells such as fibroblasts . On a cautionary note , parasites may spread between cells during tissue homogenization , posing an additional challenge to in vitro studies of host range 8 , 9 . In this section , we describe studies on the relative roles of different cell types as hosts for Leishmania spp . The importance of the neutrophil . One of the major chal - lenges that is faced by the metacyclic promastigote after it enters the mammalian host is to establish intracellular residence in long - lived macrophages without trigger - ing their innate antimicrobial defences . In 2003 , Laskay and colleagues suggested that neutrophils could act as ‘Trojan Horses’ to help promastigotes to achieve this goal . Through studying L . major , they observed that promastigotes were readily phagocytosed by neutrophils in vitro , but survived within neutrophil phagosomes . The infected neutrophils were induced to undergo apopto - sis and became a phagocytic meal for macrophages that were added to the culture . As apoptotic neutrophils are phagocytosed through receptor - mediated pathways that fail to trigger macrophage defence responses 10 , their car - goes of promastigotes were thereby efficiently and safely shuttled into the macrophage phagosome 11 . Neutrophils are indeed present in the early lesions that follow L . major infection in mice , and they are also detectable by histo - pathology in many forms of human leishmaniasis . Two - photon intravital imaging has recently provided a strik - ingly visual demonstration of the rapidity with which neutrophils descend upon L . major promastigotes after sandfly ( or needle ) transmission , and these cells can now reasonably be regarded as one of the main early hosts for L . major in vivo 12 . Rapid infiltration of neutrophils into the skin is not limited to those Leishmania spp . that cause cutaneous disease , as it also occurs with L . infantum , which causes visceral leishmaniasis 13 . The cues that drive this neutro - phil response are yet to be defined . The rapidity of the response and its association with local tissue damage sug - gests a role for alarmins , which are endogenous molecules that signal tissue and cell damage 14 . However , candidate alarmins such as interleukin - 33 ( IL - 33 ) 15 have not yet been directly measured in leishmaniasis . Mononuclear phagocytes that are infected with Leishmania parasites produce various chemokines , which are known to attract neutrophils ( reviewed in REF . 16 ) . Cytokines also exert control over neutrophil recruitment . For example , IL - 17 can promote 17 and type I interferons ( IFNs ) can inhibit 18 neutrophil recruitment , but their precise contribution to this immediate immune response is unclear . Finally , unlike needle infection , sandflies may co - transmit bac - teria and viruses , which may help drive inflammatory responses 19 , 20 . In situ imaging has shown that most infected neutrophils , which rapidly engulf promastig - otes on infection , are short - lived and release the parasites before being actively phagocytosed by macrophages 12 . In fact , the same study showed that the numbers of para - sites in macrophages and dendritic cells ( DCs ) of mice are unchanged after neutrophil depletion , which suggests that neutrophils may merely scavenge parasites that are otherwise ignored . Further in situ analysis using trans - genic mice to visualize other potential host cells should prove to be equally informative ( see later ) . In summary , although neutrophils clearly participate in the early response to infection , their role as a Trojan Horse has yet to be directly confirmed in vivo . Although the studies noted above suggest that uptake by neutrophils contributes to L . major infectivity and may assist in life cycle progression , this may not be the case during infections with other Leishmania spp . , or indeed under all circumstances with L . major . For example , Figure 1 | The life cycle of Leishmania parasites . Leishmania procyclic promastigotes differentiate in sandflies into infective , non - dividing metacyclic promastigotes , which are located ready for transmission at the stomodeal valve ( an invagination of the foregut into the midgut ) . During blood feeding , the sandfly regurgitates metacyclic promastigotes , together with immunomodulatory parasite - derived proteophospho - glycans and various salivary components . The metacyclic promastigotes are then phagocytosed by one of several possible cell types that are found in the local environment ( FIG . 2 ) . After establishing an intracellular residence , metacyclic promastigotes transform into aflagellate amastigotes . Amastigotes undergo replication within host cells , which rupture when too many amastigotes are present , allowing reinfection of local phagocytes . The transmission cycle is complete when infected phagocytes are taken up by another sandfly with the blood meal , and amastigotes then convert into promastigotes in the sandfly midgut . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | AUGUST 2011 | 605 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved neutrophil depletion in mice increased susceptibility to needle - inoculated L . braziliensis infection 21 . Some early studies with L . major have suggested that the effects of neutrophil depletion are mouse strain dependent 22 , but these studies often used a monoclonal antibody , RB6 - 8C5 , that is now known to deplete inflammatory monocytes as well as neutrophils . Contradictory roles for neutrophils are also evident from studies of another innate neutrophil function , the extrusion of neutro - phil extracellular traps ( NETs ) , which are composed of filamentous DNA that is decorated with antimicrobial peptides . In human neutrophils , NET extrusion was stimulated by L . donovani promastigotes by a pathway that was independent of lipophosphoglycan ( LPG ) ( BOX 2 ) . However , whereas wild - type parasites survived this onslaught , LPG - deficient L . donovani did not 23 , sug - gesting a parasite - protective role for this major surface glycoconjugate . By contrast , wild - type L . amazonensis was susceptible to killing by NETs , and LPG that was isolated from these parasites triggered NET release 24 . Given the many diverse parts played by neutrophils in the innate and adaptive immune response ( as further discussed below ) , it will be technically challenging to directly confirm the importance of parasite transit through neutrophils and the role of NETs in parasite establishment and disease progression in vivo . Macrophages , monocytes and dendritic cells . Although parasites can readily be found in neutrophils , it is within mononuclear phagocytes that there is the best evidence for their replication and long - term survival . Two - photon intravital imaging of mouse skin following needle injec - tion of L . major has provided direct evidence that der - mal DCs take up parasites within the first few hours of infection . The process of uptake is highly dynamic , with dermal DCs discriminating between parasites and inert beads and capturing their prey in a process that involves pseudopodium extension 25 . Resident dermal macrophages are also rapidly infected , and they become the dominant infected population after 24 hours 12 . Heterogeneity in the mechanism of phagocytic uptake ( for example , coiling versus conventional zipper phago - cytosis ) has been reported for different types of macro - phages in vitro 26 , but the mechanism ( or mechanisms ) that are used in vivo are not known . It is unclear whether dermal DCs or macrophages are capable of transporting parasites from the initial site of infection to the lymph node that drains that site and where acquired immune responses are initiated , but both questions are important for future study . As the numbers of resident macrophages and DCs in the skin are too limited to sustain parasite multipli - cation , the progression of infection may require the recruitment of the immediate precursor of these cells , the monocyte . Importantly , this process is regulated by neutrophils 27 . After cutaneous infection with L . major in mice , it seems that many of the monocytes that are recruited to the infection site become monocyte - derived DCs ( moDCs 28 ) , which subsequently have apparently contradictory roles during the infection . On the one hand , moDCs are permissive host cells for the parasite , thus expanding the developing lesion 9 . Indeed , they may facilitate further monocyte recruitment by increasing the blood supply to the site of infection 29 . On the other hand , moDCs upregulate expression of major histocompatibil - ity complex class II ( MHC class II ) molecules , which are critical for the ability of DCs to act as antigen - presenting cells . These cells also secrete IL - 12 , which is important for the induction of a host - protective T helper 1 ( T H 1 ) - type response 9 , 28 . Indeed , in mice lacking the chemokine receptor CCR2 ( and hence the ability to recruit mono - cytes to the lesions ) , a non - protective T H 2 response is induced by the infection 30 . Interestingly , whereas moDCs may be critical for the induction of a T H 1 response , the non - infected ( bystander ) DCs could be the key mediators of this response . This is supported by the fact that DCs that are infected in vitro with L . braziliensis promastigotes do not upregulate MHC class II or secrete IL - 12 , whereas uninfected bystander DCs in the same culture do 31 . Thus , some of the most important functions of DCs in pro - moting protective immunity are inhibited in infected cells . Bystander activation of DCs ( measured by upregu - lation of MHC class II ) was also found to occur in the spleen of mice that had been infected with L . donovani amastigotes , but this study showed no impediment of function in infected DCs 32 . Bystander DC activation and consequently bystander T cell activation may provide a means for facilitating a rapid T cell response at multiple systemic sites . In mouse models of visceral leishmaniasis that use intravenous inoculation of amastigotes to establish vis - ceral infection , a further degree of subtlety in host cell preference is observed . Amastigotes of L . donovani are preferentially taken up by resident tissue macrophages ( BOX 1 ) that lack the CD11b and CD11c markers , such as marginal zone macrophages and marginal metallo - phils in the spleen , stromal macrophages in the bone marrow and Kupffer cells in the liver 33 . Resident splenic Table 1 | The main species of Leishmania that affect humans * Main disease manifestation Species Old World , subgenus Leishmania Visceral leishmaniasis Leishmania donovani and Leishmania infantum Cutaneous leishmaniasis Leishmania major , Leishmania tropica and Leishmania aethiopica Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis L . aethiopica New World , subgenus Leishmania Visceral leishmaniasis L . infantum Cutaneous leishmaniasis L . infantum , Leishmania mexicana , Leishmania pifanol and Leishmania amazonensis Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis L . mexicana and L . amazonensis New World , subgenus Viannia Cutaneous leishmaniasis Leishmania braziliensis , Leishmania guyanensis , Leishmania panamensis and Leishmania peruviana Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis L . braziliensis and L . panamensis * Adapted from REF . 119 . R E V I E W S 606 | AUGUST 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Phagolysosome Metacyclicpromastigote Sandﬂy Dermis Tissue - resident macrophage or DC Neutrophil Non - leishmanicidal vacuole Blood vessel To the lymph node ? moDC macrophages that express epidermal growth factor - like module - containing mucin - like hormone receptor - like 1 ( EMR1 ) and are experimentally defined by the mono - clonal antibody F4 / 80 , and resident DCs in spleen and liver are infected to a far lesser extent . Furthermore , in contrast to the dominance of moDCs in both early and late stages of cutaneous leishmaniasis , moDCs appear to have a lesser role as hosts for L . donovani 8 . However , in tissues that contain multiple populations of potential host cells , apparent host cell preference may reflect both dif - fering levels of host cell permissiveness to infection and anatomical constraints to infection . Stromal cells as host cells for Leishmania parasites . The presence of L . major in skin and lymph node fibroblasts was first highlighted over a decade ago 34 , and since that time it has become apparent that infection of stromal cells can also occur in other forms of leishmaniasis . It was initially proposed that the residence of L . major in these cells provided a niche for survival in the face of immune attack , but recent studies also suggest that the infection of stromal cells can contribute to immune eva - sion . For example , splenic stromal cells that are infected with L . donovani express high levels of the chemokine CCL8 . Together with CXCL12 , this chemokine attracts haematopoietic stem cells into a niche that favours devel - opment of DCs that can reduce the effectiveness of T H 1 immunity 35 . The intracellular fate of Leishmania parasites The realization that Leishmania parasites can survive in diverse populations of phagocytes , which contain phagosomes with differing microbicidal properties , raises an important question : do Leishmania parasites rely on constitutive broad - acting countermeasures for protection against the phagosomal environment , or do they employ inducible virulence factors that are selec - tively expressed in differing intracellular environments ? As yet , there are few answers to this question , probably for a number of reasons . First , post - genomic analysis of leishmanial virulence factors is still in its infancy . Second , although it is the amastigote that ultimately inhabits and replicates within the phagolysosomal niche , most studies on intracellular survival have focused on the early estab - lishment of promastigotes , hence modelling only the first wave of intracellular infection . Third , the historical use of easily accessible macrophage populations ( for example , those derived from peritoneum or bone marrow ) ignores the tissue - specific heterogeneity of the host cells 36 . Nevertheless , despite these limitations in studies to date , the complexity to come is already becoming evident . Phagosome biogenesis . In mouse neutrophils , L . donovani metacyclic promastigotes survive undamaged in the phagosome — an intracellular membrane - bound com - partment that is related to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) 37 — providing a mechanistic basis for the Trojan Figure 2 | Multiple cell types are involved in the uptake of Leishmania parasites . Metacyclic promastigotes are deposited in the dermis in a mixture of immunomodulatory salivary secretions and parasite - derived proteophosphoglycans . The impact of these factors on local phagocyte function is poorly defined . Metacyclic promastigotes from the initial inoculum ( or those that have been released from infected neutrophils ) are phagocytosed by tissue - resident macrophages and dermal dendritic cells ( DCs ) . Capillary and other tissue damage resulting from the mechanical trauma of the bite may result in the release of endothelial alarmins , such as interleukin - 33 ( IL - 33 ) , which facilitates the recruitment of neutrophils . The neutrophils swarm around the extracellular metacyclic promastigotes , engulfing many in non - leishmanicidal vacuoles . The death of neutrophils releases metacyclic promastigotes that may be pre - conditioned for survival in other myeloid cells . Alarmins ( such as high mobility group protein B1 ( HMGB1 ) and IL - 1 β ) , which are released from ruptured neutrophils , possibly aid in attracting inflammatory monocyte - derived DCs ( moDCs ) to the local site . Infected inflammatory moDCs may facilitate parasite traffic to the draining lymph node . Long - term replication and perpetuation of the pathogen principally involves either macrophages or moDCs , depending on the parasite species . It is not known whether neutrophils are involved in amastigote uptake after the initial infection . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | AUGUST 2011 | 607 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Granules Cytosolic particles within neutrophils that are referred to as primary , tertiary or specific , based on their staining characteristics and their content . Primary granules ( also called azurophilic granules ) contain the enzyme myeloperoxidase , which is responsible for the green colour of pus . RAB GTPases A large family of monomeric guanine nucleotide binding proteins that act as important regulators of vesicle transport and docking in eukaryotic cells . Fc receptors Cell surface receptors that recognize the Fc tails of antibody molecules . The binding of particles that are coated with antibody by the Fc receptors on phagocytic cells triggers internalisation and potent antimicrobial effector responses . Horse model referred to earlier . Maintenance of this ER - like compartment requires LPG - dependent inhibi - tion of lysosomal fusion ( a function for LPG that was first described when studying the infection of macrophages 38 ) . Thus , LPG acts as a virulence factor to allow safe pas - sage of metacyclic promastigotes through neutrophils , in addition to its other numerous roles . However , a rather different picture has emerged from studies of human neutro phils that were infected with L . major or L . donovani , in which no evidence for the involvement of the ER in phagosome formation was found 39 . In these neutrophils , primary granules could fuse with parasite - containing phagosomes , but parasite survival was ultimately deter - mined by whether or not fusion of the phagosome with tertiary and specific granules ( which are responsible for acidification and superoxide generation , respectively ) had occurred ( FIG . 3a ) . In macrophages , it is generally accepted that parasite - containing phagosomes undergo ‘maturation’ to acquire lysosomal properties , and promastigotes inhibit this process . However , early events in phagosome biogen - esis are less clear . In support of an ER - mediated model of phagocytosis , one study found that most phagosomes that are formed around L . donovani and Leishmania pifanoi promastigotes in bone marrow - derived macro - phages contain the ER chaperone calnexin as well as SEC22b ( a vesicle protein that is involved in ER – Golgi transport ) . Using the toxin ricin as a tool to monitor ER – phagosome communication , this study further sug - gested that the ER and the phagosome were in continu - ous communication 40 . Delayed phagosomal maturation , first demonstrated with L . donovani 38 , has also been observed using bone marrow - derived macrophages that were infected with L . mexicana . In this elegant study , many of the technical challenges of analysing asynchro - nous processes such as phagocytosis were overcome by using real - time imaging of infection in macrophages that were derived from transgenic mice expressing RAB5 ( which is one of several RAB GTPases and a key orches - trator of endosome and phagosome maturation ) fused to GFP 41 . Surprisingly , RAB5 was detected in L . mexicana - containing phagosomes for only 1 – 2 min , indicating the rapid maturation of these organelles . Phagosome matu - ration was delayed ( measured by an increase in the time that the parasite spent in a RAB5 + compartment ) when LPG1 - deficient promastigotes ( which do not undergo complement receptor - mediated phagocytosis ) were used , or when wild - type parasites were opsonized with anti - body to target them for uptake by Fc receptors . However , in contrast to earlier reports 38 , LPG - dependent inhibi - tion of phagosome maturation in this model did not ultimately affect parasite intracellular survival 41 . Various studies have demonstrated that the acidifi - cation of phagosomes that typically occurs during their transformation into phagolysosomes is transiently inhib - ited in parasite - containing phagosomes . For L . donovani , this has been reported to be due to the integration of LPG into lipid microdomains of the phagosome membrane that contain the ganglioside GM1 . This process leads to exclu - sion or loss of synaptotagmin V , which is an essential player in the recruitment of the vesicular proton ATPase ( V - ATPase ) that drives phagosome acidification 42 . Hence , LPG - deficient parasites were assumed to die as a result of the acidification that occurred before they became fully adapted to an intracellular lifestyle . However , the obser - vation that LPG - deficient L . major is also rapidly killed in macrophages that lack signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 ( STAT1 ) , in which phagosome acidifica - tion fails owing to defective chloride channel function , suggests that the death of LPG - deficient L . major is inde - pendent of acidification . Indeed , in these latter studies , a host - protective effect for STAT1 dependent phagosome acidification was observed to operate only on amastig - otes 43 . Related to this observation , a recent study has sug - gested that the shift in temperature that is associated with the move from an invertebrate vector to a mammalian host is the major determinant of amastigote - specific gene expression 44 , rather than phagosome acidification . In addition to the parasite - and cell type - specific dif - ferences noted above , host cell maturation status can also influence the intracellular fate of Leishmania para - sites . For example , the maturation of parasite - containing phagosomes in immature bone marrow DCs is arrested at the stage of the late endosome , whereas in mature bone marrow DCs the parasite - containing phagosomes acquire the small GTPase RAB7 and fuse with lysosomes ( FIG . 3b ) . This might provide a mechanism for ensuring that the immature DCs that are infected at local sites can transport live parasites to systemic tissue . Unfortunately , Box 1 | Monocyte and macrophage diversity Monocytes , as well as neutrophils , originate in the bone marrow from a common myeloid precursor cell . Monocytes have a critical role in leishmanial infections as they differentiate into macrophages , which provide a home for parasite replication , but can also differentiate into dendritic cells ( DCs ) , which are crucial in priming a protective immune response . The macrophages and DCs that arise from monocytes exhibit many different phenotypes , which are thought to be determined by cues within the infected tissues 114 . In addition , monocytes are a heterogeneous population of cells , which may also contribute to the generation of distinct macrophage and DC subsets 115 . In humans , the best described subsets are classic monocytes , which are defined by their expression of CD14 , and pro - inflammatory monocytes , which in addition to CD14 also express the low - affinity Fc receptor CD16 . Different markers define monocyte subsets in mice . One monocyte subset expresses CCR2 ( a chemokine receptor that is critical for release of cells from the bone marrow ) and LY6C ( the function of which is unknown ) and is recruited into inflammatory sites . Another subset is potentially derived from LY6C hi monocytes and expresses the fractalkine receptor , CX 3 CR1 . The LY6C hi monocytes that migrate into leishmanial lesions are the source of monocyte - derived DCs . Our understanding of how these diverse monocyte subsets contribute to disease is still limited . Macrophages also display considerable tissue - specific heterogeneity , reflected both in function and phenotype . For example , in the spleen there are distinct populations of macrophages in the red pulp ( where they express F4 / 80 ) and the marginal zone ( where macrophages at the outer border express SIGNR1 ( also known as CD209 antigen - like protein B ) and macrophages at the inner border , which are known as metallophilic macrophages , express CD169 ) . In lymph nodes , macrophages in the subcapsular sinus have a defined role in antigen capture . In liver , resident tissue macrophages are called Kupffer cells , but even these may be heterogeneous . Resident tissue macrophages may have conventional roles — for example , as phagocytes — but some may also have a supportive role in maintaining tissue structure or forming part of the stem cell niche . As some of these macrophages have functions that are reminiscent of fibroblasts , they may be referred to as ‘stromal’ macrophages . Our understanding of how these different types of macrophages contribute to the various forms of leishmaniasis is very rudimentary 8 , 33 , 72 . R E V I E W S 608 | AUGUST 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Lipid microdomains Regions of a biological membrane that are enriched in a particular protein or lipid and can vary in size , composition and function . For example , lipid rafts are highly dynamic microdomains , 10 – 200 nm in size , that are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids and serve to compartmentalize different membrane functions . similar studies examining phagosome biology in other host cells under various conditions of activation are lacking . In infections with some Leishmania parasites from the New World , the parasite - containing phagosomes are strikingly enlarged , and it has recently been suggested that this may help dilute the leishmanicidal effects of nitric oxide . Lysosome size in cells is regulated by lyso - somal trafficking regulator ( LYST ; also known as Beige protein ) . Mice with mutations in Lyst and humans with Chédiak – Higashi syndrome ( who carry mutations in the human homologue , LYST ) have large lysosomes and lysosome - related organelles , including phagosomes . When LYST was overexpressed in mouse macrophages and fibroblasts , phagosomes were reduced in size and the parasites contained within them were more susceptible to killing by nitric oxide . As LYST is induced during infec - tion with Leishmania parasites , it therefore behaves as an inducible innate response gene 45 . Iron regulation in the phagosome . Although many factors contribute to the survival of Leishmania para - sites in the phagosome , access to iron has a central role ( reviewed in REF . 46 ) ( FIG . 4 ) . Amastigotes can use ferrous iron ( Fe 2 + ) as well as hemin ( the Fe 3 + oxidation product of haem ) and haemoglobin , and a high - affinity hemin receptor has recently been described in L . infantum 47 . In mice , Slc11a1 ( also known as Nramp1 and Lsh ) encodes a phagosomal efflux pump that translocates Fe 2 + and Mn 2 + into the cytosol 48 and thus limits iron availability to the parasite . As a countermeasure , L . amazonensis upregulates the expression of its own iron transporter , LIT1 , after its entry into macrophages 46 , 49 . Recent stud - ies with L . donovani suggest that intra - phagosomal competition for iron may , by depleting the macrophage labile - iron pool , activate the cytosolic iron sensors IRP1 and IRP2 , which leads indirectly to increased production of the iron - binding protein transferrin and thus transferrin - mediated iron uptake 50 . Subverting intracellular signalling As Leishmania parasites inhabit an intracellular niche , it is perhaps not surprising that they have evolved vari - ous means to attenuate and / or subvert how their host cell integrates signals from the external ‘immune’ environ - ment . Indeed the literature has a rich history of reports of Leishmania spp . affecting a range of diverse macrophage functions , including chemotaxis , cytokine production and immune synapse formation . However , until recently many of these studies have been overshadowed at a mechanistic level by the vexed issue of spatial segrega - tion—that is , how do intra - phagosomal parasites affect the cytosolic signalling pathways of their host cell ? In this section we review recent studies that are beginning to provide some clarity to this issue . Cellular phosphotyrosine phosphatases . The role of a host protein phosphatase , SRC homology 2 domain phospho - tyrosine phosphatase 1 ( SHP1 ; also known as PTPN6 ) , in regulating anti - leishmanial immunity has long been rec - ognized ( reviewed in REF . 51 ) . SHP1 has a central role in the regulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase ( iNOS ) and hence nitric oxide production , and it was recently shown that SHP1 binds to a conserved KTIM motif that is found in multiple kinases that act downstream of SHP1 and are associated with innate immunity ( these kinases include extracellular signal - related kinase 1 ( ERK1 ) , ERK2 and IL - 1 receptor - associated kinase 1 ( IRAK1 ) ) . L . donovani increases SHP1 activity and expression in host macrophages , a process thought to contribute to parasite survival . But how is this achieved ? New evidence points to a well - known leishmanial virulence factor , major surface protease ( MSP ; also known as GP63 and leishmanolysin ) 52 – 54 . MSP enters the host cell cytosol in a process that is dependent on the presence of cholesterol - rich lipid microdomains or ‘lipid rafts’ in the host cell membrane 55 , and appears to have an ability to selectively cleave intra - cytosolic protein tyrosine phosphatases such as SHP1 , protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B ( PTP1B ) and T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase ( TCPTP ; also known as PTPN2 ) , leading to their activation 55 , 56 . The kinetics of protein tyrosine phosphatase cleavage after exposure to parasites or to recombinant MSP suggests that the raft - dependent entry of MSP into the host cell cytosol may precede internalization , but it is unclear whether this continues while the parasite is within the phagosome . Leishmania spp . contain multiple MSP genes , and species differences in expression of these genes are well known ; for example , in L . chagasi MSPs originate from three gene classes and , in this species at least , there are important differences in glycosylation and cellular localization between MSPs in promastigotes and amastigotes 54 . It will be important to determine whether all MSPs cleave intra - cytosolic protein tyrosine phosphatases . In L . donovani , MSP can be found on the promastigote surface as well as in the parasite cytoplasm , and it has been proposed that these pools of MSP are functionally distinct , with the sur - face MSP being involved in parasite development within Box 2 | Surface coat of leishmanial promastigotes Leishmania promastigotes are covered by a dense glycocalyx , which is composed of several types of molecules that are attached to the plasma membrane using a glyco - phospoinositol ( GPI ) anchor . The most abundant molecule is lipophosphoglycan ( LPG ) , which has an important role in the interactions between the parasite and the sandfly and , once in the mammalian host , promotes the infectivity of the parasites . LPG is a long phosphoglycan polymer with multiple repeating sugar residues , glycan side chains and a capping oligosaccharide . Importantly , there is considerable diversity in LPG structure among Leishmania spp . , which explains their vector specificity 116 and may also affect their immunological properties . A series of LPG mutants have been developed in Leishmania spp . that have been extensively used to define the function of LPG both within the sandfly and within the mammalian host 117 . Changes in LPG structure as the parasites transform from a procyclic form to an infective metacyclic form are critical for releasing the parasites from the sandfly midgut , as well as protecting the promastigotes in the mammalian host from a variety of immune responses . The surface of promastigotes also contains a variety of other phosphoglycans and GPI - anchored glycoproteins . The most abundant surface glycoprotein is the zinc metalloproteinase MSP ( also known as GP63 ) 55 , which seems to have a significant role in leishmanial virulence . Perhaps unsurprisingly , the expression levels of MSP , LPG , glycoinositol phospholipids and other molecules that are associated with the host – parasite interaction may vary between Leishmania species , strain and life cycle stage . Broad - ranging , comprehensive analysis is therefore required to ascertain the biological significance of this and other leishmanial virulence factors . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | AUGUST 2011 | 609 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Phagosome Promastigote Phagosome Lysosome a b Neutrophil DC MPO - containing primary granule Tertiary granule Speciﬁc granule Parasitedegradation Parasitedegradation Parasitesurvival Parasitesurvival Immature DCs Mature DCs LAMP1and LAMP2 CD68 RAB7 Signalosome A high - molecular - mass cytosolic or membrane - bound complex that contains many of the individual proteins that are associated with a signalling pathway , often together with various scaffold proteins . the sandfly and the cytoplasmic MSP being a pre - formed store that is ready for rapid use in the mammalian host 57 , in a manner analogous to the various effectors that are used during type III secretion in bacteria 58 . MSP is not alone in targeting SHP1 , as the L . dono - vani promastigote fructose - 1 , 6 - bisphosphate aldolase immuno precipitates with SHP1 from macrophage cyto - sol . Likewise , MSP is somewhat promiscuous in its action ; in fibroblasts , transforming growth factor - β - activated kinase 1 ( an upstream activator of p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase ( p38 MAPK ; also known as MAPK14 ) ) is a target of enzymatic cleavage by MSP , providing a mech - anism for inactivating p38 MAPK 56 . Similarly , MSP also affects peri - phagosomal actin accumulation , an essen - tial feature of phagosome maturation , by cleaving the 120 kDa scaffold protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPPEST , which is a key regulator of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and actin remodelling 56 . Host cellular protein tyrosine phosphatases may also have broader roles in anti - leishmanial immunity . Of note , SHP2 ( also known as PTPN11 ) , which shares many downstream targets with SHP1 , is coupled to signal - regulatory protein α1 ( SIRPα1 ; also known as PTPNS1 ) , which is a myeloid - restricted inhibitory receptor 59 , 60 that binds the membrane glycoprotein CD47 when macro - phages encounter invariant natural killer T cells during early L . donovani infection 61 . Intriguingly , sodium stibo - gluconate , the first - line anti - leishmanial drug in most parts of the world , also targets SHP1 at concentrations that are used for chemotherapy in humans 62 . Finally , and perhaps not surprisingly , the targeting of cellular phosphatases may not be a ubiquitous virulence mech - anism , and the disparate results for parasite survival and lesion development that are seen in SHP1 - deficient macro phages and mice may reflect host genotype , the macrophages used ( peritoneal versus a cell line ) , the use of complement opsonization in vitro and even the route of inoculation 63 , 64 . Protein kinase C and nuclear factor - κB . Interference with host cell signalling at the level of macrophage protein kinase C ( PKC ) has also long been known 65 . An enzyme with PKC - like activity that is found in the infective pro - mastigotes of L . mexicana has been recently reported to be upregulated during early contact with macrophages and to be involved in macrophage invasion 66 . Similarly , a role has been proposed for phosphatidylinositol kinases in a variety of leishmanial signalling responses that are linked to invasion . Hyporesponsiveness of host MAPK and nuclear factor - κB ( NF - κB ) leads to cross - tolerance to activation by bacterial lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and L . major 67 , 68 but does not appear to be due to the induc - tion of cellular protein tyrosine phosphatases , suggesting alternative means for parasites to inhibit host responsive - ness . L . amazonensis promotes the activity of the NF - κB p50 – p50 transcriptional - repressor complex , which nega - tively regulates iNOS gene expression . Furthermore , in L . amazonensis - infected macrophages that had been pre - viously stimulated with LPS , the NF - κB p50 – p50 dimer replaced the NF - κB p65 – p50 dimer ( which is normally produced in LPS - stimulated macrophages ) . In addition , MSP cleaves the NF - κB p65 subunit 51 . These results suggest an active process of immune deviation 69 . Lipid microdomains . Lipid microdomains , including rafts and caveolae , have an important role in the organi - zation of membrane proteins , in cell – cell contact and in numerous signalling processes . Not surprisingly , they are increasingly being implicated in the interactions between macrophages and Leishmania parasites ( FIG . 5 ) . As noted above , host cell lipid rafts may have a role in the entry of leishmanial virulence factors such as MSP into the host cell cytosol . However , rafts and other lipid microdomains may also serve as targets for disrupting host cell function and , indeed , as a portal of parasite entry 70 . Microarray analysis indicates that macrophage lipid metabolic pathways are perturbed by Leishmania infection 71 , 72 . Depletion of cholesterol , which is the major lipid com - ponent of lipid rafts , is observed in a variety of experi - mental and clinical settings and has been associated with defective antigen presentation following L . dono - vani infection 73 . Strikingly , this defect can be improved by cholesterol replenishment , with dramatic effects on disease progression in vivo . Cholesterol depletion has also been implicated in immune modulation by L . major . In L . major - infected macrophages , CD40 is preferen - tially associated with a signalosome containing TRAF6 ( tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) receptor - associated fac - tor 6 ) and spleen tyrosine kinase ( SYK ) , which results Figure 3 | Phagosome fate is determined by factors from both the host and Leishmania spp . a | In human neutrophils , all phagosomes containing promastigotes fuse with myeloperoxidase ( MPO ) - containing primary granules . However , destruction of the parasites requires the additional fusion of tertiary and specific granules . Fusion of tertiary and specific granules induces a decrease in luminal pH and also results in an increase in the concentration of reactive oxygen radicals . In mouse neutrophils , it has been suggested that lipophosphoglycan ( LPG ) from the parasite has a role in regulating phagosome fate , but the fusion of specific granules has not been determined . b | Late endosomal markers such as lysosome - associated membrane protein 1 ( LAMP1 ) and LAMP2 are found in phagosomes containing Leishmania major promastigotes in both immature dendritic cells ( DCs ) and mature DCs from mouse bone marrow . By contrast , recruitment of the small GTPase RAB7 , which facilitates lysosomal fusion , was not observed in immature DCs ; this suggests that inhibition of RAB7 recruitment could be a mechanism that is used by Leishmania spp . to ensure the transport of live parasites to lymph nodes 118 . R E V I E W S 610 | AUGUST 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Fe 3 + TF Fe 3 + TF TFR Fe 3 + Fe 2 + Fe 2 + Macrophagecytoplasm Amastigote Phagolysosome Fe 2 + Fe 2 + Fe 2 + SLC11A1 SLC11A2 TF LIT1 in ERK1 - and / or ERK2 - dependent secretion of IL - 10 . This contrasts with the normal association of CD40 in uninfected cells with a signalosome that contains TRAF2 , TRAF3 , TRAF5 and the SRC kinase LYN and that leads to p38 MAPK - dependent IL - 12 production 74 . In addi - tion , L . major infection of macrophages has also been shown to induce MAPK phosphatase 1 ( MKP1 ) , which dephosphorylates p38 MAPK and reciprocally decreases expression of MKP3 , a phosphatase with specificity for ERK1 and ERK2 ( REF . 75 ) . Thus , parasite - mediated perturbation of membrane and cytosolic components of the CD40 signalling pathway may influence the immunoregulatory function of macrophages . Lipid microdomains may also underlie the promiscu - ous functions of LPG . Following L . donovani infection , LPG associates with the phagolysosome membrane , regulating the accumulation of periphagosomal fila - mentous actin ( F - actin ) and thereby transiently inhibit - ing phagosome – lysosome fusion ( see earlier ) . A recent study indicates that LPG is associated with rafts on the phagolysosome membrane and that , after raft disruption , this and other functions of LPG are lost 76 . Raft - associated LPG may also be responsible for the alteration in the sus - ceptibility of L . infantum - infected macrophages to HIV infection 77 . A role for exosomes . Exosomes are vesicles that bud from the plasma membrane , and have been found in cell - free supernatants from a variety of cultured mammalian cells and pathogens , including Leishmania spp . ( reviewed in REF . 78 ) . Recent proteomic analysis of leishmanial exosomes suggests that they contain many if not all of the molecules that have functionally been described as leishmanial virulence factors 79 . Hence , it is possible that exosomes represent vehicles that allow the entry of these virulence factors into the host cytoplasm , through fusion with the mammalian cell plasma membrane or with the phagolysosome membrane . Although exosomes from L . donovani and L . major have some influence on dis - ease outcome when administered before experimental infection 80 , the precise role of exosomes in pathogenesis remains unclear , as there are no known means through which their production by parasites can be manipulated in vivo . Type I interferons . Type I IFN responses are usually associated with viral infections ; however , both type I IFNs themselves and the signature genes they induce are increasingly becoming seen as important in leishmaniasis . One example of such a response being beneficial to the parasite is seen during infection with L . amazonensis , which induces the expression in macrophages of PKR , a protein kinase that is activated by double - stranded RNA . PKR appears to promote parasite survival through induction of the macrophage - deactivating cytokine IL - 10 ( REF . 81 ) . By contrast , there are other examples for which type I IFN - induced proteins appear detrimen - tal rather than beneficial to intracellular survival . For example , interferon regulatory factor 7 ( IRF7 ) , which is a master regu lator of the type I IFN response , acts as an up stream regulator of leishmanicidal activity in L . dono - vani - infected stromal macrophages 72 . But perhaps the most elegant example is that of Leishmania guyanensis , which is associated with mucocutaneous leishmaniasis and can carry its own virus ( Leishmania RNA virus - 1 ; LRV - 1 ) 82 . The metastatic potential of different L . guy - anensis isolates correlates with the LRV - 1 viral load . Importantly , the presence of LRV - 1 was associated with increased Toll - like receptor 3 ( TLR3 ) - dependent secre - tion of IFNβ and other pro - inflammatory cytokines from macrophages . Furthermore , cutaneous lesion develop - ment was reduced in Tlr3 – / – mice compared with wild - type mice when both were infected with L . guyanensis strains that had high levels of LRV - 1 , but no difference was observed when both were infected with L . guyanen - sis strains that had low levels of or lacked LRV - 1 . Hence , the inflammatory potential of L . guyanensis is dependent upon the virus that it carries 83 . Adaptive immunity Host cells for Leishmania spp . also have a pivotal role in bridging the gap between innate and adaptive immunity . However , although many of the survival strategies noted above may indirectly affect the three signals that are required for inducing T cell activation and differentiation ( antigen processing and presentation , the expression of co - stimulatory molecules and the production of host cell cytokines ) , there have been surprisingly few studies over the past few years that directly address these pathways in an in vivo context and / or in relation to defined virulence factors or vaccine candidate antigens . Notably , few exam - ples have been found of bona fide virulence factors that selectively target antigen presentation , although these are abundant in other intracellular pathogens . The tools of in situ analysis hold great promise for addressing some of these questions in coming years . By contrast , there has Figure 4 | Iron wars within macrophages infected with Leishmania parasites . Fe 2 + transporters from both the host ( SLC11A1 ) and Leishmania spp . ( LIT1 ) compete for phagosomal free iron . Studies in mouse macrophages that were infected with Leishmania donovani suggest that the resulting depletion of cytosolic Fe 2 + may lead to activation of the host iron - responsive element binding proteins IRP1 and IRP2 ( not shown ) 50 . These proteins enhance the stability of the transferrin ( TF ) receptor ( TFR ) mRNA , which in turn leads to increased TFR - dependent uptake of extracellular Fe 3 + . Reduction of Fe 3 + to Fe 2 + within the early endosome is followed by iron transport into the cytosol , which is dependent upon the host transporter SLC11A2 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | AUGUST 2011 | 611 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Phagosome Promastigote Virulence factors CD40 MHCII Lysosome Plasma membrane Actinremodelling Altered antigen presentation LPG - modiﬁed lipid microdomain Lipid microdomain been , and continues to be , much interest in defining the cellular mediators of acquired resistance . We describe in this section some of the more recent nuances of the acquired immune response to Leishmania spp . Host resistance and adaptive immunity . CD4 + T H 1 cells are critical for the control of Leishmania infections , owing to their ability to make IFNγ , which activates macrophages and DCs , leading to parasite death ( FIG . 6 ) . The role of CD8 + T cells in cutaneous leishmaniasis has been less well appreciated . Although early studies indi - cated that CD8 + T cells were important to control visceral leishmaniasis 84 , the initial studies with L . major indicated that CD8 + T cells were not important for control of a pri - mary infection but they participated in the resistance to reinfection 85 . However , when mice were infected with low doses of parasites , CD8 + T cells appeared to be essen - tial for resolution of primary infection 86 , owing in part to the ability of IFNγ to promote a T H 1 - type response 87 . Nevertheless , CD8 + T cells are not always associated with disease resolution . For example , the recruitment of CD8 + T cells that express the granule - associated serine protease granzyme B is correlated with lesion progression in patients infected with L . braziliensis 88 . The factors that determine when CD8 + T cells are protective and when they promote disease remain to be elucidated . Moreover , it appears that CD8 + T cell exhaustion following infec - tion with L . donovani may contribute to the chronicity of infection 89 . As noted above , moDCs that infiltrate the lesions appear to be particularly important in the induction of a CD4 + T H 1 - type response following L . major infec - tion . Interestingly , it was recently found that CD8 + T cell activation following L . major infection appears to instead depend upon dermal DCs ( defined by expression of the C - type lectin langerin ( also known as CD207 ) ) . Thus , when dermal DCs were specifically depleted in mice ( by administering diphtheria toxin to mice that expressed the simian diphtheria toxin receptor under control of the langerin promoter ) , CD8 + T cell responses were signifi - cantly diminished , but CD4 + T cell responses were not affected 90 . Importantly , CD8 + T cells that are activated during Leishmania infections may not all be specific , as uninfected DCs that have matured during inflamma - tion can stimulate CD8 + T cells to proliferate without the expression of their cognate ligands 32 . The role of these non - leishmanial - specific CD8 + T cells in the infection is not clear , but when previously activated CD8 + T cells are expanded during infection , they can provide increased resistance to previously encountered pathogens 91 . Parasite persistence . In spite of the development of a robust immune response in resistant mice , as well as in many patients , a small number of parasites persist fol - lowing disease resolution . The production of IL - 10 has a large role in dampening the immune response and thus allowing some parasites to escape destruction . This was shown by depleting IL - 10 from mice that were infected with low doses of L . major , which led to sterile cure ( that is , no living parasites remained ) 92 . Recent studies have shown that IL - 10 can come from a variety of sources following leishmanial infections , including regulatory T ( T Reg ) cells 93 , T H 1 cells 94 – 96 , CD8 + T cells 92 , B cells 97 , natural killer cells 98 , regulatory DCs 35 , macrophages 99 and neutro - phils 100 . Which of these is most important as a source of IL - 10 is less clear , but may depend upon differences in the parasites and the stages of the infection . On one hand , IL - 10 - transgenic mice ( in which IL - 10 is only pro - duced in cells that express MHC class II molecules ) are extremely susceptible to infection with L . major 101 . On the other hand , a recent study in mice expressing human IL - 10 ( from a transgene encoded on a bacterial artificial chromosome ) suggested that IL - 10 production by T cells , rather than macrophages , may be more critical for para - site clearance 102 . In L . donovani infection , CD8 + CD40 + T cells may act as contra - T Reg cells by limiting the pro - duction of IL - 10 during the early phase of infection , but themselves become susceptible to IL - 10 - induced apop - tosis as the disease progresses 103 . Thus , the question of how immunoregulatory mechanisms limit immune responses , and as a consequence lead to the persistence of parasites following disease resolution , remains an area of active investigation . When leishmaniasis involves infection of lymphoid tissues , such as the spleen and lymph nodes , these undergo dramatic remodelling 33 , 104 . Although erosion of stromal cells and vascular remodelling represent the most likely underlying mechanism behind the loss of archi - tectural integrity , the main functional consequence may be to develop a state of immune suppression dependent upon ‘spatial segregation’ ( REF . 105 ) . Of note , interventions that restore the tissue microarchitecture can have impor - tant immune restorative functions 104 , 106 . Interestingly , recent studies suggest another instance for which the Figure 5 | Lipid microdomains during Leishmania infection of macrophages . During the initial encounter , lipid microdomains on the plasma membrane of the macrophage have a role in directing parasite uptake and the entry of specific virulence factors such as major surface protein ( MSP , also known as GP63 ) . Virulence factors can also be transferred to the macrophage by parasite - produced exosomes . Once the promastigote has entered the phagosome , lipophosphoglycan ( LPG ) inserts into lipid rafts and inhibits phagosome – lysosome fusion . Additional metacyclic pro - mastigote - derived virulence factors may cross the phagosome membrane using lipid microdomains or by exosomes , and thereby reach their cytosolic targets . Similar roles for lipid microdomains could be postulated for phagosomes containing amastigotes , although little data exist to directly support this . Altered lipid rafts may also be responsible for defective antigen presentation and CD40 signalling . MHC class II , major histocompatibility complex class II . R E V I E W S 612 | AUGUST 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology DC DC Monocyte DC CD4 + CD8 + CD8 + Macrophage Central memory Eﬀector cells IL - 10 Antigen presentation IFN γ T Reg B cell T H 1 NK cell Macrophage Concomitant immunity A situation in which immunological resistance to reinfection co - exists at the same time as persistence of the original infection . mechanism behind an ineffective immune response and , hence , enhanced parasite persistence could only have been uncovered by in situ approaches . The interac - tions between CD4 + T cells and L . major - infected host cells have been visualized using two - photon imaging in established dermal lesions . Although many of the specific T cells were found to colocalize with parasite - infected cells , there were areas of tissue where accumulations of parasites were ignored by T cells 107 . Why this is the case remains to be determined . However , avoidance of detec - tion at this level does not seem to occur in the case of hepatic L . donovani infections , in which parasites are found in defined granulomas and infiltrating effector CD8 + T cells appear to be readily able to seek out their targets 8 . As mentioned earlier , there have been many mecha - nisms described by which parasites attempt to modulate the ability of their host cells to respond to the signals that lead to induction of leishmanicidal activity . From these observations one might conclude that completely eliminating parasites may not be possible regardless of the magnitude of the immune response . However , earlier studies in which IL - 10 was eliminated have suggested that sterile cure could be achieved in certain situations 92 . More recently , in mice lacking BCL - 2 - interacting mediator of cell death ( BIM ) , a pro - apoptotic BCL - 2 family member , not only did L . major infections resolve , but also this reso - lution was associated with the clearance of all detectable parasites 108 . Hence , given a sufficient immune response , sterile cure can be achieved in leishmaniasis . Memory and vaccination . As parasites generally per - sist , even after apparent clinical cure , the type of immu - nity that is induced by Leishmania infections is akin to concomitant immunity . The T cell subsets that contribute to such immunity have been characterized over the past several years , and include CD4 + T cells with a phenotype of central memory T cells 109 , effector T H 1 cells and resting effector T H 1 cells 110 . In addition , CD8 + T cells can have a critical role in resistance to reinfection 85 . The question of how to generate these cells by vaccination remains a chal - lenge , as does the question of which T cells may be most likely to survive and provide the best protection . Recent studies suggest that the most protective CD4 + T cells are those that are multifunctional , capable of producing not only IFNγ , but also IL - 2 and TNF 111 . Consistent with the findings that elimination of IL - 10 can promote resistance , IL - 10 appears to limit the generation of these protective T cells during vaccination 112 . Unfortunately , although several approaches have been taken to develop a vaccine for leishmaniasis , to date none have been successful in humans ( reviewed in REFS 1 , 113 ) . Concluding remarks Challenges remain in understanding leishmanial biol - ogy , the host responses to the parasites and how to use such knowledge to develop new ways of combating the infection . However , advances over the past several years provide a roadmap for future discovery . The sequenc - ing of several leishmanial genomes provided a wealth of information that will be used to define new drug Figure 6 | Cellular components of the anti - leishmanial immune response . Monocytes infiltrate the site of infection and differentiate into dendritic cells ( DCs ) . DCs become infected but fail to become activated , whereas local uninfected DCs upregulate major histocompatibility complex class II ( MHC class II ) . Macrophages are also infected by the parasites . Uninfected DCs may pick up dead parasites or leishmanial antigen and become the critical antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) . CD4 + T cells are then activated and differentiate into T helper ( T H 1 ) cells , which produce interferon - γ ( IFN γ ) , and this promotes parasite killing by infected cells and also further promotes the development of T H 1 cells . Some CD4 + T cells fail to become T H 1 cells , and adopt a central memory T cell phenotype . CD8 + T cells recognizing leishmanial antigens are also activated and also produce IFN γ . Control of the response is largely mediated by the production of interleukin - 10 ( IL - 10 ) , which can come from several different cell types , including regulatory T ( T Reg ) cells , T H 1 cells , CD8 + cells , natural killer ( NK ) cells , B cells , macrophages and DCs . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | AUGUST 2011 | 613 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved targets , mechanisms responsible for drug resistance and virulence factors . Species diversity within the genus Leishmania has a major role in the manifestations of the disease . Thus , the application of genomic approaches , such as the rapid sequencing of parasite genomes as well as ‘omics’ analyses of the parasite and the host cell during infection , will certainly lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of all forms of leishmaniasis . A fresh look at the monocyte , macrophage and DC subsets that have central roles in the aetiology of Leishmania infections , is likely to yield important advances that will lead to new ideas for treatment . The quest for a prophylactic vaccine continues , although whether it is possible to develop a vaccine that pro - vides long - term protection without constant boosting remains unknown . Nevertheless , harnessing the immune response to control infection will require a better under - standing of the various types of T cells that promote protection — as well as pathology — and that regulate immunity to the parasite . Finally , Leishmania spp . will continue to provide powerful tools to interrogate the immune system , in exploring the function of myeloid - lineage cells , understanding the role of innate immune responses in both protection and pathology and defin - ing the development and interactions between effector , regulatory and memory T cells . 1 . Kedzierski , L . Leishmaniasis vaccine : where are we today ? J . Glob . Infect . Dis . 2 , 177 – 185 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Peacock , C . S . et al . Comparative genomic analysis of three Leishmania species that cause diverse human disease . Nature Genet . 39 , 839 – 847 ( 2007 ) . 3 . Kaye , P . M . & Blackwell , J . M . Postgenomic research on leishmaniasis : a critical self - appraisal . Trends Parasitol . 24 , 401 – 405 ( 2008 ) . 4 . Akopyants , N . S . et al . Demonstration of genetic exchange during cyclical development of Leishmania in the sand fly vector . Science 324 , 265 – 268 ( 2009 ) . 5 . Dobson , D . E . et al . Leishmania major survival in selective Phlebotomus papatasi sand fly vector requires a specific SCG - encoded lipophosphoglycan galactosylation pattern . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1001185 ( 2010 ) . 6 . Sadlova , J . et al . The stage - regulated HASPB and SHERP proteins are essential for differentiation of the protozoan parasite Leishmania major in its sand fly vector , Phlebotomus papatasi . Cell . Microbiol . 12 , 1765 – 1779 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Rogers , M . E . , Ilg , T . , Nikolaev , A . V . , Ferguson , M . A . & Bates , P . A . Transmission of cutaneous leishmaniasis by sand flies is enhanced by regurgitation of fPPG . Nature 430 , 463 – 467 ( 2004 ) . 8 . Beattie , L . et al . Dynamic imaging of experimental Leishmania donovani - induced hepatic granulomas detects Kupffer cell - restricted antigen presentation to antigen - specific CD8 T cells . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1000805 ( 2010 ) . 9 . De Trez , C . et al . iNOS - producing inflammatory dendritic cells constitute the major infected cell type during the chronic Leishmania major infection phase of C57BL / 6 resistant mice . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000494 ( 2009 ) . 10 . Ravichandran , K . S . & Lorenz , U . Engulfment of apoptotic cells : signals for a good meal . Nature Rev . Immunol . 7 , 964 – 974 ( 2007 ) . 11 . Laskay , T . , van Zandbergen , G . & Solbach , W . Neutrophil granulocytes — Trojan horses for Leishmania major and other intracellular microbes ? Trends Microbiol . 11 , 210 – 214 ( 2003 ) . 12 . Peters , N . C . et al . In vivo imaging reveals an essential role for neutrophils in leishmaniasis transmitted by sand flies . Science 321 , 970 – 974 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Thalhofer , C . J . , Chen , Y . , Sudan , B . , Love - Homan , L . & Wilson , M . E . Leukocytes infiltrating the skin and draining lymph nodes in response to the protozoan Leishmania infantum chagasi . Infect . Immun . 79 , 108 – 117 ( 2010 ) . 14 . Bianchi , M . E . DAMPs , PAMPs and alarmins : all we need to know about danger . J . Leukoc . Biol . 81 , 1 – 5 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Haraldsen , G . , Balogh , J . , Pollheimer , J . , Sponheim , J . & Kuchler , A . M . Interleukin - 33 — cytokine of dual function or novel alarmin ? Trends Immunol . 30 , 227 – 233 ( 2009 ) . 16 . Oghumu , S . , Lezama - Davila , C . M . , Isaac - Marquez , A . P . & Satoskar , A . R . Role of chemokines in regulation of immunity against leishmaniasis . Exp . Parasitol . 126 , 389 – 396 ( 2010 ) . 17 . Lopez Kostka , S . et al . IL - 17 promotes progression of cutaneous leishmaniasis in susceptible mice . J . Immunol . 182 , 3039 – 3046 ( 2009 ) . 18 . Xin , L . et al . Type I IFN receptor regulates neutrophil functions and innate immunity to Leishmania parasites . J . Immunol . 184 , 7047 – 7056 ( 2010 ) . 19 . Depaquit , J . , Grandadam , M . , Fouque , F . , Andry , P . E . & Peyrefitte , C . Arthropod - borne viruses transmitted by Phlebotomine sandflies in Europe : a review . Euro . Surveill . 15 , 19507 ( 2010 ) . 20 . Hillesland , H . et al . Identification of aerobic gut bacteria from the kala azar vector , Phlebotomus argentipes : a platform for potential paratransgenic manipulation of sand flies . Am . J . Trop . Med . Hyg . 79 , 881 – 886 ( 2008 ) . 21 . Novais , F . O . et al . Neutrophils and macrophages cooperate in host resistance against Leishmania braziliensis infection . J . Immunol . 183 , 8088 – 8098 ( 2009 ) . 22 . Ribeiro - Gomes , F . L . et al . Macrophage interactions with neutrophils regulate Leishmania major infection . J . Immunol . 172 , 4454 – 4462 ( 2004 ) . 23 . Gabriel , C . , McMaster , W . R . , Girard , D . & Descoteaux , A . Leishmania donovani promastigotes evade the antimicrobial activity of neutrophil extracellular traps . J . Immunol . 185 , 4319 – 4327 ( 2010 ) . 24 . Guimaraes - Costa , A . B . et al . Leishmania amazonensis promastigotes induce and are killed by neutrophil extracellular traps . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 6748 – 6753 ( 2009 ) . 25 . Ng , L . G . et al . Migratory dermal dendritic cells act as rapid sensors of protozoan parasites . PLoS Pathog . 4 , e1000222 ( 2008 ) . 26 . Rittig , M . G . et al . Coiling phagocytosis of trypanosomatids and fungal cells . Infect . Immun . 66 , 4331 – 4339 ( 1998 ) . 27 . Charmoy , M . et al . Neutrophil - derived CCL3 is essential for the rapid recruitment of dendritic cells to the site of Leishmania major inoculation in resistant mice . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1000755 ( 2010 ) . 28 . Leon , B . , Lopez - Bravo , M . & Ardavin , C . Monocyte - derived dendritic cells formed at the infection site control the induction of protective T helper 1 responses against Leishmania . Immunity 26 , 519 – 531 ( 2007 ) . 29 . Horst , A . K . et al . CEACAM1 + myeloid cells control angiogenesis in inflammation . Blood 113 , 6726 – 6736 ( 2009 ) . 30 . Sato , N . et al . CC chemokine receptor ( CCR ) 2 is required for Langerhans cell migration and localization of T helper cell type 1 ( Th1 ) - inducing dendritic cells : absence of CCR2 shifts the Leishmania major – resistant phenotype to a susceptible state dominated by Th2 cytokines , B cell outgrowth , and sustained neutrophilic inflammation . J . Exp . Med . 192 , 205 – 218 ( 2000 ) . 31 . Carvalho , L . P . , Pearce , E . J . & Scott , P . Functional dichotomy of dendritic cells following interaction with Leishmania braziliensis : infected cells produce high levels of TNF α , whereas bystander dendritic cells are activated to promote T cell responses . J . Immunol . 181 , 6473 – 6480 ( 2008 ) . 32 . Maroof , A . , Beattie , L . , Kirby , A . , Coles , M . & Kaye , P . M . Dendritic cells matured by inflammation induce CD86 - dependent priming of naive CD8 + T cells in the absence of their cognate peptide antigen . J . Immunol . 183 , 7095 – 7103 ( 2009 ) . 33 . Engwerda , C . R . , Ato , M . & Kaye , P . M . Macrophages , pathology and parasite persistence in experimental visceral leishmaniasis . Trends Parasitol . 20 , 524 – 530 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Bogdan , C . et al . Fibroblasts as host cells in latent leishmaniosis . J . Exp . Med . 191 , 2121 – 2130 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Svensson , M . , Maroof , A . , Ato , M . & Kaye , P . M . Stromal cells direct local differentiation of regulatory dendritic cells . Immunity 21 , 805 – 816 ( 2004 ) . 36 . Gorgani , N . N . , Ma , Y . & Clark , H . F . Gene signatures reflect the marked heterogeneity of tissue - resident macrophages . Immunol . Cell Biol . 86 , 246 – 254 ( 2008 ) . 37 . Gueirard , P . , Laplante , A . , Rondeau , C . , Milon , G . & Desjardins , M . Trafficking of Leishmania donovani promastigotes in non - lytic compartments in neutrophils enables the subsequent transfer of parasites to macrophages . Cell . Microbiol . 10 , 100 – 111 ( 2008 ) . 38 . Desjardins , M . & Descoteaux , A . Inhibition of phagolysosomal biogenesis by the Leishmania lipophosphoglycan . J . Exp . Med . 185 , 2061 – 2068 ( 1997 ) . 39 . Mollinedo , F . , Janssen , H . , de la Iglesia - Vicente , J . , Villa - Pulgarin , J . A . & Calafat , J . Selective fusion of azurophilic granules with Leishmania - containing phagosomes in human neutrophils . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 34528 – 34536 ( 2010 ) . 40 . Ndjamen , B . , Kang , B . H . , Hatsuzawa , K . & Kima , P . E . Leishmania parasitophorous vacuoles interact continuously with the host cell’s endoplasmic reticulum ; parasitophorous vacuoles are hybrid compartments . Cell . Microbiol . 12 , 1480 – 1494 ( 2010 ) . 41 . Lippuner , C . et al . Real - time imaging of Leishmania mexicana - infected early phagosomes : a study using primary macrophages generated from green fluorescent protein - Rab5 transgenic mice . FASEB J . 23 , 483 – 491 ( 2009 ) . 42 . Vinet , A . F . , Fukuda , M . , Turco , S . J . & Descoteaux , A . The Leishmania donovani lipophosphoglycan excludes the vesicular proton - ATPase from phagosomes by impairing the recruitment of synaptotagmin V . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000628 ( 2009 ) . 43 . Spath , G . F . , Schlesinger , P . , Schreiber , R . & Beverley , S . M . A novel role for Stat1 in phagosome acidification and natural host resistance to intracellular infection by Leishmania major . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000381 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Alcolea , P . J . et al . Temperature increase prevails over acidification in gene expression modulation of amastigote differentiation in Leishmania infantum . BMC Genomics 11 , 31 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Wilson , J . et al . Control of parasitophorous vacuole expansion by LYST / Beige restricts the intracellular growth of Leishmania amazonensis . PLoS Pathog . 4 , e1000179 ( 2008 ) . 46 . Huynh , C . & Andrews , N . W . Iron acquisition within host cells and the pathogenicity of Leishmania . Cell . Microbiol . 10 , 293 – 300 ( 2008 ) . 47 . Carvalho , S . et al . Heme as a source of iron to Leishmania infantum amastigotes . Acta Trop . 109 , 131 – 135 ( 2009 ) . 48 . Blackwell , J . M . et al . SLC11A1 ( formerly NRAMP1 ) and disease resistance . Cell . Microbiol . 3 , 773 – 784 ( 2001 ) . 49 . Jacques , I . , Andrews , N . W . & Huynh , C . Functional characterization of LIT1 , the Leishmania amazonensis ferrous iron transporter . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 170 , 28 – 36 ( 2010 ) . 50 . Das , N . K . , Biswas , S . , Solanki , S . & Mukhopadhyay , C . K . Leishmania donovani depletes labile iron pool to exploit iron uptake capacity of macrophage for its intracellular growth . Cell . Microbiol . 11 , 83 – 94 ( 2009 ) . 51 . Gregory , D . J . & Olivier , M . Subversion of host cell signalling by the protozoan parasite Leishmania . Parasitology 130 Suppl S1 , S27 – S35 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Joshi , P . B . , Kelly , B . L . , Kamhawi , S . , Sacks , D . L . & McMaster , W . R . Targeted gene deletion in Leishmania major identifies leishmanolysin ( GP63 ) as a virulence factor . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 120 , 33 – 40 ( 2002 ) . R E V I E W S 614 | AUGUST 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 53 . Victoir , K . et al . Complexity of the major surface protease ( msp ) gene organization in Leishmania ( Viannia ) braziliensis : evolutionary and functional implications . Parasitology 131 , 207 – 214 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Hsiao , C . H . , Yao , C . , Storlie , P . , Donelson , J . E . & Wilson , M . E . The major surface protease ( MSP or GP63 ) in the intracellular amastigote stage of Leishmania chagasi . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 157 , 148 – 159 ( 2008 ) . 55 . Gomez , M . A . et al . Leishmania GP63 alters host signaling through cleavage - activated protein tyrosine phosphatases . Sci . Signal . 2 , ra58 ( 2009 ) . 56 . Halle , M . et al . The Leishmania surface protease GP63 cleaves multiple intracellular proteins and actively participates in p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase inactivation . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 6893 – 6908 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Yao , C . , Donelson , J . E . & Wilson , M . E . Internal and surface - localized major surface proteases of Leishmania spp . and their differential release from promastigotes . Eukaryot . Cell 6 , 1905 – 1912 ( 2007 ) . 58 . Winnen , B . et al . Hierarchical effector protein transport by the Salmonella Typhimurium SPI - 1 type III secretion system . PLoS ONE 3 , e2178 ( 2008 ) . 59 . Barclay , A . N . & Brown , M . H . The SIRP family of receptors and immune regulation . Nature Rev . Immunol . 6 , 457 – 464 ( 2006 ) . 60 . Takizawa , H . & Manz , M . G . Macrophage tolerance : CD47 – SIRP - α – mediated signals matter . Nature Immunol . 8 , 1287 – 1289 ( 2007 ) . 61 . Beattie , L . et al . Leishmania donovani - induced expression of signal regulatory protein alpha on Kupffer cells enhances hepatic invariant NKT - cell activation . Eur . J . Immunol . 40 , 117 – 123 ( 2010 ) . 62 . Pathak , M . K . & Yi , T . Sodium stibogluconate is a potent inhibitor of protein tyrosine phosphatases and augments cytokine responses in hemopoietic cell lines . J . Immunol . 167 , 3391 – 3397 ( 2001 ) . 63 . Forget , G . et al . Role of host phosphotyrosine phosphatase SHP - 1 in the development of murine leishmaniasis . Eur . J . Immunol . 31 , 3185 – 3196 ( 2001 ) . 64 . Spath , G . F . , McDowell , M . A . & Beverley , S . M . Leishmania major intracellular survival is not altered in SHP - 1 deficient me v or CD45 - / - mice . Exp . Parasitol . 120 , 275 – 279 ( 2008 ) . 65 . Olivier , M . , Baimbridge , K . G . & Reiner , N . E . Stimulus - response coupling in monocytes infected with Leishmania . Attenuation of calcium transients is related to defective agonist - induced accumulation of inositol phosphates . J . Immunol . 148 , 1188 – 1196 ( 1992 ) . 66 . Alvarez - Rueda , N . , Biron , M . & Le Pape , P . Infectivity of Leishmania mexicana is associated with differential expression of protein kinase C - like triggered during a cell – cell contact . PLoS ONE 4 , e7581 ( 2009 ) . 67 . Ben - Othman , R . , Dellagi , K . & Guizani - Tabbane , L . Leishmania major parasites induced macrophage tolerance : implication of MAPK and NF - κ B pathways . Mol . Immunol . 46 , 3438 – 3444 ( 2009 ) . 68 . Ben - Othman , R . , Guizani - Tabbane , L . & Dellagi , K . Leishmania initially activates but subsequently down - regulates intracellular mitogen - activated protein kinases and nuclear factor - κ B signaling in macrophages . Mol . Immunol . 45 , 3222 – 3229 ( 2008 ) . 69 . Calegari - Silva , T . C . et al . NF - κ B - mediated repression of iNOS expression in Leishmania amazonensis macrophage infection . Immunol . Lett . 127 , 19 – 26 ( 2009 ) . 70 . Rodriguez , N . E . , Gaur , U . & Wilson , M . E . Role of caveolae in Leishmania chagasi phagocytosis and intracellular survival in macrophages . Cell . Microbiol . 8 , 1106 – 1120 ( 2006 ) . 71 . Osorio y Fortea , J . et al . Transcriptional signatures of BALB / c mouse macrophages housing multiplying Leishmania amazonensis amastigotes . BMC Genomics 10 , 119 ( 2009 ) . 72 . Phillips , R . et al . Innate killing of Leishmania donovani by macrophages of the splenic marginal zone requires IRF - 7 . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1000813 ( 2010 ) . 73 . Chakraborty , D . et al . Leishmania donovani affects antigen presentation of macrophage by disrupting lipid rafts . J . Immunol . 175 , 3214 – 3224 ( 2005 ) . 74 . Rub , A . et al . Cholesterol depletion associated with Leishmania major infection alters macrophage CD40 signalosome composition and effector function . Nature Immunol . 10 , 273 – 280 ( 2009 ) . 75 . Srivastava , N . , Sudan , R . & Saha , B . CD40 - modulated dual - specificity phosphatases MAPK phosphatase ( MKP ) - 1 and MKP - 3 reciprocally regulate Leishmania major infection . J . Immunol . 186 , 5863 – 5872 ( 2011 ) . 76 . Winberg , M . E . et al . Leishmania donovani lipophosphoglycan inhibits phagosomal maturation via action on membrane rafts . Microbes Infect . 11 , 215 – 222 ( 2009 ) . 77 . Garg , R . , Lodge , R . , Descoteaux , A . & Tremblay , M . J . Leishmania infantum promastigotes reduce entry of HIV - 1 into macrophages through a lipophosphoglycan - mediated disruption of lipid rafts . J . Infect . Dis . 197 , 1701 – 1708 ( 2008 ) . 78 . Silverman , J . M . & Reiner , N . E . Exosomes and other microvesicles in infection biology : organelles with unanticipated phenotypes . Cell . Microbiol . 13 , 1 – 9 ( 2010 ) . 79 . Silverman , J . M . et al . An exosome - based secretion pathway is responsible for protein export from Leishmania and communication with macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 842 – 852 ( 2010 ) . 80 . Silverman , J . M . et al . Leishmania exosomes modulate innate and adaptive immune responses through effects on monocytes and dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 185 , 5011 – 5022 ( 2010 ) . 81 . Pereira , R . M . et al . Novel role for the double - stranded RNA - activated protein kinase PKR : modulation of macrophage infection by the protozoan parasite Leishmania . FASEB J . 24 , 617 – 626 ( 2010 ) . 82 . Guilbride , L . , Myler , P . J . & Stuart , K . Distribution and sequence divergence of LRV1 viruses among different Leishmania species . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 54 , 101 – 104 ( 1992 ) . 83 . Ives , A . et al . Leishmania RNA virus controls the severity of mucocutaneous leishmaniasis . Science 331 , 775 – 778 ( 2011 ) . 84 . Stern , J . J . , Oca , M . J . , Rubin , B . Y . , Anderson , S . L . & Murray , H . W . Role of L3T4 + and LyT - 2 + cells in experimental visceral leishmaniasis . J . Immunol . 140 , 3971 – 3977 ( 1988 ) . 85 . Muller , I . , Kropf , P . , Etges , R . J . & Louis , J . A . Gamma interferon response in secondary Leishmania major infection : role of CD8 + T cells . Infect . Immun . 61 , 3730 – 3738 ( 1993 ) . 86 . Belkaid , Y . et al . CD8 + T cells are required for primary immunity in C57BL / 6 mice following low - dose , intradermal challenge with Leishmania major . J . Immunol . 168 , 3992 – 4000 ( 2002 ) . 87 . Uzonna , J . E . , Joyce , K . L . & Scott , P . Low dose Leishmania major promotes a transient T helper cell type 2 response that is down - regulated by interferon - γ - producing CD8 + T cells . J . Exp . Med . 199 , 1559 – 1566 ( 2004 ) . 88 . Faria , D . R . et al . Recruitment of CD8 + T cells expressing granzyme A is associated with lesion progression in human cutaneous leishmaniasis . Parasite Immunol . 31 , 432 – 439 ( 2009 ) . 89 . Joshi , T . , Rodriguez , S . , Perovic , V . , Cockburn , I . A . & Stager , S . B7 - H1 blockade increases survival of dysfunctional CD8 + T cells and confers protection against Leishmania donovani infections . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000431 ( 2009 ) . 90 . Brewig , N . et al . Priming of CD8 + and CD4 + T cells in experimental leishmaniasis is initiated by different dendritic cell subtypes . J . Immunol . 182 , 774 – 783 ( 2009 ) . 91 . Polley , R . , Sanos , S . L . , Prickett , S . , Haque , A . & Kaye , P . M . Chronic Leishmania donovani infection promotes bystander CD8 + - T - cell expansion and heterologous immunity . Infect . Immun . 73 , 7996 – 8001 ( 2005 ) . 92 . Belkaid , Y . et al . The role of interleukin ( IL ) - 10 in the persistence of Leishmania major in the skin after healing and the therapeutic potential of anti - IL - 10 receptor antibody for sterile cure . J . Exp . Med . 194 , 1497 – 1506 ( 2001 ) . 93 . Belkaid , Y . , Piccirillo , C . A . , Mendez , S . , Shevach , E . M . & Sacks , D . L . CD4 + CD25 + regulatory T cells control Leishmania major persistence and immunity . Nature 420 , 502 – 507 ( 2002 ) . 94 . Anderson , C . F . , Oukka , M . , Kuchroo , V . J . & Sacks , D . CD4 + CD25 – Foxp3 – Th1 cells are the source of IL - 10 – mediated immune suppression in chronic cutaneous leishmaniasis . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 285 – 297 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Nylen , S . et al . Splenic accumulation of IL - 10 mRNA in T cells distinct from CD4 + CD25 + ( Foxp3 ) regulatory T cells in human visceral leishmaniasis . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 805 – 817 ( 2007 ) . 96 . Stager , S . et al . Distinct roles for IL - 6 and IL - 12p40 in mediating protection against Leishmania donovani and the expansion of IL - 10 + CD4 + T cells . Eur . J . Immunol . 36 , 1764 – 1771 ( 2006 ) . 97 . Ronet , C . et al . Regulatory B cells shape the development of Th2 immune responses in BALB / c mice infected with Leishmania major through IL - 10 production . J . Immunol . 184 , 886 – 894 ( 2010 ) . 98 . Maroof , A . et al . Posttranscriptional regulation of IL - 10 gene expression allows natural killer cells to express immunoregulatory function . Immunity 29 , 295 – 305 ( 2008 ) . 99 . Miles , S . A . , Conrad , S . M . , Alves , R . G . , Jeronimo , S . M . & Mosser , D . M . A role for IgG immune complexes during infection with the intracellular pathogen Leishmania . J . Exp . Med . 201 , 747 – 754 ( 2005 ) . 100 . Charmoy , M . et al . Leishmania major induces distinct neutrophil phenotypes in mice that are resistant or susceptible to infection . J . Leukoc . Biol . 82 , 288 – 299 ( 2007 ) . 101 . Groux , H . et al . A transgenic model to analyze the immunoregulatory role of IL - 10 secreted by antigen - presenting cells . J . Immunol . 162 , 1723 – 1729 ( 1999 ) . 102 . Ranatunga , D . et al . A human IL10 BAC transgene reveals tissue - specific control of IL - 10 expression and alters disease outcome . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 17123 – 17128 ( 2009 ) . 103 . Martin , S . , Pahari , S . , Sudan , R . & Saha , B . CD40 signaling in CD8 + CD40 + T cells turns on contra - T regulatory cell functions . J . Immunol . 184 , 5510 – 5518 ( 2010 ) . 104 . Dalton , J . E . et al . Inhibition of receptor tyrosine kinases restores immunocompetence and improves immune - dependent chemotherapy against experimental leishmaniasis in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 120 , 1204 – 1216 ( 2010 ) . 105 . Ato , M . , Stager , S . , Engwerda , C . R . & Kaye , P . M . Defective CCR7 expression on dendritic cells contributes to the development of visceral leishmaniasis . Nature Immunol . 3 , 1185 – 1191 ( 2002 ) . 106 . Machado , P . R . et al . Oral pentoxifylline combined with pentavalent antimony : a randomized trial for mucosal leishmaniasis . Clin . Infect . Dis . 44 , 788 – 793 ( 2007 ) . 107 . Filipe - Santos , O . et al . A dynamic map of antigen recognition by CD4 T cells at the site of Leishmania major infection . Cell Host Microbe 6 , 23 – 33 ( 2009 ) . 108 . Reckling , S . et al . Proapoptotic Bcl - 2 family member Bim promotes persistent infection and limits protective immunity . Infect . Immun . 76 , 1179 – 1185 ( 2008 ) . 109 . Zaph , C . , Uzonna , J . , Beverley , S . M . & Scott , P . Central memory T cells mediate long - term immunity to Leishmania major in the absence of persistent parasites . Nature Med . 10 , 1104 – 1110 ( 2004 ) . 110 . Colpitts , S . L . , Dalton , N . M . & Scott , P . IL - 7 receptor expression provides the potential for long - term survival of both CD62L high central memory T cells and Th1 effector cells during Leishmania major infection . J . Immunol . 182 , 5702 – 5711 ( 2009 ) . 111 . Darrah , P . A . et al . Multifunctional T H 1 cells define a correlate of vaccine - mediated protection against Leishmania major . Nature Med . 13 , 843 – 850 ( 2007 ) . 112 . Darrah , P . A . et al . IL - 10 production differentially influences the magnitude , quality , and protective capacity of Th1 responses depending on the vaccine platform . J . Exp . Med . 207 , 1421 – 1433 ( 2010 ) . 113 . Working Group on Research Priorities for Development of Leishmaniasis Vaccines et al . Vaccines for the leishmaniases : proposals for a research agenda . PLoS Negl . Trop . Dis . 5 , e943 ( 2011 ) . 114 . Mosser , D . M . & Edwards , J . P . Exploring the full spectrum of macrophage activation . Nature Rev . Immunol . 8 , 958 – 969 ( 2008 ) . 115 . Geissmann , F . et al . Development of monocytes , macrophages , and dendritic cells . Science 327 , 656 – 661 ( 2010 ) . 116 . Sacks , D . L . Leishmania - sand fly interactions controlling species - specific vector competence . Cell . Microbiol . 3 , 189 – 196 ( 2001 ) . 117 . Beverley , S . M . & Turco , S . J . Lipophosphoglycan ( LPG ) and the identification of virulence genes in the protozoan parasite Leishmania . Trends Microbiol . 6 , 35 – 40 ( 1998 ) . 118 . Korner , U . , Fuss , V . , Steigerwald , J . & Moll , H . Biogenesis of Leishmania major - harboring vacuoles in murine dendritic cells . Infect . Immun . 74 , 1305 – 1312 ( 2006 ) . 119 . World Health Organization . Control of the leishmaniasis : report of a meeting of the WHO Expert Committee on the Control of Leishmaniases ( WHO , Geneva , 2010 ) . Acknowledgments Work in the P . K . laboratory is funded by grants from the UK Medical Research Council and the Wellcome Trust . Work in the P . S . laboratory is funded by grants from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , US National Institutes of Health . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . FURTHER INFORMATION Paul Kaye’s homepage : http : / / www . york . ac . uk / cii / staff / academic / kaye / Philip Scott’s homepage : http : / / www . med . upenn . edu / apps / faculty / index . php / g20001882 / p4382139 ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | AUGUST 2011 | 615 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved