Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . Vol . 41 ( 2002 ) pp . 4851 – 4856 Part 1 , No . 7B , July 2002 c (cid:1) 2002 The Japan Society of Applied Physics A High - Speed Atomic Force Microscope for Studying Biological Macromolecules in Action Toshio A NDO ∗ , Noriyuki K ODERA , Daisuke M ARUYAMA , Eisuke T AKAI , Kiwamu S AITO and Akitoshi T ODA 1 Department of Physics , Faculty of Science , Kanazawa University , Kakuma - machi , Kanazawa 920 - 1192 , Japan 1 Olympus Co . , 2951 Ishikawa - machi , Hachiohji , Tokyo 192 - 8507 , Japan ( Received January 11 , 2002 ; revised manuscript received February 8 , 2002 ; accepted for publication February 12 , 2002 ) The atomic force microscope ( AFM ) is a powerful tool for imaging biological molecules on a substrate , in solution . However , there is no effective time axis with AFM ; commercially available AFMs require minutes to capture an image , but many inter - esting biological processes occur at a much higher rate . Hence , what we can observe using the AFM is limited to stationary molecules , or those moving very slowly . We sought to increase markedly the scan speed of the AFM , so that in the future it can be used to study the dynamic behavior of biomolecules . For this purpose , we have developed various devices optimized for high - speed scanning . Combining these devices has produced an AFM that can capture a 100 × 100 pixel image within 80ms , thus generating a movie consisting of many successive images of a sample in aqueous solution . This is demonstrated by imaging myosin V molecules moving on mica , in solution . [ DOI : 10 . 1143 / JJAP . 41 . 4851 ] KEYWORDS : AFM , protein , biomolecules , real - time imaging , dynamics 1 . Background Protein consists of 20 kinds of amino acids . Ribosomes synthesize polypeptides by connecting these amino acids in one dimension according to the information encoded in mRNA as a sequence of four kinds of nucleotides . A polypep - tide folds into a 3D structure by itself , or with the assistance of molecular chaperones . Although many possibilities may ex - ist for the 3D structural arrangement , the resulting 3D struc - ture is strictly unique , and only the protein having this unique 3D structure can perform its particular physiological function . Hence , the “structure” and “function” of protein are tightly related . Protein is a simple material without any mysterious enigmas . Yet , protein performs very sophisticated functions that cannot be achieved by man - made creatures . Why and how do these functions proceed ? They must be understood in the framework of existing theories of chemistry and physics . The function of a protein is supported by its structure , and therefore must be understandable by knowing its structural details . Although this seems reasonable , it is a problem how to learn the structural details of protein . Is the atomic struc - tural information of protein revealed by X - ray crystallography sufﬁcient for understanding the mechanism ? Apparently , it is not . We now have many proteins whose atomic structures are well known . Yet , we have only a small number of proteins whose functions seem to have been well clariﬁed from their structures . Moreover , these few proteins perform only simple functions , for example , attachment to and detachment from a ligand , or catalysis of a simple reaction . Motor proteins ( such as myosin , kinesin , dynein ) are very sophisticated nano - machines . They produce force to pull cy - toskeletal ﬁbers , or to move along these ﬁbers . This mechan - ical function is coupled to ATP hydrolysis , and the chemical energy released by the hydrolysis is transduced to mechan - ical energy . In our laboratory , we have recently found that single molecules of myosin V , puriﬁed from chick brains , travel a long distance along actin ﬁlaments after association with them . 1 ) To observe this movement , myosin V was la - beled with a ﬂuorophore , and the movements of the resultant ﬂuorescent spots on the protein were recorded as video im - ∗ E - mail address : tando @ kenroku . kanazawa - u . ac . jp Fig . 1 . The video images at 1s intervals of processive movement of single molecules of myosin V along an actin ﬁlament . Bright spots representing individual myosin V molecules are moving up to the end of an actin ﬁla - ment . The end is becoming brighter because of a constant stream of myosin V trafﬁc . The velocity of this processive movement is about 1 µ m / s . ages ( Fig . 1 ) . However , from the images , we do not know how myosin V behaves dynamically during this movement . In particular , researchers who study biological molecular mo - tors are very enthusiastic about understanding the dynamic aspects of these proteins in action . Their enthusiasm has led to the development of new techniques for studying the pro - teins . These techniques have also been used in other ﬁelds of biological science . However , a technique that allows direct observation of nanometer - scale dynamic behavior of individ - ual protein molecules has long been sought . X - ray crystallog - raphy , optical and electron microscopy , and nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) are insufﬁcient for this purpose . The infor - mation we need in order to understand a particular protein is ; ( a ) its physiological action such as movement of a molec - ular motor , ( b ) the ﬁne structure of the protein with atomic resolution , ( c ) the kinetics of the chemical reactions involved such as ATP hydrolysis , and ( d ) the structural dynamics of the protein in action . The ﬁrst aspect can be studied by op - tical microscopy , the second by X - ray crystallography , and 4851 4852 Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . Vol . 41 ( 2002 ) Pt . 1 , No . 7B T . A NDO et al . the third can be studied by various transient techniques . The fourth aspect is the most difﬁcult to study . The time scale of a protein’s structural dynamics in action may range from a nanosecond to a second . However , the time scale of phys - iological action ranges from a millisecond to a second . An atomic force microscope ( AFM ) allows observation of pro - tein in solution . However , its scan speed is too low to cap - ture protein in motion . A high - speed AFM seems to be only the device able to fulﬁll the missing part among techniques in this physiologically intimate time scale . It is this that has been our motivation for developing a high - speed AFM capable of acquiring many successive 100 2 pixels images at intervals of 80 ms . 2 ) In this report , we give brief descriptions of critical aspects of this development , and discuss the signiﬁcance of this new instrument to life science . 2 . Factors Limiting the Scan Speed of AFM What factors of the AFM limit the scan speed ? Here , we consider only the tapping mode of operation ( Digital Instruments , Santa Barbara , CA ) . This is the mode most suit - able for observing soft samples weakly attached to a substrate , in solution . 3 ) In this mode the cantilever is oscillated at ( or near ) its resonance frequency . The oscillating tip brieﬂy taps the surface of the sample at the bottom of each swing , result - ing in a decrease in the oscillation amplitude . This decrease gives information of the sample height . The cantilever , there - fore , has to oscillate for at least one cycle for each pixel of the image . To obtain an image consisting of N × N pixels using a cantilever having the resonance frequency of F c , we require an imaging time ( T ) , given by T ≥ 2 N 2 / F c . ( 1 ) An imaging time of 80 ms for 100 × 100 pixels requires a resonance frequency higher than 250 kHz in water . When the measurement of the oscillation amplitude requires 5 – 6 waves of oscillation , the required resonance frequency should be 5 – 6 times higher than 250 kHz . It seems impossible to manufac - ture such cantilevers , because cantilevers useful for imaging soft samples should have a small spring constant as well , so as to minimize the tip - sample interaction force . Therefore , in addition to cantilevers having a high resonance frequency , we need an RMS - DC converter that can output the amplitude voltage of the input sinusoidal signals as quickly as possible . In addition to the resonance frequency of cantilevers , we have to consider another factor that limits the scan speed . Suppose that a sample on a substrate has a periodicity of λ , and the sample stage is moved horizontally with a velocity of V s , the spatial frequency of 1 / λ is converted to a tempo - ral frequency of V s / λ . The feedback system , that keeps the cantilever’s oscillation amplitude constant , moves the sample stage up and down . The feedback bandwidth ( F b ) should be wider than V s / λ . Therefore , the scan speed is limited by the bandwidth as V s < λ F b . This scan speed determines the imag - ing time as T = 2 pN 2 / V s ≥ 2 pN 2 / λ F b , ( 2 ) where p is the pixel size . For example , if T = 80 ms , N = 100 , p = 2 nm , and λ = 10 nm , then there is a re - quired feedback bandwidth larger than 50 kHz . Various de - vices are involved in the feedback loop , as shown in Fig . 2 . Fig . 2 . A schematic of a conventional AFM system for the tapping mode of operation . The cantilever is oscillated by excitation with the electric piezo actuator . The laser beam reﬂected back from the cantilever is incident onto the bi - cell photodetector . The output from the differential ampliﬁer repre - sents the deﬂection of the cantilever . The output from the RMS - DC con - verter represents the oscillation amplitude of the cantilever . When the sam - ple stage is scanned horizontally , the tip - sample interaction changes due to the variations of sample height , resulting in changes in the amplitude . The PID feedback circuit detects the difference between this amplitude and its preset value , and outputs a signal to the piezo driver in order to move the sample stage vertically . This is quickly repeated until the difference be - comes zero . Thus , the cantilever’s oscillation amplitude is kept constant during the scanning of the sample stage , and therefore , the movement of the sample stage follows the topography of the sample . Fig . 3 . Sketches of AFM scanners with conventional designs . ( A ) a tripod type , ( B ) a cylindrical type . The arrows indicate the sample stages . It is not very difﬁcult to achieve a high bandwidth for elec - tronic devices . However , the scanner is the mechanical device most difﬁcult to optimize for high - speed scanning . A well - known guiding principle for fabricating a mechanical device with a high resonance frequency is to make it with a small , compact , and light body . The sketches ( Fig . 3 ) show the con - ventional designs for the scanners that have been employed for the AFM . As long as the dimensions of these scanners are sufﬁciently large , the movements along the three axes do Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . Vol . 41 ( 2002 ) Pt . 1 , No . 7B T . A NDO et al . 4853 not interfere with each other . However , such large dimensions result in a low resonance frequency . We , therefore , require a different design for the high - speed scanner . Also required of the high - speed scanner is high rigidity against the impulsive forces produced by rapid movements of the piezo actuators . When an object having the mass of 1 g is moved at 50 kHz with an amplitude of 10 nm , a peak impulsive force of 1 . 0 N is produced . The AFM scanner should not generate unwanted vibrations of even 1 nm against this impulsive force . There - fore , the required rigidity becomes 100 kg / µ m . From simple calculations , it is evident that it is impossible to fabricate a mechanical device having such a high resonance frequency as well as high rigidity . Therefore , we need alternative guide - lines for fabricating a high - speed scanner . Several laborato - ries throughout the world have been trying to develop a high - speed AFM . 4 – 6 ) They must also have encountered the greatest difﬁculty when making a high - speed scanner . An alternative means of achieving a high - speed scanner is to use a cantilever with an integrated piezoelectric actuator such as zinc oxide . 7 ) However , such integration inevitably results in a large spring constant of the cantilever . 3 . New Devices 3 . 1 Small cantilevers A high resonance frequency and a small spring constant are conﬂicting requirements for any mechanical device . This is evident from the following equations for a strip type can - tilever . F c = 0 . 56 d L 2 (cid:1) E 12 ρ , ( 3 ) k = w d 3 4 L 3 E , ( 4 ) where k is the spring constant , d , L , and w are the thickness , the length and the width of the cantilever , and E and ρ are the Young’s modulus and the density of material used for the cantilever , respectively . 8 ) These conﬂicting requirements can be met only by using small dimensions . We fabricated small cantilevers from silicon nitride using micromachining techniques ( Fig . 4 ) . They are 140 nm thick , 2 µ m wide , and 9 – 11 µ m long . The rear side of each cantilever is coated with gold of 20 nm thickness . All surfaces of the cantilevers are further coated with osmium , about 2 nm thick . The tips were grown by electron - beam deposition , 9 ) with a growth rate of about 5 nm / s . The tip length was adjusted to about 1 µ m . Be - cause in the AFM setup the cantilever is slightly tilted from the sample substrate , the tip was grown at a slightly tilted an - Fig . 4 . Electron micrographs of the small cantilever developed for our high - speed AFM . ( A ) the cantilever made from silicon nitride has no tip . ( B ) : a tip was grown on the cantilever end by electron - beam deposition . gle to make its axis approximately normal to the substrate plane . The radius of the tip end is 5 – 8 nm . This radius is inﬂu - enced by the parameters of the scanning electron microscope ( SEM , SM - 520 , resolution 2 nm , Topcon , Tokyo ) . In our ex - perience , the shorter working distance and the smaller spot size result in a smaller tip radius . The mechanical properties of the cantilevers were tested by measuring the spectra of their thermal motions . The resonance frequencies are 1 . 3 – 1 . 8 MHz in air , and 450 – 650 kHz in water , and the spring constants are estimated to be 150 – 280 pN / nm . The highest resonance fre - quency in water , i . e . , 650 kHz , can reduce the imaging time to 30 ms for 100 × 100 pixels . 3 . 2 RMS - DC converter Conventional RMS - DC converters require at least 5 – 6 waves for conversion . This requirement arises because the converter has to use a low - pass ﬁlter in order to separate the carrier ( basic ) wave from the amplitude - modulation wave . We designed a new converter that requires only a half wave for conversion ( Fig . 3 of ref . 2 ) . This converter is a type of peak - hold circuit . Two S / H circuits hold the peak and bottom volt - ages separately . The timing signals for this holding are made by the input sinusoidal signal itself . This guarantees stable and precise conversion even when the cantilever oscillation changes its frequency and phase . The phase of the AC input signal is shifted by 90 ◦ , so its output signal crosses zero volt - age when the input signal reaches the peak or bottom . The zero - cross comparators generate rectangular wave signals at this time . The difference between the two voltages held with the two S / Hs is output as the amplitude ( not the RMS value ) of the input sinusoidal signal . This new converter is satisfac - tory for an input sinusoidal signal of up to 1 MHz . 3 . 3 Optical deﬂection detection system Since the cantilevers are very small , we required that the laser beam be focused onto the small cantilever as a small spot . Therefore , we could not use the optical deﬂection detec - tion system that has widely been used in commercial AFMs . We designed an objective - lens type of deﬂection detection system ( Fig . 5 ) . The incident laser beam is focused onto Fig . 5 . A schematic of the objective - lens type of optical deﬂection detec - tion system . For details , see the text . 4854 Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . Vol . 41 ( 2002 ) Pt . 1 , No . 7B T . A NDO et al . a small cantilever using an objective lens ( CFI Plan Fluor ELWD 20 × C , Nikon ) . The reﬂected beam is collected and collimated with the same objective lens . The incident and re - ﬂected beams are separated by a polarization beam splitter and a quarter - wavelength plate . The incident beam is entered into the objective lens at a slightly off - centered position to make the outgoing beam axis normal to the plane of the can - tilever . The focused spot is 2 – 3 µ m in diameter , sufﬁciently small for our small cantilevers . The optical lever magniﬁca - tion is about 2 , 000 . This large magniﬁcation results from the short length of the cantilevers . 3 . 4 Scanner As mentioned above , it is impossible to fabricate a mechan - ical device with the high resonance frequency ( > 50 kHz ) and high rigidity ( > 100 kg / µ m ) required of the high - speed scan - ner . We considered the following possibility : ( 1 ) We might somehow reduce the resonance amplitude even when the res - onance occurs at low frequencies ; ( 2 ) We might somehow counteract the impulsive forces produced by the quick move - ment of the piezo actuators . After making and testing a num - ber of scanners with different designs , we reached the design illustrated in Fig . 6 ( also in Fig . 2 of ref . 2 ) . Stack - type piezo - electric actuators ( AE0203D04 , Tokin , Tokyo ) are used in this scanner . They have a resonance frequency of 260 kHz in free oscillation , their maximum displacement is 4 . 5 µ m , and their capacitance is 90 nF . This scanner has a two - layered struc - ture . One layer is for scanning in the y - direction , and the other layer is for scanning in the x - and z - directions . This structure guarantees no interference between the movements along the three axes . The z - scanner has two z - piezo actuators placed in opposite directions to one another . A sample stage Fig . 6 . Scanner assembly . The piezo actuators are 5mm long , 4mm wide , and 2 . 7mm thick . Base - 2 ( 6 × 6 . 7 × 2 . 7mm 3 ) is clamped in the z - direction between Plate - 2 and Base - 1 via six steel ball bearings ( three for the top , and the other three for the bottom ) . Base - 1 ( 10 × 16 . 7 × 2 . 7mm 3 ) is also clamped in the z - direction between Plate - 1 and Plate - 0 via six steel ball bearings ( three for the top , and the other three for thebottom ) . The bearings are 1mm in diameter . Each clamp is made using three screws placed close to each of the ball bearings . A sample stage is attached to the top of the z - piezo . Fig . 7 . Dependence on the shape of the sample stage of the cantilever’s response when the sample stage is quickly moved toward the cantilever . The lower signals represent the voltage applied to the z - actuator to move the sample stage . The upper signals represent the cantilever deﬂection . The time and length scales are shown under each panel . The tip of the cantilever in water is kept in contact with a mica surface . ( A ) the sample stage is a slide glass cut to 5 × 5mm square . ( B ) the sample stage is a glass of circular - trapezoid shape with a small top surface of 1mm diameter . When this test is carried out with the cantilever being oscillated , its amplitude does not vibrate so signiﬁcantly as seen in ( A ) , irrespective of the shape of the sample stage . is attached to one of the z - piezo actuators via a thin layer of vacuum grease . These actuators are displaced simultaneously in the same distance , but in counter directions , so that any impulsive forces produced are canceled out . The base plate ( Base - 2 ) , to which the two z - actuators as well as an x - actuator are attached , is clamped in the z - direction by two ﬂat surfaces ( Base - 1 and Plate - 2 ) via steel ball bearings . This design al - lows smooth movement of the base ( and hence , the sample stage ) in the x - direction , and minimizes the vibrations of the base in the z - direction . When the z - piezo is displaced quickly , hydrodynamic force is generated as a reaction from the sam - ple solution to the sample stage ( Fig . 7 ) . To minimize this reactive force , a glass of circular - trapezoid shape with a small top surface of 1 mm diameter is used as the sample stage . A result of the performance test of the z - scanner is shown in Fig . 8 . In the setup shown in Fig . 8 , the oscillation ampli - tude of the sample stage was measured as a function of the driving frequency . The oscillation amplitude was constant up to about 60 kHz . The large amplitude observed at 100 kHz is due to the resonance of the piezo actuators themselves ( when one end of a piezo actuator is ﬁxed , its resonance frequency becomes half the resonance frequency of that when it is os - cillated with both ends free ) . Because the devices involved in the feedback loop , other than the scanner , have bandwidths much wider than 60 kHz , the feedback bandwidth is thus de - termined to be about 60 kHz . To conﬁrm this conclusion , we took a pseudo - image by oscillating the sample stage at 55 kHz and with the amplitude of 20 nm using a piezo ﬁlm , without scanning in the x - or y - direction . The imaging time was 40 ms for 100 × 100 pixels . As shown in Fig . 9 , the periodical pattern of 55 kHz was successfully imaged . 4 . Imaging Prior to reaching the ﬁnal phase of this development of a high - speed AFM , the minimum time for taking an image with 100 × 100 pixels was limited to ≥ 0 . 4 s . This limitation was due to overload in the PC processing such as data sampling and the signal generation for the x - and y - scans . With this imaging time , we could not clearly snap an image of myosin Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . Vol . 41 ( 2002 ) Pt . 1 , No . 7B T . A NDO et al . 4855 Fig . 8 . Performance test of the high - speed z - scanner . ( A ) the experimental setup for this test . The cantilever tip immersed in water is kept in contact with the sample stage . The frequency for driving the z - actuators is scanned from 1kHz to 100kHz . ( B ) the oscillation of the sample stage as a func - tion of the driving frequency . The oscillation is measured by detecting the cantilever deﬂection . Fig . 9 . A pseudo - image obtained with a ﬁlm piezo attached to the sample stage being oscillated at 55kHz , without scanning in the x - or y - direction . V weakly attached to a mica surface , in solution . This im - plies that myosin V might be rapidly moving on the substrate , in solution . Therefore , we imaged dust ﬁrmly attached to a mica surface , in solution , and made a movie by zooming - in and zooming - out ( changing the scan size between 600 nm and 2500 nm ) ( Fig . 10 ) . In observing the successive images we noticed that mirror images appeared at the left margin of the images . This is caused by the inertia of the mass attached to Fig . 10 . Successive images , at 0 . 4s intervals , of dust attached to a mica surface , in water . The size of the scan area is changed every 0 . 4s by zoom - ing in and out on the sample . The numbers shown under each image are the frame numbers . The magniﬁed image in the lower right corner is of the 21st image , and a mirror image appearing is indicated by an arrow head . the free end of the x - piezo . Therefore , the mass was reduced slightly . Moreover , to avoid the overload of the PC process - ing , we designed a circuit that generates signals for x - and y - scans . Thus , the PC can concentrate on data sampling . Ac - cording to eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , the feedback bandwidth of 60 kHz as well as the high resonance frequencies of the small can - tilevers can reduce the time for capturing an image with 100 2 2 nm pixels to 70 ms , as long as the apparent width of the sample is not too small . We examined whether imaging can really be carried out at ( or near ) the maximum rate predicted here . Myosin V directly attached to mica , in solution , was imaged successively ( 240 nm scan range ; 100 2 pixels ) for 4 s ( 50 frames ) . The scan rate was 1 . 25 kHz , corresponding to a tip speed of 0 . 6 mm / s , and the frame rate was 12 . 5 / s . The an - gle between the head and neck regions dramatically changed ( Fig . 11 ; Fig . 5 of ref . 2 ) . The reconstructed movie is available from the CD - ROM of “Molecular Biology of The Cell” , 4th ed . ( Garland Science Publishing , 2002 ) . 5 . Signiﬁcance of the High - Speed AFM to Life Science In life science , it has been a dream to view the nanometer - scale dynamic behavior of individual biopolymers in solu - tion . The capacity to acquire successive images every 80 ms will allow a large expansion in the scope of biological pro - cesses that can be examined in real time . In the near future , we should be able to observe the behavior of processive mo - tors such as kinesin 10 ) and myosin V 1 ) moving along their tracks , of molecular chaperones assisting a polypeptide chain 4856 Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . Vol . 41 ( 2002 ) Pt . 1 , No . 7B T . A NDO et al . Fig . 11 . Successive images of myosin V on mica , in buffer solution . The same area of 240 × 240nm 2 was imaged 50 times with 100 × 100 pix - els . Only nine successive images are shown . The reconstructed movie is available from the CD - ROM of “Molecular Biology of The Cell” , 4th ed . ( Garland Science Publishing , 2002 ) . to fold , or of a ribosome synthesizing a polypeptide accord - ing to the nucleotides sequence on mRNA . Such direct ob - servations will provide insight into the mechanisms by which biomolecular machines operate . We think that the high - speed AFM has further potential in life science . If we can link dy - namic images of a protein acquired by the high - speed AFM to its known atomic structure , we may be able to construct dynamic atomic models not obtainable by other techniques . How can we make such a link ? The AFM can view only the surface of the protein , from one side . The other side , facing the substrate , cannot be observed . Therefore , the information obtained by using the AFM seems too remote from the atomic structure of the protein . Therefore , we may require additional structural information that can mediate this linking process . Cryo electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ) can view the inside of a protein , and report an electron density map of lower resolu - tion than is achievable with X - ray crystallography . Fitting of cryo - EM images of protein to the corresponding atomic struc - ture has already been carried out successfully in several cases . Suppose cryo - EM images are obtained for protein molecules that were performing a function immediately before freez - ing ; these molecules will be found with different conforma - tions among these images . These conformations must occur on a single molecule of protein that dynamically changes its structure along the time axis . Therefore , the conformations found in the cryo - EM images can be aligned along the time axis , reﬂecting the dynamic AFM images . Then , we must de - form the atomic structure so as to ﬁt it to the conformations found in the cryo - EM images . In this way , we can construct dynamic atomic models that move and thus reﬂect the AFM movies . By analyzing such a model ( for example , by calcu - lating the potential energies of the atomic structures aligned along the time axis ) , we can probably understand the physics of its physiological function from the structural details . The static atomic structures of many proteins have been revealed by X - ray crystallography . However , the basic framework of structural biology has not been changed signiﬁcantly since the ﬁrst success by Professor Perutz in 1936 . We hope that the high - speed AFM will enable a breakthrough in structural biology in the future . Acknowledgement This work was supported by the Proposal - based New Industry Creative Type Technology R & D Promotion Program from the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization ( NEDO ) of Japan to T . A . 1 ) T . Sakamoto , I . Amitani , E . Yokota and T . Ando : Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 272 ( 2000 ) 586 . 2 ) T . Ando , N . Kodera , E . Takai , D . Maruyama , K . Saito and A . Toda : Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 ( 2001 ) 12468 . 3 ) C . A . J . Putman , K . O . Van der Werf , B . G . De Grooth , N . F . Van Hulst and J . Greve : Appl . Phys . Lett . 64 ( 1994 ) 2454 . 4 ) M . B . Viani , T . E . Sch¨affer , G . T . Paloczi , L . L . Pietrasanta , B . L . Smith , J . B . Thompson , M . Richter , M . Rief , H . E . Gaub and K . W . Plaxco : Rev . Sci . Instrum . 70 ( 1999 ) 4300 . 5 ) T . Sulcheck , R . Hsieh , J . D . Adams , S . C . Minne , C . F . Quate and D . M . Adderton : Rev . Sci . Instrum . 71 ( 2000 ) 2097 . 6 ) S . J . T . van Noort , K . O . van der Werf , B . G . de Grooth and J . Greve : Biophys J . 77 ( 1999 ) 2295 . 7 ) S . C . Minne , S . R . Manalis and C . F . Quate : Appl . Phys . Lett . 67 ( 1995 ) 3918 . 8 ) D . Sarid : Scanning Force Microscopy with Applications to Electric , Magnetic , and Atomic Forces ( Oxford Univ . Press , New York , 1991 ) Chap . 1 . 9 ) D . J . Keller and C . Chih - Chung : Surf . Sci . 268b ( 1992 ) 333 . 10 ) R . D . Vale , T . Funatsu , D . W . Pierce , L . Romberg , Y . Harada and T . Yanagida : Nature 380 ( 1996 ) 451 .