New Literacy Theories for Participatory Design : Lessons from Three Design Cases with Australian Aboriginal Communities Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor Queensland University of Technology GPO Box 2434 , Brisbane , QLD , 4001 Australia jen . taylor @ qut . edu . au Alessandro Soro Queensland University of Technology GPO Box 2434 , Brisbane , QLD , 4001 Australia alessandro . soro @ qut . edu . au Margot Brereton Queensland University of Technology GPO Box 2434 , Brisbane , QLD , 4001 Australia m . brereton @ qut . edu . au ABSTRACT Literacy and power are closely entwined , and not all literacy practices are equally supported and recognised within dominant discourses and political structures . Technology design offers new possibilities for supporting culturally - diverse literacy practices , including the preservation and maintenance of endangered languages . While literacy is an inherent aspect of design work , theories of literacy as a social practice encompassing a variety of different senses and modes of expression are under - utilised within the design community . We survey the current landscape on literacy and design , and illustrate how six lenses of new literacy theory articulated by Kathy Mills [ 1 ] can support us to be more attentive to the literacy practices enacted in design through their application to three design cases with Australian Aboriginal communities . Finally , we reflect on our own Digital Community Noticeboard project to contribute four ways that new literacy theory can inform participatory design . 1 CCS CONCEPTS Human - centered computing ~ HCI theory , concepts and models • Human - centered computing ~ Empirical studies in HCI KEYWORDS Literacy , Participatory Design , New Literacy Theory , Aboriginal ACM Reference format : J . L . Taylor , A . Soro , and M . Brereton . 2018 . New Literacy Theory for Participatory Design : Lessons from Three Design Cases with Australian Aboriginal Communities . In PDC ' 18 : Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference - Volume 1 , August 20 - 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210588 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6371 - 6 / 18 / 08… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210588 1 INTRODUCTION Literacy and power are closely entwined . Ever since the establishment of reading and writing , dominant ideologies about “what counts as literacy” and what modes of expression are privileged ( e . g . reading and writing ) [ 2 ] have been enacted through education policies and institutions . While access to primary schooling has long been one of the United Nation’s Millennium Development Goals [ 3 ] , not all literacy practices are equally recognised , valued , or supported in educational settings such as the classroom [ 2 ] . Traditional ideas about literacy as reading and writing position literacy as “individualised , singular , print - based and fixed” [ 4 ] . Yet , in a globalised and networked society , new visions such as the multiliteracies agenda recognise the potential for technology to support diverse expressions of language and culture by drawing together different modes of communication in new ways , and new interactions between global and local flows of language and culture [ 5 ] . Participatory design is well - positioned to interrogate issues of power and politics connected with literacy , given its commitment to involving people in designing technology that shapes their individual and social futures [ 6 ] . New literacy theories offer avenues for better understanding and designing for diverse forms of literacy practices and cultural expression , with the potential for participatory design to challenge existing power structures and discourses that recognise certain literacies above others . A range of work has been undertaken on designing for literacy in participatory design ( PD ) and Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . However , design researchers are only starting to engage with new literacy theory as articulated through six lenses by Kathy Mills : socio - cultural , critical , multimodal , socio - spatial , socio - material , and sensory literacies [ 1 ] . We have not yet taken stock of these efforts , and reflected on how these new literacy theories resonate with design theory and have the potential to inform design . We posit that new literacy theory can support us to be more attentive to the literacy practices and ideologies that are enacted in all design work , with a view to designing in ways that value and recognise culturally - diverse literacy practices . In this paper , we survey the current landscape on literacy and design in PD and HCI , and explore the resonances between new literacy theories and design theories . Drawing on three design cases with Australian Aboriginal communities , one with which we were directly involved , we apply the lenses to these projects to PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 2 illustrate how they can help us to identify and make sense of diverse forms of literacy practice that may not be reflected in traditional definitions of literacy . Finally , we examine our own Digital Community Noticeboard project and contribute a reflection on the potential for new literacy theory to inform participatory design strategies and choices in four ways : 1 ) developing design intentions that target literacy at different levels ; 2 ) focusing our attention during design activities ; 3 ) taking local social interactions and communication activities as the starting point ; and 4 ) rethinking how to search for and position work on literacy and design . 2 LITERACY IN PD AND HCI 2 . 1 Literature Survey Overview We conducted a literature survey of prior HCI projects from the PDC and SIGCHI archives to gain an overview of the current research landscape on designing for literacy and design researchers’ engagement with literacy theory . We commenced with a keyword search for “literacy” in the Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ) proceedings , yielding only 7 results in total . To broaden our scope , we reviewed additional design literature on literacy from the ACM Digital Library by searching for papers with literacy in the title , abstract , and author keywords , filtered to SIGCHI sponsored conferences . These returned an additional 30 results for our review . To gain a broad overview of the landscape , we clustered the papers based on their definitions of literacy , project domains , user groups , technology types , and design theories and paradigms , using author keywords and content . 2 . 1 . 1 Definitions of Literacy . Diverse definitions of literacy were represented in the paper keywords and contents . Functional literacy ( reading and writing skills ) was a perspective represented in a large number of the papers ( e . g . [ 7 – 12 ] ) . In some cases , this framing of literacy was clearly defined in the paper , for example as “the ability to read , write , and speak in the language of your nation of residence , and to use mathematics at a level necessary to function at work and in society in general " [ 12 ] . Papers also referred to literacy not only as reading and writing skills but also as experiences including “parent - child shared reading” [ 13 ] and reading environments conducive to leisure reading experiences amongst children [ 10 ] . In other cases , literacy was not defined in the paper but the perspective of functional literacy was implied , particularly in papers that address designing for “low literacy” users ( e . g . [ 11 , 14 , 15 ] ) . Literacy was also defined in terms of more specific skills . Two papers referred to data literacy , with one referring to “visualization literacy” as “the ability to confidently create and interpret visual representations of data” [ 16 ] , and the other seeking to foster “critical data literacy” skills amongst youth using social media , here defined as being the skills to “access , interpret , critically assess , manage , handle , and ethically use data” [ 17 ] . Nine papers referred to some form of technical literacy ( [ 18 – 27 ] ) , using a diverse range of terms including “digital literacy” [ 27 ] , “device literacy” [ 18 ] , and “technological literacy” [ 25 ] ) . A small number of papers referred to “information literacy” [ 28 ] , “web search literacy” [ 29 ] , with some relating more specifically to the ability to access and use information in particular domain such as “energy literacy” [ 30 ] , “health literacy” [ 31 ] , and “financial literacy” [ 32 ] . Additional perspectives of literacy included “material literacy” [ 24 ] , “spatial literacy” [ 33 ] , “games literacy” [ 34 ] , and “visual literacy” [ 35 ] . 2 . 1 . 2 Domains of Literacy . The following domains of study were identified for literacy - related design projects based on the paper keywords . These categories include : accessibility , including design to support literacy of visually - impaired people [ 36 , 37 ] and children with Down Syndrome [ 9 ] ; education and learning , including “computer science education” [ 22 ] , “patient education” [ 31 ] , and “games education” [ 34 ] ; work [ 38 ] ; the home [ 19 ] ; the environment [ 30 , 39 ] ; HCI4D ( e . g . [ 14 ] ) ; and health [ 31 , 40 , 41 ] . Other types of activities and behaviours involving literacy discussed in these papers include “civic engagement” [ 26 ] and “digital storytelling” [ 42 ] . 2 . 1 . 3 Types of Users . The papers analysed generally referred to types of users by age categories ( e . g . “adult” ( e . g . [ 8 , 12 ] ) , “children” ( e . g . [ 7 , 16 , 21 ] ) , “youth” [ 17 , 26 ] , or “teens” [ 32 ] ) , familial roles such as “parents” ( e . g . [ 13 , 32 ] ) , and designing for “high literacy” and “low literacy” users , for example in [ 11 ] . 2 . 1 . 4 Types of Technology and Materials . Literacy papers in PDC and SIGCHI represent a wide range of technologies and materials as described in their author keywords . Technology was different at different levels of abstraction , from general terms such as “user interfaces” ( e . g . [ 9 ] ) to more specific technologies . These include : apps and mobile interfaces ( e . g . [ 16 , 40 , 41 ] ) ; electronics ( e . g . [ 21 , 24 ] ) , including RFID [ 9 ] ; different types of software platforms including digital libraries [ 8 ] , conversational agents [ 31 ] , and social media [ 17 , 43 ] ; and tangible interfaces ( e . g . [ 9 , 13 , 37 , 42 ] ) . 2 . 1 . 5 Design Theories , Paradigms , Approaches , and Methods . Five of the literacy papers surveyed had “participatory design” as a keyword ( [ 8 , 10 , 12 , 27 , 40 ] ) , with participatory methods and approaches including “participatory action research” [ 25 ] , “participatory workshops” [ 10 ] , and “cooperative enquiry” [ 8 ] . Additional design approaches included “contextual inquiry” [ 8 ] , “service design” [ 40 ] , and “claims” and “patterns” [ 15 ] . Data gathering methods represented in the papers include interviews [ 9 , 11 , 36 ] , focus groups [ 36 ] , and video recording [ 11 , 21 ] . A small number of different design theories and paradigms were referenced such as “sociotechnical systems” [ 19 ] , “ubiquitous computing” [ 33 ] , “research through design” [ 32 ] , and “usability” [ 20 ] . 2 . 2 Literature Survey Findings The literature survey shows that only a small number of papers from PDC and SIGCHI publications were explicitly related to literacy . Common definitions of literacy in these papers were traditional views of literacy such as functional literacy , technology use skills , or knowledge of a particular topic or domain . The design research community is only starting to engage with new literacy concepts such as “spatial literacy” [ 33 ] and “material literacy” [ 24 ] . By describing people as having “high” or “low” literacy and focusing on interface constructs , we New Literacy Theories for Participatory Design PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 3 may neglect a more holistic view of people’s literacy practices and communication skills . Although there were an assortment of different literacy domains and types of technology discussed . There is scope for further consideration of other technologies including gestures , haptics , wearables , and virtual and augmented reality . While there are seven papers in the PDC archives relating to literacy , we noticed a general lack of discussion relating designing for literacy to the “fundamental aspects” of participatory design [ 44 ] . These include two of the key tenets that recognise users as “experts in their work domains” , and people’s “rights to participate in the shaping of the worlds in which they act” [ 6 ] . Participatory design workshops were used for purposes such as co - designing books and reading environments that would promote a reading culture amongst children [ 10 ] , and considering different ways to involve teachers and learning in the design and delivery of adult literacy [ 12 ] and technology skills courses [ 25 ] . Yet , there seems to be a lack of explicit discussion about the power dynamics and politics of designing for literacy , with the exception of [ 25 ] that empowers learners to “critique [ … ] the dominant view that they were technologically “illiterate”” and considers the role of participatory design in bringing about “personal and political transformation” [ 25 ] . Relating literacy and participatory design to theories such as postcolonial computing [ 45 ] , feminist theory [ 46 ] and social - justice oriented design [ 47 ] may help to bring these issues to the fore . 3 LITERACY , POWER , AND ABORIGINAL AUSTRALIA 3 . 1 Origins and Meanings of “Literacy” The notion of literacy is ubiquitous in everyday life , yet it is not culturally universal and has no direct equivalent in many languages [ 2 , 48 ] . Tracing the history of literacy as a concept and the evolution of its meanings sheds light on the relationship between literacy and power . The origins of the term literacy in the English language date back to the 1500’s as evolution of the word “literate” from the Latin “litterātus” meaning “an erudite or learned person ; a member of the learned class” [ 49 ] , articulated in relation to its perceived opposite “illiteracy” [ 50 ] . The early role of literacy in the Western context was to carry out social functions relating to government , religion , and the economy [ 51 , 52 ] , later taking on connotations of “wealth , power , status and knowledge” [ 52 ] . Two key contemporary meanings of literacy are “the ability to read and write” and “competence or knowledge in a particular area” [ 49 ] , extending to “digital literacy” with the advent of personal computers [ 53 ] . However , this traditional approach to literacy has been critiqued for attempting to understand literacy skills as separate from and independent of the social and cultural contexts in which they are practiced , and advancing the view of literacy as something that can transferred from the mind of a teacher to a student [ 50 ] . Alternative perspectives such as those advanced by the new literacy studies agenda see literacy as a social practice beyond individual skills , situated within particular social and cultural contexts [ 54 ] , and carried out through “literacy events” [ 48 ] . The “multiliteracies” vision recognises the potential for new technologies to reflect other modes of literacy apart from reading writing and heighten regional diversity of languages and cultures [ 5 ] . This being said , new literacy theories are subject to their own critique of emphasizing the “local” at the expense of understanding how these literacies are situated within national social structures and global systems [ 48 ] . Kathy Mill’s seminal work synthesizes the many different theoretical perspectives of contemporary literacy theory , presented as six “lenses” : “socio - cultural” , “critical” , “multimodal” , “socio - spatial” , “socio - material” , and “sensory literacies” [ 1 ] . 3 . 2 Literacy as Power These various definitions of literacy have power implications , with certain ideas about literacy embedding particular Western political ideologies and values . For example , written attributions of authorship embody individualist perspectives of intellectual property and rights to ownership and recognition for work , and the circulation of written texts “separates the message from the author” [ 51 ] . This operates in tension with alternative epistemological positions such as notions of collective ownership and authority to knowledge in Australian Aboriginal cultures [ 55 ] , and the tightly interwoven connections between people , country , and knowledge practices [ 56 ] . Additionally , written literacy has problematic historical associations with being an indicator of modernity and “social progress” by advancing rational thought [ 48 , 51 ] , compared to the traditions of “oral cultures” [ 51 , 57 ] . These perspectives have been heavily critiqued for perpetuating negative and false stereotypes , and oversimplified dichotomies [ 50 ] . Formal education and schooling have served as an instrument for promoting literacy [ 52 ] , advancing particular ideologies and privileging certain discourses [ 2 ] . Janks highlights four dimensions of literacy as power : 1 ) the ability for stereotypes about literacy to perpetuate “negative subject positions” for particular people who do not conform to these normative standards ; 2 ) the lack of equal recognition for different literacy practices and political nature of determining “what counts” as literacy ; 3 ) the fact that written literacy is given precedence over other modes of expression ; and 4 ) the implications of uneven access to technology on literacy skills development [ 2 ] . Additionally , UNESCO contends that bilingualism is generally undervalued in formal schooling contexts internationally [ 52 ] , which presents a challenge for minority languages that are underrepresented in mainstream schooling systems . 3 . 3 Literacy and Indigenous Languages We discuss three different design cases with Australian Aboriginal communities , one of which draws upon our own experience of designing a cross - cultural digital community noticeboard with a very remote Australian Aboriginal community [ 58 ] . In the Australian political context , there has been a major policy focus on “Closing the Gap” between PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 4 Indigenous and non - Indigenous literacy levels and educational attainment [ 59 ] , though these initiatives emphasize and measure literacy as reading and writing in English and have been critiqued for perpetuating deficit models of literacy [ 60 ] . At present , there are 120 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander languages currently being spoken in Australia , though “all traditional languages are at risk of declining” [ 61 ] . Their presence in the schooling system has been subject to seven key shifts in bilingual education policy logics ranging from assimilation , to integration , to plurilingualism , through to the present focus on the English language in the classroom [ 62 ] . The continued strength and diversity of Indigenous languages is a testament to their resilience in the face of colonisation , assimilation , and missionisation . Indigenous peoples recognise the potential for and challenges of technology use for the intergenerational transmission of their languages and cultural practices [ 63 ] . Studies have illustrated the widespread appropriation and use of mobile phones in Aboriginal communities even in places that lack cellular mobile connectivity for uses such as offline multimedia sharing [ 64 ] . Kral and colleagues illustrate the multimodal literacy practices exhibited by Aboriginal youth in the production of music videos , and the use of SMS for innovative language use in English and Aboriginal languages [ 11 ] . There have been a number of technology design projects involving Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander languages including mobile apps [ 65 ] , digital noticeboards [ 58 ] , and social robots [ 66 ] . Yet , the design implications of viewing these types of projects through the lenses of new literacy theory has not yet been considered . 4 SIX LENSES OF LITERACY THEORY We provide a summary of each of Kathy Mills six lenses of literacy theory [ 1 ] and relate these to design theories and projects , though we acknowledge that we are not able to represent them here in their full richness . The lenses are not mutually exclusive , and while Mills extensively discusses the interconnections , overlaps , and tensions between the lenses , we are not able to unpack them in this paper . 4 . 1 Socio - Cultural Literacies The Socio - Cultural Lens on literacy shifts the focus from literacy as individual competencies to literacy as a social practice [ 67 ] and shines a light on the relationship between literacy practices and the particular social and cultural contexts in which they are produced and reproduced . Mills relates the socio - cultural literacy lens to the various “discourses” in which we participate to communicate and express our identity in different areas of everyday life such as work , school , home , and recreational activities [ 1 ] . Mills identifies key theoretical perspectives that underpin the socio - cultural lens of literacy such as Goffman’s seminal work The Presentation of the Self In Everyday Life [ 1959 ] , and social theories of learning such as Lave and Wenger’s Communities of Practice [ 68 , 69 ] that have been taken up in the design research community . Mills’ examples of empirical studies suggest that ethnography is commonly used as an approach for studying literacy practices in a variety of cultural and linguistic contexts . The shift in orientation from literacy as individual skills to situated social practices corresponds to two important trends in HCI research . One is the movement from the “classical cognitivism” in to the “phenomenologically situated” paradigms in HCI [ 70 ] , where interactions with technology are products of particular settings and situations . The notion of literacy as a social practice also aligns with the idea of looking beyond interactions with technology to social practices involving technology use as “historical processes and performances , longer - term actions which persist over time” [ 71 ] . Just as literacy practices are seen as socially and culturally constructed , technology is socially - constructed and culturally appropriated [ 72 ] , and design methods and artefacts are culturally - located [ 45 , 73 ] . Walton and Vukovic’s study of web use by South African students illustrates the contextual nature of literacy practices and information use , and the potential for web interfaces to exclude those who are not familiar with the “specific forms of literacy or communicative practices” that reflect Western literacy ideologies [ 74 ] . From a participatory design perspective , approaching literacy practices as situated and contingent also corresponds with the early shift from “traditional” to “cooperative” approaches to workplace innovation and technology design that privileged designing from the basis of people’s situated actions rather than abstract and formalised models of “problems” [ 75 ] . Two examples of literacy and design projects from the literacy survey that explicitly considered socio - cultural literacy theories are : 1 ) Campos and colleagues’ collaborative storytelling app that supports oral storytelling skills development and links the design to the user’s context through measures such as the use of “ recognizable cultural forms” [ 42 ] ; and 2 ) Ahn’s study of social media use that considers the types of literacy skills that can be developed given the platform’s affordances , social interactions using the tools , and the social and cultural contexts of users [ 23 ] . 4 . 2 Critical Literacies The Critical Literacy Lens aims to address power imbalances with respect to literacy education and practices . Mills’ c ritical literacy lens considers literacy from the perspective of “social inequalities , social structures , power and human agency ” , and advocates for addressing unequal power relations reified through certain literacy practices [ 1 ] . Mills argues that students must be equipped with the critical thinking and analysis skills to interrogate how literacy products such as texts are constructed in ways that they perpetuate particular ideas about literacy and are located within particular social structures [ 1 ] . Mills references works underpinning the critical literacies lens such as Paulo Friere’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed [ 76 ] , Dewey’s work on education and child psychology [ 77 ] , and Marxist and neo - Marxist theory ( in [ 1 ] ) . The focus of the critical literacy lens on power dynamics and social change relates to several theoretical orientations in HCI . The postcolonial computing agenda [ 45 ] draws attention to the New Literacy Theories for Participatory Design PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 5 potential for design to perpetuate uneven power relations between designers and users . This could be extended to considering who has the agency to decide which cultural perspectives of “literacy” are privileged in design projects . Both Feminist HCI [ 46 ] and Social Justice - Oriented Design [ 47 ] consider themes that align with critical literacy such as agency , empowerment , and equity , including consideration of women’s viewpoints that are not given adequate recognition in existing social structures [ 46 ] . Recognising people’s rights to participate in the creation of technology that shapes their lives [ 78 ] therefore includes a right to deciding which types of literacies should be supported by and reflected by interactive systems . Two examples from our literature survey that address the concerns of critical literacy are Hautea and Hill’s project that encourages young people to “critique , question , and debate” data analytics by scratch programming using their own learning data [ 17 ] , and Campbell’s “inside out methodology” to technology education that supports learners to subvert their perceived positi on as “illiterate” by normative standards [ 25 ] . 4 . 3 Multimodal Literacies The Multimodal Literacy Lens considers the way in which meaning is generated by combining together different modes of communication [ 1 ] , such as linguistic , audio , spatial , gestural , and visual modes [ 5 ] . Mills points out that human communication is inherently multimodal [ 1 ] , and new types of digital technology and multimedia platforms are allowing people to generate and distribute novel types of multimodal texts that include written words , audio , images , video , and animations [ 1 ] . Mills also examines the concept of “transmediation” in the digital era [ 79 ] . Mills relates multimodal literacy to scholarship such as Suhor’s social semiotics [ 80 ] and the work of Kress and Van Leeuwen [ 81 ] . Semiotic theory and multimodality have been incorporated into design in various ways , including the establishment of a dedicated ACM Conference on Multimodal Interaction . Semiotic theory has been enlisted to better understand the technology design process by viewing design as a “communicative process” that involves the exchange of meaning between designers , users , and the system [ 82 ] . When viewed from the perspective of participatory design , engaging with multimodality in design activities and the use of technology prototypes could thus support “genuine participation” [ 6 ] by decentring modes of communication that are familiar to technology designers and instead accounting for the broader literacy practices of partipant communities . Jadan - Guerrero and colleagues’ “Kiteracy” project is a multimodal literacy project that facilitates “playful reading strategies” for children with Down Syndrome through creative explorations using cardboard , multi - touch , and tangible interfaces [ 9 ] . 4 . 4 Socio - Spatial Literacies The Socio - Spatial Literacy Lens relates to the “spatial dimension of literacy , including the flows , networks , and connections bet ween literacy practices that circulate in society” , influenced by the processes of globalisation [ 1 ] . Mills’ spatial lens draws attention to the socio - geographic distribution of languages , and the spatially and temporally situated nature of literacy practices [ 1 ] . Mills’ socio - spatial literacy lens is theoretically motivated by works including Castell’ s The Networked Society [ 83 ] , Soja’s Thirdspace Theory [ 84 ] , and Jenkin et al . ' s work on participatory culture [ 85 ] . Space and place have been addressed in many guises in the HCI community , including its implications for work and education in the sub areas of Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Computer - Supported Cooperative Education . Harrison a nd Dourish’s seminal work Re - place - ing Space argues for a shift in vision from the concept of “space” as the foundation for design , to examining and designing with respect to the social me anings associated with “places” [ 86 ] . A follow - on paper reconsiders how places are socially constructed with the advent of wireless technologies [ 87 ] . Kaptelinin and Bannon also bring a spatial lens to interaction design by suggesting that we look beyond designing technology to considering activity spaces as the “object of design” to “create better environments for [ … ] work , learning , and leisure activities ” [ 88 ] . Both these perspectives on space and design could encompass the topic of literacy by understanding the relationship between literacy practices and technology use in a range of different contexts including school , work , home , and beyond , and the variety of meanings invested in literacy places . With respect to our survey , Krogh and colleagues made the explicit connection between “space” and “literacy” by describing the implications of spatial relations with technology on social relations with others [ 33 ] . Wheeler et al . also explore different types of “reading spaces” that would be conducive to promoting a reading culture amongst Namibian children through co - design activities with school students [ 10 ] . Just as globalised technology and ubiquitous computing have ramifications for the spatiality of literacy , the purview of participatory design has also evolved away from the workplace to new contexts where literacy is practiced including internet communities , public events , and the home [ 89 ] . 4 . 5 Socio - Material Literacies The Socio - Material Literacy Lens pertains to “the material dimensions of education” [ 1 ] . Mills illustrates how theories of materiality such as artefactual literacy and object ethnography take materials as the starting points for understanding how interactions between people and materials shape the “human elements of literacy learning” , including objects used across the school and at home [ 1 ] . Mills’ discussion of s ocio - material literacy takes up perspectives such as Latour’s Actor Network Theory [ 90 ] by studying the literacy practices that stem from certain “socio - material assemblages” [ 1 ] . Other relevant references and theoretical resonances discussed by Mills include works on tools by Vygotsky and others and Cultural Historical Activity Theory ( e . g . [ 91 ] ) . Materiality is a theoretical perspective that is gaining increasing attention in design research as it is in literacy studies [ 92 ] . For example , Giaccardi and colleagues advance a PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 6 framework of “materials experience” that accounts for the “social and cultural practices developed within the situated experience of materials” [ 93 ] with the potential to consider the materiality of literacy as one of these practices . In the area of Tangible User Interfaces , the elements of Hornecker and Buur’s Tangible Interaction Framework [ 94 ] relate to different aspects of the literacy lenses , and their attention to the ways in which the “ configuration of material objects and space affects and directs emerging group behavior” [ 94 ] could include the socio - material circumstances that give shape t o literacy practices . Suchman’s articulation of design as “entry into the networks of working relations [ … ] that make technical systems possible” [ 95 ] prompts us to consider designing for literacy from a systems view , interrogating how technologies are appropriated into certain literacy practices or take on positions within literacy ideologies . The material aspects of literacy practices present a point of departure for design activities relating to literacy , given that design - by - doing through prototyping is a vehicle for co - exploration in participatory design [ 6 ] . One paper from the survey that connects materials and literacy together is Landwehr and colleagues ’ study of the “material literacy ” as children’s skills and competencies in electronics “maker” activities [ 24 ] . 4 . 6 Sensory Literacies Finally , the Sensory Literacy Lens is being pioneered as a new strand of literacy theory by Kathy Mills and colleagues , which recognises that the body is “central to the practical accomplishment of literacy in its many communication forms , requiring bodily interactions with material technologies” [ 1 ] . Mills argues that the “body should be explicitly foregrounded in any theory about the process of meaning making” and asserts that the body’s role in literacy should be considered as an integrated whole with the mind rather than separately [ 1 ] . Related concepts include embodiment , kinesthesia , and haptics [ 1 ] . Key work by Mills and colleagues on sensory literacy includes Sensing place : Embodiment , Sensoriality , Kinesis , and Children Behind the Camera [ 96 ] and Race , the Senses , and the Materials of Writing and Literacy Practices [ 97 ] , and the book makes reference to works such as Pink’s “sensory ethnography” [ 98 ] . If embodiment in HCI captures the interdependence of action , perception and cognition ( as opposed to models of cognition that approach these as separate , abstract processes [ 99 , 100 ] ) , sensory ethnography [ 98 ] and sensory literacies build on the understanding that experience , practice , and knowledge involve , inextricably , all of the senses [ 98 ] . These concepts resonate ( and to a degree build upon ) phenomenological understandings of perception and interaction , that underline how meaning making always happens by acting in the world , through our body as a whole [ 99 , 100 ] . These concepts also find analogies in psychological research on embodiment of language and action that show how action , manipulation and language interrelate ( e . g . [ 101 ] ) , and how action supports thinking [ 102 ] . Certain sensory literacy practices and forms of knowledge may not be contingent on communicating through reading and writing . For example , South African environmental trackers have a high degree of expertise in “sophisticated and complex information about the environment” shaped by sensory engagement with place despite being considered “functionally illiterate” [ 103 ] . The Textual Tinkerability project relates to sensory literacy by discussing the “multisensory turns” through gesture and voice in collaborative storytelling practices between adults and children using an animated tablet app [ 13 ] . 5 VIEWING ABORIGINAL DESIGN PROJECTS THROUGH NEW LITERACY LENSES 5 . 1 Introduction to the Three Cases In this section , we introduce three cases of design projects with Australian Aboriginal communities , and illustrate how the lenses can be applied to identify diverse social practices involving literacy . The cases were chosen for their diversity and the availability of multiple publications for each that detail different aspects of the projects . We note that Mills also works with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the education research context ( e . g . [ 104 ] ) and incorporates a discussion of these in [ 1 ] . We have instead chosen technology design case studies in writing for the design research community . 5 . 1 . 1 Case 1 : Digital Storytelling Projects with Victorian Aboriginal Youth . Digital Storytelling projects have been undertaken by Fran Edmonds and colleagues from the University of Melbourne with Aboriginal young people and organisations based in Victoria , Australia . We have reviewed four publications relating to the project published from 2014 - 2016 [ 105 – 108 ] , though none are published in the HCI community . The publications present findings from a series of digital storytelling workshops involving Aboriginal youth , Aboriginal Elders , researchers , and cultural institutions , and the development of a mobile digital storytelling app with Indigenous players from a football club [ 106 ] . The three aims of the earlier workshops were to “promote intergenerational knowledge exchange” , “harness the creative capacity of digital technology” , and “improve digital and media literacy skills ” [ 107 ] . The app project was more explicitly aimed at digital literacy and technology design and use [ 106 ] . The project explicitly engaged with literacy as “digital literacy” or “digital - visual literacy” , defined as the participants’ “capacity to control and manage their visual identities and to support and strengthen their explorations of self . ” [ 108 ] 5 . 1 . 2 Case 2 : Traditional Knowledge Management and Grounding Documentaries . This project relates to Traditional Knowledge Revival Pathways ( TKRP ) initiatives established by Kuku - Thaypan Elders “Old Man” Musgrave , Dr . Tommy George , and Victor Steffensen , whose traditional lands are in the Cape York Peninsula [ 109 ] . We reviewed three publications relating to TKRP co - authored by Nic Bidwell and colleagues from 2008 - 2009 , two published at HCI conferences ( DIS [ 56 ] and OzCHI [ 110 ] ) and one in the Journal of Community , Citizen’s and Third Sector Media and Communication [ 109 ] . These publications report on their approach of Elders and youth working together to produce “grounding documentaries” [ 56 ] , videos intended to New Literacy Theories for Participatory Design PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 7 preserve and convey cultural knowledge on topics such as fire management and controlled burning [ 56 ] . The project does not make explicit reference to “literacy” , but Bidwell and colleagues describe Elders as “reading the country” [ 56 ] . They highlight the ways in which the TKRP methodology values Kuku - Thaypan traditional knowledge and cultural protocols and frames the relationship between people and place in ways that reflect Aboriginal epistemologies rather than Western perspectives of place . 5 . 1 . 3 Case 3 : Cross - Cultural Digital Community Noticeboard Project . The third case relates to our own Digital Community Noticeboard project with the very remote Aboriginal community of Groote Eylandt . The aim of the project was to support information sharing between community members , government service providers , and other organisations located in the different townships on topics including healthcare , culture , education , and the environment [ 111 ] . We draw on our insights from a range of design workshops , some of which are described in publications from 2013 - 2017 [ 58 , 112 – 115 ] . Literacy has been an explicit focus of the project from the outset in “supporting communication and promoting literacy across the community” [ 58 ] . The noticeboard project addresses the community’s aspirations to “stand in both worlds” [ 116 ] by promoting literacy practices in English and Anindilyakwa through features such as a multimodal interface and karaoke text highlighting in both languages . 5 . 2 Applying the Literacy Lenses to the Cases We have applied two lenses of literacy theory to each of the three cases . While additional lenses are applicable to each of these projects , we have focused on the lenses that resonate with these particular projects in interesting and meaningful ways . 5 . 2 . 1 Socio - Cultural and Critical Literacy Lenses on Digital Storytelling Project with Victorian Aboriginal Youth . The Socio - Cultural Lens helps us to understand how the literacy practices enacted through Edmonds and colleagues’ digital storytelling workshops are socially - situated with respect to Aboriginal social protocols and cultural knowledge . For example , Edmonds et al . point out how their youth participants perceived and valued “stories” differently than normal social media content , particularly those stories re lating to “country , kin and community” [ 106 ] . Some of E dmonds and colleagues’ workshop activities took Aboriginal participants’ own photographs and existing Aboriginal film productions as a starting point for digital storytelling activities [ 107 ] . Edmond and colleagues also discuss how their participants ’ attitudes towards the stories that they created in the workshops were also framed by cultural associations such as feelings of “pride” in their work , but also without feelings of “shame” associated with drawing attention to one’s individual achievements [ 107 ] . The empirical work illustrates how the concept of a “story” is not a neutral term , and that the performance of “storytelling” in one particular design context may not have the same meaning as in others . The socio - cultural literacy lens can therefore serve as a resource for design by thinking through the ways in which creating digital content such as stories and notices is socially and culturally situated . Thus , following Winschiers - Theophilus and colleagues’ argument in [ 73 ] that design activities involving digital content creation need to be grounded in the literacy practices of the design setting rather than externally imposed by the designer . The role of dialogical narrative styles such as “yarning” [ 117 ] in stories produced , and the act of engaging Aboriginal Elders and youth together in “culturally safe” spaces [ 105 ] also suggests the need for participatory design activities to maintain a dual focus not only on creating digital content that preserves Indigenous knowledges , but also in supporting the literacy practices involved in its performance in ways that respect participants’ cultural values and social protocols [ 118 ] . Applying the Critical Literacy Lens demonstrates the potential for technology design to challenge hegemonic literacies and discourses about Aboriginal people . Edmonds and colleagues point out that their digital storytelling workshops can help strengthen young Aboriginal people’s “ capacity for control over self - representation” [ 105 ] , facilitating cultural practices in online spaces , and promoting Aboriginal views of history [ 106 ] . The workshop activities engage with “alternatives to the standard first - person , linear narrative approach” [ 108 ] , with the presence of Aboriginal facilitators for creatively exploring positive expressions of Aboriginality [ 108 ] . The empirical work draws our attention to questions about who has the power to represent themselves and others in digital content , interface designs , and publications written about participatory design projects . From a critical literacies perspective , the emphasis of participatory design o n amplifying participants’ voices and valuing their literacy practices both in design artefacts and written research outputs can play a role in challenging the deficit discourses surrounding government policies relating to Indigenous literacy in Australia [ 119 ] . 5 . 2 . 2 Sensory and Socio - Spatial Literacy Lenses on Traditional Knowledge Management and Grounding Documentaries . The Sensory Literacy Lens highlights the position of the body and senses in literacy practices , such as communicating environmental knowledge in the case of Bidwell and colleagues’ work [ 56 ] . They describe relations to place in Indigenous knowledge systems as being “embodied in interactions that do not separate mind , body and environment” [ 56 ] . Bidwell et al . demonstrate the “indexical” nature of the Elder s ’ environmental knowledge in the ways that it maps to environmental features [ 56 ] . The grounding documentary videos show how the Elders’ “reading” the landscape corresponds to memories , em otional connections to place , and knowledge about fire management , and guides the corporeal aspects of knowledge performance such as movement through place and gestures [ 56 ] . Bidwell and colleagues’ work highlights the role of the body in literacy practices of place such as personal memories , emotions , and sensation as a form of knowledge that operates in “concurren [ ce ] ” with scientific data such as maps and images [ 56 ] . However , they caution that studying the role of the body in “in - situ” literacy practices is potentially challenging as “not all such embodied meanings are available for cognitive inspection” [ 56 ] . Although this project was not explicitly framed through the theoretical construct of literacy , Bidwell et al . make the PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 8 connection with “ reading directly from vividly , detailed country types ” [ 56 ] . The empirical work therefore shows how reading and writing can be understood beyond interpreting and producing symbols on a page to mean richer multisensory and embodied experiences that require other types of expertise . Looking at the TKRP case with respect to the sensory literacy lens could therefore help the participatory design community to move away from traditional visions of literacy as reading and writing skills , to more holistic perspectives on how people use the senses to communicate in sophisticated ways . Looking at grounding documentaries through the Socio - Spatial Literacies Lens shows how Aboriginal worldviews can challenge dominant Western discourses about place , and considers the spatial implications of transmitting Aboriginal knowledge using technology . Bidwell and colleagues contend that grounding documentaries convey a “sense of belonging to place” [ 56 ] and experiences of place that cannot be fully represented through abstract representations of place such maps produced through cartographic processes [ 56 ] . Moreover , they illustrate the role of video technology in facilitating flows of Aboriginal environment knowledge through place and time both between generations within the local community of Kuku - Thaypan people , and to global audiences of Indigenous and non - Indigenous people using social media [ 109 ] . The empirical work suggests that “environmental literacy” is not only about the having the skills to access and use environmental information , but also recognising that literacy practices concerning the environment can also privilege particular experiences of place . Additionally , designing for literacy practices involving Indigenous knowledges and languages may encompass communication in local communities , with the diaspora who may live away from traditional country , and with the broader Australian and international public . 5 . 2 . 3 Socio - Material and Multimodal Literacy Lenses on the Digital Community Noticeboard Project . The Socio - Material Literacy Lens sheds light on how the noticeboard as an object is implicated in the performance of certain knowledges and literacy practices . In our notice - making workshops , we observed that certain assemblages of people , materials , and technology were particularly conducive to engagement with digital storytelling practices by the children and adults . A key motivation for community members’ involvem ent was the valuing of Anindilyakwa language through digital technology by making stories in both English and Anindilyakwa , which prompted Aboriginal adults to want to take part in translating their stories into their language . The appropriation of the noticeboard into different settings including the classroom and the multimedia centre [ 120 ] shows how the noticeboard entered into the socio - material assemblages present in certain spaces . The empirical work illustrates the networks of relations [ 95 ] between people , places , and materials including digital technologies that give rise to particular literacy practices . The s ocio - material literacy lens helps us think about measuring success in participatory design in terms of engagement in literacy practices rather than measuring reading and writing skills . However , there are certain methodological challenges in identifying what types of participatory design methods can best render visible these networks and allow us to map or trace them in ways that are meaningful to design research . The Multimodal Literacy Lens demonstrates the ability for the digital noticeboard to facilitate storytelling through various modes of expression , supporting the community’s aspirations to improve their written literacy skills in both languages while enriching oral cultural traditions [ 116 ] . We also noticed that Aboriginal community members preferred diverse modes of literacy as a starting point for creating stories . On the one hand , the linguists approached making the notices by writing in English then translating into written Anindilyakwa , before recording oral versions of texts [ 113 ] . On the other hand , we observed that some younger people were less forthcoming to write stories themselves without the assistance of the researchers or started with drawings , while others took photographs as a basis for storytelling [ 115 ] . This empirical work provides an account of how a flexible , multimodal interface such as the noticeboard can support a number of different literacy - related endeavours , including supporting reading and writing skills development through features such as the karaoke interface [ 120 ] , as well as sharing information in ways that reflect rich oral cultural traditions . The multimodal literacy lens and the notion of transmediation as unpacked by Mills [ 79 ] also leads us to interrogate the consequences of design products on the presentation and interpretation of stories on the noticeboard at the fixed sites in which they are deployed versus the same stories being told in - situ on country . 6 DISCUSSION We have introduced lenses of new literacy theory , but how might these lenses serve a useful purpose for participatory design ? We will reflect on our own Digital Community Noticeboard project , introduced in the previous section , by illustrating four ways that these lenses of new literacy theory can inform design strategies and choices . 6 . 1 Design Intentions to Target Literacy at Different Levels The lenses help us to think through our design intentions to address literacy practices at different levels . For example , the critical literacies lens supports us to focus upon issues of power and literacy ideologies . This can range from supporting individuals to develop the communication skills to participate in particular communities and discourses , to designing technology that recognises and privileges literacy practices in minority languages that may be marginalised in dominant social systems . In the case of the Digital Community Noticeboard project , the initial purpose of the noticeboard was to support communication between a Land Council and community members , particularly regarding Council services and activities [ 111 ] . Developing a platform specifically for communication in both English and Anindilyakwa supported literacy practices in a minority language that is not explicitly recognised by mainstream social media sites . That is , the project explicitly aimed to empower New Literacy Theories for Participatory Design PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 9 local people by supporting their own language . Additionally , having a multimodal interface was a key mechanism to facilitate people’s participation in the project by affording the flexibility to upload text and audio in either language . The design intention was therefore to enhance communication practices at a community level in ways that incorporated both the language of the local oral culture as well as the language of local government i . e . English . It was this particular function of the noticeboard , supporting local community communication , that served as the impetus for evolving a participatory design relationship with the project partners [ 111 ] . Although the system has features such as karaoke - text highlighting that could support individual users’ written literacy skills development , the scope of the project did not involve evaluating how these specific features were used . This would have involved evaluation at an individual level , whereas the focus of the project was more broadly about socio - cultural practices and how people use literacy rather than how skilled people are at particular forms of expression . Taking an explicit focus on literacy from the outset with the view of literacy as a social practice could have opened the design space to a range of other possible design intentions at a more local level , within particular organisations such as the school community . From the perspective of the social - cultural lens , skills such as reading and writing are “fundamentally about social participation” in particular contexts and the potential to assume and challenge particular identities and positions within a community [ 121 ] . Therefore , the design intention of the noticeboard project could have instead sought to strengthen individual people ’s skills and abilities to participate in the discourses of the schooling system and the workplace as well as cultural activities in their own language . While the noticeboard system has been deployed in the schools , assessing the ability for the noticeboard to support childhood development and language acquisition , or designing technology to cultivate particular “literate” positions in the classroom [ 121 ] is a different problem requiring the sustained use of the noticeboard interface in educational activities and expertise of education researchers as project partners . There is an open question as to how design research can best contribute to projects that target literacy practices at macro or micro levels where design can serve both political and practical ends . However , we also acknowledge that communities do not speak with one cohesive voice ; rather there are partial knowledges [ 122 ] and power relations at play within all communities , for example in relation to one’s social circle , which may be influenced by one’s seniority , gender and so on . These partial perspectives and situated knowledges [ 122 ] may influence people’s literacy practices and communication ( e . g . only certain people in community would feel comfortable posting content on the noticeboard ) , though a detailed discussion of this is beyond the scope of this paper . As researchers , we too have a partial perspective and our design intuitions and judgements are shaped by our cumulative understanding of the context , but also limited by our own assumptions and biases . We have developed approaches such as the “Debrief O’Clock” fieldnote practice to incorporate reflexivity into our data recording and analysis [ 123 ] . 6 . 2 Drawing on The Lenses to Focus Our Attention in the Design Process The different literacy lenses focus on particular aspects of literacy practices such as the socio - cultural context , the senses , materials , and modes of interaction . Adopting the new literacy lenses early in the design process can help us to identify what to pay attention to and how to focus our observations during our design activities . Later in the design process , drawing on the new literacy theory lenses can support data analysis by assisting us to identify what is interesting about the use of technology in particular literacy practices , and provides a language to help articulate our findings . In our own project , the socio - material literacy lens helped us to understand that certain configurations of peop le and materials influenced people’s level of engagement in design activities to make content for the noticeboard , and also offered different mechanisms of participation . For example , we observed that a dictionary produced by the Language Centre was an essential resource for any noticeboard activities that involved producing content in the local language . The dictionary was consulted for a range of purposes including to check the spellings and definitions of words and to provide inspiration for notice content , by both children and adults . Taking different material starting points to develop content ( e . g . taking a photograph , drawing a picture , writing a text description , providing a translation ) opened up different opportunities for people to participate and engage in design activities , particularly when bringing together people from different generations with expertise in specific tasks . The socio - material literacy lens has helped us to identify what was interesting about the design activities and how different socio - material configurations gave rise to certain literacy practices when analysing our fieldnotes . Explicitly drawing on the socio - material lens when planning future workshops could help us to develop our activities and guide our design enquiry in ways that enhance active participation in the design workshops . In the future , we could choose to pay closer attention to materials from the outset and seek to better understand how people interact with different materials when using the noticeboard , what materials such as the dictionary represent to users ( e . g . the authority of the linguists ) , and how the noticeboard could better interface with these materials ( e . g . integration with an electronic version of the dictionary ) . Being more attentive to material starting points may also help us plan and develop our kit of tools and techniques for design workshops by understanding the practices that they generate and sustain ( e . g . materials such as clay , paper , paint and different types of activities that engage with this media ) . 6 . 3 Taking Local Communication Practice as a Starting Point New literacy theory , in particular the Socio - Cultural Literacy lens , approaches literacy as a social practice that arises within PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 10 particular socio - cultural contexts . As Edmonds et a l . ’s digital storytelling project illustrates , meanings of what constitutes a story , how to construct a narrative , and how people creatively express themselves are culturally - situated and contextual [ 108 ] . Designing for literacy not only means developing design interventions that support and enrich particular literacy practices , but also that particular literacy practices and ideologies are enacted through participatory design activities . This is complemented by additional lenses such as the Multimodal Literacy Lens that shows the ability for interfaces to privilege certain modes of communication ( particularly writing ) and exclude others , and the potential for multimodal interfaces to enhance technology accessibility . In our design workshops to develop content for the digital noticeboard , we observed that storytelling activities often unfolded in ways that were different to what we expected . As noted in [ 120 ] , the noticeboard was initially designed for perfunctory information exchange analogous to a physical noticeboard . However , some noticeboard stories created through the workshops took a narrative form spanning a number of pages , while in other activities noticeboard stories spanned several pages but content on each page was discrete and did not explicitly build on the pages before it . This suggests the value of using open - ended and flexible technology prototypes in design activities to enable people to communicate and use literacy in ways that are meaningful to them . From a Spatial perspective , conducting noticeboard workshops within particular settings ( e . g . in a school , government office , or community centre ) meant that our design activities were framed by the communication practices and literacy ideologies that were valued in those particular spaces . Finding a variety of different settings for design workshops based on existing activities where people communicate and interact beyond the school , may help to approach designing for literacy as a social practice [ 124 ] . This resonates with Bidwell’s design activities in South Africa , where finding “anchors” in local activities and priorities helped situate design activities in ways that were “compatible with those features of primary orality and performance that construct traditional identity” [ 125 ] . 6 . 4 Rethinking How to Search for and Position Work on Literacy and Design Our application of the Spatial and Sensory Literacy Lenses to the TKRP case illustrates that examining different types of “communicative practices” [ 124 ] can show how various literacies are enacted , even when these practices are not referred to using the theoretical construct of “literacy” . This poses the dual challenge of how to identify relevant related work that may not be visible using literacy as a search term , and how to position our research contributions when every communicative practice can potentially consist of different oral , written , or visual aspects [ 124 ] . Our application of the new literacy lenses to the cases illustrates that every design project , particularly those involving communications technology , incorporates designing for literacy practices in both the use of design methods and artefacts . The literature survey therefore did not necessarily return results that were the most interesting and relevant to our own project . Instead , the papers that have been the most enlightening in understanding how to design a noticeboard to support communication in an Aboriginal community are ones that describe : social practices and activities in similar cultural contexts ( e . g . other design projects involving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people as in the cases ) ; the dynamics of participatory design activities involving storytelling and the production of digital content ( e . g . [ 10 ] ) ; and projects with similar prototypes to the noticeboard ( e . g . [ 126 ] ) . Searching for “literacy” thus requires us to look beyond the theoretical constructs of literacy , reading , and writing , and draw on the new literacy lenses to help make sense of the different types of literacy enacted in design projects . 7 CONCLUSIONS In conclusion , we argue that literacy is an inherent aspect of all design work , and that new literacy theory can help us to identify and reflect on a variety of different literacy ideologies and communicative practices that are at play in participatory design projects . Our literature survey of PDC and SIGCHI conferences shows that while previous efforts to design for literacy are broad - ranging , design researchers are only starting to engage with literacy theory and its implications for participation . We illustrate how the application of these lenses to three design cases with Australian Aboriginal communities can sensitize us to the different forms of literacy enacted through social practices that extend beyond traditional perspectives of literacy as reading and writing skills . Finally , we suggest four different ways in which new literacy theory can inform participatory design strategies and choices , with a view to designing technology that values , embraces , and recognises culturally - diverse literacy practices in a globalised world . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank and acknowledge the Anindilyakwa community and their Land Council , and the Australian Research Council for Linkage Grant ( LP120200329 ) . Thank you to the reviewers for their constructive feedback . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Kathy A . Mills . 2016 . Literacy Theories for the Digital Age : Social , Critical , Multimodal , Spatial , Material , and Sensory Lenses . Multilingual Matters , Bristol . [ 2 ] Hilary Janks . 2009 . Turning to Literacy . In Literacy and Power . Routledge , Abingdon , United Kingdom , 1 – 19 . [ 3 ] United Nations . 2008 . Goal 2 : Achieve Universal Primary Education . Millenium Development Goals Website . Retrieved October 30 , 2017 from http : / / www . un . org / millenniumgoals / education . shtml [ 4 ] Cathy Burnett . 2017 . Reading the Future : The Contribution of Literacy Studies to Debates on Reading and Reading Engagement for Primary - Aged Children . In Improving Reading and Reading Engagement in the 21st Century , C Ng and B Bartlett ( eds . ) . Springer , Singapore , 119 – 140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 10 - 4331 - 4 [ 5 ] The New London Group . 1996 . A Pedagogy of Multiliteracies : Designing Social Futures . Harvard Educational Review 66 , 1 : 60 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17763 / haer . 66 . 1 . 17370n67v22j160u [ 6 ] Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson . 2012 . Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge , Abingdon , United Kingdom . New Literacy Theories for Participatory Design PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 11 [ 7 ] Ivan Sysoev , Anneli Hershman , Susan Fine , Claire Traweek , and Deb Roy . 2017 . SpeechBlocks : A Constructionist Early Literacy App . In Proceedings of IDC 2017 , 248 – 257 . [ 8 ] Nancy Kaplan , Yoram Chisik , Kendra Knudtzon , Rahul Kulkarni , Stuart Moulthrop , Kathryn Summers , and Holly Weeks . 2004 . Supporting Sociable Literacy in the International Children’s Digital Library . In Proceedings of IDC 2004 , 89 – 96 . [ 9 ] Janio Jadan - Guerrero , Javier Jaen , María A . Carpio , and Luis A . Guerrero . 2015 . Kiteracy : A Kit of Tangible Objects to Strengthen Literacy Skills in Children with Down Syndrome . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’15 , 315 – 318 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771905 [ 10 ] Helvi Itenge - Wheeler , Essi Kuure , Margot Brereton , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2016 . Co - creating an Enabling Reading Environment for and with Namibian Children . Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 : 131 – 140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940315 [ 11 ] N Kodagoda , B L W Wong , and N Kahan . 2009 . Overview of behaviour characteristics of high and low literacy users : Information seeking of an online social service system . 5726 LNCS , PART 1 : 77 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 03655 - 2 _ 8 [ 12 ] Steven Robert Harris . 2002 . PO in Ponty : Design - by - Doing in Adult Basic Education . In Proceedings of PDC 2002 , 278 – 283 . [ 13 ] Angela Chang . 2012 . Textual Tinkerability : Encouraging Storytelling Behaviors to Foster Emergent Literacy . In Proceedings of CHI 2012 , 505 – 520 . [ 14 ] Elefelious Getachew Belay , Addis Ababa , D Scott Mccrickard , Virginia Tech , Solomon Atnafu Besufekad , and Addis Ababa . Designing Mobile Interaction for Low - Literacy ( D - MILL ) . Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction - AfriCHI’16 : 251 – 255 . [ 15 ] Elefelious G Belay , D Scott Mccrickard , and Solomon A Besufekad . Claims - Inspired Pattern Development : Designing for Low Literacy . Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction - AfriCHI’16 : 144 – 148 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998581 . 2998596 [ 16 ] Basak Alper , Nathalie Henry Riche , Fanny Chevalier , and Jeremy Boy . 2017 . Visualization Literacy at Elementary School . In Proceedings of CHI 2017 , 5485 – 5497 . [ 17 ] Samantha Hautea and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2017 . Youth Perspectives on Critical Data Literacies . In Proceedings of CHI 2017 , 919 – 930 . [ 18 ] Christelle Scharff , Andrew Greenberg , and Sean D Costa . 2016 . AppDock : An Education and Outreach Space for Device Literacy . Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction - AfriCHI’16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998581 . 2998608 [ 19 ] E . S . Poole . 2014 . Is living with others a barrier to technical literacy ? Proceedings of the International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work : 178 – 181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2660398 . 2660412 [ 20 ] Jennifer Hill and Rahul Simha . 2016 . Designing a Literacy - Based Mobile Application for Adult Learners . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems : 3076 – 3083 . https : / / doi . org / http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892397 [ 21 ] S L Chu , E Deuermeyer , R Martin , F Quek , A Berman , M Suarez , N Zarei , B Nam , and C Banigan . 2017 . Becoming makers : Examining “making” literacy in the elementary school science classroom . IDC 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children : 316 – 321 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079745 [ 22 ] Chris Proctor and Paulo . 2017 . Interactive fiction : Weaving together literacies of text and code . In Proceedings of IDC 2017 Extended Abstract , 555 – 560 . [ 23 ] June Ahn . 2013 . What Can We Learn from Facebook Activity ? Using Social Learning Analytics to Observe New Media Literacy Skills . Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge - LAK ’13 : 135 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2460296 . 2460323 [ 24 ] Sophie Landwehr Sydow , Jakob Tholander , and Martin Jonsson . 2017 . “It’s a Bomb ! ” – Material Literacy and Narratives of Making . In Proceedings of CHI 2017 , 121 – 132 . [ 25 ] Nancy Campbell . 2004 . Making sense of imbrication . In Proceedings of the 2004 Participatory Design Confere , 65 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1011870 . 1011878 [ 26 ] Henry Mainsah and Andrew Morrison . 2012 . Social media , design and civic engagement by youth : a cultural view . In Proceedings of the 2012 Participatory Design Conference , 1 – 9 . [ 27 ] Elaine Maria and Luz Barth . 2002 . Projeto Crisalida ( Chrysalis Project ) : participatory interdisciplinary educational proposal for intervention in the female prison system of southern Brazil . In Proceedings of the 2012 Participatory Design Conference , 284 – 287 . [ 28 ] Neesha Kodagoda , B . L William Wong , and Nawaz Khan . 2009 . User interface sketching to improve low and high literacy user information seeking on government and social service websites . VTT Symposium ( Valtion Teknillinen Tutkimuskeskus ) , 258 : 381 – 388 . [ 29 ] Ioannis Karatassis . 2017 . WebSAIL : Computer - based Methods for Enhancing Web Search Literacy . 403 – 405 . [ 30 ] Tobias Schwartz , Sebastian Denef , Gunnar Stevens , Leonardo Ramirez , and Volker Wulf . 2013 . Cultivating energy literacy - results from a longitudinal living lab study of a home energy management system . Chi’13 : 1193 – 1202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466154 [ 31 ] Timothy W Bickmore , Laura M Pfeifer , and Brian W Jack . 2009 . Taking the Time to Care : Empowering Low Health Literacy Hospital Patients with Virtual Nurse Agents . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) , 1265 – 1274 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518891 [ 32 ] John Zimmerman , Jodi Forlizzi , Justin Finkenaur , Sarah Amick , Ji Young Ahn , Nanako Era , and Owen Tong . 2016 . Teens , Parents , and Financial Literacy . Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’16 : 312 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901889 [ 33 ] Peter Gall Krogh , Marianne Graves , and Kenton O Hara . 2017 . Sensitizing Concepts for Socio - Spatial Literacy in HCI . In Proceedings of CHI 2017 , 6449 – 6460 . [ 34 ] José P . Zagal . 2008 . A framework for games literacy and understanding games . Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Future Play Research , Play , Share - Future Play ’08 : 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1496984 . 1496991 [ 35 ] Suzanne Watzman . 1999 . Visual Literacy for Interface Designers : Tips , Tools , Techniques AND Inspiration . In Proceedings of CHI 1999 , 145 – 146 . [ 36 ] Brian Frey . 2012 . From Texting App to Braille Literacy . In Proceedings of CHI 2012 Extended Abstracts , 2495 – 2500 . [ 37 ] Abigale Stangl , Jeeeun Kim , and Tom Yeh . 2014 . Technology to Support Emergent Literacy Skills in Young Children with Visual Impairments . In Proceedings of CHI 2014 Extended Abstracts , 1249 – 1254 . [ 38 ] Valèria Ligurgo . 2016 . Media and Information Literacy Competences in the Workplace . Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work - GROUP ’16 : 485 – 490 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2957276 . 2997023 [ 39 ] Kim Fortun . 2000 . Net risk : Environmental information design , access , and literacy . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference 2000 , 263 – 267 . [ 40 ] Retha De Harpe . 2012 . Lessons learnt from the participatory design of a mobile care data application in a resource - restricted context . In Proceedings of the 2012 Participatory Design Conference , 125 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2348144 . 2348184 [ 41 ] Beenish M Chaudhry , Christopher Schaefbauer , Ben Jelen , Katie A Siek , Kay Connelly , Engineering Drive , and Boulder E St . 2016 . Evaluation of a Food Portion Size Estimation Interface for a Varying Literacy Population . [ 42 ] Fabio Campos , Paulo Blikstein , and Ali Azhar . 2017 . The Conference of the Birds : A Collaborative Storytelling . In Proceedings of IDC 2017 , 729 – 732 . [ 43 ] Henry Mainsah and Andrew Morrison . 2014 . Participatory design through a cultural lens : insights from postcolonial theory . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference . [ 44 ] Kim Halskov and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen . 2015 . The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 2002 - 2012 . International Journal of Human Computer Studies 74 : 81 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 003 [ 45 ] Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 : 1312 – 1320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753522 [ 46 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for Design . In Proceedings of CHI 2010 , 1301 – 1310 . [ 47 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design . Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’16 : 656 – 671 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901861 [ 48 ] UNESCO . 2006 . Chapter 6 : Understandings of literacy . In Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2006 . UNESCO , Paris , France , 147 – 159 . Retrieved November 7 , 2017 from www . unesco . org / education / GMR2006 / full / chapt6 _ eng . pdf [ 49 ] Oxford English Dictionary . 2017 . “literate , adj . and n . ” OED Online . [ 50 ] John Buschman . 2009 . Information Literacy , “New Literacies” and Literacy . Library Quarterly 79 , 1 : 95 – 118 . [ 51 ] Carl F Kaestle . 1985 . Chapter 1 : The History of Literacy and the History of Readers . Review of Research in Education 12 , 1 : 11 – 53 . [ 52 ] UNESCO . 2006 . Chapter 8 : The making of literate societies . In Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2006 . UNESCO , Paris , France , 189 – 213 . PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 12 [ 53 ] David Bawden . 2008 . Origins and concepts of digital literacy . Digital literacies : Concepts , Policies and Practices 30 : 17 – 32 . [ 54 ] David Barton , Mary Hamilton , and Roz Ivanic . 2000 . Situated Literacies : Reading and Writing in Context . Routledge , London . [ 55 ] Michael Davis . 1996 . Indigenous Peoples and Intellectual Property Rights . Parliament of Australia . Retrieved October 15 , 2017 from http : / / www . aph . gov . au / About _ Parliament / Parliamentary _ Departments / Parliamentary _ Library / pubs / rp / RP9697 / 97rp20 [ 56 ] Nicola J Bidwell , Tommy George , Peta - Marie Standley , Tommy George , and Vicus Steffensen . 2008 . The Landscape’s Apprentice : Lessons for Place - Centred Design from Grounding Documentary . In Proceedings of DIS 2008 ( DIS ’08 ) , 88 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1394445 . 1394455 [ 57 ] Walter J Ong . 1980 . Literacy and Orality in Our Times . Journal of Communication 30 , 1 : 197 – 204 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 2466 . 1980 . tb01787 . x [ 58 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Anita Lee Hong , and Paul Roe . 2017 . A Cross - Cultural Noticeboard for a Remote Community : Design , Deployment , and Evaluation . In Proceedings of INTERACT 2017 . [ 59 ] Australian Government and Prime Minister . 2017 . Closing the Gap Prime Min ister’s Report 2017 . Canberra . Retrieved April 20 , 2017 from http : / / closingthegap . pmc . gov . au / [ 60 ] Catherine Sarah Wilson . 2016 . Cultural learning for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children and young people : Indigenous knowledges and perspectives in New South Wales schools . Southern Cross University . [ 61 ] Doug Marmion , Kazuko Obata , and Jakelin Troy . 2014 . Community , identity , wellbeing : the report of the Second National Indigenous Languages Survey . AIATSIS , Australian Government Indigenous Languages Support , Canberra . Retrieved from www . aiatsis . gov . au [ 62 ] Graham Mckay . 2017 . The Policy Framework for Bilingual Education in Australian Indigenous Languages in the Northern Territory . In History of Bilingual Education in the Northern Territory , B . C . Devlin et al . ( ed . ) . Springer Science + Business Media , Singapore , 85 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 10 - 2078 - 0 [ 63 ] Helen Verran , Michael Christie , Bryce Anbins - King , Trevor Van Weeren , and Wulumdhuna Yunupingu . 2007 . Designing digital knowledge management tools with Aboriginal Australians . Digital Creativity 18 , 3 : 129 – 142 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14626260701531944 [ 64 ] Fiona Brady , Laurel Dyson , and Tina Asela . 2008 . Indigenous adoption of mobile phones and oral culture . In Proceedings of Cultural Attitudes Towards Communication and Technology , 384 – 398 . [ 65 ] Margaret Carew , Jennifer Green , Inge Kral , Rachel Nordlinger , and Ruth Singer . 2015 . Getting in Touch : Language and Digital Inclusion in Australian Indigenous Communities . Language Documentation & Conservation 9 : 307 – 323 . [ 66 ] ARC Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language . 2017 . Transportable Robot Developed by Opal Team and Language Centre . Website . Retrieved October 30 , 2017 from http : / / www . dynamicsoflanguage . edu . au / news - and - media / latest - headlines / article / ? id = transportable - robot - developed - by - opal - team - and - language - centre [ 67 ] Brian Street . 2003 . What’s “new” in New Literacy Studies ? Critical approaches to literacy in theory and practice . Current Issues in Comparative Education , 5 , 2 : 77 – 91 . [ 68 ] Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger . 1991 . Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation . Cambridge University Press , New York . [ 69 ] Etienne Wenger . 2000 . Communities of Practice and Social Learning Systems . Organization 7 , 225 – 246 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 135050840072002 [ 70 ] Steve Harrison , Deborah Tatar , and Phoebe Sengers . 2007 . The three paradigms of HCI . In Proceedings of CHI 2007 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1234 / 12345678 [ 71 ] Kari Kuutti and Liam Bannon . 2014 . The Turn to Practice in HCI : Towards a Research Agenda . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) , 3543 – 3552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557111 [ 72 ] Silvia Lindtner , Ken Anderson , and Paul Dourish . 2012 . Cultural appropriation : Information technologies as sites of transnational imagination . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 77 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145220 [ 73 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Shilumbe Chivuno - Kuria , Gereon Koch Kapuire , Nicola J . Bidwell , and Edwin Blake . 2010 . Being Participated - A Community Approach . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ’10 ) , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900443 [ 74 ] Marion Walton and Vera Vukovic . 2003 . Cultures , literacy , and the web . Interactions 10 , 2 : 64 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 637848 . 637864 [ 75 ] Joan M Greenbaum and and Morten Kyng . 1991 . Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems . L Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ . [ 76 ] Paulo Freire . 2000 . Pedagogy of the oppressed . Bloomsbury Publishing , London . [ 77 ] John Dewey . 1980 . The school and society . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . [ 78 ] Ann Light . 2010 . The unit of analysis in understanding the politics of participatory practice . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference on - PDC ’10 , 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900473 [ 79 ] Kathy A . Mills . 2011 . “I’m making it different to the book” : Transmediation in Young Children’s Multimodal and Digital Text . Australasian Journal of Early Childhood 36 , 3 : 56 – 65 . [ 80 ] Charles Suhor . 1984 . Towards a Semiotic - Based Curriculum . Journal of Curriculum Studies 16 , 3 : 247 – 257 . [ 81 ] Gunther Kress and Theo van Leeuwen . 2006 . Reading Images : The Grammar of Visual Design . Routledge , London . [ 82 ] Clarisse Sieckenius De Souza , Simone Diniz Junqueira Barbosa , and Raquel Oliveira Prates . 2001 . A semiotic engineering approach to HCI . In CHI ’01 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 634067 . 634104 [ 83 ] Manuel Castells . 2000 . The Rise of the Network Society . Blackwell , Malden . [ 84 ] Edward Soja . 1996 . Thirdspace : Journeys to Los Anegeles and Other Real - and - Imagined Places . Blackwell , Oxford . [ 85 ] Henry Jenkins , Katie Clinton , Ravi Purushotma , Alice J . Robison , and Margaret Weigel . 2009 . Confronting the challenges of participatory culture : Media education for the 21st century . MIT Press , Massachusetts . [ 86 ] Steve Harrison and Paul Dourish . 1996 . Re - place - ing space . Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’96 7 : 67 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 240080 . 240193 [ 87 ] Paul Dourish . 2006 . Re - Space - ing Place : “Place” and “Space” Ten Years On . In Proceedings of CSCW 2006 , 299 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180921 [ 88 ] Victor Kaptelinin and Liam J . Bannon . 2012 . Interaction design beyond the product : Creating technology - enhanced activity spaces . Human - Computer Interaction 27 , 3 : 277 – 309 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2011 . 646930 [ 89 ] Ditte Amund Basballe , Kim Halskov , and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen . 2016 . The early shaping of participatory design at PDC . Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference on Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - PDC ’16 : 21 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2948076 . 2948078 [ 90 ] Bruno Latour . 2005 . Reassembling the Social — An Introduction to Actor Network Theory . Oxford University Press , Oxford . [ 91 ] Yrjö Engeström , Reijo Miettinen , and Raija - Leena Punamäki . 1999 . Perspectives on Activity Theory . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . [ 92 ] Daniela K Rosner , Jean - François Blanchette , Leah Buechley , Paul Dourish , and Melissa Mazmanian . 2012 . From Materials to Materiality : Connecting Practice and Theory in HCI . In In CHI ’12 Extended Abstra cts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’12 ) , 2787 – 2789 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212721 [ 93 ] Elisa Giaccardi and Elvin Karana . 2015 . Foundations of Materials Experience . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15 , 2447 – 2456 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702337 [ 94 ] Eva Hornecker and Jacob Buur . 2006 . Getting a grip on tangible interaction : a framework on physical space and social interaction . In Proceedings of CHI 2006 , 437 – 446 . https : / / doi . org / http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124838 [ 95 ] Lucy Suchman . 2002 . Located accountabilities in technology production . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14 , 2 : 91 – 105 . [ 96 ] Kathy Mills , Barbara Comber , and Pippa Kelly . 2013 . Sensing place : Embodiment , sensoriality , kinesis , and children behind the camera . English Teaching 12 , 2 : 11 – 27 . [ 97 ] Kathy A . Mills , John Davis - Warra , Marlene Sewell , and Mikayla Anderson . 2015 . Indigenous ways with literacies : transgenerational , multimodal , placed , and collective . Language and Education 30 , 1 : 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500782 . 2015 . 1069836 [ 98 ] Sarah Pink . 2011 . Multimodality , multisensoriality and ethnographic knowing : social semiotics and the phenomenology of perception . Qualitative Research 11 , 3 : 261 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1468794111399835 [ 99 ] Toni Robertson . 2002 . The public availability of actions and artefacts . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 11 , 3 – 4 : 299 – 316 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1021214827446 [ 100 ] Toni Robertson . 2012 . Actual bodies are ageing bodies . In Proc . OzCHI 2012 , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1613 / jair . 301 New Literacy Theories for Participatory Design PDC ’18 , August 20 – 24 , 2018 , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium Taylor et al . 13 [ 101 ] Autumn Hostetter and Martha Alibali . 2008 . Visible embodiment : Gestures as simulated action . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 15 , 3 : 495 – 514 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / PBR . 15 . 3 . 495 [ 102 ] Paul Maglio and David Kirsh . 1994 . On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action . Cognitive Science 18 , 4 : 513 – 549 . https : / / doi . org / http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0364 - 0213 ( 94 ) 90007 - 8 [ 103 ] Edwin H Blake . 2002 . A Field Computer for Animal Trackers . In Proceedings of CHI 2002 Extended Abstracts , 532 – 533 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 506461 . 506466 [ 104 ] Kathy A . Mills , John Davis - Warra , Marlene Sewell , and Mikayla Anderson . 2015 . Indigenous ways with literacies : transgenerational , multimodal , placed , and collective . Language and Education 30 , 1 : 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500782 . 2015 . 1069836 [ 105 ] Fran Edmonds . 2014 . Digital storytelling and Aboriginal young people : an exploration of digital technology to support contemporary Koori culture . In Mobile Media Making in an Age of Smartphones . Pan Macmillan US , 92 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / 9781137469816 . 0015 [ 106 ] Fran Edmonds , Christel Rachinger , Gursharan Singh , Richard Chenhall , Michael Arnold , Poppy de Souza , and Susan Lowish . 2014 . What’s ya Story : The making of a digital storytelling mobile app with Aboriginal young people . University of Melbourne , Melbourne . [ 107 ] Fran Edmonds , Richard Chenhall , Michael Arnold , Tania Lewis , Susan Lowish , Digital Storytelling , Fran Edmonds , Richard Chenhall , Michael Arnold , Tania Lewis , and Susan Lowish . 2014 . Telling our Stories : Aboriginal young people in Victoria and Digital Storytelling . Melbourne . [ 108 ] Fran Edmonds , Michelle Evans , Scott Mcquire , and Richard Chenhall . 2016 . Ethical Considerations When Using Visual Methods in Digital Storytelling with Aboriginal Young People in Southeast Australia . In Ethics and Visual Research Methods , D Warr , M Guillemin , S Cox and J Waycott ( eds . ) . Palgrave Macmillan , London , 171 – 184 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / 978 - 1 - 137 - 54305 - 9 [ 109 ] Peta - Marie Standley , Nicola J . Bidwell , Tommy George Senior , Victor Steffensen , and Jacqueline Gothe . 2009 . Connecting Communities and the Environment through Media : Doing , Saying and Seeing Along Traditional Knowledge Revival Pathways . Journal of Community , Citizen’s and Third Sector Media and Communication October , 5 : 9 – 27 . [ 110 ] David Browning , Nicola J Bidwell , and Dianna Hardy . 2008 . Rural Encounters : Cultural Translations Through Video . In Proceedings of OzCHI 2008 , 148 – 155 . [ 111 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , and Anita Lee Hong . 2012 . Evolving a relationship for cross - cultural participatory innovation . In Proceedings of Participatory Innovation Conference 2012 , 1 – 5 . Retrieved from http : / / eprints . qut . edu . au / 48143 / [ 112 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , Thomas Amagula , Serena Bara , Judy Larara , and Anita Lee Hong . 2013 . Growing Existing Aboriginal Designs to Guide a Cross - Cultural Design Project . In Proceedings of the 14th IFIP TC13 International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction 2013 ( INTERACT ’13 ) , 323 – 330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 40483 - 2 _ 22 [ 113 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Anita Lee Hong , Paul Roe , and Anita Lee . 2015 . Bi - Cultural Content Publication on a Digital Noticeboard : A Design and Cultural Differences Case Study . In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction ( OzCHI ’15 ) , 217 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838813 [ 114 ] Alessandro Soro , Anita Lee Hong , Grace Shaw , Paul Roe , and Margot Brereton . 2015 . A Noticeboar d in “Both Worlds” Unsurprising Interfaces Supporting Easy Bi - Cultural Content Publication . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’15 ) , 2181 – 2186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732713 [ 115 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Paul Roe , Anita Lee Hong , Paul Roe , Anita Lee Hong , and Paul Roe . 2016 . Cross - Cultural Dialogical Probes . In Proc . AFRICHI 2016 , 114 – 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998581 . 2998591 [ 116 ] Anindilyakwa Land Council . 2012 . ALC 15 year Strategic Plan ( 2012 - 2027 ) . Anindilyakwa Land Council , Alyangula , Groote Eylandt . [ 117 ] Dawn Bessarab and Bridget Ng’andu . 2010 . Yarning About Yarning as a Legitimate Method in Indigenous Research . International Journal of Critical Indigenous Studies 3 , 1 : 37 – 50 . [ 118 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Alessandro Soro , Paul Roe , Anita Lee Hong , and Margot Brereton . 2018 . Digitising Culture as Supporting Cultural Processes in the Digital Era . In Digitisation of Culture : Namibian And International Perspectives , D . S . Jat , J . Sieck , H . Muyingi , H . Winschiers - Theophilus , A . Peters and S . Nggada ( eds . ) . Springer Publishing . [ 119 ] Cressida Fforde , Lawrence Bamblett , Ray Lovett , Scott Gorringe , and Bill Fogarty . 2013 . Discourse , deficit and identity : Aboriginality , the race paradigm and the language of representation in contemporary Australia . Media International Australia , 149 : 162 – 173 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1329878X1314900117 [ 120 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Anita Lee Hong , and Paul Roe . 2016 . Designing Evaluation Beyond Evaluating Design : Measuring Success in Cross - Cultural Projects . In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OzCHI ’16 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3010915 . 3010965 [ 121 ] Deborah Wells Rowe . 2010 . Research Directions : Directions for Studying Early Literacy as Social Practice . Language Arts 88 , 2 : 134 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 41804241 [ 122 ] Donna Haraway . 1988 . Situated Knowledges : The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective . Feminist Studies 14 , 3 : 575 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3178066 [ 123 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Alessandro Soro , Paul Roe , Anita Lee Hong , and Margot Brereton . 2018 . “Debrief O’Clock” : Plannin g , Recording , and Making Sense of a Day in the Field in Design Research . In Proceedings of CHI 2018 . [ 124 ] Alan Rogers , Bryan Maddox , Juliet Millican , Katy Newell Jones , Uta Papen , and Anna Robinson - Pant . 1999 . Re - Defining Post - Literacy in a Changing World . Department For International Development , London . [ 125 ] Nicola J . Bidwell . 2009 . Anchoring design in rural customs of doing and saying . Lecture Notes in Computer Science 5726 LNCS , PART 1 : 686 – 699 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 03655 - 2 _ 75 [ 126 ] Nicola J . Bidwell , Simon Robinson , Elina Vartiainen , Matt Jones , Masbulele Jay Siya , Thomas Reitmaier , Gary Marsden , and Mounia Lalmas . 2014 . Designing Social Media for Community Information Sharing in Rural South Africa . In Proceedings of SAICSIT 2014 , 104 – 114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2664591 . 2664615