Bending stiffness of Candida albicans hyphae reﬂects adaptive behavior of the fungal cell wall † Elodie Couttenier a , b Sophie Bachellier - Bassi , b Christophe d’Enfert , b and Catherine Villard ∗ a ‡ March 22 , 2022 Abstract The cell wall is a key component of fungi . It constitutes a stiff shell which counteracts internal cell turgor pressure . Its mechanical properties thus contribute to deﬁne cell mor - phology . Measurements of the elastic moduli of the fungal cell wall have been carried out in many species including Candida albicans , a major human opportunistic pathogen . They mainly relied on atomic force microscopy , and mostly considered the yeast form . We developed a parallelized pressure - actuated microﬂuidic device to measure the bend - ing stiffness of hyphae . We found that the cell wall stiffness lies in the MPa range . We the used three different ways to disrupt cell wall physiology : inhibition of beta - glucan syn - thesis , a key component of the inner cell wall ; application of an hyperosmotic shock triggering a sudden decrease of the hyphal diameter ; deletion of two genes encoding GPI - modiﬁed cell wall proteins resulting in reduced cell wall thickness . The bending stiffness values were affected to different extents by these environmental stresses or genetic modiﬁcations . Overall , our results support the elastic nature of the cell wall and its ability to remodel at the scale of the entire hypha over minutes . Introduction Candida albicans is one of the most important fungi from a clinical standpoint . It has been estimated that 70 % of healthy individuals carry C . albicans at any given time dur - ing their lifetime [ 1 ] . C . albicans is also one of the most important human opportunistic fungal pathogens . It is re - sponsible for mucosal diseases in otherwise healthy individ - uals ( following for example an antibiotic treatment ) , as well as deep - seated infections in immunocompromised patients . Disseminated candidiasis , i . e . fungal invasion of internal organs through bloodstream infections is associated with a high mortality rate ( ∼ 50 % ) even with current antifungal treatments [ 2 ] . The pathogenicity of C . albicans relies largely on its ability 0 a Université PSL , Physico - Chimie Curie , CNRS UMR168 , Paris , France . 0 b Institut Pasteur , Université de Paris , INRAE , USC2019 , Unité Biologie et Pathogénicité Fongiques , F - 75015 Paris , France . 0 † Electronic Supplementary Information ( ESI ) available : Fig . S1 - S7 . 0 ‡ Present address : Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Energies de De - main ( LIED ) , Université de Paris , UMR 8236 CNRS , F - 75013 , Paris , France ∗ Corresponding author . E - mail : catherine . villard @ u - paris . fr . to grow according to distinct morphological forms ranging from unicellular budding yeasts to elongated invasive ﬁla - ments called hyphae [ 3 , 4 ] . A hypha consists of mononucle - ated compartments separated by walls ( septa ) which do not alter the regular tubular diameter of the overall ﬁlament ( contrarily to pseudo - hyphae [ 5 ] ) . The ﬁlamentous forms achieve tissue penetration and invasion , whereas the yeast form promotes dissemination , acting as seeds for future hy - phal colonization in local or distant organs [ 6 ] . Filamenta - tion can be induced in vitro by tuning the physicochemical growth parameters such as pH or temperature , or by adding e . g . serum or N - acetylglucosamine to the culture medium [ 3 , 7 ] . As pollen tubes or root hairs , the growth of hyphae is driven by an internal turgor pressure [ 8 ] combined to a di - rectional vesicular trafﬁcking supplying proteins and lipids to the hyphal tip . The turgor pressure is counteracted by the existence of a bilayered cell wall , composed of an outer layer of mannan and glycoproteins , and of a denser in - ner layer containing polysaccharides , mainly β - glucans and chitin [ 9 , 10 ] . Any disturbance of cell wall composition and structure may impair cell physiology , and eventually cell in - tegrity . The cell wall can be modeled as an elastic shell of decreased elasticity away from the tip [ 11 , 12 ] . Reﬁnements of such models may include viscous aspects [ 13 ] . The com - bination of a stiff cell wall in subapical regions and of a softer tip leads to the lengthwise growth of hyphae . The protrusive forces developed by the forward move - ment of the hyphal tip reach a few µ N [ 14 ] , and allow penetration of viscoelastic environments of rigidities up to 200kPa [ 15 ] , which is also the upper limit of the range of soft tissues rigidities [ 16 ] . To achieve penetration , hyphal adhe - sion is instrumental [ 17 ] . In situations where the resistive forces experienced by the hyphal tip exceeds the adhesive forces , hyphae must also resist buckling [ 15 , 18 ] . The beam theory applied to this turgid hollow ﬁlament considered as an elastic thin rod [ 19 ] expresses the elastic ﬂexural buck - ling load as a linear function of the bending stiffness EI [ 20 ] , with E the Young modulus of the cell wall and I a geomet - rical parameter referred to as the second - moment of area . Knowing that the composition and structure of this protec - tive shell change as a function of growth conditions [ 21 ] and environmental stress [ 22 ] , the bending stiffness constitutes an interesting overall mechanical parameter to quantify the 1 cell wall stress - induced responses . Microﬂuidic devices speciﬁcally dedicated to the mea - surement of various mechanical parameters of ﬁlamen - tous walled cells such as the growth - stalling [ 15 , 23 ] and protrusive [ 15 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] forces have been developed dur - ing the last two decades [ 27 ] for various biological systems , i . e . Schizosaccaromyces pombe [ 23 ] , the oomycete Achlya bisexualis [ 26 ] , pollen tubes [ 24 ] , and C . albicans hyphae [ 15 , 25 ] . These passive methods rely on the deformation of elements of the microﬂuidic device by the forces pro - duced by the growing cells . Measuring the bending stiff - ness required actuated devices . The seminal work of Sa - nati Nezhad et al . was dedicated to the deﬂection of sin - gle pollen tubes using hydrodynamic forces [ 28 ] . More ad - vanced microﬂuidics tools employed “mother machine” de - rived devices , originally designed to study long - term growth and division patterns of bacteria , to measure the bending properties of arrays of ﬁlamentous E . coli and B . subtilis cells [ 29 , 19 ] . We have elaborated on these previous works to build a de - vice performing two complementary tasks : the positioning of C . albicans yeasts in a ﬁrst ( i . e . seeding ) chamber and the application of hydrodynamic forces on the hyphae induced from these yeasts in a second ( i . e . bending ) chamber ( ﬁgure 1a ) . An array of microchannels connects the two chambers and provides guidance for hyphal growth . Differently from a previous work [ 28 ] , we implemented a tight mechanical maintenance of hyphae at the channel exit in order to max - imize the contribution of the ﬁlament bending stiffness in the total observed deﬂection ( i . e . to minimize the contribu - tion of artifactual lateral displacement of hyphae inside the channels ) . The deﬂection of hyphae was measured and analyzed through a theoretical framework based on the elastic beam theory . We carried out simulations based on ﬁnite element analysis to size the different parts of our device and to re - ﬁne the mechanical modeling used to extract the bending stiffness from the deﬂection of hyphae . We present here measurements of the bending stiffness of C . albicans hyphae in different conditions . We ﬁrst assessed the action of caspofungin . This anti - fungal drug is known to target the synthesis of β - glucans , which predominantly occurs at new cell wall addition sites at the hyphal tip . Sur - prisingly , we observed dramatic reduction of the measured bending stiffness , suggesting that casponfungin affects the entire length of the hypha cell wall beyond the newly added material at the tip . The ability of the cell wall to remodel in response to an environmental stress could also be deduced from the observed decrease in bending stiffness following an hyperosmotic shock . Finally , a simple change in the cell wall thickness does not affect much its mechanical proper - ties , as observed using a mutant of GPI - modiﬁed cell wall proteins . Overall , these ﬁndings provide new insights into how a hypha responds mechanically to various perturba - tions , and show that C . albicans is able to adjust its bend - ing stiffness in a range of about one order of magnitude in response to environmental changes . Materials and methods Microﬂuidic chip fabrication A ﬁrst layer of SU - 8 2002 ( MicroChem ) is spin - coated on a silicon wafer to obtain a ﬁnal thickness of 1 . 5 µ m . After a soft bake , this layer of negative photoresist is exposed to UV light thanks to direct laser writing lithography ( Heidelberg , µ PG101 ) . Post - exposure bake and development with PG - MEA are performed to obtain the ﬁrst layer . The same pro - cess is repeated to add a second layer of 3 µ m height . It is precisely aligned on the ﬁrst one thanks to reference crosses on both layers . Then a third layer of SU - 8 2035 is spread out on top of the mold in order to get the macro - chambers of 30 µ m height . After an alignment step , the mold is then exposed to UV light through a chromium mask ( MJB4 mask aligner ) . The heights of the mold were measured with a mechanical proﬁlometer ( Dektak ) . The mold is ﬁrst treated with trichloroperﬂuorooctylsi - lane ( ABCR GmbH ) deposited in vapor phase during 15 min in order to prevent adhesion of PDMS to the mold . Then PDMS is mixed with its curing agent ( Sylgard 184 silicone elastomer kit ) at the ratio 10 : 1 ( w / w ) , degassed in bulk , poured on the mold , degassed again and ﬁnally cured at 75 ◦ C overnight . The cured PDMS is then peeled off from the mold , in - lets and outlets are punched with a 1 . 5 mm diameter biopsy punch ( Kai Industries ) . Differential surface coating After a step of surface activation using an oxygen plasma , PDMS chips are bonded on glass Petri dishes ( Fluorodish , VWR ) . An adhesive coating only in the seeding chamber ( left channel on the ﬁgure 1b ) is then performed . For this purpose , a small drop of ﬁbronectin bovine plasma ( FN , Sigma ) at 50 µ g / mL is introduced in this chamber about 15 minutes after plasma treatment rather than immediately . This waiting time allows to tune the hydrophilicity of both chambers in order to favor spreading of the aqueous so - lution of FN in the seeding chamber while preventing it from invading the bending chamber through the microchan - nels . After 10 minutes , the chip is thoroughly washed with ethanol and dried . Yeast culture and hyphal induction Most of the experiments have been performed using the SC5314 reference strain of C . albicans . A mutant with dele - tion of two GPI - anchored proteins Pga59 and Pga62 has also been used [ 30 , 31 ] . Strains are stored at - 80 ◦ C in YPD medium ( 1 % yeast extract , 2 % peptone , and 2 % glu - cose in distilled water ( w / v ) ) supplemented with 25 % of glycerol ( v / v ) . They are streaked on YPD agar plates ( YPD medium supplemented with 1 . 5 % of agar ( 15g / L of agar ) ) and kept for maximum 3 weeks at 4 ◦ C . Prior to each ex - periment , a preculture is done : a colony from the plate is put in 3 mL of YPD liquid medium , and kept under agitation overnight at 30 ◦ C . Typically , 50 µ L of this solution diluted in 1mL of YPD corresponds to an optical density slightly 2 below 1 , corresponding to ≈ 10 7 cells / mL . 5 µ L of the vol - ume of this preculture ( i . e . ≈ 10 6 cells ) is added to 495 µ L of the ﬁlamentation medium composed of 445 µ L of syn - thetic complete medium ( i . e . SC medium , containing 0 . 67 % yeast nitrogen base without amino - acids , 2 % glucose , and 0 . 2 % amino - acid mix [ 32 ] ( w / v ) ) and 50 µ L of N - acetyl - D - glucosamine at 1 mg / mL . Overall , the dilution of the precul - ture is made so that about a thousand of cells are inserted in the seeding chamber . Bending hyphae under tangential ﬂow Hyphal growth takes place into an incubator regulated at 37 ◦ C until most hyphae have crossed the microchannels and have started to invade the bending chamber . Usually a few hours are necessary to grow ﬁlaments that protrude 30 µ m approximately . The chip is then ready for bending exper - iments , which take place at room temperature using puri - ﬁed water ( Millipore Milli - Q lab water system ) to impose the tangential ﬂow . In that aim , the chip is connected to a pressure - based ﬂow controller ( Flow EZ , Fluigent ) and a ﬂow sensor ( Flow Unit , Fluigent ) is added upstream . Wa - ter ﬂow rate can then be controlled in the bending chamber , and ﬂow rates ranging from 0 to 40 µ L / min ( equivalent in our system to pressures ranging from 0 to 80 m bar ) are in - crementally used to deﬂect the ﬁlaments . The above protocol is used to measure hyphae deﬂexion in control situations . To assess the effect of caspofungin , it is followed by the replacement of the medium present in the whole chip by a fresh SC medium containing the de - sired concentration of the drug ( in our case 1 µ g / mL , pre - pared from 0 . 5 µ L of a stock solution at 1 mg / mL mixed with 495 µ L of the ﬁlamentation medium ) . The device is then put again 30 min into the incubator before the same protocol as for control experiments is applied to measure the hyphae deﬂexion . Regarding sorbitol , no incubation step is required and the concentration in sorbitol of the water bending solution , namely 2 . 5M ( 455 g / L of sorbitol powder ) is set the same than in the seeding chamber to provide uniform osmotic conditions all over the device . Numerical simulations 3D simulations were performed with Comsol Multiphysics . First , simulations of the ﬂow to get the velocity proﬁle in the bending chamber was carried out . The ﬂow calculated in a simplest model of the bending chamber , i . e . a rectangular channel , was compared to calculations using a more realistic design which includes the microchannels ( ESI† Fig . S1a - c ) . A variation in the velocity proﬁle of less than 5 % was found , thus showing the negligeable contribution of microchannels in the ﬂow distribution near the surface of interest . We have thus considered in further simulations the ﬂow in a rectan - gular channel without taking into account the rest of the device . Then rigid cylinders were introduced in our simulations in order to model the bending of ﬁlaments under the ﬂow . We chose to implement rigid cylinders instead of tubes for the sake of computation time , the thin meshing required for a tube being useless for this much larger spatial scale com - putation . We used the ﬂuid - structure interaction module , considering that one end of the cylinders was ﬁxed to the wall to reproduce the immobilization of hyphae by the mi - crochannels . Design of the microﬂuidic chip The microﬂuidic device is composed of 2 main compart - ments , i . e . the seeding and bending chambers , separated by an array of microchannels ( ﬁgure 1a ) . The ﬁrst step of this experiment consists in positioning the yeasts in front of the microchannels prior to their ﬁla - mentation ( ﬁgure 1c ) . High - efﬁciency trapping of cells was previously obtained with designs of various complexity [ 33 , 34 , 35 ] . Here we chose to introduce a long serpentine at the exit of the seeding chamber . Its length and width were chosen so that its hydraulic resistance is equivalent to that of microchannels . This design allows a large fraction of the ﬂow to be diverted toward the bending chamber through the microchannels , driving about 3 / 4 of the yeasts in that direction where they will get trapped into small pockets de - signed to accommodate single yeasts . The microchannels were sized smaller than the character - istic size of yeasts ( 5 µ m ) , so that these cells will not be able to penetrate further into these channels . Once most of the traps are occupied , the resistance on this path will increase due to yeasts blocking the channels . Any excess of cells will be thus redirected towards the outlet . Beyond their ﬁltering effect toward yeasts , the role of mi - crochannels is threefold . First , they provide initial direc - tional guidance , leading hyphae to emerge as perpendicu - larly as possible to the edge of the bending chamber ( ﬁgure 1d ) . Second , they prevent these ﬁlaments to move later - ally under the ﬂow : it is essential to avoid this contribu - tion by adjusting as much as possible the dimensions of the microchannels to the size of hyphae . Third , they localize the exit of hyphae on the bottom surface of the bending chamber . We observed that about one third of the ﬁlaments continue to growth close to this surface . We thus choose , contrarily to [ 28 ] , to work within a single focal plane of ob - servation , which simplify both data acquisition and analysis procedures and increases signiﬁcantly the throughput of a single experiment . To fulﬁll these aforementioned functions at the best , we designed funnel - like channels characterized by 2 successive heights of 3 µ m and 1 . 5 µ m ( ESI† Fig . S2 ) . We observed that a 3 µ m height is well adapted to induction and guidance of the germ tube arising from the trapped yeast . However the space around the ﬁlament was too large to prevent its lateral or vertical movements . A reduction of the height in the ﬁ - nal portion of the microchannel suppressed these unwanted effects . Besides , backward movements had to be prevented . In the case of pollen tubes , this was performed by introducing kinks in the growth channel [ 28 ] . In the present study , FN coating of the seeding chamber and the use of narrow chan - 3 Figure 1 - Design of the chip and experimental procedure . ( a ) Scheme of the microﬂuidic device containing 2 main chambers connected by microchannels , a leftward seeding chamber and a rightward bending chamber . A long serpentine is used to increase the hydrodynamic resistance of the seeding compartment and consequently to reach an eﬃcient positioning of the yeasts in front of the microchannels . ( b ) Fibronectin coating ( in blue on the schemes ) into the seeding chamber . The bending chamber remains uncoated , as assessed from the localization of the PLL - FITC coating replacing non ﬂuorescent FN in mock experiments ( image , obtained from ﬂuorescence imaging ) . ( c ) Trapping of yeasts at the entrance of the microchannels , followed by ( d ) hyphal growth in the bending chamber where they are subjected to shear ﬂow . Scale bars : 20 µ m . 4 nels were enough to immobilize both the mother yeast cells and the hyphae against backward displacements under ﬂow . Lastly , while hyphae need to be ﬁxed on one end , bend - ing experiments also require them to be able to move and deﬂect under the ﬂow in the bending chamber . It is thus crucial to avoid adhesion between hyphae and the substrate in these experiments . This is the reason why the FN coating was limited to the seeding chamber and therefore the PDMS was left uncoated in the bending chamber ( see methods ) . The length of these microchannels was set to 40 µ m to ensure a guided ﬁlamentation in a relatively short time , considering an elongation rate of the hyphae around 0 . 3 µ m / min . In order to maximize the number of ﬁlaments inside the bending chamber while avoiding a crosstalk in the velocity proﬁles from one hypha to its nearest neighbor , we determined the deﬂection of a single ﬁlament and compared it to the value obtained when the ﬁlament was surrounded by several others separated by various distances ( ESI† Fig . S3a - b ) . We ﬁnally obtained an optimized distance of 40 µ m between microchannels . Theoretical model : elastic deforma - tions of a beam As in previous works [ 19 , 28 , 29 ] , we used the hollow tube deﬂexion model to obtain the bending stiffness of hyphae . We also implemented some reﬁnements of this general mod - eling frame to better describe our system . We detail below the overall approach that we have set - up to retrieve the me - chanical properties of hyphae from their deﬂection under ﬂow . Filaments We considered hyphae as hollow cylinders with a radius r and a cell wall thickness t W . The second moment of area I ( in m 4 ) with respect to the ﬂow direction axis is expressed as follow for these ﬁlaments : I = π r 3 t W . Force exerted on the ﬁlaments The ﬂow is laminar and can be precisely computed in the rectangular bending chamber . As already stated above , only the ﬁlaments staying close to the surface are taken into ac - count . In this frame , the force per unit length f exerted by the ﬂow on a cylinder lying on a surface [ 36 , 19 ] is ex - pressed as : f = 4 πη rdvdz ( z → 0 ) ( 1 ) where η is the viscosity of the liquid ( Pa . s ) , r is the radius of the ﬁlament ( m ) and dv / dz is the gradient of velocity along the z direction close to the bottom of the channel ( s − 1 ) . Indeed , in this conﬁguration , numerical simulations show that , close to the surface ( where z goes to 0 ) , the gradient of velocity along the y direction , i . e . dv / dy , is negligible compared to dv / dz . However , dv / dz is not constant along the y direction ( see the spatial proﬁles of both dv / dy and dv / dz along the y direction in ESI† Fig . S4 ) , meaning that the force f is not constant along y . This spatial variation of f ( y ) was taken into account to compute EI from the hydro - dynamic force and the deﬂection . This point is detailed in the next section . Expression of the bending stiffness Assuming small elastic deformations and a uniform force per unit length f on the ﬁlament along the y direction ( ﬁg - ure 2a ) , the Euler - Bernouilli beam theory for a cantilever beam subjected to a uniformly distributed load leads to the following relationship between the beam’s maximal deﬂec - tion δ , the applied force f and the bending stiffness EI [ 37 , 19 ] : EI = fl 4 8 δ ( 2 ) with :   E the Young modulus in Pa I the second moment of area with respect to the x - axis in m 4 f the force per unit length applied on the ﬁlament in N , see eq . 1 l the ﬁlament’s length in m Although not considered in [ 28 , 19 , 29 ] , and as men - tioned in the previous section , the force f is not constant along the length of the hyphae ( i . e . along the y direction , see ESI† Fig . S4 ) . The best linear approximation of these simulations is to consider the force not as a constant but as an increasing load over a length l 1 before reaching a plateau for l > l 1 ( ﬁgure 2a ) . The value for l 1 , determined using Comsol , is around 15 µ m . Considering that the mean value of the hyphal protruding length considered in this study is close to 30 µ m , this reﬁnement of the model is particularly pertinent as it would account for an overestimation of EI by 10 % for this length , and by about 22 % for a length of 20 µ m . Using this reﬁnement of the model , equation 2 becomes EI = f δ [ 1 8 l 4 − 1 6 l 31 l + 2 15 l 4 1 ] ( 3 ) for ﬁlament lengths l > l 1 . Force - ﬂow relationship As shown in eq . 2 the bending stiffness EI is deduced from the δ ( f ) variation . Experimentally , we record instead the δ ( Q ) curves and then deduce f from the measure of Q . The relation between f and Q can be obtained from the Poiseuille velocity distribution for a liquid ﬂowing in a chan - nel of width w and height h : v ( z ) = ∆ P 2 η w z ( h − z ) . From this v ( z ) relationship , we obtain dvdz ( z → 0 ) = ∆ P 2 η w h . On the other hand , (cid:104) v (cid:105) = 1 h (cid:82) v ( z ) dz = ∆ P 12 η w h 2 , which leads to dvdz ( z → 0 ) = 6 (cid:104) v (cid:105) h . From the straightforward relation (cid:104) v (cid:105) = Qwh , we ﬁnally obtain f = 4 πη rdvdz ( z → 0 ) = 24 πη r (cid:104) v (cid:105) h = 24 πη r Q wh 2 . The overall angular tilt induced by the applied hydrody - namic force , eventually superimposed to an initial growth 5 Figure 2 - Forces exerted on a single hypha and deﬂection . ( a ) Scheme of hydrodynamic forces exerted on a hypha . Model consid - ered in [ 19 ] ( top ) versus model developed in this study , taking into account the variation along y of the hydrodynamic forces ( bottom ) . The length l 1 is deduced from Comsol simulations , see ESI† Fig . S4 . ( b ) Geometrical parameters characterizing a hypha of length l tilted by θ under the action of hydrodynamic forces . tilt , implies different geometrical corrections to deduce the deﬂection value δ ( Q ) ( ﬁgure 2b ) . First , an initial deﬂection δ 0 may result from the eventual existence of a ﬂow - free ini - tial tilt , which should be subtracted to the overall deﬂection δ x measured along the x axis . Next , δ ( Q ) = ( δ x − δ 0 ) / sin θ , with θ the angular tilt induced by the ﬂow . Finally , the hy - drodynamic force is exerted only over a length l p = l sin θ , meaning that a tilted hypha will be submitted to a force reduced by sin θ . Considering equation 3 and the above cor - rections , the general expression of EI is ﬁnally : EI = 24 π η h 2 r wQ sin 2 θ δ x − δ 0 [ 1 8 l 4 − 1 6 l 31 l + 2 15 l 4 1 ] . ( 4 ) In practice , the term Q sin 2 θ δ x − δ 0 will be deduced for each hy - pha initially deﬂected by δ 0 from the best linear ﬁt of the variation of the deﬂection δ x and the associated angular tilt values θ for a series of increasing ﬂow rates Q . Results Measurement of the bending stiffness of hy - phae We applied increasing and decreasing ﬂow rates on hyphae in the bending chamber . The time allowed to each step was set to about 15 seconds , which is a good trade - off between reaching a stable ﬂow and limiting the duration of the whole experiment , in particular to avoid any drift in hyphal length . The maximum ﬂow rate was chosen to remain in the limit of reversible deformations , which was assessed by perform - ing a full cycle of ﬂow increase and decrease and by check - ing the absence of major hysteresis . We computed then the bending stiffness EI by taking into account the points ob - tained during the increasing part of the ﬂow cycle . Typical images and data resulting from such experiments are shown in ﬁgure 3a - c . In this particular example , the hypha was initially tilted by δ 0 ( ﬁgure 3a ) . Figure 3b shows Figure 3 - Bending properties of hyphae from the reference strain SC5314 . ( a ) Images of an hypha initially deﬂected by δ 0 before ( top ) , during ( middle ) and after ( bottom ) ﬂow application . The initial tilted position of the hypha is indicated in the middle image . The amplitudes of the deﬂection δ 0 , δ x and δ are indicated according to the nomenclature used in ﬁgure 2 . ( b ) Example of deﬂexion curves obtained for this hypha . Top : deﬂexion δ x obtained during increasing ( solid circles ) and decreasing ( open circles ) ﬂow rates Q . Bottom : deﬂection data formatted to show the linear ﬁt from which the bending stiﬀness EI will be deduced for each hypha ( see equation 4 ) . Only the data corresponding to increasing ﬂow rate Q are considered . ( c ) Distribution ( mean ± SD = 4 . 5 ± 2 . 5 µ N . µ m 2 ) of bending stiﬀness EI deduced from the slope of the linear variation shown in ( b ) . n = 69 hyphae . the raw deﬂection values δ x after a full cycle of ﬂow increase and decrease ( top graph ) and the linear ﬁt of the points leading to term δ values for the raising part of the cycle only . The calculation of the bending stiffness EI uses the inverse of the slope displayed in this later ﬁgure , i . e . Q / δ ( see equation 4 ) . For the reference strain SC5314 of C . albicans , we measured a mean bending stiffness EI = 4 . 5 ± 2 . 5 µ N . µ m 2 ( n = 69 , ﬁgure 3c ) . This value is about 2 orders of magnitude above the bending stiffness reported for E . coli [ 19 , 29 , 38 ] . Considering the measured diameter values for each hypha and the assumption of a cell wall thickness of 230 nm [ 30 ] , we estimated the longitudinal Young modulus of the refer - ence strain SC5314 to be 6 . 4 ± 3 . 4 MPa , interestingly in the same range as the values obtained for E . coli [ 39 ] . The liter - ature provides a few values of this parameter for different yeast species . The ﬁssion yeast displays a Young modulus of ≈ 30 MPa [ 40 , 23 , 41 ] . For S . cerevisiae , the reported values are distributed in a wide range , from around the MPa [ 42 , 43 , 44 ] to hundreds of MPa [ 45 , 46 ] . Values of the Young modulus of C . albicans are also quite distributed between very low ( i . e . ≈ 100 - 200kPa ) [ 47 , 48 , 49 ] to values in the MPa range [ 50 , 51 , 52 ] . The values we obtain with our method are thus coherent with the order of magnitude reported in part of the literature , whose inconsistencies re - main to be elucidated . 6 Inﬂuence of caspofungin treatment on bending stiffness Caspofungin belongs to a new class of antifungal agents , the echinocandins . This antifungal drug is known to inhibit the synthesis of β - 1 , 3 - glucan , which is a main component of the fungal cell wall . This synthesis is particularly active at the apex . It is thus expected that the cell wall at the tip should be the major target of caspofungin . However , this antifungal agent seems to also affect the cell wall outside the location where new synthesis occurs , i . e . the mature cell wall [ 53 ] . Considering that any disturbance of the cell wall should affect the bending stiffness of hyphae , we decided to explore the effect of this antifungal agent in our system . Filaments were ﬁrst subjected to a cycle of increasing and decreasing ﬂow rates to obtain a reference stiffness for each ﬁlament in a medium devoid of caspofungin . Then , as described in the Materials and Methods , the measured hyphae were incubated for 30 minutes at 37 ◦ C in a cul - ture medium supplemented with caspofungin at a concen - tration of 1 µ g / mL . Such an acute drug application at a concentration well above the minimum inhibitory concen - tration ( MIC ) of 0 . 125 µ g / mL in glucose - rich medium [ 53 ] was chosen to maximize the chance to see an effect of caspo - fungin while limiting changes in hyphal length and overall morphology ( i . e . branching ) and to prevent any adapta - tion mechanisms through the activation of cell wall compen - satory pathways [ 54 ] . Control experiments ( see ESI† Fig . S5 ) without caspofungin in the bending medium were per - formed , showing that the 30 min incubation and medium change steps does not modify the bending stiffness of ﬁla - ments . The behavior of most ﬁlaments could be followed before ( n = 18 ) and after ( n = 21 ) the application of the drug ( see an example in ﬁgure 4a ) . For a minority of ﬁlaments however ( n = 5 ) , we got data for only a single condition , the one related to caspofungin being more represented ( n = 4 ) . In this case , hyphae previously immobile despite the applied ﬂow were released from their adhesion to the surface after the introduction of the antifungal agent . We chose in ﬁgure 4b to present the distribution of all data together with the ratio of paired data . The distribution of paired data can be found in the supplementary ﬁgures ( see ESI† Fig . S6a ) . We ﬁrst observed that this concentration of caspofungin reduces slightly the diameter of hyphae , from 1 . 99 ± 0 . 13 µ m without caspofungin to 1 . 83 ± 0 . 20 µ m with this drug ( ﬁg - ure 4b ) . of the hyphal tip . But the main effect of caspo - fungin application is a reduction by more than a factor of two ( ratio 0 . 40 ± 0 . 34 ) of the bending stiffness EI of hyphae ( ﬁgure 4b ) . The mean reduction of the diameter d by a factor of 0 . 926 induced by caspofungin would lead to a re - duction of the second moment of inertia I ∝ d 3 of ≈ 0 . 79 . The caspofungin - induced morphological effect can thus only partially account for the bending stiffness variation . We thus conclude that caspofungin affects the mechanical properties of the cell wall at the hypha scale . These ﬁlaments being composed of mononucleated com - partments separated by septa , we wanted to check if the Figure 4 - Consequences of an antifungal treatment using caspo - fungin at 1 µ g / mL for 30min on the reference strain SC5314 . Graphs display means and standard deviations . ( a ) Images of a hypha bending under ﬂow before and after caspofungin treat - ment . ( b ) Diameters . Left : distribution of diameters before ( 1 . 99 ± 0 . 13 µ m , n = 18 ) and after ( 1 . 83 ± 0 . 20 µ m , n = 21 ) antifungal treatment ; p = 0 . 0081 ( Mann - Whitney test ) ; Right : diameter ratio for paired data ( 0 . 93 ± 0 . 12 , n = 17 ) ( c ) Bending stiﬀness EI . Left : distribution of the bending stiﬀness EI before ( 6 . 54 ± 3 . 84 µ N . µ m 2 , n = 18 ) and after ( 1 . 98 ± 1 . 63 µ N . µ m 2 , n = 21 ) antifungal treatment , p < 0 . 0001 ( Mann - Whitney test ) ; Right : distribution of EI ratio for paired data ( 0 . 117 ± 0 . 0283 , n = 17 ) . 7 presence of these internal cross - walls could be a preferen - tial target for the action of caspofungin . The length of in - dividual compartments is typically 20 µ m while the hyphae protrude from 10 to 55 µ m in the bending chamber . First we did not observed angled hyphal shapes after caspofun - gin application that would suggest the presence of bending points at the septa . Then we looked for a variation in the bending stiffness as a function of length , as any speciﬁc im - pairment of the septa would lead to an additional increase of the deﬂection . We did not measure a signiﬁcant variation of EI as a function of hyphal length ( ESI† Fig . S8 ) . We thus concluded that a large part ( i . e . ≈ 2 / 3 ) of the reduction of the bending stiffness after caspofungin application should be attributed to a reduction of the cell wall Young modulus E , or the cell wall thickness , or most probably a combination of both . Inﬂuence of sorbitol treatment on bending stiffness In C . albicans yeast , osmotic shock induces a volume de - crease within seconds , associated with major changes in cell wall architecture . These structural changes occur prior the activation of high - osmolarity glycerol ( Hog1 ) or cell in - tegrity signaling pathways which takes tens of minutes to manifest themselves [ 55 ] . This shrinkage of the cell wall perimeter in yeast , and its reversibility when returning to an osmoneutral medium , shows its highly elastic properties , attributed mainly to the spring - like properties of the β 1 , 3 - glucan chains found in the inner cell wall [ 56 ] . The time scale of these changes being too fast to allow a modiﬁcation of the cell wall overall volume , the almost instantaneous reduction in cell diameter leads at very short term to an in - crease in the cell wall thickness , and speciﬁcally the inner β - glucan and chitin layers [ 55 ] . However , if the cell wall properties of yeasts under osmotic stress have been explored , there is still little reports on hy - phal properties under such stress . We thus set up experi - ments to measure the bending stiffness of hyphae submit - ted to an hyperosmotic shock provided by 2 . 5M of sorbitol , a polyol compound known to increase the osmolarity of aqueous solutions [ 57 ] . Hydrodynamic forces were applied within about 5 minutes after sorbitol medium replacement . As expected , the hypha diameter decreased signiﬁcantly ( i . e . by a reduction factor 1 . 28 ) under the application of sorbitol ( ﬁgure 5a ) . Similarly to what we observed using caspofungin , the reduction of diameter tends to free previ - ously adherent hyphae , leading to more data for the con - dition with sorbitol ( see ESI† Fig . S6b for the distribution of paired data only ) . The analysis of hypha deﬂection re - vealed an even more dramatic decrease of the bending stiff - ness by a factor of about 7 ( ﬁgure 5b ) . The extent of this change cannot be attributed only to the hypha’s diameter reduction which alone would lead to a factor of only 2 ( i . e . 1 . 28 3 ) in the reduction of EI through the r 3 dependence of the second moment of area I . Moreover , the contribution of I = π r 3 t W in the measured EI values might be even reduced if taking into account an increase of the cell wall thickness Figure 5 - Behavior of the reference strain SC5314 before and after an hyperosmotic shock provided by 2 . 5M of sorbitol . Graphs display means and standard deviations . ( a ) Left : distribution of diameters before ( 2 . 07 ± 0 . 13 µ m , n = 10 ) and after ( 0 . 142 ± 0 . 039 µ m , n = 13 ) sorbitol application , p < 0 . 0001 ( Mann - Whitney test ) ; Right : diame - ter ratio for paired data ( 0 . 78 ± 0 . 033 , n = 10 ) . ( b ) Left : distribution of the bending stiﬀness EI before ( 6 . 46 ± 4 . 77 µ N . µ m 2 , n = 8 ) and after ( 0 . 888 ± 0 . 615 µ N . µ m 2 , n = 12 ) sorbitol application , p < 0 . 0001 ( Mann - Whitney test ) ; Right : distribution of EI ratio for paired data ( 0 . 14 ± 0 . 099 , n = 8 ) . t W proportional to hyphal diameter reduction ( considering the reasonable hypothesis of a conservation of the biomass of the cell wall ) . We conclude that most of the changes in the bending stiffness EI should therefore be attributed to a modiﬁcation of the cell wall mechanical properties induced by a rapid remodeling of the cell wall . Study of a cell wall mutant Most proteins in the yeast cell wall are glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins ( GPI - modiﬁed proteins ) which are covalently linked to it . Simultaneous deletion of the genes for two of these cell wall proteins , Pga59 and Pga62 , does not have a major im - pact on hyphal growth . However , it induces a modiﬁcation of the cell wall thickness [ 30 ] . More precisely , the total thickness measured by transmission electron microscopy increases from 230 nm in the SC5314 wild type strain to 290 nm for the ∆ pga 59 ∆ pga 62 mutants , while the inner wall thickness evolves from 150 to 230nm . We tested if these modiﬁcations would affect the bending stiffness of this mutant ( Figure 6 ) . Although non signiﬁcant , the increase in the mean value of the bending stiffness measured for the ∆ pga 59 ∆ pga 62 mutant strain as compared to the reference strain is similar to the ratio between the thickness of their total cell wall ( 1 . 2 compared to 1 . 26 , respectively ) . We conclude that when the diameter of the hypha is not modiﬁed , as it is the case here , a change in the cell wall thickness affects the mechanical property , but 8 the linearity between this morphological parameter and EI prevents any major change in the mechanical properties of the cell wall . Figure 6 - Distribution of the bending stiﬀness EI of the refer - ence strain SC5314 ( WT , 4 . 50 ± 2 . 49 µ N . µ m 2 , n = 69 ) and of the ∆ pga 59 ∆ pga 62 mutant ( ∆∆ , 5 . 44 ± 3 . 60 µ N . µ m 2 , n = 26 ) , p = 0 . 329 ( Mann - Whitney test ) . Discussion We have developed a microﬂuidic device capable of measur - ing the bending strength of individual C . albicans hyphae by applying hydrodynamic forces . The analysis of bending data implied some experimental precautions , that we have imple - mented ( e . g . maintaining the base of the hypha during ﬂow application ) . It also led to the adaptation of a general model by taking into account the geometry of our system ( edge ef - fects for the calculation of the gradient of the hydrodynamic force ) as well as the deviations observed with respect to a canonical situation ( initial inclination of the hypha , lateral displacement at the exit of the microchannel ) . The measured bending stiffness is the product of an elas - tic modulus and of a term combining various morphological characteristics of the hyphae ( length , diameter , wall thick - ness ) . It is tempting , and we have given some examples earlier in the text , to compare these values to those obtained from AFM indentation measurements . However , several re - marks must be made at this stage . First of all , the elastic modulus obtained by indentation combines the moduli as - sociated to the 3 directions of space . Milani et al . have showed for the cell wall of living shoot apical meristems that indentation experiments were essentially sensitive to the normal modulus ( i . e . the module along the direction of indentation ) , which contributes 4 times more than the longitudinal and transverse moduli to the global apparent modulus [ 58 ] . In contrast , the wall is tangentially stretched during bending deformations . In other terms , the tangen - tial modulus should be a major component of the apparent elastic modulus involved in the bending stiffness . Moreover , considering the ﬁbrous structure of the cell wall ( in both fungi and plants ) , this tangential modulus should be higher than the two others . A normal force will indeed essentially deform the soft matrix surrounding the ﬁbers while the stiff - ness of the ﬁbers , higher than their surrounding matrix , will mostly be responsible for the strain induced by a tangential stretch . We therefore expect to deduce from our bending measurements higher elastic moduli than those measured by AFM . Note that AFM measurements are very sensitive to the am - plitude of indentation . It must remain low at the risk of probing the turgor pressure together with the cell wall rigid - ity . This is besides an elegant way to measure these two properties in a single experiment [ 46 ] . However , this point is rarely explicitly mentioned or discussed in the literature . The two modalities of the AFM technique ( normal direction and amplitude of the indentation ) may have opposite effects on the estimation of the Young modulus : one would tend to minimize the resulting effective modulus ( by giving an higher weight to the lowest , i . e . normal modulus ) , and the other would on the contrary lead to overestimate it ( from a possible contribution of the turgor pressure in the case of a too large indentation depth ) . It is thus difﬁcult to com - pare with precision our measurements with those published in the literature . However , despite a very wide disparity in the moduli published for C . albicans , we ﬁnd that the val - ues deduced from our measurements are in the high range , consistent with the above discussion . In this study , we used a concentration of caspofungin well above the minimum inhibitory concentration ( MIC ) and an incubation time of 30 min , conditions that we identiﬁed in control experiments as capable of altering the adhesive properties of the yeast form of C . albicans while not affect - ing cell viability ( not shown ) . This concentration is also expected to be lower than the concentrations giving rise to the “paradoxical effect” [ 59 ] characterized by activation of chitin synthesis in response to inhibition of β - 1 , 3 - glucan but also β - 1 , 6 - glucan [ 60 ] production . The deﬂection mea - surements show different effects related to caspofungin . The ﬁrst one relates to a loss of hyphal adhesion , as evi - denced by the detachment of ﬁlaments previously anchored on the PDMS surface during control experiments ( i . e . be - fore casponfungin application ) , consistent with our obser - vations on the yeast form . This property of caspofungin has been previously reported from AFM adhesion strength mea - surements on yeast [ 61 ] and hyphae [ 47 ] , at concentrations similar and up to 3 orders of magnitude lower than those used in the present study . The other effect is a slight de - crease in hyphal diameter after application of caspofungin , a property that could contribute to the observed loss of ad - hesion , in complement to the hypothesis of a lowering of adhesin expression in response to caspofungin [ 47 ] . The major effect of caspofungin observed in the present study remains the drastic decrease in the bending stiffness . This can come from two simultaneous effects : the decrease of the wall thickness ( " I " component of the bending modu - lus ) and a weakening of the Young’s modulus of the wall . Wall thinning has been suggested in [ 62 ] and [ 63 ] where it is stated that strains with increased caspofungin susceptibil - ity have thinner walls . This hypothesis was recently veriﬁed experimentally by direct measurements for a concentration of 5 µ g / mL and 30 minutes of incubation [ 64 ] . This phe - 9 REFERENCES REFERENCES nomenon is accompanied by cell bulging , more and more pronounced at long times ( > hour ) , which we also some - times distinguish at the hyphal tip ( see ﬁgure 4 ) . The ob - served decrease of the Young’s modulus of the wall is con - sistent with the concentration used , too low to induce a synthesis of chitin aiming at counteracting a weakening of the cell wall , but strong enough to trigger a loss of viability linked to cell wall or plasma membrane damages [ 53 ] . Our results are also in agreement with the results of AFM mea - surements performed for concentrations similar to ours [ 61 ] . Concentrations 20 to 2000 times lower over longer times , however , seem to give opposite results [ 48 , 47 ] . This de - crease in Young’s modulus at the scale of a hypha may how - ever be surprising , as the inhibition of β - glucan synthesis was expected to be localized only at the tip . However , our results are in line with the work of Hao et al . [ 53 ] who ob - served in C . albicans that dividing yeasts exposed to caspo - fungin mother and daughter cells exhibited similar vital - ity loss , as evidenced by methylene blue staining intensity . These authors suggested a continuous cell wall remodeling process as an explanation to these results . The signiﬁcant decrease in hyphal diameter subjected to 2 . 5M sorbitol reﬂects the expected loss of C . albicans turgor pressure following an hyper - osmotic shock . Turgor pres - sure should not be involved in the calculation of bending stiffness at low strains . This assumption is based on ﬁnite element simulations on one hand [ 28 ] , and on theoretical considerations based on the main argument that a bending deformation of a pressurized tube does not modify its in - ternal volume [ 65 , 66 ] . However , we prefer to leave open the question of a possible contribution of the turgor pres - sure for future works , in particular because the deﬂections observed under sorbitol application might not fall anymore into the low deformation range considered theoretically in [ 66 ] . Besides , the diameter reduction is expected to trigger a reconﬁguration of the wall structure , which could even resemble to a destructuring considering the abruptness of this event . This impairment of the cell wall structure could contribute to the decrease of the Young’s modulus value we observed . Conclusion Many questions in plant and fungal biology address the me - chanics of pressurized ﬁlaments . Complementary to local methods such as AFM , the strategy developed here allows an access to the mechanics of Candida albicans at the hy - pha scale through the measurement of their bending stiff - ness . This method is generic and could be applied to the hyphae of multiple species of ﬁlamentous fungi by a simple tuning of the dimensions of the microﬂuidic device . In this ﬁrst study dedicated to C . albicans , we were able to high - light the consequences in hypha mechanical properties of an anti - fungal drug widely used in clinic and of an hyper - osmotic shock , while we noticed that modiﬁcations of the wall structure do not always lead to signiﬁcant changes . Our work thus shows the complementarity of pharmacological , structural and biomechanical approaches in the study of the biology of the cell wall of hyphae . Conﬂicts of interest There are no conﬂicts to declare . Acknowledgements We warmly thank Arezki Boudaoud for his careful critical reading of the manuscript . This work beneﬁted from the technical contribution of the joint service unit CNRS UAR 3750 . The authors would like to thank the engineers of this unit for their advice during the development of the experiments . This work was supported by the European Research Council Advanced Grant 321107 “CellO” and the Institut Pierre - Gilles de Gennes ( “Investissements d’avenir” program ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0001 - 02 PSL and ANR - 10 - LABX - 31 , and ANR - 10 - EQPX - 34 ) . References [ 1 ] S . M . Noble , B . A . Gianetti , and J . N . Witchley , “ Candida albicans cell - type switching and functional plasticity in the mammalian host , ” Nature Reviews Mi - crobiology , vol . 15 , no . 2 , pp . 96 – 108 , 2017 . [ 2 ] R . Gupta , A . Malik , M . Rizvi , and M . Ahmed , “An Alarming Increase of Fungal Infections in Intensive Care Unit : Challenges in the Diagnosis and Treatment , ” J Appl Pharm Sci , vol . 6 , no . 11 , pp . 114 – 119 , 2016 . [ 3 ] P . Sudbery , N . Gow , and J . Berman , “The distinct morphogenic states of Candida albicans , ” Trends in Microbiology , vol . 12 , no . 7 , pp . 317 – 324 , 2004 . [ 4 ] B . G . Seman , J . L . Moore , A . K . Scherer , B . A . Blair , S . Manandhar , J . M . Jones , and R . T . Wheeler , “Yeast and ﬁlaments have specialized , independent activities in a zebraﬁsh model of Candida albicans infection , ” Infection and immunity , vol . 86 , no . 10 , pp . e00415 – 18 , 2018 . [ 5 ] P . E . Sudbery , “Growth of Candida albicans hyphae , ” Nature Reviews Microbiol - ogy , vol . 9 , no . 10 , pp . 737 – 748 , 2011 . [ 6 ] D . Kadosh and V . Mundodi , “A re - evaluation of the relationship between mor - phology and pathogenicity in Candida species , ” Journal of Fungi , vol . 6 , no . 1 , p . 13 , 2020 . [ 7 ] E . Stewart , S . Hawser , and N . A . Gow , “Changes in internal and external ph accompanying growth of Candida albicans : studies of non - dimorphic variants , ” Archives of microbiology , vol . 151 , no . 2 , pp . 149 – 153 , 1989 . [ 8 ] R . R . Lew , “How does a hypha grow ? The biophysics of pressurized growth in fungi , ” Nature Reviews Microbiology , vol . 9 , no . 7 , pp . 509 – 518 , 2011 . [ 9 ] N . A . R . Gow , F . L . van de Veerdonk , A . J . P . Brown , and M . G . Netea , “ Can - dida albicans morphogenesis and host defence : discriminating invasion from colonization , ” Nature Reviews Microbiology , vol . 10 , no . 2 , pp . 112 – 122 , 2011 . [ 10 ] C . Munro and M . L . Richard , “The Cell Wall : Glycoproteins , Remodeling , and Regulation , ” in Candida and Candidiasis , Second Edition , pp . 197 – 223 , 2012 . [ 11 ] A . Goriely , M . Tabor , and A . Tongen , “A morpho - elastic model of hyphal tip growth in ﬁlamentous organisms , ” in IUTAM Symposium on Cellular , Molecu - lar and Tissue Mechanics ( K . Garikipati and E . M . Arruda , eds . ) , ( Dordrecht ) , pp . 245 – 255 , Springer Netherlands , 2010 . [ 12 ] E . Eggen , M . Niels de Keijzer , and B . M . Mulder , “Self - regulation in tip - growth : The role of cell wall ageing , ” Journal of Theoretical Biology , vol . 283 , no . 1 , pp . 113 – 121 , 2011 . [ 13 ] T . de Jong , J . Hulshof , and G . Prokert , “Modelling fungal hypha tip growth via viscous sheet approximation , ” Journal of Theoretical Biology , vol . 492 , p . 110189 , 2020 . [ 14 ] D . D . Thomson , S . Wehmeier , F . J . Byﬁeld , P . A . Janmey , D . Caballero - Lima , A . Crossley , andA . C . Brand , “Contact - induced apicalasymmetry drivesthe thig - motropic responses of Candida albicans hyphae , ” Cellular Microbiology , vol . 17 , no . 3 , pp . 342 – 354 , 2015 . [ 15 ] C . Puerner , N . Kukhaleishvili , D . Thomson , S . Schaub , X . Noblin , A . Semi - nara , M . Bassilana , and R . A . Arkowitz , “Mechanical force - induced morphology changes in a human fungal pathogen , ” BMC Biology , pp . 1 – 21 , 2020 . 10 REFERENCES REFERENCES [ 16 ] C . F . Guimarães , L . Gasperini , A . P . Marques , and R . L . Reis , “The stiffness of living tissues and its implications for tissue engineering , ” Nature Reviews Mate - rials , vol . 5 , no . 3 , pp . 351 – 370 , 2020 . [ 17 ] P . Sundstrom , “Adhesion in Candida spp , ” Cellular microbiology , vol . 4 , no . 8 , pp . 461 – 469 , 2002 . [ 18 ] T . Bedekovic and A . C . Brand , “Microfabrication and its use in investigating fungal biology , ” Molecular Microbiology , 2021 . [ 19 ] A . Amir , F . Babaeipour , D . B . McIntosh , D . R . Nelson , and S . Jun , “Bending forces plastically deform growing bacterial cell walls , ” Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences , vol . 111 , no . 16 , pp . 5778 – 5783 , 2014 . [ 20 ] F . A . Leckie and D . J . Dal Bello , “Buckling , ” in Strength and Stiffness of Engineer - ing Systems , pp . 1 – 29 , Springer , 2009 . [ 21 ] I . V . Ene , A . K . Adya , S . Wehmeier , A . C . Brand , D . M . Maccallum , N . A . Gow , and A . J . Brown , “Host carbon sources modulate cell wall architecture , drug resistance and virulence in a fungal pathogen , ” Cellular Microbiology , vol . 14 , no . 9 , pp . 1319 – 1335 , 2012 . [ 22 ] D . S . Childers , G . M . Avelar , J . M . Bain , D . E . Larcombe , A . Pradhan , S . Budge , H . Heaney , and A . J . Brown , “Impact of the environment upon the Candida albicans cell wall and resultant effects upon immune surveillance , ” The Fungal Cell Wall , pp . 297 – 330 , 2019 . [ 23 ] N . Minc , A . Boudaoud , and F . Chang , “Mechanical Forces of Fission Yeast Growth , ” Current Biology , vol . 19 , no . 13 , pp . 1096 – 1101 , 2009 . [ 24 ] A . Sanati Nezhad , M . Naghavi , M . Packirisamy , R . Bhat , and A . Geitmann , “Quantiﬁcation of cellular penetrative forces using lab - on - a - chip technology and ﬁnite element modeling . , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , vol . 110 , no . 20 , pp . 8093 – 8098 , 2013 . [ 25 ] D . D . Thomson , S . Wehmeier , F . J . Byﬁeld , P . A . Janmey , D . Caballero - Lima , A . Crossley , andA . C . Brand , “Contact - induced apicalasymmetry drivesthe thig - motropic responses of Candida albicans hyphae , ” Cellular Microbiology , vol . 17 , no . 3 , pp . 342 – 354 , 2015 . [ 26 ] A . Tayagui , Y . Sun , D . Collings , A . Garrill , and V . Nock , “An elastomeric mi - cropillar platform for the study of protrusive forces in hyphal invasion , ” Lab Chip , 2017 . [ 27 ] C . E . Stanley , G . Grossmann , X . Casadevall i Solvas , and A . J . DeMello , “Soil - on - a - Chip : microﬂuidic platforms for environmental organismal studies , ” Lab Chip , vol . 16 , no . 2 , pp . 228 – 241 , 2016 . [ 28 ] A . S . Nezhad , M . Naghavi , M . Packirisamy , R . Bhat , and A . Geitmann , “Quan - tiﬁcation of the Young’s modulus of the primary plant cell wall using Bending - Lab - On - Chip ( BLOC ) , ” Lab on a Chip , vol . 13 , no . 13 , p . 2599 , 2013 . [ 29 ] Y . Caspi , “Deformation of ﬁlamentous Escherichia coli cells in a microﬂuidic device : A new technique to study cell mechanics , ” PLoS ONE , vol . 9 , no . 1 , 2014 . [ 30 ] E . Moreno - Ruiz , G . Ortu , P . W . de Groot , F . Cottier , C . Loussert , M . C . Prévost , C . de Koster , F . M . Klis , S . Goyard , and C . D’Enfert , “The GPI - modiﬁed pro - teins Pga59 and Pga62 of Candida albicans are required for cell wall integrity , ” Microbiology , vol . 155 , no . 6 , pp . 2004 – 2020 , 2009 . [ 31 ] A . M . Gillum , E . Y . Tsay , and D . R . Kirsch , “Isolation of the Candida albicans gene for orotidine - 5’ - phosphate decarboxylase by complementation of S . cerevisiae ura3 and e . coli pyrf mutations , ” Molecular and General Genetics MGG , vol . 198 , no . 1 , pp . 179 – 182 , 1984 . [ 32 ] “doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . rec090308 , ” Cold Spring Harb Protocol , 2016 . [ 33 ] S . Kobel , A . Valero , J . Latt , P . Renaud , and M . Lutolf , “Optimization of microﬂu - idic single cell trapping for long - term on - chip culture , ” Lab on a Chip , vol . 10 , no . 7 , p . 857 , 2010 . [ 34 ] A . Sanati Nezhad , M . Ghanbari , C . G . Agudelo , M . Naghavi , M . Packirisamy , R . B . Bhat , and A . Geitmann , “Optimization of ﬂow assisted entrapment of pollen grains in a microﬂuidic platform for tip growth analysis , ” Biomedical Microdevices , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 23 – 33 , 2014 . [ 35 ] T . Geng , E . L . Bredeweg , C . J . Szymanski , B . Liu , S . E . Baker , G . Orr , J . E . Evans , and R . T . Kelly , “Compartmentalized microchannel array for high - throughput analysis of single cell polarized growth and dynamics , ” Scientiﬁc Reports , vol . 5 , no . 1 , p . 16111 , 2015 . [ 36 ] G . Schubert , “Viscous ﬂow near a cusped corner , ” Journal of Fluid Mechanics , vol . 27 , no . 4 , pp . 647 – 656 , 1967 . [ 37 ] J . M . Gere and B . J . Goodno , Mechanics of materials . Dover Publications , Inc . , New York , 2009 . [ 38 ] S . Wang , H . Arellano - Santoyo , P . A . Combs , and J . W . Shaevitz , “Actin - like cy - toskeleton ﬁlaments contribute to cell mechanics in bacteria , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol . 107 , no . 20 , pp . 9182 – 9185 , 2010 . [ 39 ] M . Mathelié - Guinlet , C . Grauby - Heywang , A . Martin , H . Février , F . Morote , A . Vilquin , L . Beven , M . - H . Delville , and T . Cohen - Bouhacina , “Detrimental im - pact of silica nanoparticles on the nanomechanical properties of Escherichia coli , studied by AFM , ” Journal of colloid and interface science , vol . 529 , pp . 53 – 64 , 2018 . [ 40 ] V . Davi and N . Minc , “Mechanics and morphogenesis of ﬁssion yeast cells , ” Current Opinion in Microbiology , vol . 28 , pp . 36 – 45 , 2015 . [ 41 ] N . Minc , A . Boudaoud , and F . Chang , “Mechanical forces of ﬁssion yeast growth , ” Curr . Biol , vol . 24 , no . 1436 , pp . 10 – 1016 , 2014 . [ 42 ] A . E . Pelling , S . Sehati , E . B . Gralla , and J . K . Gimzewski , “Time dependence of the frequency and amplitude of the local nanomechanical motion of yeast , ” Nanomedicine : Nanotechnology , Biology and Medicine , vol . 1 , no . 2 , pp . 178 – 183 , 2005 . [ 43 ] B . Goldenbogen , W . Giese , M . Hemmen , J . Uhlendorf , A . Herrmann , and E . Klipp , “Dynamics of cell wall elasticity pattern shapes the cell during yeast mating morphogenesis , ” Open biology , vol . 6 , no . 9 , p . 160136 , 2016 . [ 44 ] J . Arfsten , S . Leupold , C . Bradtmöller , I . Kampen , and A . Kwade , “Atomic force microscopy studies on the nanomechanical properties of Saccharomyces cere - visiae , ” Colloids and Surfaces B : Biointerfaces , vol . 79 , no . 1 , pp . 284 – 290 , 2010 . [ 45 ] A . E . Smith , Z . Zhang , C . R . Thomas , K . E . Moxham , and A . P . Middelberg , “The mechanical properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , vol . 97 , no . 18 , pp . 9871 – 9874 , 2000 . [ 46 ] D . Vella , A . Ajdari , A . Vaziri , and A . Boudaoud , “The indentation of pressur - ized elastic shells : From polymeric capsules to yeast cells , ” Journal of the Royal Society Interface , vol . 9 , no . 68 , pp . 448 – 455 , 2012 . [ 47 ] A . Çolak , M . A . Ikeh , C . J . Nobile , andM . Z . Baykara , “Insituimagingof Candida albicans hyphal growth via atomic force microscopy , ” Msphere , vol . 5 , no . 6 , pp . e00946 – 20 , 2020 . [ 48 ] S . Hasim , D . P . Allison , S . T . Retterer , A . Hopke , R . T . Wheeler , M . J . Doktycz , and T . B . Reynolds , “ β - ( 1 , 3 ) - glucan unmasking in some Candida albicans mu - tants correlates with increases in cell wall surface roughness and decreases in cell wall elasticity , ” Infection and immunity , vol . 85 , no . 1 , pp . e00601 – 16 , 2017 . [ 49 ] C . Formosa , M . Schiavone , H . Martin - Yken , J . M . François , R . E . Duval , and E . Dague , “Nanoscale effects of caspofungin against two yeast species , Saccha - romyces cerevisiae and Candida albicans , ” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemother - apy , vol . 57 , no . 8 , pp . 3498 – 3506 , 2013 . [ 50 ] S . Ma , W . Ge , Y . Yan , X . Huang , L . Ma , C . Li , S . Yu , and C . Chen , “Effects of Strep - tococcus sanguinis bacteriocin on deformation , adhesion ability , and young’s modulus of Candida albicans , ” BioMed research international , vol . 2017 , 2017 . [ 51 ] I . V . Ene , A . K . Adya , S . Wehmeier , A . C . Brand , D . M . MacCallum , N . A . Gow , and A . J . Brown , “Host carbon sources modulate cell wall architecture , drug resistance and virulence in a fungal pathogen , ” Cellular microbiology , vol . 14 , no . 9 , pp . 1319 – 1335 , 2012 . [ 52 ] D . Alsteens , P . Van Dijck , P . N . Lipke , and Y . F . Dufrêne , “Quantifying the forces driving cell – cell adhesion in a fungal pathogen , ” Langmuir , vol . 29 , no . 44 , pp . 13473 – 13480 , 2013 . [ 53 ] B . Hao , S . Cheng , C . J . Clancy , and M . H . Nguyen , “Caspofungin kills Candida albicans by causing both cellular apoptosis and necrosis , ” Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy , vol . 57 , no . 1 , pp . 326 – 332 , 2013 . [ 54 ] L . A . Walker , C . A . Munro , I . De Bruijn , M . D . Lenardon , A . McKinnon , and N . A . Gow , “Stimulation of chitin synthesis rescues Candida albicans from echinocan - dins , ” PLoS Pathogens , vol . 4 , no . 4 , 2008 . [ 55 ] I . V . Ene , L . A . Walker , M . Schiavone , K . K . Lee , H . Martin - Yken , E . Dague , N . A . Gow , C . A . Munro , and A . J . Brown , “Cell wall remodeling enzymes modulate fungal cell wall elasticity and osmotic stress resistance , ” MBio , vol . 6 , no . 4 , pp . e00986 – 15 , 2015 . [ 56 ] F . M . Klis , P . Mol , K . Hellingwerf , and S . Brul , “Dynamics of cell wall structure in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , ” FEMS microbiology reviews , vol . 26 , no . 3 , pp . 239 – 256 , 2002 . 11 REFERENCES REFERENCES [ 57 ] P . Attﬁeld and S . Kletsas , “Hyperosmotic stress response by strains of bakers’ yeasts in high sugar concentration medium , ” Letters in Applied Microbiology , vol . 31 , no . 4 , pp . 323 – 327 , 2000 . [ 58 ] P . Milani , M . Gholamirad , J . Traas , A . Arnéodo , A . Boudaoud , F . Argoul , and O . Hamant , “In vivo analysis of local wall stiffness at the shoot apical meristem in Arabidopsis using atomic force microscopy , ” The Plant Journal , vol . 67 , no . 6 , pp . 1116 – 1123 , 2011 . [ 59 ] N . P . Wiederhold , D . P . Kontoyiannis , R . A . Prince , and R . E . Lewis , “Atten - uation of the activity of caspofungin at high concentrations against Candida albicans : possible role of cell wall integrity and calcineurin pathways , ” Antimi - crobial agents and chemotherapy , vol . 49 , no . 12 , pp . 5146 – 5148 , 2005 . [ 60 ] D . A . Stevens , M . Ichinomiya , Y . Koshi , and H . Horiuchi , “Escape of Candida from caspofungin inhibition at concentrations above the mic ( paradoxical ef - fect ) accomplished by increased cell wall chitin ; evidence for β - 1 , 6 - glucan synthesis inhibition by caspofungin , ” Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy , vol . 50 , no . 9 , pp . 3160 – 3161 , 2006 . [ 61 ] S . Proa - Coronado , C . Séverac , A . Martinez - Rivas , and E . Dague , “Beyond the paradigm of nanomechanical measurements on cells using AFM : an automated methodology to rapidly analyse thousands of cells , ” Nanoscale Horizons , vol . 5 , no . 1 , pp . 131 – 138 , 2020 . [ 62 ] A . Plaine , L . Walker , G . Da Costa , H . M . Mora - Montes , A . McKinnon , N . A . Gow , C . Gaillardin , C . A . Munro , and M . L . Richard , “Functional analysis of Candida albicans gpi - anchored proteins : roles in cell wall integrity and caspofungin sen - sitivity , ” Fungal Genetics and Biology , vol . 45 , no . 10 , pp . 1404 – 1414 , 2008 . [ 63 ] M . Toutounji , S . Tokajian , and R . A . Khalaf , “Genotypic and phenotypic charac - terization of Candida albicans lebanese hospital isolates resistant and sensitive to caspofungin , ” Fungal Genetics and Biology , vol . 127 , pp . 12 – 22 , 2019 . [ 64 ] V . Davì , H . Tanimoto , D . Ershov , A . Haupt , H . De Belly , R . Le Borgne , E . Cou - turier , A . Boudaoud , and N . Minc , “Mechanosensation dynamically coordinates polar growth and cell wall assembly to promote cell survival , ” Developmental cell , vol . 45 , no . 2 , pp . 170 – 182 , 2018 . [ 65 ] E . Siéfert , E . Reyssat , J . Bico , and B . Roman , “Programming stiff inﬂatable shells from planar patterned fabrics , ” Soft Matter , vol . 16 , no . 34 , pp . 7898 – 7903 , 2020 . [ 66 ] R . Comer and S . Levy , “Deﬂections of an inﬂated circular - cylindrical cantilever beam , ” AIAA journal , vol . 1 , no . 7 , pp . 1652 – 1655 , 1963 . 12