https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 09760911221086047 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) 34 – 48 , 2022 © The Author ( s ) 2022 Reprints and permissions : in . sagepub . com / journals - permissions - india DOI : 10 . 1177 / 09760911221086047 journals . sagepub . com / home / mdw Article The Development of Celtic Music Identity : Globalisation and Media Influences Wong Zhi Xuan 1 and Loo Fung Ying 1 Abstract The notion of Celtic music is constantly changing based on specific contexts . Mass media used as communication tools to promote and sustain an authentic tradition could be complicated in terms of contextualisation and commodification in a globalised world . Hence , this work investigates the formation of Celtic music identity , its transformation , tension , and adaptation to the global world . Prior work in the literature suggests more practical - based research in homogenising Celtic music’s historical and musicological discourse to discover its potential in cultural reconstruction and knowledge that links to its global development . Thus , this study explored the global development of Celtic music and analysed the impact on its definition through the influence of cultural hybridity and global media by investigating its origin , cultural changes , and possible sustainable interventions . Keywords Celtic music , authenticity , identity , media influences , popular culture , sustainability , globalisation Introduction In the era of media , mobility , and technological advancement , the flow of musical encounters from other cultures that have traversed across the borders of different regions has become a norm . Although music is a cultural trait representing one’s ethnicity or national identity , new musical styles continue to emerge when immigrant musicians practice the music of their heritage along an embedded 1 Department of Music , Faculty of Creative Arts , Universiti Malaya , Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia Corresponding author : Loo Fung Ying , Department of Music , Faculty of Creative Arts , Universiti Malaya Kuala Lumpur , Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur 50603 , Malaysia . E - mail : loofy @ um . edu . my Wong and Ying 35 acculturation process that they are gradually absorbed into a foreign country ( Toynbee & Dueck , 2011 ) . As Appadurai ( 1996 ) explained , global culture combines different people in a modern nation that tends to reproduce a sense of locality . In the past decades , the development of Celtic music has revealed a changing pattern of cultural complexity susceptible to a continuous flow between local and global spaces . Hence , the notion of its authenticity changes according to the different contexts and the ascendency of popular culture with the advancement of technology and mass media , which directs research focus onto discourses of authenticity , identity , and hybridity in the studies of Celtic culture and ethnomusicology . The literature has identified Celtic music as a form of Western Europe folk music traditions , primarily the Irish , Scottish , and English . Traditional music from Wales , the Isle of Man , Brittany , and Galicia , is also considered Celtic music ( Melhuish , 1998 ) . However , a particular focus was discussed on Irish music as the dominant feature in Celtic music . A stronger association of ‘Irishness’ in Celtic music arose when the Riverdance was presented as an intermission performance in the Eurovision Song Contest held in Dublin in 1994 ( Nicholsen , 2016 ) . However , although the Riverdance produced by Abhann Productions was accompanied by a combination of traditional music from other Celtic countries , the optics highlighted the Irish stepdance performance ( Scahill , 2009 ) . Thus , factors including the Irish famine in 1845 that have caused continuous emigration , the Irish Independence in 1922 and the Riverdance performance in 1994 have resulted in the Irish music dominance of Celtic music ( Miller & Shahriari , 2014 ) . McCoy ( 2013 ) explained that the Irish diaspora caused by The Great Famine in the mid - nineteenth century had caused the continuous interchanging terms of ‘Irish’ and ‘Celtic’ . According to O’Flynn ( 2014 ) , Celtic music is an intersected combination of the traditional music of Ireland and its developing musical practice . He also claimed that the term ‘Irish - Celtic music’ represents contemporary music - making firmly based on Western apprehension . Ethnomusicologist James Porter ( 1998 ) explained that Celtic music identity holds more than one definition . In his article , Porter ( 1998 ) used the verb ‘locating’ to recognise Celtic music in different circumstances and spaces with its local and global specifications . Given that the idioms of Celtic music identity can be shaped by and layered with specific political , religious , occupational , gendered , and citizenship situations , focused thematic studies with consideration to its geographical , spatial , and periodical concerns are essential in current and future studies . Terminologies such as ‘Celtitude’ , ‘Celticity’ and ‘Celticism’ are used to describe Celtic identity for transnational , genealogical , and communal reasons ( Dietler , 2006 ) . However , Nicholsen ( 2016 ) mentioned that people obsessed with the Celtic culture , also known as ‘Celtomaniacs’ , believe that British and Irish citizens are racially Celtic , though the opposite voice forms the ‘Celtoscepticism’ disagree . Nicholsen ( 2016 ) suggested that ‘Celtoscepticism’ will be required to promote the knowledge of misapplication of the term ‘Celtic’ . Celtic music has established its diversity with other music genres ( Koch , 2006 ) . Since the 1960s , a few bands , such as the Steeleye Span and Horslips , have created music that drew influences from the Celtic sound ( Harper & Hodgett , 36 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) 2005 ) . One of the most renowned bands , Clannad , made its reputation evolving Celtic fusion music with New Age music , smooth jazz , and the Gregorian chant in the 1970s , which then brought influences on other Celtic - inspired pop musicians such as The Corrs , Enya , U2 , and Cappercaillie ( Sawyers , 2000 ) . Many scholars claimed that the certainty of musical hybridity in Celtic music suggests that further research regarding the individual experiences of Celtic music hybridity is required to identify the liminal spaces between its local and global cultures . Therefore , to understand how the global identity of Celtic music is constructed and transformed in chronological order , this review article aims to discover the scholarly gaps and issues of Celtic music in terms of its authenticity and sustainability that is resulted through globalisation . This is done by delving into its origins , transmission methods , and transformation . Methodology This article consists of the systematic reviews of 84 works from 1975 to 2020 to discuss the developments of Celtic music identity in the global context . These works of literature included published articles , books , and theses of primarily Irish and Scottish traditional music that were chosen based on the themes of authenticity , identity , hybridity , sustainability , and media influences . Although the historical information was organised chronologically to build the fundamental knowledge of Celtic music , the discussions shifted between periods within each section based on the ideas approached . In addition , virtual fieldwork based on Celtic music organisation websites was employed to provide the data and evidence to support the history and fundamental knowledge of Celtic music , including its developments in the social media era . Recognition and the Issues of Identity and Authenticity in Celtic Music The Celts’ root is perhaps inseparable from its legends and myths that their descendants have inherited since the Middle Ages . Calvo - Sotelo ( 2017 ) claimed that Celtic mythology and its music especially have served as major aspects of constructing the European identity . According to Roberts ( 1986 ) , the term ‘Celtic’ was used in the seventeenth century to describe a Celtic group of antiquarians , Edward Lhuyd . However , this term has been used to a member or the groups of Celtic linguists in the modern days . The constructions and reconstructions of identity and affinity towards the cultures of Ireland , Scotland , Wales , and Brittany are termed as ‘Celtic’ ( Dietler , 1994 ) . Social anthropologist , Malcolm Chapman ( 1992 ) , mentioned that the culture of Celts is known as the ‘other’ of the Anglo - Saxon , and it is this sense of ‘otherness’ that has led the Celts to construct their own identity . In another article , Chapman showed that Celtic music is constructed and defined as ‘Celtic’ by assuming its ‘self’ and ‘other’ elaboration , central and Wong and Ying 37 peripheral , contrasting cultural concerns , and romanticism issues ( Chapman , 1994 ) . On the other hand , Harrison ( 1976 , 1986 ) considered ‘Celtic’ as a culture rather than an ethnicity . He also mentioned that ‘The Celtic Sound’ is applied to the globalised contexts of the 1920s and 1950s popular folk music fusions . Similar to how languages , social behaviours , and cultural etiquettes are universalised for better global communication ( Sparke , 2013 ) , Celtic music changed according to its interpretation and representation . Therefore , it invites arguments concerning its globalised identity . Furthermore , the misconceptions of the term ‘Irish’ and ‘Celtic’ are aggravated continuously by using the term ‘Celtic’ to signify ‘Irish’ and vice versa in the diasporic countries of Irish communities due to the Irish Independence and the popularisation of the Riverdance ( McCoy , 2013 ; Miller & Shahriari , 2014 ) . However , Wilkinson’s ( 2003 , p . 220 ) concept of ‘Celtitude’ , which he defined as ‘ways of being and feeling Celtic that implies a psycho - social construct , that is , a set of multi - modal—constantly reconfigured data—signs , sounds , texts , objects , actions , interactions , and perceptions’ , has created a framework to reconstruct these social , political , and musical changes in the Celtic culture . Gearóid Ó hAllmhuráin ( 2013 ) discussed Celtic music’s historical and contemporary cultural change and analysed its global soundscapes compared to its former homelands to Arjun Appadurai’s panoptic model of ethnoscapes , ideoscapes , mediascapes , technoscapes , and financescapes . Similarly , Reiss ( 2003 ) perceived the realm of ‘Celtic Imaginary’ that forms a connection between audiences to its homeland in the context of Appadurai’s ethnoscape and technoscape . He also explained that Celtic music hybridity in popular music contextualises and idealises the image of Celtic music culture . On the other hand , cultural tourism is another reason that defies traditional Irish music of its authenticity to become what Ó hAllmhuráin described as ‘postmodern simulacrum’ in the case of Ó hAllmhuráin ( 2016 , p . 223 ) , with further consequences of industrialisation , popularity , and celebrification from a global context . The situation reflects what Hagmann and Morrisey ( 2019 ) explained about the importance of the authenticity of folk songs that drew on several different aspects derived from the origin , expressed by the performers , and the experience of the audience . Recent research ( Fitzgerald & O’Flynn , 2014 ; Knapp , 2012 ) has shown that Celtic music’s ideology may be perceived differently by each individual , and the emic viewpoints of Celtic music communities worldwide add value to its global definition . As Celtic music continues to gain its popularity in the global world , many outsider - musicians came to Ireland to learn the authentic Irish music , which has , in turn , caused the issues of its authenticity to be questioned to the performance of an outsider ( O’Shea , 2008 ) . However , Graber ( 2015 ) stated that foreigners no longer need to live in Irish society to learn Irish traditional music in the era of advanced technologies and travel convenience . They have put in the same effort as local Irish musicians . The only difference between these two parties is their familiarity with Irish tunes ( Graber , 2015 ) . Furthermore , McLaughlin and McLoone ( 2000 ) claimed that Irish music does not need to satisfy the expectation of ‘Irishness’ , nor in the form of traditional music for it to be successful in the 38 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) market , as the concept of being ‘different’ in Irish popular music stands out in the industry , of which they then concluded that the sense of Irish identity is constantly being challenged in the form of music hybridisation and globalisation . According to Ó Súilleabháin ( 1981 ) and Flemming ( 2004 ) , the process of reinterpreting and negotiating Irish traditional music includes its concern for contemporary situations , which are required to identify its nature . Though the Scottish Highland bagpipes and Gaelic songs are the main musical traditions of Scotland , the drastic increase of emigration due to the Great Famine has resulted in a tremendous cultural loss in the country , only to be revived and adapted into diasporic countries , especially in the Canadian provinces of Quebec , Cape Breton , Newfoundland , and the Prince Edward Island ( McKean , 1998 ) . Some of the most common regional styles of Irish traditional music had been represented by John Doherty ( 1900 – 1980 ) of Donegal , Michael Coleman ( 1891 – 1946 ) of Sligo , and Pádraig O’ Keefe ( 1887 – 1963 ) of Sliabh Luachra . According to McLoone ( 1994 ) , Kenneth Frampton’s idea of critical regionalism helps set Irish music’s specific local and global contexts . In addition to the success of Comhaltas , the organisation often has shaped the regional identity of Irish traditional music unintentionally through competitions ( Kearney , 2013 ) . Kearney suggested that the independent examination of Comhaltas branches may enhance the appreciation of Irish traditional music regional styles and its connection with the regional landscapes of Ireland . However , Scott Spencer questioned its authenticity by comparing Irish traditional music played in competition with the informal sessions held in kitchens and pubs . Nevertheless , Comhaltas has accepted that ‘change is inherent in Irish music’ since the early of the past decade ( Spencer , 2009 , p . 61 ) . Although the discussions and debates surrounding the notion of authenticity in Irish music and Celtic music remain unsolidified , it is without a doubt that the nature of Celtic music has been transformed over time due to current high - speed technologies and its global interests that have been popularised via international films and social media . However , there are no restrictions on who and how Celtic music representation is considered when it comes to its propriety and authenticity . Transmission , Sustainability and Revivalism of Celtic Music Anthropologist Laurent Aubert stressed that although the transmission may take various approaches , it is the most crucial level that garners cultural authenticity ( Aubert , 2007 ) . Celtic music tradition has always been orally transmitted from generation to generation . In Waldron’s ( 2009 ) case study , many adult learners of Celtic music argued that the authentic way of music learning is through listening by ear and grasping the melody on an instrument without a physical script . However , the oral transmission may be challenging for beginners . Celtic music tradition began as a community practice where musicians gathered and played one tune in unison , with little to no ornamented variations . Gilbert ( 2018 ) claimed that most Celtic traditional music organisers share a common belief that social Wong and Ying 39 skills and musicianship are more important than the techniques and repertoires learnt in formal Celtic music education . Informal music practices open doorways to different learning approaches and increase enjoyment in music learning , essential to providing learners with the necessary abilities to participate in community sessions ( Waldron & Veblen , 2009 ) . McKerrell emphasised that having a community - based musical practice and at the same time accepting the music in a commercial context provides a more realistic approach to sustaining traditional music ( McKerrell , 2018 ) . In support of McKerrell’s sustainability approach , Lavengood ( 2008 ) claimed that the Celtic music community provides the best practices that gather people to build social identity and relationships . According to Lavengood ( 2008 ) , international tourism and performances of Celtic music were gathered at Cape Breton Island , Nova Scotia , where it has become the centre of North Atlantic Celtic music revival . On the contrary , Kari Veblen’s ( 1994 ) study with two renowned Irish musicians , Michael Tubridy and Maire O’Keeffe , along with the triangulation of data from music teachers and students from Irish regions , information about teaching Irish music in an institutionalised context . Based on Veblen’s research , the teachers would only guide students to project personal styles and where to ornament a tune . Still , the students would make the final decisions on the artistic features of a particular tune and take responsibility for or her learning progress ( Veblen , 1994 ) . According to Harte ( 2015 ) , there is no specific framework for Irish traditional music education . However , different organisations designed and ran graded exams for Irish traditional music . In line with the efforts to set up programs and syllabuses , advanced technology has increased the possibilities of online learning without concerns of proximity . Founded by an acclaimed flautist and tin whistle player , Kirsten Allstaff , the Online Academy of Irish Music ( OAIM ) provides the highest quality video platforms , including play - along backing tracks and live - streamed pub sessions . With a combination of Ireland’s finest professional musicians , OAIM instructors use the phrase - by - phrase method of teaching Irish traditional tunes . In addition , Ward ( 2016 ) explained that the virtual orality practice provided by live - streamed pub sessions had offered online learners the opportunity to experience real - life Irish music sessions through electronic devices . Apart from transmission methods , the effort from organisations is also important to sustain Irish music . Since the Irish music revivalism in the 1950s , Irish traditional music has been revived , and its interests are constantly growing ( Cawley , 2013 ) . The founding of Comhaltas CeoltóiríÉireann , or the Society of Irish Musicians , in January 1951 has introduced a non - profit society - based organisation in Dublin that promotes Irish music , dance , and language . It has since led to more competitions and festivals that have brought national and international recognition to be professional and amateur traditional Irish musicians . The organisation was formed because of the threats to its tradition and sustainability , including recognising Irish music tradition and its instruments . As Irish music activities were male - centric , women and children participation are highly encouraged ( Moran , 2012 , p . 59 ) . 40 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) The collaboration of Comhaltas with the Royal Irish Academy of Music imparted the recognition of professional traditional musicians , sources of tunes , and the regional styles of playing into their syllabus , which was launched by President Mary McAleese at the Dublin Castle in 1998 . Soon , in 2003 , Comhaltas claimed full responsibility for this program ( Comhaltas CeolóiríÉireann , 2002 ; Royal Irish Academy of Music , 1999 ) . According to Henry ( 1989 ) , Comhaltas has successfully provided a stage for Irish musicians to strengthen their traditions and cultural inventions by sharing their experiences and performing their improvised tunes . When Comhaltas has made its success in Irish traditional music education , many music schools in Ireland soon started to offer Irish traditional music programs . By following the syllabuses of Comhaltas , the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland launched the Scottish traditional music graded exams in 2008 , and the London College of Music later launched their traditional music graded exams in 2009 ( Gibson , 2014 ) . Williams ( 2014 ) explained that the revival of Irish culture in foreign countries is to reclaim the identity of the diasporic Irish that has been lost during the formation of the Irish diaspora . The standardised global repertoires of Irish music ( Motherway , 2013 ) create a sense of belonging that has constructed and maintained the Irish national or cultural identity ( Matheson , 2008 ) . However , aside from the diasporic Irish , foreigners who do not share the same heritage as the Irish , nor formerly related to Ireland , have discovered their Irish identity through personal experiences gained from participating in Irish cultural activities such as Irish traditional music camps and tap dance classes . Upon sharing her experience in Japan , Williams concluded that the performance of Irish culture in a foreign country provides nostalgic experiences to the diasporic Irish , as she shares that ‘Irish music reminded them of their childhoods , or their home , or their mother’s singing’ ( Williams , 2006 , p . 102 ) . In addition , music collection plays an essential part in sustaining a particular music culture . Documentation of music may be presented in recordings and written or printed notations . According to Gayraud ( 2013 ) , tune - collecting is an essential and natural act of a folk musician , whether for an academic purpose or the historicised folk repertoire . Recording exchange has resulted in the image of Irish traditional music rising as a cross - Atlantic phenomenon and an attraction from the neighbouring borders for its authenticity and perhaps nostalgic experiences ( Spencer , 2010 ) . As Dillane ( 2016 , p . 82 ) mentioned , ‘O’ Neil’s Music of Ireland was aimed at the broadest market , a market that would identify with its commodity that celebrated Irish music as a Celtic culture , inviting participation by all those who identified with it . Celtic music revival in foreign countries is the key to its sustainability in the global community . Woolley ( 2003 ) claimed that the three types of musical revivalism mentioned by Tamara Livingston can be overlapped by investigating the Manx traditional music revivalism in the 1970s , which include the revival that resurrects the tradition , rescues a dying tradition before its imminent extinction , and revitalises an ongoing tradition through new contexts . According to MacIsaac ( 2005 ) , the process of revivalism is designed with a range of interventional activities such as cultural protection and promotion that involve cultural Wong and Ying 41 authenticity and identity negotiations . Ethnomusicologist Fintan Vallely ( 2003 ) argued that cultural innovation is destructive to its social tradition . However , a few studies have provided a different perspective on how cultural innovation has played its role in strengthening and sustaining a particular culture . Ó hAllmhuráin ( 2013 ) argued that the hybridisation and transculturation of Celtic music are the reasons for its abounding Irish and Scottish soundscapes in North America . Apart from that , Morgenstern ( 2018 ) has also proven that the cultural innovation of Irish traditional music through music hybridity allows its revival in the global market by analysing the unique soundscapes of Planxty’s emergence of Irish and Bulgarian folk music . Hybridity and Media Influences of Celtic Music Scholars claimed that musical hybridity is an inevitable phenomenon of globalisation ( McLaughlin & McLoone , 2000 ; Motherway , 2013 ; Noone , 2016 ) . Celtic fusion music found its root in South America during the early colonial ( Dietler , 2006 ) . The combination of Irish , Scottish , Scots - Irish and African American has strongly influenced American folk music in the forms of country , blues , old - time , rock and roll , and big band ( Megaw & Megaw , 1996 ) . In the 1990s , Celtic folk music fusion was a musical trend that incorporated folk music elements and instruments from other traditions to form a sound of diversity ( Shahriari , 2015 ) . One of the most influential bands is the Afro Celt Sound System that fused Gaelic music from West Africa , established in 1995 by guitarist Simon Emmerson . According to Caroll ( 2001 ) , the inspiration for this project is based on Emmerson’s encounter with African music and its similarities to Irish air while working with Afro - pop star Baaba Maal . Other Celtic folk music fusion groups include Salsa Celtica , Skelpin , and Dehli 2 Dublin . Celtic hybrid music has grown into genres like reggae , rock , pop , punk , new age , jazz , metal , electronica , and hip hop ( Dietler , 2006 ) . Music hybridity is a mixture of music from two cultures ( Noone , 2016 ) . Based on Hood’s ( 1960 ) ‘bi - musicality’ , Noone suggested the term ‘mongrel’ metaphor that describes the internal awareness who practices multiple kinds of music ( Noone , 2016 ) . According to Noone , this internal awareness encourages individual practitioners to enhance , enculture , and innovate while hybridising music from one culture to another . Following the study of John Lennon’s Irish orientalism , Dillane and Noone ( 2016 , p . 136 ) suggested the phenomenon of Irish music orientalism by emphasising musical hybridity with a quote by Homi Bhabha : ‘it makes you increasingly aware of the construction of culture and the invention of tradition’ . Dillane and Noone ( 2016 ) later suggested that more practical - based research is required to homogenise the historical and musicological discourse of Irish music studies , which will , in turn , discover its potential for cultural reconstruction and knowledge that creates linkage to its global development . 42 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) Popular trends on social media create convenience for Celtic music encounters . However , in a generation of globalised and hybridised cultures , information processed via multimedia platforms may be slightly altered from its origin . McKerrell ( 2015 ) argued that the mediated concept of Scottish traditional music may have created a misunderstanding of how Scottish traditional music sounds due to the inevitable cultural mix in the cyber world . This has led the discussions back to the question of authenticity and identity . As Spencer ( 2010 , p . 437 ) mentioned , ‘the global impact of these recordings ( Irish music ) brought the Irish diaspora into the continual negotiations among musicians over ideas of tradition and authenticity’ . Since the authenticity of Celtic music is constantly changing according to different contexts , this section focuses on how the recognition of Celtic music is shaped globally based on multimedia . In 1980 , the first Celtic Film and TV Festival was held on the island of South Uist . The festival soon became a three - day annual event of conferences , masterclasses , networking , screenings , international forums , daily award ceremonies supported by the national and local governments , arts , cultural councils , and funding organisations . The initial aim of the festival was to promote minority languages such as the Gaelic language in the film industry . The festival later introduced the radio categories in 1999 . Since then , the festival has been held in Ireland , Scotland , Wales , Cornwall , Brittany , and the Isle of Man ( Celtic Media Festival , n . d . ) . To date , the festival has been renamed the Celtic Media Festival . It covers broadcasts , films , and televisions and has radios , software , and other digital applications . The film is one of the most comprehensive art forms , including motion pictures , literacy , architecture , drama , dance , and music ( Khatchadourian , 1975 ) . Simon Nugent ( 2017 ) stated that the anachronistic use of Celtic music in historical films on the medieval and Middle Age eras in Hollywood has often appeared in scenes of the countryside or folkish affairs , which eventually shaped the younger generations’ perception towards ‘authentic’ Celtic music despite its incongruence to the film narrative , as well as geographical and historical concerns . Nugent also explained how the notion of Celtic music is stereotyped due to its misapplication in the film industry , even though its initial aim is to awaken the nostalgia of historical moments . However , introducing British and Irish music in the film industry , Donnelly ( 2019 ) concluded that the rise of Irish popular music has somehow maintained certain degrees of authenticity in Irish folk music . Unfortunately , there is a lack of research on Celtic music in video games in the same context . The RTÉ , also known as the RaidióTeilifísÉireann , is a national television and radio broadcaster of Ireland . Its services include producing news and other kinds of entertainment . RTÉ Archives hold paramount importance in the Irish music and dance archival . Associated with traditional music recordings since the 1940s , RTÉ serves as evidence of today’s Irish traditional music popularity ( RTÉ Archives , n . d . ) . Another community radio station in Scotland , Celtic Music Radio , also broadcasts traditional and contemporary Celtic - influenced music in Glasgow and Wong and Ying 43 worldwide listeners via the internet . Its programs are highly based on Scotland’s music festivals and competitions such as the Celtic Connections Music Festival , the Scottish International Piano Competition , the World Pipe Band Championships , and the Merchant City Festival ( Celtic Music Radio , n . d . ) . Bracefield ( 2004 ) stated that radio broadcasts significantly impacted the development of Irish traditional music in the United States . According to Bracefield , many recordings were produced by some of the most excellent Irish traditional musicians . They emigrated to America from the 1920s to the 1930s to satisfy the demands of ‘music from home’ in the market . As a result , Irish traditional music was disseminated via radio broadcasting from the 26 radio stations of the Irish World in the late 1920s ( Bracefield , 2004 ) . Given that most of the American recordings of Irish traditional music were from Michael Coleman , James Morrison , and Paddy Killoran , who all came from County Sligo , many music scholars were concerned whether the style of Sligo has dominated the recordings of Irish traditional music . However , Bracefield ( 2004 ) claimed that contemporary musicians have improvised and developed their individuality in Irish traditional music . Nevertheless , American recordings of Irish traditional music have been commercialised . In addition , the use of piano accompaniments and incorporating other contemporary instruments have significantly impacted the representation of Irish traditional music ( Bracefield , 2004 ) . According to Smith ( 2001 ) , transmitting and encountering traditional music is achievable online , and modern inventions strengthen the older traditions of Irish traditional music practices globally . Aside from that , Spencer ( 2009 ) claimed that the current advanced technologies have perhaps allowed musicians to engage the authenticity of Irish traditional music from local to global or both at once . However , Keegan - Phipps and Wright ( 2020 ) argued that the convenience of current social network technologies has changed how folk music is transmitted . On the other hand , Bayley and Waldron ( 2020 ) claimed that this phenomenon is an example of Rainie and Wellman’s ( 2012 ) ‘Triple Revolution’ , which refers to the combination of smartphones , the Internet , and social networks . Bayley and Waldron ( 2020 ) concluded that the collaboration of online learning and offline community practices are essential learning approaches in the future , such as the current convergent community music school OAIM , where a combination of aural transmission , observational instructions , and community engagements is provided to Celtic music learners in both online and offline basis . As we live in a world of advanced technologies , social media is undoubtedly the most convenient platform for music encounters . Based on Roudometof’s ( 2016 ) theory of ‘glocalisation’ , Hebert and Rykowski ( 2018 ) have suggested a new perspective of ‘glocalisation’ in music that emphasises the local traditions due to globalisation . A concept firmly attached to the mass media is filling the gap between a particular culture’s global and local notions . However , Hebert and Williams ( 2020 ) explained that social media had changed the ethnomusicological fieldwork . In terms of music education and cultural preservation , social media has indeed impacted global musical production and consumption . Still , the homogenisation of a particular culture’s ‘glocal’ context might as well narrate its definition more comprehensively through global and local perspectives . 44 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) Conclusion In summary , it can be said that the ideology of Celtic music has been shaped over time , mainly when hybridisation has occurred . In a globalised era , the notion of authenticity in Celtic music varies according to different Celtic music perceivers . Hence , their ‘unique’ experiences based on specific contexts across the globe are the new values in Celtic music research . Diasporic Celtic communities and Celtic culture preservation centres are found primarily in Central Europe , the United States of America , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , and Japan . Provided that community - based practice is one of the core sustainable interventions of Celtic music development , different contexts of Celtic music practices in homogenising current advanced technology are essential fields to discover ample opportunities that the current digital world has provided us . Continual research in media consumption and virtual - based Celtic music collaborative practices may serve as more information on the current and future development of the Celtic music identity . Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest concerning the research , authorship and / or publication of this article . Funding The authors received no financial support for this article’s research , authorship , and / or publication . References Appadurai , A . ( 1996 ) . Modernity at large : Cultural dimensions of globalization . University of Minnesota Press . Aubert , L . ( 2007 ) . The music of the other : New challenges for ethnomusicology in a global age . Ashgate Publishing . Bayley , J . G . , & Waldron , J . ( 2020 ) . ‘It’s never too late’ : Adult students and music learning in one online and offline convergent community music school . International Journal of Music Education , 38 ( 1 ) , 36 – 51 . Bracefield , H . ( 2004 ) . Gramophone or radio : Transatlantic effects on the development of traditional music in Ireland . Irish Journal of American Studies , 13 / 14 , 115 – 121 . Calvo - Sotelo , J . C . ( 2017 ) . I Celti , la prima Europa : The role of Celtic myth and Celtic music in the construction of European identity . Popular Music and Society , 40 ( 4 ) , 369 – 389 . Caroll , J . ( 2001 , July 14 ) . Celts get Afro beat . The Irish Times . https : / / www . irishtimes . com / news / celts - get - afro - beat - 1 . 317903 Cawley , J . ( 2013 ) . The musical enculturation of Irish traditional musicians : An ethno - graphic study of learning processes [ PhD Dissertation ] . University College Cork . http : / / hdl . handle . net / 10468 / 1548 Celtic Media Festival . ( n . d . ) . The festival . https : / / www . celticmediafestival . co . uk / the - fes - tival # Celtic Music Radio . ( n . d . ) . About . https : / / www . celticmusicradio . net / about / Wong and Ying 45 Chapman , M . ( 1992 ) . Who are the Celts ? In M . Chapman ( Ed . ) , The Celts : The construc - tion of a myth ( pp . 1 – 13 ) . Palgrave Macmillan . Chapman , M . ( 1994 ) . Thoughts on Celtic music . In M . Stokes ( Ed . ) , Ethnicity , identity and music : The musical construction of place ( pp . 29 – 44 ) . Oxford & Providence . Comhaltas CeoltóiríÉireann ( 2002 ) . SCT exam info . https : / / comhaltas . ie / education / sct _ exam / Dietler , M . ( 1994 ) . ‘Our ancestors the Gauls’ : Archeology , ethnic nationalism , and the manipulation of Celtic identity in modern Europe . American Anthropologists , 96 ( 3 ) , 584 – 605 . Dietler , M . ( 2006 ) . Celticism , Celtitude , and Celticity : The consumption of the past in the age of globalization . In S . Rieckhoff ( Ed . ) , Celtes et Gaulois dans l’histoirel’historiographie et l’idéologie moderne . Actes de la table ronde de Leipzig , 16 – 17 juin 2005 ( pp . 237 – 248 ) . Bibracte , Centre Archéologique Européen . Dillane , A . ( 2016 ) . Irish traditional music dissemination at the end of the long nineteenth century : Francis O’Neill’s music of Ireland ( 1903 ) and the city of Chicago . In M . Dossena & S . Rosso ( Eds . ) , Knowledge dissemination in the long nineteenth century : European and Transatlantic perspectives ( pp . 65 – 85 ) . Cambridge Scholars Publishing . Dillane , A . , & Noone , M . ( 2016 ) . Irish music orientalism . New Hibernia Review , 20 ( 1 ) , 121 – 137 . https : / / doi : 10 . 1353 / nhr . 2016 . 0003 . Donnelly , K . J . ( 2019 ) . British and Irish film music . In J . Hill ( Ed . ) , A companion to British and Irish cinema ( pp . 217 – 233 ) . John Wiley & Sons . Fitzgerald , M . , & O’Flynn , J . ( 2014 ) . Music and identity in Ireland and beyond . Ashgate Publishing . Flemming , R . ( 2004 ) . Resisting cultural standardisation : Comhaltas Ceoltoiri Eireann and the revitalisation of traditional music in Ireland . Journal of Folklore Research , 41 ( 2 ) , 227 – 257 . Gayraud , E . ( 2013 ) . Tradition through time : The changing face of collections in folk music in the British Isles . Kaleidoscope , 5 ( 2 ) , 36 – 60 . Gibson , R . ( 2014 ) . Scottish traditional fiddle exams . Scottish Fiddle Music . https : / / scot - tishfiddlemusic . com / 2014 / 10 / 10 / scottish - traditional - fiddle - exams / Gilbert , L . ( 2018 ) . ‘Not just bow and string and notes’ : Director’s perspectives on com - munity building as pedagogy in Celtic traditional music education organisations . International Journal of Music Education , 36 ( 2 ) , 588 – 600 . Graber , E . ( 2015 ) . The Irish experience : Identity and authenticity in Irish traditional music [ Honours Project ] . Lawrence University Research Repository . https : / / lux . lawrence . edu / cgi / viewcontent . cgi ? article = 1078 & context = luhp Hagmann , L . , & Morrissey F . , A . ( 2019 ) . Multiple authenticities of folk songs . In T . Claviez , K . Imesch & B . Sweers ( Eds . ) , Critique of authenticity ( pp . 1 – 30 ) . Vernon Press . Harper , C . , & Hodgett , T . ( 2005 ) . Irish Folk , Trad & Blues : A secret history . Cherry Red . Harrison , F . ( 1976 ) . Towards a chronology of Celtic folk instruments . In E . Stockmann ( Ed . ) , Studia instrumentorium musicae popularis ( Vol . IV , pp . 98 – 101 ) . Musikmuseet . Harrison , F . ( 1986 ) . Celtic music : Characteristics and chronology . In K . H . Schmidt , R . Ködderitzch ( Eds ) , Geschichte und Kultur der Kelten ( pp . 252 – 263 ) . Carl Winter Universitätsverlag . Harte , C . ( 2015 , July 16 – 22 ) . Teaching the tunes : Understanding the role of Irish tradi - tional music in higher education in North America [ Conference session ] . International Conference of Traditional Music Ireland . Astana , Kazakhstan . 46 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) Henry , E . O . ( 1989 ) . Institutions for the promotion of indigenous music : The case for Ireland’s Comhaltas Ceoltoiri Eireann . Ethnomusicology , 33 ( 1 ) , 67 – 95 . https : / / doi : 10 . 2307 / 852170 Hebert , D . G . , & Rykowski , M . ( 2018 ) . Music Glocalization : Heritage and innovation in a digital age . Cambridge Scholars Press . Hebert , D . G . , & Williams , S . ( 2020 ) . Ethnomusicology , music education , and the power and limitations of social media . In J . Waldron , S . Horsley & K . K . Veblen ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of social media and music learning ( pp . 467 – 488 ) . Oxford University Press . Hood , M . ( 1960 ) . The challenge of bi - musicality . Ethnomusicology , 4 ( 2 ) , 55 – 59 . Khatchadourian , H . ( 1975 ) . Film as art . The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , 33 ( 3 ) , 271 – 284 . https : / / doi : 10 . 2307 / 428353 Kearney , D . ( 2013 ) . Regions , regionality , and regionalisation in Irish traditional music : The role of Comhaltas CeoltóiríÉireann . Ethnomusicology Ireland , 2 / 3 , 72 – 94 . Keegan - Phipps , S . , & Wright , L . ( 2020 ) . ‘Tradition’ , vernacularism , and learning to be a folk musician with social media . In J . Waldron , S . Horsley & K . K . Veblen ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of social media and music learning ( pp . 443 – 466 ) . Oxford University Press . Knapp , D . H . ( 2012 ) . The effects of multicultural music instruction on the perception of authenticity and preference for teaching multicultural music [ PhD Thesis ] . Florida State University . https : / / fsu . digital . flvc . org / islandora / object / fsu % 3A182948 Koch , J . T . ( 2006 ) . Celtic culture : A historical encyclopedia . ABC - CLIO . Lavengood , K . E . ( 2008 ) Transnational communities through global tourism : Experiencing Celtic culture through music practice on Cape Breton Island , Nova Scotia [ PhD Thesis ] . Indiana University . MacIsaac , E . ( 2005 ) . Music on the wind : Women songwriters in the more traditional revival in Ireland . The Phenomenon of Singing , 5 , 188 – 210 . Matheson , C . M . ( 2008 ) . Music , emotion and authenticity : A study of Celtic music fes - tival consumers . Journal of Tourism and Cultural Change , 6 ( 1 ) , 57 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14766820802140448 McCoy , N . ( 2013 ) . The rise of the Celtic cyber - diaspora : The Influence of the ‘new age’ on internet Pagan communities and the dissemination of ‘Celtic’ music . In D . Weston & A . Bennett ( Eds . ) , Pop Pagans : Paganism and popular music ( pp . 176 – 188 ) . Routledge . McKean , T . ( 1998 ) . Celtic music and the growth of the Féis movement in the Scottish highlands . Western Folklore , 57 ( 4 ) , 245 – 259 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1500262 McKerrell , S . ( 2015 ) . Focus : Scottish traditional music . Routledge . McKerrell , S . ( 2018 ) . Traditional music and cultural sustainability of Scotland . In S . McKerell & G . West ( Eds . ) , Ashgate popular and folk series : Understanding Scotland musically : Folk , tradition and policy ( pp . 17 – 29 ) . Routledge . McLaughlin , N . , & McLoone , M . ( 2000 ) . Hybridity and national music : The case of Irish rock music . Popular Music , 19 ( 2 ) , 181 – 199 . McLoone , M . ( 1994 ) . The emergence of Irish popular music . In N . McLaughlin & M . McLoone ( Eds . ) Rock and popular music in Ireland : Before and after U2 ( pp . 1 – 39 ) . Irish Academic Press . Megaw , J . V . S . , & Megaw , M . R . ( 1996 ) . Ancient Celts and modern ethnicity . Antiquity , 70 ( 267 ) , 175 – 181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0003598X00083046 Melhuish , M . ( 1998 ) . Celtic tides : Traditional music in a new age . Quarry Music Books . Miller , T . E . , & Shahriari , A . ( 2014 ) . World music concise edition : A global journey . Routledge . Wong and Ying 47 Moran , A . ( 2012 ) . Irish music abroad : Diasporic sounds in Birmingham . Cambridge Scholars Publishing . Morgenstern , F . ( 2018 ) . Planxty’s ( re ) negotiation of the liminal space between traditional and innovation : Musical hybridity , ‘mongrelity’ and the revival of Irish traditional music in the 1970s [ PhD Thesis ] . University of Limerick . Motherway , H . S . ( 2013 ) . The globalisation of Irish traditional song performance . Ashgate Publishing . Nicholsen , M . D . ( 2016 ) . ‘File under Celtic’ : The uses and misuses of a musical myth , 1882 – 1999 . The Canadian Journal of Irish Studies , 39 ( 2 ) , 134 – 161 . Noone , M . ( 2016 ) . The mongrel metaphor : An arts practice response to understanding musical hybridization . Ethnomusicology Ireland , 4 , 1 – 23 . Nugent , S . ( 2017 ) . Celtic music and Hollywood cinema : Representation , stereotype , and affect . In J . Cook , A . Kolassa & A . Whittaker ( Eds . ) , Recomposing the past : represen - tations of early music on stage and screen ( pp . 107 – 123 ) . Routledge . O’Flynn , J . ( 2014 ) . Kalfou Danjere ? Interpreting Irish - Celtic music . In M . Fitzgerald & J . O’Flynn ( Ed . ) , Music and identity in Ireland and beyond ( pp . 233 – 258 ) . Ashgate . Ó hAllmhuráin , G . ( 2013 ) . The stranger’s land : Historical traditions in the Celtic sound - scapes of North America . In M . Newton ( Ed . ) , Celts in the Americas ( pp . 186 – 207 ) . Cape Breton University Press . Ó hAllmhuráin , G . ( 2016 ) . Flowing tides : History and memory in an Irish soundscape . Oxford University Press . O’Shea , H . ( 2008 ) . The making of Irish traditional music . Cork University Press . Súilleabháin , Ó M . ( 1981 ) . Irish music defined . The Crane Bag , 5 ( 2 ) , 83 – 87 . Porter , J . ( 1998 ) . Locating Celtic music ( and song ) . Western Folklore , 57 ( 4 ) , 205 – 224 . Rainie , L . , & Wellman , B . ( 2012 ) . Networked : The new social operating system . MIT Press . Reiss , S . ( 2003 ) . Tradition and imaginary : Irish traditional music and the Celtic phenom - enon . In M . Stokes & P . Bohlman ( Eds . ) , Celtic modern : Music at the global fringe ( pp . 145 – 170 ) . Scarecrow Press . Roberts , B . F . ( 1986 , & and , July 10 – 15 ) . Edward Lhuyd Celtic linguistics [ Conference ses - sion ] . The Seventh International Congress of Celtic Studies . Oxford , United Kingdom . Roudometof , V . ( 2016 ) . Glocalisation : A critical introduction . Routledge . Music , Royal Irish Academy of ( 1999 ) . Syllabus of traditional music examinations . Royal Irish Academy of Music . RTÉ Archives . ( n . d . ) . Music , song and dance of Ireland . https : / / www . rte . ie / archives / exhibitions / 1664 - traditional - music / Sawyers , J . S . ( 2000 ) . The complete guide to Celtic Music : From the Highland Bagpipe and Riverdance to U2 and Enya . Aurum Press . Scahill , A . ( 2009 ) . Riverdance : Irish traditional music . New Hibernia Review / Iris ÉireannachNua , 13 ( 2 ) , 70 – 76 . Shahriari , A . ( 2015 ) . Euro - Pop and Folk fusions . In Popular world music ( pp . 103 – 127 ) . Routledge . Smith , S . ( 2001 ) . Traditional music : Ceol Traidisiúnta : Irish traditional music in a modern world . New Hibernia Review / Iris Éireannach Nua , 5 ( 2 ) , 111 – 125 . Sparke , M . ( 2013 ) . Introducing globalisation : Ties , tensions and uneven integration . Wiley . Spencer , S . ( 2009 ) . Traditional Irish music in the twenty - first century : Networks , technol - ogy , and the negotiation of authenticity . In S . Brady & F . Walsh ( Eds . ) , Crossroads : Performance studies and Irish culture ( pp . 58 – 71 ) . Palgrave Macmillan . 48 Media Watch 13 ( 1 ) Spencer , S . ( 2010 ) . Wheels of the world : How recordings of Irish traditional music bridged the gap between homeland and diaspora . Journal of the Society for American Music , 4 ( 4 ) , 437 – 449 . Spencer , S . ( 2010 ) . Transatlantic migrations of Irish music in the early recording age . In D . T . Gleeson ( Ed . ) , The Irish in the Atlantic world ( pp . 53 – 75 ) . The University of South Carolina Press . Toynbee , J . , & Dueck , B . ( 2011 ) . Migrating music . Routledge . Vallely , F . ( 2003 ) . The Apollos of Shamrockery : Traditional music in the modern age . In M . Stokes , P . V . Bohlman & M . Werkman ( Eds . ) , Celtic modern : Music at the global fringe ( pp . 201 – 218 ) . Scarecrow Press . Veblen , K . ( 1994 ) . The teacher’s role in transmission of Irish traditional music . International Journal of Music Education , 24 ( 1 ) , 21 – 30 . Waldron , J . ( 2009 ) . How adult learners learn Celtic traditional music : An exploratory case study . Music Education Research International , 3 , 51 – 71 . Waldron , J . , & Veblen , K . ( 2009 ) . Learning in a Celtic community : An exploration of informal music learning and adult amateur musicians . Bulletin of the Council for Research in Music Education , 180 , 59 – 74 . Ward , F . ( 2016 ) . Processes of transmission in Irish traditional music : Approaching a vir - tual orality [ PhD Thesis ] . University of Limerick . Williams , S . ( 2006 ) . Irish music and the experience of nostalgia in Japan . Asian Music , 37 ( 1 ) , 101 – 119 . Williams , S . ( 2014 ) . Irish music revivals through generations of diaspora . In C . Bithell & J . Hill ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of music revival ( pp . 598 – 617 ) . Oxford University Press . Wilkinson , D . ( 2003 ) . ‘Celtitude’ , professionalism , and the Fest Noz in traditional music in Brittany . In M . Stokes , P . V . Bohlman & M . Werkman ( Eds ) , Celtic modern : Music at the global fringe ( pp . 219 – 256 ) . Scarecrow Press . Woolley , C . ( 2003 ) . The revival of Manx traditional music : From the 1970s to the present day [ PhD Thesis ] . University of Edinburgh . About the Authors Zhixuan Wong is a PhD candidate in the Department of Music at Universiti Malaya , Malaysia . She is a violinist and her research area includes Irish traditional music and Hindustani classical music . Loo Fung Ying received her PhD from University of Sheffield ( 2009 ) . She is an Associate Professor in the Department of Music at Universiti Malaya , Malaysia . Her research focuses on cultural musicology and Malaysian music .