90 CHAPTER 6 SELECTION OF REQUIREMENT ELICITATION TECHNIQUE : A NEURAL NETWORK BASED APPROACH 6 . 1 Introduction Requirement Elicitation is the base building block for a software project and has very high impact on subsequent design and builds phases as well . Due to the criticality and impact of this phase , it is very important to perform the requirement elicitation in no less than a perfect manner . One of the most difficult jobs during requirement elicitation process is to select appropriate technique from a wide variety of tools and techniques . Here , a new approach is proposed using an artificial neural network for selection of requirement elicitation technique from a wide variety of techniques . A neural network is trained by the back propagation algorithm . The trained network can be used as a base for selection of elicitation techniques . 6 . 2 Problem Definition & Scope There are varieties of elicitation techniques but it is considered a difficult task for an elicitor to decide which technique or combination of techniques is most suitable for Requirement Elicitation process . This is normally because of lack of understanding about the available techniques . This inadequate understanding of elicitation technique leads to selection of improper elicitation technique for a given project , which ultimately can result in failure of the project . So , it can be very helpful for the requirement elicitor to know about the selection of appropriate elicitation techniques [ 96 ] . Requirement elicitors have a variety of elicitation techniques but flexible guidelines and effective approach for selection are required , which can be helpful for the selection criterion of elicitation techniques [ 100 ] . 91 6 . 3 Background of Neural Network Artificial neural networks ( ANNs ) are designed to resemble the structure and information - processing capabilities of the brain . The architectural components of a neural network are computational units similar to the neurons of the brain . A neural network is formed from one or more layers of these neurons , the interconnections of which have associated synaptic weights . Each neuron in the network is used to perform calculations that contribute to the overall learning process , or training , of the network . The neuron interconnections are associated with synaptic weights that store the information computed during the training of the network . The neural network is thus a massive parallel information processing system that utilizes distributed control to learn and store knowledge about its environment . The two inherent factors that influence the superior computational ability of the neural network are its parallel distributed design and its capability to extrapolate the learned information to yield outputs for inputs not presented during training . These characteristics of the neural network allow complex problems to be solved . Data mining , pattern recognition , and function approximation are some of the tasks that can be handled by neural networks . The architecture of the neural network consists of the input layer , the hidden layer and the output layer . Each of the hidden nodes and output nodes apply a tan - sigmoid transfer function ( 2 / ( 1 + exp ( - 2 * n ) ) - 1 ) to the various connection weights . A multi - layer feed - forward neural network consists of an input layer of non computational units ( one for each input ) , one or more hidden layers of computational units , and an output layer of computational units . Back propagation is the standard training method that is applied to multi - layer feed - forward networks . The algorithm consists of passing the input signal forward and the error signal backward through the network . In the forward pass , one input vector is presented to the input layer , and the input signal is filtered forward through the subsequent layers of the network to generate a set of outputs . The network outputs are compared with the actual outputs of the training example and an error signal is generated . In the backward pass , the synaptic weights are updated using the learning constant according to the effect they have in generating the incorrect outputs . 92 Fig 6 . 1 : Structure of Neuron 6 . 4 Attributes for Selecting the Requirement Elicitation Technique Selection of Requirement Elicitation techniques are based on various attributes . The attributes plays an important role in selection of requirement elicitation techniques . These key attributes are identified after intensive literature survey and consultation of professionals working in different software houses . There are 9 different attributes which are identified for selection of elicitation techniques . These attributes are known as evaluating factors for selection of requirement elicitation technique . The selected attributes are shown in table 6 . 1 . Table 6 . 1 : Evaluating factors for selection of Requirement Elicitation Techniques Attributes Values Domain Understanding the Domain Acquiring Domain Knowledge Domain Characteristic identification Stakeholder Stakeholder Identification Stakeholders Classification Elicitation Identification of Requirement Sources Tool Selection Others Budget Constraints Quality concerns Project Status 93 6 . 5 Software Project Scaling Scaling can happen on many dimensions , including Man hours , code - size , headcount , number of interfaces , cost , no of requirements . Scaling in size of code usually happen simultaneously with an increase in headcount , as more people are required to develop and maintain a growing code base , and conversely one would expect more engineers produce more software code . The number of products is correlated with the code size , but not necessarily directly proportional : many products may be simply rearrangements or bundles of features , or different skins on the same package , as can be the case when several industry vertical products can be derived from a single product simply by adopting the specific language of that vertical . Single - person software development is typically nimbler than large projects , as the cost of mistakes is usually smaller . Although such endeavors can be disciplined , they typically take many shortcuts , which may very well be acceptable since the expected deliverables really are not the same . In small projects developer , manager and strategist , all but the same person . In large scale projects , these roles are distributed among many : requires coordination . So from the above discussion it is justified that software can be classified into small scale software and large scale software . The classification is based on the following Attributes described in the table 6 . 2 . Attributes Small Scale Project Large Scale Project Man - hours Small Large Interfaces Less More Requirements Small Large Features Simple Complex Cost Low High Quality Minimum QA Larger QA Deadlines Flexible Stringent Table 6 . 2 : Project Scaling Attributes 94 6 . 6 Suitability Analysis of Requirement Elicitation Techniques There are varieties of Elicitation Techniques but the challenge is to select the right one from a wide variety of requirement elicitation techniques . To select the evaluating factors for selection of requirement elicitation techniques , literature was surveyed intensively and professionals working in different software houses were consulted . After literature survey and discussion with professionals , 9 evaluating factors are identified which plays an important role while requirement elicitation technique selection . The impact of evaluating factor for selection of requirement elicitation techniques are studied and documented for small scale & large scale projects . Requirement Elicitation Technique Evaluating Factors I n t er f a ce p r o t o t y p i n g O b s er v a t i o n B r a i n s t o r m i n g I n t er v i e w G r o up M ee t i n g s W o r k s h o p Q u e s t i o nn a i re s E x p er t I n t er v i e w s S ce n a r i o s Understanding the Domain x x x Acquiring Domain Knowledge x x x Domain Characteristic identification x x x x Stakeholder Identification x x x Stakeholders Classification x x x x Identification of Requirement Sources x x x x Tool Selection x x x x Budget Constraints x x x x Project Status x x x x Table 6 . 3 : Selection of Elicitation Techniques in Small scale projects 95 The selection of elicitation techniques in small scale projects based on the evaluating factors are shown in table 6 . 3 . Requirement Elicitation Technique Evaluating Factors I n t er f a ce p r o t o t y p i n g O b s er va t i o n B r a i n s t o r m i n g I n t er v i e w G r o up M ee t i n g s W o r k s h o p Q u e s t i o nn a i re s E x p er t I n t er v i e w s S ce n a r i o s Understanding the Domain x x x x Acquiring Domain Knowledge x x x x x Domain Characteristic identification x x x x Stakeholder Identification x x x x x Stakeholders Classification x x x x Identification of Requirement Sources x x x x x Tool Selection x x Budget Constraints x x x Project Status x x x x Table 6 . 4 : Selection of Elicitation Techniques in Large scale projects The selection of elicitation techniques in large scale projects based on the evaluation factors are shown in table 6 . 4 . 6 . 7 Selection of Requirement Elicitation Techniques : A Neural Network Based Approach Requirement elicitation is generally performed using an elicitation methodology or a series of techniques . Many such techniques exist , all with the common aim to assist elicitor in understanding needs [ 26 ] . Although some elicitor think that just one technique is applicable to all situations , one methodology or technique cannot possibly be sufficient for all conditions [ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] . Elicitor selects a particular 96 elicitation technique for any combination of four reasons : ( 1 ) It is the only technique that the elicitor knows . ( 2 ) It is the elicitor’s favorite technique for all situations . ( 3 ) The elicitor follows some explicit methodology , and that methodology prescribes a particular technique at the current time . ( 4 ) The elicitor understands intuitively that the technique is effective in the current circumstance . Clearly the fourth reason demonstrates the most maturity by the elicitor . Here in this research study neural network based approach is used for selection of requirement elicitation techniques and implemented using MATLAB NNtool . 6 . 7 . 1 . Proposed Algorithm : Neural network based model for Requirement Elicitation Technique  Initially the techniques and their impact are analyzed from small scale projects and large scale projects .  Adjacency matrix A is obtained for small scale projects and , matrix B is obtained for large scale projects  Using MATLAB tool for elicitation technique selection .  Using NNtool for creating neural network  Assign input vector ( v ) values  Assign target values ( t )  Create neural network  Training of neural network  The result of training  Simulating the neural network  Analysis of result obtained . 6 . 7 . 2 . Description of Algorithm : Method followed for selection of Requirement Elicitation Technique . 1 ) Initially table 6 . 3 and table 6 . 4 of elicitation techniques with their impact is analyzed for small scale projects and large scale projects . 2 ) Matrix A is obtained from table 6 . 3 and matrix B is obtained from table 6 . 4 . 97 3 ) Using MATLAB for Requirement Elicitation Technique selection . a ) Using NNtool for creating neural network b ) Assign input vector ( v ) values Figure 6 . 2 : Assign Input values to Neural Network 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 A = A = 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 B = 98 c ) Assign target values ( t ) Figure 6 . 3 : Assign target values to neural Network d ) Create neural network Figure 6 . 4 : Neural Network description 99 i ) Name : Requirement Elicitation ii ) Network properties 1 ) Network Type : Feed forward Back propagation 2 ) Input Range : [ 0 , 1 ; 0 , 1 ] 3 ) Training Function : TRAINLM 4 ) Adaptation Learning Function : LEARNGDM 5 ) Performance function : MSE 6 ) No of Layers : 2 e ) Neural Network for Selection of Requirement Elicitation Technique Figure 6 . 5 : Neural Network Structure 100 f ) Training of neural network Figure 6 . 6 : Training g ) The result of training Figure 6 . 7 : Training result 101 h ) Simulating the neural network Fig 6 . 8 : Simulation of neural network i ) Result of neural network based approach Fig 6 . 9 a : Output of Neural Network 102 Fig 6 . 9 b : Output of Neural Network 6 . 8 Result Analysis The proposed neural network based approach for selection of Requirement Elicitation Technique is implemented using MATLAB tool . The algorithm is implemented using NNTool box . The NNTool box is used for creating neural network . The working of MATLAB NNTool for selection of requirement elicitation technique is shown in fig 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 . Assign input vector ( v ) values V = { 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 ; 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 } Assign target values ( t ) values T = { 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 } . The neural network is created with name Requirement Elicitation along with the following Network properties . The Network Type is Feed forward Back propagation with Input Range [ 0 , 1 ; 0 , 1 ] and TRAINLM as the Training Function . The Adaptation learning function is LEARNGDM and performance function as MSE with no of layers is 2 . The neural network is trained and the result of training is obtained after that neural network is simulated . 103 The Result is analyzed as ‘1’ in the output vector will corresponds to the elicitation technique being used for the evaluating factor of requirement elicitation and ‘0’ in the output vector corresponds to the technique being discarded for the given evaluating factor of requirement elicitation as shown in Matrix R . The result of neural network for selection of requirement elicitation technique is shown in matrix R From the above findings weight count ( Wc ) is assigned to each of the corresponding elicitation technique as shown in table 5 . A scale of 2 - 10 is assigned to each elicitation technique t . The technique with highest weight count will be the most effective technique of requirement elicitation and lowest count is least effective . Technique t Weight Count Wc Observation 5 Brainstorming 8 Interview 10 Group Meetings 2 Workshop 9 Questionnaires 6 Ethnography 3 Scenarios 7 Interface Prototype 4 Table 6 . 5 : Weight count of Elicitation techniques 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 R = 104 Results shown in table 6 . 5 conclude that Interview is the most effective technique for requirement elicitation and workshop is the second efficient technique for requirement elicitation . Interview is most effective technique that starts with a set of pre - defined questions that eventually leads to open discussion for complex items . Interview is most simple and generic way to elicit requirements from multiple stakeholders . Interviews are effective in understanding the problems in the existing system and to find the requirements of the stakeholders in the existing system and to elicit general requirements of the stakeholders . Workshop , brainstorming are the most formalized and realistic way to requirement elicitation . Brainstorming and workshop session has high bandwidth , thus provide us with variety of different ideas , selecting the best suited one based on voting or any other criteria . Workshop encourages out of the box thinking , i . e . thinking unlimited by normal constraints . Prototyping is the more expensive than all the other requirement elicitation techniques . Though they are more efficient and effective in requirement elicitation but they are costly and time consuming . Prototyping is an effective technique for projects , where it is difficult to capture user requirements and expectations without providing some model that actually resembles the appearance of real product . Questionnaire technique is a good way to collect data in mass number in a cost effective manner . The effectiveness of questionnaire depends on prior preparation and format of the questions . Questionnaire is highly dependent on its effective design , knowledge and honesty of the respondent . Overall Scenario is highly recommended of the systems which have complex and critical requirements . This will help to remove any ambiguity in the requirements . Not only this , requirements of web based systems can also be gathered by scenario story boards . Scenarios are also effective for the projects which have to be completed in short time window or the projects in which process improvement is needed .