Examining Crowd Work and Gig Work Through The Historical Lens of Piecework Ali Alkhatib , Michael S . Bernstein , Margaret Levi Computer Science Department and CASBS Stanford University { ali . alkhatib , msb } @ cs . stanford . edu , mlevi @ stanford . edu ABSTRACT The internet is empowering the rise of crowd work , gig work , and other forms of on – demand labor . A large and grow - ing body of scholarship has attempted to predict the socio – technical outcomes of this shift , especially addressing three questions : 1 ) What are the complexity limits of on – demand work ? , 2 ) How far can work be decomposed into smaller mi - crotasks ? , and 3 ) What will work and the place of work look like for workers ? In this paper , we look to the historical schol - arship on piecework — a similar trend of work decomposition , distribution , and payment that was popular at the turn of the 20th century — to understand how these questions might play out with modern on – demand work . We identify the mech - anisms that enabled and limited piecework historically , and identify whether on – demand work faces the same pitfalls or might di ﬀ erentiate itself . This approach introduces theoretical grounding that can help address some of the most persistent questions in crowd work , and suggests design interventions that learn from history rather than repeat it . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Group and Organization Interfaces Author Keywords Crowd work ; gig work ; on – demand work ; piecework INTRODUCTION The past decade has seen a ﬂourishing of computationally – mediated labor . A framing of work into modular , pre – deﬁned components enables computational hiring and management of workers at scale [ 68 , 17 , 83 ] . In this regime , distributed workers engage in work whenever their schedules allow , often with little to no awareness of the broader context of the work , and often with ﬂeeting identities and associations [ 104 , 94 ] . For years , such labor was limited to information work such as data annotation and surveys [ 82 , 161 , 166 , 51 , 119 ] . However , Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2017 , May 06 - 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA © 2017 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4655 - 9 / 17 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025974 physically embodied work such as driving and cleaning have now spawned multiple online labor markets as well [ 94 , 3 , 1 , 2 ] . In this paper we will use the term on – demand labor , to capture this pair of related phenomena : ﬁrst , crowd work [ 83 ] , on platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk ( AMT ) and other sites of ( predominantly ) information work ; and second , gig work [ 48 , 118 ] , often as platforms for one – o ﬀ jobs , like driving , courier services , and administrative support . The realization that complex goals can be accomplished by directing crowds of workers has spurred ﬁrms to explore sites of labor such as AMT to ﬁnd the limits of this distributed , on – demand workforce . Researchers have also taken to the space in earnest , developing systems that enable new forms of production ( e . g . [ 14 , 18 , 117 ] ) and pursuing social scientiﬁc inquiry into the workers on these platforms [ 128 , 138 ] . This research has identiﬁed the sociality of gig work [ 54 ] , as well as the frustration and disenfranchisement that these systems e ﬀ ect [ 72 , 104 , 106 ] . Others have focused on the responses to this frustration , reﬂecting on the resistance that workers express against digitally – mediated labor markets [ 94 , 133 ] . This body of research has broadly worked toward the answer to one central question : What does the future hold for on – demand work and those who do it ? Researchers have o ﬀ ered insights on this question along three major threads : First , what are the complexity limits of on – demand work — speciﬁcally , how complex are the goals that crowd work can accomplish , and what kinds of industries may eventually utilize it [ 142 , 79 , 165 , 164 , 110 , 59 ] ? Second , how far can work be decomposed into smaller microtasks [ 27 , 100 , 92 , 29 , 111 ] ? And third , what will work and the place of work look like for workers [ 72 , 73 , 54 , 106 ] ? This research has largely sought to answer these questions by examining extant on – demand work phenomena . So far , it has not o ﬀ ered an ontology to describe or understand the develop - ments in worker processes that researchers have developed , or the emergent phenomena in social environments ; nor has any research gone so far as to anticipate future developments . Piecework as a lens to understand on – demand work In this paper , we o ﬀ er a framing for on – demand work as a contemporary instantiation of piecework , a work and payment structure which breaks tasks down into discrete jobs , wherein payment is made for output , rather than for time . We are not the ﬁrst to relate on – demand work to piecework : in 2013 , for Observations in piecework Mechanism Implications for On – demand Work Complexity Growth from simple tasks such as sewing to more complex composite outcomes on the assembly line ﬂoor . Complexity was limited to tasks that could be easily measured and evaluated for pay - ment by the piece . Measurement and veriﬁcation will remain persistent challenges that will limit com - plexity unless solved . Decomposition Work began sliced such that non – experts could perform each piece , but over time was sliced such that non – overlapping expertise was required for each step . Scientiﬁc Management and Taylorism in - formed and drove decomposition by mea - suring and facilitating the optimization of smaller tasks . After scientiﬁc management matured , piecework began specialized training to cre - ate experts in narrow tasks . A similar shift seems feasible with on – demand work . Workers Firms antagonized and exploited workers , leading workers to support one another in - dependently , ultimately resulting in strong advocacy groups counterbalancing ﬁrms . The features of piecework ( independence and transience ) were both the fulcrum man - agers used to exploit workers as well as the focal point around which workers bonded . While worker frustrations are similar , the decentralized nature of on – demand work will limit collective action until there exist platforms to coordinate and exert pressure . Table 1 . Piecework and on – demand work have both wrestled with questions of how complex work can get , how ﬁnely – sliced tasks can become , and what the workplace will look like for workers . We connect piecework’s history ( left ) to the mechanisms that determined its outcomes to these three questions ( center ) in order to derive predictions for modern on – demand work ( right ) . example , Kittur et al . referenced crowd work as piecework brieﬂy as a loose analogy [ 83 ] . Our goal in this paper is to inspect the relationship much more closely . But more than this , the framing of on – demand labor as a reinstantiation of piecework gives us years of historical material to help us make sense of this new form of work , and allows us to study on – demand work through a theoretical lens that is informed by years of rigorous , empirical research . More concretely , by positioning on – demand labor as an instan - tiation or even a continuation of piecework , we can make sense of past events as part of a much larger series of interrelated phenomena ( Table 1 ) . We can reﬂect on di ﬀ erences in the features that impacted piecework historically and on – demand work today . And , to some extent , we can use these di ﬀ erences to o ﬀ er some predictions of what on – demand work researchers and workers themselves might expect to see on the horizon . For example , we will draw on piecework’s scholarship on task decomposition , which was historically limited by shortcom - ings in measurement and instrumentation , and leverage that insight to suggest how modern technology a ﬀ ects this mecha - nism in on – demand work — namely , enabling precise tracking and measurement via algorithms and software . We organize this paper as follows : ﬁrst , we review the deﬁ - nition and history of piecework to make clear the analogy to on – demand work ; and second , we examine the three major research questions above using the lens of piecework . For each question , we will contrast the perspective the piecework scholarship o ﬀ ers with on – demand labor’s body of research , identify similarities and di ﬀ erences , and then o ﬀ er predictions for on – demand work . A REVIEW OF PIECEWORK The HCI community has used the term “piecework” to describe myriad instantiations of on – demand labor , but researchers have generally made this allusion in passing . Since we trace a much stronger parallel between ( historical ) piecework and ( contemporary ) on – demand work , a more comprehensive back - ground on piecework will be useful . Speciﬁcally , ﬁrst , we’ll deﬁne “piecework” as researchers in its ﬁeld understand it ; and second , we’ll trace the rise and fall of piecework at a high level , identifying key ﬁgures and ideas during this time . This section is not intended to be comprehensive : instead , it sets up the sca ﬀ olding necessary for our later investigations of on – demand work’s three questions : complexity limits , task decomposition , and worker relationships . What is piecework ? : A primer and timeline Aligning on – demand work with piecework requires an un - derstanding of what piecework is . While it has had several deﬁnitions over the years , we can trace a constellation of char - acteristics that recur throughout the literature . We’ll follow this research , collecting descriptions , examples , and deﬁni - tions , to develop a sense of piecework . Piecework’s history traces back further than most would likely expect . Grier describes the process astronomers adopted of hiring teenage men to calculate equations in order to better – predict the trajectories of various celestial bodies in the night sky [ 55 ] . In the ﬁrst half of the 19th century , George Airy was perhaps the ﬁrst to rigorously put piecework – style de - composition to work ; by breaking complex calculations into constituent parts , and training young men to solve simple al - gebraic problems , Airy could distribute work to many more people than could otherwise complete the full calculations . Piecework began in the intellectual domain of astronomical calculations and projections , but it found its foothold in manual labor . Piecework took hold in farm work [ 120 ] , in textiles [ 12 , 123 ] , on railroads [ 22 ] , and elsewhere in manufacturing [ 134 ] by the mid – 19th century . By 1847 we ﬁnd a concise deﬁnition of piecework in Raynbird’s essay on piecework , particularly driven toward encapsulating the manual labor of farm work . He does this by contrasting two paradigms : “the chief di ﬀ er - ence lies between the day – labourer , who receives a certain some of money . . . for his day’s work , and the task – labourer , whose earnings depend on the quantity of work done” [ 120 ] . Chadwick o ﬀ ers a number of illustrative examples : “pay - ment is made for each hectare which is pronounced to be well ploughed . . . for each living foal got from a mare ; . . . for each living calf got” [ 28 ] . This framing gives us an intuitive sense of piecework ; “payment for results , ” as he calls it , is not only common in practice , but well – studied in labor economics [ 46 , 154 , 155 , 64 ] . It’s worth acknowledging that “this distinction [ between piece – rates and time – rates ] was not completely clear – cut” [ 63 ] . Em - ployers adopted piece – rates in some aspects and time – rates in others . The Rowan premium system , for example , essentially paid workers a base rate for time plus additional pay depend - ing on output [ 129 ] . As Rowan’s premium system guaranteed an hourly rate regardless of the worker’s productive output as well as additional compensation tied to performance , work - ers were in some senses “task – labourers” , but in other senses “day – labourers” . This was just one of several alternatives to strict time – and piece – rate remuneration paradigms . In the late years of the 19th century , Taylor — a mechanical engineer with an interest in work e ﬃ ciency — began studying and formalizing the decomposition , tracking , and management of tasks [ 144 ] . In 1911 he published The principles of scien - tiﬁc management , concretizing an idea that had nebulously been forming , and which he had been working out himself , for years [ 145 ] . Scientiﬁc Management ( and Fordism ) thrust piecework into higher gear , especially as mass manufacturing and a depleted wartime workforce forced industry to ﬁnd new ways to eke out more production capacity . It may be worth thinking about piecework through the lens of its emergent properties to help understand it . Raynbird argues for the merits of piecework , pointing out that “piece work holds out to the labourer an increase of wages as a reward for his skill and exertion . . . he knows that all depends on his own diligence and perseverance . . . [ and ] so long as he performs his work to the satisfaction of his master , he is not under that control to which the day – labourer is always subject” . The argument that “task – labourers” enjoy freedom from control crops up in Raynbird’s and later Rowan’s works [ 120 , 129 ] . We see this sense of independence in myriad times , locales , and industries . Satre o ﬀ ers a look into the lives and culture of “match – girls” , teenage women who assembled matchsticks in the late 19th century in London . Of interest was their repu - tation “ . . . for generosity , independence , and protectiveness , but also for brashness , irregularity , low morality , and little education” [ 134 ] . Hagan and Fisher document piecework from 1850 through 1930 in Australia , ﬁnding similar notions of independence and autonomy among piecework newspaper compositors : “If a piece – work compositor . . . decided that he did not want to work on a particular day or night , the man - agement recognised his right to put a ‘substitute’ or ‘grass’ compositor in his place” [ 58 ] . This sense of independence and autonomy appears to be a common thread of piecework . Since workers could now choose their own schedule and style , a discussion arose on how best to manage pieceworkers . This conversation came to regard workers antagonistically [ 130 ] , a far cry from the earlier rhetoric on piecework , which promised that pieceworkers would gladly work diligently and for as long as possible , as incentive – based pay rewarded exactly , and thus aligned the goals of both managers and workers [ 35 ] . Piecework opened the door for people who previously couldn’t participate in the labor market to do so , and to acquire job skills incrementally . During World War II , women received training in narrow subsets of more comprehensive jobs , en - abling work in capacities similar to conventional ( male ) work - ers [ 63 ] . Women previously had virtually no opportunities to engage in engineering and metalworking apprenticeships as men did ; now , they could be trained quickly on narrowly scoped tasks , demonstrate proﬁciency , and become experts . “Rosie the Riveter” , an icon of 20th century America who represented empowerment and opportunity for women [ 66 ] , would have been a pieceworker [ 38 ] . Piecework’s popularity in the United States and Europe fell almost as quickly as it had climbed . Between 1938 and 1942 , the proportion of metal workers under piecework systems had climbed steeply from 11 % to 60 % [ 61 ] . By 1961 , Carlson ﬁnds , the proportion dropped to 8 % [ 26 ] . He notes that , from 1973 to 1980 , the holdouts of piecework — where more than 50 % worked under incentive wage plans — were principally in clothes – making ( e . g . hosiery , footwear , and garments ) . Hart and Roberts o ﬀ er a number of explanations for the sudden demise of piecework . The salient suggestions include : 1 ) the emergence of more e ﬀ ective , more nuanced incentive models — rewarding teams for complex achievements , for instance ; 2 ) the shifting of piecework industries such as manufacturing and textiles to other countries ; and 3 ) the quality of “multidi - mensional” work , which was too di ﬃ cult to evaluate [ 63 ] . In summary , piecework : 1 ) paid workers for quantity of work done , rather than time done , but occasionally mixed the two payment models ; 2 ) a ﬀ orded workers a sense of freedom and independence ; and 3 ) structured tasks in such a way as to facilitate more narrowly scoped training and education . Viewing on – demand work as a modern instantiation of piece - work is relatively straightforward by this deﬁnition . First , platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk ( AMT ) , Uber , Upwork , and TaskRabbit pay by the task , though some mix systems in similar ways to the Rowan system’s combination of piece rate and time rate pay . Second , workers are attracted to these platforms by the freedom they o ﬀ er to pick the time and place of work [ 104 , 21 ] . Third , system developers as on Mechanical Turk typically assume no professional skills in transcription or other areas , and attempt to build that exper - tise into the workﬂow [ 112 , 14 ] . Given this alignment , many of the same historical properties of piecework will apply to on – demand work as well . Case studies in piecework Throughout the paper , we will return to four case studies to frame our analyses : Airy’s use of human computers ; domestic and farm workers ; the “match – girls” strike ; and industrial and assembly – line workers . In introducing these cases at a high level , we’ll trace the history of piecework while also framing the later analysis of the leading research threads we named earlier : complexity , decomposition , and relationships . Airy’s computers In the 19th century , the calculation of celestial bodies had become a competitive ﬁeld , and Airy needed to compute tables that would allow sailors to locate themselves by starlight from sea . This work ostensibly called for educated people who comprehensively understood mathematics . Airy realized that he could break the tasks down and delegate the constituent parts to human computers , or people who could compute basic functions . These human computers “ . . . possessed the basic skills of mathematics , including ‘Arithmetic , the use of Logarithms , and Elementary Algebra’ ” [ 55 ] . As a result , many of Airy’s computers had relatively rudimentary educations compared to those that typically worked in the calculation of solar tables . Airy distributed tasks by mail , allowing work to be completed by a somewhat geographically distributed workforce , and paid for each piece of work completed . The human computers captured several aspects of task decom - position that would become common . First , the work was designed such that it could be done independently and without collaboration . Second , the work was designed so that interme - diate results could be quickly veriﬁed : Airy would have two workers each do the calculation , and another person compare their answers . Third , Airy identiﬁed ways to decompose the large task into narrowly – trainable subtasks . Some of Airy’s policies were more controversial , for exam - ple ﬁring computers once they reached age 23 . This practice ensured two outcomes that disfavored workers . First , it drasti - cally reduced professional advancement , as workers’ careers ended quickly , and without conventional backgrounds in math - ematics they later struggled to ﬁnd work for which their expe - rience was meaningful . And second , it limited workers’ ability to organize by ensuring that workers were in little communica - tion with each other , and that they had almost no opportunity to recognize their circumstances and to coordinate . Domestic and farmhand labor The application of piecework to farm work in the late 19th century and later to manufacturing of small goods , such as garments and matches , at the turn of the 20th century proved to be a formative period for piecework as we would come to know it . Piecework regimes in farms and in homes engaged workers in assembling clothing . Textile manufacturers found that they could deliver fabric to people at their homes , asking them to sew together clothing . The manufacturers would later return to retrieve the ﬁnished garments , paying these workers for each piece of clothing completed . Farm work applied the idea of piecework by paying workers for tasks like picking bushels of fruit or bringing to birth animals [ 28 ] . Workers could , in principle , assemble as much or as little clothing as they wanted ; the reality was more grim , as Riis documented in How the Other Half Lives in 1901 [ 123 ] . He found that workers endured bleak living conditions and worked long hours attempting to scrape together a living . The match – girls’ strike Match – makers were some of the ﬁrst workers in mass man - ufacturing to successfully rally for political causes . At the end of the 19th century , manufacturers had begun to employ teenage women to assemble matchsticks in factories . These women rallied ﬁrst in the form of a march on parliament in 1871 to protest a proposed tax , and later ( more famously ) in what was later called “the match – girls strike of 1888” [ 134 ] . This later strike was sparked by a worker’s arbitrary docking of pay , but much deeper resentment had been simmering for years . Match – girls were already frustrated with the arbitrari - ness of management , poor working conditions , and having to work with hazardous materials such as white phosphorus , the improper handling of which caused serious , painful , disﬁgur - ing medical conditions in the bones and ultimately death . Regardless of what prompted it , the lasting impact of the match – girls strike of 1888 was profound . This was one of the earliest and most famous successful worker strikes , and perhaps the beginning of “militant trade unionism” [ 134 ] . As Webb and Webb described , “the match – girls’ victory turned a new leaf in Trade Union annals” : in the 30 years after the match – girls strike , the Trade Union Movement enrollment grew from 20 % of eligible workers to over 60 % [ 153 ] . Match – girls were some of the earliest to have formed a trade union , according to Booth’s account in 1903 . Satre noted that match – girls “ . . . pooled their resources to purchase their plumes and clothes . . . and expressed their solidarity through small [ and major ] strikes” [ 20 ] . But they were also , as Satre confesses , known for “brashness , irregularity , low morality , and little education” [ 134 ] . These were workers who treasured their independence , but also ﬁercely protected one another . “Brashness” may have detracted from their public image , but almost undoubtedly contributed to their sense of solidarity , making their propensity to act against such unfair treatment and poor conditions understandable and maybe predictable . Industrial workers Piecework might be most familiar in the context of indus - trial and factory work , which largely deﬁned manufacturing through the 20th century . Before the factory assembly line arose , however , railway companies adopted piecework regimes at the turn of the 20th century . What followed was a ﬂourish - ing of management practices , as railway companies worked to ﬁnd e ﬀ ective ways to motivate and evaluate this skilled work - force of engineers . Graves takes up a case study of the Santa Fe Railway , ﬁnding that they employed “e ﬃ ciency experts” to develop a “standard time” to determine pay for each task at the company informed by “thousands of individual operations” ; Graves goes on to list some of the roles required to facilitate piecework in the early 20th century — among them , “piece - work clerks , inspectors , and ‘experts’ ” [ 52 ] . This oversight , while controversial ( especially among workers [ 75 ] ) , paved the way for piecework to grow substantially . The 1930s represented a boom for piecework on an unprece - dented scale , especially among engineering and metalworking industries . Hart and Roberts characterize the 1930s — and more broadly the ﬁrst half of the 20th century — as the “hey - day” of piecework . They attribute this to the shortage of male workers , who would have gone through a conventional apprenticeship process a ﬀ ording them more comprehensive knowledge of the total scope of work . Piecework found its way into the war e ﬀ ort during World War II . With the vast majority of men drafted into service , fac - tories found themselves turning to a mostly female workforce that had neither the formal training nor years of experience that men would have had from apprenticeships . Rather than attempting to train this new labor force in every aspect of in - dustrial work , these women were trained for individual tasks and correspondingly assigned to that or a similar task . RESEARCH QUESTIONS Research in crowdsourcing has spent the better part of a decade exploring how to grow its limits . This has largely involved iteratively identifying barriers to high – quality , complex work , then overcoming them through novel designs of systems , work – ﬂows , and processes ( e . g . [ 14 , 121 , 84 ] ) . The question has become whether there are limits to on – demand work , and if so , what factors determine them . To this question , a number of contributions to the ﬁeld have pressed for answers . The exploration of on – demand labor’s potential and limits has principally navigated three dimensions : First , what are the complexity limits of on – demand work ? Second , how far can work be decomposed into smaller microtasks ? And third , what will work and the place of work look like for workers ? We’ll explore these aspects of on – demand labor by connecting to corresponding piecework literature and comparing its lessons to the current state of on – demand labor . Complexity Limits of On – Demand Work A key question to the future of on – demand work is what pre - cisely will become part of this economy . Paid crowdsourcing began with simple microtasks on platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk , but microtasks are only helpful if they build up to a larger whole . So , our ﬁrst question : how complex can the work outcomes from on – demand work be ? The perspective of on – demand work Kittur et al . were among the ﬁrst to ask whether crowdsourc - ing could be used for more than parallelizing tasks [ 84 ] . Their work showed that it could , with proof – of – concept crowdsourc - ing of encyclopedia articles and news summaries — tasks which could be veriﬁed or repeated with reasonable expecta - tions of similar results . Seeking to raise the complexity ceiling , researchers have since created yet more applications and tech - niques , including conversational assistants [ 90 ] , medical data interpreters [ 90 ] , and idea generation [ 163 , 164 ] . To achieve complex work , this body of research has often applied ideas from Computer Science to design new workﬂows . System designers leverage techniques such as MapReduce [ 84 ] and sequence alignment algorithms [ 87 ] , arranging humans as computational black boxes . This approach has proven a compelling one because it leverages the inherent advantages of scale , automation , and programmability that software a ﬀ ords . It is now clear that this computational workﬂow approach works with some classes of complex tasks , but the broader wicked problems largely remain unsolved . As a ﬁrst example , idea generation shows promise [ 163 , 164 ] , but there is as yet no general crowdsourced solution for the broader goal of in - vention and innovation [ 49 ] . Second , focused writing tasks are now feasible [ 80 , 14 , 110 , 147 , 5 ] , but there is no general solu - tion to create a cross – domain , high – quality crowd – powered author . Third , data analysis tasks such as clustering [ 34 ] , cat - egorization [ 10 ] , and outlining [ 99 ] are possible , but there is no general solution for sense – making . It is not yet clear what insights would be required to enable crowdsourced solutions for these broader wicked problems . Restricting attention to non – expert , microtask workers proved limiting . So , Retelny et al . introduced the idea of crowdsourc - ing with online paid experts from platforms such as Upwork . Expert crowdsourcing enables access to a much broader set of workers , for example designers and programmers . The same ideas can then be applied to expert “macro – tasks” [ 32 , 57 ] , enabling the crowdsourcing of goals such as user – centered design [ 121 ] , programming [ 91 , 45 , 30 ] , and mentorship [ 142 ] . However , there remains the open question of how complex the work outcomes from expert crowds can be . The perspective of piecework Piecework’s body of research most squarely addresses com - plexity in two of the cases we looked at earlier : Airy’s human computers and among industrial workers . Airy’s work on astronomical charts opened the door to greater task complexity by encoding the intelligence into the process rather than the people . Airy’s computers had relatively limited education in mathematics , but by combining simple mathemat - ical operations , Airy was able to create a complex composite outcome [ 55 ] . Likewise , in Ford’s factories , no individual could build the entire car , but the process could emergently produce one . But when piecework intially entered the American economy , it was not used for complex work . Without having designed complex work processes , piecework managers were restricted to available workers’ skills such as sewing : it was infeasible to provide new pieceworkers with the comprehensive education that apprenticeships imparted [ 63 ] . So , initially piecework arose for farm work , and as Raynbird and others discuss , the practice remained relatively obscure until it blossomed in the textile industry [ 120 ] . Complexity levels remained low at the turn of the 20th century as piecework saturated densely populated urban areas such as London and New York City [ 123 ] . Measurement also limited the complexity of piecework : only tasks that could be measured and priced could be completed via piecework . Earlier we discussed Graves’s and later Brown’s analysis of railway workers . They identiﬁed task homogeneity and measurement as key requirements for piece - work to be successful . However , complex , creative work — which is inherently heterogeneous and di ﬃ cult to routinize — was unsuitable [ 52 ] . Brown’s description of “e ﬃ ciency experts” would corroborate this : e ﬃ ciency experts can e ﬀ ectively gauge how long known tasks should take , but would ﬁnd themselves overwhelmed if they attempted to assess creative tasks like scientiﬁc re - search , which can take an arbitrary number of iterations before proceeding to a subsequent step . Moreover , piecework was limited to tasks that could be quickly and accurately evaluated . Hart argues that evaluation limited piecework’s complexity : at some point , evaluating multidimen - sional work for quality ( rather than for quantity ) becomes in - feasible . In his words , “if the quality of the output is more di ﬃ - cult to measure than the quantity [ . . . ] then a piecework system is likely to encourage an over – emphasis on quantity . . . and an under – emphasis on quality” [ 62 ] . Complex work , which is often subjective to evaluate , falls victim to this pitfall . Comparing the phenomena The research on piecework tells us that we should expect it to thrive in industries where the nature of the work is limited in complexity [ 22 ] , and become less common as work becomes more complex . Has computation shifted piecework’s previous limits of expertise , measurement , and evaluation ? In some ways , yes : technology increases non – experts’ lev - els of expertise by giving access to information that would otherwise be unavailable . For example , taxi drivers in Lon - don endure rigorous training to pass a test known as “The Knowledge” : a demonstration of the driver’s comprehensive familiarity with the city’s roads . This test is so challenging that veteran drivers develop signiﬁcantly larger the regions of the brain associated with spatial functions such as navigation [ 101 , 102 , 140 , 141 , 160 , 159 ] . In contrast , with on – demand plat - forms such as Uber , services such as Google Maps and Waze make it possible for people entirely unfamiliar with a city to op - erate professionally [ 139 , 65 ] . Other examples include search engines enabling information retrieval , and word processors enabling spelling and grammar checking . By augmenting the human intellect [ 43 ] , computing has shifted the complexity of work that is possible with minimal or no training . Algorithms have automated some tasks that previously fell to management . Computational systems now act as “piecework clerks” [ 52 ] to inspect and modify work [ 72 , 106 ] . However , these algorithms are less competent than humans at evalu - ating subjective work , as well as in their ability to exercise discretion , causing new problems for workers and managers . Implications for on – demand work Algorithms are undoubtedly capable of shepherding more complex work than the linear processes available to Airy and Ford . However , as work becomes more complex , it becomes increasingly di ﬃ cult to codify a process to achieve it [ 44 , 41 ] . So , while algorithms will increase the complexity ceiling beyond what was possible previously with piecework , there is a fundamental limit to how complex such work can become . Technology’s ability to support human cognition will enable stronger assumptions about workers’ abilities , increasing the complexity of on – demand work outcomes . Just as the shift to expert crowdsourcing increased complexity , so too will workers with better tools increase the set of tasks possible . Beyond this , further improvements would most likely come from replicating the success of narrowly – slicing education for expert work as Hart and Roberts and later Grier described in their piecework examples of human computation [ 55 ] and drastically reformulating macro – tasks given the constraints of piecework [ 63 ] . An argument might be made that MOOCs and other online education resources provide crowd workers with the resources that they need , but it remains to be seen whether that work will be appropriately valued , let alone prop - erly interpreted by task solicitors [ 7 ] . If we can overcome this obstacle , we might be able to empower more of these workers to do complex work such as engineering , rather than doom them to “uneducated” match – girl reputations [ 134 ] . However , many such experts are already available on platforms such as Upwork , so training may not directly increase the complex - ity accessible to on – demand work unless it makes common expertise more broadly available . Evaluation remains as di ﬃ cult for crowd work as it did for the e ﬃ ciency experts . Reputation systems for crowdsourcing platforms remain notoriously inﬂated [ 67 ] . Ultimately , many aspects of assessment remain subjective : whether a logo made for a client is fantastic or terrible may depend on taste . So , in the case of complexity , the history of piecework does not yet o ﬀ er compelling evidence that on – demand work will achieve far more complex outcomes than piecework did . Im - provements in workﬂows , measurement , and evaluation have already been made , and it’s not immediately clear that the re - maining challenges are readily solvable . However , on – demand work will be far more broadly distributed than piecework his - torically was — reaching many more tasks and areas of exper - tise by virtue of the internet . Decomposing Work At its core , on – demand work has been enabled by decom - position of large goals into many small tasks . As such , one of the central questions in the literature is how ﬁnely – sliced these microtasks can become , and which kinds of tasks are amenable to decomposition . In this section , we place these questions in the context of piecework’s Taylorist evolution . The perspective of on – demand work Many contributions to the design and engineering of crowd work consist of creative methods for decomposing goals . Even when tasks such as writing and editing cannot be reliably per - formed by individual workers , researchers have demonstrated that the decomposition of these tasks into workﬂows can suc - ceed [ 84 , 14 , 147 , 110 ] . These decompositions typically take the form of workﬂows , instantiated as algorithmically man - aged sequences of tasks that resolve interdependencies [ 17 ] . Workﬂows often utilize a ﬁrst sequence of tasks to identify an area of focus ( e . g . , a paragraph topic [ 84 ] , an error [ 14 ] , or a concept [ 163 , 164 ] ) and a second sequence of tasks to execute work on that area . This decomposition style has been success - fully applied across many areas , including food labeling [ 112 ] , brainstorming [ 137 , 163 ] , and accessibility [ 90 , 87 , 88 ] . If decomposition is key to success in on – demand work , the question arises : what can , and can’t , be decomposed ? More pointedly , how thinly should work be sliced and subdivided into smaller and smaller tasks ? The general trend has been that smaller is better , and the microtask paradigm has emerged as the overwhelming favorite [ 148 , 146 ] . This work illus - trates a broader sentiment in both the study and practice of crowd work , that microtasks should be designed resiliently against the variability of workers , preventing a single errant submission from impacting the agenda of the work as a whole fully exploiting the abstracted nature of each piece of work [ 71 , 89 , 149 ] . In this sense , ﬁner decompositions are seen as more robust — both to interruptions and errors [ 32 ] — even if they incur a ﬁxed time cost . At the extreme , recent work has demonstrated microtasks that take seconds [ 150 , 23 ] or even fractions of a second [ 85 ] . However , workers perform better when similar tasks are strung together [ 89 ] , or chained and arranged to maximize the attention threshold of workers [ 24 ] . Despite this , we as a community have leaned into the peril of low – context work , “embracing error” in crowdsourcing [ 85 ] . The general lesson has been that the more micro the task , and the more ﬁne the decomposition , the greater the risk that workers lose context necessary to perform the work well . For example , workers edit adjacent paragraphs in inconsistent ways [ 14 , 80 ] , interpret tasks in di ﬀ erent ways [ 76 ] , and exhibit lower motivation [ 81 ] without su ﬃ cient context . Research has sought to ameliorate this issue by designing workﬂows to help workers “act with global understanding when each contributor only has access to local views” [ 151 ] , typically by automati - cally or manually generating higher – level representations for the workers to reﬂect on [ 34 , 151 , 80 ] . As the additional context necessary to complete a task dimin - ishes , the invisible labor of ﬁnding tasks [ 104 ] has arisen as a major issue . Chilton et al . illustrate the task search challenges on AMT [ 33 ] . Workers seek out good requesters [ 104 ] and then “streak” to perform many tasks of that same type [ 33 ] . Researchers have reacted by designing task recommendation systems ( e . g . [ 36 ] ) and minimizing the amount of time that people need to spend doing anything other than the work for which they are paid [ 25 ] . The perspective of piecework Four major stages characterize decomposition in the history of piecework . The ﬁrst stage was decomposition of an expert task such that it could be done by non – experts . This was arguably the main innovation of Airy’s human computers . Rather than hire expert computers , Airy identiﬁed ways to break down astrological calculations into steps that could be completed with only a basic knowledge of mathematics . Likewise , Brown argued that piecework arose in industries with homogeneous tasks and low ﬁxed costs of machinery and training [ 22 ] . After decomposing tasks for amateurs , the second major stage was to apply the same methods to domain experts . Unlike Airy’s human computers , railway engineers had signiﬁcant expertise [ 22 ] . As Brown noted , however , it was still possible to discretize and measure their work . Thus , experts such as railway engineers became pieceworkers as well . Third , decomposition led to quantiﬁcation and scientiﬁc man - agement . What can be modularized can be measured , and what can be measured can be optimized . With Taylor’s formaliza - tion of scientiﬁc management in Taylorism ( and Henry Ford’s eponymously named Fordism ) , piecework in the early and mid – 20th century surged , especially in industrial work . Scientiﬁc management promised that the careful measurement of work - ers would yield higher e ﬃ ciency and output [ 145 , 97 ] . While Brown points out that piecework dramatically advanced the instrumented measurement of workers , in Taylor’s time highly instrumented , automatic measurement of workers was all but impossible [ 22 ] . Instead , managers conducted “stop watch time studies” [ 109 ] , using completion times to inform per – task compensation , similarly to the e ﬃ ciency experts hired in the Santa Fe Railway , but substantially more precise . The distilla - tion of work into smaller units ultimately bottomed out with tasks as small as could be usefully measured [ 52 ] . The fourth and ﬁnal stage was narrow expertise training . Even after work is decomposed and measured , there were not enough qualiﬁed workers available to do it . So , as World War II raged and there was a dearth of skilled workers , man - agers trained women just enough to be able to complete their tasks [ 63 ] . Over time , these women could gain proﬁciency and gain broader expertise . Comparing the phenomena Where measurement and instrumentation were limiting fac - tors for historical piecework , computation has changed the situation so that a dream of scientiﬁc management and Tay - lorism — to measure every motion at every point throughout the workday and beyond — is not only doable , but trivial [ 152 ] . Where Graves directly implicates measurement as preventing scientiﬁc management from being fully utilized [ 52 ] , modern crowd work is measuring and modeling every click , scroll , and keyboard event [ 132 , 131 ] . The result is that on – demand work can articulate and track far more carefully than piecework historically could . A second shift is the relative ease with which the metaphorical “assembly line” can be experimented with and measured . His - torical manufacturing equipment could not quickly be assem - bled , edited , and redeployed [ 69 ] . In contrast , today system – designers can share , modify , and instantiate environments like sites of labor in a few lines of code [ 95 , 98 ] . This opportunity has spurred an entire body of work investigating the e ﬀ ects of ordering , pacing , interruptions , and other factors accelerating scientiﬁc management that would have been all but impossible as few as 20 years ago [ 37 , 24 , 32 , 31 , 85 ] . Implications for on – demand work If decomposition in piecework progressed in four stages , we have seen three of them in on – demand work so far . First , as with piecework , on – demand work began by decomposing tasks so that anyone could complete them , as with data la - beling on Amazon Mechanical Turk . Second , we began to modularize and measure external expertise ( e . g . , software engi - neering , design ) so that it could be brought into crowdsourcing systems [ 121 , 30 ] . Third , we used measurement to mathemati - cally optimize workers’ behaviors so that we could make the systems more e ﬃ cient [ 156 ] . The fourth stage , then , appears likely to occur : narrow train - ing of workers for these decomposed expert tasks . There is demand for skilled workers in many crowdsourcing tasks , and systems to help train workers [ 142 ] . We might expect to see the rise of systems that sca ﬀ old workers into extremely narrow areas of expertise , for instance using online courses as proof of expertise in a speciﬁc domain necessary for a microtask . Finally , improved measurement and lowered costs of produc - tion have made it feasible to apply piecework methods to many domains where it may not have historically been possible . The limit is no longer measurement precision , but human cogni - tion . Task switching and other cognitive costs make it di ﬃ cult to work on tasks so far decontextualized from their original intention [ 89 ] . There will of course be tasks that can be de - composed without much context , and these will form the most ﬁne – grained of microtasks . However , other tasks cannot be freed from context — for example , logo design requires a deep understanding of the client and their goals . Workers’ Relationships to their Work HCI and CSCW have historically framed themselves around supporting work . While all artifacts have politics , the recent shift into computational labor systems has directly impacted the lives and livelihoods of workers in new ways . So , it’s im - perative to ask : What will the future look like for the workers who use these systems ? The perspective of on – demand work Who are the crowd workers and what draws them to crowd work ? Early literature emphasized motivations like fun and spare change , but this narrative soon shifted to emphasize that many workers use platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk as a primary source of income [ 77 , 70 , 11 ] . Despite this , Mechanical Turk is a disappointingly low – wage worksite for most people in the United States [ 70 , 104 , 56 ] . Thus , those who choose to opt out of the traditional labor force and spend signiﬁcant time on Mechanical Turk are especially motivated by the opportunity for autonomy and transience between tasks [ 77 ] . While some describe Turkers as powerless victims or even unaware of what’s going on , this framing is increasingly being rejected by workers and designers as “cast [ ing ] Turkers as dopes in the system . ” [ 73 ] . Workers’ relationships with requesters are fraught . The unbri - dled power that requesters have over workers , and the resultant frustration that this generates , has motivated research into the tense relationships between workers and requesters [ 53 , 133 ] . Workers are often blamed for any low – quality work , regardless of whether they are responsible [ 104 , 106 ] . Some research is extremely open about this position , blaming unpredictable work on “malicious” workers [ 50 ] or those with “a lack of expertise , dedication [ or ] interest” [ 136 ] . Workers resent this position , and for good reason . Irani and Silberman highlighted the information asymmetry between workers and requesters on AMT , which led to the creation of Turkopticon , a site which allows Turkers to rate and review requesters [ 72 ] . Dynamo then took this critique on information asymmetry and power imbalances further , designing a platform to facilitate collective action among Turkers to changes to their circumstances [ 133 ] . Researchers have also begun to appreciate the sociality of crowd workers . Because the platforms do not typically in - clude social spaces , workers instead congregate o ﬀ – platform in forums and mailing lists . There , Turkers exchange advice on high – paying work , talk about their earnings , build social connections , and discuss requesters [ 104 ] . Many crowd work - ers know each other through o ﬄ ine and online connections , coordinating behind – the – scenes despite the platforms encour - aging independent work [ 54 , 162 ] . However , the frustration and mistrust that workers experience with requesters does occasionally boil over on the forums . The perspective of piecework Early observers believed that workers were strongly motivated by the autonomy of working in the piecework model . Clark observed textile mill pieceworkers and reported , “When he works by the day the Italian operative wishes to leave before the whistle blows , but if he works by the piece he will work as many hours as it is possible for him to stand” [ 35 ] . However , the emergent trend contrasted with this early rhetoric , as when workers began instituting “The Fix” , deliberately slow work to game e ﬃ ciency experts [ 130 ] . Piece workers , Roy found , would form acrimonious relationships with their managers . Soon , workers began resisting piecework regimes . The match – girls engaged in their famous strike of 1888 , particularly push - ing to abolish the ﬁnes that were taken out of their wages . Soon others followed suit , including women in the garment industry in Philadelphia who established collective bargaining rights [ 42 ] and national coal miners who e ﬀ ected an individual minimum wage in 1912 [ 125 ] . Many worker organizations began weighing in against piece - work and the myriad oversights it made in valuing workers’ time [ 75 , 122 ] . As mounting attention increasingly revealed problems in piecework’s treatment of workers , workers them - selves began to speak out about their frustration with this new regime . Organizations representing railway workers , mechani - cal engineers , and others began to mount advocacy in defense of workers [ 75 , 122 ] . Pieceworkers’ relationships with their employers eventually developed a pattern of using laborer ad - vocacy groups [ 96 , 8 , 105 , 74 ] . Following the template of the match – girls , collective action grew to become a central component of negotiating with managers [ 60 , 115 ] . Relative to the modern on – demand workers , there is a notice - able dearth of information on the interpersonal relationships among pieceworkers beyond the match – girls at the end of the 19th century . Nevertheless , we can o ﬀ er some observations : primary sources indicate that labor organizations wished for workers to identify as a collective group , “not only as rail - road employees but also as members of the larger life of the community” [ 75 ] . Doing this , Ostrom and others later argued , would facilitate collective action and perhaps collective gov - ernance [ 116 , 60 , 115 ] . Riis also contributed to this sense of shared struggle and endurance by documenting pieceworkers in their home – workplaces , literally bringing to light the grim circumstances in which pieceworkers lived and worked [ 123 ] . Comparing the phenomena There was generally less written about work quality concerns for historical pieceworkers than there is in modern on – demand work . Why the di ﬀ erence ? One possibility is that , by writing web scripts and applying them to many tasks , a small number of spammers have an outsized inﬂuence on the perception of bad actors . Another possibility is that historical pieceworkers faced much more risk in shirking : it was much harder for pieceworkers to move to a new location and ﬁnd a new job . Today , Mechanical Turk workers can work for a dozen or more di ﬀ erent groups in the span of a day . A third possibility : online anonymity breeds distrust [ 47 ] , and where pieceworkers could be directly observed by foremen and known to them , online workers are known by little more than an inscrutible alphanumeric string , like A2XJMS2J2FMVXK . The relationship between workers and employers has also shifted : while historically the management of workers had to be done through a foreman , foremen of the 20th century have largely been replaced by algorithms of the 21st century [ 94 ] . Consequently , the agents managing work are now cold , logi - cal , and unforgiving . While a person might recognize that the “attention check” questions proposed by Le et al . and others ensure that malicious and inattentive workers are stopped [ 93 , 113 ] , some implementations of these approaches only seem to antagonize workers [ 106 ] . As Anderson and Schmittlein wrote in 1984 , “when performance is di ﬃ cult to evaluate , im - perfect input measures and a manager’s subjective judgment are preferable to defective ( simple , observable ) output mea - sures” [ 9 ] . This frustration has only grown as requesters have had to rely on automatic management mechanisms . Only a few use the equivalent of human foremen [ 57 , 86 ] . Relative to the history of collective action for piecework - ers , on – demand workers have struggled to make their voices heard [ 133 , 73 , 72 ] . With workers constantly drifting through these platforms , and with many part – time members , it’s ex - tremely di ﬃ cult to corral the group to make a collective de - cision [ 133 ] . Even when they can , enforcement remains a challenge : while pieceworkers could physically block access to a site of production and convince other workers to join them , online labor markets provide no facilities for workers to change the experience of other workers . This is a key limita - tion — without it , workers cannot enforce a strike . Implications for on – demand work The decentralization and anonymization of on – demand work , especially online crowd work , will continue to make many of its social relationships a struggle . While some workers get to know each other well on forums [ 104 , 54 ] , many never engage in these social spaces . Without intervention , worker relationships and collectivism are likely to be inhibited by this decentralized design . One option is to build worker central - izing points into the platform , for example asking workers to vote on each others’ reputation or allowing groups of workers to collectively reject a task from the platform [ 157 ] . The history of piecework further suggests that relationships be - tween workers and employers might be improved if employers engaged in more human management styles . Instead of dele - gating as many management tasks as possible to an algorithm , it might be possible to build dashboards and other information tools that empower modern crowd work foremen [ 86 ] . If the literature on piecework is to be believed , more considerate human management may resolve many of the tensions . Reciprocally , crowd work may be able to inform piecework research in this domain . There exists far less literature about piece workers’ relationships than there does today about on – demand workers’ relationships . Two reasons stand out : ﬁrst , modern platforms are visible to researchers in ways that the sites of piece work labor were not . Second , Anthropology stands on a ﬁrmer theoretical and methodological basis than it did at the turn of the 20th century . Malinowski , Boas , Mead , and other luminaries throughout the ﬁrst half of the 20th cen - tury e ﬀ ectively deﬁned Cultural Anthropology as we know it today ; participant – observation , the etic and the emic under - standing of culture , and reﬂexivity didn’t take even a resem - blance of their contemporary forms until these works [ 103 , 19 , 108 ] . On – demand labor today may give us an opportunity to revisit open questions in piecework with a more reﬁned lens . DISCUSSION In our analysis of on – demand work via the piecework lens , three issues arise : 1 ) the hazards of predicting the future , 2 ) utopian and dystopian visions , and 3 ) a research agenda . We will attempt to grapple with these questions here explicitly . The Hazards of Predicting the Future The past isn’t a perfect predictor for the future ; as Scholz cautions , “it would be wrong to conclude that in the realm of digital labor there is nothing new under the sun” [ 135 ] . Our analysis is limited by the di ﬀ erences , foreseen and unforeseen , between historical piecework and modern on – demand work . For example , unlike physical work environments , people can ( and often do ) make one – o ﬀ contributions to online communi - ties [ 107 ] . While we have attempted to identify some likely parallels and divergences between piecework and on – demand work , we can’t claim to have accounted for everything . But this does not mean that attempting to draw meaningfully from historical scholarship would be folly ; enough of piece - work can and does inform on – demand work that HCI and CSCW researchers might seek out historical framings for other phenomena of study as well . While we can only speculate one of ( perhaps many ) possible futures , history does allow us to articulate and bound which futures appear more likely . Rosenberg and others have contributed substantially to the practice in part by clearly limiting the extent of their claims — only o ﬀ ering , for instance , “to narrow our estimates and thus to concentrate resources in directions that are more likely to have useful payo ﬀ s” [ 127 ] . Using this approach , our method of relating history to modern socio – technical systems may be a useful tool for researchers attempting to make sense of ostensibly new phenomena . In other words , o ﬀ ering “that past history is an indispensable source of information to anyone interested in characterizing technologies” [ 126 ] . Utopian and Dystopian Visions An easy narrative is to characterize the future of on – demand labor at one of two extremes . On one hand , crowd work researchers imagine the application of crowdsourcing as a potentially bright future that enables the achievement of near – impossible goals and career opportunities [ 143 , 83 , 18 , 142 ] . On the other hand , researchers warn that on – demand labor will create exploitative sites of dispossession [ 135 ] , discrimi - nation [ 40 ] , and invisible , deeply frustrated workers [ 72 , 16 ] . A uniquely challenging facet of this domain is the public attention that it has garnered . Activists have described specula - tive work as having “essentially been turned into modern – day slaves” [ 13 ] . Meanwhile , advocates have described it as “a project of sharing aimed at providing ordinary people with more economic opportunities and improving their lives” [ 39 ] . Piecework teaches us that , without appropriate norms and poli - cies , the dystopian outcome has happened and may happen again . The piecework nature of on – demand work induces us “to neglect tasks that are less easy to measure” [ 6 ] , rewarding us not for creativity but predictability ; payment for this work may ultimately be determined by algorithms that fundamen - tally don’t understand people ; the layers between us and our managers might eventually become “defective ( simple , observ - able ) ” algorithms [ 9 ] , just like those which already frustrate on – demand workers [ 94 , 133 , 72 ] . However , social policy has advanced since the early 1900s , so as on – demand work grows , a repeat of How the Other Half Lives [ 123 ] seems less likely . On the other hand , while piecework’s nascent years were grim , what followed was a century of some of the most potent labor advocacy organizations in modern history [ 63 , 105 ] . Even today , the geist of the labor union revolution inspires collective action and worker empowerment around the world . Recently , in India , workers across the nation engaged in the largest labor strike in human history [ 4 ] . If labor advocacy groups can ﬁnd ways to e ﬀ ect change in on – demand work as some have called for [ 78 ] , then the future of on – demand labor may follow the same trajectory of worker empowerment that piecework saw . The history of piecework suggests that the utopian and dystopian outcomes will both occur , in di ﬀ erent parts of the world and to di ﬀ erent groups of people . When piecework largely disappeared in the United States , outsourcing appeared — creating major labor issues around the world . It’ss entirely possible that we will create a new brand of ﬂexible online career in developed countries , while simultaneously fueling an unskilled decentralized labor force in developing nations . As designers and researchers , this prompts the question : which outcome are we attempting to promote or avoid for whom ? A Research Agenda Piecework also helps bring into focus the areas of research that might bear the most fruit . We return to the three questions that motivated this paper : 1 ) What are the complexity limits of on – demand work ? 2 ) How far can work be decomposed into smaller microtasks ? 3 ) What will work and the place of work look like for workers ? While we have arguably outpaced piecework with regard to the limits on the complexity of work , the most complex and open – ended wicked problems [ 124 ] remain the domain of older human collectives such as governments and organiza - tions . In addition , we can learn from the piecework literature as it relates to the stymieing e ﬀ ect that mismanagement has on workers ; research into complexity limits should focus on ﬁnd - ing new ways to manage workers , in particular using humans ( perhaps other crowd workers ) to act as modern “foremen” . Piecework researchers looking into decomposition pointed out long ago that piecework is saddled by a lower limit on decom - position : as Bewley mentions , “piecework does not compen - sate workers for time spent switching tasks” [ 15 ] . We’ve since studied this phenomenon in crowd work both observationally [ 33 ] and experimentally [ 89 ] . We should consider whether this remains a worthwhile area to explore ; unless the work we put forth directly a ﬀ ects the costs of task – switching — for instance , the cost of suboptimal task search , or the cognitive burden of changing tasks — we may only make incremental advances in micro – task decomposition . When the cognitive cost of understanding a task and its inputs outstrips the e ﬀ ort required to complete it , decomposition seems a poor choice . Finally , we turn to the relationships of crowd workers . The crowd work literature here can convincingly speak back to the piecework scholarship perhaps more than in the other sections . The tools that are available to us today — not just technical , but methodological — make it possible to discover , study , and partner with crowd workers in ways that were unimaginable to piecework researchers . Bigham engages in crowd work [ 16 ] not just because it’s possible , but because our community appreciates the importance of approaches such as participant – observation and ethnography as a whole [ 114 ] . We should also take a moment to explore the opportunity to dis - cuss the ethics of on – demand labor , as Williamson does [ 158 ] . The literature on the history of piecework does not frame the question as whether piecework is inherently ethical or unethi - cal , instead asking what conditions render it exploitative . The literature we have brought to bear suggests that exploitation occurs when conditions harm workers directly or indirectly , such as in sweatshops and agricultural work with pesticides , or where employers systematically underpay or overwork la - borers by contemporary standards . The question then is whether given socio – technical infrastruc - tures systematically harm , underpay , or overwork workers . For example , Amazon Mechanical Turk does not directly re - quire any rate of payment for work , but its design encourages employers to engage in exploitative behavior : piece – rate pay , for example , does not value workers’ task search time ; addi - tionally , task design interfaces undeniably frame workers as unreliable by recommending replication with multiple workers rather than trusting and paying individual workers more . Piecework also has lessons for a number of other research questions in crowdsourcing . For example , future work could more deeply explore the evolution of scientiﬁc management as it relates to crowdsourcing optimization ; quality control approaches between the two eras ; and further analysis of in - centive structures . CONCLUSION On – demand work is not new , but a contemporary instantia - tion of piecework . In this paper , we reconsider three major research questions in on – demand work using piecework as a lens : 1 ) What are the complexity limits of on – demand work ? 2 ) How far can work be decomposed into smaller microtasks ? 3 ) What will work and the place of work look like for workers ? We draw on piecework scholarship to inform analyses of what has changed , what hasn’t , and may change soon . Reciprocally , we believe that modern on – demand work can teach us about the broader phenomenon of piecework as well . If history really does repeat itself , the best we can do is be prepared . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by the Stanford Cyber Initiative and National Science Foundation award IIS - 1351131 . REFERENCES 1 . 2015 . House Cleaning , Handyman , Lawn Care Services in Austin , Denver , Kansas City , Minneapolis and San Francisco — - Zaarly . ( 9 2015 ) . https : / / www . zaarly . com / 2 . 2015 . TaskRabbit connects you to safe and reliable help in your neighborhood . ( 9 2015 ) . https : / / www . taskrabbit . com / 3 . 2015 . Uber . ( 9 2015 ) . https : / / www . uber . com / 4 . 2016 . 150 Million Indian Workers Take Part In Largest Strike in Centuries . ( 9 2016 ) . http : / / therealnews . com / t2 / index . php ? option = com _ content & task = view & id = 31 & Itemid = 74 & jumival = 17170 5 . Elena Agapie , Jaime Teevan , and Andrés Monroy - Hernández . 2015 . Crowdsourcing in the ﬁeld : A case study using local crowds for event reporting . In Third AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing . 6 . Jonas Agell . 2004 . Why are Small Firms Di ﬀ erent ? Managers’ Views . Scandinavian Journal of Economics 106 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 437 – 452 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 0347 - 0520 . 2004 . 00371 . x 7 . J Ignacio Aguaded - Gómez . 2013 . The MOOC Revolution : A new form of education from the technological paradigm . Comunicar 41 , 21 ( 2013 ) , 7 – 8 . 8 . John S Ahlquist and Margaret Levi . 2013 . In the interest of others : Organizations and social activism . Princeton University Press . 9 . Erin Anderson and David C . Schmittlein . 1984 . Integration of the Sales Force : An Empirical Examination . The RAND Journal of Economics 15 , 3 ( 1984 ) , 385 – 395 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2555446 10 . Paul André , Aniket Kittur , and Steven P . Dow . 2014 . Crowd Synthesis : Extracting Categories and Clusters from Complex Data . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , 989 – 998 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531653 11 . Judd Antin and Aaron Shaw . 2012 . Social Desirability Bias and Self - reports of Motivation : A Study of Amazon Mechanical Turk in the US and India . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , 2925 – 2934 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208699 12 . Peter Baker . 1993 . Production restructuring in the textiles and clothing industries . New Technology , Work and Employment 8 , 1 ( 1993 ) , 43 – 55 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 005X . 1993 . tb00033 . x 13 . Je ﬀ Bercovici . 2011 . AOL – Hu ﬀ po Suit Seeks $ 105M : ‘This Is About Justice’ . ( 4 2011 ) . http : / / www . forbes . com / sites / jeffbercovici / 2011 / 04 / 12 / aol - huffpo - suit - seeks - 105m - this - is - about - justice 14 . Michael S . Bernstein , Greg Little , Robert C . Miller , Björn Hartmann , Mark S . Ackerman , David R . Karger , David Crowell , and Katrina Panovich . 2010 . Soylent : A Word Processor with a Crowd Inside . In Proceedings of the 23Nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’10 ) . ACM , 313 – 322 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1866029 . 1866078 15 . Truman F Bewley . 1999 . Why wages don’t fall during a recession . Harvard University Press . 16 . Je ﬀ rey Bigham . 2014 . My MTurk ( half ) Workday . ( 7 2014 ) . http : / / www . cs . cmu . edu / ~ jbigham / posts / 2014 / half - workday - as - turker . html 17 . Je ﬀ rey P . Bigham , Michael S . Bernstein , and Eytan Adar . 2015 . Human - Computer Interaction and Collective Intelligence . In Handbook of Collective Intelligence . MIT Press , 57 – 84 . http : / / repository . cmu . edu / cgi / viewcontent . cgi ? article = 1264 18 . Je ﬀ rey P . Bigham , Chandrika Jayant , Hanjie Ji , Greg Little , Andrew Miller , Robert C . Miller , Robin Miller , Aubrey Tatarowicz , Brandyn White , Samual White , and Tom Yeh . 2010 . VizWiz : Nearly Real - time Answers to Visual Questions . In Proceedings of the 23Nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’10 ) . ACM , 333 – 342 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1866029 . 1866080 19 . Franz Boas . 1940 . Race , language , and culture . University of Chicago Press . 20 . Charles Booth . 1903 . Life and Labour of the People in London . Vol . 8 . Macmillan and Company . 21 . Robin Brewer , Meredith Ringel Morris , and Anne Marie Piper . 2016 . " Why Would Anybody Do This ? " : Understanding Older Adults’ Motivations and Challenges in Crowd Work . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 2246 – 2257 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858198 22 . Charles Brown . 1990 . Firms’ Choice of Method of Pay . Industrial & Labor Relations Review 43 , 3 ( 1990 ) , 165S – 182S . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 001979399004300311 23 . Carrie J . Cai , Philip J . Guo , James R . Glass , and Robert C . Miller . 2015 . Wait - Learning : Leveraging Wait Time for Second Language Education . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , 3701 – 3710 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702267 24 . Carrie J . Cai , Shamsi T . Iqbal , and Jaime Teevan . 2016 . Chain Reactions : The Impact of Order on Microtask Chains . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 3143 – 3154 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858237 25 . Chris Callison - Burch . 2014 . Crowd - workers : Aggregating information across turkers to help them ﬁnd higher paying work . In Second AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing . 26 . Norma W Carlson . 1982 . Time rates tighten their grip on manufacturing industries . Monthly Lab . Rev . 105 ( 1982 ) , 15 . 27 . L . Elisa Celis , Sai Praneeth Reddy , Ishaan Preet Singh , and Shailesh Vaya . 2016 . Assignment Techniques for Crowdsourcing Sensitive Tasks . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer – Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 836 – 847 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2835202 28 . Edwin Chadwick . 1865 . Openi , at the Meeting of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science , held at York , in September , 1864 . Journal of the Statistical Society of London 28 , 1 ( 1865 ) , 1 – 33 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2338394 29 . Joseph Chee Chang , Aniket Kittur , and Nathan Hahn . 2016 . Alloy : Clustering with Crowds and Computation . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 3180 – 3191 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858411 30 . Yan Chen , Steve Oney , and Walter S . Lasecki . 2016 . Towards Providing On - Demand Expert Support for Software Developers . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 3192 – 3203 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858512 31 . Justin Cheng , Jaime Teevan , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2015a . Measuring Crowdsourcing E ﬀ ort with Error – Time Curves . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , 1365 – 1374 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702145 32 . Justin Cheng , Jaime Teevan , Shamsi T . Iqbal , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2015b . Break It Down : A Comparison of Macro - and Microtasks . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , 4061 – 4064 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702146 33 . Lydia B . Chilton , John J . Horton , Robert C . Miller , and Shiri Azenkot . 2010 . Task Search in a Human Computation Market . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation ( HCOMP ’10 ) . ACM , 1 – 9 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1837885 . 1837889 34 . Lydia B . Chilton , Greg Little , Darren Edge , Daniel S . Weld , and James A . Landay . 2013 . Cascade : Crowdsourcing Taxonomy Creation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , 1999 – 2008 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466265 35 . William Alexander Graham Clark . 1908 . Cotton Textile Trade in Turkish Empire , Greece , and Italy . Vol . 10 . US Government Printing O ﬃ ce . 36 . Dan Cosley , Dan Frankowski , Loren Terveen , and John Riedl . 2007 . SuggestBot : Using Intelligent Task Routing to Help People Find Work in Wikipedia . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’07 ) . ACM , 32 – 41 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1216295 . 1216309 37 . Peng Dai , Je ﬀ rey M . Rzeszotarski , Praveen Paritosh , and Ed H . Chi . 2015 . And Now for Something Completely Di ﬀ erent : Improving Crowdsourcing Workﬂows with Micro - Diversions . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , 628 – 638 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675260 38 . Andrea Rees Davies and Brenda D Frink . 2014 . The origins of the ideal worker : The separation of work and home in the United States from the market revolution to 1950 . Work and Occupations 41 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 18 – 39 . 39 . Jan Drahokoupil and Brian Fabo . 2016 . The Sharing Economy That Is Not : Shaping Employment In Platform Capitalism . ( 7 2016 ) . https : / / www . socialeurope . eu / 2016 / 07 / sharing - economy - not - shaping - employment - platform - capitalism / 40 . Benjamin G Edelman , Michael Luca , and Dan Svirsky . 2015 . Racial Discrimination in the Sharing Economy : Evidence from a Field Experiment . Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper 16 - 069 ( 2015 ) . 41 . Amy C . Edmondson . 2012 . Teaming : How organizations learn , innovate , and compete in the knowledge economy . John Wiley & Sons , San Francisco , California . 42 . Boris Emmet . 1918 . Trade Agreements In The Women’s Clothing Industries Of Philadelphia . Monthly Review of the U . S . Bureau of Labor Statistics 6 , 1 ( 1918 ) , 27 – 39 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 41829256 43 . Douglas C Engelbart . 2001 . Augmenting human intellect : a conceptual framework ( 1962 ) . PACKER , Randall and JORDAN , Ken . Multimedia . From Wagner to Virtual Reality . New York : WW Norton & Company ( 2001 ) , 64 – 90 . 44 . Samer Faraj and Yan Xiao . 2006 . Coordination in Fast - Response Organizations . Management Science 52 , 8 ( 2006 ) , 1155 – 1169 . http : / / mansci . journal . informs . org / content / 52 / 8 / 1155 . short 45 . Ethan Fast and Michael S . Bernstein . 2016 . Meta : Enabling Programming Languages to Learn from the Crowd . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’16 ) . ACM , 259 – 270 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2984511 . 2984532 46 . David N Figlio and Lawrence W Kenny . 2007 . Individual teacher incentives and student performance . Journal of Public Economics 91 , 5 ( 2007 ) , 901 – 914 . 47 . Batya Friedman , Peter H . Khan , Jr . , and Daniel C . Howe . 2000 . Trust Online . Commun . ACM 43 , 12 ( 12 2000 ) , 34 – 40 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 355112 . 355120 48 . Gerald Friedman . 2014 . Workers without employers : shadow corporations and the rise of the gig economy . Review of Keynesian Economics 2 ( 2014 ) , 171 – 188 . 49 . Mark Fuge , Kevin Tee , Alice Agogino , and Nathan Maton . 2014 . Analysis of collaborative design networks : A case study of openideo . Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering 14 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 021009 . 50 . Ujwal Gadiraju , Ricardo Kawase , Stefan Dietze , and Gianluca Demartini . 2015 . Understanding Malicious Behavior in Crowdsourcing Platforms : The Case of Online Surveys . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , 1631 – 1640 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702443 51 . David Geiger , Stefan Seedorf , Thimo Schulze , Robert C Nickerson , and Martin Schader . 2011 . Managing the Crowd : Towards a Taxonomy of Crowdsourcing Processes . . In AMCIS . 52 . Carl Graves . 1981 . Applying Scientiﬁc Management Principles to Railroad Repair Shops — the Santa Fe Experience , 1904 - 18 . Business and Economic History 10 ( 1981 ) , 124 – 136 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 23702539 53 . Mary Gray . 2015 . Fixing the Chaotic Crowdworker Economy . ( 8 2015 ) . http : / / www . bloombergview . com / articles / 2015 - 08 - 12 / fixing - the - chaotic - crowdworker - economy 54 . Mary L . Gray , Siddharth Suri , Syed Shoaib Ali , and Deepti Kulkarni . 2016 . The Crowd is a Collaborative Network . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer – Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 134 – 147 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819942 55 . David Alan Grier . 2013 . When computers were human . Princeton University Press . 56 . Neha Gupta , David Martin , Benjamin V . Hanrahan , and Jacki O’Neill . 2014 . Turk - Life in India . In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’14 ) . ACM , 1 – 11 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2660398 . 2660403 57 . Daniel Haas , Jason Ansel , Lydia Gu , and Adam Marcus . 2015 . Argonaut : macrotask crowdsourcing for complex data processing . Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 8 , 12 ( 2015 ) , 1642 – 1653 . 58 . J . Hagan and C . Fisher . 1973 . Piece Work and Some of Its Consequences in the Printing and Coal Mining Industries in Australia , 1850 - 1930 . Labour History 25 ( 1973 ) , 19 – 39 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 27508091 59 . Nathan Hahn , Joseph Chang , Ji Eun Kim , and Aniket Kittur . 2016 . The Knowledge Accelerator : Big Picture Thinking in Small Pieces . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 2258 – 2270 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858364 60 . Russell Hardin . 1982 . Collective action . Resources for the Future . 61 . Robert A Hart . 2005 . Piecework Versus Timework in British Wartime Engineering . ( 2005 ) . 62 . Robert A Hart and others . 2016 . the rise and fall of piecework . IZA World of Labor ( 2016 ) . 63 . Robert A Hart and J Elizabeth Roberts . 2013 . The rise and fall of piecework – timework wage di ﬀ erentials : market volatility , labor heterogeneity , and output pricing . ( 2013 ) . 64 . John S . Heywood , W . S . Siebert , and Xiangdong Wei . 1997 . Payment by Results Systems : British Evidence . British Journal of Industrial Relations 35 , 1 ( 1997 ) , 1 – 22 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8543 . 00038 65 . Sam Hind and Alex Gekker . 2014 . ’Outsmarting Tra ﬃ c , Together’ : Driving as Social Navigation . Exchanges : the Warwick Research Journal 1 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 165 – 180 . 66 . Maureen Honey . 1985 . Creating Rosie the Riveter : class , gender , and propaganda during World War II . Univ of Massachusetts Press . 67 . John J . Horton , Leonard N . Stern , and Joseph M . Golden . 2015 . Reputation Inﬂation : Evidence from an Online Labor Market . ( 2015 ) . 68 . Je ﬀ Howe . 2008 . Crowdsourcing : How the power of the crowd is driving the future of business . Random House . 69 . Te C Hu . 1961 . Parallel Sequencing and Assembly Line Problems . Operations Research 9 , 6 ( 1961 ) , 841 – 848 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / opre . 9 . 6 . 841 70 . Panagiotis G Ipeirotis . 2010 . Demographics of mechanical turk . ( 2010 ) . 71 . Shamsi T . Iqbal and Brian P . Bailey . 2008 . E ﬀ ects of Intelligent Notiﬁcation Management on Users and Their Tasks . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , 93 – 102 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357070 72 . Lilly C . Irani and M . Six Silberman . 2013 . Turkopticon : Interrupting Worker Invisibility in Amazon Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , 611 – 620 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470742 73 . Lilly C . Irani and M . Six Silberman . 2016 . Stories We Tell About Labor : Turkopticon and the Trouble with " Design " . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 4573 – 4586 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858592 74 . Sanford M Jacoby . 1983 . Union – management cooperation in the United States : Lessons from the 1920s . Industrial & Labor Relations Review 37 , 1 ( 1983 ) , 18 – 33 . 75 . B . M . Jewell . 1921 . The problem of piece work . Number nos . 1 - 16 in The Problem of Piece Work . Bronson Canode Print . Co . https : / / books . google . com / books ? id = NN5NAQAAIAAJ 76 . Sanjay Kairam and Je ﬀ rey Heer . 2016 . Parting Crowds : Characterizing Divergent Interpretations in Crowdsourced Annotation Tasks . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 1637 – 1648 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820016 77 . Nicolas Kaufmann , Thimo Schulze , and Daniel Veit . 2011 . More than fun and money . Worker Motivation in Crowdsourcing – A Study on Mechanical Turk . . In AMCIS , Vol . 11 . 1 – 11 . 78 . Sarah Kessler . 2015 . What Does A Union Look Like In The Gig Economy ? ( 2 2015 ) . http : / / www . fastcompany . com / 3042081 / what - does - a - union - look - like - in - the - gig - economy 79 . Joy Kim and Andrés Monroy - Hernández . 2016 . Storia : Summarizing Social Media Content Based on Narrative Theory Using Crowdsourcing . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer – Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 1018 – 1027 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820072 80 . Joy Kim , Sarah Sterman , Allegra Argent Beal Cohen , and Michael S Bernstein . 2017 . Mechanical Novel : Crowdsourcing Complex Work through Revision . In Proceedings of the 20th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work \ & Social Computing . 81 . Peter Kinnaird , Laura Dabbish , and Sara Kiesler . 2012 . Workﬂow Transparency in a Microtask Marketplace . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’12 ) . ACM , 281 – 284 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2389176 . 2389219 82 . Aniket Kittur , Ed H . Chi , and Bongwon Suh . 2008 . Crowdsourcing User Studies with Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , 453 – 456 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357127 83 . Aniket Kittur , Je ﬀ rey V . Nickerson , Michael Bernstein , Elizabeth Gerber , Aaron Shaw , John Zimmerman , Matt Lease , and John Horton . 2013 . The Future of Crowd Work . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’13 ) . ACM , 1301 – 1318 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441923 84 . Aniket Kittur , Boris Smus , Susheel Khamkar , and Robert E . Kraut . 2011 . CrowdForge : Crowdsourcing Complex Work . In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’11 ) . ACM , 43 – 52 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2047196 . 2047202 85 . Ranjay A . Krishna , Kenji Hata , Stephanie Chen , Joshua Kravitz , David A . Shamma , Li Fei - Fei , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2016 . Embracing Error to Enable Rapid Crowdsourcing . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 3167 – 3179 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858115 86 . Anand Kulkarni , Philipp Gutheim , Prayag Narula , David Rolnitzky , Tapan Parikh , and Björn Hartmann . 2012 . Mobileworks : Designing for quality in a managed crowdsourcing architecture . IEEE Internet Computing 16 , 5 ( 2012 ) , 28 – 35 . 87 . Walter Lasecki , Christopher Miller , Adam Sadilek , Andrew Abumoussa , Donato Borrello , Raja Kushalnagar , and Je ﬀ rey Bigham . 2012 . Real - time Captioning by Groups of Non - experts . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’12 ) . ACM , 23 – 34 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2380116 . 2380122 88 . Walter S . Lasecki , Kyle I . Murray , Samuel White , Robert C . Miller , and Je ﬀ rey P . Bigham . 2011 . Real - time Crowd Control of Existing Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’11 ) . ACM , 23 – 32 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2047196 . 2047200 89 . Walter S . Lasecki , Je ﬀ rey M . Rzeszotarski , Adam Marcus , and Je ﬀ rey P . Bigham . 2015 . The E ﬀ ects of Sequence and Delay on Crowd Work . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , 1375 – 1378 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702594 90 . Walter S . Lasecki , Rachel Wesley , Je ﬀ rey Nichols , Anand Kulkarni , James F . Allen , and Je ﬀ rey P . Bigham . 2013 . Chorus : A Crowd - powered Conversational Assistant . In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’13 ) . ACM , 151 – 162 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2501988 . 2502057 91 . Thomas D . LaToza , W . Ben Towne , Christian M . Adriano , and André van der Hoek . 2014 . Microtask Programming : Building Software with a Crowd . In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’14 ) . ACM , 43 – 54 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2642918 . 2647349 92 . Edith Law , Ming Yin , Joslin Goh , Kevin Chen , Michael A . Terry , and Krzysztof Z . Gajos . 2016 . Curiosity Killed the Cat , but Makes Crowdwork Better . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 4098 – 4110 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858144 93 . John Le , Andy Edmonds , Vaughn Hester , and Lukas Biewald . 2010 . Ensuring quality in crowdsourced search relevance evaluation : The e ﬀ ects of training question distribution . In SIGIR 2010 workshop on crowdsourcing for search evaluation . 21 – 26 . 94 . Min Kyung Lee , Daniel Kusbit , Evan Metsky , and Laura Dabbish . 2015 . Working with Machines : The Impact of Algorithmic and Data – Driven Management on Human Workers . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , 1603 – 1612 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702548 95 . Lawrence Lessig . 2006 . Code . Lawrence Lessig . 96 . Margaret Levi , David Olson , Jon Agnone , and Devin Kelly . 2009 . Union democracy reexamined . Politics & Society 37 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 203 – 228 . 97 . Alain Lipietz . 1982 . Towards Global Fordism ? New Left Review 0 , 132 ( 3 1982 ) , 33 . http : / / search . proquest . com / docview / 1301937328 ? accountid = 14026 Last updated — 2013 – 02 – 24 . 98 . Greg Little , Lydia B . Chilton , Max Goldman , and Robert C . Miller . 2010 . TurKit : Human Computation Algorithms on Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the 23Nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’10 ) . ACM , 57 – 66 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1866029 . 1866040 99 . Kurt Luther , Nathan Hahn , Steven P Dow , and Aniket Kittur . 2015 . Crowdlines : Supporting Synthesis of Diverse Information Sources through Crowdsourced Outlines . In Third AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing . 100 . Ioanna Lykourentzou , Angeliki Antoniou , Yannick Naudet , and Steven P . Dow . 2016 . Personality Matters : Balancing for Personality Types Leads to Better Outcomes for Crowd Teams . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer – Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 260 – 273 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819979 101 . Eleanor A . Maguire , David G . Gadian , Ingrid S . Johnsrude , Catriona D . Good , John Ashburner , Richard S . J . Frackowiak , and Christopher D . Frith . 2000 . Navigation - related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97 , 8 ( 2000 ) , 4398 – 4403 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 070039597 102 . Eleanor A . Maguire , Rory Nannery , and Hugo J . Spiers . 2006 . Navigation around London by a taxi driver with bilateral hippocampal lesions . Brain 129 , 11 ( 2006 ) , 2894 – 2907 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / brain / awl286 103 . Bronislaw Malinowski . 2002 . Argonauts of the Western Paciﬁc : An account of native enterprise and adventure in the archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea . Routledge . 104 . David Martin , Benjamin V . Hanrahan , Jacki O’Neill , and Neha Gupta . 2014 . Being a Turker . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , 224 – 235 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531663 105 . Jamie K McCallum . 2013 . Global unions , local power : the new spirit of transnational labor organizing . Cornell University Press . 106 . Brian McInnis , Dan Cosley , Chaebong Nam , and Gilly Leshed . 2016a . Taking a HIT : Designing Around Rejection , Mistrust , Risk , and Workers’ Experiences in Amazon Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 2271 – 2282 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858539 107 . Brian James McInnis , Elizabeth Lindley Murnane , Dmitry Epstein , Dan Cosley , and Gilly Leshed . 2016b . One and Done : Factors A ﬀ ecting One - time Contributors to Ad - hoc Online Communities . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 609 – 623 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820075 108 . Margaret Mead and Franz Boas . 1973 . Coming of age in Samoa . Penguin . 109 . Milton J Nadworny . 1955 . Scientiﬁc management and the unions , 1900 - 1932 ; a historical analysis . Harvard University Press . 110 . Michael Nebeling , Alexandra To , Anhong Guo , Adrian A . de Freitas , Jaime Teevan , Steven P . Dow , and Je ﬀ rey P . Bigham . 2016 . WearWrite : Crowd – Assisted Writing from Smartwatches . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 3834 – 3846 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858169 111 . Edward Newell and Derek Ruths . 2016 . How One Microtask A ﬀ ects Another . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 3155 – 3166 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858490 112 . Jon Noronha , Eric Hysen , Haoqi Zhang , and Krzysztof Z . Gajos . 2011 . Platemate : Crowdsourcing Nutritional Analysis from Food Photographs . In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’11 ) . ACM , 1 – 12 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2047196 . 2047198 113 . David Oleson , Alexander Sorokin , Greg Laughlin , Vaughn Hester , John Le , and Lukas Biewald . 2011 . Programmatic Gold : Targeted and Scalable Quality Assurance in Crowdsourcing . ( 2011 ) . http : / / www . aaai . org / ocs / index . php / WS / AAAIW11 / paper / view / 3995 114 . Judith S Olson and Wendy A Kellogg . 2014 . Ways of Knowing in HCI . Springer . 115 . Mancur Olson . 1965 . Logic of collective action public goods and the theory of groups Rev . ed . . 116 . Elinor Ostrom . 1990 . Governing the commons : The evolution of institutions for collective action . Cambridge university press . 117 . Gabriele Paolacci , Jesse Chandler , and Panagiotis G Ipeirotis . 2010 . Running experiments on amazon mechanical turk . Judgment and Decision making 5 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 411 – 419 . 118 . Paolo Parigi and Xiao Ma . 2016 . The Gig Economy . XRDS 23 , 2 ( 12 2016 ) , 38 – 41 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3013496 119 . Alexander J . Quinn and Benjamin B . Bederson . 2011 . Human Computation : A Survey and Taxonomy of a Growing Field . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , 1403 – 1412 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979148 120 . Hugh Raynbird . 1847 . Essay on Measure Work , locally known as task , piece , job , or grate work ( in its application to agricultural labour ) . 121 . Daniela Retelny , Sébastien Robaszkiewicz , Alexandra To , Walter S . Lasecki , Jay Patel , Negar Rahmati , Tulsee Doshi , Melissa Valentine , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2014 . Expert Crowdsourcing with Flash Teams . In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’14 ) . ACM , 75 – 85 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2642918 . 2647409 122 . Frank Richards . 1904 . Is Anything the Matter with Piecework . ASME . 123 . Jacob August Riis . 1901 . How the other half lives : Studies among the tenements of New York . Penguin . 124 . Horst WJ Rittel and Melvin M Webber . 1973 . Dilemmas in a general theory of planning . Policy sciences 4 , 2 ( 1973 ) , 155 – 169 . 125 . D . H . Robertson . 1912 . A Narrative of the Coal Strike . The Economic Journal 22 , 87 ( 1912 ) , 365 – 387 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2221944 126 . Nathan Rosenberg . 1982 . Inside the black box : technology and economics . Cambridge University Press . 127 . Nathan Rosenberg . 1994 . Exploring the black box : Technology , economics , and history . Cambridge University Press . 128 . Joel Ross , Lilly Irani , M . Six Silberman , Andrew Zaldivar , and Bill Tomlinson . 2010 . Who Are the Crowdworkers ? : Shifting Demographics in Mechanical Turk . In CHI ’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’10 ) . ACM , 2863 – 2872 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753846 . 1753873 129 . James Rowan . 1901 . A Premium System of Remunerating Labour . Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers 61 , 1 ( 1901 ) , 865 – 882 . 130 . Donald Roy . 1954 . E ﬃ ciency and “the ﬁx " : Informal intergroup relations in a piecework machine shop . American journal of sociology ( 1954 ) , 255 – 266 . 131 . Je ﬀ rey Rzeszotarski and Aniket Kittur . 2012 . CrowdScape : Interactively Visualizing User Behavior and Output . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’12 ) . ACM , 55 – 62 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2380116 . 2380125 132 . Je ﬀ rey M . Rzeszotarski and Aniket Kittur . 2011 . Instrumenting the Crowd : Using Implicit Behavioral Measures to Predict Task Performance . In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’11 ) . ACM , 13 – 22 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2047196 . 2047199 133 . Niloufar Salehi , Lilly C . Irani , Michael S . Bernstein , Ali Alkhatib , Eva Ogbe , Kristy Milland , and Clickhappier . 2015 . We Are Dynamo : Overcoming Stalling and Friction in Collective Action for Crowd Workers . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , 1621 – 1630 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702508 134 . Lowell J . Satre . 1982 . After the Match Girls’ Strike : Bryant and May in the 1890s . Victorian Studies 26 , 1 ( 1982 ) , 7 – 31 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3827491 135 . Trebor Scholz . 2012 . Digital labor : The Internet as playground and factory . Routledge . 136 . Victor S . Sheng , Foster Provost , and Panagiotis G . Ipeirotis . 2008 . Get Another Label ? Improving Data Quality and Data Mining Using Multiple , Noisy Labelers . In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ( KDD ’08 ) . ACM , 614 – 622 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1401890 . 1401965 137 . Pao Siangliulue , Kenneth C . Arnold , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , and Steven P . Dow . 2015 . Toward Collaborative Ideation at Scale : Leveraging Ideas from Others to Generate More Creative and Diverse Ideas . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , 937 – 945 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675239 138 . Six Silberman . 2015 . Stop citing Ross et al . 2010 , “Who are the crowdworkers ? " . ( 3 2015 ) . https : / / medium . com / @ silberman / stop - citing - ross - et - al - 2010 - who - are - the - crowdworkers - b3b9b1e8d300 139 . Thiago H Silva , Pedro OS Vaz de Melo , Aline Carneiro Viana , Jussara M Almeida , Juliana Salles , and Antonio AF Loureiro . 2013 . Tra ﬃ c condition is more than colored lines on a map : characterization of waze alerts . In International Conference on Social Informatics . Springer , 309 – 318 . 140 . Walter Skok . 1999 . Knowledge Management : London Taxi Cabs Case Study . In Proceedings of the 1999 ACM SIGCPR Conference on Computer Personnel Research ( SIGCPR ’99 ) . ACM , 94 – 101 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 299513 . 299625 141 . Walter Skok . 2000 . Managing knowledge within the London taxi cab service . Knowledge and Process Management 7 , 4 ( 2000 ) , 224 . 142 . Ryo Suzuki , Niloufar Salehi , Michelle S . Lam , Juan C . Marroquin , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2016 . Atelier : Repurposing Expert Crowdsourcing Tasks As Micro – internships . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 2645 – 2656 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858121 143 . John C . Tang , Manuel Cebrian , Nicklaus A . Giacobe , Hyun - Woo Kim , Taemie Kim , and Douglas “Beaker " Wickert . 2011 . Reﬂecting on the DARPA Red Balloon Challenge . Commun . ACM 54 , 4 ( 4 2011 ) , 78 – 85 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1924421 . 1924441 144 . Frederick Winslow Taylor . 1896 . A piece rate system . Economic Studies 1 , 2 ( 1896 ) , 89 . 145 . Frederick Winslow Taylor . 1911 . The principles of scientiﬁc management . Harper . 146 . Jaime Teevan , Shamsi T . Iqbal , Carrie J . Cai , Je ﬀ rey P . Bigham , Michael S . Bernstein , and Elizabeth M . Gerber . 2016b . Productivity Decomposed : Getting Big Things Done with Little Microtasks . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’16 ) . ACM , 3500 – 3507 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2856480 147 . Jaime Teevan , Shamsi T . Iqbal , and Curtis von Veh . 2016a . Supporting Collaborative Writing with Microtasks . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , 2657 – 2668 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858108 148 . Jaime Teevan , Daniel J . Liebling , and Walter S . Lasecki . 2014 . Selfsourcing Personal Tasks . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’14 ) . ACM , 2527 – 2532 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2581181 149 . Rajan Vaish , Peter Organisciak , Kotaro Hara , Je ﬀ rey P Bigham , and Haoqi Zhang . 2014a . Low E ﬀ ort Crowdsourcing : Leveraging Peripheral Attention for Crowd Work . In Second AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing . 150 . Rajan Vaish , Keith Wyngarden , Jingshu Chen , Brandon Cheung , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2014b . Twitch Crowdsourcing : Crowd Contributions in Short Bursts of Time . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , 3645 – 3654 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2556996 151 . Vasilis Verroios and Michael S Bernstein . 2014 . Context trees : Crowdsourcing global understanding from local views . In Second AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing . 152 . E . Waltz . 2012 . How i quantiﬁed myself . IEEE Spectrum 49 , 9 ( 9 2012 ) , 42 – 47 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MSPEC . 2012 . 6281132 153 . Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb . 1894 . The History of Trade Unionism . ( 1894 ) . 154 . Martin L Weitzman . 1976 . The new Soviet incentive model . The Bell Journal of Economics ( 1976 ) , 251 – 257 . 155 . Martin L . Weitzman . 1980 . The " Ratchet Principle " and Performance Incentives . The Bell Journal of Economics 11 , 1 ( 1980 ) , 302 – 308 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3003414 156 . Peng Dai Mausam Daniel S Weld . 2010 . Decision – theoretic control of crowd – sourced workﬂows . In Twenty – Fourth Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence . 157 . Mark E . Whiting , Dilrukshi Gamage , Aaron Gilbee , Snehal Gaikwad , Shirish Goyal , Alipta Ballav , Dinesh Majeti , Nalin Chhibber , Freddie Vargus , Teo Moura , Angela Richmond Fuller , Varshine Chandrakanthan , Gabriel Bayomi Tinoco Kalejaiye , Tejas Seshadri Sarma , Yoni Dayan , Adam Ginzberg , Mohammed Hashim Kambal , Kristy Milland , Sayna Parsi , Catherine A . Mullings , Henrique Oreﬁce , Sekandar Matin , Vibhor Sehgal , Sharon Zhou , Akshansh Sinha , Je ﬀ Regino , Rajan Vaish , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2017 . Crowd Guilds : Worker - led Reputation and Feedback on Crowdsourcing Platforms . In CSCW : Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 158 . Vanessa Williamson . 2016 . On the Ethics of Crowdsourced Research . PS : Political Science & Politics 49 , 1 ( 001 001 2016 ) , 77 – 81 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S104909651500116X 159 . Katherine Woollett and Eleanor A Maguire . 2011 . Acquiring “the Knowledge” of London’s layout drives structural brain changes . Current biology 21 , 24 ( 2011 ) , 2109 – 2114 . 160 . Katherine Woollett , Hugo J . Spiers , and Eleanor A . Maguire . 2009 . Talent in the taxi : a model system for exploring expertise . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B : Biological Sciences 364 , 1522 ( 2009 ) , 1407 – 1416 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2008 . 0288 161 . Shao - Yu Wu , Ruck Thawonmas , and Kuan - Ta Chen . 2011 . Video Summarization via Crowdsourcing . In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’11 ) . ACM , 1531 – 1536 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979803 162 . Ming Yin , Mary L Gray , Siddharth Suri , and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan . 2016 . The Communication Network Within the Crowd . In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web . International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee , 1293 – 1303 . 163 . Lixiu Yu , Aniket Kittur , and Robert E . Kraut . 2016a . Distributed Analogical Idea Generation with Multiple Constraints . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 1236 – 1245 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557371 164 . Lixiu Yu , Aniket Kittur , and Robert E . Kraut . 2016b . Encouraging “Outside - The - Box” Thinking in Crowd Innovation Through Identifying Domains of Expertise . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 1214 – 1222 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820025 165 . Alvin Yuan , Kurt Luther , Markus Krause , Sophie Isabel Vennix , Steven P Dow , and Bjorn Hartmann . 2016 . Almost an Expert : The E ﬀ ects of Rubrics and Expertise on Perceived Value of Crowdsourced Design Critiques . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer – Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , 1005 – 1017 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819953 166 . M . C . Yuen , I . King , and K . S . Leung . 2011 . A Survey of Crowdsourcing Systems . In Privacy , Security , Risk and Trust ( PASSAT ) and 2011 IEEE Third Inernational Conference on Social Computing ( SocialCom ) , 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on . 766 – 773 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / PASSAT / SocialCom . 2011 . 203