SemanticCollage : Enriching Digital Mood Board Design with Semantic Labels Janin Koch Aalto University Espoo , Finland Nicolas Tafﬁn Univ . Paris - Saclay , Inria , CNRS Saclay , France Andrés Lucero Aalto University Espoo , Finland Wendy E . Mackay Univ . Paris - Saclay , Inria , CNRS Saclay , France Figure 1 : SemanticCollage : a semantically enriched digital mood board tool for image collection and interpretation . Blue tools support image and text manipulation ; Red tools provide semantic labels . ABSTRACT Designers create inspirational mood boards to express their de - sign ideas visually , through collages of images and text . They ﬁnd appropriate images and reﬂect on them as they explore emergent design concepts . After presenting the results of a participatory design workshop and a survey of professional de - signers , we introduce SemanticCollage , a digital mood board tool that attaches semantic labels to images by applying a state - of - the - art semantic labeling algorithm . SemanticCollage helps designers to 1 ) translate vague , visual ideas into search terms ; 2 ) make better sense of and communicate their designs ; while 3 ) not disrupting their creative ﬂow . A structured observation with 12 professional designers demonstrated how semantic labels help designers successfully guide image search and ﬁnd relevant words that articulate their abstract , visual ideas . We conclude by discussing how SemanticCollage inspires new uses of semantic labels for supporting creative practice . Author Keywords Creativity support tools ; Sensemaking ; Ideation ; Semantics Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands . © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6974 - 9 / 20 / 07 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395494 CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Interactive systems and tools ; • Applied computing → Arts and humanities ; INTRODUCTION Designers often express and explore visual ideas through mood boards , which are collages composed of images , text , and ob - ject samples . Mood boards act as a source of inspiration in creative ﬁelds such as fashion and design , and are especially helpful when ideas are hard to express verbally [ 9 ] . Mood boards are not only innovative and fun to create [ 21 ] , but also encourage designers to probe more deeply into the project’s themes and concepts , serving as a powerful tool for commu - nicating a “web of seemingly unconnected ideas , difﬁcult to express verbally with similar impact” [ 19 ] . The process begins when the client expresses rough ideas for a product or service . The designer then engages in a highly dynamic and iterative [ 21 ] process of ﬁrst collecting visual inspirational material , then composing the mood board by selecting and arranging these images , while constantly inter - preting the material [ 45 ] by identifying missing images [ 32 ] and trying to “to understand connections , [ . . . ] anticipate their trajectories and act effectively . ” [ 25 ] The ﬁnal mood board communicates visual ideas to the client or other stakeholders [ 30 , 8 , 21 ] . The intrinsic visual nature of mood boards en - courages creation of new ideas [ 48 ] , with wide potential for innovative discovery and problem solving [ 21 ] . Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 407 However , educators stress that visual abstraction , or ﬁnding the right images and interpreting their meaning , is a critical but difﬁcult - to - learn skill [ 9 ] usually requiring professional design education [ 7 , 9 ] , or years of professional experience . Visual abstraction lets designers translate abstract ideas into structured visual representations [ 7 ] . Unfortunately , ﬁnding images that reﬂect abstract ideas is challenging and designers often spend signiﬁcant time searching for the ‘right’ image . Today , designers turn to image search engines , e . g . Google , or curated inspirational platforms , such as Behance or Pinter - est . However , most search engines only support text queries , forcing designers to ﬁnd relevant , searchable words that cap - ture each visual abstraction . Although Google Reverse Image Search lets users use a picture to ﬁnd related images from the web , it offers little control over unsuitable results . Another key challenge is why certain selected images are inter - esting : Designers must articulate their ideas , to themselves or others , or synthesize larger concepts , based on their collected material and experience [ 27 ] . This sense - making process is crucial for reﬂection on new concepts . Unfortunately , current tools offer little support for reﬂecting upon visual material . Research Questions We are interested in helping designers : 1 . express and explore vague , not - yet - developed ideas for re - trieving inspirational material ; 2 . make sense of and reﬂect upon their chosen material and communicate it to stakeholders ; and 3 . beneﬁt from computational support without disrupting their creative ﬂow . One approach is to take advantage of advances in computer vision and machine learning , which can extract semantic infor - mation from images . Yet , as Steinﬁeld argues , if “computers cannot see the way we see , they cannot help us to reason the way we wish to reason” [ 48 ] . This paper explores how to create digital mood boards that beneﬁt from semantic labels . After discussing related work , we describe the results of two preliminary studies that explored professional designers’ ev - eryday experiences in creating mood boards . We then in - troduce SemanticCollage , a digital mood board that extracts semantic labels from images , and uses them to support design - ers’ search and reﬂection activities . We describe the system with an illustrated scenario , followed by a detailed technical description . Next , we describe the results of a structured obser - vation with 12 professional designers who performed two pairs of comparable , ecologically grounded design tasks related to composition and refection . We conclude with a discussion of the implications for design and directions for future research . RELATED WORK The mood board design process involves three key activities : collecting material , constructing the board and reﬂecting upon it [ 30 ] . Here , we focus on studies and tools related to the collection and reﬂection processes . Collection Designers alternate between ‘exploration’ and ‘exploita - tion’ [ 39 ] : They start with a known ‘anchor point’ , e . g . objects or associations , and reﬁne the search , step by step , to narrow down the possibilities until they reach the desired result [ 50 ] . Text - Based Search is the most common strategy for ﬁnding images in large online collections , such as Google Image Search [ 28 ] . Others , such as ImageFinder [ 40 ] , Unsplash [ 37 ] , Muzli Search [ 5 ] and Pinterest [ 38 ] , provide vast collections of curated images . Machine learning often supports image - search queries with user - speciﬁed rules [ 18 ] , pre - deﬁned preferences , e . g . colors or patterns [ 17 ] , or via user - speciﬁed [ 11 ] and dy - namic [ 53 ] clustering . By contrast , Bouchard et al . [ 2 ] show how to retrieve images that better ﬁt search queries semanti - cally : A textual analysis of the image’s web page produces semantic labels , and the resulting images are selected based on how well their semantics match the query . Designers found semantic - based search results more inspiring than those from standard image search engines . However , while promising , such systems still require designers to formulate precise text queries or visual speciﬁcations . Verbalizing vague , visual ideas is difﬁcult , which limits the potential of this approach . Image - Based Search has beneﬁted from recent advances in computer vision and machine learning . Google Image Search uses Google Lens [ 35 ] for ‘reverse image retrieval’ : When the user drags an image into the search bar , an image recognition algorithm uses neural networks to translate it into semantic labels [ 28 ] . These reference the image’s original web page , if applicable , as well as images deemed similar to the primary object . Pinterest also lets users select parts of a Pinterest image to suggest similar objects . Designers can highlight an object’s importance by specifying three to ﬁve semantic labels . Niice [ 34 ] lets users search for images via user - provided tags or dominant colors from a previously selected image . Image - based search reduces the need for ﬁnding the ‘right’ search terms , but current systems only handle one image at a time , and users cannot control which features are deemed important . We argue that users should be able to search for interesting features from any combination of images and text . Interpretation Sense making is an immersive process that involves discov - ery and learning , also known as ‘reﬂection - in - action’ [ 44 ] . Mood board designers synthesize ideas and concepts based on collected material , contextual understanding and their own experience [ 27 ] . Russell et al . [ 43 ] explore sense making with respect to large document collections , while Klein et al . [ 25 ] consider the reciprocal interaction between the user’s envi - sioned material and the material itself . Making sense of visual material helps designers elaborate , reﬂect on and question their current vision . Reﬂection methods that encourage such behavior in non - digital settings focus on ﬁltering , generalizing and sharing meaning for idea convergence [ 14 , 46 ] . Interpretation Tools help designers articulate the meaning of their work . For example , CoSense [ 36 ] is a web search tool that encourages sense making among participants using search summaries in the form of search - term tag clouds . The Rich bookmarks [ 52 ] interface lets users create links to vi - sual and semantic metadata to reﬂect on collected material . These approaches share the goal of grouping materials to - gether , where links and images highlight internal relationships , Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 408 e . g . tag clouds . Although designers can record annotations , these approaches do not support the reﬂection process itself . The key challenge in visual ideation is how to provide reﬂec - tive material that helps designers make sense of their images . Schön’s [ 45 ] concept of reﬂection - on - action refers to post - design processes that revisit earlier design processes , decisions , and activities . Tools such as ReﬂectionSpace [ 47 ] and Maps for design reﬂection [ 13 , 12 ] let designers visualize their ideation activities over time , both to reﬂect upon earlier alternatives , and to develop a holistic view of the whole design process . This suggests that capturing the semantic meanings of images , especially given how they evolve over time , may offer new insights to mood board designers . Creativity Support Tools Creativity support tools focus mainly on ﬁnding new mate - rial [ 51 ] by retrieving previously searched material [ 16 ] ; sug - gesting related material [ 2 ] ; encouraging collaboration [ 22 , 49 ] ; or combining existing physical and digital material [ 24 ] . These systems offer a wide variety of solutions for collect - ing relevant material . However , they do not fully support the expression of vague , visual ideas via text - based search terms to ﬁnd relevant images , nor do they help users articulate the meaning of their mood boards . In design practice , professional mood board designers rely primarily on rich design tools , e . g . Adobe Illustrator , to com - pose their material and construct meaning . However , mood board design requires iterative exploration and construction of meaning through structure and search . We thus apply Lupfer et al . ’s free - form curation concept , which enables “elements to be spontaneously gathered from the web [ . . . ] , manipulated , and visually assembled in a continuous space” [ 33 ] , thus en - couraging the evolution of ideas and semantic relationships . INFORMING THE DESIGN The research literature suggests that mood board design is an iterative , cyclic process that involves collecting images from magazines and online sources , and reﬂecting upon these on a mood board . To gain a more nuanced understanding of the mood board design process and inspire ideas for tools that avoid disrupting creative ﬂow , we conducted two preliminary studies : 1 . a participatory design workshop to better under - stand the mood board design process , and 2 . a survey about digital mood board design with professional designers . Participatory Design Workshop The participatory design workshop ( Fig . 2 ) included two groups of three designers , each with an author and at least one practicing mood board designer . The three - hour work - shop began with a brief mood board presentation based on [ 9 , 19 ] . Each group chose an initial topic , then looked for images , negotiated their selection , and arranged the results on a mood board . We provided foamcore boards , diverse magazines , and standard paper prototyping supplies . Each group presented their work and reﬂected on the overall process . We video recorded the workshop and took hand - written notes . Results One group explored a ‘stretchable materials store’ ; the other created a ‘sustainability lab’ . Both spontaneously followed Figure 2 : Each group created a physical mood board a standard design process [ 8 , 31 ] , which involves collecting material and interpreting it during the construction of the board , each with different tools and communication styles . Collection : Participants sought images that ‘ﬁt’ the group’s evolving narrative , but were happy to discover surprises and happy accidents . Some images ‘matched’ the concept “col - orwise” or because it was “the image I looked for” . Others were chosen even though the reason was hard to express in words : “I don’t know – I just like this image” . Some mate - rial was selected for its general appearance : “This is really cute” or “I don’t know what to do with it but I will cut it out anyway” . We noticed that they often lacked adequate words to express why they chose particular images . After selecting their material , both groups laid out the images , often stack - ing or clustering them thematically , e . g . saying : “These are professionals ! ” then adding them to the mood board . Interpretation : Participants cropped and adjusted images , then clustered and separated them and discussed their meaning : “This is something like a digital texture” . They arranged them to support the group’s narrative : “I’m going to cut it so it looks like a tool tree” or “This image connects both these images very nicely . ” As new ideas arose , participants sought addi - tional images . One group removed and stacked their images , then reassembled them in a new layout , adding new concepts , deleting others . Both groups added notes and labels for the ﬁnal presentation . Survey of Professional Mood Board Designers We conducted a digital survey to gain insights into challenges faced by professional mood board designers [ 41 ] . Participants : 15 professional designers from Europe and North America ( 8 men , 7 women , age 23 – 45 ) responded to the survey . Professional experience ranged from 1 to 15 years ( mean 5 . 8 ) , primarily in User Experience , Graphic and Interaction design . Responses were anonymous , and participants were not paid . Survey instrument : Questions ( 27 open - ended , 5 Likert - style , and 5 multiple - choice ) focused on search and sense - making strategies . The ﬁrst nine revisited their own recent project ; the rest asked them to analyze an early - and a late - stage mood board and say how they would continue , given the design brief . Data Analysis : We ran a mixed - approach thematic analysis [ 4 ] . Top - down themes included ‘collection’ , ‘composition’ and ‘reﬂection’ from the research literature . One author coded the participants’ answers based on both top - down themes and Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 409 themes that emerged ( bottom - up ) , with particular focus on themes related to our research questions . The same author summarized closely related themes and identiﬁed patterns ; a second author reviewed the themes . We also calculated descriptive statistics for answers to Likert - scale questions . Results Most designers ( 9 / 15 ) use mood boards for at least half their projects ; the majority ( 12 / 15 ) said they only create digital mood boards . A common reason for creating digital mood boards ( 5 / 15 ) was “sorting my thoughts and feelings relating to the project” . Designers said that mood boards help them ex - plore different styles ( P8 , P12 ) and communicate them through visual material ( 6 / 15 ) . Like the participatory design groups , participants follow the standard mood board design process , i . e . collecting images , designs and stories ( P7 ) , adding details e . g . “deﬁning words” or “sorting and composing” ( P11 , P14 , P9 ) . Respondents use a variety of professional tools , includ - ing Adobe ( 5 / 15 ) , mainly Illustrator ( 3 / 5 ) , Sketch / InVision ( 4 / 15 ) , online Platforms such as Pinterest / Behance ( 3 / 15 ) , and dedicated tools such as Arena ( P2 ) or Milanote ( P9 ) . Collecting Material : Designers ﬁnd inspirational material via search engines ( 9 / 15 ) , platforms such as Behance / Pinterest ( 3 / 15 ) or magazines ( 3 / 15 ) . However , they mentioned that “sometimes it is painful to ﬁnd the right search keyword to ﬁnd the image” ( P7 ) and it can take minutes ( 6 / 15 ) to hours ( 5 / 15 ) to ﬁnd it . They describe this as an iterative process : Even though the ﬁrst image “was found in half an hour , it didn’t depict everything I wanted , so I kept looking for three more hours” ( P9 ) to ﬁnd the right image . Finding the right initial image was often challenging . One designer wanted to “search images by color on Dribbble and Google , [ and ] use the ﬁrst image as input for Google image search , but also look for new images by just browsing content on Behance to add some versatility to the mood board” ( P5 ) . Another would “jot down what is still missing [ and ] search with these keywords and with some research on what these keywords mean in the target group’s lives” ( P9 ) . Both de - signers actively avoided deﬁning a query ( 1 ) or searching for inspiration . Some select suitable material based on color ( P5 , P13 ) or “emotions an image evokes , especially regarding senses but also associations and yet again semantic meanings of objects , materials and symbols” ( P9 ) . Implications for Design Transforming visual ideas into textual search terms : Workshop participants had difﬁculty articulating why particular images were ‘right’ , and survey designers had problems expressing visual ideas as text search terms . Design implication : Help designers transform visual ideas into effective search terms . Alternating visual and text - based search : In both studies , de - signers spent signiﬁcant time searching for images . Survey designers described ﬁrst browsing digital inspirational plat - forms for new images and then searching ; searching for initial relevant keywords ; or using inspirational images to begin a search . Design implication : Let designers use any combina - tion of image - and text - based material as search expressions . Guiding image search : Even if designers chose an appropriate initial query , they still struggled to guide the remaining search , since most image platforms return highly similar or duplicate images . They needed ‘anchor points’ or in - between steps to reﬁne the search towards the desired result [ 50 ] . Design implication : Let designers specify either visual or textual anchor points to guide the search . Reﬂecting on visual ideas : Workshop participants combined images into larger abstract concepts , which they then dis - cussed . One group questioned and re - evaluated their whole mood board and launched a new search process . Survey de - signers also reported using their mood boards to reﬂect on their ideas and evoke emotions . All designers valued mood boards as a means of communicating their ideas . Design im - plication : Help designers reﬂect on abstract visual concepts by suggesting meanings for relevant clusters of images . SEMANTICCOLLAGE SCENARIO The following scenario illustrates how Tom , a designer , would use SemanticCollage to develop a new concept for a ‘cofﬁce’ that combines a Café atmosphere with an ofﬁce space . Tom starts with an empty SemanticCollage canvas for his mood board , a search panel that accepts both images and text as tool , and a ‘maybe’ stack for potentially useful images ( Fig . 3 ) . Sear Search 2 Search 3 Mood Board Canvas ‘Maybe’ Stack Tool Panel C o m p o s e Figure 3 : SemanticCollage interface : Tool panel , Mood board canvas , and ‘Maybe’ stack . Tom writes “cozy looking coffeehouses” into the search bar and scrolls through the results to see more images . He drags interesting ones to the main canvas . Next , he searches for the phrase ‘ofﬁce spaces’ , but ﬁnds the results rather ‘cold’ , not really what he was looking for . He decides to drag a ‘cozy - looking’ coffeehouse image into the search ﬁeld . When it lights up yellow , he knows it has been registered and added to the existing search term ( Fig . 4 . 1 ) . SemanticCollage displays semantic labels below the image in the search bar ( Fig . 4 . 2 ) , with ‘ + ’ and ‘ - ’ buttons that let him adjust their inﬂuence . Tom removes ‘room’ as irrelevant , then presses ‘enter’ to search for the revised combination of his initial phrase and relevant semantics associated with his ‘cozy’ image . He drags several interesting possibilities to the canvas . Tom forms clusters of images that represent both concepts and contrasts he is contemplating . When he hovers over an image , a menu with various tools appears ( Fig . 1 . 9 & 1 . 11 ) . He cuts and recolors several images , then clicks on the ‘Reﬂection’ tab to see a tag cloud of the current semantic labels and a palette of the images’ colors ( Fig . 5 ) . The ﬁrst cloud ( Fig . 1 . 5 ) displays the full set of semantic labels in the mood board . The size of Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 410 Figure 4 : Mixed Media Search : 1 ) The search ﬁeld accepts images . 2 ) Semantic labels related to the image appear and their relevance can be adjusted . each word is dictated by the number of images with that label , and the sizes of those images in the mood board . Tom selects words he ﬁnds surprising , which highlights the images with the corresponding semantic label . He re - positions several images , but still feels something is missing . He shift - clicks on several images of ‘cozy coffeehouses’ to create a group of images . He then generates a new tag cloud by click - ing on the ‘common labels’ button , which extracts semantic labels as if it were a single image ( Fig . 1 . 6 ) . This cloud con - tains new semantics that do not appear in any of the original images . He realizes that “architectural styles” is an implicit trait the images share . He searches again , looking for ‘cozy’ business - related architectural styles . Tom adds a color palette and text that explains key elements of the ﬁnal collage ( Fig . 5 ) . Figure 5 : Tom’s mood board : Tag clouds show semantic labels . The color palette is derived from the images . SYSTEM AND USER INTERFACE SemanticCollage is an easy - to - use semantically enhanced tool for creating mood boards . It uses HTML / JS / Jquery ( front - end ) , Python ( back - end ) connected to a Postgres database and Web . py as a web - framework . It is lightweight and can be deployed on any local computer 1 . The interface contains three main areas : a tool panel , a mood board canvas , and a ‘maybe’ stack for keeping images ( Fig . 3 ) . Designers can switch between the collection and interpretation panels using the tabs on the left . 1 Code available at https : / / userinterfaces . aalto . ﬁ / SemanticCollage The mood board construction tools are integrated into the canvas and can be accessed by the designer at any time ( Fig . 6 ) . Unlike existing tools , SemanticCollage connects all the design phases interactively . Designers can drag searched images directly to the mood board . All images can also be used as search terms ( Fig . 4 ) . Every change to the mood board affects the reﬂection tools in real time . SemanticCollage ’s two main panels are called ‘Compose’ and ‘Reﬂect’ . Semantic Labels Semantic labels play an important role in SemanticCollage , whether they are visible or hidden from the user . The system uses a two - stage retrieval process : 1 ) an object recognition al - gorithm detects image attributes , e . g . objects , faces or text , and passes them to 2 ) a classiﬁcation algorithm that maps these attributes to classes in an ontology . Training these machine - learning classiﬁers requires a large quantity of labeled data and is sensitive to domain - dependent patterns that may result in incorrect classiﬁcation [ 42 ] . Since our goal is to let designers use any visual material , either from online sources or their own uploaded material , we apply a state - of - the - art object recog - nition and semantic labeling algorithm provided by Google Vision [ 29 ] . Because it is trained with several thousand labels from diverse contexts , we can retrieve semantic labels quickly , without being limited to speciﬁc domains or sources . We retrieve new semantic labels every time an image is cropped or dragged onto the canvas , the ‘maybe’ stack or the upload area . For each image , we select the ten labels re - trieved from the Vision API with the highest conﬁdence scores . Labels are linked to an image and assigned an integral weight based on their conﬁdence scores : the label with the highest score receives a weight of 2 ( most relevant ) , the next two labels 1 ( relevant ) , and the other labels 0 ( not relevant ) . Designers can modify these relevance levels by hand and add labels using the Inspector menu attached to every image ( Fig . 1 . 4 ) . Collection Semantic Search We chose DuckDuckGo [ 15 ] , an open source search engine , in order to release the SemanticCollage code to the research com - munity . We appreciate its limited tracking behavior , which lets us isolate the impact of using semantic labels from the ‘learning’ of the search algorithm . The result quality of Duck - DuckGo was perceived as sufﬁcient in pre - studies , unlike the large differences in semantic labeling algorithms we reviewed . However , other search engines can also be used . Designers can use text and images as search objects . Images can be dragged into the search area . They are then visually added to the search bar and their semantic labels are displayed underneath ( Fig . 4 ) . If more than one image is added , the order of the labels follows the order of the images in the search ﬁeld . Designers can modify the weight of these search labels with the ‘ + ’ and ‘ - ’ buttons next to them . The search term reﬂects the order of the searched elements , text or images , and sorts the semantic labels for each image by relevance , excluding irrelevant ones . Search results are displayed as a scrollable list of 30 - 50 images , and images can be dragged to the canvas , ‘maybe’ stack or search bar directly . Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 411 Images added to the canvas are stored in full resolution for later use in the local ﬁle system . Each search query creates a new Search History item displayed underneath the search bar in a scrollable list containing text and image information . Designers can reuse previously searched terms by clicking an item in this list , which is then added to the search bar . Uploading Material Designers frequently use previous work or photos as sources of inspiration . In SemanticCollage , designers can upload their own material ( Fig . 1 . 3 ) , which is then made available in the ‘maybe’ area . Semantic labels are queried and attached to the uploaded image and can be used in the design process . Interpretation During the design process , designers interpret images and groups of images to make sense of larger concepts . Semantic - Collage supports this by providing overview clouds , requested clouds and extracted color samples ( Fig . 1 ) . Semantic Clouds SemanticCollage ’s interactive semantic clouds display labels for all mood board images ( Fig . 1 . 5 ) . We present two tag clouds : semantic frequency , and semantic frequency combined with dominance in the mood board . The ﬁrst cloud ties word size to the number of images being labeled . The second cloud adds weights representing the sizes of those images in the mood board . Resizing an image dynamically updates the cloud . Clicking labels within a cloud highlights all images on the mood board that share that semantic label . Requested Semantic Clouds Designers can shift - click to select multiple images to retrieve the semantic labels for the whole group , which is then treated as a single image . The ‘common labels’ button takes a screen - shot of the selected images , preserving their location , size and order , and requests new semantic labels . The resulting labels appear in the ﬁeld below the button , ordered by conﬁdence score ( Fig . 1 . 6 ) . Treating a group of images as a whole of - ten produces semantic labels that diverge from the individual semantics , making it easier to understand their similarities . Color Palette Since color plays an important role in visual inspiration , Se - manticCollage uses the MMCQ algorithm 2 [ 1 ] to analyze each image for its ten major colors , which are then added to the color palette ( Fig . 1 . 7 ) . Designers can select non - aggregated color samples for image manipulation or color patches ( Fig . 5 ) . Mood Board Construction Tools Designers require basic image manipulation tools to success - fully design a professional - looking mood board , e . g . to modify size , color , and orientation ( Fig . 1 . 8 – 11 ) . For easier access , these tools surround the image currently selected ( Fig . 6 ) . Editing Tools Designers can freely drag and scale images on the canvas , as well as change the z - order ( front and back ) , rotate or ﬂip images horizontally or vertically ( crop tool ) ( Fig . 6 ) . Select - ing the Color item opens a color editor with a color wheel 2 https : / / github . com / fengsp / color - thief - py Figure 6 : Image and graphical Menus and color picker that uses CSS ﬁlters ( Fig . 1 . 11 ) to modify dominant image colors . Finally , designers can crop images to highlight important elements ( Fig . 1 . 9 ) , which then receive new , locally saved semantic labels . Adding Graphical , Textual Elements Double clicking on the canvas opens a menu ( Fig . 6 , right ) that lets the user add shapes ( circles , rectangles ) , text elements and sticky notes . Objects and images share the same editing tools . The text editor supports changing text color , weight , font and size ( Fig . 1 . 10 ) . Maybe Stack Designers can store images that they are unsure of in the ‘maybe’ stack , a scrollable list of images located below the mood board canvas ( Fig . 3 ) . Images can be dragged in or out of this area , and are greyed out to minimize distraction from the canvas . When an image is selected on the mood board canvas , a ﬁlter is applied to the maybe stack that highlights images with similar semantics . STUDY METHOD We ran a study to investigate the potential of semantic labels for mood board ideation . We wanted to see if SemanticCollage helps designers 1 ) ﬁnd appropriate images , even if they cannot clearly articulate what they should be ; 2 ) make sense of the images they gather and communicate their meaning to an external stakeholder ; and 3 ) allow them to maintain control of intelligent suggestions , without disturbing their creative ﬂow . We conducted a structured observation [ 20 , 3 ] with 12 profes - sionally trained designers . This type of quasi - experiment [ 6 ] is designed to enhance ecological validity , by combining con - trolled conditions derived from empirical observations , thus facilitating comparisons within and across real - world tasks . Participants We recruited 12 trained designers ( 6 women , 6 men ; age 24 - 40 ) with 1 - 16 years of professional experience ( Table 1 ) . All provided informed consent and agreed to the recording of the session and anonymized publication of the results . European privacy law ( GDPR ) was followed throughout . Setup Participants sit at a desk with a Macintosh laptop , one ex - ternal monitor , a mouse and keyboard . The experimenter launches SemanticCollage , which appears on the large screen , Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 412 ID Age Sex Area of design Design Practice 1 31 M Interaction Design , Digital Media 3 yrs . 2 40 M Industrial Design 6 yrs . 3 33 M Interaction Design 4 yrs . 4 39 F Web , ﬁne arts , interaction 6 yrs . 5 29 F Industrial , product , STS 2 yrs . 6 28 F Fine arts , IT product design 5 yrs . 7 31 F Industrial , interaction 10 yrs . 8 26 M Architecture 2 yrs . 9 40 F Graphic Design , Arts School 16 yrs . 10 25 M Information Systems 1 yrs . 11 33 M Architecture and information systems 9 yrs . 12 24 F Interior design 1 yrs . Table 1 : Professional designers backgrounds and experience . and changes the tool state according to each of the ﬁve condi - tions . The introduction videos for each condition , as well as the post - condition questionnaires , are displayed on the laptop and are launched by the participants . Procedure The experiment takes approximately one hour , and includes two controlled tasks to evaluate Compose and Reﬂect ( de - scribed below ) , followed by an open task . The ﬁrst two tasks each involve two scenarios , with separate but equivalent de - sign briefs . Each task is presented with and without seman - tic labels resulting in four controlled conditions . We used a within - participant design , counter - balanced for order , so that each participant experienced all four conditions . In the ﬁnal , open - ended task , the designer can use any of SemanticCol - lage ’s features to create a new concept . Protocol : Each condition begins with a video describing rele - vant SemanticCollage functionality . Participants read a card with a short description of the brief , goals and time avail - able . After completing the tasks , they present their mood boards to a potential client , played by the experimenter , and complete a questionnaire . The experimenter conducts a ﬁnal semi - structured interview to probe for details about the partic - ipant’s experience . Participants are encouraged to reﬂect upon SemanticCollage ’s strengths and weaknesses , and think how they might use it in their own work . Composition tasks : Participants are asked to create two new mood boards that express a new visual concept for a ‘cofﬁce store’ and a ‘MEETbar’ . The ‘cofﬁce store’ combines the concepts of a cozy Café and an ofﬁce space , where employees engage in formal and informal meetings in a cozy environment . The ‘MEETbar’ is a place where teams can meet after work , with the casual atmosphere of a bar . For each brief , participants have seven minutes to ﬁnd and compose appropriate images into a mood board to be presented later . Reﬂection tasks : Participants prepare two mood boards that present a concept for a high - end shoe store and a children’s fashion store . To save time , participants are told to start with a concept previously prepared by a colleague who could not attend the meeting . Participants have ﬁve minutes to reﬂect upon , modify , and present the ﬁnal mood boards . Open task : Participants were asked to create a new visual sales concept for the upcoming summer holiday season , and retrieved more details about target audience and context . They had ten minutes to build a mood board with enabled semantic labels , and present the ﬁnal mood board . Semantic Label conditions : The Compose and Reﬂect tasks both involved two separate design tasks , with and without semantic labels . The semantic conditions include Semantic - Collage ’s tools for revealing and editing semantic labels ( blue features in Fig . 1 ) . The non - semantic conditions hide this func - tionality , but still permit text and image queries . Note that even without semantic labels , this version of SemanticCollage exceeds the capabilities of , e . g . , Google Image Search or Pin - terest , making it a more fair comparison to assess the beneﬁts of semantic labels . Questionnaire : Participants ﬁlled out two sections : 1 . Creativity Support Index [ 10 ] , which measures 1 ) collabo - ration , 2 ) enjoyment , 3 ) exploration , 4 ) expressiveness , 5 ) immersion , and 6 ) worthiness of effort ; and 2 . Five Likert - style questions that compare participants prefer - ences with respect to the semantic and non - semantic condi - tions for each scenario . Data Collection and Analysis We collected audio and screen recordings , questionnaires , and hand - written notes . We ran a mixed - approach thematic analy - sis , with top - down themes , Collection and Interpretation from the literature ; as well as use of Semantic Labels , the main contribution of the system , and overall Usability . The coding and veriﬁcation process matched that of the earlier studies . RESULTS We report results from statistical testing and observations from our interview data . Examples of mood boards created in the study appear in Figure 7 . Quantitative Results We compared the two pairs of conditions , with and without semantic labels , according to the Creativity Support Index , and preferences about each condition’s perceived usefulness . We used a repeated - measures ANOVA , treating ‘participant’ as a random factor using SAS JMP’s REML procedure . Creativity Support Index We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant preference for Compose ( F ( 1 , 33 ) = 10 . 29 , p = . 003 ; means 65 . 36 vs . 56 . 64 ) over Reﬂect , which suggests the primary importance of collecting and constructing in the ideation process . When interacting with semantic labels , users rate creativity support higher in terms of Enjoyment and Exploration , which are both crucial to collecting and reﬂecting upon inspirational material . The additional interaction with the provided semantics , though , also led to a small decrease in Immersion , and caused additional Effort to use . No measures were signiﬁcant ( see Table 2 ) , which was expected since the non - semantic condition already exceeds the functionality of currently available common tools . Preferences Participants reported their perceived usefulness of semantic labels in the two conditions . Due to a logging error , answers from one participant’s compose preferences were not saved . The rest of the data is consistent and was not affected . Participants preferred the semantic version of each tool , inde - pendent of the task and condition . Speciﬁcally , they preferred Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 413 ( a ) Cofﬁce ( b ) MEETbar ( c ) Shoe store Figure 7 : Example mood boards designed in the study semantic labels for the Compose task ( 64 % ) and Reﬂect task ( 58 % ) , to the non - semantic versions : Compose ( 0 % ) and Re - ﬂect ( 25 % ) . The other participants were neutral : Compose ( 36 % ) and Reﬂect ( 17 % ) . This suggests that providing in - teractive semantic labels can help designers throughout the inspiration process . We also asked participants to rate the perceived usefulness of semantic labels . Most designers rated semantic labels as more useful for the Compose ( 64 % ) than the Reﬂect condition ( 33 % ) . However , a few rated the labels as irrelevant for mood board design : Compose ( 18 % ) and Reﬂect ( 17 % ) . The rest were neutral : Compose ( 18 % ) and Reﬂect ( 50 % ) . Qualitative Results Providing interactive semantic labels for the inspiration phase helped designers better express their ideas . Participants used them to ﬁnd “the proper word for what you are already think - ing” , because they often “have some inspiration maybe already pictured , but how to ﬁnd this picture ? ” ( P1 ) . Designers were able to search for vague or partially expressed ideas : “This picture is kind of nice , but I want something more similar to that one” ( P3 ) . Providing semantic analysis for reﬂection encouraged sense making , where designers “think through the concepts” ( P7 ) , and remain in control of the current process . Semantic Enriched Search Designers expressed a clear preference for the semantic condi - tion when using interactive labels . Discovering material : Designers appreciated the ability to “mix text and images in the search” ( P10 ) , a feature that the most experienced designers deemed “unprecedented” ( P9 ) . Some found “a lot of new images [ that I ] wouldn’t probably ﬁnd if I didn’t drag the visuals [ to the search ] ” ( P5 ) , and were happy about the many “options to choose from” ( P6 ) . The interactive semantic labels helped designers ﬁnd the ‘right’ im - ages faster ( P5 , P8 ) , and provided a new source of inspiration No Semantic Semantic Sig . Factor Score SD Score SD p Collaboration 13 , 08 4 , 45 13 , 17 3 , 81 . 8057 Enjoyment 13 , 21 4 , 99 14 , 38 3 , 85 . 1459 Exploration 10 , 63 4 , 14 11 , 42 4 , 38 . 483 Expressiveness 10 , 88 4 , 03 10 , 92 3 , 37 . 5945 Immersion 13 , 17 4 , 68 12 , 46 4 , 85 . 544 Results Worth Effort 13 , 17 4 , 54 12 , 96 4 , 28 . 325 CSI 57 19 . 17 60 . 93 18 . 03 . 9596 Table 2 : Creativity Support Index results for sem / no sem . ( P1 , P6 , P8 ) . Labels also suggested alternatives , especially when words were missing , e . g . when searching for abstract objects such as texts and fonts . Some designers added system - generated semantic words to the search just to “see what comes out” ( P6 ) . Most found the process enjoyable : “ [ it’s ] fun to collect images and that I can use them immediately” ( P4 ) . Expressing ideas : Designers felt that the primary innovation was the ability to say : “This picture is kind of nice , but I want something more similar to that one . ” ( P3 ) , and to manipulate the semantics accordingly ( P2 , P3 , P6 , P7 ) : “To combine the pictures with words , to express it both with words and the images . ” Designers found the labels useful and missed them in the non - semantic condition ( P6 ) . They said the labels helped them “narrow down” ( P8 ) what they want and “easily get more out of a speciﬁc topic . ” ( P2 ) . Feeling in control : Semantic labels in the search area also helped participants better understand and control the system : “Because I feel like that is how the system works , this is also how I would search for stuff with the semantics” ( P1 ) . This was true not only of the non - semantic conditions , but also commercial tools . The ability to adjust with “plus and minus helped me to get the picture I wanted more quickly” ( P8 ) . P6 said that the semantic search interface “gave me more choices and also it was more accurate . I have the feeling in terms of color choices or the images that it was showing me . I was kind of overwhelmed actually with the information . I had so many options to choose from . ” Reﬂection - in - action : One designer said that what he “really liked in the inspect tool was that there were some keywords , like these are the main keywords , and they have a hierarchy . ” He added : “If these are the main keywords , but that is actually not the thing that I need , then I go to the other ones and select them [ which ] helped to align my thinking . ” ( P1 ) . Participants also said that semantic labels help “explain why I am interested in the picture” and “somehow helps me to do this artistic work” ( P8 ) . Finally , P1 reﬂected on his ability to use existing material for search : “You can always go from where you have been before , so you don’t have to remember what you have searched before” . When combined with the search history , it offers a “tracking along your line of thinking” . Semantics Clouds support Sense making and Reﬂection Most designers preferred the semantic reﬂection condition ( 10 / 12 ) , except two designers who preferred the simplicity of the non - semantic conditions . Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 414 Sense making : The most beneﬁcial aspect of using labels is to support sense making . Participants said that the labels helped them “think through the concepts” ( P7 , P3 ) and “help me to explain why I like it” ( P8 ) . The semantic overview clouds also helped “clear . . . up my thinking , so what do I want to talk about” ( P1 ) , helped “organise my ideas” ( P6 ) and “gives me a very good , very fast understanding of what has been there” ( P7 ) . With respect to their own , self - collected material , it helped them “categorize these and sort of see the connections between these pictures” ( P6 ) . Without semantic clouds “it was not as easy” ( P7 ) to reﬂect on the mood board and harder “to make up my own words” ( P3 ) . Reﬂection - on - action : As with semantic search , participants said they were more aware of the mood board content ( P4 , P5 ) . It helped “in the moment where I basically had the same things there and then I looked at the tags and I realised : [ . . . ] maybe I can just address something completely different” ( P1 ) ; and encouraged exploration of other elements ( P11 ) . Just “see - ing and checking the meaning” ( P4 ) and “different words in different sizes made you think through” ( P7 ) . The designers reported that semantics helped them “articulate the reason why I chose it , because the gut feeling is somehow very difﬁcult to explain” ( P8 ) . The labels made designers feel “a bit more in control of my design , because I was able to see these key - words” ( P6 ) and reﬂect upon them . Finally , this reﬂection was not limited to their own creation process : “This software helped to explain the idea to someone else” ( P4 ) . Using SemanticCollage Impact on mood board design : Almost all participants ( 11 / 12 ) appreciated the simplicity of the interface and found it ‘fun’ ( P4 , P7 ) and fast to use and learn ( P2 , P6 , P11 ) . This includes control of the features ( P1 , P4 , P7 ) : “You can move the pic - tures” ( P1 ) , “adjust them easily” ( P2 ) and things are “easy to ﬁnd” ( P5 ) . Ten participants wanted to use the tool in their design practice , especially because of the increased speed over creating a physical mood board . One mentioned that he hoped “this could be a professional tool for designers , then I would like to use it” ( P8 ) while others said they “would deﬁnitely use it , because there are strong beneﬁts : it is fast and it is usable and in many ways it follows the natural workﬂow” ( P2 ) . Comparison with commercial tools : The experience of cre - ating visual collages encouraged many participants to com - pare SemanticCollage to existing digital and physical tools . They described it as “really fast and easy to use compared to , let’s say , Photoshop” ( P2 ) , which is “time consuming to get the pictures there from the websites” ( P2 ) . This holds despite SemanticCollage ’s more limited feature set compared to Photoshop ( P7 ) , which might reduce its usefulness ( P12 ) . Participants also said that SemanticCollage was “deﬁnitely much faster than just having the google search” ( P5 , P8 ) . They appreciated having access to all the tools in a single system , which lets them “follow the natural workﬂow” ( P2 ) , while accelerating the process ( P6 , P11 ) because “ [ I ] don’t have to look for tools” ( P12 ) and can use images immediately ( P4 ) . Semantics beyond SemanticCollage Multiple participants suggested innovative ideas for using SemanticCollage . Several said that semantic search would be useful for “anything visual . . . not maybe just mood boards but the idea of ﬁnding pictures or ﬁnding visuals that portray a certain message” ( P1 ) . They also felt that semantic labels could help designers reﬂect on their previous work : “If I make a mood board and then look at it again in one week , having these labels would be super useful . ” ( P5 ) . They also highlighted its potential for collaborative work ( P4 , P5 , P7 , P9 ) , where semantic labels could “track [ ] your co - workers’ opinions , and also your own opinions” ( P5 ) . P4 felt that SemanticCollage could be the ‘communication board of the future’ , when working on a mood board “with a co - worker” or for “group discussion or brainstorming” ( P4 ) , P7 said that collaborators would beneﬁt by developing “their own way and understanding of those words , so there would be a language that they use you cannot display at the moment” . Others suggested using it to communicate with external stakeholders : SemanticCollage would help to “get a better brief , and better understand [ his client’s ] ideas , mood , tastes , like colors” ( P9 ) . DISCUSSION This paper investigates the potential of semantic labels to sup - port digital mood board design . We are particularly interested in whether they address our key research questions , i . e . do they help designers 1 ) better express and explore vague , visual ideas ; 2 ) make sense of , reﬂect upon and communicate the meaning of their visual concepts ; and 3 ) take advantage of semantic labels without disrupting their creative ﬂow ? Semantic Labels Help Express Visual Ideas Since designers think visually , revealing the underlying seman - tics of images reduces the burden of coming up with the right search terms . They can begin with images , or combinations of images and text as search objects . SemanticCollage uses each image’s semantic labels to digitally represent visual objects for search . This retains the ﬂexibility of text - based searches , with free choice of search engine . Note that , although we chose DuckDuckGo for our studies , SemanticCollage also works well with Google Image Search and curated collections such as Unsplash . SemanticCollage also better aligns search results to the designer’s intentions . Some image search engines use similar descriptive semantic labeling algorithms to label their collections , but they cannot handle vague requests , such as “I want something more similar to that one” ( P3 ) . Furthermore , SemanticCollage lets users adapt the semantics to improve iterative search , providing “choices that are more accurate [ . . . ] I had so many options to choose from . ” ( P6 ) Participants said that semantic - based search tools helped them ﬁnd images they would not otherwise have found , similar to [ 2 ] . However , retrieving semantic labels from the image itself , rather than from its original web page , lets SemanticCollage stay independent from the source of the material . Users can choose any source , as well as generating or modifying their own images . SemanticCollage also helps designers ﬁnd better words and arguments for explaining their ideas to others . Se - mantic labels and clouds are especially useful for articulating the reasoning behind a particular decision , because : “a gut feeling is somehow very difﬁcult to explain” ( P8 ) . Earlier research uses time or activity - based information to support design reﬂection , whereas SemanticCollage draws semantic Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 415 content directly from the images on the mood board . Designers ﬁnd these content - centered clouds very useful for reﬂecting on relationships among images , and seeking better descriptions of the overall mood board . SemanticCollage also helps address ‘design ﬁxation’ [ 23 ] , where designers become stuck on certain ideas , thus harming creativity . Even if designers are tempted to reuse the semantics provided , instead of constructing their own ideas , Semantic - Collage retrieves semantics from a large set of training data which generates diverse , but accurate labels . Providing the top ten semantic labels balances the trade - off between exploiting existing search items , and expanding the designer’s inspiration space . Our results indicate that SemanticCollage can support diverse forms of mood boards , including unstructured collec - tions , focused design spaces , and communicative layouts . Semantic Labels Help Sense Making and Communication SemanticCollage demonstrates a new form of computational support for reﬂecting upon visual material . It supports reﬂection - in - action by letting designers take advantage of system - generated semantic clouds and requested clouds to synthesize ideas and concepts . These text - based tag clouds offer an enriched overview of selected image sets , increasing designer’s understanding both of the mood board’s current content , and what it lacks . SemanticCollage also helps de - signers visualize relationships across images based on content , e . g . by highlighting images with similar semantics and letting users request ‘common labels’ for selected groups of images . Designers also found semantic labels helpful when seeking missing words . Deciding which image to include can be difﬁ - cult : “I don’t know – I just like this image” . However , Teevan et al . [ 50 ] argue that designers need these ‘anchor points’ to let them reﬁne their search in order to eventually obtain the de - sired result . Study participants found semantic labels helpful “to explain why I like it” ( P8 ) . The material itself thus enriches and alters the designer’s evolving vision [ 25 ] , and serves as a new starting point for further exploration . SemanticCollage avoids disrupting creative ﬂow Designers found the interaction with SemanticCollage to be fun , easy and powerful . They could easily personalize se - mantic labels , creating a highly dynamic , iterative form of interaction , but only when it made sense within the creative process . Study participants especially enjoyed their level of control , and appreciated the sense that they understood “how the system works . ” ( P1 ) Directions for Future Research SemanticCollage offers an example of how to apply semantic analysis to improve ideation and reﬂection on visual material in the context of mood board design . However , many creative practices , including sketching , crafting and sculpting , could also beneﬁt from exploring open - ended image and shape as - sociations . Enriching system knowledge with semantic labels can improve the suitability of user’s contributions , and would also open new semantic spaces to explore . Our results show that semantic analysis of images helps designers make sense of their own work , suggesting that systems such as Semantic - Collage could be designed for other creative practices , such as web , game character or industrial product design . Semantic - Collage could also enrich the collaborative aspects of creative ideation and sense making . A ﬁrst step is ImageSense [ 26 ] , a collaborative mood board design tool where designers and machine learning algorithms share agency in the exploration , sharing , and communication of ideas . Limitations of the Study The study is designed to let us compare two common design tasks , collection and reﬂection , with and without semantic labels , which balances the trade - offs between a lab study that offers control at the expense of ecological validity , and a real - world observation study that provides the reverse . However , the resulting tasks are only ﬁve - seven minutes each , and some participants felt under time pressure during the study . Also , our goal was to understand if and how semantic labels sup - port collection and reﬂection activities , rather than to evaluate SemanticCollage as a complete mood board design tool . The latter would require a follow - up longitudinal study , ideally with professional designers , to study the impact of Semantic - Collage in a real world design setting . CONCLUSION We present SemanticCollage , a digital mood board design tool that exploits existing computer vision algorithms to enrich images with semantic labels . These interactive computer - generated semantic labels are accessible to designers , enhanc - ing both search and reﬂection capabilities . SemanticCollage ’s features and layout are closely aligned with the design pro - cess , combining collection , composition and reﬂection phases within a single tool . This synergy produces a visual ideation process where designers naturally express visual ideas , cre - ate relationships among images , and reﬂect on image collec - tions . SemanticCollage supports human - computer partner - ships where designers remain in control by personalizing and extending the inﬂuence of the semantic labels , as needed . Our study showed that SemanticCollage ’s semantic features increase exploration and enjoyment ; and most designers ﬁnd semantic labels useful throughout the design process . De - signers felt they were in control , and created highly diverse types of mood boards , including unstructured collections , de - sign spaces , and communicative layouts . Semantic labels also helped designers ‘reﬂect in action’ , helping them to transform their vague ideas into expressive search queries . Reﬂecting on semantic labels further increases awareness of mood board content , including identifying missing elements on the board , and helps designers discover new relationships among images , and ﬁnd words to communicate their ideas to external stake - holders . SemanticCollage demonstrates how we can create a ﬂuid , intuitive tool that takes advantage of state - of - the - art semantic labeling algorithms to offer designers better support for ideation and sense making . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was funded by the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme ( grant agreement No . 637991 ) and CREATIV : Creating Co - Adaptive Human - Computer Partner - ships ( grant agreement No . 321135 ) . Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 416 REFERENCES [ 1 ] Dan Bloomberg . 2019 . Color quantization using modiﬁed median cut . ( 03 2019 ) , 6 . [ 2 ] Carole Bouchard , Jean - francois Omhover , Celine Mougenot , Ameziane Aoussat , and Stephen J Westerman . 2008 . TRENDS : a content - based information retrieval system for designers . In Design Computing and Cognition’08 . Springer , 593 – 611 . [ 3 ] Adrien Bousseau , Theophanis Tsandilas , Lora Oehlberg , and Wendy E . Mackay . 2016 . How Novices Sketch and Prototype Hand - Fabricated Objects . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . ACM , San Jose , United States . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858159 [ 4 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 5 ] Search by Muzli . 2020 . Muzli ( 2020 ) . https : / / search . muz . li [ 6 ] Donald Thomas Campbell and Thomas D Cook . 1979 . Quasi - experimentation : Design & analysis issues for ﬁeld settings . Rand McNally College Publishing Company Chicago . [ 7 ] Hernan Casakin and Gabriela Goldschmidt . 1999 . Expertise and the use of visual analogy : implications for design education . Design studies 20 , 2 ( 1999 ) , 153 – 175 . [ 8 ] Tracy Cassidy . 2011 . The mood board process modeled and understood as a qualitative design research tool . Fashion Practice 3 , 2 ( 2011 ) . [ 9 ] Tracy Diane Cassidy . 2008 . Mood boards : Current practice in learning and teaching strategies and students’ understanding of the process . International Journal of Fashion Design 1 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 43 – 54 . [ 10 ] Erin Cherry and Celine Latulipe . 2014 . Quantifying the creativity support of digital tools through the creativity support index . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 21 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 21 . [ 11 ] Douglass R . Cutting , David R . Karger , Jan O . Pedersen , and John W . Tukey . 1992 . Scatter / Gather : A Cluster - based Approach to Browsing Large Document Collections . In Proceedings of the 15th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’92 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 318 – 329 . [ 12 ] Peter Dalsgaard and Kim Halskov . 2012 . Reﬂective Design Documentation . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 428 – 437 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318020 [ 13 ] Peter Dalsgaard , Kim Halskov , and Rune Nielsen . 2008 . Maps for design reﬂection . Artifact 2 , 3 - 4 ( 2008 ) , 176 – 189 . [ 14 ] Alanah Davis , Gert - Jan de Vreede , and Robert Briggs . 2007 . Designing thinkLets for convergence . AMCIS 2007 Proceedings ( 2007 ) , 358 . [ 15 ] DuckDuckGo . 2020 . DuckDuckGo Search engine . ( 2020 ) . https : / / duckduckgo . com [ 16 ] Volodymyr Dziubak . 2019 . Supporting graphic designers’ online inspiration seeking practices via software tools . ( 2019 ) . [ 17 ] James Fogarty , Jodi Forlizzi , and Scott E Hudson . 2001 . Aesthetic information collages : generating decorative displays that contain information . In Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . ACM , 141 – 150 . [ 18 ] James Fogarty , Desney Tan , Ashish Kapoor , and Simon Winder . 2008 . CueFlik : Interactive Concept Learning in Image Search . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 29 – 38 . [ 19 ] Charles Freeman , Sara Marcketti , and Elena Karpova . 2017 . Creativity of images : using digital consensual assessment to evaluate mood boards . Fashion and Textiles 4 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 17 . [ 20 ] Jérémie Garcia , Theophanis Tsandilas , Carlos Agon , and Wendy E Mackay . 2014 . Structured observation with polyphony : a multifaceted tool for studying music composition . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM , 199 – 208 . [ 21 ] Steve Garner and Deana McDonagh - Philp . 2001 . Problem interpretation and resolution via visual stimuli : the use of ‘mood boards’ in design education . Journal of Art & Design Education 20 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 57 – 64 . [ 22 ] Sonja Gutwein . 2013 . Computer support for collaborative creativity . Beyond the Desktop ( 2013 ) , 15 . [ 23 ] David G Jansson and Steven M Smith . 1991 . Design ﬁxation . Design studies 12 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 3 – 11 . [ 24 ] Ianus Keller , Froukje Sleeswijk Visser , Remko van der Lugt , and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2009 . Collecting with Cabinet : Or how designers organise visual material , researched through an experiential prototype . Design Studies 30 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 69 – 86 . [ 25 ] Gary Klein , Brian Moon , and Robert R Hoffman . 2006 . Making sense of sensemaking 1 : Alternative perspectives . IEEE intelligent systems 21 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 70 – 73 . [ 26 ] Janin Koch , Nicolas Tafﬁn , , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Markku Laine , Andrés Lucero , and Wendy Mackay . 2020 . ImageSense : An Intelligent Collaborative Ideation Tool to Support Diverse Human - Computer Partnerships . In Proceedings of the ACM Human - Computer Interaction ( CSCW ’20 ) . ACM . [ 27 ] John Kolko . 2010 . Sensemaking and framing : A theoretical reﬂection on perspective in design synthesis . Design Research Society ( 2010 ) . Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 417 [ 28 ] Google LLC . 2020a . Google Images Search . ( 2020 ) . https : / / images . google . com / [ 29 ] Google LLC . 2020b . Vision AI , Cloud Vision API . ( 2020 ) . https : / / cloud . google . com / vision / [ 30 ] Andrés Lucero . 2012 . Framing , aligning , paradoxing , abstracting , and directing : how design mood boards work . In Proceedings of the designing interactive systems conference . ACM , 438 – 447 . [ 31 ] Andrés Lucero . 2015 . Funky - Design - Spaces : Interactive Environments for Creativity Inspired by Observing Designers Making Mood Boards . In Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 474 – 492 . [ 32 ] Andrés Lucero , Dzmitry Aliakseyeu , Kees Overbeeke , and Jean - Bernard Martens . 2009 . An Interactive Support Tool to Convey the Intended Message in Asynchronous Presentations . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Computer Enterntainment Technology ( ACE ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 8 . [ 33 ] Nic Lupfer , Andruid Kerne , Andrew M . Webb , and Rhema Linder . 2016 . Patterns of Free - form Curation : Visual Thinking with Web Content . In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International Conference on Multimedia ( MM ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 12 – 21 . [ 34 ] shared visual library Niice - A smart . 2020 . Niice ( 2020 ) . https : / / niice . co / [ 35 ] Rajan Patel . 2018 . World around you with Google Lens and the Assistant . ( 2018 ) . https : / / www . blog . google / products / google - lens / google - lens - real - time - answers - questions - about \ - world - around - you / [ 36 ] Sharoda A Paul and Meredith Ringel Morris . 2011 . Sensemaking in collaborative web search . Human – Computer Interaction 26 , 1 - 2 ( 2011 ) , 72 – 122 . [ 37 ] Unsplash : Beautiful Free Images & Pictures . 2020 . Unsplash ( 2020 ) . https : / / unsplash . com / / [ 38 ] Pinterest . 2020 . Pinterest ( 2020 ) . https : / / www . pinterest . com [ 39 ] Peter Pirolli and Stuart Card . 2005 . The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identiﬁed through cognitive task analysis . In Proceedings of international conference on intelligence analysis , Vol . 5 . McLean , VA , USA , 2 – 4 . [ 40 ] Image Finder High quality free stock images . 2020 . ImageFinder ( 2020 ) . https : / / imagefinder . co / [ 41 ] Yvonne Rogers . 2004 . New theoretical approaches for human - computer interaction . Annual review of information science and technology 38 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 87 – 143 . [ 42 ] Natalia Rümmele , Yuriy Tyshetskiy , and Alex Collins . 2018 . Evaluating approaches for supervised semantic labeling . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1801 . 09788 ( 2018 ) . [ 43 ] Daniel M Russell , Mark J Steﬁk , Peter Pirolli , and Stuart K Card . 1993 . The cost structure of sensemaking . In Proceedings of the INTERACT’93 and CHI’93 conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 269 – 276 . [ 44 ] Donald A Schön . 1987 . Educating the reﬂective practitioner . ( 1987 ) . [ 45 ] Donald A Schön . 2017 . The reﬂective practitioner : How professionals think in action . Routledge . [ 46 ] Isabella Seeber , Gert - Jan De Vreede , Ronald Maier , and Barbara Weber . 2017 . Beyond brainstorming : Exploring convergence in teams . Journal of Management Information Systems 34 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 939 – 969 . [ 47 ] Moushumi Sharmin and Brian P Bailey . 2013 . ReﬂectionSpace : an interactive visualization tool for supporting reﬂection - on - action in design . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition . ACM , 83 – 92 . [ 48 ] Kyle Steinfeld . 2017 . Dreams may come . In Acadia . 590 – 599 . [ 49 ] Hillevi Sundholm , Henrik Artman , and Robert Ramberg . 2004 . Backdoor Creativity : Collaborative Creativity in Technology Supported Teams . . In COOP . 99 – 114 . [ 50 ] Jaime Teevan , Christine Alvarado , Mark S Ackerman , and David R Karger . 2004 . The perfect search engine is not enough : a study of orienteering behavior in directed search . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 415 – 422 . [ 51 ] Kai Wang and Jeffrey V Nickerson . 2017 . A literature review on individual creativity support systems . Computers in Human Behavior 74 ( 2017 ) , 139 – 151 . [ 52 ] Andrew M Webb , Rhema Linder , Andruid Kerne , Nic Lupfer , Yin Qu , Bryant Poffenberger , and Colton Revia . 2013 . Promoting reﬂection and interpretation in education : Curating rich bookmarks as information composition . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition . ACM , 53 – 62 . [ 53 ] Jun Xiao , Xuemei Zhang , Phil Cheatle , Yuli Gao , and C Brian Atkins . 2008 . Mixed - initiative photo collage authoring . In Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on Multimedia . ACM , 509 – 518 . Creativity and Design Support Tools DIS ’20 , July 6 – 10 , 2020 , Eindhoven , Netherlands 418