Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 21 , 3070 – 3079 , September 1 , 2010 Differential Requirements for Clathrin - dependent Endocytosis at Sites of Cell – Substrate Adhesion Erika M . Batchelder and Defne Yarar The Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and the Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research , Cambridge , MA 02142 Submitted December 16 , 2009 ; Revised June 29 , 2010 ; Accepted July 7 , 2010 Monitoring Editor : Sandra Lemmon Clathrin - dependent endocytosis is a major route for the cellular import of macromolecules and occurs at the interface between the cell and its surroundings . However , little is known about the inﬂuences of cell – substrate attachment in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Using biochemical and imaging - based methods , we ﬁnd that cell – substrate adhesion reduces the rate of endocytosis . Clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) in proximity to substrate contacts exhibit slower dynamics in comparison to CCPs found more distant from adhesions . Direct manipulation of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) to modulate adhesion demonstrates that tight adhesion dramatically reduces clathrin - dependent endocytosis and extends the lifetimes of clathrin structures . This reduction is in part mediated by integrin - matrix engagement . In addition , we demonstrate that actin cytoskeletal dynamics are differentially required for efﬁcient endocytosis , with a stronger require - ment for actin polymerization in areas of adhesion . Together , these results reveal that cell – substrate adhesion regulates clathrin - dependent endocytosis and suggests that actin assembly facilitates vesicle formation at sites of adhesion . INTRODUCTION Clathrin - dependent endocytosis is a major pathway for the internalization of lipids and receptor - bound macromolecules into eukaryotic cells and is critical for many biological pro - cesses including nutrient uptake and cell signaling ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . Clathrin - dependent endocytosis occurs in multiple steps and involves the assembly of structural proteins , including clathrin , onto the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane to form clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) . CCPs serve to concentrate the macromolecules destined for internalization . These CCPs then invaginate and pinch off to form vesicles that are transported into the cell . This process reshapes the mem - brane that forms the interface between the cell and its extracel - lular environment . However , previous studies have primarily focused on the intracellular factors , such as cytosolic accessory proteins and lipids , that regulate vesicle formation . In contrast , physical connections with the external environment , including whether cell – substrate contact inﬂuences clathrin - mediated en - docytosis , are poorly understood . Most cells in solid tissues grow adherently . To perform basic cellular processes such as proliferation and differenti - ation , these cells must attach to and spread on the surround - ing network of ECM . The integrin family of transmembrane receptors are the principle cell surface adhesion receptors that mediate cell – matrix adhesion ( Hynes , 2002 ) . Activated integrins cluster in macromolecular assemblies , including focal adhesions and focal contacts , where they attach to the underlying substrate and mediate mechanical and chemical signals into and out of the cell . Focal adhesions are also sites that link the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) to the ﬁlamentous actin cytoskeleton ( reviewed in Naumanen et al . , 2008 ) . The role of actin cytoskeletal dynamics during clathrin - coated vesicle formation is not fully understood . Although clear genetic and biochemical evidence indicates that cortical actin dynamics are required for endocytosis in budding yeast ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ) , the requirement for actin assembly and disassembly during clathrin - coated ves - icle formation in animal cells remains under debate . Distinct requirements for actin assembly during clathrin - coated ves - icle formation have been reported in different cell types ( Schafer et al . , 1998 ; Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ; Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Moskowitz et al . , 2003 ; Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ; Boucrot et al . , 2006 ; Lee et al . , 2006 ) , and have also been suggested to be differ on distinct surfaces of the same cell ( Yarar et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . Here , we sought to elucidate the inﬂuence of adhesion on clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Using physiological and more deﬁned substrates , we report that adhesion negatively regulates clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Moreover , we demonstrate that vesicle formation has different require - ments for actin assembly , depending on the context of cel - lular substrate adhesion . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture BSC1 cells stably expressing clathrin light chain ( CLC ) - enhanced green ﬂuo - rescent protein ( EGFP ) or (cid:1) 2 - EGFP ( kindly provided by T . Kirchhausen , HMS , Cambridge , MA ) were maintained as described ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . All plasmids were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 – 12 – 1044 ) on July 14 , 2010 . Address correspondence to : Defne Yarar ( yarar @ wi . mit . edu ) . Abbreviations used : CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; TIR - FM , total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ; CLC - EGFP , clathrin light chain—enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein fusion ; IRM , interfer - ence reﬂection microscopy , BSA , bovine serum albumin . © 2010 E . M . Batchelder and D . Yarar This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Com - mons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . 3070 CA ) according to manufacturer’s instructions and imaged 16 – 20 h after transfection . Plasmids mCherry - Paxillin was kindly provided by C . Waterman ( NIH , Bethesda , MD ) and dynamin1 - mRFP by S . Schmid ( TSRI ; La Jolla , CA ) ( Soulet et al . , 2005 ) . Fluorescence Microscopy Coverslips ( no . 1 . 5 , Corning , Corning , NY ) or 35 - mm uncoated MatTek dishes ( Nunc , Waltham , MA ) were precoated with poly - l - lysine ( PLL ; 1 mg / ml ) for 1 h at 37°C , washed three times with dH 2 O , dried completely , and then coated with either ﬁbronectin ( 50 (cid:2) g / ml , BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) , heat - dena - tured bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , or concanavalin A ( conA ) overnight at 4°C , and washed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . Coverslips were precoated with PLL to allow cells to lightly attach to BSA - coated coverslips ; in the absence of PLL , cells did not adhere to BSA - coated coverslips . Cells , ( n (cid:1) 1 . 2 (cid:2) 10 5 ) were detached from near conﬂuency using PBS (cid:3) 5 mM EDTA , plated onto coverslips in serum - free medium ( SFM ; DMEM containing 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 ) , and allowed to adhere for 1 – 3 h . To image cells on uncoated coverslips / MatTek dishes , 3 – 4 (cid:2) 10 4 cells were seeded and incu - bated for (cid:4) 48 h at 37°C . For inhibition of (cid:3) 1 integrin – mediated adhesion studies , anti - (cid:3) 1 integrin inhibitory antibody , AIIB2 ( 8 (cid:2) g / ml ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , Iowa City , IA ) or control mouse antibody ( 8 (cid:2) g / ml ) was included when cells were seeded on ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips in SFM . Alternatively , antibodies were included when cells were seeded on coverslips in Optimem ( Invitrogen ) and incubated for 48 h . Cells were imaged in DMEM ( no phenol red ) , 2 . 5 % FCS , and 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 . In experiments with inhibitory antibodies , cells were imaged in Optimem supplemented with antibodies . Images of mCherry / monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein ( mRFP ) - or EGFP - fusion proteins were collected at 2 – 3 - s intervals with an inverted microscope ( TE2000U , Nikon , Garden City , NY ) modiﬁed to allow for through - the - objective multispectral total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ( TIR - FM ) using a 100 (cid:2) , 1 . 45 NA objective ( Nikon ) . Exposure times of 50 – 200 and 500 – 600 ms were used for imaging EGFP - and mCherry / mRFP - fusion proteins , respectively . The wavelength and intensity of the 2 W multiline laser ( Coherent , Santa Clara , CA ) were controlled with an AOTF ( 488 / 568 lines ) . We used a evanescent ﬁeld depth of (cid:4) 200 nm . Fluorescence emission was controlled with a ﬁlter wheel device ( Sutter Instruments , Novato , CA ) containing narrow bandpass emission ﬁl - ters . Control of all electronic hardware and camera acquisition was achieved with MetaMorph software ( Molecular Devices , West Chester , PA ) . Stage temperature and CO 2 levels were controlled with an environmental chamber ( Solent Scientiﬁc , Segensworth , United Kingdom ) maintained at 37°C . IRM images were acquired before and after time courses for subsequent analysis . To visualize actin , cells were microinjected with X - rhodamine actin ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) and incubated for 3 – 7 h before imaging . Cells were then imaged as above , except that culture medium was supplemented with 1 . 0 U oxyrase per ml ( Oxyrase , Mansﬁeld , OH ) . For indirect immunoﬂuorescence , cells were plated onto coverslips and ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 25 min at room temperature . Cells were perme - abilized in PBS containing 0 . 1 % saponin and 2 % BSA and incubated with rabbit anti - ﬁbronectin ( kindly provided by R . Hynes , MIT ) , monoclonal anti - paxillin antibodies ( BDBiosciences , SanJose , CA ) , anti - (cid:3) 1integrinantibodies ( 9EG7clone thatrecognizesligandbound (cid:3) 1 , BDBiosciences ) , orCy3 - conjugatedanti - rabbit / mouse / rat secondary antibodies ( Jackson Laboratory , Bar Harbor , ME ) . Stained cells were mounted in Fluoromount G ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , Hatﬁeld , PA ) imaged using an inverted Delta Vision epiﬂuorescence microscope ( Applied Precision , Issaquah , WA ) , and a Cool Snap HQ2 CCD ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . For (cid:3) 1 integrin colocalization analyses in ﬁbronectin - attached cells images were acquired by TIR - FM , and for (cid:3) 1 integrin colocalization analyses in cells plated on uncoated coverslips for 48 h images were acquired by scanning - confocal microscopy . For analysis , the average signal from the secondary anti - body alone was subtracted from the (cid:3) 1 integrin image . Images were each separately contrast enhanced to optimize detection of (cid:3) 1 integrin foci , pseudo - colored , and merged using Metamorph software . Diffraction - limited CCPs were chosen at random in the absence of the (cid:3) 1 integrin signal and then analyzed for colocalization with (cid:3) 1 integrin . Image Analysis of Living Cells CCPs were deﬁned as diffraction - limited , individual structures that never split into multiple species . Clathrin - labeled structures that were larger than diffraction - limited CCPs were chosen as large clathrin assemblies . To avoid internal organelles , rapidly moving structures and structures lasting for less than eight consecutive frames were excluded from analysis . For analysis of clathrin dynamics near / far from sites of adhesion , clathrin structures within ( (cid:4) 20 pixels ; 850 nm ) and outside ( (cid:5) 20 pixels ) zones of adhesions , ( identiﬁed in IRM or mCherry - paxillin images ) were selected on pre - deﬁned frames of the time - lapse movie . The duration from the ﬁrst ap - pearance to the frame before disappearance was used to determine CCP / clathrin - coated structure ( CCS ) lifetime . To determine the fraction of CCPs that colocalize with dynamin - mRFP or x - rhodamine actin , images from time - lapse movies were pseudocolored red ( for dynamin or actin ) and green ( for CLC ) and merged . Green , diffraction - limited CCPs were ﬁrst identiﬁed in the absence of the red channel . Then , with the red channel showing , the appearance of a red signal that was above the local background before the disappearance of the CCP was counted as a colocalization event . For the perturbation of actin assembly , cells were perfused with latrunculin B ( 1 (cid:2) M ) after an initial 10 - min time course and imaged for another 10 min with TIR - FM . Only lifetimes of CCPs before or after latrunculin B treatment that terminated with the colocalization of dynamin - mRFP were analyzed . Large clathrin structures were excluded from this analysis . An IRM or mCherry - paxillin image after the time course was used to determine regions close to and more distant from the coverslip . Surface density of clathrin structures was de - termined by averaging the number of CCPs in regions on two initial and ﬁnal frames before or after latrunculin B treatment and expressed as the average number of clathrin structures per micrometer of surface area . Biochemical Assays Transferrin endocytosis assays were modiﬁed from ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ; Carter et al . , 1993 ) . Cells were detached , seeded onto ﬁbronectin or BSA - coated coverslips , and allowed to adhere for 1 h as described above . The time course of internalization was initiated by adding serum - free medium containing biotin - conjugated transferrin ( 4 (cid:2) g / ml ) . Internalization was stopped by plac - ing coverslips on ice . Sequestration from avidin and processing of signal was performed as previously described ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ; Carter et al . , 1993 ) . The level of biotin - transferrin internalization was normalized to the amount of internalization for cells plated on BSA to account for day - to - day variation . Horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) uptake assays were performed as previously reported ( Schlunck et al . , 2004 ) , with the exception that cells were plated on ﬁbronectin or BSA - coated coverslips , as described above . To measure adhesion levels , cells were plated on coated coverslips as described above and allowed to adhere for 1 – 2 h . Coverslips were then washed three times with PBS by trituration and resuspended in phosphatase substrate ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) in lysis buffer ( 0 . 4 % Triton X - 100 , 50 mM sodium citrate , pH 6 . 5 ) . Remaining cells were quantiﬁed by OD 405 nm and expressed as the percent of total cells plated . Whiskers of box plots are presented from 5 to 95 percentiles . Mean and outliers are marked as open circles and asterisks , respectively . Statistical analyses were performed with Minitab statistical software ( Minitab , State College , PA ) ( www . minitab . com ) . Experiments with more than two popula - tions were analyzes using ANOVA combined with Tukey multiple compar - ison test . RESULTS To study the inﬂuence of adhesion on clathrin - dependent endocytosis , we used BSC1 epithelial cells stably expressing EGFP - tagged CLC ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . These ﬂat cells are well suited to both microscopic - and biochemical - based analyses . We ﬁrst determined if the rate of CCP dynamics differed in distinctly adherent membrane regions within the same cell . To this end , we incubated cells on coverslips for (cid:4) 48 h in the presence of a complex composition of ECM derived from the serum - containing culture medium and ECM molecules secreted by the cells . We imaged CLC - EGFP dynamics on the ventral plasma membrane of cells using time - lapse t otal i nternal r eﬂection f luorescence m icroscopy ( TIR - FM ) and visualized the pattern of cell – substrate adhe - sion using i nterference r eﬂection ﬂuorescence m icroscopy ( IRM ) , a method in which regions of the plasma membrane closer to the coverslip appear dark ( Curtis , 1964 ; Figure 1A ) . In contrast to the uniform , diffraction - limited clathrin struc - tures observed under shorter incubation periods ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) , cells allowed to attach to cov - erslips for two days contained a heterogeneous population of CCSs , including both diffraction - limited CCPs and larger clathrin assemblies ( Figure 1 ) . Interestingly , the majority of the large clathrin assemblies overlapped with or were im - mediately adjacent to ( within 850 nm ) regions of the cell close to substrate attachment sites ( Figure 1 , A and B ) . Similar structures have been detected in a variety of cell types ( Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ; Keyel et al . , 2004 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . As a complimentary approach , we transiently expressed mCherry - paxillin to mark focal adhesions and quantiﬁed the fraction of large clathrin assemblies and CCPs Adhesion Inﬂuences Endocytosis Vol . 21 , September 1 , 2010 3071 that could be observed overlapping with or lying adjacent ( within 850 nm ) to focal adhesions . Similarly , the majority of large clathrin structures were found in these areas ( Figure 1 , E and F ) . These data suggest that the local environment near sites of cell – substrate contact may inﬂuence the behavior of clathrin - coated structures . Traditional , diffraction - limited CCPs ( (cid:6) 250 nm in size ) are the major carriers for endocytic cargo into cells ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) and have recently been suggested to fulﬁll the majority of the endocytic capacity of the cell ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . As a ﬁrst approach to determine if there is a connec - tion between clathrin - dependent endocytosis and substrate adhesion , we measured the lifetimes of diffraction - limited CCPs in regions of the plasma membrane in relation to substrate - contact sites , as determined by IRM . Manual anal - ysis of CCP lifetimes ( deﬁned as the moment of the ﬁrst appearance to the last time point before disappearance ) revealed that CCPs closely apposed to the coverslip per - sisted for 1 . 7 times longer ( 164 (cid:7) 7 s ; Student’s t test ; p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) than CCPs in unattached membrane zones ( 96 (cid:7) 3 s ; Figure 1 , C and D ; Supplemental Movie 1 ) . Lifetimes of randomly selected CCSs ( including both diffraction - limited CCPs and larger CCSs ) were also signiﬁcantly longer ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) in membrane regions close to the substrate than regions farther from the substrate ( Supple - mentary Figure S1 ) . Similarly , the analysis of CCP lifetimes in relation to mCherry - paxillin – labeled focal adhesions re - vealed an increase in CCP lifetimes near adhesions ( 132 (cid:7) 9 ; p (cid:6) 0 . 001 ) in comparison to CCPs more distant from focal adhesions ( 85 (cid:7) 5 s ; Figure 1 , G and H ; Supplemental Movie 2 ) . CCP lifetimes were also found to be signiﬁcantly longer at sites of adhesion using spinning - disk confocal imaging , which samples a thicker optical section , excluding the pos - sibility that CCP lifetimes as determined by TIR - FM resulted from a longer duration in the evanescent ﬁeld ( unpublished data ) . Taken together , these data demonstrate a spatial heter - ogeneity of CCP lifetimes in cells that correlates with the nature of the underlying substrate attachment , with slowly internal - izing CCPs localizing near sites of substrate adhesion . Adhesion to Fibronectin Slows the Rate of Transferrin Endocytosis To test directly whether cell – substrate adhesion inﬂuences clathrin - mediated endocytosis , we next assessed the effects of tight cellular adhesion under more deﬁned adhesion con - ditions . To this end , we coated coverslips with saturating levels of ﬁbronectin ( 50 (cid:2) g / ml ; Supplemental Figure S2A ) , an ECM molecule secreted by BSC1 cells ( Supplemental Figure S2 , B and C ) . As a control , we used coverslips coated with heat denatured BSA , a substrate previously used to generate weak adhesion conditions ( Gupton and Waterman - Storer , 2006 ; Figure 2A ) . To minimize the confounding ef - fects that may arise from modiﬁcation of the underlying substrate by endocytosis or exchange with proteins in the culture medium , cells were only allowed to attach to the coated coverslips for a short interval ( 1 – 3 h ) in serum - free medium . Cells adhered to ﬁbronectin were spread , often pancake - shaped , and formed mature focal adhesions ( Figure 2 , B and C ) . In contrast , most cells plated on BSA - coated coverslips did not spread well , exhibited thick , phase - dense rufﬂes , and sometimes formed smaller focal contacts ( Figure 2 , B and C ) , indicative of their weak adhesion state . Using these two distinct adhesion conditions , we analyzed the internalization of transferrin , a ligand for constitutive clath - 600 450 300 150 0 CC P L i f e t i m e ( s ) proximity to contactsnear far D CC P L i f e t i m e ( s ) 500 400 300 200 100 0 proximity to adhesions near far H % o f popu l a t i on nea r c on t a c t s i t e s B % o f popu l a t i on 0 20 40 60 80 100 large structuresCCPs F 0 20 40 60 80 100 large structuresCCPs IRM CLC - EGFP A merge C nea r f a r p r o x i m i t y t o c on t a c t s i t e s G nea r f a r p r o x i m i t y t o f o c a l adhe s i on s mCherry - Paxillin E merge CLC - EGFP Figure 1 . Clathrin dynamics are distinct at sites of substrate adhesion . ( A ) CLC - EGFP imaged by TIR - FM ( left , green in merge ) and the ventral cell surface imaged by IRM ( center , blue in merge ) show that large clathrin structures overlap with substrate contact sites . BSC1 cells were plated in serum - containing medium for 48 h . ( B ) Bar graph showing mean percentage ( (cid:7) SEM ) of large clath - rin structures or CCPs adjacent to / overlapping with substrate contact regions , as determined by IRM . n (cid:5) 399 , 21 cells ( each clathrin class ) . ( C ) Kymograph of representative clathrin structures near and far from substrate contact sites . ( D ) Box plots showing the distribution of lifetimes of dif - fraction - limited CCPs , based on their relative prox - imity to sites of adhesion . n (cid:5) 283 CCPs , 15 cells / category . Populations were signiﬁcantly different ; p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , Student’s t test . See Supplemental Movie 1 . ( E ) TIR - FM images of CLC - EGFP ( left , green in merge ) and mCherry - paxillin ( center , red in merge ) . ( F ) Bar graph showing the mean percent - age ( (cid:7) SEM ) of large clathrin structures or CCPs adjacent to / overlapping with mCherry - paxillin la - beled focal adhesions . n (cid:5) 404 , 20 cells / each clath - rin classiﬁcation . ( G ) Kymograph of representative clathrin structures based on their relative proximity to mCherry - paxillin - labeled focal adhesions . ( H ) Box plots showing the distribution of lifetimes of diffraction - limited CCPs based on their relative proximity to mCherry - paxillin – labeled focal adhe - sions . n (cid:5) 100 CCPs , four cells / category . Popula - tions were signiﬁcantly different ; p (cid:6) 0 . 001 , Stu - dent’s t test . See Supplemental Movie 2 . Scale bars in cells , ( A and E ) 5 (cid:2) m . Scale bars in kymographs , time (cid:1) 1 min and distance (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) m . E . M . Batchelder and D . Yarar Molecular Biology of the Cell 3072 rin - mediated endocytosis , biochemically ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ; Carter et al . , 1993 ) . Cells adherent to ﬁbronectin - coated cov - erslips internalized transferrin at a signiﬁcantly slower rate than those adherent to BSA - coated coverslips ( 60 % reduc - tion in uptake from 0 to 5 min , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , Student’s t test ; Figure 2D ) . Moreover , transferrin receptor surface levels were 1 . 8 (cid:7) 0 . 3 ( mean (cid:7) SD ) fold higher in cells adherent to ﬁbronectin than in cells adherent to BSA , consistent with the reduction in rates of endocytosis . Cells attached to BSA - coated coverslips exhibited phase - dense rufﬂes ( Figure 2B and data not shown ) , structures that have been correlated with ﬂuid - phase internalization ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . Thus , we also quantitatively measured the ﬂuid - phase up - take of HRP . In contrast to the difference observed in trans - ferrin internalization , we did not detect a difference in HRP internalization in cells plated on ﬁbronectin compared with that of cells plated on BSA - coated coverslips ( Sup - plemental Figure S3 ) . This indicates that the difference in the rate of transferrin uptake reﬂects a reduction in clath - rin - mediated endocytosis upon adhesion and not a change in bulk ﬂuid - phase internalization . Adhesion to Fibronectin Slows CCP Dynamics Our biochemical analysis of endocytosis under deﬁned sub - strate conditions demonstrates that a quantitative change in endocytosis occurs upon substrate adhesion in a population of cells . To test the effects of adhesion on individual cells , we imaged CLC - EGFP dynamics on the ventral plasma mem - brane of cells plated under the same conditions ( on ﬁbronec - tin - or BSA - coated coverslips for 1 – 3 h ) using time - lapse TIR - FM . Analysis of the lifetimes of diffraction - limited CCPs demonstrated that CCPs bound to ﬁbronectin persisted longer ( 440 (cid:7) 10 s ) than CCPs in cells under less adhesion ( BSA ; 98 (cid:7) 5 s ; Figure 3 , A and B , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , ANOVA ; Supplemental Movie 3 ) . Although these values indicate a signiﬁcant difference in lifetimes , the analysis may underes - timate CCP lifetimes in cells attached to ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips because 25 % of the CCPs persisted for the full 10 min of the time course ( Figure 3B ) . One possible explanation for the shorter - lived CCPs in cells under low - adhesion con - ditions is that membrane ﬂuctuations move CCPs prema - turely out of the illuminated optical section and abbreviate the apparent CCP lifetime . Because dynamin GTPase is es - sential for clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ) and exhibits a single peak of recruitment to CCPs immediately before ves - icle formation ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) , we monitored dynamin recruit - ment to exclude nonproductive endocytic events . We pre - dicted that if the disappearance of CLC - EGFP does not correlate with vesicle formation , a peak of dynamin - mRFP recruitment at the CCP would not coincide with internaliza - tion . However , a peak of dynamin - mRFP transiently local - ized with the majority of the diffraction - limited clathrin structures ( 80 (cid:7) 3 % ; n (cid:1) 6 cells , 350 CCPs ) before their disappearance in cells on BSA - coated coverslips , conﬁrming that the loss of the CLC - EGFP signal was not due to move - ment out of the illuminated optical section ( Figure 3C , Sup - plemental Movie 4 ) . We next determined if the proximity of diffraction - limited CCPs to focal adhesions in cells attached to coverslips uni - formly coated with ﬁbronectin inﬂuenced CCP dynamics . Interestingly , we detected a small , yet signiﬁcantly longer average lifetime for CCPs found close to mCherry - paxillin labeled adhesions ( 424 (cid:7) 19 s ) in comparison to those far from adhesions ( 350 (cid:7) 15 s ) in the majority of ﬁbronectin - adherent cells analyzed ( Student’s t test , three of four cells , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ; Figure 3D ) . In addition , the lifetimes of the CCPs far from the focal adhesions in ﬁbronectin - adherent cells were signiﬁcantly longer than CCP lifetimes in cells plated on BSA ( 98 (cid:7) 5 s , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , ANOVA ) . This may reﬂect the difference in the size and nature of the adhesions or the underlying cytoskeleton that forms in these different condi - tions and is consistent with the idea that a uniform coating of high levels of ﬁbronectin - mediated adhesion has both local and global effects on CCP dynamics . Other Modes of Adhesion May Also Regulate CCP Dynamics To determine if the adhesion - mediated reduction in CCS dynamics is speciﬁc to ﬁbronectin - mediated adhesion or if adhesion to another unrelated substrate is sufﬁcient to re - duce CCP dynamics , we plated cells on coverslips coated with the plant lectin conA . ConA binds to the glycoproteins residing on the cell surface and does not induce signaling . Analysis of diffraction - limited CCP dynamics from time - lapse TIR - FM movies revealed that nearly all CCP dynamics were lost in cells plated on conA , with an average lifetime of 596 (cid:7) 2 s ( Figure 3 , E and F ) . We are underestimating the lifetimes of these CCPs , however , as most of the CCPs persisted for the full length of the 10 - min time course . This indicates that an adhesion - mediated reduction in CCP dy - A 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 time ( min ) FibronectinBSA s eque s t e r ed t r an s f e rr i n ( % o f s u r f a c e bound , no r m a li z ed ) D B C Fibronectin BSA a tt a c hed c e ll s ( f r a c t i on o f t o t a l ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 FN BSA an t i - pa x illi n BSA Fibronectin Figure 2 . Tightly adhered cells exhibit a reduced rate of endocy - tosis in comparison to weakly adhered cells . Deﬁned conditions were developed for tight and weak adhesion , shown in ( A ) an adhesion assay and ( B ) phase - contrast images of cells plated on ﬁbronectin - and heat - denatured BSA - coated coverslips . Cells are tightly adhered to ﬁbronectin - ( (cid:1) ) but poorly attached to BSA ( u ) - coated coverslips . Data are shown as mean (cid:7) SD , n (cid:1) three independent experiments . Cells were plated on coated coverslips in serum - free medium for 1 - 3 h . ( C ) Anti - paxillin immunoﬂuores - cence TIR - FM images of cells plated on ﬁbronectin - ( left ) and BSA ( right ) - coated coverslips are presented , showing the morphology and size of focal adhesions / contacts . Scale bars , 10 (cid:2) m . ( D ) Tight adhesion reduces clathrin - dependent endocytosis of transferrin . Time courses of biotin - conjugated transferrin sequestered from avi - din in cells plated on ﬁbronectin - ( F , dashed line ) and BSA ( f , solid line ) - coated coverslips as in B are shown , demonstrating that clath - rin - mediated endocytosis is signiﬁcantly slowed in cells plated on ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips in comparison to cells plated on BSA - coated coverslips ( p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , Student’s t test ) . Results are shown as a percent of the total surface - associated transferrin . Data are normal - ized to maximum endocytosis levels and shown as mean (cid:7) SD , n (cid:1) four duplicate experiments . Adhesion Inﬂuences Endocytosis Vol . 21 , September 1 , 2010 3073 namics is not ﬁbronectin speciﬁc . Although the mechanisms that reduce CCP dynamics in cells plated on conA and ﬁbronectin may be distinct , these observations underscore the importance of cell – substrate adhesion on clathrin - depen - dent endocytosis . A Subset of CCPs Colocalize with Active (cid:1) 1 Integrin Cells attach to the ECM through integrins , heterodimeric transmembrane proteins at the cell surface ( Hynes , 2002 ) . In combination with a number of different (cid:6) subunits , (cid:3) 1 inte - grin has been shown to be important for binding to ﬁbronec - tin . BSC1 cells express (cid:3) 1 integrin , which localizes on the cell surface in punctate and linear patterns , likely corresponding to focal contacts and adhesions , respectively ( Figure 4 ) . One possible mechanism to explain how tight adhesion reduces clathrin - mediated endocytosis is that clathrin structures at sites of adhesion are loaded with integrins that are directly attached to the ECM and consequently are retained at the cell surface . To test this , we measured the colocalization of diffraction - limited CCPs with (cid:3) 1 integrin bound to the ECM in relation to focal adhesions in cells grown in serum for 48 h . We used indirect immunoﬂuorescence with an anti - body that speciﬁcally recognizes a ligand - bound conforma - tion of (cid:3) 1 integrin ( 9EG7 ; Lenter et al . , 1993 ) and identiﬁed focal adhesions with an anti - paxillin antibody . Analysis of images taken with confocal microscopy indicated a signiﬁ - cant increase in the fraction of CCPs overlapping with ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin at sites of adhesion ( 55 (cid:7) 3 ; p (cid:6) 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) in comparison to CCPs away from adhe - sions ( 27 (cid:7) 4 ; Figure 4 ) . This suggests that physical associ - ation CCPs with the ECM through (cid:3) 1 integrin may contrib - ute to the inhibition of vesicle formation . Consistent with this , a greater fraction of CCPs overlapped with ligand - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin in cells plated on ﬁbronectin - coated cov - erslips ( 19 (cid:7) 6 % ) in comparison to CCPs in cells plated on BSA - coated coverslips and imaged with TIR - FM ( 11 (cid:7) 1 % ; p (cid:6) 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) . Although these data suggest that (cid:3) 1 integrin molecules directly attached to the ECM reduce clathrin dynamics , they do not account for the prolonged lifetime measured for (cid:5) 75 % of the CCPs in ﬁbronectin - adherent cells in comparison to CCPs found in cells attached to BSA - coated coverslips . Thus , the adhesion - mediated in - hibition of clathrin - coated vesicle formation may be partially explained by a direct physical attachment of clathrin struc - tures to the underlying matrix through (cid:3) 1 integrin . Reduction in CCP Dynamics Is Mediated by (cid:1) 1 Integrin Because a higher fraction of CCPs under conditions of high adhesion colocalized with ligand - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin , we in - vestigated the contribution of (cid:3) 1 integrin function to vesicle formation . We ﬁrst tested the effect of a function - blocking (cid:3) 1 integrin antibody ( AIIB2 ; 8 (cid:2) g / ml ) on CCPs dynamics in cells plated on coverslips in serum - containing medium for 48 h . However , we did not observe a difference in cell morphology or CCP dynamics ( data not shown ) . Because serum contains a combination of ECM molecules ( e . g . , vi - Figure 3 . Clathrin - coated structures have in - creased lifetimes in tightly adhered cells . ( A ) TIR - FM images and ( B ) box plots showing CCP lifetime distributions in cells plated on ﬁbronectin - and BSA - coated coverslips for 1 – 3 h in serum - free medium . Corresponding kymographs made from rectangular regions are shown to right of the images in A . n (cid:5) 200 , ﬁve cells each condition . Populations of life - times were signiﬁcantly different , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , ANOVA . See Supplemental Movie 3 . ( C ) TIR - FM kymographs of CLC - EGFP ( top , green in merge ) and dynamin - mRFP ( middle , red in merge ) from cells plated on BSA - coated coverslips are presented , showing CCPs re - cruit dynamin late in vesicle formation . See Supplemental Movie 4 . ( D ) Box plots showing the distribution of lifetimes of CCPs based on their relative proximity to mCherry - paxillin - labeled focal adhesions in cells plated on ﬁ - bronectin - coated coverslips for 1 – 3 h in se - rum - free medium . n (cid:5) 145 , four cells . CCP lifetimes near and far from adhesions were signiﬁcantly different in 3 – 4 cells , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , Student’s t test . ( E ) TIR - FM image and ( F ) box plots showing CCS lifetime distributions of cells plated on conA - coated coverslips . Cells were incubated for 1 – 3 h in serum - free me - dium . Corresponding kymograph made from rectangular region is shown to the right of image . n (cid:5) 125 , four cells each condition . See Supplemental Movie 5 . Scale bars in cells , 5 (cid:2) m . Scale bars in kymographs , time (cid:1) 1 min and distance (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) m . E . M . Batchelder and D . Yarar Molecular Biology of the Cell 3074 tronectin and ﬁbronectin ) , we tested the effect of (cid:3) 1 integrin inhibition on CCPs dynamics in cells allowed to attach to coverslips in serum - free medium for an extended period ( 48 h ) , allowing the cells to attach to matrix that they themselves secreted . The lifetimes of diffraction - limited CCPs in the vicinity of adhesions revealed that CCPs in anti - (cid:3) 1 integrin antibody ( AIIB2 ; 8 (cid:2) g / ml ) - treated cells were signiﬁcantly shorter lived ( 129 (cid:7) 5 s , p (cid:6) 0 . 01 , Student’s t test ) than CCPs in control antibody treated cells ( 200 (cid:7) 8 s ; Figure 5 , A and B , Supplemental Movie 6 ) . This demonstrates that the (cid:3) 1 integrin - ECM attachment contributes to the adhesion - medi - ated inhibition of CCP dynamics . We next determined whether (cid:3) 1 integrin mediates the reduction in CCP lifetime in cells attached to uniformly coated coverslips by treating cells with anti - (cid:3) 1 integrin in - hibitory ( AIIB2 ; 8 (cid:2) g / ml ) or a control antibody during ad - hesion with short incubation times . In contrast to cells incu - bated with control antibodies , cells treated with the (cid:3) 1 integrin inhibitory antibody formed phase - dense , rufﬂed la - mellipodia , consistent with the reduction of adhesion ( data not shown ) . The average lifetime of diffraction - limited CCPs in anti - (cid:3) 1 integrin antibody - treated cells plated on ﬁbronec - tin was signiﬁcantly shorter ( 185 (cid:7) 9 s ) than the lifetime of CCPs in control antibody treated cells ( 419 (cid:7) 13 s ; Figure 5 , C and D , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , Student’s t test ; Supplemental Movie 7 ) , demonstrating that the reduction in endocytosis in ﬁbronec - tin - attached cells is (cid:3) 1 integrin dependent . The extent of rescue of CCP lifetimes was incomplete , however , when compared with CCPs lifetimes in cells plated on BSA - coated coverslips ( 185 vs . 98 s ) . This suggests that either the anti - body does not completely inhibit (cid:3) 1 integrin function , or other modes of adhesion also contribute to the reduction of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cells adherent to uniformly coated ﬁbronectin . Taken together , these data demonstrate that (cid:3) 1 integrin - mediated adhesion negatively inﬂuences CCP dynamics . Actin Dynamics Are Required for Efﬁcient Endocytosis Because the lifetimes of CCPs can be differentiated by their proximity to the underlying substrate , we sought to deter - mine if there are distinct molecular requirements for vesicle formation under different adhesion conditions . We hypoth - esized that attachment of a CCP to the matrix , for example through (cid:3) 1 integrin , would be expected to resist membrane deformation . Because actin polymerization is sufﬁcient to drive the motility of a load ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) , we sought to determine if endocytosis at sites of cell – substrate adhesion preferentially requires actin polymerization . However , whereas the role of actin assembly and disassembly dynam - ics in endocytosis has been demonstrated in some cells ( Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Moskowitz et al . , 2003 ; Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ; Lee et al . , 2006 ) , the role of actin in other cell types , including the BSC1 cells used in this study ( Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ; Boucrot et al . , 2006 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) , remains under debate . As a ﬁrst step , we demon - strated that diffraction - limited CCPs in BSC1 cells recruit actin during vesicle formation in cells microinjected with ﬂuorescently labeled actin ( Figure 6A , Supplemental Movie 8 ) , similar to CCPs in a variety of other cell types ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ; Benesch et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . A similar fraction of diffraction - limited CCPs in regions both near ( 54 (cid:7) 2 % , n (cid:1) 5 cells , 206 CCPs ) and far ( 53 (cid:7) 3 % , n (cid:1) 5 cells , 180 CCPs ) from sites of substrate adhesion as determined by IRM colocalized with actin before their disappearance . To determine if actin assembly plays a role in clathrin - coated vesicle formation in BSC1 cells , we acutely treated cells plated on coverslips for 48 h in the presence of serum - containing medium with a low concentration of latrunculin B ( 1 (cid:2) M ) , a pharmacological agent that sequesters actin monomers and inhibits actin assembly ( Spector et al . , 1989 ) . After an initial time course , cells were perfused with 1 (cid:2) M latrunculin B . Under these conditions focal adhesions per - sisted and cells did not detach dramatically from the sub - strate ( Figure 6 ) . However , the motile behaviors of the CCPs changed upon inhibition of actin assembly ; many CCPs in BSA CLC - EGFP ligand - bound β 1 integrin paxillin A 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 % CC P s o v e r l ap p i n g w i t h a c t i v e −β 1 i n t eg r i n near far proximity to adhesions 19 ± 2 % 11 ± 1 % f i b r one c t i n CLC - EGFP ligand - bound β 1 integrin merge B merge zoom Figure 4 . Ligand - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin colocalizes with CCPs at focal adhesions . ( A ) Indirect immunoﬂuorescence images ( imaged by scanning confocal microscopy ) of ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin ( top cen - ter panel , red in merge ) and paxillin ( top right panel , blue in merge ) in BSC1 CLC - EGFP expressing cells plated for 48 h on coverslips in serum - containing medium . CLC - EGFP ( top right panel , green in the merge ) is also shown . Examples of CCPs overlapping with ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin near ( arrow ) and far from ( arrowheads ) focal adhesions are indicated . Bar graph showing the percent ( (cid:7) SEM ) of CCPs that overlap with the ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin near and far from focal adhesions is shown ( n (cid:5) 780 CCPs , 14 cells ) . The fraction of CCPs overlapping with (cid:3) 1 integrin was signiﬁcantly greater near focal adhesions ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) . Magniﬁcation of yel - low - boxed area in merge also shown . ( B ) Indirect immunoﬂuores - cence images ( imaged by TIR - FM ) of ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin ( mid - dle panels , red in merge ) in BSC1 CLC - EGFP ( left panels , green in merge ) cells plated on ﬁbronectin - ( top ) and BSA ( bottom ) - coated coverslips . The average percent ( (cid:7) SEM ) of CCPs that overlap with the ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin is shown ( n (cid:5) 1100 CCPs , 20 cells / condition ) and is signiﬁcantly different ( p (cid:6) 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) . Scale bars , 5 (cid:2) m . Adhesion Inﬂuences Endocytosis Vol . 21 , September 1 , 2010 3075 areas without adhesion increased in their rate of lateral movement ( Supplemental Movie 9 , data not shown ) , as pre - viously observed ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Boucrot et al . , 2006 ) . The increase in CCP movement upon disassembly of the actin cytoskeleton has been shown to correlate between multiple CCPs within a local area ( Boucrot et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that large regions of the plasma membrane may become motile . Therefore , we measured lifetimes of diffrac - tion - limited CCPs that transiently recruit dynamin - mRFP before their disappearance , to exclude events in which the loss of the CLC - EGFP signal resulted from ﬂuctuations of the membrane and movement out of the illuminated optical section . Indeed , we observed a reduction in the proportion of diffraction - limited CCPs that colocalized with dynamin before their disappearance after latrunculin B treatment at sites far from the substrate ( as determined by IRM ; 80 (cid:7) 3 % before vs . 56 (cid:7) 7 % after latrunculin B treatment , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ; n (cid:1) 4 cells , n (cid:5) 135 CCPs ) . This difference was not apparent for CCPs in membrane regions localized close to the under - lying substrate ( 82 (cid:7) 2 % before vs . 78 (cid:7) 3 % after latrunculin B treatment , p (cid:1) 0 . 4 ; n (cid:1) 4 cells , n (cid:5) 135 CCPs ) . Strikingly , we found that disassembly of the actin cytoskeleton differ - entially affected CCP lifetimes , depending on the nature of the underlying cell – substrate contact . CCP lifetimes in both adherent and nonadherent regions of the membrane , as determined by IRM or mCherry - paxillin localization , were increased upon latrunculin B treatment , indicating that actin plays a role in endocytosis in BSC1 cells in both of these adhesive conditions ( Figure 6 , B and C , data not shown ) . However , CCP endocytosis in adherent regions of the mem - brane was more severely inhibited [ 130 (cid:7) 60 % increase in lifetime ( mean (cid:7) SD ) , n (cid:5) 150 CCPs , six cells ] than in nonadherent regions ( 65 (cid:7) 37 % increase in lifetime , n (cid:5) 150 CCPs , six cells ; ANOVA , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ; Figure 6C , Supplemental Movie 9 ) . Consistent with the severe inhibition in the rate of endocytosis , CCP density at sites of substrate contact was increased after disruption of actin dynamics ( Figure 6D , p (cid:6) 0 . 01 , Student’s t test ) . In contrast , CCP density did not signiﬁcantly change in areas far from the substrate ( p (cid:6) 0 . 4 , Student’s t test ) . We also tested the effect of latrunculin B treatment in cells plated on ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips and found that CCP lifetimes were increased by 1 . 7 - fold ( data not shown ) . The parallel experiment in cells plated on low adhesive conditions was technically challenging be - cause upon treatment with latrunculin B , many of these cells detached from the coverslip , precluding their analysis ( data not shown ) . Taken together , these data indicate that actin assembly plays a role in efﬁcient coated vesicle formation in regions of the cell with and without substrate contact , but is preferentially required for clathrin - coated vesicle formation in regions of adhesion . DISCUSSION Clathrin - dependent endocytosis occurs on the plasma mem - brane , the site of cell – substrate adhesion . Here , we used quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy , biochemistry , and molecular perturbations to demonstrate that substrate adhe - sion negatively inﬂuences clathrin - coated vesicle formation and generates spatial heterogeneity of CCP lifetimes on the cell surface . Furthermore , we ﬁnd that the reduction of coated vesicle formation in cells adherent to the ECM mol - ecule ﬁbronectin is mediated in part by (cid:3) 1 integrin and that clathrin - dependent endocytosis at sites of adhesion is facil - itated by a dynamic actin cytoskeleton . Although previous studies on endocytosis have primarily focused on tissue culture cells grown in vitro , our discovery that adhesion inﬂuences endocytosis has important implica - tions for the functions of cells that normally grow in the context of multicellular tissues surrounded by ECM . In ad - dition to our demonstration that clathrin - dependent endo - cytosis is affected by interactions with the substrate , adhe - sion may more generally affect endocytosis . Indeed , substrate adhesion has been found to negatively regulate the uptake of the AMPA receptor through clathrin - dependent endocytosis and the internalization of caveolae ( del Pozo et al . , 2005 ; Cingolani et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , the density and number of clathrin assemblies observed on macrophages was reported to be greater on the adherent surface than on the free surface ( Aggeler and Werb , 1982 ) . Although many factors are involved in CCP formation and internalization , these data may be explained in part by an adhesion - medi - ated reduction in the kinetics of internalization . Together , A IgG AIIB2 B 0100200300400500600 α−β 1 integrin during adhesion control IgG during adhesion CC P L i f e t i m e ( s ) a t s ub s t r a t e - c on t a c t s i t e s control IgG during adhesion C α−β 1 integrin during adhesion D 0100200300400500600 CC P L i f e t i m e ( s ) on F N - c oa t ed c o v e r s li p s F N - c oa t ed c o v e r s li p FN / IgG FN / AIIB2 Figure 5 . (cid:3) 1 integrin – dependent adhesion re - duces CCP dynamics . ( A and B ) ; TIR - FM im - ages ( A ) and box plots ( B ) showing lifetime distributions of CCPs at sites closest to the cov - erslip in cells plated on “uncoated” coverslips in the presence of either control IgG ( left ) or inhibitory (cid:3) 1 integrin antibody ( AIIB2 ; right ) . Cells were incubated for 48 h on the coverslip in serum - free medium . Corresponding kymo - graphs made from the rectangular regions are shown to the right of images . n (cid:5) 120 CCPs , six cells / condition . Populations of lifetimes were signiﬁcantly different , p (cid:6) 0 . 01 , ANOVA . See Supplemental Movie 6 . ( C ) TIR - FM images and ( D ) box plots showing lifetime distributions of CCPs in cells plated on ﬁbronectin ( FN ) - coated coverslips and incubated with either control IgG ( left ) or inhibitory (cid:3) 1 integrin antibody ( AIIB2 ; right ) during adhesion . Cells were in - cubated for 1 – 3 h in serum - free medium . Cor - responding kymographs made from the rectan - gular regions are shown to right of images . n (cid:1) 165 CCPs , ﬁve cells / condition . Populations of lifetimes were signiﬁcantly different , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , ANOVA . See Supplemental Movie 7 . Scale bars in cells , 5 (cid:2) m . Scale bars in kymographs , 1 min and 2 (cid:2) m . E . M . Batchelder and D . Yarar Molecular Biology of the Cell 3076 these ﬁndings support a general role for adhesion in affect - ing multiple routes of endocytosis . Mechanism of Adhesion - mediated Reduction in CCP Dynamics There are two primary , nonmutually exclusive mechanisms by which substrate adhesion inhibits the rate of clathrin - dependent endocytosis . First , the inhibition of clathrin - de - pendent endocytosis may occur through a direct linkage of a CCP constituent with the underlying substrate that phys - ically impedes internalization . Second , this inhibition may occur through an indirect , signaling - based route that func - tions through the modiﬁcation of the endocytic machinery or the cell cortex . In support of the idea that adhesion directly inhibits en - docytosis , we found that a greater fraction of clathrin struc - tures near focal adhesions overlapped with ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin than clathrin structures more distant from focal adhesions . In addition , more CCPs in cells adherent to ﬁ - bronectin - coated coverslips colocalized with ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin than CCPs in cells adherent to BSA - coated cover - slips . An interaction of CCPs with the underlying substrate was suggested previously by Maupin and Pollard ( 1983 ) , who observed structures by EM that resembled a combina - tion of ﬂat and curved CCPs and clathrin - coated vesicles . These structures closely apposed the underlying substrate , especially in proximity to focal contacts . Also consistent with the notion that physical linkage to the underlying substrate restrains the CCP at the cell surface , we found that adhesion to conA - coated coverslips dramatically inhibits CCP dynamics . In addition , to (cid:3) 1 - integrin – mediated adhesion , our results also suggest that other methods of physical attachment to the underlying substrate may contribute to the reduction in CCP dynamics . First , although more CCPs colocalize with ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin in cells grown on ﬁbronectin - than BSA - coated coverslips , the majority of CCPs did not colo - calize with active (cid:3) 1 integrin . However , (cid:4) 75 % of the CCPs in ﬁbronectin - adherent cells exhibited longer lifetimes than all of the CCPs in cells plated on BSA - coated coverslips . Therefore , (cid:3) 1 integrin loading of CCPs cannot account for the reduction in the lifetimes of all of the CCPs under conditions of tight adhesion . This trend , although less dra - matic , was also true in cells grown on coverslips with non - uniform substrates . However , because the analysis of ﬁxed cells only provides information on a single time point in the life of a CCP and the interactions of (cid:3) 1 integrin with ECM are transient , we may be underestimating the fraction of CCPs that are ﬁlled with ECM - bound (cid:3) 1 integrin . Neverthe - less , we observed only a partial rescue of adhesion - mediated inhibition of endocytosis upon perturbation of (cid:3) 1 integrin function , suggesting that other modes of substrate attach - ment to the matrix , including other integrins , may also in - ﬂuence CCP dynamics . Hence , there may be other ECM - associated integrins within CCPs or other nonintegrin modes of adhesions that inﬂuence CCP dynamics . Although physical adhesion to the ECM may directly resist endocytosis , adhesion may inﬂuence clathrin - depen - dent endocytosis indirectly by converting mechanical infor - mation into chemical signals . A signal - based mechanism that reduces the rate of endocytosis would be expected to inﬂuence CCP dynamics in membrane regions distant from sites of adhesion . Consistent with this notion , it has been suggested recently that adhesion may have a global effect on CCP dynamics ( Liu et al . , 2009 ) . Indeed , our biochemical measurements of transferrin uptake , which sample endocy - tosis at both the ventral and dorsal plasma membranes , Figure 6 . Actin cytoskeletal assembly is preferentially required for endocytosis at sites of substrate contact . ( A ) TIR - FM images and kymographs of CLC - EGFP and x - rhodamine actin , showing that actin is recruited to CCPs late during vesicle formation . Cell was plated in serum - containing medium for 48 h . See Supplemental Movie 8 . ( B ) TIR - FM images of CLC - EGFP and dynamin - mRFP and corresponding IRM image showing pattern of adhesion . ( C ) Box plots showing the lifetime distributions of CCPs that transiently recruit dynamin . Cells plated on uncoated coverslips for 48 h in serum - containing medium were perfused with 1 (cid:2) M latrunculin B after a 10 - min time course . n (cid:1) 150 CCP / adherent condition per ﬁve cells . Signiﬁcant difference between populations ( * p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , ANOVA ) . Corresponding kymographs generated from yellow rect - angular regions ( 1 (cid:1) near contact site ; 2 (cid:1) far from contact site ) are shown . ( D ) Bar graph ( mean (cid:7) SD ) showing the ratio of CCP density before latrunculin B to after latrunculin B treatment in regions near to and far from the substrate ( as determined by IRM ) is signiﬁcantly different ( p (cid:6) 0 . 01 , Student’s t test ) . Arrows in C . exemplify regions with increased CCP density after latrunculin B treatment . See Supplemental Movie 9 . Scale bars in cells , 5 (cid:2) m . Scale bars in kymographs , time (cid:1) 1 min and distance (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) m . Adhesion Inﬂuences Endocytosis Vol . 21 , September 1 , 2010 3077 suggest a global inﬂuence of adhesion on the rate of clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Furthermore , CCP lifetimes in cells plated on ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips were extended in regions both near and far from adhesions , supporting the idea that adhesion has a global inﬂuence on endocytosis . In contrast to our ﬁndings , Liu et al . ( 2009 ) found that patterned substrates , but not a uniform coating of substrate , had a global effect on endocytosis . This conﬂicting result may be due to the distinct culture conditions used in our two stud - ies , including the duration of adhesion and the presence of serum . These methodological differences could have pro - found effects on the composition and structure of the adhe - sions , as well as the organization and dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton and thus differentially affect CCP dynamics . A reduction in lamellar actin assembly and disassembly dynamics , which occurs under conditions of high adhesion ( Gupton and Waterman - Storer , 2006 ) , could also reduce the local rate of actin dynamics at sites of endocytosis . This would result in a reduction of the force that is generated for membrane deformation and thereby slow endocytosis . Fi - nally , a reduction in actin dynamics could also prevent the endocytosis of CCPs that are embedded in the actin cy - toskeleton ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , multiple distinct mechanisms , including physical retention of CCPs by inte - grins and signaling - based methods , may play roles in the regulation of endocytosis at sites of adhesion . Contribution of Actin Dynamics to Clathrin - dependent Vesicle Formation at Sites of Adhesion In addition to playing a negative role in CCP dynamics , actin assembly and disassembly may play a positive role in vesicle formation . However , the contribution of the actin cytoskeleton to clathrin - dependent vesicle formation re - mains controversial . Although actin dynamics clearly con - tribute to many stages of clathrin - dependent formation in some cell types and conditions ( Moskowitz et al . , 2003 ; Mer - riﬁeld et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ; Lee et al . , 2006 ) , actin dynamics appear to play a less critical role in other cell types ( Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ; Boucrot et al . , 2006 ; Liu et al . , 2009 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . A previous report suggested that actin dynamics do not play a role in the formation of conventional clathrin - coated vesicles in BSC1 cells used in this study ( Boucrot et al . , 2006 ) . The explanation for the difference between our results and previous work may lie in the dis - tinct experimental procedures used in the two studies , in - cluding the duration of cell attachment to the coverslip , the concentration of latrunculin B used , and the exclusion of nonproductive CCP lifetimes . We suggest that a lack of effect in vesicle formation after the disruption of actin dynamics in BSC1 cells , as previously observed , may result from a dif - ference in inhibitor sensitivity of the cells that is dependent on the time of adhesion or a consequence of increased move - ment of the plasma membrane after disruption of actin assembly resulting in shorter measured CCP lifetimes . In addition to differences in methodologies used between the many different studies , the conﬂicting results upon the disruption of actin dynamics found in different cell types may be accounted for by the adhesion state of the cells . Speciﬁcally , CCPs in cells with large areas of substrate ad - hesion or tighter local adhesion might exhibit a greater requirement for actin dynamics . In support of this model , our data reveal an increased requirement for actin assembly during clathrin - coated vesicle formation at sites of substrate adhesion . A recent study has also suggested that actin assembly is required for the formation and uptake of ﬂat , large clathrin structures termed “plaques” found on the adherent mem - brane of some cells ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . These authors , however , did not observe these plaques in BSC1 cells , sug - gesting that the diffraction limited CCPs that we analyzed here are not plaques . Consistent with this , the lifetimes of our diffraction - limited CCPs at sites of adhesion are shorter ( (cid:4) 160 s ) than the lifetimes reported for the plaques ( starting from (cid:4) 210 s ) . However , because it is not clear how different culture and adhesion conditions inﬂuence the formation of plaques , we cannot rule out the possibility that the larger clathrin structures that we have observed at sites of adhe - sion may be related to plaques . In summary , we propose a model in which cell – substrate adhesion increases the force required to deform a membrane during clathrin - coated vesicle formation . This mechanism is in part mediated by the direct attachment of CCP cargo , namely (cid:3) 1 integrin , with the ECM . This adhesion force is counteracted by actin cytoskeletal assembly , which drives vesicle formation . Interestingly , turgor pressure in budding yeast , pushing the plasma membrane against the cell wall , inhibits endocytosis , but is counteracted by actin cytoskel - etal forces ( Aghamohammadzadeh and Ayscough , 2009 ) , suggesting that the mechanism underlying clathrin - medi - ated vesicle formation may be conserved . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to S . Schmid , C . Waterman , T . Parsons ( University of Virginia ) , and R . Hynes for kindly providing reagents . We also thank S . Alford , I . Cheeseman , S . Gupton , R . Hynes , and A . Rodal for critically reading the manuscript , the Gertler lab for sharing their equipment , and the Koch Institute Microscopy core for use of the microscopes . This study was sup - ported by a Leukemia and Lymphoma fellowship ( 3432 - 07 ) and a Whitehead Institute grant ( D . Y . ) . REFERENCES Aggeler , J . , and Werb , Z . ( 1982 ) . Initial events during phagocytosis by mac - rophages viewed from outside and inside the cell : membrane - particle inter - actions and clathrin . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 613 – 623 . Aghamohammadzadeh , S . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2009 ) . Differential require - ments for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1039 – 1042 . Benesch , S . , Polo , S . , Lai , F . P . , Anderson , K . I . , Stradal , T . E . , Wehland , J . , and Rottner , K . ( 2005 ) . N - WASP deﬁciency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3103 – 3115 . Blanpied , T . A . , Scott , D . B . , and Ehlers , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Dynamics and regula - tion of clathrin coats at specialized endocytic zones of dendrites and spines . Neuron 36 , 435 – 449 . Boucrot , E . , Saffarian , S . , Massol , R . , Kirchhausen , T . , and Ehrlich , M . ( 2006 ) . Role of lipids and actin in the formation of clathrin - coated pits . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 4036 – 4048 . Carter , L . L . , Redelmeier , T . E . , Woollenweber , L . A . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1993 ) . Multiple GTP - binding proteins participate in clathrin - coated vesicle - medi - ated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 37 – 45 . Cingolani , L . A . , Thalhammer , A . , Yu , L . M . , Catalano , M . , Ramos , T . , Colicos , M . A . , and Goda , Y . ( 2008 ) . Activity - dependent regulation of synaptic AMPA receptor composition and abundance by beta3 integrins . Neuron 58 , 749 – 762 . Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . Curtis , A . S . ( 1964 ) . The mechanism of adhesion of cells to glass . a study by interference reﬂection microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 20 , 199 – 215 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . del Pozo , M . A . , Balasubramanian , N . , Alderson , N . B . , Kiosses , W . B . , Grande - Garcia , A . , Anderson , R . G . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 901 – 908 . E . M . Batchelder and D . Yarar Molecular Biology of the Cell 3078 Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Van Oijen , A . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nibert , M . L . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Warren , R . A . , Kessels , M . M . , Keen , J . H . , Heuser , J . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2001 ) . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1209 – 1223 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated en - docytosis in mammalian cells . Trafﬁc 1 , 161 – 171 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . , and Keen , J . H . ( 1999 ) . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 . Gupton , S . L . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2006 ) . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migra - tion . Cell 125 , 1361 – 1374 . Hynes , R . O . ( 2002 ) . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 – 687 . Keyel , P . A . , Watkins , S . C . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Endocytic adaptor molecules reveal an endosomal population of clathrin by total internal reﬂec - tion ﬂuorescence microscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 13190 – 13204 . Lee , D . W . , Wu , X . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2006 ) . Recruitment dynamics of GAK and auxilin to clathrin - coated pits during endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3502 – 3512 . Lenter , M . , Uhlig , H . , Hamann , A . , Jeno , P . , Imhof , B . , and Vestweber , D . ( 1993 ) . A monoclonal antibody against an activation epitope on mouse inte - grin chain beta 1 blocks adhesion of lymphocytes to the endothelial integrin alpha 6 beta 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 9051 – 9055 . Liu , A . P . , Loerke , D . , Schmid , S . L . , and Danuser , G . ( 2009 ) . Global and local regulation of clathrin - coated pit dynamics detected on patterned substrates . Biophys . J . 97 , 1038 – 1047 . Loerke , D . , Mettlen , M . , Yarar , D . , Jaqaman , K . , Jaqaman , H . , Danuser , G . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit matu - ration . PLoS Biol . 7 , e57 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconsti - tution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . Maupin , P . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1983 ) . Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin ﬁlaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin ﬁxation . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 51 – 62 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Perrais , D . , and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clath - rin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Moskowitz , H . S . , Heuser , J . , McGraw , T . E . , and Ryan , T . A . ( 2003 ) . Targeted chemical disruption of clathrin function in living cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4437 – 4447 . Naumanen , P . , Lappalainen , P . , and Hotulainen , P . ( 2008 ) . Mechanisms of actin stress ﬁbre assembly . J . Microsc . 231 , 446 – 454 . Rappoport , J . Z . , and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) . Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 847 – 855 . Saffarian , S . , Cocucci , E . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2009 ) . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000191 . Schafer , D . A . , Welch , M . D . , Machesky , L . M . , Bridgman , P . C . , Meyer , S . M . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Visualization and molecular analysis of actin assem - bly in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1919 – 1930 . Schlunk , G . , Damke , H . , Kiosses , W . B . , Rusk , N . , Symons , M . H . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Schmid , S . L . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 256 – 267 . Smythe , E . , Redelmeier , T . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1992 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis in semiintact cells . Methods Enzymol . 219 , 223 – 234 . Soulet , F . , Yarar , D . , Leonard , M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . SNX9 regulates dynamin assembly and is required for efﬁcient clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2058 – 2067 . Spector , I . , Shochet , N . R . , Blasberger , D . , and Kashman , Y . ( 1989 ) . Latruncu - lins—novel marine macrolides that disrupt microﬁlament organization and affect cell growth : I . Comparison with cytochalasin D . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 13 , 127 – 144 . van der Bliek , A . M . , and Meyerowitz , E . M . ( 1991 ) . Dynamin - like protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular trafﬁc . Na - ture 351 , 411 – 414 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 964 – 975 . Adhesion Inﬂuences Endocytosis Vol . 21 , September 1 , 2010 3079