SCIENCE CHINA Life Sciences © Science China Press and Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 life . scichina . com www . springerlink . com * Corresponding author ( email : luoj @ psych . ac . cn ) • RESEARCH PAPERS • December 2010 Vol . 53 No . 12 : 1474 – 1482 doi : 10 . 1007 / s11427 - 010 - 4088 - z Effective connectivity of dorsal and ventral visual pathways in chunk decomposition WU QiYuan 1 , 2 , WU LiLi 1 , 2 & LUO Jing 2 * 1 Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100049 , China ; 2 Institute of Psychology , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100101 , China Received February 3 , 2010 ; accepted April 20 , 2010 Chunk decomposition is defined as a cognitive process which breaks up familiar items into several parts to reorganize them in an alternative approach . The present study investigated the effective connectivity of visual streams in chunk decomposition through dynamic causal modeling ( DCM ) . The results revealed that chunk familiarity and perceptual tightness made a com - bined contribution to highlight not only the “what” and the “where” streams , but also the effective connectivity from the left inferior temporal gyrus to the left superior parietal lobule . modulatory connectivity , dynamic causal modeling , chunk familiarity , perceptual tightness Citation : Wu Q Y , Wu L L , Luo J . Effective connectivity of dorsal and ventral visual pathways in chunk decomposition . Sci China Life Sci , 2010 , 53 : 1474 – 1482 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s11427 - 010 - 4088 - z Chunk facilitates information processing , as it combines various parts and carries intensive information . However , chunk is also an obstacle in insight problem solving when it is needed to interpret subparts in a new manner . According to representational change theory , improper representation of a perceptual or understanding process would hinder solu - tion in problem solving . A solution depends on effective representational change [ 1 ] , which is accomplished through decomposing improper chunks . For example , when books were copied in the past , a page was taken as a whole , and only when books were decomposed into words or characters and recombined , was typography possible . Manufacturing processes as a whole , such as making needles , were de - composed into sub procedures and treated with different techniques , thereby improving efficiency . In 1999 , Knoblich et al . [ 2 ] showed chunk decomposi - tion theory of insight through experimentation . They used matchstick arithmetic problems and asked subjects to cor - rect false equations with a single matchstick move . For ex - ample , if the false equation was “VI = VII + I” , the solution was to move the right matchstick of VII ( 7 ) and to place it on the right of VI ( 6 ) . Because VII ( 7 ) consisted of a V ( 5 ) and two I ( 1 ) , it was a loose chunk and to decompose it to VI ( 6 ) and I ( 1 ) was straightforward . However , to correct the equation “XI = III + III” was more difficult , because it needed to decompose X ( 10 ) to “ \ ” and “ / ” and recompose them to V ( 5 ) . The behavioral results revealed that the tighter the chunk was , the less probability of solving it and the longer time would be required . From then on , matchstick arithmetic problems have been used in chunk decomposition studies , partially revealing the corresponding cognitive process . However , matchstick arithmetic problems have some drawbacks in that familiar - ity with Roman numerals is hard to control , and the varia - tions of Roman arithmetic problems are quite limited . They are therefore not suitable materials for fMRI and ERP stud - ies , which require 30 trials or more . Chinese characters are typical perceptual chunks , and compared with Roman nu - Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 1475 merals , they have some advantages : they have larger num - ber of items as well as more variations . Besides , familiarity and tightness are relatively easy to control by using differ - ent characters . Chinese characters are composed of radicals , which in turn , are composed of strokes . Radicals are mean - ingful and sometimes pronounceable , thus they may also be regarded as chunks . Strokes , by contrast , do not carry any meaning and are not perceived as chunks . According to the chunk decomposition theory , it is much easier to separate a character at the radical level than to separate it at the stroke level , because the strokes are tightly embedded in the holis - tic chunk [ 1 , 3 ] . For example , in experiments using Chinese characters , two characters were presented , such as “ 白 - 排 ” , and subjects were asked to move away a part of the right one and add this part to the left one to make up two new Chinese characters . The solution was to move the “ 扌 ” from “ 排 ” to on left of “ 白 ” and the result would be “ 拍 - 非 ” . Decomposition at the radical level is easier , e . g . , “ 青 - 话 ” to “ 请 - 舌 ” , “ 女 - 宝 ” to “ 安 - 玉 ” and “ 矢 - 匡 ” to “ 医 - 王 ” , than at the stroke level , e . g . , “ 三 - 四 ” to “ 王 - 匹 ” , “ 干 - 学 ” to “ 平 - 字 ” , “ 三 - 兴 ” to “ 兰 - 六 ” , “ 大 - 不 ” to “ 天 - 个 ” , for problems at the stroke level refer to tighter chunks . An eye movement study with matchstick arithmetic problems revealed that the fixation time on the parts of equations depended on the types of the equations , and the shift and length of fixation suggested that both “what” and “where” visual pathways participated in chunk decomposi - tion [ 4 ] . Studies of brain cognitive process with Chinese characters had significant findings . For example , Luo et al . [ 1 ] found that certain cortical areas in the dorsal and ventral pathways were activated during chunk decomposition , while there was inconsistent activation in the early and higher visual cortical areas , which suggested that the char - acteristics of visual process during chunk decomposition . The chunk decomposition of matchstick arithmetic prob - lems and Chinese characters partially refers to the space process , and both studies revealed that chunk decomposition had two cognitive aspects : what and where . However , little is known about the two aspects and the interaction between them . The visual system includes the whole occipital and most parts of the parietal and temporal cortical areas [ 5 ] . In 1982 Ungerleider and Mishkin [ 6 ] demonstrated that the visual system had two major processing streams , a dorsal stream and a ventral stream , both of which began with the occipital cortical areas , with the dorsal stream ending in the posterior parietal cortex while the ventral ending in the inferior tem - poral gyrus . Because the dorsal stream was for spatial in - formation , it was designated as the “where” pathway , while the ventral stream was for object recognition , thus it was designated as the “what” pathway . There is an agreement that both streams begin with the primary visual cortex , BA 17 or V1 , passing through the second visual cortex , BA 18 or V2 , and respectively ending in the posterior parietal cor - tex and the inferior temporal gyrus [ 7 , 8 ] . For owl monkeys the terminal of the dorsal stream was the inferior parietal gyrus BA 7 , while for humans the posterior parietal cortex includes the inferior parietal gyrus BA 40 and the superior parietal gyrus BA 7 . The latter has a homogeneous structure with the inferior parietal gyrus BA 7 of the owl monkeys , which is known as the terminal of the dorsal stream , so for humans the terminal of the dorsal stream is the superior parietal gyrus BA 7 ; for both owl monkeys and humans , the terminal of the ventral stream is the inferior temporal gyrus BA 19 [ 9 ] . There are various views about the cortical areas and the interaction of the two streams . Some regard the two streams to be independent , while others feel that they are dependent on each other [ 10 , 11 ] . For example , Hagmann [ 12 ] demonstrated that there was interaction between corti - cal areas of parietal and temporal lobes . The aim of the present report is to use dynamic causal modeling ( DCM ) to study the effective connectivity of the two visual streams during chunk decomposition of Chinese characters . DCM is one of the methods for studying effec - tive connectivity . Different from multivariate regression models or structural equation modeling which both take the input of oxyhemoglobin saturation as results of random en - dogenous noise , DCM assumes that the input is the definite experimental operation . In the past years , DCM has been a useful tool for psychological studies , such as language , at - tention , motion and emotion [ 13 – 16 ] . For example , Mechelli et al . [ 17 ] used DCM to study category effects and found category effects in the occipital and temporal cortex were mediated by inputs from the early visual cortex , while the connectivity from the superior / inferior parietal area to the category - responsive areas was unaffected by the pres - entation of stimuli , which indicated that the category effects in the occipital and temporal cortex were mediated by bot - tom - up mechanisms . The present study was designed to reveal the impact of two factors , chunk familiarity and structural tightness , on chunk decomposition . Familiarity is how familiar the chunks to be solved are to subjects , with the more familiar being , the more difficult to solve . Structural tightness refers to whether or not the components of chunks to be solved are meaningful units , if they are ( such as I of VI ) , the chunks are loose , otherwise they are tight ( such as / of X ) , and the tighter the chunks , the more difficult to solve them [ 2 ] . In the present study , we used real Chinese characters and equivalent pseudo Chinese characters as two levels of fa - miliarity , and structural tightness was determined by the level at which the decomposition occurred . If at the radical level , it was loose , and if at the stroke level , it was tight ( Figure 1 ) . For loose chunks , the removed and the remaining parts are both meaningful chunks . Compared with equivalent pseudo Chinese characters , the key obstacle of chunk de - composition in real Chinese characters is where the chunks are , but not what the chunks are . That is to say , because the 1476 Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 Figure 1 Procedure of a trial . In each trial , the first phase was a Judg - ment phase , and the stimulus was presented on the screen for 1200 ms , subjects needed to press a key to judge whether or not the stimulus was a real Chinese character . A fixation was presented for 2800 ms and after that came the second phase . The second phase was a Chunk Decomposition phase , during which a new stimulus was presented for 3000 ms , the left of which was the stimulus of the first phase , and the right of which was a part of it to be removed , and the subjects also needed to press a key to judge whether the remaining part of the left was a real character . From up to down are examples of the conditions Unfamiliar _ Loose , Unfamiliar _ Tight , Familiar _ Loose and Familiar _ Tight . familiarity is higher for real Chinese characters , the de - composition needs more effects in order to control where the chunks are . Compared with loose chunks , when to de - compose tight chunks , subjects do not take the remaining parts as meaningful chunks ( e . g . , most people do not take “ 匹 ” as part of “ 四 ” ) , so subjects not only need to perceive where the chunks are and also what the chunks are . Espe - cially when the words are quite familiar and the chunks are really tight , the interaction between the “where” and the “what” streams is greater . In all , according to previous studies of chunk decomposition with eye movements and fMRI [ 1 , 4 ] , we suppose that in the present study , familiarity would influence the connectivity of the “where” pathway , while structural tightness would influence both the “what” and the “where” pathways . The addition of familiarity and structural tightness would increase the additional interaction between the two pathways . 1 Materials and methods 1 ) 1 . 1 Subjects 16 college students ( eight females , aged from 19 to 25 years ) participated in the study as paid volunteers . They were all health , right - handed , had normal or corrected normal vision and no history of psychiatric or neurological disorders . Be - cause Chinese characters are graphic characters with spatial structures , we only chose subjects using Pinyin but not the Wubi method . Written informed consent was obtained from all volunteers prior to the study , which was approved by the Ethics committee of the Psychology Institute of CAS for Neurology and Neurosurgery . Data of two subjects were discarded because their angles of head movements were larger than 1° . 1 . 2 Experimental design and stimuli The study had four experimental conditions ( 2×2 fac - tor - design ) . One factor was perceptual familiarity , which has two levels designed with real Chinese characters and pseudo Chinese characters , and the other factor was struc - tural tightness with two levels determined by the level at which chunk decomposition occurred , loose at the radical level and tight at the stroke level ( Figure 1 ) . In all there were 176 stimuli . The four conditions were Unfamiliar _ Loose , Unfamiliar _ Tight , Familiar _ Loose and Familiar _ Tight , each condition with 44 stimuli , four probe words and 40 targets . The subjective familiarity of all stim - uli was assessed by 60 volunteers on a five - point scale , in which 1 represents quite unfamiliar , and 5 represents quite familiar . Two subjects’ data were discarded because they rated each stimulus with the same points . The results showed that the familiarity of real Chinese characters was significantly greater than that of pseudo Chinese characters ( F ( 1 , 57 ) = 1870 . 599 , P < 0 . 001 ) ) . This indicated that we con - trolled the familiarity with real Chinese characters and pseudo Chinese characters . The statistics of strokes showed that characters or pseudo Chinese characters with loose structures had significantly more strokes than those with tight structures ( F ( 1 , 43 ) = 252 . 146 , P < 0 . 001 ) . 1 . 3 Experimental procedure The experiment consisted of four blocks , each with 44 trials , among which were four probes and 40 targets . Every condi - tion had the same number of probes and targets during each block . The order of both blocks and trials were random . BOLD signal change presented the accumulative effect of all signals in a certain time window , and the coding process contaminated the chunk decomposition process in which we were interested , we therefore designed two phases in each trial , a Judgment phase and a Chunk Decomposition phase . The interval time between the two phases was 2800 ms and each trial lasted 7000 ms . The interval time between trials was 3000 ms . The procedure of each trial is illustrated in Figure 1 . 1 . 4 MRI data acquisition All MRI data were obtained by a 3 Tesla Siemens Allegra 1 ) The present report is based on fMRI data of Wu LiLi et al . ’s research which has not been published ( Wu L L , Knoblich G , Luo J . The role of chunk tightness and chunk familiarity in problem solving : evidence from ERPs and fMRI ) . Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 1477 MRI scanner with standard wireless electric circle . We first used T1 - weighted fast - field echo to acquire structural im - ages , and each scan included 128 slices ( thickness = 1 . 33 cm ) with TR = 2530 ms , TE = 3 . 39 ms , FOV = 256 mm×256 mm , FA = 7° , VS = 1 . 33 mm×1 mm×1 . 33 mm . We used T2 - weighted echo - planar volumes with BOLD contrasts to ac - quire functional images with 33 axial slices , TR = 2000 ms , TE = 30 ms , FOV = 200 mm×200 mm , Matrix = 64×64 , FA = 90° , VS = 3 . 1 mm×3 . 1 mm×4 . 0 mm . For each subject , functional data were acquired in four scanning sessions . 222 volumes were acquired per session . Subjects’ heads were fixed to limit head movements . 1 . 5 fMRI data analysis Statistical parametric mapping ( SPM5 , Wellcome Depart - ment of Imaging Neuroscience , London , UK ; http : / / www . fil . ion . ucl . ac . uk / spm ) was used for slice timing ( to the 33rd slice ) , image realignment , normalization to the Montreal Neurological Institute ( MNI ) standard space , smoothing by an 8 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel . Data of two subjects were discarded to allow for T1 stabilization because the head movement angles were greater than 1° . At the first stage , the time series of each subject were high - pass filtered at 1 / 128 Hz . No global normalization was performed . For each participant , we modeled four sessions , each including nine conditions , J _ Unfamiliar _ Loose , J _ Unfa - miliar _ Tight , J _ Familiar _ Loose , J _ Familiar _ Tight , D _ Unfa - miliar _ Loose , D _ Unfamiliar _ Tight , D _ Familiar _ Loose , D _ Familiar _ Tight and Error ( J , Judgment phase ; D , Chunk Decomposition phase ) . The Error condition concluded all events whose response time was more or less three standard deviations than to the mean of each conditions of the two phases . The contrast images obtained from D _ Unfami - liar _ Loose , D _ Unfamiliar _ Tight , D _ Familiar _ Loose , D _ Fa - miliar _ Tight were used for further analysis and simplified as Unfamiliar _ Loose , Unfamiliar _ Tight , Familiar _ Loose , Familiar _ Tight . With the contrasts we computed a within - subjects one way ANOVA assessment of their significance at the group - level ( n = 14 ) and defined five contrasts as follows ( the first four were T - contrasts , and the last was F - contrast ) : ( i ) Familiar vs . Unfamilar : [ ( Familiar _ Loose + Familiar _ Ti - ght ) − ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Unfamiliar _ Tight ) ] ; ( ii ) Unfamilar vs . Familiar : [ ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Unfamiliar _ Tight ) − ( Fa - miliar _ Loose + Familiar _ Tight ) ] ; ( iii ) Tight vs . Loose : [ ( Un - familiar _ Tight + Familiar _ Tight ) − ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Fami - liar _ Loose ) ] ; ( iv ) Loose vs . Tight : [ ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Fa - miliar _ Loose ) − ( Unfamiliar _ Tight + Familiar _ Tight ) ] ; ( v ) Main effect of all stimuli : ( Unfamiliar _ Tight + Familiar _ Tight + Unfamiliar _ Loose + Familiar _ Loose ) . All reported effects were related to voxel - level statistics ( P < 0 . 005 , FWE ( family wise error ) ) . 1 . 6 Dynamic causal modeling Dynamic causal modeling ( DCM ) assumes that the brain is a nonlinear dynamic input - state output system subjective to experimentally controlled perturbations , and inputs either directly drive specific areas or modulate the strengths of the connections between them . The outputs are the regional hemodynamic responses , which are connected to the neu - ronal state variables with a biophysically validated forward model of hemodynamic responses . DCM yields three sets of model parameters : ( i ) direct influence of inputs on some cortical areas ; ( ii ) the intrinsic connections that reflect the context - independent coupling between neuronal states in different areas ; ( iii ) modulatory or bilinear inputs that re - flect context - dependent changes in the coupling between regions [ 18 ] . Among the three sets of parameters , the third modulatory connection is most significant , because it re - veals the influence of inputs on intrinsic connection . It is noticeable that the strength of effective connectivity does not represent the activity of the local areas , but how fast one area influences another . Often , there are several competing hypotheses about a system of interest , each of which is rep - resented by a specific DCM . Using Bayesian model selec - tion ( BMS ) with log evidences of the competing models we identified the optimal model . The log evidence is called the Bayesian factor ( BF ) , and is approximated by AIC / BIC ( Akaike’s Information Criterion , AIC ; Baysian Information Criterion , BIC ) or NFE ( negative free energy ) . The present study used SPM8b ( Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience , London , UK ) which applied NFE . The larger the NFE ( the smaller the abstract ) is , the more optimal the model is . By comparison with NFE , we obtained the opti - mal model [ 19 – 22 ] . For each participant , we specified a General Linear Model ( GLM ) matrix for DCM ( dcm - GLM ) , which con - sisted of six types of events : the first four were Unfamil - iar _ Loose , Unfamiliar _ Tight , Familiar _ Loose , Famil - iar _ Tight ( only for conditions of Chunk Decomposition phase ) , the fifth was the addition of the first four types ( ALL ) , the last included all other events ( whose response time was more or less than the mean of each conditions of the second phase and all events in the first phase ) . The first five were involved in DCM analysis . At the same time , to avoid the issue of collinearity between regressors within dcm - GLM , which would interfere with the definition and extraction of volumes of interest , we also specified a second GLM matrix ( voi - GLM ) and an additional regressor for the main effect of all the events of the chunk decomposition phase . The voi - GLM was used to extract volumes of interest . In the voi - GLM , we defined nine types of events , which were the same with those of the fMRI data analysis . We used a high - pass filter at 1 / 128 Hz in both the voi - GLM and the dcm - GLM . No global normalization was performed . All events were time - locked to the onset of vis - ual stimuli . We modeled the four sessions as one single 1478 Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 concatenated session and we added four additional regres - sors , each with values of 1 for the scans of one session and 0 for the other scans for the first four sessions . All volumes of areas of interest were extracted by SVC ( small volume correction ) and were based on the T - contrast of each par - ticipant’s voi - GLM . To extract volumes of each area of interest , we thresh - olded at P = 1 , then defined spherical volumes ( radius = 12 mm ) around the group - level coordinates of the three brain regions , and extracted the maximum activation peak for each participant . We also checked that the subject - specific coordinates actually corresponded to the anatomical loca - tion represented by the group - level coordinates . We ex - tracted spherical volumes of interest from a 6 mm radius centered on the identified subject - specific coordinates . All volumes of interest were corrected with the main effects of all stimuli in chunk decomposition ( F - contrast ) for the ef - fects of interest . We also adopted a two - stage random - effects approach . Firstly at the single - participant level , we designed three DCM models based on dcm - GLM , and at the within - subject level with BMS we found the optimal model was the third one ( see Results ) . Finally , we computed two - tailed contrasts ( n = 14 ) between the experimental conditions for the condi - tion - specific modulatory effects , and tested whether or not the effective connectivity were significantly greater than zero . We used a Shapiro - Wilk normality test to check the normality of the distribution of values pertaining to the strength of each individual connection for all subjects . Given a prevalently non - normal distribution of the connec - tion strength values , we adopted a non - parametric statistical approach . 2 Results 2 . 1 Behavioral results In both the Judgment phase and the Chunk Decomposition phase , subjects needed to press keys to respond . Only the results from Chunk Decomposition are included in this re - port . We used SPSS to analyze the accuracy and response time by a 2×2 ANOVA ( familiarity×structural tightness ) method ( Table 1 and Figure 2 ) . For accuracy , we found that the main effect of familiarity was significant ( P < 0 . 001 , F ( 1 , 13 ) = 24 . 202 ) , the accuracy of unfamiliar items was signifi - cantly higher than that of familiar items , and the accuracy of loose items was also significantly higher than that of tight items ( P < 0 . 001 , F ( 1 , 13 ) = 41 . 566 ) . The interaction was also significant ( P < 0 . 001 , F ( 1 , 13 ) = 14 . 610 ) . For response time , we found that the main effect of familiarity was significant ( P < 0 . 001 , F ( 1 , 13 ) = 104 . 289 ) , the response time of familiar items was significantly longer than that of unfamiliar items , the response time of items with a tight structure was sig - nificantly longer than that with a loose structure ( P < 0 . 001 , F ( 1 , 13 ) = 278 . 297 ) , and also the interaction was significant ( P < 0 . 001 , F ( 1 , 13 ) = 43 . 974 ) . 2 . 2 fMRI results We designed two phases in each trial , a Judgment phase and a Chunk Decomposition phase . The first phase was set to reduce the influence of coding process on chunk decompo - sition . The fMRI results revealed that the activated cortical areas were different in the two phases . The present study utilized DCM to reveal the effective connectivity of both the dorsal and ventral visual pathways in chunk decomposi - tion of Chinese characters , so we only report the fMRI re - sults of the Chunk Decomposition phase . 2 . 2 . 1 Main effect of all stimuli To find the main effect of all stimuli , we performed a con - junction analysis of all four conditions in the Chunk Decom - position phase in group - level analysis and found that the peak was in the left inferior occipital gyrus ( LIOG , BA18 , MNI coordinates : x = 33 , y = − 84 , z = − 9 ) , which means that this area was highly activated in all four conditions . We also found from the F - contrast of all stimuli ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Un - familiar _ Tight + Familiar _ Loose + Unfamiliar _ Tight ) that the peak was also at the same coordinate . The peak belongs to the second visual area V2 , where both the dorsal and ventral visual streams pass through . 2 . 2 . 2 Main effect of familiarity To find the main effect of familiarity , we analyzed the T - Figure 2 Behavioral results : accuracy and response time . A , Accuracy . B , Response time . Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 1479 Table 1 Accuracy and response time in the Chunk Decomposition phase Loose Tight Unfamiliar Familiar Unfamiliar Familiar Accuracy 0 . 9929 0 . 9875 0 . 9393 0 . 8750 Standard error ( SE ) 0 . 00313 0 . 00435 0 . 01404 0 . 01777 Mean response time ( ms ) 701 . 6907 815 . 1471 1119 . 7843 1454 . 8214 Standard error ( SE ) 44 . 03068 50 . 89998 56 . 74077 43 . 65215 contrast of familiarity vs . unfamiliarity : ( Familiar _ Loose + Familiar _ tight ) – ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Unfamiliar _ tight ) . The results revealed that it activated both the left and right ante - rior cingulate ( BA 32 ) and the left fusiform gyrus ( BA 37 ) . Further analysis revealed that the T - contrast of ( Famil - iar _ loose – Unfamiliar _ Loose ) activated no cortical areas , and the main effect of familiarity resulted from the T - con - trast of ( Familiar _ Tight − Unfamiliar _ Tight ) . 2 . 2 . 3 Main effect of structural tightness To find the effect of structural tightness , we analyzed the T - contrast of Tight vs . Loose : [ ( Unfamiliar _ tight + Famil - iar _ tight ) − ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Familiar _ Loose ) ] and found bilateral inferior frontal gyrus ( BA 47 / 9 / 10 / 46 ) , bilateral middle frontal gyrus ( BA 6 / 9 / 10 / 46 ) , bilateral inferior tem - poral gyrus ( BA 19 / 20 ) , left middle occipital gyrus ( BA 19 ) , right superior occipital gyrus ( BA 39 ) , bilateral superior parietal gyrus ( BA 7 ) , bilateral fusiform gyrus ( BA 20 / 37 ) , bilateral precuneus ( BA 31 / 7 ) , right precingulate ( BA 32 ) , left inferior parietal gyrus ( BA 40 ) , left postcentral gyrus ( BA 2 / 40 ) and right precentral gyrus ( BA 9 ) . We also fur - ther analyzed the T - contrast of ( Unfamiliar _ Tight − Unfa - miliar _ Loose ) and ( Familiar _ Tight − Familiar _ Loose ) and found they activated areas similar to those which were acti - vated by [ ( Unfamiliar _ tight + Familiar _ Tight ) – ( Unfamil - iar _ Loose + Familiar _ Loose ) ] . The most significant peaks in the visual pathways were as follows : the left inferior tem - poral gyrus ( LITG , BA 19 , MNI coordinates : x = − 48 , y = − 63 , z = − 9 ) , which was anatomically the terminal of the ventral visual pathway ; the left superior parietal lobule ( LSPL , BA 7 , MNI coordinates : x = − 24 , y = − 69 , z = 45 ) , which was ana - tomically the terminal of the dorsal visual pathway in the postparietal cortex . 2 . 3 DCM Various studies have revealed that the left superior posterior lobule ( LSPL , BA 7 ) and the left posterior inferior temporal cortex ( LPIT , BA 19 / 37 ) were critical areas in processing the visual information of Chinese characters [ 23 – 28 ] . Spe - cifically , the LSPL processed Chinese characters’ substruc - tures ( such as radicals ) [ 28 ] , while LPIT processed the im - age information of Chinese characters from long - term memory [ 29 ] . The present study revealed that the main ac - tivated area of all stimuli was the left inferior occipital gyrus , which anatomically belonged to the second visual area V2 , where both the dorsal and ventral visual pathways pass through , while the main effect of structural tightness included most areas of the visual system , with the most highly activated areas consisting of the left inferior parietal lobule ( BA 40 ) , left superior parietal lobule ( BA 7 ) and the left inferior temporal gyrus ( BA 19 ) . Because the left hemisphere is more involved in language processing than the right hemisphere , to simplify the models [ 22 ] , like some other DCM studies [ 13 ] , our DCM models took the left in - ferior occipital gyrus , left superior parietal lobule and left inferior temporal gyrus into account . The left inferior tem - poral gyrus ( LITG ) and the left superior parietal lobule ( LSPL ) were extracted from the main effect of structural tightness ( T - contrast of [ ( Unfamiliar _ tight + Familiar _ tight ) − ( Unfamiliar _ Loose + Familiar _ Loose ) , and their coordinates were based on the group results of the main effect of struc - tural tightness ( see Results ) . The left inferior occipital gyrus ( LIOG ) was exacted from the main effect of all stimuli in Chunk Decomposition ( F - contrast ) in the group - level ANOVA analysis and served as the input of these models . At the single - subject level , each participant’s dcm - GLM was designed as follows . ALL ( all stimuli of the Chunk Decomposition phase ) had direct influence on LIOG as in - put , four conditions had a modulatory effect on all inter - connections defined in the models . For the interconnections we defined three models ( Figure 3 ) : ( i ) both the dorsal and ventral visual pathway had a bottom - up connection , LIOG → LSPL and LIOG → LITG ; ( ii ) the dorsal visual pathway had a bidirectional connection , the ventral pathway had a bottom - up connection and there was a connection from Figure 3 Three DCM models . A , Model 1 . B , Model 2 . C , Model 3 . LIOG , left inferior occipital gyrus ; LITG , left inferior temporal gyrus ; LSPL , left superior parietal lobule . 1480 Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 LSPL to LITG , i . e . , the model had four connections , LIOG ←→ LSPL , LIOG → LITG , LSPL → LITG ; ( iii ) as various reports suggest that the intrinsic connections are not neces - sarily limited by anatomical findings [ 13 ] , we postulated that the three areas of interest had bidirectional connections between any two of them , i . e . , the model had six connec - tions , LIOG ←→ LSPL , LIOG ←→ LITG , LSPL ←→ LITG . We used BMS and found that the third model was optimal . To find the optimal model , we compared the negative free energy of the three models in group - level utilizing the random effects method . We found that the third model had the largest negative free energy with the smallest absolute value , and the third model had the largest addition of nega - tive free energy of all subjects . The optimal mode was thus the third model ( Figure 3C ) . The negative free energy is found in the supplied materials . We used the t - test in SPSS to analyze the connectivity in the third model ( Bonferroni - corrected for multiple com - parisons ) . The results showed that the direct effect of all stimuli on LIOG was significant ( Mean = 0 . 4319 , SE = 0 . 0653 , P < 0 . 001 ) . For the intrinsic connectivity which was inde - pendent from conditions , only LIOG → LSPL and LITG ←→ LSPL were significantly greater than zero ( Figure 4 and Table 2 ) . 3 Discussion The present study was aimed to explore how two predefined difficulties – – perceptual familiarity and perceptual tight - ness – – would affect chunk decomposition process through Chinese character decomposition tasks . We analyzed the visual complexity of all stimuli by comparing the number of their strokes and found the number of stokes of loose items was significantly larger than that of tight items . However , the behavioral results showed that the accuracy of loose items was significantly higher than that of tight items , which indicated that the difficulty of chunk decomposition did not result from the number of strokes , which caused the difference in visual complexity . The results of all 58 sub - jects who assessed the subjective familiarity showed famili - arity of real characters was significantly higher than that of pseudo characters , which indicated that it was reasonable to use real Chinese characters and pseudo Chinese characters to design the familiar and unfamiliar levels . The present report investigated the brain cognitive proc - ess of chunk decomposition . It not only duplicated the re - sults of Luo et al . [ 1 ] with Chinese characters which acti - vated both the dorsal and ventral visual pathways , but also revealed the effective connectivity of the two visual path - ways under different conditions . The behavioral results showed that the chunk familiarity ( Unfamiliar _ Loose vs . Fa - miliar _ Loose , Unfamiliar _ Tight vs . Familiar _ Tight ) and per - ceptual tightness ( Unfamiliar _ Loose vs . Unfamiliar _ Tight , Familiar _ Loose vs . Familiar _ Tight ) both resulted in sig - nificant differences in accuracy and response time , with an interaction between the two factors . Those indicated that both factors affected the decomposition process , as well as making an additional amplification effect together . The DCM analysis found changes of effective connectivity which were similar with behavioral results : at a loose struc - tural tightness level , increased familiarity caused the in - crease of the effective connectivity of the “where” pathway . At an unfamiliar level , increased structural tightness caused the increase of both the “what” and the “where” pathways . When familiarity and structural tightness both increased , not only the effective connectivity of the “what” and the “where” pathways increased , but also the effective connec - tivity of the functional connection from LITG to LSPL , i . e . , from the terminal of the “what” pathway to the terminal of the “where” pathway . Those findings facilitated under - standing of the brain cognitive process of chunk decompo - sition . The “multiple causes of difficulty in insight” theory has been proposed , postulating that several obstacles needed to be overcome though a given insight appeared to consist of a single step [ 20 ] . However , this theory does not illustrate how multiple difficulties interact with each other . The cur - rent study extends this theory , for we have not only ob - served the independent influence of chunk familiarity and perceptual tightness on the dorsal and ventral visual path - ways , but we have also observed the additional amplifica - tion effect of them on the terminal of the dorsal visual stream with that of the ventral visual stream , which was not independently observed with familiarity or structural tight - ness . These findings suggest that the combination of the two factors result in additional amplified effect and cause addi - tional brain cognitive processes . Using DCM to investigate the effective connectivity of the dorsal and ventral visual pathways during chunk de - composition takes advantage of a well - known anatomical structure to simplify the model . However , there also costs . For example , this approach does not take into account such other cortical areas as the frontal areas . It has been shown that the frontal areas took part in the course of chunk de - composition in a study with patients whose brains were damaged in the frontal areas . It was found that patients with damage to the frontal areas , which were involved in prob - lem space and up - down control in problem solving , had better performance than normal people in solving the matchstick problems [ 30 ] . However , as the frontal areas include numerous sub cortical areas and have complex connections with other cortical areas , it is appropriate to limit the DCM models in a more controllable frame . With - out the frontal areas , the present study of the effective con - nectivity of the dorsal and ventral visual pathways retains logical consistency . Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 1481 Figure 4 Intrinsic connectivity and modulatory connectivity of four conditions . A , Intrinsic connectivity . B − E , Modulatory connectivity of four conditions : Unfamiliar _ Loose ( B ) , Familiar _ Loose ( C ) , Unfamiliar _ Tight ( D ) , Familiar _ Tight ( E ) . Straight lines represent intrinsic connectivity and dashed lines repre - sent modulatory connectivity . Table 2 Intrinsic connectivity and modulatory connectivity a ) Modulatory connectivity Loose Tight Connection Intrinsic connectivity Unfamiliar Familiar Unfamiliar Familiar “What” : LOIG → LITG 0 . 085 − 0 . 019 0 . 021 0 . 244 * 0 . 292 * “Where” : LOIG → LSPL 0 . 443 * 0 . 102 0 . 112 * 0 . 202 * 0 . 191 * LITG → LOIG 0 . 137 0 . 023 0 . 021 − 0 . 039 − 0 . 010 LITG → LSPL 0 . 582 * − 0 . 045 − 0 . 007 0 . 041 0 . 053 * LSPL → LOIG 0 . 241 − 0 . 021 0 . 016 − 0 . 014 − 0 . 027 LSPL → LITG 0 . 408 * − 0 . 080 − 0 . 087 − 0 . 070 − 0 . 047 a ) Bold print with * indicates significant effective connectivity with t - test ( P < 0 . 05 , Bonferroni - corrected for multiple comparisons ) . 1482 Wu QiYuan , et al . Sci China Life Sci December ( 2010 ) Vol . 53 No . 12 4 Conclusion The effective connectivity of the dorsal and ventral visual pathways differed among conditions with differently diffi - cult tasks . When the structure was loose , increased familiar - ity caused the increase of the effective connectivity of the “where” pathway . When the familiarity was low , increased structural tightness caused the increase of both the “what” and the “where” pathways . When familiarity and structural tightness both increased , not only the effective connectivity of the “what” and the “where” pathways increased , but also the effective connectivity of the functional connection from the terminal of the “what” pathway to that of the “where” pathway . This work was supported by the Knowledge Innovation Program of Chi - nese Academy of Sciences ( Grant No . KSCX2 - YW - R - 28 ) , the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( Grant No . 30770708 ) and the Na - tional Hi - Tech Research and Development Program of China ( Grant No . 2008AA022604 ) . 1 Luo J , Niki K , Knoblich G . Perceptual contributions to problem solving : Chunk decomposition of Chinese characters . Brain Res Bull , 2006 , 70 : 430 – 443 2 Knoblich G , Ohlsson S , Haider H , et al . Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight problem solving . J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn , 1999 , 25 : 1534 – 1555 3 Luo J , Knoblich G . Studying insight problem solving with neuroscientific methods . Methods , 2007 , 42 : 77 – 86 4 Knoblich G , Ohlsson S , Raney G E . An eye movement study of insight problem solving . Mem Cognit , 2001 , 29 : 1000 – 1009 5 Wandell B A , Dumoulin O D , Brewer A A . Visual field maps in human cortex . Neuron , 2007 , 56 : 366 – 83 6 Ungerleider L G , Mishkin M . Two cortical visual systems . In : Goodale M A , Mansfield R J W , eds . Analysis of Visual Behavior . Cambridge : MIT Press , 1982 7 Kaas J H , Lyon D C . Pulvinar contributions to the dorsal and ventral streams of visual processing in primates . Brain Res Rev , 2007 , 55 : 285 – 96 8 Wohlschlager A M , Specht K , Lie C , et al . Linking retinotopic fMRI mapping and anatomical probability maps of human occipital areas V1 and V2 . Neuroimage , 2005 , 26 : 73 – 82 9 Milner A D , Goodale M A . The Visual Brain in Action . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1995 10 Laycock R , Crewther D , Crewther S . The advantage in being magnocellular : A few more remarks on attention and the magnocellular system . Neurosci Biobehav Rev , 2008 , 32 : 1409 – 1415 11 Zanon M , Busan P , Monti F , et al . Cortical connections between dorsal and ventral visual streams in humans : Evidence by TMS / EEG co - registration . Brain Topogr , 2009 12 Hagmann P , Cammoun L , Gigandet X , et al . Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex . PLoS Biol , 2008 , 6 : e159 13 Heim S , Eickhoff S B , Ischebeck A K , et al . Effective connectivity of the left BA 44 , BA 45 , and inferior temporal gyrus during lexical and phonological decisions identified with DCM . Hum Brain Mapp , 2009 , 30 : 392 – 402 14 Siman - Tov T , Mendelsohn A , Schonberg T , et al . Bihemispheric leftward bias in a visuospatial attention - related network . J Neurosci , 2007 , 27 : 11271 – 11278 15 Grefkes C , Eickhoff S B , Nowak D A , et al . Dynamic intra - and interhemispheric interactions during unilateral and bilateral hand movements assessed with fMRI and DCM . Neuroimage , 2008 , 41 : 1382 – 1394 16 Schlooseer R G , Wagner G , Koch K , et al . Fronto - cingulate effective connectivity in major depression : A study with fMRI and dynamic causal modeling . Neuroimage , 2008 , 43 : 645 – 655 17 Mechelli A , Price C J , Noppeney U , et al . A dynamic causal modeling study on category effects : Bottom - up or top - down mediation ? J Cogn Neurosci , 2003 , 15 : 925 – 934 18 Penny W D , Stephan K E , Mechelli A , et al . Modeling functional integration : A comparison of structural equation and dynamic causal models . Neuroimage , 2004 , 23 : 264 – 274 19 Ashburner J , Friston K J , Penny W D . Dynamical causal modeling . In : Human Brain Function . San Diego : Academic Press , 2003 20 Kershaw T C , Ohlsson S . Multiple causes of difficulty in insight : The case of the nine - dot problem . J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn , 2004 , 30 : 3 – 13 21 Penny W D , Stephan K E , Mechelli A , et al . Comparing dynamic causal models . Neuroimage , 2004 , 22 : 1157 – 1172 22 Stephan K E , Penny W D , Daybuzeau J , et al . Bayesian model selection for group studies . Neuroimage , 2009 , 46 : 1004 – 1017 23 Chee M W , Tan E W , Thiel T . Mandarin and English single word processing studied with functional magnetic resonance imaging . J Neurosci , 1999 , 19 : 3050 – 3056 24 Chee M W , Weekes B , Lee K M , et al . Overlap and dissociation of semantic processing of Chinese characters , English words , and pictures : Evidence from fMRI . Neuroimage , 2000 , 12 : 392 – 403 25 Lee C Y , Tsai J L , Kuo W J , et al . Neuronal correlates of consistency and frequency effects on Chinese character naming : An event - related fMRI study . Neuroimage , 2004 , 23 : 1235 – 1245 26 Tan L H , Feng C M , Foxy P T , et al . An fMRI study with written Chinese . Neuroreport , 2001 , 12 : 83 – 88 27 Tan L H , Liu H L , Perfetti C A , et al . The neural system underlying Chinese logograph reading . Neuroimage , 2001 , 13 : 836 – 846 28 Deng Y , Booth J R , Chou T L , et al . Item - specific and generalization effects on brain activation when learning Chinese characters . Neuropsychologia , 2008 , 46 : 1864 – 1876 29 Nakamura K , Honda M , Okada T , et al . Participation of the left posterior inferior temporal cortex in writing and mental recall of kanji orthography : A functional MRI study . Brain , 2000 , 5 : 954 – 967 30 Reverberi C , Toraldo A , Serena D , et al . Better without ( lateral ) frontal cortex ? Insight problems solved by frontal patients . Brain , 2005 , 128 : 2882 – 2890