DESIGNING A VISUAL DATABASE FOR FASHION DESIGNERS Charlie Hill , Gilliart Crampton Smith , Eleanor Curtis , Stephen Kamlish Royal College of Art Computer Related Design Department Kensington Gore , London SW72EU ( 071 ) 5845020 ext . 327 email : rca . baker @ AppleLink . Apple . com ABSTRACT The design and rapid prototyping of a hypermedia tool is described in which interaction design techniques were employed after extensive empirical research into the fashion design process . ‘l % e tool enables fashion designers to draw on past work when designing new garments , and incorporates a novel approach to casual data entry . The interaction design process is explained from problem analysis through animated walkthroughs to prototype development , Issues are raised for both researchers and developers : problems in the transition from research to design ; difficulties in testing usability during conceptual design ; the need to make systems emotionally engaging and memorable . KEYWORDS : interaction design , graphic design , user interface , fashion design , database applications , hypermedia , data entry , annotation , design process INTRODUCTION In this paper some design aspects of a recently completed project are introduced . The project addressed the need of leading UK garment manufacturing and retailing companies to reduce the time to develop new garments within tight cost and quality constraints . The project had two stages : empirical research into the fashion design environmen ~ and design of a software tool to aid fashion designers . In the empirical research cognitive science methodology was used to increase understanding of the fashion design process . The research identified the need to support the work of fashion designers by increasing the availability of historical information about garment designs . DESIGN PROBLEM A system was designed with two purposes a ) to capture key information about garments during their development life , and thereby form an archive of ‘garment history’ ; Mike Scaife School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences Sussex University Brighton , BN1 ~ H email : mikesc @ cogs . sussex . ac . uk b ) to make the garment history archive accessible to fashion designers in support of their current design work . DESIGN PROCESS The design team consisted of an interaction designer , a graphic designer , a cognitive scientist and a cognitive psychologist . Interaction design focuses on human communication issues in the user interface . A rapid progression was made from an initial problem analysis , through design concept sketches of user interaction , to production of several artifacts for user testing : some conjectural printed outputs ; animated ‘walkthroughs’ of conjectural interfaces and two working prototypes . The design process lasted seven months , as followx Development User Testing Weeks Problem analysis 8 Scenarios 2 Printed outputs scenarios 2 Walkthroughs Printed outputs 2 First prototype Walkthroughs 4 Second prototype First prototype 4 Data entry 2 Minor changes second prototype 4 PROBLEM ANALYSIS A major period of the project was spent assimilating the research findings in order to translate them into a ‘design brief’ with clear objectives . The history archive should a ) be accessible to fashion designers who do not otherwise use compttte ~ , b ) captwe and disseminate key garment design issues ( known as ‘snags and opportunities’ or ‘lessons learnt’ ) over a few design seasmx c ) be organised as a hierarchical ‘taxonomy’ of seasons of gturnents , each having several information categories fabric , style , sales , etc . Hypermedia technology such as HyperCard and SuperCardm was preferred because it combines images and sound with text - based searching . The user interface was intentionally not designed to conform with any standard ‘look and feel’ because the eventual computing environment was unknown , and standard style guides do not cover the design of innovative visual analogues . 49 CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT ‘Scenarios’ — imaginary stories which illustrate the situations in which a design might be used — were developed to aid visudisation of design concepts , e . g . : a ) Input — Someone finds a problem or opportunity with a garment ( e . g . a certain cotton skirt has fraying hems due to the stitching design ) and notes it in the archive . b ) Output — A designer working on a new design undertakes a search for relevant information . E . g . the designer is working on a cotton garment next year and wants to know what pmblerns might arise with this fabric . A telephonic scenario was developed in which the role of the computer was played by a highly informed person at the end of the telephone . ‘his scenario was important because it helped separate the functional requirements for the tool from any interactive form specific functions might take . Consultation with users established the usefulness of the service described by the telephone scenario . Casual Data Entry A two - tier approach was taken to data entry to enable comments to be rapidly captured from users in their normal working environment . Whereas the general attributes of garments are formally compiled at the end of the season , comments may be added at any stage in the life of the garment . The mechanism for inputting comments uses the metaphor of ‘post - it notes’ . Notes are attached to garment attribute displays to draw attention to key issues . PRINTED OUTPUTS It was unclear how much information would be useful to users , without overload . Three printed outputs were therefore designed a general summary of a garmen ~ more detailed fabric information ; and a chart of size dimensions . Some graphic design problems were thus identified , and the desired content of the archive established . WALKTHROUGHS More specific responses were obtained from users by & monstrating animations ( made in Directorm ) of possible interactive sequences with a simplified history tool . The animations employed strong visual metaphors and very simple flow of control to ensure ready comprehension . A row of wardrobe icons represented seasonsof garments . A ‘rack’ displayed miniature ‘cards’ of selected garments . Each card represented one category of information ( fabric , sales , etc . ) . Dots indicated which cards have notes attached . A ‘pinboard’ was used for viewing cards : each a summary of attributes , with pop - up notes attached . New notes were created by ‘dragging’ a sheet off a ‘note - pad’ . Garment searcheswere made via a photographic image of items on a table : a fabric swatch , cotton - reel , watch , etc . , representing search categories . A query was formed by clicking on options , generating a subset of garments for display on the rack . The rack visualized available notes in each category . Users confirmed the general acceptability of the visual interface and contributed ideas about the required functions of the history tool . me basic concept was thus established . PtRST PROTOIYPE A minimal design prototype was developed using Supercardm . In this ‘vertical’ prototype the visual query technique , the rack , and the card functions were implemented . The visual design was changed to allow more space for the cards of attribute information and notes , to accommodate abetter * of information . Some screen lay - out details were only crudely designed to make a working system available for user testing as early aspossible . Users broadly welcomed the design and were able to use the system afta a single demonstration . There was concern about the legibility of the attribute display cards . SECOND PROTOTYPE A second prototype was developed . The visual design was radically changed to put grater emphasis on the garment taxonomy , and to increase the initial visual appeal of the system , the consistencey of navigation controls , and the legibility of the attribute displays . It was also made possible to ‘highlight’ important notes to make them more prominent on the rack . Whereas in the fwst prototype a ‘model world of objects’ represented the interactive items ( note - pad , notes , cards , rack , etc . ) , in the second prototype a more harmonious display was achieved by considering as primary the overall screen image . User testing was based on red garment data from previous seasons . Users indicated that the tool would make useful data accessible to people not otherwise using computers , and improve communication between design personnel . CONCLUSIONS Many issues were raised of concern to both researchers and developers . To make the transition from knowledge generated by research , to a clear design strategy , requires a ‘creative leap’ . Visual and interactwn & sign techniques ensure the leap is made towards efficient and enjoyable interaction . Whereas many issues of ti”lity were resolved in the projec ~ the usability of the system was difficult to refine because the designers needed freedom to change the language of interaction to refine the system as a whole . In concept development , utility comes before usability , Factors in the acceptance of the system included the initial emotional engagement of users , and the ease of reuse afforded by use of memorable imagery . These appeared to outweigh strict legibility issues . Giving priority to visual design problems was a key factor in making database technology accessible to novice computer users . It was felt more time was needed to explore alternative visual designs . Many graphic and information design issues emerged which needed further study . We needed to iterate not just the detailed visual design , but the concept as well . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of Professor Robin Baker and Durrell Bishop of the Royal College of Art . 50