Please cite this article in press as : Diesendruck , G . , & Graham , S . A . Kind matters : A reply to Samuel - son and Perone . Cognitive Development ( 2010 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2010 . 02 . 003 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model COGDEV - 377 ; No . of Pages5 Cognitive Development xxx ( 2010 ) xxx – xxx Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cognitive Development Reply Kind matters : A reply to Samuelson and Perone Gil Diesendruck a , ∗ , Susan A . Graham b a Department of Psychology , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat - Gan 52900 , Israel b University of Calgary , Canada In the article that is a subject of Samuelson and Perone’s commentary , we reported the results of a study in which 15 - month - olds were presented with novel target objects that possessed a nonobvious property—a novel sound . We found that infants attempted to elicit the novel sound on test objects that matched the target object in shape , more so than on test objects that matched the target in color or texture . Critically , this pattern of behavior emerged only in a condition in which none of the test objects could actually produce a sound . We concluded that this selective generalization to shape - matched objects reﬂects infants’ expectation that objects similar in shape share nonobvious properties . In their commentary , Samuelson and Perone ( S & P ) challenged our interpretation on both empirical and theoretical grounds . In what follows , we respond to these challenges by ﬁrst addressing incorrect representations of our ﬁndings and then discussing the theoretical challenges presented in their commentary . A full consideration of the data S & P present a reinterpretation of the presumed ﬁndings reported by us ( G & D ) , arguing that our interpretation of what children represented in the task was incorrect . Based on their account of our ﬁndingsandpriorworkbyPeroneandothers , S & Parguethatinfantsmayhavebeensimplyassociating “the particular shape of the object with the particular action performed on the object . ” That is , they argue that infants did not form a mental representation of the object as possessing the nonobvious property . In response to these claims , we must ﬁrst point out that S & P do not accurately report our ﬁndings . They summarize these ﬁndings as demonstrating that “infants more frequently reproduced target actions in the unpredicted condition and those actions were more likely to be performed on test objects that shared the same shape with the target object than test objects that shared either color or texture . ” Later , in presenting an alternative interpretation of our ﬁndings , S & P declare that “infants may then reproduce the target actions on novel objects more frequently in the unpredicted than the predicted condition . . . ” This is incorrect . Infants did not reproduce actions more frequently in ∗ Corresponding author . E - mail address : dieseng @ mail . biu . ac . il ( G . Diesendruck ) . 0885 - 2014 / $ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2010 . 02 . 003 Please cite this article in press as : Diesendruck , G . , & Graham , S . A . Kind matters : A reply to Samuel - son and Perone . Cognitive Development ( 2010 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2010 . 02 . 003 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model COGDEV - 377 ; No . of Pages5 2 G . Diesendruck , S . A . Graham / Cognitive Development xxx ( 2010 ) xxx – xxx the unpredicted than in the predicted condition . In fact , they acted on the objects more frequently in the predicted condition , where the test objects possessed the same property as the target objects . Furthermore , infantsperformedmoretargetactionsontheshape - matchobjectversusthecolor - match and the texture - match objects only in the unpredicted condition . There were no differences in target actions performed on the different test objects in either the baseline or predicted conditions . This is a crucial distinction because it nulliﬁes S & P’s claim regarding what infants in our study learned . That is , if infants had only formed an association between the shape of the object and the action performed on it , they should have privileged shape over color and texture in the predicted condition as well . Moreover , S & P’s interpretation of our ﬁndings fails to provide a convincing account of why infants in our study privileged shape over other perceptual properties in the unpredicted condition . That is , if infants were simply forming associations between actions and objects , why would they have differentially persisted in performing the action on the shape - match test object in that condition ? After all , all test objects presented to infants afforded the action ( as infants demonstrated in the predicted condition ) . Thus , counter to S & P’s account , our ﬁndings indicate that the only aspect of the unpredicted condition that was “surprising” and thus somewhat bothersome to infants , was the lack of sound in the shape - match test objects . For this reason , we concluded that infants expect same shape objects to also share nonobvious properties , suggesting that they appreciate that shape similarity is a reliable cue to category membership . Finally , we disagree with S & P’s characterization of how ﬁndings by Perone and colleagues con - tradict our interpretation of our results . First , it is important to note that the studies by Perone and colleagues described in S & P’s commentary involve 10 - month - olds , infants ﬁve months younger than those in our experiments . Second , the methods employed are visual habituation paradigms using videotaped events , in contrast to our interactive manual exploration paradigm . There is a long history of debate regarding the possible differences in categorization processes that are engaged in looking versus interactive tasks ( Mandler , 2000 ) . Thus , the applicability of ﬁndings from studies involving infants so much younger than ours and from such different paradigms as ours is questionable . Never - theless , we welcome the opportunity to address the issues raised by S & P . In Perone and Oakes’s ( 2006 ) Experiments 3 – 5 , on which Panel E in S & P’s Figure 1 is based , infants were habituated to videotaped stimuli with variations on two dimensions . Infants failed to learn relationsbetweenparticularactionsandsoundsorbetweenobjectsandparticularsounds . Importantly for the present argument , the combined manipulations of two dimensions used in these experiments were more complicated and very different from what infants in our experiment had to process . A more relevant assessment of the types of relations our infants might have formed would be to habituate infants to stimuli with one value on each dimension , to see if they dishabituate equally to changes in each of the three dimensions . In fact , when presented with such an assessment in Perone and Oakes’s Experiments 1 and 2 , 10 - month - olds did dishabituate to changes in either action or sound . That is , infants were surprised if an object similar in shape to the habituation object did not squeak when squeezed , or if it squeaked when rolled . Thus , in a task similar to ours , 10 - month - olds did code the association between appearance and sound , and between appearance and action . Furthermore , Perone , Madole , Ross - Sheehy , Carey , & Oakes ( 2008 ) found that 7 - month - olds were more surprised when an experimenter performed a novel action with sound on a similarly shaped object , than when the experimenter performed the same action with sound on a differently shaped object ( action and sound were confounded ) . Thus , consistent with our ﬁndings , 7 - month - olds expected two similarly shaped objects to be acted on similarly and produce the same sound . That is , many things can be squeezed and then squeak , but if something does so , that is all it does ! This ﬁnding is consistent with our conclusions—shape - based categories determine the type of property an object possesses . Our study suggests that infants recognize this by 15 months of age , and others have found that 2 - year - olds do so even more explicitly ( Casler & Kelemen , 2007 ) . S & P conclude that explanations of early categorization behaviors that fail to fully consider what is revealed by behavioral measures can lead to unwarranted assumptions regarding infants’ repre - sentations . We could not agree more . What is crucial , of course , is ﬁrst accurately portraying the evidence . Please cite this article in press as : Diesendruck , G . , & Graham , S . A . Kind matters : A reply to Samuel - son and Perone . Cognitive Development ( 2010 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2010 . 02 . 003 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model COGDEV - 377 ; No . of Pages5 G . Diesendruck , S . A . Graham / Cognitive Development xxx ( 2010 ) xxx – xxx 3 The necessity and logic of kinds In the second part of their commentary , S & P question the need to postulate that infants hold a conceptofkind . Onecandividetheirargumentintothreeclaims : ( a ) infant / childdatacanbeexplained without postulating kinds ; ( b ) data similar to those produced by infants / children can be simulated in entities that arguably do not have conceptual representations of kinds ; and ( c ) the postulation of kinds creates a logical conundrum . We dispute each of these claims . First , there is a vast literature on how a conceptual representation of kinds underlies infants’ and children’s responses in categorization tasks ( Booth & Waxman , 2008 ; Gelman , 2003 ; Markson , Diesendruck , & Bloom , 2008 , forreviews ) . OneparticularlypowerfuldemonstrationcomesfromBooth and Waxman ( Booth & Waxman , 2002 ; Booth , Waxman , & Huang , 2005 ) . They demonstrated that chil - dren’scriteriaforgeneralizinganametootherobjectsvarydependingonobjectkind . Thatis , ifchildren were told that certain objects were animals , they generalized the name of a target object to other test objects based on their similarity on visual dimension X . If children were told that the same objects were inanimates , they generalized the name of that target object to other test objects based on their similarity on a different visual dimension . ( See Graham et al . , in press , for similar ﬁndings . ) Another relevant set of studies demonstrates how children’s naming of a novel object or symbol depends on information children received or inferred regarding the intentional creation of the object / symbol . For instance , a splash of paint that looks like a sun will be called “sun” , if it was intentionally drawn by someone ( Bloom & Markson , 1998 ; Gelman & Bloom , 2000 ; Gelman & Ebeling , 1998 ) ; an object shaped like a novel object will not be called by the novel object’s name if it is a container for that novel object ( Diesendruck , Markson , & Bloom , 2003 ) . Finally , recent work with infants has demonstrated that infants make purposive generalizations based on kind - relevant cues ( i . e . , shape and / or labels ) , but not based on other types of similarity cues . For example , Dewar and Xu ( 2009 ) demonstrated that 10 - month - olds expect that objects that share a label will share an internal property , regardless of perceptual similarity or dissimilarity . Similarly , a number of studies from our laboratory have demon - strated that when objects are labeled with shared count nouns , infants will generalize nonobvious properties to objects that differ signiﬁcantly in shape ( Graham & Kilbreath , 2007 ; Graham , Kilbreath , & Welder , 2004 ; Welder & Graham , 2001 ) . Moreover , 16 - month - olds rely on shared labels to guide their inductions only when those labels are presented within a naming context that clearly marks them as count nouns ( Keates & Graham , 2008 ) . In other words , infants do not infer that two objects with the same shape or same label inevitably have the same hidden properties . Rather , they use these cues to guide their inferences only when these types of cues provide guidance regarding the object’s category or kind . It is clear in these studies that visual information , task demands , and context do not sufﬁce to explain children’s behavior . One could in fact read S & P’s position as consistent with this statement . They propose that “categorization behaviors emerge in a moment as prior knowledge is brought to bear in a task by relevant perceptual cues . ” So , clearly , “prior knowledge” is crucial to categorization . Indeed , proponents of kind - based accounts take as a central goal to establish what prior knowledge childrenhaveaboutdifferentontologicalkinds , language , andthepossibleinteractionsbetweenthem . Of course , these accounts do not deny the importance of children’s capacities to detect statistical regularities in the input for a complete explanation of conceptual development . They simply maintain that children’s concepts cannot be solely the product of associative learning ( Waxman & Gelman , 2009 ) . S & P reinforce their claim regarding the lack of utility of “kinds” by describing a word - learning robot . They conclude that if a robot can succeed in word learning without a representation of kinds , there is no need to posit kinds . This argument reminded one of the present authors ( GD ) of a lecture given in a cognitive science colloquium by a computer engineer . The engineer described the marvels of a connectionist network that , “analogously” to mice in a food - searching procedure , was capable of developing a spatial representation of a maze . At the end of the lecture , a comparative psycholo - gist asked the engineer how well the computer program performed compared to mice . The engineer replied : “It did much better ! ” . The engineer’s smirk when reporting the program’s performance likely reﬂected his attitude that he was not trying to simulate mice ; he was solving a computational prob - lem . Please cite this article in press as : Diesendruck , G . , & Graham , S . A . Kind matters : A reply to Samuel - son and Perone . Cognitive Development ( 2010 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2010 . 02 . 003 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model COGDEV - 377 ; No . of Pages5 4 G . Diesendruck , S . A . Graham / Cognitive Development xxx ( 2010 ) xxx – xxx We argue that the comparison between the word - learning robot and the infant is not germane to the discussion of the relevance of kinds . We cannot induce identity in process from similarity in behavior . S & P are quite likely aware of this fact , as they specify that the robot in their example takes “input similar to that presented to children . ” One wonders , however , what “similar” truly means . Was the robot fed verbs , prepositions , adjectives , full sentences to parse ? Did it get actions , movements , internal states , multiple visual perspectives ? Did it get input that was not directed at it ? Does it know anything else about the world besides what it was fed during the learning trials ? Does it grow ? Does its hardware mature ? Is it the outcome of natural selection ? Surely , the input and environment were not as varied as that experienced by a 15 - month - old infant . To ascertain with conﬁdence that the computer simulation is a valid rendering of what children experience – both in terms of the input each is exposed to and the computational / representational machinery at their disposal – seems to us a much bigger leap than the one presumably we are making by arguing that children’s brains can represent abstract concepts . Which brings us to the last part of their argument : “Such [ kind - based ] accounts are also par - ticularly problematic for our understanding of development because explaining infant behavior as resulting from an understanding of “kinds” or “conceptual understanding” begs the question of where an understanding of kinds or concepts comes from . ” ( p . 7 ) . The inference S & P seem to draw from this conundrum is that if we do not know how to explain X ( i . e . , an understanding of kinds ) , then X must not exist . But the history of science is full of examples that prove this inference wrong . In fact , many would say that that is exactly the function of scientiﬁc theories : you posit the existence of a concept X to explain a certain phenomenon because it is the concept consistent with most of the observations regarding the phenomenon . Backed by this accumulated body of evidence , you then pursue an expla - nation for the concept X . This was true for atomic physics and for genetics , so why not for psychology ? S & P view the “begging” question of where an understanding of kinds or concepts comes from as a fatal blow to kind - based accounts ; we see it as one of the fundamental functions of scientiﬁc theories . In fact , advocates of kind - based accounts have indeed begun to posit the learning mechanisms that may lead to the development of kinds ( see Xu , Dewar , & Perfors , 2009 ) . Final thoughts We believe it is time to move beyond theoretical reinterpretations of data , and provide data that directly address alternative accounts ( see exchange between Samuelson & Smith , 1998 , and Diesendruck , Markson , Akhtar , & Reudor , 2004 , for an example ) . We believe that our study accom - plishes this goal . It contrasts two alternative accounts , which , at least at some point in their formulations , made two very clear and different predictions . One account claimed that the shape bias should appear initially , and primarily , in lexical extension tasks because it is the product of second - order generalizations based on the frequency of correlations found in the linguistic input . The other account claimed that the shape bias may not be lexically speciﬁc , because a notion of conceptual sim - ilarity is primary , including a realization that shape is the best predictor of such similarity . Translating ourtheoreticalpositionsintoempiricallytestableandviablealternativepredictionsisanecessarystep if we are to seriously engage in such theoretical debates . If we each keep to our corners and produce empiricalteststhatareimpenetrabletoadvocatesoftheotherposition , thennorealscientiﬁcprogress will be achieved . Acknowledgments Susan Graham’s contribution was supported by a Discovery grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada ( NSERC ) and funding from the Canada Research Chairs Pro - gram . References Bloom , P . , & Markson , L . ( 1998 ) . Intention and analogy in children’s naming of pictorial representations . Psychological Science , 9 , 200 – 204 . Please cite this article in press as : Diesendruck , G . , & Graham , S . A . Kind matters : A reply to Samuel - son and Perone . Cognitive Development ( 2010 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2010 . 02 . 003 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model COGDEV - 377 ; No . of Pages5 G . Diesendruck , S . A . Graham / Cognitive Development xxx ( 2010 ) xxx – xxx 5 Booth , A . E . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2002 ) . Word learning is smart : Evidence that conceptual information affects preschoolers’ extension of novel words . Cognition , 84 , B11 – B22 . Booth , A . E . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2008 ) . Taking stock as theories of word learning take shape . Developmental Science , 11 , 185 – 194 . Booth , A . E . , Waxman , S . R . , & Huang , Y . T . ( 2005 ) . Conceptual information permeates word learning in infancy . Developmental Psychology , 41 , 491 – 505 . Casler , K . , & Kelemen , D . ( 2007 ) . Reasoningaboutartifactsat24months : Thedevelopingteleo - functionalstance . Cognition , 103 , 120 – 130 . Dewar , K . , & Xu , F . ( 2009 ) . Do early nouns refer to kinds or distinct shapes ? Evidence from 10 - month - old infants . Psychological Science , 20 , 252 – 257 . Diesendruck , G . , Markson , L . , & Bloom , P . ( 2003 ) . Children’s reliance on creator’s intent in extending names for artifacts . Psychological Science , 14 , 164 – 168 . Diesendruck , G . , Markson , L . , Akhtar , N . , & Reudor , A . ( 2004 ) . Two - year - olds’ sensitivity to speakers’ intent : An alternative account of Samuelson and Smith . Developmental Science , 7 , 33 – 41 . Gelman , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The essential child . New York : Oxford University Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Bloom , P . ( 2000 ) . Young children are sensitive to how an object was created when deciding what to name it . Cognition , 76 , 91 – 103 . Gelman , S . A . , & Ebeling , K . S . ( 1998 ) . Shape and representational status in children’s early naming . Cognition , 66 , B35 – B47 . Graham , S . A . , & Kilbreath , C . S . ( 2007 ) . It’s a sign of the kind : Gestures and words guide infants’ inductive inferences . Develop - mental Psychology , 43 , 1111 – 1123 . Graham , S . A . , Kilbreath , C . S . , & Welder , A . N . ( 2004 ) . 13 - Month - olds rely on shared labels and shape similarity for inductive inferences . Child Development , 75 , 409 – 427 . Graham , S . A . , Welder , A . N . , Merriﬁeld , B . , & Berman , J . M . J . ( in press ) . Preschoolers’ extension of novel words to animals and artifacts . Journal of Child Language . Keates , J . , & Graham , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Categorylabelsorattributes : Whydolabelsguideinfants’inductiveinferences ? Psychological Science , 19 , 1287 – 1293 . Mandler , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Perceptual and conceptual processes in infancy . Journal of Cognition and Development , 1 , 3 – 36 . Markson , L . , Diesendruck , G . , & Bloom , P . ( 2008 ) . The shape of thought . Developmental Science , 11 , 204 – 208 . Perone , S . , & Oakes , L . M . ( 2006 ) . Itclickswhenitisrolledanditsqueakswhenitissqueezed : What10 - month - oldinfantslearn about object function . Child Development , 77 , 1608 – 1622 . Perone , S . , Madole , K . L . , Ross - Sheehy , S . , Carey , M . , & Oakes , L . M . ( 2008 ) . The relation between infants’ activity with objects and attention to object appearance . Developmental Psychology , 44 , 1242 – 1248 . Samuelson , L . K . , & Smith , L . B . ( 1998 ) . Memory and attention make smart word learning : An alternative account of Akhtar , Carpenter , and Tomasello . Child Development , 69 , 94 – 104 . Waxman , S . R . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 2009 ) . Earlyword - learningentailsreference , notmerelyassociations . TrendsinCognitiveScience , 13 , 258 – 263 . Welder , A . N . , & Graham , S . A . ( 2001 ) . The inﬂuence of shape similarity and shared labels on infants’ inductive inferences about nonobvious object properties . Child Development , 72 , 1653 – 1673 . Xu , F . , Dewar , K . , & Perfors , A . ( 2009 ) . Induction , overhypotheses , andtheshapebias : Someargumentsandevidenceforrational constructivism . InB . M . Hood , & L . Santos ( Eds . ) , Theoriginsofobjectknowledge ( pp . 263 – 284 ) . NewYork : OxfordUniversity Press .