NANO - RHEOLOGY OF HYDROGELS USING DIRECT DRIVE FORCE MODULATION ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPY TRACK : Materials Tribology / Nanotribology Joint Session I : Mechanics and Tribochemistry at the Nanoscale P . C . Nalam 1 , N . Gosvami 2 , M . Caporizzo 3 , R . J . Composto 3 , R . W . Carpick 2 , 3 1 Civil and Environmental Engineering , University of Illinois Urbana Champaign , Champaign , Illinois , United States 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , United States 3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , United States ABSTRACT Hydrogels are widely used soft materials in cartilage tribology , among other applications . We present a magnetic force - based direct drive modulation method to measure local nano - rheological properties of polyacrylamide hydrogels across a broad frequency range ( 10 Hz - 2 kHz ) using colloid - attached AFM probes in liquid . The frequency bandwidth was extended to lower frequencies ( upto 0 . 1 Hz ) by acquiring slow force - displacement which show loading - direction mechanical behavior dependence : approach curves showed Hertzian while retraction curves fit JKR model . Using small amplitude modulation at faster rates , the load dependence of the storage stiffness transitioned from Hertzian to a dynamic punch - type model , indicating significant influence of material dissipation coupled with adhesion . The study highlights possible transitions in the probe - material contact mechanical behavior of soft matter especially when the applied strain rates and the material relaxation rates become comparable . INTRODUCTION : Soft materials are often viscoelastic in nature , and display strain - rate dependent mechanical properties . Multiple relaxation modes result from the multiple length scale features present in the amorphous and inhomogeneous structure and nanoscale methods to investigate the viscoelastic heterogeneities in soft matter are lacking . Atomic force microscope enables the measurement of mechanical properties of materials in a wide range of forces ( from pN to mN ) , at different strain rates and with nanometer scale spatial resolution . Force modulation technique using tip - based modulation is developed to determine the frequency - dependent viscoelastic response of the materials by sensitively measuring or controlling the changes in amplitude and phase of the cantilever deflection while the tip is in contact with the sample . Further , the appropriate contact mechanical models for measuring mechanical properties such as Young’s modulus for adhesive , viscoelastic soft materials are investigated . The validity of different contact mechanical models to understand the stiffness response of the materials as a function of applied load and modulating frequencies is explored . Polyacrylamide hydrogels find important applications as force sensing platforms . They are also widely used as bio - materials in cartilage tribology , therapeutics and as possible injectable drug carriers . These hydrogels experience forces at different length scales and at varying strain rates depending on their application and thus necessitating the need for the study of nano - rheology properties of hydrogels . Further , the polyacrylamide hydrogels are also model substrates to understand single - cell mechanics , as hydrogels are isotropic at macro - scales , linearly viscoelastic and display no plasticity . Polyacrylmide gels with varying elastic moduli and film thicknesses can be easily designed , which enables a better control of experimental conditions . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION : Polyacrylamide gels with two different cross - linker densities are synthesized for these measurements ( table 1 ) . Colloid probe force spectroscopy was applied to avoid non - linear stress - strain deformations during indentation measurements . Further , keeping in - line with Hertzian assumption , the dimensions for the contacting materials i . e . radius of the colloid and the thickness of the film are held significantly larger than both the contact area formed ( a ) and the depth of indentation ( d ) [ 1 ] . The effect of colloid roughness on the measured mechanical properties was minimized by employing colloid probes with root mean square roughness of less than 1 . 5 nm . Fig . 1 shows the quasi - static force – indentation curves ( FD ) obtained on both high - and low - crosslinked hydrogels . At low strain rate response ( 0 . 1 - 10 Hz ) , we observed an adhesion hysteresis between the approach and retraction curves , i . e . the approach curve fits the Hertzian mechanics ( yellow line ) and the retraction curve fits the Johnson - Kendall - Robertson ( JKR ) mechanics ( black line ) . This indicates that the inter - molecular interactions initiate between the sample and the probe only upon coming into contact and hence changing the type of contact geometry upon indentation . For measuring moduli at high strain rates , magnetically - actuated cantilevers with modulating frequencies ranging from 10 Hz to 2000 Hz were employed . The direct - drive actuation of the cantilevers ( using idrive TM ) , especially in liquid medium , avoids the forest of peaks in frequency and phase response of the cantilever over several decades of excitation frequencies . Further modulating the tip , instead of the sample stage , avoids the need to evaluate the medium - induced hydrodynamic effects . The storage and loss stiffnesses of the material are estimated by measuring amplitude and phase change response of the cantilever out - of - contact and in - contact with the hydrogel . A ~ 135 % and ~ 105 % increase in the storage stiffness was observed for the low - and the high – crosslinked PAG gels , respectively as the modulating frequencies were varied from 10 Hz to 2000 Hz . The loss stiffness and loss tangent showed a transition at 100 Hz for both the hydrogels . However , when measuring the mechanical modulus , the Hertzian fit showed deviation for the stiffness vs . force curves obtained on both the hydrogels , especially at high modulating frequencies ( Fig . 2a ) . With increase in modulating frequencies , the relaxation time for hydrogels become comparable to the applied strain rates . This delays the opening of the crack at the edge of the contact , i . e . the adhesive contact area formed by the hydrogels with the colloid displays a viscoelastic resistances to the changes in applied load . This results in almost a constant contact size and a dynamic punch - type contact mechanics is appropriate for adhesive , viscoelastic materials . Assuming stiffness proportional contact area , frequency - dependent stiffness response S ( w ) , when S is proportional to A ( contact area ) as ( ) 3 / 2 2 ) / ( 1 1   − + = adh o F F S w S ( Eqn . 1 ) where F adh is the adhesion at zero stiffness and S o ( w ) the stiffness at zero load . Fig . 2 ( black lines ) shows that the dissipative dynamic punch model is more appropriate for adhesive contacts , even at high modulating frequencies . The dynamic storage modulus ( E ( w ) ) from the stiffness - load curves are thus obtained using [ 2 ] : 31 24 ) 0 ( ) ( ) (   − = adh r o r RF E w S w E ( Eqn . 2 ) Comparison of the storage moduli measured across 4 decades of frequency space using different length scale of measurement , i . e . , nanoscale static FD measurements ( applying the Hertz fit to extract E o ) and nanoscale modulation measurements ( applying the punch fit to extract E o ) is presented in Fig . 2b . The values obtained from slow FD measurements are consistent with the values obtained from the dynamic punch model fits . The similar storage modulus for hydrogels obtained from different approaches indicate that the frequency response of the storage modulus is a time - dependent ( viscoelastic ) effect and is independent of the amplitude of the modulation . CONCLUSIONS : Using the appropriate contact models across the full frequency range measured , the storage moduli were found to remain nearly constant until an increase began near ~ 100 Hz . The softer gels’ storage modulus showed an increase ~ 85 % ( 8kPa – 14 . 5 kPa ) , and the stiffer gels’ showed about ~ 95 % increase ( 16 . 3 to 31 . 6 kPa ) when the strain rates were increased from 0 . 1 Hz to 2000 Hz ( across 4 decades of frequencies ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Mr . Anil Gannepalli from Asylum Research USA and Nano Bio Interface Center at UPENN for AFM instrumentation . REFERENCE [ 1 ] E . K . Dimitriadis , F . Horkay , J . Maresca , B . Kachar and R . S . Chadwick , Biophys . J . , 2002 , 82 , 2798 – 2810 . [ 2 ] K . J . Wahl , S . A . S . Asif , J . A . Greenwood and K . L . Johnson , J . Colloid Interface Sci . , 2006 , 296 , 178 – 188 . [ 3 ] P . C . Nalam , N . N . Gosvami , M . A . Caporizzo , R . J . Composto and R . W . Carpick , Soft Matter , 2015 , 11 , 8165 - 8178 . KEYWORDS Nanoscale Viscoelastic Force Spectroscopy , Hydrogels , Polyacrylamide , Nano - rheology , Dynamic punch - model .