THEORY BUILDING FROM CASES : OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES KATHLEEN M . EISENHARDT Stanford University MELISSA E . GRAEBNER University of Texas at Austin The Academy of Management Journal has taken the lead among major journals in spotlighting alter - native methods that take advantage of rich empiri - cal data . In a series of “From the Editor” commen - taries , scholars cogently have explicated related topics such as qualitative research ( Gephart , 2004 ) , grounded theory building ( Suddaby , 2006 ) , the value of richness ( Weick , 2007 ) and the persuasive power of the single case ( Siggelkow , 2007 ) . In this commentary , we focus on the related research strat - egy of theory building from cases , particularly mul - tiple cases . Scholars have used case studies to develop the - ory about topics as diverse as group process ( Ed - mondson , Bohmer , & Pisano , 2001 ) , internal organ - ization ( Galunic & Eisenhardt , 2001 ; Gilbert , 2005 ) , and strategy ( Mintzberg & Waters , 1982 ) . Classic scholars ( Chandler , 1962 ; Whyte , 1941 ) as well as the authors of highly regarded AMJ papers ( Dutton & Dukerich , 1991 ; Sutton & Raphaeli , 1988 ) have used the method . Indeed , papers that build theory from cases are often regarded as the “most interest - ing” research ( Bartunek , Rynes , & Ireland , 2006 ) and are among the most highly cited pieces in AMJ ( e . g . , Eisenhardt , 1989a ; Gersick , 1988 ) , with im - pact disproportionate to their numbers . Not sur - prisingly then , the winning authors ( Ferlie , Fitzger - ald , Wood , & Hawkins , 2005 ; Gilbert , 2005 ) of the most recent AMJ Best Article Award relied on this method . Building theory from case studies is a research strategy that involves using one or more cases to create theoretical constructs , propositions and / or midrange theory from case - based , empirical evi - dence ( Eisenhardt , 1989b ) . Case studies are rich , empirical descriptions of particular instances of a phenomenon that are typically based on a variety of data sources ( Yin , 1994 ) . Cases can be historical accounts , such as Weick’s ( 1993 ) study of the Mann Gulch fire , but they are more likely to be contem - porary descriptions of recent events , such as Gil - bert’s ( 2005 ) study of adaptation to discontinuous environmental change by newspaper organizations . The central notion is to use cases as the basis from which to develop theory inductively . The theory is emergent in the sense that it is situated in and developed by recognizing patterns of relationships among constructs within and across cases and their underlying logical arguments . Central to building theory from case studies is replication logic ( Eisenhardt , 1989b ) . That is , each case serves as a distinct experiment that stands on its own as an analytic unit . Like a series of related laboratory experiments , multiple cases are discrete experiments that serve as replications , contrasts , and extensions to the emerging theory ( Yin , 1994 ) . But while laboratory experiments isolate the phe - nomena from their context , case studies emphasize the rich , real - world context in which the phenom - ena occur . The theory - building process occurs via recursive cycling among the case data , emerging theory , and later , extant literature . Although some - times seen as “subjective , ” well - done theory build - ing from cases is surprisingly “objective , ” because its close adherence to the data keeps researchers “honest . ” The data provide the discipline that mathematics does in formal analytic modeling . A major reason for the popularity and relevance of theory building from case studies is that it is one of the best ( if not the best ) of the bridges from rich qualitative evidence to mainstream deductive research . Its emphasis on developing constructs , measures , and testable theoretical propositions makes inductive case research consistent with the emphasis on testable theory within mainstream de - ductive research . In fact , inductive and deductive logics are mirrors of one another , with inductive theory building from cases producing new theory from data and deductive theory testing completing the cycle by using data to test theory . Moreover , since it is a theory - building approach that is deeply embedded in rich empirical data , building theory We appreciate helpful comments from Diane Bailey , Steve Barley , Chris Bingham , Jason Davis , Nathan Furr , and Ben Hallen as well as the sponsorship of the National Science Foundation IOC Award # 0621777 and the Stan - ford Technology Ventures Program . (cid:1) Academy of Management Journal 2007 , Vol . 50 , No . 1 , 25 – 32 . Copyright of the Academy of Management , all rights reserved . Contents may not be copied , emailed , posted to a listserv , or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s express written permission . Users may print , download or email articles for individual use only . 25 from cases is likely to produce theory that is accu - rate , interesting , and testable . Thus , it is a natural complement to mainstream deductive research . But while theory building from cases is increas - ingly prominent , challenges in writing publishable manuscripts using this research strategy exist . Some reviewers who work on large - scale , hypothesis - testing research may misunderstand the method ( e . g . , expect random sampling ) , or simply regard their own methods as superior . Some reviewers who work with other research strategies that also use rich empirical data ( e . g . , naturalistic inquiry ) may emphasize thick narrative descriptions but be less interested in gener - ating testable and generalizable theory . Still other reviewers may be sympathetic to research that is based on rich empirical evidence but be confused by the jumble of labels used to describe such research , which include grounded theory building , qualitative research , theory building from cases , and naturalistic inquiry . Having been involved with numerous re - search projects and written many papers that develop theory from cases , we are particularly sympathetic to authors . So , our purpose is to highlight the opportu - nities that differentiate building theory from cases from other research strategies , describe some of its common challenges , and suggest possible antidotes . Justifying Theory Building Sound empirical research begins with strong grounding in related literature , identifies a research gap , and proposes research questions that address the gap . But when using theory building from cases as a research strategy , researchers also must take the added step of justifying why the research ques - tion is better addressed by theory - building rather than theory - testing research . The implicit assump - tion is that theory building from cases is less pre - cise , objective , and rigorous than large - scale hy - pothesis testing . Moreover , failure to convince readers that a theory - building study is warranted in the first few pages can sink a manuscript before readers ever reach the findings . In other words , readers may ask , So why is this an inductive study ? A key response to this challenge is to clarify why the research question is significant , and why there is no existing theory that offers a feasible answer . Conflicting theories are not enough . Rather , it is critical to convince readers that the research ques - tion is crucial for organizations and / or theory , and demonstrate that the existing research either does not address the research question at all , or does so in a way that is inadequate or likely to be untrue . An example is early research on making fast stra - tegic decisions ( Eisenhardt , 1989a ) . The introduc - tion makes a strong case that fast strategic decision making is crucial for firm performance in high - velocity environments , including an example of a firm that died because its executives decided slowly . The introduction then goes on to demon - strate that the research literature has mostly ig - nored this critical topic . The background section describes several ideas from the literature that ad - dress speed ( albeit obliquely ) , but then shows that the logic underlying these ideas is unconvincing . For example , although some of the literature im - plies that centralized strategic decision making might be fast , centralization could not solve prob - lems of access to relevant information , implemen - tation , and confidence to decide in the face of un - certainty . Thus , it is unlikely that fast decision making is simply a matter of centralization per se . The background section concludes by asking whether a “snap decision” process could actually be realistic . The challenge of justifying inductive case re - search partially depends on the nature of the re - search question . For theory - driven research ques - tions that extend existing theory ( Lee , Mitchell , & Sabylinski , 1999 ) , a researcher has to frame the research within the context of this theory and then show how inductive theory building is necessary . Typically , the research question is tightly scoped within the context of an existing theory , and the justification rests heavily on the ability of qualita - tive data to offer insight into complex social pro - cesses that quantitative data cannot easily reveal . For example , Greenwood and Suddaby ( 2006 ) stud - ied how a known instance of institutional change at the center of a field occurred ( i . e . , promotion of change by elite firms within the accounting profes - sion ) . They justified their approach in terms of extending institutional theory and the ability of qualitative data to explicate the complex social pro - cesses involved . In contrast , for phenomenon - driven research questions , a researcher has to frame the research in terms of the importance of the phenomenon and the lack of plausible existing theory . Here the re - search question is broadly scoped to give the re - searcher more flexibility . The justification rests on the phenomenon’s importance , and the lack of vi - able theory and empirical evidence . For example , Bingham and Eisenhardt ( 2006 ) justified their study of what executives learn when they engage in a repeated organizational process ( in their study , internationalization ) by observing that learning is a ubiquitous process , and yet the vast empirical lit - erature on learning ignores the content of what is actually learned . More broadly , theory - building re - search using cases typically answers research ques - tions that address “how” and “why” in unexplored 26 February Academy of Management Journal research areas particularly well ( Edmondson & Mc - Manus , 2007 ) . By contrast , the research strategy is ill - equipped to address the questions “how often , ” and “how many , ” and questions about the relative empirical importance of constructs . Theoretical Sampling of Cases Another frequent challenge to theory building from cases concerns case selection . Some readers make the faulty assumption that the cases should be representative of some population , as are data in large - scale hypothesis testing research . In other words , they ask , How can the theory generalize if the cases aren’t representative ? A key response to this challenge is to clarify that the purpose of the research is to develop theory , not to test it , and so theoretical ( not random or strati - fied ) sampling is appropriate . Theoretical sampling simply means that cases are selected because they are particularly suitable for illuminating and ex - tending relationships and logic among constructs . Again , just as laboratory experiments are not ran - domly sampled from a population of experiments , but rather , chosen for the likelihood that they will offer theoretical insight , so too are cases sampled for theoretical reasons , such as revelation of an unusual phenomenon , replication of findings from other cases , contrary replication , elimination of al - ternative explanations , and elaboration of the emer - gent theory . Theoretical sampling of single cases is straight - forward . They are chosen because they are unusu - ally revelatory , extreme exemplars , or opportuni - ties for unusual research access ( Yin , 1994 ) . For example , Weick ( 1993 ) used an extreme case of lost sensemaking in the wilderness fire - fighting disaster at Mann Gulch ; Galunic and Eisenhardt ( 1996 , 2001 ) examined organizational adaptation in an ex - emplar firm that was the highest performing tech - nology - based corporation in the world for several decades ; and Dutton and Dukerich ( 1991 ) studied the New York Port Authority , where they had un - usual access through friends . Thus , single - case re - search typically exploits opportunities to explore a significant phenomenon under rare or extreme circumstances . But while single - case studies can richly describe the existence of a phenomenon ( Siggelkow , 2007 ) , multiple - case studies typically provide a stronger base for theory building ( Yin , 1994 ) . Again , to use the analogy of laboratory experiments , the theory is better grounded , more accurate , and more general - izable ( all else being equal ) when it is based on multiple case experiments . Multiple cases enable comparisons that clarify whether an emergent find - ing is simply idiosyncratic to a single case or con - sistently replicated by several cases ( Eisenhardt , 1991 ) . Multiple cases also create more robust the - ory because the propositions are more deeply grounded in varied empirical evidence . Constructs and relationships are more precisely delineated be - cause it is easier to determine accurate definitions and appropriate levels of construct abstraction from multiple cases . For example , Brown and Eisenhardt ( 1997 ) found that , although some firms used alliances to experiment with the future , others used futurists and exploratory products . With mul - tiple cases , the authors set an appropriate level of abstraction ( i . e . , probes ) that was more accurate than the individual instantiations ( e . g . , alliances , exploratory products ) . Multiple cases also enable broader exploration of research questions and the - oretical elaboration . For example , Brown and Eisenhardt ( 1998 ) added successful and unsuccess - ful turnaround cases that enabled them to add fur - ther longitudinal elements to their theory . Because case numbers are typically small , a few additional cases can significantly affect the quality of the emergent theory . For example , adding three cases to a single - case study is modest in terms of num - bers , but offers four times the analytic power . Thus , theory building from multiple cases typically yields more robust , generalizable , and testable the - ory than single - case research . But although multiple cases are likely to result in better theory , theoretical sampling is more compli - cated . The choice is based less on the uniqueness of a given case , and more on the contribution to the - ory development within the set of cases . That is , multiple cases are chosen for theoretical reasons such as replication , extension of theory , contrary replication , and elimination of alternative explana - tions ( Yin , 1994 ) . For example , Graebner and Eisen - hardt ( 2004 ) studied acquisition from the seller per - spective by examining three replicated cases in which the executives sold their companies , a con - trary replication in which executives could have sold their companies but did not , and then further cases in different industries that explored industry - level explanations . A particularly important theo - retical sampling approach is “polar types , ” in which a researcher samples extreme ( e . g . , very high and very low performing ) cases in order to more easily observe contrasting patterns in the data . Al - though such an approach can surprise reviewers because the resulting theory is so consistently sup - ported by the empirical evidence , this sampling leads to very clear pattern recognition of the central constructs , relationships , and logic of the focal phenomenon . 2007 27 Eisenhardt and Graebner Dealing with Interview Data Case studies can accommodate a rich variety of data sources , including interviews , archival data , survey data , ethnographies , and observations . For example , Hargadon and Sutton ( 1997 ) combined observations of brainstorming sessions , interviews with corporate actors , and ethnographies of two projects in their case study of routine innovation at Ideo . But as research incorporates more cases and moves away from everyday phenomena such as work practices to intermittent and strategic phe - nomena such as acquisitions and strategic decision making , interviews often become the primary data source . Interviews are a highly efficient way to gather rich , empirical data , especially when the phenomenon of interest is highly episodic and in - frequent . But interviews also often provoke a “knee - jerk” reaction that the data are biased in which impression management and retrospective sensemaking are deemed the prime culprits . The prototypical reader asks , Is the theory just retro - spective sensemaking by image - conscious informants ? The challenge of interview data is best mitigated by data collection approaches that limit bias . A key approach is using numerous and highly knowl - edgeable informants who view the focal phenom - ena from diverse perspectives . These informants canincludeorganizationalactorsfromdifferenthier - archical levels , functional areas , groups , and geog - raphies , as well as actors from other relevant organ - izations and outside observers such as market analysts . It is unlikely that these varied informants informants will engage in convergent retrospective sensemaking and / or impression management . For example , in our study of acquisitions from the seller perspective , Graebner and Eisenhardt ( 2004 ) we relied on interviews with executives from two hierarchical levels at the selling firms , executives from two hierarchical levels at the buying firms , board members from both the buying and selling firms , and investment bankers who provided back - ground information about M & A . Another key approach to mitigating bias is to combine retrospective and real - time cases ( Leonard - Barton , 1990 ) . Retrospective cases rely on inter - views ( and archival data ) that build up the number and depth of cases efficiently and so enable a re - searcher to cover more informants and include more cases . Such interviews are particularly accu - rate when the focal events are recent . In contrast , real - time cases employ longitudinal data collection of interviews and , often , observations , both of which help to mitigate retrospective sensemaking and impression management . A more subtle challenge arises from the confu - sion between qualitative data and qualitative re - search . Theory - building cases usually rely exten - sively on qualitative data from interviews and other sources , such as observations , historical books , ar - chives , and so forth . This research is often termed “qualitative” simply because it relies significantly on qualitative data . But qualitative research can also refer to the use of qualitative data in research strategies other than organizing data into cases and using replication logic to build theory . For exam - ple , Elsbach and Kramer ( 2003 ) accumulated qual - itative data on individual “pitches” in their study of face - to - face interviews in Hollywood , but they pooled their data rather than organize it into cases . Adding to the confusion , some scholars have a very specific definition of what constitutes “qualitative research” that goes well beyond the type of data . For example , Gephart ( 2004 ) described qualitative research as “multimethod research that uses an in - terpretive , naturalistic approach to its subject mat - ter ( Denzin & Lincoln , 1994 ) ” and “addresses ques - tions about how social experience is created and given meaning” ( Gephart , 2004 : 454 – 455 ) . Accord - ing to this view , qualitative research is highly de - scriptive , emphasizes the social construction of re - ality , and focuses on revealing how extant theory operates in particular examples . This view is dif - ferent in terms of research activities , goals , and epistemology from the more objective and positiv - ist stance of theory building from cases as well as from other research strategies also termed “qualita - tive . ” The key implication is that some readers will confuse different kinds of research that seem simi - lar because they use qualitative data , and these readers may be disappointed if the research does not then match their understanding of “qualitative research . ” A straightforward approach for coping with the varied meanings of “qualitative research” is to avoid the term . Rather , clarify the research strategy being used , and contrast it with other “qualitative” approaches with differing epistemological assump - tions . Specifically , when inducting theory from cases , be explicit about the theory - building goal and to liberally use footnotes that sharpen the dis - tinctions among the multiple meanings of qualita - tive research . The key here is to convey the theory - building strategy clearly while avoiding confusion , philosophical pitfalls , and unrealistic reader expectations . Presenting Empirical Evidence A critical aspect of empirical research is present - ing the evidence from which the theory of interest 28 February Academy of Management Journal was inducted . In large - scale deductive studies , there is a widespread norm of presenting theory and then empirical evidence in compact numerical tables that summarize statistical analyses of large amounts of data . But case data cannot be so tightly summarized , because much of it consists of rich qualitative detail . In a single - case study , the challenge of presenting rich qualitative data is readily addressed by simply presenting a relatively complete rendering of the story within the text . The story typically consists of narrative that is interspersed with quotations from key informants and other supporting evidence . The story is then intertwined with the theory to dem - onstrate the close connection between empirical evidence and emergent theory . This intertwining keeps both theory and evidence at the forefront of the paper . Gersick ( 1994 ) , Hargadon and Douglas ( 2001 ) , and Mintzberg and Waters ( 1982 ) are exem - plars of this approach . 1 But presenting a relatively complete and un - broken narrative of each case is infeasible for multiple - case research , particularly as the number of cases increases . If the researcher relates the nar - rative of each case , then the theory is lost and the text balloons . So the challenge in multiple - case research is to stay within spatial constraints while also conveying both the emergent theory that is the research objective and the rich empirical evidence that supports the theory . Coping with the trade - off between rich story and well - grounded theory is easier to do in a multicase book or a single - case paper . But in journal articles , multicase researchers face a particularly difficult trade - off between the - ory and empirical richness . It can be especially challenging to satisfy readers who expect the exten - sive narratives of single - case research . They ask , Where’s the rich story ? The best way to address this challenge of “better stories vs . better theories” is to develop a theory in sections or by distinct propositions in such a way that each is supported by empirical evidence . Thus , the overarching organizing frame of the paper is the theory , and each part of the theory is demonstrated by evidence from at least some of the cases . But since it is generally not realistic to support every theoretical proposition with every case within a text itself , the use of extensive tables and other visual devices that summarize the related case ev - idence are central to signaling the depth and detail of empirical grounding . In other words , the use of summary tables and aids that summarize the case evidence complements the selective story descrip - tions of the text and further emphasizes the rigor and depth of the empirical grounding of the theory . A separate table that summarizes the evidence for each theoretical construct is a particularly effective way to present the case evidence . These “construct tables” summarize the case evidence and indicate how the focal construct is “measured , ” thus in - creasing the “testability” of the theory and creating a particularly strong bridge from the qualitative evidence to theory - testing research . Graebner ( 2004 ) , Gilbert ( 2005 ) , and Zott and Huy ( 2007 ) are excellent examples of blending construct tables with selected text descriptions . Summarizing case evidence within tables and organizing the text around the theory can be , how - ever , disappointing to readers who are expecting the “richness” of detailed narratives from the em - pirical data . This is particularly likely among read - ers whose research predilections favor description over theory . So , although it may seem trivial , it is usually helpful to remind reviewers that the objec - tive is theory development . More significantly , it is critical to invest in developing well - crafted tables , appendixes , and visual aids to demonstrate the the - ory’s underlying empirical support and the antici - pated richness of the case data , and to tie those tables clearly to the text . Writing the Emergent Theory The objective of building theory from cases is theory . But unlike in large - scale hypothesis - testing research , there is no “sure - to - please” stan - dard template for writing emergent theory in theory - building research . Since different readers have their own preferences , they often ask , Why did you format the theory this way ? A useful way to cope with this challenge is to write the theory in multiple ways . First , sketch the emergent theory in the introduction . Then , in the body of paper , write each proposition ( implicitly or explicitly stated ) , and link it to the supporting em - pirical evidence for each construct and for the pro - posed relationship between the constructs . When the research is well done , the propositions will be consistent with most ( or even all ) of the cases be - cause the researcher has effectively “pattern - matched” between theory and data . It is also crucial to write the underlying theoretical arguments that provide the logical link between the constructs within a proposition . These arguments can be 1 An alternative approach is to present the story and then the theory . But this approach moves the theory off center stage and makes the empirical grounding of the theory less apparent . Nonetheless , it is a reasonable and common approach . 2007 29 Eisenhardt and Graebner drawn from case evidence ( e . g . , an informant ex - plaining the logic ) and / or from more detached logic . Finally , provide a visual theory summary such as a “boxes and arrows” diagram or summary table . Eisenhardt ( 1989a ) , Gilbert ( 2005 ) , and Maurer and Ibers ( 2006 ) offer exemplars of the mul - tiple ways of writing theory within a single paper . Using these multiple ways to present the theory is often a safe starting point for initial manuscript submissions . A more subtle challenge arises from confusion about the meaning of “grounded theory build - ing . ” For some scholars , grounded theory build - ing simply means creating theory by observing patterns within systematically collected empiri - cal data . This view often includes some notion of recursively iterating between ( and thus con - stantly comparing ) theory and data during anal - ysis , and theoretically sampling cases ( as de - scribed earlier ) . As Langley ( 1999 ) noted , this is a widely held view of grounded theory building . In this view , the quality of the theory and the strength of its empirical grounding are more cen - tral to research quality than the specifics of the theory - building process . But for other scholars , grounded theory building has a more precise meaning that stems from the original focus of Glaser and Strauss ( 1967 ) on the interpretation of meaning by social actors . For ex - ample , Suddaby described grounded theory build - ing as “most suited to efforts to understand the process by which actors construct meaning out of intersubjective experience” ( Suddaby , 2006 : 634 ) . Others go further to emphasize elaborate processes ( and terminology ) for how researchers should gather field data and discover theory using a hier - archical structure of categories ( Corbin & Strauss , 1990 ) . Constant comparison and theoretical sam - pling take on precise meanings : “constant compar - ison” means simultaneous collection and analysis of data , and “theoretical sampling” means that de - cisions about which data to collect next are deter - mined by the theory in progress ( Suddaby , 2006 ) . In this view , adherence to specific grounded theory building processes is important in judging research quality . But strict adherence can also result in the - ory with limited generalizability ( Langley , 1999 ) and idiosyncratic path dependence on the particu - lar empirical starting point . As when coping with the multiple meanings of “qualitative research , ” it is often helpful to deal with the multiple meanings of “grounded theory building” by avoiding the term unless one is ac - tually using the Glaser and Strauss ( 1967 ) ap - proach . It is also helpful to preempt misunder - standing by engaging in systematic data collection and theory development processes that are re - ported with transparent description , particularly regarding how the theory was inducted from the data ( e . g . , description of cross - case comparison techniques ) . The key here is to convey the rigor , creativity , and open - mindedness of the research processes while sidestepping confusion and philo - sophical pitfalls . Finally , a surprising challenge can arise from readers who are disappointed by parsimonious theory . Particularly when readers are more fa - miliar with the idiosyncratic detail of some single - case research , they may expect the complicated theory that can arise from such cases . Somewhat surprisingly , single cases can enable the creation of more complicated theories than multiple cases , because single - case researchers can fit their theory exactly to the many details of a particular case . In contrast , multiple - case researchers retain only the relationships that are replicated across most or all of the cases . Since there are typically fewer of these relationships than there are details in a richly observed single case , the resulting theory is often more parsimonious ( and also more robust and generalizable ) . A key approach to dealing with this challenge is to ensure that the theory fully exploits the available evidence in terms of pos - sible nuances and alternative interpretations . It also helps to remind readers that parsimony , ro - bustness , and generalizability characterize superior theory . Conclusion Theory building from case studies is an increas - ingly popular and relevant research strategy that forms the basis of a disproportionately large num - ber of influential studies . But like the adherents of any research method , its adherents face some pre - dictable challenges , some of which have , ironi - cally , emerged precisely because research relying on rich qualitative data is becoming more common . The good news is that these often very legitimate challenges can be mitigated through precise lan - guage and thoughtful research design : careful jus - tification of theory building , theoretical sampling of cases , interviews that limit informant bias , rich presentation of evidence in tables and appendixes , and clear statement of theoretical arguments . The result is fresh theory that bridges well from rich qualitative evidence to mainstream deductive re - search . This is the hallmark of building from case studies . 30 February Academy of Management Journal REFERENCES Bartunek , J . M . , Rynes , S . L . , & Ireland , R . D . 2006 . What makes management research interesting and why does it matter ? Academy of Management Journal , 49 : 9 – 15 . Bingham , C . B . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 2006 . Unveiling the creation and content of strategic processes : How and what firms learn from heterogeneous experience . Proceedings of the Academy of Management . Brown , S . L . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 1997 . The art of contin - uous change : Linking complexity theory and time - paced evolution in relentlessly shifting organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 1 – 35 . Brown , S . L . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 1998 . Competing on the edge : Strategy as structured chaos . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Chandler , A . D . 1962 . Strategy and structure . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Corbin , J . , & Strauss , A . 1990 . Grounded theory research : Procedures , canons and evaluative criteria . Qualita - tive Sociology , 13 : 3 – 21 . Denzin , N . K . , & Lincoln , Y . S . 1994 . Introduction : Enter - ing the field of qualitative research . In N . K . Denzin & Y . W . Lincoln ( Eds . ) , Handbook of qualitative research : 1 – 17 . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Dutton , J . E . , & Dukerich , J . M . 1991 . Keeping an eye on the mirror : The role of image and identity in organ - izational adaptation . Academy of Management Journal , 34 : 517 – 554 . Edmondson , A . C . , Bohmer , R . M . , & Pisano , G . P . 2001 . Disrupted routines : Team learning and new technol - ogy implementation in hospitals . Administrative Science Quarterly , 46 : 685 – 716 . Edmondson , A . C . , & McManus , S . E . 2007 . Methodolog - ical fit in organizational field research . Academy of Management Review : In press . Eisenhardt , K . M . 1989a . Making fast strategic decisions in high - velocity environments . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 32 : 543 – 576 . Eisenhardt , K . M . 1989b . Building theories from case study research . Academy of Management Review , 14 : 532 – 550 . Eisenhardt , K . M . 1991 . Better stories and better con - structs : The case for rigor and comparative logic . Academy of Management Review , 16 : 620 – 627 . Elsbach , K . D . , & Kramer , R . M . 2003 . Assessing creativity in Hollywood pitch meetings : Evidence for a dual - process model of creativity judgments . Academy of Management Journal , 46 : 283 – 301 . Ferlie , E . , Fitzgerald , L . , Wood , M . , & Hawkins , C . 2005 . The nonspread of innovations : The mediating role of professionals . Academy of Management Journal , 48 : 117 – 134 . Galunic , D . C . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 1996 . The evolution of intracorporate domains : Divisional charter losses in high - technology , multidivisional corporations . Or - ganization Science , 7 : 255 – 282 . Galunic , D . C . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 2001 . Architectural innovation and modular corporate forms . Academy of Management Journal , 6 : 1229 – 1249 . Gephart , R . P . 2004 . Qualitative research and the Acad - emy of Management Journal . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 47 : 454 – 462 . Gersick , C . J . G . 1988 . Time and transition in work teams . Toward a new model of group development . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 31 : 9 – 41 . Gersick , C . J . G . 1994 . Pacing strategic change . Academy of Management Journal , 9 – 45 . Gilbert , C . G . 2005 . Unbundling the structure of inertia : Resource versus routine rigidity . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 48 : 741 – 763 . Glaser , B . , & Strauss , A . 1967 . The discovery of grounded theory : Strategies in qualitative re - search . London : Wiedenfeld and Nicholson . Graebner , M . E . 2004 . Momentum and serendipity : How acquired leaders create value in the integration of technology firms . Strategic Management Journal , 25 : 751 – 777 . Graebner , M . E . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 2004 . The seller’s side of the story : Acquisition as courtship and gov - ernance as syndicate in entrepreneurial firms . Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 49 : 366 – 403 . Greenwood , R . , & Suddaby , R . 2006 . Institutional entre - preneurship in mature fields : The Big Five account - ing firms . Academy of Management Journal , 49 : 27 – 48 . Hargadon , A . B . , & Douglas , Y . 2001 . When innovations meet institutions : Edison and the design of the elec - tric light . Administrative Science Quarterly , 46 : 476 – 501 . Hargadon , A . B . , & Sutton , R . I . 1997 . Technology broker - ing and innovation in a product development firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 : 716 – 749 . Langley , A . 1999 . Strategies for theorizing from process data . Academy of Management Review , 4 : 691 – 710 . Lee , T . L . , Mitchell , T . R . , & Sablynski , C . J . 1999 . Qual - itative research in organizational and vocational psy - chology : 1979 – 1999 . Journal of Vocational Behav - ior , 55 : 161 – 187 . Leonard - Barton , D . 1990 . A dual methodology for case studies : Synergistic use of a longitudinal single site with replicated multiple sites . Organization Sci - ence , 1 : 1 – 19 . Maurer , I . , & Ebers , M . 2006 . Dynamics of social capital and their performance implications : Lessons from biotechnology start - ups . Administrative Science Quarterly , 51 : 262 – 292 . Mintzberg , H . , & Waters , J . A . 1982 . Tracking strategy in an entrepreneurial firm . Academy of Management Journal , 25 : 465 – 499 . 2007 31 Eisenhardt and Graebner Siggelkow , N . 2007 . Persuasion with case studies . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 50 : 20 – 24 . Suddaby , R . 2006 . What grounded theory is not . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 49 : 633 – 642 . Sutton , R . I . , & Raphaeli , A . 1988 . Untangling the rela - tionship between displayed emotions and organiza - tional sales : The case of convenience stores . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 31 : 461 – 487 . Weick , K . E . 1993 . The collapse of sensemaking in organ - izations : The Mann Gulch disaster . Administrative Science Quarterly , 38 : 628 – 652 . Weick , K . E . 2007 . The generative properties of richness . Academy of Management Journal , 50 : 14 – 19 . Whyte , W . F . 1941 . Corner boys : A study in clique be - havior . American Journal of Sociology , 46 : 647 – 664 . Yin , R . K . 1994 . Case study research : Design and meth - ods ( 2nd ed . ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Zott , C . , & Huy , Q . N . 2007 . How entrepreneurs use symbolic management to acquire resources . Admin - istrative Science Quarterly : In press . Kathleen M . Eisenhardt ( kme @ stanford . edu ) is the Stan - ford W . Ascherman M . D . Professor of Strategy and Or - ganizations in the Department of Management Science and Engineering and the codirector of the Stanford Tech - nology Ventures Program , Stanford University . She re - ceived her Ph . D . from Stanford’s Graduate School of Business . Her research interests include alliance and net - work processes , strategy as simple rules , and competitive power dynamics in technology - based entrepreneurial and established companies . She studies these issues us - ing both theory building from cases and simulation methods . Melissa E . Graebner ( melissa . graebner @ mccombs . utexas . edu ) is an assistant professor of management at the McCombs School of Business in the University of Texas at Austin . She received her Ph . D . in management science and engineering from Stanford University . Her research interests include corporate governance , trust , and strategic decision making . She examines these issues in the contexts of mergers and acquisitions and entrepre - neurial firms . 32 February Academy of Management Journal