Cell , Vol . 96 , 195 – 209 , January 22 , 1999 , Copyright ª 1999 by Cell Press Axis Development and Early Review Asymmetry in Mammals is activated and maternal mRNA degraded at the two - cell stage , within 24 hr of fertilization . Cleavage culminates in blastulation when two distinct Rosa S . P . Beddington * and Elizabeth J . Robertson † * Division of Mammalian Development MRC National Institute for Medical Research tissues form : the trophectoderm ( TE ) and the inner cell The Ridgeway mass ( ICM ) . These are mutually exclusive tissue lin - Mill Hill eages , since the progeny of the TE contribute only to the London NW7 1AA trophoblast and extraembryonic ectoderm and those of United Kingdom the ICM to the fetus and extraembryonic mesoderm and † Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology endoderm ( Gardner , 1983 ) . The segregation of these Harvard University two tissues is presaged by polarization of individual Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 blastomeres during cleavage , first manifest at the eight - cell stage . A series of asymmetric or symmetric cell divisions ensues that results in segregation of polar Introduction cells , which form the TE , and apolar cells , which form Studying the formation of the embryonic axes in mam - the ICM ( Johnson and Ziomek , 1981 ) . Formation of the mals poses a special problem because patterning of the blastocyst gives unequivocal polarity to the conceptus embryo itself is a relatively late event in development . with the ICM situated at one end , which we will call Inthemouse , explicitpatterninthetissuethatwillgener - proximal . More recently it has been confirmed that the ate the future organism only becomes apparent one - nascent blastocyst is also bilaterally symmetrical , being third of the way through a gestational period of 3 weeks . invariably oval rather than spherical ( Gardner , 1997 ) . This tardiness of eutherian mammals is due to viviparity . However , this axis of bilateral symmetry does not seem The earliest stages of their development are necessarily to be polarized in that one end cannot be distinguished preoccupied with the generation of extraembryonic tis - from the other ( Figure 1 , red arrowheads ) . At 4 . 5 days , sues essential for survival in utero . This means that the a third tissue differentiates on the surface of the ICM . conceptus , comprising both the extraembryonic and This is the primitive endoderm destined to generate only embryonic components , is already a complex structure the extraembryonic parietal and visceral endoderm and implanted in the uterus by the time the embryo itself ( Gardner , 1983 ) . The remainder of the ICM , now known begins to acquire obvious pattern . For this reason , the as epiblast , will give rise to the entire fetus , including architecture of the conceptus as a whole cannot be the germ line and all the extraembryonic mesoderm . ignored when considering the origin of the embryonic Polar TE continues to divide , producing extraembry - onic ectoderm that pushes the epiblast and enveloping axes of mammals . This contrasts with the develop - visceral endoderm toward the distal pole of the concep - ment of most invertebrates and anamniote vertebrates , tus . A cavity forms in the center of the epiblast , due to where , from the moment of fertilization , embryogenesis a mixture of apoptotic and survival signals from the is wholly concerned with defining the pattern of the visceral endoderm ( Coucouvanis and Martin , 1995 ) , and future organism . Indeed , in many cases , this patterning the epiblast becomes a cup - shaped epithelial tissue . begins during oogenesis when molecular asymmetries The first morphological sign of embryonic pattern is are laid down in the egg . evident 6 . 5 days after fertilization when gastrulation In this review , we will explore some of the characteris - begins . Epiblast cells at one point on the rim of this tics of mouse development relevant to axis develop - otherwise apparently homogeneous epithelium undergo ment . We will consider whether the pattern that devel - an epithelial – mesenchymal transformation to generate ops in the mouse conceptus influences pattern that mesoderm and form the primitive streak . This point de - appears later in the embryo , and we will discuss what fines the posterior pole of the future embryo , and , thus , is known about how the definitive axes of the embryo the diametrically opposite side of the cylinder is recog - ( anterior – posterior [ A – P ] ; dorsal – ventral [ D – V ] ; and left – nized as anterior . During the next 12 – 24 hr , the streak right [ L – R ] ) are laid down during mammalian devel - elongates from the rim of the cup to its distal tip . Here , opment . at the anterior end of the streak , a specialized structure forms , which is known as the node ( Figure 1 ) . For rea - Anatomy of Early Mouse Development sons given below , the node is considered homologous Figure 1 illustrates the first week of mouse development to the organizer of other vertebrate embryos . The node ( see Hogan et al . , 1994 ; Tam and Behringer , 1998 , for generates axial mesendoderm , which comprises that more comprehensive review ) . The fertilized mouse egg mesoderm which will populate the midline of the embryo is a small ( approximately 80 (cid:109) m in diameter ) cell . It has ( prechordal plate and notochord ) and the definitive gut a polarity because the polar bodies generated by the endoderm . Untilthenodeforms , andhencethedefinitive first and second meiotic divisions are sequentially ex - gut endoderm , the epiblast remains enveloped in extra - truded at the same site , where they remain tethered embryonic visceral endoderm . The posterior end of the during ensuing cleavage ( Gardner , 1997 ) . The site of streak gives rise to extraembryonic mesoderm , while theirextrusion hasbeencalledthe animalpole . Although lateral plate mesoderm and paraxial mesoderm emerge cleavage stages are prolonged , taking approximately 3 from the intervening levels of the streak . The midline mesoderm from the node corresponds to what is called days for the egg to produce 16 cells , the zygotic genome Cell196 Figure 1 . Diagram of the First 7 . 5 Days of Mouse Development from Fertilization Preimplantation development is depicted on the top row with postimplantation development on the bottom ( not drawn to scale ) . The germ layers of the 6 . 5 and 7 . 5 day embryos are also shown as flattened sheets for ease of comparison with other vertebrate and mammalian embryos . The major axes of the embryo are shown superimposed on the profile of an adult mouse . dorsal mesoderm in other vertebrates and the extraem - places as fast as every 2 hr ( Snow , 1977 ) . Furthermore , unlike the predominantly coherent growth seen in pre - bryonic and lateral mesoderm to ventral . Hence , the origin of the primitive streak is critical in defining not gastrula Xenopus embryos , the epiblast cells of the mouse intermix extensively before gastrulation ( see be - only the A – P but also the D – V axis . Since the orientation of the L – R axis is dependent on the orientation of the low ) . These differences , together with the early activa - tion of the zygotic genome , early degradation of mater - other two axes , L – R pattern also ultimately relies on where the streak forms . Not surprisingly , this morpho - nal mRNA , and the lateness of gastrulation , make it hard tosee howdeterminants presentin themouse eggcould logical sequence of events suggested that pattern for - mation in the mammalian embryo could be explained persist long enough directly to influence embryonic pat - tern . However , if embryonic pattern is dictated by the once the cues for localizing streak formation were un - derstood . early axis of bilateral asymmetry in the blastocyst , then it is conceivable that pattern in the fertilized egg could It is worth remembering thatas well as the presence of elaborate extraembryonic tissues , mammalian embryos determine the axes of the conceptus and thereby those of the embryo . arrive at gastrulation in a very different state to that of other vertebrate embryos . There is a marked difference in size , there being only about 600 epiblast cells when Axes of the Conceptus In a trivial sense the proximal – distal axis of the blasto - gastrulation begins in mouse compared with several thousand cells in an equivalent stage Xenopus embryo . cyst obviously corresponds to the D – V axis of the em - bryo ( Figure 1 ) . However , this is more of a geometrical Presumably because of this , mouse embryos grow rap - idly during the periimplantation period and , unlike Xeno - coincidence than one that has meaning in terms of de - termining pattern formation . As stated above , the D – V pus , continue to do so throughout gastrulation , epiblast cells dividing on average at least every 6 hr and in some axis of the embryo , with respect to where the more Review197 dorsal tissues of the embryo originate as opposed to has never been tested ( see Gardner , 1998 ) . However , isolated blastomeres from the two - cell stage can de - ventral ones , is dictated not by the shape of the concep - tus but rather by where the primitive streak forms . velop into mice , and at later cleavage stages adding , removing , or rearranging cells seems to have no effect The first intimation that axes of the conceptus might influence the orientation of the A – P axis of the embryo on the pattern of the surviving embryos . Such experi - ments also indicate that individually cells remain totipo - came from histological studies on implanting blasto - cysts and early postimplantation egg cylinders ( Smith , tent up to the timeof blastulation , although their position during cleavage will influence their fate—inside cells 1980 , 1985 ) . It appeared thatthe tiltof the 4 . 5day blasto - cyst was preserved during implantation as a persistent tending to become ICM and outside cells becoming TE ( see Hogan et al . , 1994 ) . bending of the ectoplacental cone to one side ( Figure 1 ) . From these static descriptive studies , it was claimed The strongest argument against graded cues present in the egg being responsible for dictating the orientation that this side corresponded to the side on which the primitive streak would form . However , when the visceral of axes is that when intact eight - cell embryos are simply placed in contact with one another they will aggregate endoderm was marked with horseradish peroxidase on the side toward which the ectoplacental cone tilted and , and form a single chimeric embryo . The initial aggrega - tion and formation of a chimeric blastocyst occurs with - subsequently , the site of the nascent primitive streak determined , it was found that the streak was just as out cells from the two eight - cell embryos intermixing or sorting out ( Garner and McLaren , 1974 ) . Surely , the likely to form on the opposite side ( Gardner et al . , 1992 ) . Therefore , at present , no decisive evidence indicates formation of two separate individual embryos , rather than a single chimeric one , would be the more likely that the axes of asymmetry in the postimplantation con - ceptus directly influence A – P pattern in the embryo it - outcome if each eight - cell embryo contained its own array of axial determinants inherited from the egg . It self . Moreover , the essential experiment of indelibly and clonally marking one or the other end of the 4 . 5 day has been argued ( Gardner , 1998 ) that the proportion of nonchimeric offspring derived from such aggregation blastocyst tilt in order to examine whether there is any relationship between the direction of the tilt and where experiments is significant , but the reasons for this non - chimerism have never been clarified . Therefore , al - the later A – P axis forms has yet to be attempted . Before implantation the tilt of the 4 . 5 day blastocyst though it cannot be ruled out that pattern in the mamma - lian egg normally and necessarily influences the pattern probably arises from the axis of bilateral symmetry de - scribed in nascent blastocysts . By tracing the location of the blastocyst , there is no experimental evidence to demonstrate that it does . of polar bodies , this axis of bilateral symmetry has been traced back to the animal – vegetal axis of the fertilized While the axes of the conceptus have not yet been shown to directly influence the embryonic ones , the egg ( Gardner , 1997 ) . Veryunexpectedlythosepolarbod - ies , tethered by a cytoplasmic bridge to their original importance of extraembryonic tissues in initiating em - bryonic pattern is becoming obvious . This is implicit site of extrusion , are not randomly positioned at the early blastocyst stage . They are almost always situated from the widespread distribution of ICM clones pro - duced by blastocyst injection and examined using an in line with the blastocoelic surface of the ICM and at oneor otherpoleof theaxisofbilateral symmetry ( Figure in situ lineage marker during gastrulation and early or - ganogenesis ( Beddington et al . , 1989 ) . Clonal descen - 1 ) . This implies that in undisturbed development the animal pole of the egg maps to one pole of the early dants are foundin all embryonic tissuetypes and distrib - uted throughout the length and breadth of the embryo , blastocyst’s axis of bilateral symmetry . Furthermore , the proteins leptin and STAT3 are clearly localized to the showing that epiblast cells must intermix extensively prior to gastrulation . Such mixing of clonal epiblast de - animal pole of mouse and human oocytes and during cleavage preferentially segregate to the trophectoderm scendants has now been shown to coincide with the epiblast becoming an epithelium on the sixth day of rather than ICM lineage ( Antczak and Van Blerkom , 1997 ) . Does this mean that pattern in the mammalian gestation ( Gardner and Cockroft , 1998 ) . Importantly , such cell mixing makes it unlikely that patterning infor - egg does , after all , influence pattern in the conceptus and , thereby , possibly in the embryo itself ? mation for axis formation can reside in the preimplanta - tion epiblast . Therefore , it is more probable that it is The developmental lability of the preimplantation either the extraembryonic tissues or the mother that mammalian embryo has always been taken to indicate provides the initial cues for axis specification in mam - thatneithermosaicismnorgradedinformationintheegg mals . Influences from the mother via the uterus can could be essential for dictating subsequent embryonic probably be discounted , since it is possible to develop pattern . Recently it has been shown that fertile offspring early somite stage embryos with normal axes from blas - can be produced from eggs in which a substantial vol - tocysts grown in vitro ( Hsu , 1979 ) . ume of either the animal or vegetal pole of the egg hasbeen mechanicallyremoved ( Zernicka - Goetz , 1998 ) . This argues against localized determinants in the egg Origin of the D – V and A – P Axes Undoubtedly , where the primitive streak forms is critical being required for subsequent pattern formation , al - though it does not necessarily rule out the presence of to the orientation of both the A – P and D – V axes . How - ever , surprisingly , evidence has emerged recently for an influential gradient capable of regulation . Cleavage planes dictate that only at the eight - cell stage would precocious anterior patterning in the extraembryonic endoderm ( anterior visceral endoderm [ AVE ] ) of the blastomeres contain cytoplasm from different animal – vegetal levels of the egg , and it is true that the potency mammalian conceptus , in both the mouse and the rab - bit , before there is any sign of primitive streak formation of all eight individual blastomeres from a single embryo Cell198 Figure 2 . Cell Movements and Molecular Signals Controlling Axis Formation ( A ) Changes in cell movement and gene expression that mark the conversion of the proximal – distal axis of the conceptus into the A – P axis of the embryo . At 5 . 5 days , distal visceral endoderm cells ( green ) , marked by Hex expression , give rise only to anterior progeny , which populate the AVE and eventually move into the extraembryonic region ( green arrows ) . The AVE induces anterior character in the underlying epiblast ( turquoise ) . Transcripts of future markers of the primitive streak such as Cripto ( lilac ) are ubiquitously expressed in the epiblast ( pale blue ) at 5 . 5 days but restricted to the proximal rim of epiblast at 6 . 0 days , where other markers of the primitive streak , such as T ( deep purple ) start to be expressed . Bmp4 ( dark blue ) is transiently expressed in the adjacent extraembryonic ectoderm . Caudal cell movement in the proximal epiblast ( white arrow ) results in the primitive streak forming opposite the AVE at 6 . 5 days . By 7 . 0 days extraembryonic mesoderm ( crimson ) , which may be regarded as ventral in character , is produced from the posterior aspect of the streak while anteriorly the organizer ( mauve ) forms , which gives rise to dorsal mesoderm and gut endoderm ( axial mesendoderm ; orange ) . ( B ) Possible scheme of the molecular interactions that may differentiate A from P at 6 . 5 days . One role of the AVE would be to provide the requisite TGF (cid:98) and Wnt inhibitors while the streak is being induced in order to allow expression of anterior markers such as Hesx1 . ( reviewed by Beddington and Robertson , 1998 ) . More - a morphological difference is not apparent , but the AVE can be distinguished molecularly ( Figure 2A ) . Expres - over , this anterior extraembryonic endoderm has been shown to be functional in providing the embryo with sion of the VE - 1 antigen ( Rosenquist and Martin , 1995 ) and of the genes Otx2 ( Ang and Rossant , 1994 ; Acamp - anterior character . This is unexpected because years of experimental analysis in Xenopus and other vertebrate ora et al . , 1995 ) , Lim1 , goosecoid , cerberus - related 1 ( Belo et al . , 1997 ) , and Hex ( Thomas et al . , 1998 ) is embryos have ascribed anterior patterning to products of the organizer—the earliest axial mesendoderm ema - restrictedto amedial stripof theAVE underlyingapprox - imately the anterior third of the epiblast at least 12 hr nating from the organizer being responsible for inducing ectoderm to become neural and giving this neural tissue before the streak has formed . As the streak forms , the most anterior extreme of the AVE in the region where the explicit A – P pattern ( reviewed by Harland and Gerhart , 1997 ) . Therefore , to have anterior pattern essential for heart will develop starts to express Mrg1 ( Dunwoodie et al . , 1998 ) , and slightly more posteriorly , where it overlies complete axis formation before the streak , and hence the organizer , has formed runs contrary to traditional epiblast fated to give rise to oral ectoderm and forebrain ( Thomas et al . , 1997 ) , Hesx1 is expressed ( Thomas and thinking . Pattern and Cell Movement in the AVE Beddington , 1996 ) . Thus , as gastrulation starts , the AVE is already a finely patterned tissue and so cannot de - In the rabbit embryo , the AVE underlying the epiblast is morphologically distinct , being more columnar in char - pend on its patterning on products of the streak . Cell lineage studies have shown that the AVE is de - acter than the rest of the visceral endoderm before gas - trulation starts ( Viebahn et al . , 1995 ) . In the mouse such rived from a handful of endoderm cells situated at the Review199 distal tip of the 5 . 5 day conceptus , which alone express properties of the mammalian AVE , or it functions earlier than has been tested during chick development . Hex ( Thomas et al . , 1998 ) . Remarkably , these distal cells give rise only to anterior descendants ( Figure 2A ) . Mutations in a number of genes that are first ex - pressed in the AVE and only subsequently in epiblast Whether this anisotropic cell movement in the visceral endoderm layer is due to differences in proliferation , derivatives affect anterior development . These include Hesx1 ( a paired - like homeobox - containinggene ; Dattani the orientation of cell divisions , or some kind of barrier preventing posterior movement remains to be seen . et al . , 1998 ) , Lim1 ( a member of the LIM class of tran - scription factors ; Shawlot and Behringer , 1995 ) , and Shortly after this anterior movement of visceral endo - derm cells commences it is mirrored by a posteriorward Otx2 ( encoding a homeodomain - containing transcrip - tion factor related to Drosophila otd ; Acampora et al . , movement of epiblast cells at the embryonic – extra - embryonic junction ( Lawson et al . , 1991 ) . In this way 1995 ; Matsuo et al . , 1995 ; Ang et al . , 1996 ) . For example , in Otx2 (cid:50) / (cid:50) embryos at egg cylinder stages , the posterior the ring of gene expression in the proximal epiblast of primitive streak markers , such as T ( Thomas and Bed - rotation of epiblast seems to occur normally but the visceral endoderm remains distal ( Acampora et al . , dington , 1996 ) , resolves to the posterior where gastrula - tion begins ( Figure 2A ) . Although cellular in nature , this 1998 ) , and the resulting embryos are missing midbrain and forebrain . More complex genetic interactions are “rotation , ” brought about by the anterior movement of distal visceral endoderm cells and the posterior move - indicated by the anterior truncations observed in em - bryos that are heterozygous for HNF3 (cid:98) , a member of ment of proximal epiblast cells , bears some resem - blance to the directed movement of the oocyte nucleus the winged helix forkhead family of transcription factors expressed throughout the visceral endoderm , and that in response to signals from follicle cells in the egg cham - ber of Drosophila , needed to establish the major axes also either lack gsc ( yet another homeobox containing gene ; Filosa et al . , 1997 ) or are heterozygous for a muta - of the fruit fly ( Gonzalez - Reyes et al . , 1995 ) . Recently , a mutation in Cripto has been described tion in nodal ( a member of the TGF (cid:98) superfamily encod - ing secreted signaling molecules ; Varlet et al . , 1997b ) . in the mouse that prevents the appropriate rotation of visceralendoderm andepiblast ( Ding etal . , 1998 ) . Cripto On their own these mutants do not reveal whether wild - type gene function is necessary in the AVE or needed is a gene encoding a member of a family of extracellular , membrane - associated proteins that contain cysteine - only in epiblast derivatives . However , when ES cells are injected into blastocysts they preferentially colonize rich and epidermal growth factor – like motifs , and there is evidence that Cripto may be a signaling molecule that epiblast and its derivatives ( Beddington and Robertson , 1989 ) , and , therefore , it is possible to make chimeras in activates the MAPK pathway ( Kannan et al . , 1997 ) . The product of the one - eyed pinhead gene in zebrafish , which the extraembryonic tissues can be of one geno - type and the epiblast and its derivatives of another . In which when mutated results in defective anterior devel - opment and cyclopia , also belongs to this family ( Zhang this way a number of genes have been shown to be essential in extraembryonic tissues for development to et al . , 1998 ) . In the mouse embryo , Cripto initially is expressed uniformly in the epiblast , but before gastrula - proceed normally , and in a few cases this requirement has been shown to be a patterning one rather than sim - tion its transcripts become restricted to the region of the proximal rim of the epiblast that will give rise to the ply nutritive . When chimeras are made from wild - type ES cells in - streak ( Figure 2 ) . Embryos homozygous for a loss - of - function mutation in Cripto do not orientate their A – P jected into Otx2 (cid:50) / (cid:50) morulae , anterior development is never initiated , even though the epiblast may be exclu - axis correctly . Instead , both AVE markers and anterior ectoderm markers such as Hesx1 remain located dis - sively or predominantly wild type ( Figure 3 ) . When Otx2 (cid:50) / (cid:50) ES cells are injected into wild - type morulae , tally , and extraembryonic mesoderm markers , which should be posterior , are proximal . Interestingly , al - producing predominantly mutant epiblast , anterior de - velopment is initiated correctly , but it is not maintained though there is neither a streak nor an organizer , an ectopic AVE is present , and even more revealing , the ( Rhinn et al . , 1998 ) . Consequently , Otx2 function seems to be required in the extraembryonic tissues , presum - epiblast adjacent to it assumes anterior character . The AVE Effects Embryonic Anterior Pattern ably in visceral endoderm where it is expressed , if ante - rior patterning is to commence . Interestingly , substitu - The anterior nature of the ectoderm present in Cripto (cid:50) / (cid:50) embryos ( Ding et al . , 1998 ) suggests that visceral endo - tion of Otx2 by its close relative Otx1 , by recombining Otx1 into the Otx2 locus , also rescues only the initiation derm can impart anterior pattern in the absence of an organizer . Additional evidence that the AVE is important but not the maintenance of anterior patterning . In this case the Otx1 transgene is translated normally in vis - in establishing the anterior terminus of the mammalian embryo comes from several different kinds of experi - ceral endoderm but is only transcribed in the epiblast ( Acampora et al . , 1998 ) . This curious observation may ments . Removal of the AVE at the earliest stages of gastrulation prevents or diminishes expression of fore - reflect natural differences in translational control be - tweentheextraembryonic endodermandepiblasttissue brain markers ( Thomas and Beddington , 1996 ) . Con - versely , recombining chick epiblast with the AVE from lineages . An extraembryonic requirement for the nodal gene , pre – streak stage rabbit embryos induces expression of forebrain markers in the chick epiblast ( Kno¨tgen et al . , which interacts with HNF3 (cid:98) during head development , has also been demonstrated ( Figure 3 ; Varlet et al . , 1999 ) . Interestingly , the anterior hypoblast from mid – streak stage chick embryos does not elicit this response 1997a ) . Embryos that lack nodal fail to gastrulate , but when wild - type ES cells are injected into nodal (cid:50) / (cid:50) blas - in epiblast , nor does its removal prevent epiblast from expressing forebrain markers ( Kno¨tgen et al . , 1999 ) . Ei - tocysts , gastrulation proceeds . In these chimeras , em - bryos develop with an appropriately patterned trunk , ther the anterior chick hypoblast lacks the patterning Cell200 Figure 3 . Visceral Endoderm Influences An - terior Pattern The expression patterns of nodal and Otx2 at the onset of gastrulation and the results from chimera experiments demonstrating that each gene is required in the visceral endo - derm for normal anterior development of the embryo . buttheyaremissinganteriorstructures . Thegastrulation center , this inducing activity being strongest in dorsal – vegetal blastomeres ( see Harland and Gerhart , 1997 ) . defect is also rescued when nodal (cid:50) / (cid:50) cells are injected Since part of the Nieuwkoop center will give rise only into wild - type blastocysts , but in this case anterior de - to yolky cells later in development , often misleadingly velopmentisnormal . Unlike Otx2 , nodal isnotexpressed called gut endoderm , they may be viewed as containing in anterior epiblast derivatives , but , clearly , its expres - extraembryonic material . Likewise in zebrafish , ectopic sion in visceral endoderm is essential if these anterior injection of genes expressed in the syncitial yolk layer , embryonic tissues are to form and be patterned cor - which does not contribute to the embryo itself , can in - rectly . Embryos that lack Smad2 , whose transcripts are duce or affect organizer ( embryonic shield ) formation ubiquitous in the early mouse conceptus and whose and function ( Feldman et al . , 1998 ; Yamanaka et al . , product is thought to cooperate with Smad4 in order to 1998 ) . transduce activin - like signals , make only extraembry - As we have seen , in the mouse some of the earliest onic ( posterior ) mesoderm and fail to differentiate an markers of streak formation , like T , are first expressed AVE ( Waldrip et al . , 1998 ) . Again , chimeras demonstrate circumferentially in the proximal epiblast immediately that absence of Smad2 extraembryonically is sufficient adjacent to the extraembryonic ectoderm ( Figure 2A ) . to produce this phenotype . Not surprisingly , Smad4 has Others , such as Cripto and nodal , are initally expressed also been shown to be necessary in extraembryonic ubiquitously in the epiblast but then maintained only in tissues for the normal development and function of vis - this rim ( Figure 2A ) . Subsequently , cell movements in ceral endoderm ( Sirard et al . , 1998 ) . the proximal epiblast seem to direct these cells to the The nature of the TGF (cid:98) ligand or ligands whose sig - posterior where epithelial continuity is lost and the nals need to be transduced by these Smads in extraem - streak forms ( Lawson et al . , 1991 ) . If the expression of bryonic tissues is not yet known . Activin itself is an thesegenesisinducedormaintainedbyextraembryonic unlikely candidate because embryos lacking activin (cid:98) A tissues , then both the extraembryonic ectoderm and the and / or (cid:98) B subunits do not have characteristic anterior visceral endoderm may be involved—extraembryonic defects , and mothers deficient in activin (cid:98) B give birth to ectoderm inducing gene expression in proximal epiblast normal young ( Vassalli et al . , 1994 ; Matzuk et al . , 1995a ) . and visceral endoderm providing posterior polarity . However , embryos lacking the Activin Type IB serine - However , unlike the AVE , no genes have yet been de - threonine kinase receptor , ALK4 , fail to gastrulate , and scribed that are exclusively expressed in posterior vis - chimeras have shown that this receptor is also required ceral endoderm . Its only distinguishing feature at pres - in extraembryonic tissues for normal epiblast develop - ent is that cell lineage studies ( Lawson et al . , 1987 ) ment ( Gu et al . , 1998 ) . Whatever the exact molecular indicate that posterior visceral endoderm cells remain pathways , it is clear that the AVE , and probably also in situ overlying the streak throughout streak elongation the extraembryonic ectoderm , are essential for initiating and while the node becomes patent . It is possible that anterior development in the embryo . the AVE provides the impetus for the posteriorward Primitive Streak Induction movement of epiblast cells , thereby spatially coordinat - How the primitive streak is induced remains unsolved . ing A – P and D – V development . Certainly , the character - istic constriction in the conceptus seen at the level of In Xenopus the organizer is induced by the Nieuwkoop Review201 the proximal epiblast in several mutants , which can be prevents expression of the primitive streak marker T ( Winnier et al . , 1995 ) . Likewise , embryos lacking the type rescued by the presence of wild - type extraembryonic I BMP receptor , ALK3 , form egg cylinders but fail to tissues ( e . g . , Otx2 , Rhinn et al . , 1998 ; HNF3 (cid:98) , Dufort et make mesoderm ( Mishina et al . , 1995 ) . The absence of al . , 1998 ) , indicates that growth or morphogenesis in nodal in the epiblast also prevents gastrulation , and by different regions of the epiblast may be selectively influ - the time the streak forms nodal is expressed only in enced either by the visceral endoderm or the extraem - the posterior epiblast , so it too may effect mesoderm bryonic ectoderm . induction ( Conlon et al . , 1994 ) . Misexpression of a Wnt1 Mesoderm - inducing properties of posterior visceral class of signal , chick Wnt8 , can induce an additional endoderm are implied by the fact that isolated pre – or streak in the mouse complete with a secondary node early streak stage epiblast can only differentiate into ( Po¨pperl et al . , 1997 ) . Moreover , the absence of axin , haemopoeitic or endothelial cells , indicative of extraem - which encodes an inhibitor of the Wnt signaling path - bryonic mesoderm formation , if they are recombined way , results in embryos with duplicated or multiple with visceral endoderm ( Belaoussoff et al . , 1998 ) . This streaks and nodes ( Gluecksohn - Schonheimer , 1949 ; does not seem to be just a survival effect because re - Perry et al . , 1995 ; Zeng et al . , 1997 ) . Hence , Wnt signal - combining visceral endoderm and prospective forebrain ing does seem to be involved in the induction of the ectoderm fromthe anteriorof mid – streakstage embryos streakandnode , butthereisnoevidencetodatedemon - respecifies the latter to form blood and vascular tissue . strating the requirement for Wnt gene activity , either This reinforces the notion that pattern in the epiblast as a competence - modifying signal or as a mesoderm depends critically on influences from its local environ - inducer . ment ( Beddington , 1982 ) . With regard to mesoderm in - The Role of the Organizer duction , it isstill notclear whatkind orkindsof mesoder - The mouse node expresses homologs of many of the mal tissue are being induced to elicit streak formation . genes expressed in the organizer of Xenopus ( Bed - Anatomically , the formation of a distinct node , or orga - dington and Smith , 1993 ) . It also gives rise to a similar nizer , occurs several hours after the streak has been repertoire of embryonic tissues , namely prechordal induced and extraembryonic mesoderm production has mesoderm , notochord , and gut endoderm ( Beddington , already begun . Is posterior – ventral mesoderm , in the 1981 , 1984 ; Lawson et al . , 1991 ) , and can induce sec - guise of extraembryonic mesoderm , induced first and ondary axes when transplanted ( Beddington , 1994 ; Tam the node , which will produce anterior and dorsal meso - et al . , 1997 ) . These attributes make the mouse node derm , induced secondarily ? Although the expression equivalent to Spemann’s organizer in frogs . Therefore , patterns of appropriate marker genes have not been it would be reasonable to suppose that , like the frog compared in the same embryo at a resolution that can organizer , it produces tissue that neuralizes ectoderm distinguish the expression profiles of individual cells , it and provides it with A – P pattern . However , we have wouldappearthat gsc , whichissubsequentlyexpressed already seen that anterior pattern evolves well before exclusively in the early node ( Blum et al . , 1992 ) , is coex - there is a node or primitive streak , and so the mouse pressed with markers of ventral mesoderm , such as node must be different from Spemann’s organizer . In - Bmp4 , when the streak is first induced ( Winnier et al . , deed , it is unable to duplicate a complete axis ; second - 1995 ) . Therefore , the formation of the node may involve ary axes invariably have anterior truncations and lack , the gradual separation of organizer and streak charac - for example , forebrain ( Beddington , 1994 ; Po¨pperl et teristics into different cells rather than simultaneous but al . , 1997 ; Tam et al . , 1997 ) . The anterior truncation of distinct inductive events like those invoked to explain secondary axes induced by ectopic chick Wnt8 could Xenopus mesoderminduction ( see Harlandand Gerhart , be due to the subsequent posteriorizing properties of 1997 ) . What happens in mouse is not dissimilar to the Wnt molecules , but this would not account either for initial coexpression of homologs of Gsc and T in the the fact that the de novo prospective forebrain marker same cells of zebrafish embryos followed by their segre - Hesx1 is expressed in these embryos but never in dupli - gation into separate cell populations ( Schulte - Merker cated domains or that the induced and native axes are et al . , 1994 ) . One interpretation of how the Nieuwkoop always fused anteriorly , suggesting that there was only center exerts its influence in Xenopus is that by lo - ever a single anterior terminus . Thus , unlike Spemann’s calizing components of the Wnt signaling pathway it organizer , duplicationofthemousenodeisnotsufficient selectively alters the way in which cells respond to to induce duplication of the most anterior structures . In mesoderm - inducing signals , essentially changing their this respect , it is interesting that embryos homozygous competence so that they are predisposed to form more for a mutation in HNF3 (cid:98) , which lack an identifiable node , dorsal tissue ( see Harland and Gerhart , 1997 ) . Thus , still express diagnostic markers of anterior development sustained but localized Wnt signaling could gradually ( Ang and Rossant , 1994 ; Weinstein et al . , 1994 ) . It may lead to node formation at the anterior end of the mouse also be relevant that the animal cap of Xenopus shows primitive streak , leaving posterior parts competent only signs of D – V pattern before it is contacted by products to produce more ventral and posterior mesoderm . of the organizer ( see Harland and Gerhart , 1997 ) , and Recently it has been shown that Bmp4 is transiently that distinctive anterior CNS ( row 1 ) cells with excep - expressed in the extraembryonic ectoderm abutting the tional patterning properties form early during gastrula - epiblast just before gastrulation begins ( Figure 2 ; Wal - tion in zebrafish embryos , also possibly without being drip et al . , 1998 ) and , thereby , could induce expression induced by the organizer ( Houart et al . , 1998 ) . in the epiblast of certain genes that will be expressed While the node does not initiate anterior pattern in the in the streak . Certainly , the absence of BMP4 causes mouse embryo , it is undoubtedly important in main - taining and extending it , and it is no accident that node most embryos to arrest at the egg cylinder stage and Cell202 derivatives express much the same repertoire of genes been recognized for many years , not least in its distinct head organizer and trunk organizer activities ( see Har - as the AVE ( see Beddington and Robertson , 1998 ) . Re - combining tissues produced by the node with ectoderm land and Gerhart , 1997 ) . What the mammalian embryo demonstrates is that these two organizing activities can shows that axial mesendoderm is necessary for induc - tion of the midbrain – hindbrain junction marker , En - belong to separate tissue lineages , the primitive endo - derm ( head organizer ) and the epiblast ( trunk organizer ) . grailed , in neurectoderm ( Rhinn et al . , 1998 ) . Similarly , chimera experiments have shown that wild - type expres - The distinct origins of these organizing tissues in mam - mals may represent a specialization of viviparity , or they sion of HNF3 (cid:98) in node derivatives remains essential for the appropriate D – V patterning of the neural tube , may indicate a more ancient dichotomy . The antiquity of mechanisms used to distinguish anterior from poste - normal heart morphogenesis , and aspects of L – R axis formation ( see below ; Dufort et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , rior is indicated by the existence of paired - like homeo - box genes , which demarcate apical development in Hy - axial mesendoderm from the node probably initiates A – P pattern in the trunk , including the hindbrain , but dra ( Gauchat et al . , 1998 ) . In Xenopus , the yolky cells in the depths of the organizer may be regarded as the serves only to maintain and refine preexisting A – P pat - tern further rostrally . head organizer because they express cerberus , a gene encoding a BMP inhibitor , whose ectopic expression Emphasis inthis reviewhas beenplaced onthe impor - tance of extraembryonic tissues in ordaining embryonic caninducesecondaryanteriorstructures ( Bouwmeester et al . , 1996 ) . If these cells are equivalent to the AVE , pattern . However , these tissue interactions are not just one way . The requirement for Cripto produced by the which is known to express a cerberus - like gene , are they induced by the same cues that generate the trunk epiblast ( Ding et al . , 1998 ) is but one example of the reciprocal interactions that must take place between organizer ? If they are induced and controlled in a similar way to the trunk organizer , then this is not the case for the future embryo and its surrounding extraembryonic tissues . Likewise , as node derivatives replace the AVE , the AVE in mammalian embryos . However , the separate head and trunk organizer locations recently docu - without apparent disruption to gene expression pat - terns , information from anterior epiblast may be essen - mented in the postimplantation mouse conceptus do not necessarily mark when symmetry is first broken to tial to preserve aspects of axial mesendoderm pattern . In this way , information imparted by one tissue to its create these different organizing centers . In order to really understand how A – P and D – V pattern arise and neighbormaybe returnedinkindby thatneighbor , either in the same or more elaborate form . So pattern is pro - how their patterning is coordinated in mammals , it is imperative to establish the earliest time and place that gressively stabilized , refined , and embellished . Common Elements of Vertebrate instrumental pattern is laid down . At present , although this is already known to be earlier than was supposed , Anterior Development In Xenopus , head formation is thought to require the its origin has yet to be pinpointed . It must be admitted that axis development is a some - inhibition of BMP - and Wnt1 - like activities while being refractory to the inhibition of FGF signaling ( see Harland what abstract notion . What is studied is the origin of different tissues with different properties , not the emer - and Gerhart , 1997 ) . Therefore , one role of the AVE may be to locally inhibit the induction of posterior or ventral gence of an imaginary line running the length of an or - ganism . While a mathematician draws the imaginary line development , for example by curtailing expression of Bmp4 in the anterior extraembryonic ectoderm or by to explain what has happened , the embryo does not . In Drosophila , the early A – P axis has distinct termini that inhibiting BMP and Wnt activities ( Figure 2B ) . In this respect , one might predict that anterior development elaborate a spatial gradient between both termini . This gradient determines the expression boundaries of gap should be initiated normally in mutant embryos lacking Bmp4 or BmprI / Alk3 . A requirement for inhibiting Wnt genes whose removal will lead to a gap phenotype , for example , intact termini but a missing midsection . In activityisindicatedbytheeffectsofectopicallyexpress - ing chick Wnt8 in mouse embryos . As well as its streak mammalsnosuchgapphenotypeshavebeendescribedforearlyaxialpattern . Loss of part of the trunk invariably duplicating activity , Wnt8 can later caudalize nascent CNS , apparently expanding the midbrain at the expense includes loss of one or other of the termini . It may be that in a rapidly growing embryo the production of a of the forebrain ( Po¨pperl et al . , 1997 ) . Exactly how first the AVE and then node derivatives inhibit BMP and Wnt seamless axis depends more on the timetable and order activities has yet to be established , but it is likely to of forming different tissues from each termini than gen - involve secretion of inhibitory binding molecules that erating a morphogen gradient that encompasses and can protect adjacent ectoderm from caudalizing or dictates all axial levels . If in mammals we are dealing mesoderm - inducing influences ( Figure 2B ) . Obviously , with sequential differentiation of specific tissues , whose molecules such as Cerberus , Chordin , Dickkopf , Nog - geography may be continually adjusted because each gin , Follistatin , andFrzbdescribedin Xenopus arecandi - tissue is reliant on the next for its further development , dates ( see De Robertis et al . , 1997 ; Harland and Gerhart , the problem becomes less how an axis is determined 1997 ) , although the phenotypes obtained in the mouse andmorewhatasymmetrieselicit theformationofdiffer - from loss - of - function mutations in these inhibitors , ent tissues . which so far have individually removed noggin ( McMa - hon et al . , 1998 ) and follistatin ( Matzuk et al . , 1995b ) , L – R Axis Determination suggest that these molecules may have to operate in The invariant nature of body situs within and across all concert in order to be effective . That the amphibian organizer is heterogeneous has vertebrate species implies that determination of the L – R Review203 axis is controlled by a highly conserved pathway . In the L – R pattern referred to as heterotaxia . In other cases , organs may develop as either right or left mirror images mouse , although the left and right sides of the embryo are established when the A – P and D – V axes form , the called isomerisms . Thus , genetics suggests that the L – R pathway is finely balanced with perturbations at differ - embryonic body planremains effectively bilaterally sym - metrical for several days afterward . Only when the em - ent levels of the cascade inflicting different insults on final body situs . Interfering early tends to randomize or bryo reaches early somite stages does the first anatomi - cal sign of an L – R difference become apparent : the reverse overall situs , whereas later disturbances alter only some organs . primitive heart tube invariably curves to the right of the ventral midline . By the 6 - to 8 - somite stage , more exten - In humans ICS results in randomization of total body situs , implicating a gene that acts early during the L – R sive L – R asymmetry begins to emerge as the embryo starts to rotate about its A – P axis . This turning requires pathway . ICS is caused by a mutation in a microtubule - associated dynein gene ( Afzelius , 1985 ) , a fact that in - twisting of the embryo in an anticlockwise direction along its entire rostrocaudal axis . Axial rotation is cou - formed a candidate gene approach employed to identify the product of the mouse iv mutation . A number of dy - pledwithventral closurewhentheedges ofthedefinitive gutendodermandthemostlateralaspectsoftheembry - nein genes map to the distal region of mouse chromo - some 12where the iv mutation resides , and oneof these , onic body wall grow toward each other and fuse along the ventral midline . The mechanism ( s ) underlying these a member of the class of axonemal dynein proteins , was recently shown to correspond to iv ( Supp et al . , 1997 ) . orchestrated and directional morphogenetic events , which obviously require coordinated movement in multi - In the original iv / iv mouse strain , the mutation causes a single amino acid change in a highly conserved region ple embryonic tissues , is poorly understood . Laterally asymmetriccellproliferation combinedwiththephysical of the motor domain , and the gene has been named left - right dynein ( lrd ) . As yet , there is no formal genetic constraints imposed on the embryo by its surrounding extraembryonicmembranes mayprovideboth theimpe - proof that this missense mutation in lrd leads to loss - of - function of the protein in iv / iv mice . However , lrd tus and directionality for some of them . Certainly , meso - dermal tissue located at the most lateral edges of the also maps to the 600 kb deletion associated with the transgene insertion mutation legless , which is allelic to embryo proliferates more on the left side than on the right ( Miller and Runner , 1978 ) . iv . Homozygous lgl mutants lack lrd and also display random body situs ( Supp et al . , 1997 ) . Transcripts of lrd During and after turning , organ situs patterns start to emerge . For example , the stomach and liver , which are can be detected at preimplantation stages but are most abundant and symmetrically distributed in the 7 . 5 day both derivatives of the gut , come to lie on different sides of the midline . Bilaterally paired organs also acquire mature node . Expression is then widespread , including some ciliated epithelia , although the function of later lrd marked L – R differences . On the left side of the thoracic cavity , a single lobe lung primordium forms , whereas expression does not seem to be essential because apart from situs defects iv / iv animals are normal and fully enhanced branching morphogenesis produces a four - lobed lung on the right . Interestingly , this difference is fertile . That randomization of the mammalian L – R axis can be due to the absence of an intracellular motor is intrinsic to the developing organ because isolated left and right lung primordia in culture maintain their respec - consistent with the notion that asymmetric movement of molecules is crucial for the initial specification of L – R . tive branching pattern . How do cells and tissues know on which side of the body they lie ? This is an intriguing The transgene insertion causing the inv mutation de - letes the coding sequence of a gene encoding a novel theoreticalproblemandonethathasprovokedanumberofconceptualmodels ( reviewed by Lander et al . , 1998 ) , 1000 amino acid protein ( Mochizuki et al . , 1998 ; Morgan et al . , 1998 ) . Sequence analysis suggests that this is an the most influential of which is the notion that a chiral molecule is aligned along the A – P axis of the early em - intracellular protein whose C - terminal domain is rich in anykrin repeats . As with lrd , the expression pattern of bryo ( Brown and Wolpert , 1990 ; reviewed by Levin and Mercola , 1998 ) . While we still understand little about inv is largely uniformative , since the gene is transcribed from early stages of embryogenesis , and all lineages of how initial polarity is determined , substantial progress has been made in identifying downstream genes that the early postimplantation embryo contain low levels of inv transcripts ( Mochizuki et al . , 1998 ) . Conclusive proof elaborate L – R pattern . Genetic Insights into Early L – R Asymmetry that the L – R defects in inv are due to loss of this single gene was obtained by rescuing the phenotype of inv / There are numerous reports of familial human situs de - fects ( reviewed by Kosaki and Casey , 1998 ) that range inv embryos by introducing into them a transgene ex - pressing inv cDNA under the control of a ubiquitous from single autosomal recessive mutations , such as im - motile cilia syndrome ( ICS ) that randomizes body situs , promoter ( Mochizuki et al . , 1998 ) . Obviously , much still has to be learned about the pre - to more complex pedigrees where situs defects are con - fined to a subset of organs . In mouse the inversus vis - cise intracellular localization and function of the inv and iv proteins . Although they are essential if gene expres - cerum ( iv ) mutation results in randomization of heart looping and body situs ( Hummel and Chapman , 1959 ) , sion asymmetries are to emerge , it is not clear when they are first needed , nor why loss of one ( inv ) should whereas animals homozygous for the inversion of em - bryonic turning ( inv ) mutation mostly show complete lead to complete inversion of the L – R axis while loss of the other ( iv ) causes random laterality . It is also unclear inversion of embryonic turning and body situs ( Yoko - yama et al . , 1993 ) . Inboth mice and humans , assignment how genes , and presumably their protein products , which are expressed more or less ubiquitously , can ef - of L – R can be random along the A – P axis of a single individual , producing a mixture of normal and abnormal fect L – R asymmetry . Perhaps the cellular function of inv Cell204 Figure 4 . L – R Asymmetry in Gene Expression ( A ) nodal expression in thenode andleft LPM of 8 - somite stage embryos . ( B ) Expression of lefty - 1 in the floor plate and of lefty - 2 in the left LPM of 8 - somite stage embryos . ( C ) Diagram of nodal and lefty - 1 expression in a cross section of the node . ( D ) Diagram of nodal and lefty - 2 expression in the LPM and of lefty - 1 in the floor plate of an early somite stage embryo . may be easier to decipher by studying its role in kidney Another piece in the L – R puzzle is Pitx2 , a member of the bicoid class of homeodomain factors , which morphogenesis ( Yokoyama et al . , 1993 ) . seems to be an important and highly influential target of L – R Asymmetry in Gene Expression the nodal and lefty pathways . In frog , chick , and mouse , Inthechick , genesencodinganumberofsignalingmole - Pitx2 is expressed on the left side of the axis shortly cules , including an activin receptor ( ActRIIa ) , sonic after nodal is detected in the LPM ( Logan et al . , 1998 ; hedgehog ( Shh ) , and nodal , are transiently expressed Piedra et al . , 1998 ; Ryan et al . , 1998 ; St . Amand et al . , on one side only of the midline during gastrulation . This 1998 ; Yoshioka et al . , 1998 ) . The Pitx2 expression do - asymmetric gene expression precedes any anatomical main is larger than that of nodal , persists longer , and signs of laterality , and its onset is marked by ActRII , includes not only the left LPM but also the left side of which is expressed first and along the right side of the the developing gut tube and the heart . Both nodal and primitive streak and developing node ( Levin et al . , 1995 ) . lefty can induce ectopic Pitx2 in chick embryos , and if Activation of this receptor , possibly by a localized the right side of the axis of chick embryos is infected source of activin (cid:98) B , allows expression of Shh and nodal with retroviruses expressing Pitx2 , both the heart and only on the left side of the node ( Levin et al . , 1997 ) . derivatives of the gut become left isomerized ( Logan et In this way L – R differences start to be amplified and al . , 1998 ) . Hence , Pitx2 seems toact asa globalexecutor ultimately cause nodal expression in a broad stripe of of L – R pattern . lateral plate mesoderm ( LPM ) exclusively on the left The mouse node and its derivatives also show asym - side . In mouse , frog , and zebrafish only the asymmetric metric gene expression patterns . When the node first expression of nodal seems to be exactly like that in emerges , it already has a unique , bilaminar architecture . chick . Ventrally a sheet of small cuboidal cells , each bearing Mouse nodal is also expressed in the left LPM but a single motile cilium , constitutes the notochordal plate , seems to act in concert with two novel TGF (cid:98) family while the dorsal layer comprises columnar epiblast members , lefty - 1 and lefty - 2 . Atveryearlysomitestages , ( Sulik et al . , 1994 ) . The ventral cells give rise to noto - expression of all three signaling molecules is induced chord and definitive endoderm , while the dorsal cells exclusively in cell populations on the left side of the contribute to the floor plate in the ventral midline of the embryo ( Figure 4 ) . lefty - 1 is highly expressed in the four neural tube ( Figure 4 ; Beddington , 1994 ; Sulik et al . , or five cells of the left floor plate , while nodal and lefty - 2 1994 ) . nodal isexpressedintheventrallayer , specifically are coexpressed in the left LPM fated to become the in cells at the extreme lateral edges of the notochordal future ventral body wall ( Collignon et al . , 1996 ; Lowe et plate ( Collignon et al . , 1996 ) . Although initially symmetri - al . , 1996 ; Meno et al . , 1996 , 1997 ) . Transcripts of lefty - 2 cal , by the 5 - to 6 - somite stage the number of cells and nodal appear simultaneously , and both are immedi - expressing nodal on the left side is approximately twice ately distributed along most of the A – P axis , suggesting that on the right ( Collignon et al . , 1996 ) . This asymmetry a rather global induction mechanism . The anterior limit in the node may coincide with that in the LPM , and of this left - sided mesodermal expression lies in the dor - tissue grafting experiments in chick have shown that sal wall of the pericardial cavity and extends to a poste - the molecular asymmetry seen in Hensen’s node is influ - rior boundary in the nascent mesoderm emerging from enced by signals from lateral tissue ( Pagan - Westphal the streak ( Figure 4 ) . Just as the onset of nodal and and Tabin , 1998 ) . However , unlike mouse , chick nodal lefty - 2 expressionin theLPM appears tobe coordinately is never expressed on the right of the node ( Levin et al . , regulated , so is their downregulation ( as is that of 1995 ) . Later nodal expression persists in the tail bud , lefty - 1 ) , since by the 12 - to 14 - somite stage their respec - but here its expression is symmetrical , indicating that whatever the asymmetric cues may be that regulate its tive transcripts are barely detectable . Review205 brief left - handed expression they must be short lived . Since the elevated proliferation rate in the left LPM that correlates with normal anticlockwise axial rotation oc - The expression of lefty - 1 is particularly remarkable be - cause it is always confined to just 4 – 5 cells situated only curs instead on the right in iv / iv embryos ( Miller and White , 1998 ) , one function of these genes must be nor - on the left side of the future floor plate ( Figure 4 ; Meno et al . , 1996 , 1997 ) . mally to selectively increase growth on the left side of the embyro . Circumstantial evidence also implicates mouse snail , Playing out L – R Pattern Given that iv and inv must be at or near the top of the a zinc finger transcription factor . In the chick , cSnr - 1 is expressed in the right LPM in a domain very similar to L – R pathway , how is their influence translated into L – R pattern ? In inv / inv embryos , the expression of nodal , that of nodal in the left ( Issac et al . , 1997 ) . Antisense experiments have placed cSnr - 1 downstream of nodal , lefty - 1 , and lefty - 2 is essentially reversed ( Collignon et al . , 1996 ; Lowe et al . , 1996 ; Meno et al . , 1996 , 1997 ) . and the simplest model to explain this reciprocal pattern of gene expression is that Nodal acts to repress expres - Sometimes only the anterior boundary of nodal expres - sion is reduced , but this seems sufficient to uncouple sion of cSnr - 1 on the left side ( Issac et al . , 1997 ) . Mouse snail also appears to be more strongly expressed in the direction of heart looping from that of axial rotation ( Collignon et al . , 1996 ) ; the heart tube now loops to mesoderm on the right side ( Sefton et al . , 1998 ) , but because loss - of - function mutationsin snail arrest devel - the left , indicating that normally nodal promotes right - handed looping . This is reminiscent of the redirected opment at early postimplantation stages ( Jiang et al . , 1998 ) , it is not known whether mouse snail can influence heart looping seen in chick embryos when nodal is ec - topically expressed in the right LPM ( Levin et al . , 1997 ) . situs . Nor is it known whether mouse snail expression is perturbed by the iv and inv mutations . Another possible The situation in iv / iv animals is more confusing . One would have predicted that molecular asymmetry in the target of TGF (cid:98) signaling may be Zic3 , a putative zinc finger transcription factor , whose mutation can cause LPM would either be lost or randomized , but in fact four different patterns of gene expression are seen . Approxi - heterotaxia or situs inversus in humans ( Gebbia et al . , 1997 ) . mately , equal numbers of embryos show expression of nodal , lefty - 1 , and lefty - 2 on the left side , the right side , Nodal , Lefties , and the Midline Barrier In the developing node , asymmetry of nodal in the noto - both sides , or neither side ( Lowe et al . , 1996 ; Meno et al . , 1997 ) . Why the loss of lrd can upset the L – R program chordal plate precedes asymmetry of lefty - 1 in the over - lying prospective floor plate cells . The node is clearly in such a way that four different effects on LPM gene expression result is unclear , but it may be relevant that instrumental in inducing lefty - 1 because its midline ex - pression is absent in embryos lacking HNF3 (cid:98) that have reversing the A – P axis of the node in chick embryos can phenocopy inv in terms of the spectrum of nodal no node ( Dufort et al . , 1998 ) . However , nodal itself is unlikely to be the sole inducer of lefty - 1 because of the expression patterns produced ( Pagan - Westphal and Tabin , 1998 ) . apparent lack of situs defects in chimeric nodal mutant embryos ( Varlet et al . , 1997a ) . In the chick , the SHH Compound heterozygotes for mutations in nodal and HNF3 (cid:98) , which haveahighincidence oflateralitydefects , pathway has been implicated in regulating nodal , be - cause LPM expression of nodal is completely blocked also show altered nodal expression . In these embryos it is expressed bilaterally and somewhat abnormally in and heart looping randomized by application of anti - SHH antibodies ( Pagan - Westphal and Tabin , 1998 ) . the LPM ( Collignon et al . , 1996 ) . lefty - 1 mutants also result in situs defects , which can be traced back to However , genetics suggests that shh is not required to establish normal situs either in mammals ( Chiang et al . , disturbed expression of lefty - 2 and nodal in the LPM : lefty - 2 expression changing first , closely followed by 1996 ) or zebrafish ( Schauerte et al . , 1998 ) . What then mediates the asymmetric expression of alterations in nodal . Transcripts of both genes appear in the right LPM and are most abundant anteriorly . Thus , nodal and lefty genes ? Are nodal and lefty - 2 coordi - nately regulated , or does one induce the other ? Misex - Lefty - 1 activity is required in 4 – 5 cells of the midline in order to restrict nodal and lefty - 2 to the left LPM ( Meno pression of either mouse lefty gene in chick embryos can induce expression of the endogenous nodal gene , et al . , 1998 ) . Once again ectopic expression of these TGF (cid:98) molecules leads to Pitx2 appearing on the wrong albeit only at certain developmental stages ( Yoshioka et al . , 1998 ) . Since nodal cannot induce itself in this way , side of the embryo , and left isomerisms appear later in the thorax . Interestingly , ActRIIA - deficient mice display Nodal and Lefty probably signal via different receptor complexes , as predicted by their divergent signaling right isomerisms ( Oh and Li , 1997 ) , and expression of dominant - negative forms of the activin receptor in frogs domains . However , the chick homolog of lefty has never been tested in these experiments , and in such overex - blocks asymmetric Pitx2 expression ( Ryan et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , Pitx2 expression is almost certainly controlled by pression assays it is always possible that an overabun - dance of Lefty protein binds unphysiologically to TGF (cid:98) Nodal and Lefty presumably operating via the activin signal transduction pathway ( see below ) . However , the receptor complexes to activate them . It is also possible that Lefty acts in a different way because Lefty mole - absence of situs defects in chimeras containing almost exclusively nodal mutant cells ( Varlet et al . , 1997a ) indi - cules lack the conservedcysteine residue normally used to form active dimers ( Meno et al . , 1996 , 1997 ) . There - cates that in the LPM Nodal and Lefty - 2 may serve the same function . Wherever it has been studied , the fore , it could instead be an extracellular antagonist of TGF (cid:98) signaling , blocking ligands or their receptors . In - sidedness of Pitx2 expression seems always to follow that of nodal and lefty , and therefore these genes collec - deed , in Xenopus animalcaps , overexpressionofchime - ric molecules comprising the Bmp2 prodomain joined tivelyareseenastheimportantexecutorsofL – Rpattern . Cell206 J . ( 1996 ) . A targeted mouse Otx2 mutation leads to severe defects to the lefty mature domain leads to direct neuralization , in gastrulation and formation of axial mesoderm and to deletion of indicating that BMP signaling has been blocked . How - rostral brain . Development 122 , 243 – 252 . ever , it may be too simplistic to extrapolate this finding Antczak , M . , and Van Blerkom , J . ( 1997 ) . Oocyte influences on early to the normal situation because Lefty proproteins are development : the regulatory proteins leptin and Stat3 are polarized poorly processed ( Meno et al . , 1996 , 1997 ) , and the in mouse and human oocytes and differentially distributed within identity of the prodomain of TGF (cid:98) molecules can alter the cells of the preimplantation stage embryo . Mol . Hum . Reprod . the half - life of the mature ligand after processing ( Con - 3 , 1067 – 1086 . stam and Robertson , 1999 ) . The relationships between Beddington , R . S . P . ( 1981 ) . An autoradiographic analysis of the po - tencyofembryonicectoderminthe8thdaypostimplantationmouse nodal and lefty signaling may become clearer when the embryo . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 64 , 87 – 104 . regulatory elements governing their expression are Beddington , R . S . P . ( 1982 ) . An autoradiographic analysis of tissue characterized and the receptor complexes through potency in different regions of the embryonic ectoderm during gas - which they signal are more accurately defined . trulation in the mouse . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 69 , 2656 – 2685 . It has been proposed that the primary role of Lefty - 1 Beddington , R . S . P . ( 1994 ) . Induction of a second neural axis by the is to locally inhibit molecules on the left from diffusing mouse node . Development 120 , 613 – 620 . across the midline , lefty - 1 being expressed when the Beddington , R . S . P . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1989 ) . An assessment of midline is only two cells thick , consisting of a monolayer the developmental potential of embryonic stem cells in the midges - of floor plate cells and a monolayer of mesendoderm tation mouse embryo . Development 105 , 733 – 737 . ( Figure 4 ) . Superficially , this is an attractive hypothesis , Beddington , R . S . P . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1998 ) . Anterior patterning but it does not fit easily with the reality of a rapidly in the mouse . Trends Genet . 14 , 277 – 284 . growing embryo and a cast of signaling molecules that Beddington , R . S . P . , andSmith , J . C . ( 1993 ) . Thecontrolofvertebrate probably act only as short - range signals ( Jones et al . , gastrulation : inducing signals and responding genes . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 3 , 655 – 661 . 1996 ; Reilly and Melton , 1996 ) . Nodal and Lefty - 2 pro - Beddington , R . S . P . , Morgenstern , J . , Land , H . , andHogan , A . ( 1989 ) . duced by the LPM are a long way away from the midline , An in situ transgenic enzyme marker for the midgestation mouse and the likelihood of their passive diffusion to the right fetus and the visualization of inner cell mass clones during early side of the embryo must be remote ( Figure 4 ) . If Lefty - 1 organogenesis . Development 106 , 37 – 46 . is blocking other signals , we do not yet know what they Belaoussoff , M . , Farrington , S . , and Baron , M . H . ( 1998 ) . Hematopoi - are . The only gene later expressed with L – R asymmetry etic induction and respecification of A – P identity by visceral endo - in gut endoderm is Pitx2 , but its transcripts are on the derm signaling in the mouse embryo . Development 125 , 5009 – 5018 . same left - hand side as those of lefty - 1 in the floor plate . Belo , J . A . , Bouwmeester , T . , Leyns , T . , Kertesz , L . , Gallo , N . , Follet - Some key ingredients of the L – R pathway have been tie , M . , and De Robertis , E . M . ( 1997 ) . Cerberus - like is a secreted identified , but we are still a long way from understanding factor with neuralizing activity expressed in the anterior primitive endoderm of the mouse gastrula . Mech . Dev . 68 , 45 – 57 . exactly what they do or how they interact with each Blum , M . , Gaunt , S . J . , Cho , K . W . Y . , Steinbeisser , H . , Blumberg , B . , other . Again the first molecular signs of asymmetry and Bittner , D . , and De Robertis , E . M . ( 1992 ) . Gastrulation in the mouse : the results from overexpression assays in chick do not the role of the homeobox gene goosecoid . Cell 69 , 1097 – 1106 . tell us when the L – R axis is established . If anterior pat - Bouwmeester , T . , Kim , S . - H . , Sasai , Y . , Lu , B . , andDe Robertis , E . M . tern is already present in the conceptus before gastrula - ( 1996 ) . Cerberusisahead - inducingsecretedfactorexpressedinthe tion , is it possible that the mammalian L – R axis is also anterior endoderm of Spemann’s organizer . Nature 382 , 596 – 601 . a legacy from extraembryonic tissues ? This may only Brown , N . , and Wolpert , L . ( 1990 ) . The development of handedness be clear when the intermediates translating lrd and inv in left / right asymmetry . Development 109 , 1 – 9 . function into asymmetric Lefty and Nodal expression Chiang , C . , Litingtung , Y . , Lee , E . , Young , J . L . , Westphal , H . , and are identified . Beachy , P . ( 1996 ) . Cyclopia and defective axial patterning in mice lacking Sonic Hedgehog gene function . Nature 383 , 407 – 413 . Acknowledgments Collignon , J . , Varlet , I . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1996 ) . Relationship between asymmetric nodal expression and the direction of embry - onic turning . Nature 381 , 155 – 158 . Wethank PeterRigbyandTristan Rodriguezfortheir helpfuldiscus - sion and apologize to all those whose work has not been cited due Conlon , F . L . , Lyons , K . M . , Takaesu , N . , Barth , K . S . , Kispert , A . K . , to space constraints . Herrmann , B . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1994 ) . A primary requirement for nodal in the formation and maintenance of the primtive streak in mouse . Development 120 , 1919 – 1928 . References Constam , D . B , and Robertson E . J . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of Bone Mor - Acampora , D . , Mazan , S . , Lallemand , Y . , Avataggiato , V . , Maury , M . , phogenetic Protein activities by pro domains and proprotein con - Simeone , A . , and Brulet , P . ( 1995 ) . Forebrain and midbrain regions vertases . J . Cell Biol . , in press . are deleted in Otx2 (cid:50) / (cid:50) mutants due to a defective anterior neurecto - Coucouvanis , E . , and Martin , G . R . ( 1995 ) . Signals for death and derm specification during gastrulation . Development 121 , 3279 – survival : a two - step mechanism for cavitation in the vertebrate em - 3290 . bryo . Cell 83 , 279 – 287 . Acampora , D . , Avantaggiato , V . , Tuorto , F . , Briata , P . , Corte , G . , and Dattani , M . , Martinez - Barbera , J . - P . , Thomas , P . Q . , Brickman , J . M . , Simeone , A . ( 1998 ) . Visceralendoderm - restrictedtranslationof Otx1 Gupta , R . , Krauss , S . , Wales , J . , HindmarshP . C . , Beddington , R . S . P . , mediates recovering of Otx2 requirements for specification of ante - and Robinson , I . C . ( 1998 ) . Mutations in the homeobox gene Hesx1 rior neural plate and proper gastrulation . Development 125 , 5091 – associated with septo - optic dysplasia in human and mouse . Nat . 5104 . Genet . 19 , 125 – 133 . Afzelius , B . ( 1985 ) . Theimmotileciliasyndrome : amicrotubule - asso - DeRobertis , E . M . , Kim , S . , Leyns , L . , Piccolo , S . , Bachiller , D . , Agius , ciated defect . CRC Crit . Rev . Biochem . 19 , 63 – 87 . E . , Belo , J . A . , Yamamoto , A . , Hainski - Brousseau , A . , Brizuela , B . , et Ang , S . - L . , and Rossant , J . ( 1994 ) . HNF - 3 (cid:98) is essential for node and al . ( 1997 ) . Patterning by genes expressed in Spemann’s organizer . notochord formation in mouse development . Cell 78 , 561 – 574 . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . LX11 , 169 – 175 . Ding , J . , Yang , L . , Yam , Y . - T . , Chen , A . , Desai , N . , Wynshaw - Boris , Ang , S . - L . , Jin , O . , Rhinn , M . , Daigle , N . , Stevenson , L . , andRossant , Review207 A . , and Shen , M . M . ( 1998 ) . Cripto is required for correct orientation Johnson , M . H . , and Ziomek , C . A . ( 1981 ) . The foundation of two of the anterior - posterior axis in the mouse embryo . Nature 395 , distinct cell lineages within the mouse morula . Cell 24 , 71 – 80 . 702 – 707 . Jones , C . M . , Ames , N . , and Smith , J . C . ( 1996 ) . Signaling by TGF (cid:98) Dufort , D . , Schwartz , L . , Harpal , K . , and Rossant , J . ( 1998 ) . The family members : short range effects of Xnr - 2 and BMP4 contrast transcription factor HNF3 (cid:98) is required in visceral endoderm for nor - with the long range effects of activin . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1468 – 1475 . mal primitive streak morphogenesis . Development 125 , 3015 – 3025 . Kannan , S . , De Santis , M . , Lohmeyer , M . , Riese , D . J . , II , Smith , G . H . , Dunwoodie , S . L . , Rodriguez , T . , and Beddington , R . S . P . ( 1998 ) . Hynes , N . , Seno , M . , Brandt , R . , Bianco , C . , Persico , G . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Msg1 and Mrg1 , founding members of a gene family , show distinct Cripto enhances the tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc and activates patterns of gene expression during mouse embryogenesis . Mech . mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) in mammary epithelial Dev . 79 , 27 – 40 . cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 3330 – 3335 . Feldman , B . , Gates , M . A . , Egan , E . S . , Dougan , S . T . , Rennebeck , Kno¨tgen , H . , Viebahn , C . , and Kessel , M . ( 1999 ) . Head induction in G . , Sirotkin , H . I . , Schier , A . F . , and Talbot , W . S . ( 1998 ) . Zebrafish the chick byprimitive endoderm of mammalian , butnot avian origin . organiser development and germ layer formation require nodal - Development , in press . related signals . Nature 395 , 181 – 184 . Kosaki , K . , and Casey , B . ( 1998 ) . Genetics of human left - right axis Filosa , S . , Rivera - Perez , J . A . , Gomez , A . P . , Gansmuller , A . , Sasaki , malformations . Semin . Cell . Dev . Biol . 9 , 89 – 99 . H . , Behringer , R . R . , and Ang , S - L . ( 1997 ) . Goosecoid and HNF - 3 (cid:98) Lander , A . , King , T . , and Brown , N . A . ( 1998 ) . Left - right development : genetically interact to regulate neural tube patterning during mouse mammalian phenotypes and conceptual models . Semin . Cell . Dev . embryogenesis . Development 124 , 2843 – 2854 . Biol . 9 , 35 – 41 . Gardner , R . L . ( 1983 ) . Origin and differentiation of extraembryonic Lawson , K . A . , Pedersen , R . A . , and van der Geer , S . ( 1987 ) . Cell fate , tissues in the mouse . Int . Rev . Exp . Pathol . 24 , 63 – 133 . morphogenetic movement and population kinetics of embryonic Gardner , R . L . ( 1997 ) . The early blastocyst is bilaterally symmetrical endodermatthetimeofgermlayerformationinthemouse . Develop - and its axis of symmetry is aligned with the animal - vegetal axis of ment 101 , 627 – 652 . the zygote in the mouse . Development 124 , 289 – 301 . Lawson , K . A . , Meneses , J . J . , andPedersen , R . A . ( 1991 ) . Clonalanal - Gardner , R . L . ( 1998 ) . Axial relationships between egg and embryo ysisoftheepiblastduringgermlayerformationinthemouseembryo . in the mouse . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 39 , 35 – 71 . Development 113 , 891 – 911 . Gardner , R . L . , and Cockroft , D . L . ( 1998 ) . Complete dissipation of Levin , M . , andMercola , M . ( 1998 ) . Thecompulsionofchirality . Genes coherent clonal growth occurs before gastrulation in mouse epi - Dev . 12 , 763 – 769 . blast . Development 125 , 2397 – 2402 . Levin , M . , Johnson , R . , Stern , C . , Kuehn , M . , and Tabin , C . ( 1995 ) . Gardner , R . L . , Meredith , M . M . , and Altman , D . G . ( 1992 ) . Is the ante - A molecular pathway determining left right asymmetry in chick em - rior - posterior axis of the fetus specified before implantation in the bryogenesis . Cell 82 , 803 – 814 . mouse ? J . Exp . Zool . 264 , 437 – 443 . Levin , M . , Pagan , S . , Roberts , D . , Cooke , J . , Kuehn , M . , andTabin , C . Garner , W . , and McLaren , A . ( 1974 ) . Cell distribution in chimaeric ( 1997 ) . Left / right signals and the independent regulation of different mouse embryos before implantation . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 32 , aspects of situs in the chick embryo . Dev . Biol . 189 , 57 – 67 . 495 – 503 . Logan , M . , Pagan - Westphal , S . M . , Smith , D . M . , Paganessi , L . , and Gauchat , D . , Kreger , S . , Holstein , T . , and Galliot , B . ( 1998 ) . prdl - a , Tabin , C . J . ( 1998 ) . The transcription factor pitx2 mediates situs - a gene marker for hydra apical differentiation related to triploblastic specificmorphogenesisinresponsetoleft - rightasymmetricsignals . paired - like head - specific genes . Development 125 , 1637 – 1645 . Cell 94 , 307 – 317 . Gebbia , L . , Ferrero , G . , Pilia , G . , Bassi , M . , Aylsworth , A . , Pennman - Lowe , L . A . , Supp , D . M . , Sampath , K . , Yokoyama , T . , Wright , C . V . , splitt , M . , Bird , L . , Bamforth , J . , Burn , J . , Schlessinger , D . , Nelson , Potter , S . S . , Overbeek , P . , and Kuehn , M . R . ( 1996 ) . Conserved left - D . L . , and Casey , B . ( 1997 ) . X - linked situs abnormalities result from right asymmetry of nodal expression and alterations in murine situs mutations in ZIC3 . Nat . Genet . 17 , 305 – 308 . inversus . Nature 381 , 158 – 161 . Gluecksohn - Schonheimer , S . ( 1949 ) . Theeffectsofalethalmutation Matsuo , I . , Kuratini , S . , Kimura , C . , Takeda , N . , andAizawa , S . ( 1995 ) . responsibleforduplicationsandtwinninginmouseembryos . J . Exp . Mouse Otx - 2 functions in the formation and patterning of the head . Zool . 110 , 47 – 76 . Genes Dev . 9 , 2646 – 2658 . Gonzalez - Reyes , A . , Elliot , H . , and St . Johnston , D . ( 1995 ) . Polariza - tionofbothmajorbodyaxesin Drosophila bygurken - torpedosignal - Matzuk , M . M . , Kumar , T . R . , Vassalli , A . , Bickenbach , J . R . , Roop , ing . Nature 375 , 654 – 658 . D . R . , Jaenisch , R . , and Bradley , A . ( 1995a ) . Functional analysis of activins during mammalian development . Nature 374 , 354 – 356 . Gu , Z . , Nomura , M . , Simpson , B . B . , Lei , H . , Feijen , A . , Van den Eijnden - van Raaij , J . , Donahoe , P . K . , and Li , E . ( 1998 ) . The type I Matzuk , M . M . , Lu , N . , Vogel , H . , Sellheyer , K . , Roop , D . , andBradley , activinreceptor ActRIBisrequired foreggcylinder organizationand A . ( 1995b ) . Multiple defects and perinatal death in mice deficient in gastrulation in the mouse . Genes Dev . 12 , 844 – 857 . follistatin . Nature 374 , 360 – 363 . Harland , R . , and Gerhart , J . ( 1997 ) . Formation and function of Spe - Meno , C . , Saijoh , Y . , Fujii , H . , Ikeda , M . , Yokoyama , T . , Toyoda , Y . , mann’s organizer . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 , 611 – 667 . and Hamada , H . ( 1996 ) . Left - right asymmetric expression of the TGF (cid:98) - family member lefty in mouse embryos . Nature 381 , 151 – 155 . Hogan , B . , Beddington , R . , Costantini , F . , andLacy , E . ( 1994 ) . Manip - ulating the Mouse Embryo : A Laboratory Manual . ( Cold Spring Har - Meno , C . , Ito , Y . , Saijoh , Y . , Matsuda , Y . , Tashiiro , K . , Kuhara , S . , bor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Press ) . andHamada , H . ( 1997 ) . Twocloselyrelatedleft - rightasymmetrically Houart , C . , Westerfield , M . , andWilson , S . W . ( 1998 ) . Asmall popula - expressed genes , lefty - 1 and lefty - 2 : their distinct expression do - tionofanteriorcellspatternstheforebrainduringzebrafishgastrula - mains , chromosomal linkage and direct neuralizing activity in Xeno - tion . Nature 391 , 788 – 792 . pus embryos . Genes Cells 2 , 513 – 524 . Hsu , Y . C . ( 1979 ) . In vitro development of individually cultured whole Meno , C . , Shimono , A . , Saijoh , Y . , Yashiro , K . , Mochida , K . , Oishi , mouse embryos from blastocyst to early somite stage . Dev . Biol . S . , Noji , S . , Kondoh , H . , and Hamada , H . ( 1998 ) . Lefty - 1 is required 68 , 453 – 461 . for left - right determination as a regulator of lefty - 2 and nodal . Cell 94 , 287 – 297 . Hummel , K . P . , and Chapman , D . B . ( 1959 ) . Visceral inversion and associated anomalies in the mouse . J . Hered . 50 , 9 – 23 . McMahon , J . A . , Takada , T . , Zimmerman , L . B . , Fan , C . - M . , Harland , R . M . , and McMahon , A . P . ( 1998 ) . Noggin - mediated antagonism of Issac , A . , Sargent , M . G . , and Cooke , J . ( 1997 ) . Control of vertebrate BMP signaling is required for growth and patterning of the neural left - right asymmetry by a snail - related zinc finger gene . Science tube and somite . Genes Dev . 12 , 1438 – 1452 . 275 , 1301 – 1304 . Miller , S . A . , andRunner , M . N . ( 1978 ) . Tissuespecificityforincorpora - Jiang , R . , Lan , Y . , Norton , C . R . , and Gridley , T . ( 1998 ) . Defects in tion of 3H - thymidine by the 10 - to 12 - somite mouse embryo . J . gastrulation and mesoderm migration in mice lacking the Sna gene . Dev . Biol . 198 , 224 – 225 . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 44 , 181 – 189 . Cell208 Miller , S . A . , and White , R . D . ( 1998 ) . Right - left asymmetry of cell Smith , L . J . ( 1985 ) . Embryonic axis orientation in the mouse and its proliferationpredominatesinmouseembryosundergoingclockwise correlation with blastocyst relationships to the uterus : I . relation - axial rotation . Anat . Rec . 250 , 103 – 108 . ships from 41 / 2 days to 91 / 2 days . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 89 , 15 – 35 . Mishina , Y . , Suzuki , A . , Ueno , N . , and Behringer , R . R . ( 1995 ) . Bmpr encodesatypeIbonemorphogeneticproteinreceptorthatisessen - Snow , M . H . L . ( 1977 ) . Gastrulation in the mouse : growth and region - tial for gastrulation during mouse embryogenesis . Genes Dev . 6 , alization of the epiblast . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 42 , 293 – 303 . 432 – 438 . St . Amand , T . R . , Ra , J . , Zhang , Y . , Hu , Y . , Baber , S . I . , Qui , M . , and Mochizuki , T . , Saijoh , Y . , Tsuchiya , K . , Shirayoshi , Y . , Takai , S . , Taya , Chen , Y . ( 1998 ) . Cloning and expression pattern of chicken pitx2 : a C . , Yonekawa , H . , Yamada , K . , Nihei , H . , Nakatsuji , N . , et al . ( 1998 ) . newcomponent intheSHHsignaling pathwaycontrolingembryonic Cloning of inv , a gene that controls left / right asymmetry and kidney heart looping . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 247 , 100 – 105 . development . Nature 395 , 177 – 181 . Sulik , K . , Dehart , D . B . , Inagaki , T . , Carson , J . L . , Vrablic , T . , Morgan , D . , Turnpenny , L . , Goodship , J . , Dai , W . , Majumder , K . , Gesteland , K . , and Schoenwolf , G . C . ( 1994 ) . Morphogenesis of the Matthews , L . , Gardner , A . , Schuster , G . , Vien , L . , Harrison , W . , Elder , node and notochordal plate . Dev . Dyn . 210 , 260 – 278 . F . F . B . , Pennman - Splitt , M . , Overbeek , P . , and Strachan , T . ( 1998 ) . Supp , D . , Witte , D . , Potter , S . , and Brueckner , M . ( 1997 ) . Mutation Inversin , a novel gene in the vertebrate left - right axis pathway , is of an axonemal dynein affects left - right asymmetry in inversus vis - partially deleted in the inv mouse . Nat . Genet . 20 , 149 – 156 . cerum mice . Nature 389 , 963 – 966 . Oh , S . P . , and Li , E . ( 1997 ) . The signaling pathway mediated by the Tam , P . P . L . , and Behringer , R . R . ( 1998 ) . Mouse gastrulation : the type IIB activin receptor controls axial patterning and lateral asym - formation of a mammalian body plan . Mech . Dev . 68 , 3 – 25 . metry in the mouse . Genes Dev . 11 , 1812 – 1826 . Tam , P . P . L . , Steiner , K . A . , Zhou , S . X . , and Quinlan , G . A . ( 1997 ) . Pagan - Westphal , S . M . , and Tabin , C . J . ( 1998 ) . The transfer of left - Lineageandfunctionalanalysisofthemouseorganizer . ColdSpring right positional information during chick embryogenesis . Cell 93 , Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . LXII , 115 – 125 . 25 – 35 . Thomas , P . , and Beddington , R . S . P . ( 1996 ) . Anterior primitive endo - Perry , W . L . , Vasiceck , T . J . , Lee , J . J . , Rossi , J . M . , Zeng , L . , Zhang , T . , derm may be responsible for patterning the anterior neural plate in Tilghman , S . M . , and Costantini , F . ( 1995 ) . Phenotypic and molecular the mouse embryo . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1487 – 1496 . analysis of a transgenic insertional allele of the mouse Fused locus . Thomas , P . , Brickman , J . , Po¨pperl , H . , Krumlauf , R . , andBeddington , Genetics 141 , 321 – 332 . R . S . P . ( 1997 ) . Axis duplication and anterior identity in the mouse Piedra , M . E . , Icardo , J . M . , Albajar , M . , Rodriguez - rey , J . C . , and Ros , embryo . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . LXII , 135 – 144 . M . A . ( 1998 ) . Pitx2 participates in the late phase of the pathway Thomas , P . , Brown , A . , and Beddington , R . S . P . ( 1998 ) . Hex : a ho - controlling left - right asymmetry . Cell 94 , 319 – 324 . meobox gene revealing peri - implantation asymmetry in the mouse Po¨pperl , H . , Schmidt , C . , Wilson , V . , Dodd , J . , Krumlauf , R . , and embryo and an early transient marker of endothelial cell precursors . Beddington , R . S . P . ( 1997 ) . Misexpression of Cwnt8C in the mouse Development 125 , 85 – 94 . induces an ectopic embryonic axis and causes a truncation of the anterior neuroectoderm . Development 124 , 2997 – 3005 . Varlet , I . , Collignon , J . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1997a ) . Nodal expres - sion in the primitive endoderm is required for the specification of Reilly , K . M . , andMelton , D . A . ( 1996 ) . Short - rangesignalingbycandi - theanterioraxisduringmousegastrulation . Development 124 , 1033 – datemorphogens oftheTGF (cid:98) family andevidencefora relaymech - 1044 . anism of induction . Cell 86 , 743 – 754 . Varlet , I . , Collignon , J . , Norris , D . P . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1997b ) . Rhinn , M . , Dierich , A . , Shawlot , W . , Behringer , R . , Le Meur , M . , and Nodal signaling and axis formation in the mouse . Cold Spring Harb . Ang , S . - L . ( 1998 ) . Sequential roles for Otx2 in visceral endoderm Symp . Quant . Biol . LXII , 105 – 113 . andneuroectodermforforebrainandmidbraininductionandspecifi - cation . Development 125 , 845 – 856 . Vassalli , A . , Matzuk , M . M . , Gardner , H . A . R . , Lee , K - F . , and Jaenisch , Rosenquist , T . A . , and Martin , G . R . ( 1995 ) . Visceral endoderm - 1 ( VE - R . ( 1994 ) . Activin / inhibin betaB subunit gene disruption leads to 1 ) : an antigen marker that distinguishes anterior from posterior em - defectsin eyeliddevelopment andfemalereproduction . GenesDev . bryonic visceral endoderm in the early post - implantation mouse 8 , 414 – 427 . embryo . Mech . Dev . 49 , 117 – 121 . Viebahn , C . , Mayer , B . , and Hrabe de Angelis , M . ( 1995 ) . Signs of Ryan , A . K . , Blumberg , B . , Rodriguez - Esteban , C . , Yonei - Tamura , S . , the principle body axes prior to primitive streak formation in the Tamura , K . , Tsukui , T . , de la Pena , J . , Sabbagh , W . , Greenwald , J . , rabbit embryo . Anat . Embryol . 192 , 159 – 169 . Choe , S . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Pitx2 determines left - right asymmetry of Waldrip , W . R . , Bikoff , E . K . , Hoodless , P . A . , Wrana , J . L . , and Robert - internal organs in vertebrates . Nature 394 , 545 – 551 . son , E . J . ( 1998 ) . Smad2 signaling inextraembryonic tissues deter - Schauerte , H . E . , Van Eeden , F . J . M . , Fricke , C . , Odenthal , J . , Strahle , mines anterior - posterior polarity of the early mouse embryo . Cell U . , and Haffter , P . ( 1998 ) . Sonic hedgehog is not required for the 92 , 797 – 808 . induction of medial floor plate cells in the zebrafish . Development Weinstein , D . C . , RuiziAltaba , A . , Chen , W . S . , Hoodless , P . , Prezioso , 125 , 2983 – 2993 . V . R . , Jessell , T . M . , and Darnell , J . J . ( 1994 ) . The winged - helix tran - Schulte - Merker , S . , Hammerschmidt , M . , Beuchle , D . , Cho , K . W . , scription factor HNF - 3 beta is required for notochord development De Robertis , E . M . , and Nusslein - Volhard , C . ( 1994 ) . Expression of in the mouse embryo . Cell 78 , 575 – 588 . zebrafish goosecoid and no tail gene products in wild - type and Winnier , G . , Blessing , M . , Labosky , P . A . , and Hogan , B . L . M . ( 1995 ) . mutant no tail embryos . Development 120 , 843 – 852 . Bone morphogenetic protein - 4 is required for mesoderm formation Sefton , M . , Sanchez , S . , and Nieto , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Conserved and and patterning in the mouse . Genes Dev . 9 , 2105 – 2116 . divergent roles for members of the Snail family of transcription fac - Yamanaka , Y . , Mizuno , T . , Sasai , Y . , Kishi , M . , Takeda , H . , Kim , C . - H . , tors in the mouse and chick embryo . Development 125 , 3111 – 3121 . Hibi , M . , andHirano , T . ( 1998 ) . Anovelhomeoboxgene , dharma , can Shawlot , W . , and Behringer , R . ( 1995 ) . Requirement for Lim - 1 in induce the organizer in a non - cell - autonomous manner . Genes Dev . head organizer function . Nature 374 , 425 – 430 . 12 , 2345 – 2353 . Sirard , C . , De la Pompa , J . L . , Elia , A . , Itie , A . , Mirtsos , C . , Cheung , Yokoyama , T . , Copeland , N . G . , Jenkins , N . A . , Montgomery , C . A . , A . , Hahn , S . , Wakeham , A . , Schwartz , L . , Kern , S . E . , Rossant , J . , Elder , F . F . , andOverbeek , P . A . ( 1993 ) . Reversalofleft - rightasymme - and Mak , T . W . ( 1998 ) . The tumor suppressor gene Smad4 / Dpc4 is try : a situs inversus mutation . Science 260 , 679 – 682 . required for gastrulation and later for anterior development of the mouse embryo . Genes Dev . 12 , 107 – 119 . Yoshioka , H . , Meno , C . , Koshiba , K . , Sugihara , M . , Itoh , H . , Ishimura , Y . , Inoue , T . , Ohuchi , H . , Semina , E . , Murray , J . C . , Hamada , H . , and Smith , L . J . ( 1980 ) . Embryonic axis orientation in the mouse and its Noji , S . ( 1998 ) . Pitx2 , a bicoid - type homeobox gene , is involved in correlation withblastocyst relationships tothe uterus : I . relationship a lefty - signaling pathway in determination of left - right asymmetry . between 82 hours and 41 / 2 days . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 55 , 257 – 277 . Cell 94 , 299 – 305 . Review209 Zeng , L . , Fagotto , F . , Zhang , T . , Hsu , W . , Vasiceck , T . J . , Perry , W . L . , Lee , J . J . , Tilghman , S . M . , Gumbiner , B . M . , and Costantini , F . ( 1997 ) . Themouse Fused locusencodesaxin , aninhibitoroftheWntsignal - ing pathway that regulates embryonic axis formation . Cell 90 , 181 – 192 . Zernicka - Goetz , M . ( 1998 ) . Fertile offspring from mammalian eggs lackingeitheranimalorvegetalpoles . Development 125 , 4803 – 4808 . Zhang , J . , Talbot , W . S . , and Schier , A . F . ( 1998 ) . Positional cloning identifies zebrafish one - eyed pinhead as a permissive EGF - related ligand required during gastrulation . Cell 92 , 241 – 251 .