1 Making Sense of Sensemaking George W . Furnas University of Michigan 550 E . University Ave . , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 furnas @ umich . edu Daniel M . Russell IBM Almaden Research Center 650 Harry Rd . , San Jose , CA 95120 daniel2 @ us . ibm . com Author Keywords Sensemaking ; information visualization ; query formation ; representation construction ; information seeking . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] . H3 . 0 [ Information Retrieval ] . INTRODUCTION Making sense of the world is a common activity . It happens whenever you confront a new , complex problem . At work , your boss says , “Can you give a presentation next week on how wireless will affect our business ? ” Or perhaps , you join a new committee , and wonder “Who are these people ? Who is in charge ? What is our mission ? What are we really going to do ? ” Maybe you move to a new neighborhood , and you try to make sense of the streets , schools , parks , shopping , and neighbors . Or you say to yourself , “I really need to get an updated cellphone - - what has been happening with the current set of features , costs , plans and new gadgets ? ” These kinds tasks begin a process of collecting and organizing data . Often the information can be organized into a fairly simple structure , one that helps to solve the problem . But as we well know , the process is sometimes ill - defined , iterative and complex : information retrieval , organization and task re - definition all interact in sometimes subtle ways . All of these behaviors lead to the creation of sense ; that is , the process of sensemaking . Sensemaking can be a core professional task in itself , as it is for researchers , designers , or intelligence analysts . It arises when we change our place in the world or when the world changes around us . It arises when new problems , opportunities , or tasks present themselves , or when old ones resurface . It involves finding the important structure in a seemingly unstructured situation . It is an activity with cognitive and social dimensions , and has informational , communicational , and computational aspects . Such an important activity deserves any support it can get from information technologies . Indeed , many major thrusts of HCI can be seen as contributing salient perspectives and technologies . Visualization aims to help people see structure in data or information ; information retrieval is needed to find relevant input to the process . Combining all of these aspects of information use defines the behaviors of sensemaking—what people do to make sense of the information in their world . For example , a seminal early hypermedia work of Notecards [ 3 ] [ 5 ] was aimed at helping work in design , research and intelligence analysis . NoteCards provided tools for creating structures from initial data , then evolving those representational structures to better fit the task . Search tools and visualizations made examining the information space straightforward . NoteCards was an early sensemaking system that reflected each of the key aspects of sensemaking behaviors—access to a relatively large amount of information , tools to structure and organize that information , visualizations to help see the structure of the content , and information retrieval mechanisms to provide search support . SENSEMAKING TODAY There has been a recent increase of focused interest in sensemaking , spurred by at least two forces . One has been the push of the information explosion from the WWW . As is evident , web - based tools have radically changed users ability to access large amounts of information ; this in turn fundamentally changes the ways in which people seeking to understand complex problems think about the issues . Consequently , both the Library & Information Science ( LIS ) and HCI communities have begun converging on projects to help people make sense of the information resources now available . The other force has been a pull from the post - 9 / 11 intelligence community , as the need to make sense of terrorism related intelligence data has become internationally urgent . As we have begun to realize , sensemaking extends far beyond individuals making sense of their information spaces . Groups also frequently need to work together to understand larger issues , combing information from many information sources , and bringing together a synthetic understanding that melds different points of view . Group problem solving work in CSCW often involves support for sensemaking activities , and there are an active research effort in understanding what sensemaking groups currently do , and what tools might support them . WORKSHOP GOALS The workshop will include research in areas such as : 2 • how do people make sense of complex sets of information ? ( behavior studies and tool use ) • issues of representation creation , evolution and use over time • implicit and explicit aspects of sensemaking • group sensemaking : including different levels of social aggregation , from individual , to group , to large social contexts • both static and evolving problem environments • how sensemaking fits into other knowledge work ( information gathering , decision making ) • what other sensemaking schools of thought are there , and how can we mutally inform each others work ? From this meeting of the minds , the Sensemaking workshop has several desired outcomes : First , we will create working relationships between researchers whose work focuses on aspects of sensemaking . While we certainly hope to bring together those working within the HCI community , we would like to try to bring in some researchers from other disciplines as well , including Library & Information Science ( LIS ) [ 2 ] and Organizational Theory [ 6 ] and psychology ( e . g . , cognitive / problem solving research ) . Our second outcome is to enrich our understanding of sensemaking activities . This includes striving for a shared understanding of the different notions of sensemaking , laying out and structuring the space of varieties of sensemaking ( e . g . , different levels of social aggregation , static vs dynamic contexts ) , articulating their commonalities and differences . And our third goal is to draw from this is to understand design implications for improved sensemaking tools , systems and aids . REFERENCES 1 . Conklin , Jeff , Selvin , Albert , Shum , Simon B . , Sierhuis , Maarten , Facilitated hypertext for collective sensemaking : 15 years on from gIBIS . Proceedings of the twelfth ACM conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia ( Sept , 2001 ) 2 . Dervin , B . ( 1998 ) . Sense - Making theory and practice : An overview of user interests in knowledge seeking and use . Journal of Knowledge Management , 2 ( 2 ) , 36 - 46 . 3 . Halasz , F . G . , Reflections on NoteCards : seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems . ACM Journal of Computer Documentation ( JCD ) , v 25 ( 3 ) ( August , 2001 ) . 4 . Russell , D . M . , Stefik , M . J . , Pirolli , P . , Card , S . K . The cost structure of sensemaking , Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , p . 269 - 276 , April 24 - 29 , 1993 , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . 5 . Trigg , R . H . , Irish , P . M . Hypertext habitats : experiences of writers in NoteCards . Proceedings of the ACM conference on Hypertext . ( November , 1987 ) 6 . Weick , K . E . ( 1995 ) . Sensemaking in organizations . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .