Bundling of Actin Filaments by Elongation Factor 1 Inhibits Polymerization at Filament Ends John W . Murray , Brian T . Edmonds , Gang Liu , and John Condeelis Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York 10461 Abstract . Elongation factor 1 a ( EFlt ~ ) is an abundant protein that binds aminoacyl - tRNA and ribosomes in a GTP - dependent manner . EFlct also interacts with the cytoskeleton by binding and bundling actin filaments and microtubules . In this report , the effect of purified EFIot on actin polymerization and depolymerization is examined . At molar ratios present in the cytosol , EFla significantly blocks both polymerization and depoly - merization of actin filaments and increases the final ex - tent of actin polymer , while at high molar ratios to ac - tin , EFlot nucleates actin polymerization . Although EFlct binds actin monomer , this monomer - binding ac - tivity does not explain the effects of EFlot on actin po - lymerization at physiological molar ratios . The mecha - nism for the inhibition of polymerization is related to the actin - bundling activity of EFlot . Both ends of the actin filament are inhibited for polymerization and both bundling and the inhibition of actin polymeriza - tion are affected by pH within the same physiological range ; at high pH both bundling and the inhibition of actin polymerization are reduced . Additionally , it is seen that the binding of aminoacyl - tRNA to EFla re - leases EFlet ' s inhibiting effect on actin polymerization . These data demonstrate that EFI ~ t can alter the assem - bly of F - actin , a filamentous scaffold on which non - membrane - associated protein translation may be oc - curring in vivo . LONGATION factor 1 et ( EFltx ) 1 is an essential com - ponent of the protein synthetic machinery but is expressed in molar excess to its known ligands in the protein synthetic machinery , such as specific amino - acyl - tRNAs and elongation factor 13 / ' t ( Slobin , 1980 ) . EFla has been isolated as an actin - binding and - bundling pro - tein from Dictyostelium originally named ABP - 50 ( Demma et al . , 1990 ) . Sequence analysis demonstrates that ABP - 50 is Dictyostelium EFlet and is capable of catalyzing protein synthesis in vitro ( Yang et al . , 1990 ) . The discovery that EFlot binds actin with nano - to micromolar affinity in phys - iological buffers ( Dharmawardhane et al . , 1991 ; Bektas et al . , 1994 ; Edmonds et al . , 1995 ) and is present at a cyto - solic molar ratio of 1 : 4 for EFlodactin suggests that most of the EFlct within cells should be associated with actin . Indeed , EFla is found associated with the actin cytoskele - ton by immunofluorescence ( Dharmawardhane et al . , 1991 ; Collings et al . , 1994 ; Edmonds et al . , 1995 , 1996 ) and elec - tron microscopy ( Bassell et al . , 1994a ; Liu et al . , 1996a ) . An - tibodies to EFla coprecipitate actin from whole cell ex - tracts in approximately a 1 : 2 molar ratio of EFlct / actin . Address all correspondence to John Condeelis , Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1300 Morris Park Ave . , Bronx , NY 10461 . Tel . : ( 718 ) 430 - 4068 . Fax : ( 718 ) 518 - 7236 . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper . PME , polymerization buffer ; EFI ~ t , elongation factor 1 r , . Additionally , it has been shown that EFlet binds actin monomer that is cross - linked to Sepharose beads ( Dhar - mawardhane et al . , 1991 ) . Much of the protein synthetic machinery , including EFlet , is found in association with the actin cytoskeleton ( for review see Condeelis , 1995 ) . The consequences of the interaction of the protein synthetic machinery with actin is unknown . It appears that the protein synthetic machinery does not exist in a freely diffusing form in eukaryotic cells ( Stapulionis and Deutscher , 1995 ) , and many reports have been published on the transport and anchorage of mRNA on the actin cytoskeleton ( Bassell et al . , 1994b ) . EFlot , EFI - 13 ( personal communication , Marcus Fechheimer , University of Georgia ) , EF - 2 , mRNA , and ribosomes are also associated with the actin cytoskeleton as shown in vivo by immunofluorescence , electron microscopy , in situ hybridization , and in vitro by biochemical methods ( Zam - betti et al . , 1990a , b ; Dharmawardhane et al . , 1991 ; Shesta - kova et al . , 1993 ; Bassell et al . , 1994a ; Bektas et al . , 1994 ) . Actin appears to provide a means to transport and anchor this nondiffusible machinery in specific regions of a cell and this in turn may localize protein product ( Kislauskis et al . , 1994 ) . Actin filaments may also participate in the chan - neling of essential metabolites during polypeptide elonga - tion ( Condeelis , 1995 ) . EFIot is the most abundant component of the protein synthetic machinery and a very abundant actin - binding protein . Therefore , its ability to influence the assembly © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 96 / 12 / 1309 / 13 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , Number 5 , December 1996 1309 - 1321 1309 and structure of the actin cytoskeleton could be a key event in the transport , anchorage , and translation of mRNA . In this paper , we explore the effects of EFlct on actin polymerization and filament stability . Materials and Methods Protein and Aminoacyl - tRNA Purification All reagents were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Lois , MO ) un - less otherwise noted . Dictyostelium EFla was purified according to pub - lished methods ( Edmonds et al . , 1995 ) . Rabbit and Dictyostelium actin were purified as described previously ( Condeelis and Vahey , 1982 ; Bresnick and Condeelis , 1991 ) and pyrene - labeled according to published methods ( Hall et al . , 1989 ) . Unless otherwise noted , experiments used Dictyostelium actin . Actin was stored in the monomeric form in dialysis in buffer A ( 2 mM Tris , 0 . 2 mM CaCIz , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 0 . 02 % NAN3 , pH 8 . 0 ) . EFla was stored in liquid nitrogen in ct storage buffer ( 20 mM Pipes , 1 mM D ' I ' T , 0 . 02 % NAN3 , 25 % glycerol , pH 7 . 0 ) . The method that we used to synthesize 3HPhe - tRNA is essentially the same as that reported by Schreier et al . ( 1977 ) , except that we used tRNA stocks rich in tRNA TM . tRNA synthetases were isolated from rabbit retic - ulocyte lysates ( Promega Corp . , Madison , WI ) by centrifugation at 95 , 000 rpm for 20 rain at 4°C ( model TLA - 100 ; Beckman Instrs . , Fullerton , CA ) . The pellet was resuspended and then centrifuged in a buffer containing 20 mM " Iris , pH 7 . 5 , I mM DTF , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 25 M sucrose , and 0 . 5 M KC1 . Supernatants contained tRNA synthetases . For each bulk prepara - tion , a small scale tRNA aminoacylation was conducted to optimize con - ditions . Usually 80 - 90 % of tRNA Phe was aminoacylated based on the amount of 3HPhe incorporation . EFla was bound to GTP and GDP by incubation with 1 mM GTP or GDP for 30 min at room temperature in a storage buffer containing 5 mM MgCI2 . Nucleotide binding was confirtried by nitrocellulose filtration assay or mant - GTP fluorescence ( Nagata et al . , 1976 ; Liu et al . , 1996 ) . Binding of EFla - GTP to Phe - tRNA was performed by incubating 5 . 7 } xM Phe - tRNA with 7 . 1 p ~ mM EFla - GTP ( in a solution with 1 mM GTP to reduce EFla ' s binding to GDP , which is produced by the GTPase activity of EFla ) for 10 min before mixing with actin . Formation of ternary complex was confirmed under nearly identical conditions by intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence , GTPase assays , and Sephadex G75 gel filtration ( Bagshaw and Harris , 1987 ; Crochet and Parmeggiani , 1987 ; Nagata et al . , 1976 ; Slobin and Moiler , 1976 ; Liu et al . , 1996 ) . Polymerization Assays Polymerization buffer ( PME ) contained 20 mM Pipes , 2 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCI2 , 1 mM ATP , i mM DTI ' , 0 . 02 % NAN3 , 50 mM KCI , and 50 nM free calcium . If not otherwise specified , PME was at pH 6 . 5 . This buffer con - tains physiological concentrations of monovalent salts that have been measured in amebas as ~ 50 mM ( Matin and Rothman , 1980 ) . Small vol - umes of buffer A and a storage buffer enter the reactions along with G - actin and EFla . A constant free calcium concentration was maintained by ad - justing 10x PME stocks according to conditions prescribed by a metal chelation computer program incorporating EGTA / EDTA , H + , nucle - otide , and divalent cation concentrations ( from Dr . Toshikazu Hamasaki , Albert Einstein College of Medicine ) . Because potassium hydroxide was added to raise the pH , the final solutions were brought to the same ionic strength by addition of potassium chloride as confLrmed by electrical con - ductivity . At equal conductivity , a total of 50 mM potassium had been added to the buffers as both KOH and KCI . Other variations ( e . g . , small differences in glycerol concentration ) were compensated for using ¢t stor - age buffer controls . Polymerization of actin was monitored by pyrene ( 5 - 10 % labeled ) fluo - rescence ( excitation 365 nm , emission 407 nm ) using either an SLMS000 ( SLM / Aminco , Urbana , IL ) or a Hitachi F2000 fluorimeter ( Mountain View , CA ) . In unseeded polymerization experiments , actin polymeriza - tion was initiated by the addition of pyrene actin to a cuvette containing PME buffer and either EFla or a storage buffer . In seeded polymeriza - tion experiments , 1 . 5 p ~ M G - actin and various concentrations of EFla ( or control buffer ) were incubated for 3 min , at which time 0 . 5 ixM of sheared ( by vortexing ) actin filaments were added to the cuvette . In depolymeriza - tion experiments , EFla ( or control buffer ) was added to aliquots of F - actin 3 rain before dilution . Depolymerization was initiated by a 50 - fold dilution of 1 . 5 p ~ M F - actin into PME buffer containing predilution concentrations of EFla or control buffer . Polymerization and depolymerization rates were determined by the slope of a linear regression to the first 20 s of the reaction . The reactions were performed at 22°C or room temperature . Geisolin - capped Filaments 5 p . m actin was polymerized with 0 . 2 IxM gelsolin ( a generous gift from Dr . Toshi Azuma , Brigham and Women ' s Hospital , Boston MA ) in a buffer containing 2 mM rids , pH 7 . 5 , I mM MgC12 , 0 . 02 % NAN3 , 10 mM KCI , and 100 p ~ M CaCI2 . This was used as a 10× stock of seeds to start polymeriza - tion reactions as above . After equilibration to steady state ( 18 h ) , the fluo - rescence from these reactions was used in Fig . 6 c . PME buffer was ad - justed to 100 p ~ M CaCI2 in steady - state experiments using various concentrations of gelsolin ( Fig . 6 , a and b ) to ensure that the gelsolin was fully active . Monomer Binding We followed a procedure similar to that of Lee and Pollard ( 1988 ) . A cu - vette containing the maximal concentration of EFI ~ and 0 . 05 IxM pyrene actin was repeatedly diluted into 0 . 05 IxM pyrene actin , 1X PME , and the proper amount of ct storage buffer to ensure that the only constituent changing during the dilution was EFla . After a 2 - rain equilibration pause , the fluorescence was measured at excitation 344 nm and emission 386 nm . In addition , we measured light scattering at 344 nm , which produced a lin - ear signal versus EFlct concentration and assured us that nothing ( such as inner - filter effects or other technical problems ) was interfering with the excitation signal . The data of Fig . 3 were fit ( Origin computer software ; Microcal Inc . , Northampton , MA ) to a bimolecular binding isotherm ac - cording to the expression : X Y = K ~ xP1 + P2 , ( 1 ) where Y equals the fraction of bound actin , X equals the free EFlct con - centration , and P1 and P2 are standardizing variables ( P1 is the maximal change and P2 is the background value ) . The maximal change in fluores - cence was set to 1 and the data were replotted as fractional approach to this number as shown in Fig . 4 . Some monomer - binding experiments contained 0 . 1 p ~ M DNAse ( Wor - thington Biochemical Corp . , Freehold , NJ ) whose actin binding activity was confirmed in actin polymerization experiments ( not shown ) . The magnitude of fluorescence change in the monomer - binding assay was compared to a standard curve for F - actin pyrene fluorescence under iden - tical conditions . The maximal fluorescence associated with the binding of 0 . 05 p , M actin monomer gave a signal that was equivalent to the polymer - ization of 0 . 003 I ~ M pyrene actin . Mechanisms for the Inhibition of Actin Polymerization by EFl a Monomer - sequestering Mechanism . A curve showing the effect of EFla on actin polymerization if EFlct were sequestering actin monomers ( Fig . 5 a ) was generated using a monomer binding equilibrium expression ( 2 ) and the actin polymerization rate expression ( 3 ) . The monomer binding equilibrium expression : G - actin EFla Kdm°n = EFlce . G - actin ( 2 ) Substituting the total protein concentrations : KdmOn = ( G - actinto t - EFlot . G - actin ) x ( EFlc ~ te t - EFlct . G - actin ) EFl a . G - actin This quadratic equation was solved to determine the amount of EFla • G - actin at each experimental concentration of ( EFla ) tot with the help of Mathcad computer software ( version 3 . 1 ; MathSoft Inc . , Cambridge , MA ) and using the Kdmon ( 1 . 4 ~ M ) generated from the monomer binding stud - ies ( see Fig . 4 ) . The actin polymerization rate expression for the barbed end is : Rateacun = Filament End x ( k + G - actin - k _ ) ( Pollard , 1983 ) ( 3 ) In the presence of a monomer sequestering EFla this becomes : The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 1310 Rate Acfm + EF1 a = Filament End x ( k + ( G - actin - ( 4 ) EFlet . G - acfin ) - k _ ) The percent inhibition of the initial rate of actin polymerization ( see Fig . 5 a ) is calculated according to the expression : RateAean - RateAcfin + r ~ la x 100 % ( 5 ) Rate Actm where RateA ~ m is the polymerization rate in the absence of EFlct and RateActm + EFI ~ is the polymerization rate in the presence of EFlot . In the presence of a monomer - sequestering EFlct , this reduces to : EFI ( x . G - actin x 100 % ( 6 ) k G - actin tot - ~ + Eq . 6 was solved for the concentrations shown in Fig . 5 a using a value of 0 . 1 p . M for k _ / k + ( the actin barbed - end critical concentration ) . To generate a curve for the dimer sequestering model ( where EFla binds two actin monomers ) , we assumed complete independence for the two binding sites and therefore solved the monomer binding equations ( above ) with twice as much EFlcttotal . Capping Mechanism . A curve showing the effect of EFltx on actin poly - merization if EFltx were capping both ends of an actin filament was gener - ated using an end - capping equilibrium expression ( we assume rapid equi - librium ) ( Eq . 7 ) and the actin polymerization rate expression ( Eq . 3 ) . End EFla Kd ~ = EFIet . End ( 7 ) where . End = Endtot - End - EFI ( x . Substituting this into Eq . 7 , we get EFlct . End _ EFlct ( 8 ) End tot K d + EF1 ct Note that Eq . 8 is in the form of a standard binding isotherm such as Eq . 1 . In this case , the total concentration of EFlet is about 1 , 000 - fold greater than the concentration of filament ends and therefore , EFhx ~ E F lct total . In the presence of our hypothetical capping protein that caps both ends of the actin f ' dament with the same affinity , the actin polymerization rate expression ( 3 ) becomes : RateActm + EFl¢ , = ( End ~ - EFlcz . End ) x ( k + G - actin - k ) ( 9 ) and the percent inhibition of actin polymerization ( Eq . 5 ) reduced to : EFlct . End End t ~ This is the same as the left side of Eq . 8 , and therefore we modeled the ac - tivity of a capping protein using the bimolecular binding isotherm of Eq . 1 . Bundling Mechanism . The curve showing the effect of EFlot on actin polymerization ( see Fig . 5 a ) if EFI ( x were inhibiting actin polymerization through a bundling mechanism was generated by considering two fea - tures : bundling and end - burying . The bundling feature assumes that an ac - tin filament must contain a certain amount of bound EFI ~ t to rapidly form bundles , that is , to become a bundle - competent filament . The end - burying feature assumes that filament ends within a bundle become buried ( hid - den from solution and / or annealed ) at a particular rate as the bundles form . In Fig . 5 a , the inhibition of actin polymerization is plotted as a function of the total amount of EFlcx . Using the K d for the binding of EFlct to F - actin of Edmonds et al . ( 1995 ) ( assuming rapid equilibrium ) , we calcu - lated the amount of EFltx bound to F - actin ( EFlct - F - actin ) for various concentrations of EFlcttot ~ using the F - actin binding exluilibdum expression : F - actin EFI ~ t ( 10 ) KdF - ~ = EFIct . F - actin " Substituting the total protein concentrations : KdF _ ~ . w ' = ( F - actinto ~ - EFla . F - actin ) x ( EFltx ~ - EFI ~ . F - actin ) EF1 ( x . F - actin Using the light scattering data of Fig . 5 b and Eq . 10 , we calculated that the amount of EFlct bound to F - actin required to give a rate of bundle formation > 0 was , - , 0 . 31 bound EFlct per F - actin subunit ( 0 . 25 p . M EFlatot , 0 . 5 p . M F - actintot ) . We took the value of 0 . 31 to be the overall ratio of bound F - actin subunits to total F - actin subunits required for bun - dle formation . To determine the distribution of filaments that would have enough bound EFlct to be bundle competent , we used Bernoulli ' s proba - bility distribution and considered that the F - actin behaves statistically like a collection of filament hefical crossovers , or 13 monomer subunits . The Bernoulli equation ( e . g . , Feynman et al . , 1963 ) : n ! xptxq ( n - t ) ( 11 ) k ! ( n - k ) ! If the population of helical crossovers each contain n = 13 subunits , then this equation gives the expected fraction of helical crossovers that would contain k bound subunits given an overall total fraction ofp bound subunits ; that is , p is the overall fraction of bound F - actin subunits , q is the overall fraction of unbound F - actin subunits ( l - p ) , n is the total number of F - actin subunits in a helical crossover , and k is the number of bound subunits in the crossover . Therefore , to determine the fraction of helical crossovers that are expected to have at least 0 . 31 bound F - actin subunits per total F - actin subunits ( 4 bound F - actin subunits per 13 total F - actin subuhits ) , we summed the frequencies of finding < 4 bound F - actin sub - units per 13 total F - actin subunits for any given overall fraction of bound F - actin subuhits ( from Eq . 10 ) and subtracted this from 1 , i . e . , we set n = 13 , and k = 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 . The fraction of bundle - competent filaments ( BCF ) is then : - ' ~ ~ 13t ' k ( EFlct " F ' actin 1 ~ . , k ( 13 _ k ) ! x x ( 1 EFl ~ ' F ' actin ) ( ' 3 - k , } ( 12 ) F - actin We found by increasing the shear of free filaments as well as by increas - ing the molar ratios of gelsolin to actin in gelsolin - capped filaments that a greater number concentration of filament ends caused a greater inhibition of actin polymerization by EFlcc Because a first - order loss - of - fflament - end rate constant does not account for this , we used a second - order rate constant similar to the annealing mechanism of Kinosian et al . ( 1993 ) . The rate of change in the number of filament ends per second ( ignoring any back reaction ) can be given by : - BCF . End 2kbundZe ( 13 ) Integrating Eq . 13 with respect to time , the number of bundle - compe - tent filament ends at time t = BCF . End ( 0 ) ( 14 ) kbundle X t X BCF . End ( o ) + I where BCF - End = Eq . 12 x Endtot ~ . Endtot ~ is the number con - centration ( 0 . 6 nM ) , measured using the known ATP barbed end poly - merization rate constants ( Pollard and Cooper , 1986 ) and the calibrated polymerization rate . The rate of actin polymerization in the presence of EFlcx is then : ( BCF . End ( o ) Rate Acun + EFla \ EndSunbundled + kbundleXtX BCF . End ( 0 ) + 1 × i ( 15 ) ( k + G - actin - k _ ) and the inhibition of actin polymerization ( 5 ) in the presence of EFlct re - duces to : kbundie X t X BCF . End ( 0 ) + 1 x 100 % . ( 16 ) End t is the time at which the polymerization rate is measured ( 20 s ) . The rate constant for burying the filament ends that best approximated the ob - served data was 250 p . M - 1 s - 1 . The curve for the inhibition of actin poly - merization ( Fig . 5 a ) was generated by repeatedly solving these equations for various concentrations of EFlato ~ l . Light Scattering Samples containing various concentrations of EFlct in PME buffer were rapidly mixed and placed in a fluorimeter ( model F2000 ; Hitachi Sci . In - Murray et al . Elongation Factor 1 a Inhibits Actin Polymerization 1311 strs . ) , and the amount of scattered light was measured at 600 nm venus time . A tangent drawn to the first 8 s of the reaction was used to indicate the rate of the reaction in arbitrary units . Sedimentation Assay Aliquots of spontaneously polymerizing actin or actin polymerized to steady state were spun in a Beckman Airfuge at 28 p . s . i . ( 140 g ) for 20 rain . The amount of actin remaining in the supematant was measured by SDS - PAGE densitometry using NIH - Image ( version 1 . 47 ; written by Wayne Rasband , available via the internet at sippy . nimh . nih . gov ) . The snpema - tant amount was compared to an actin standard curve and subtracted from the amount of actin in the initial mixture giving a measure of F - actin . We found it more reproducible to measure the amount of actin in the superna - tant rather than the pellet . DNAse Assay Conditions for the assay were similar to those described elsewhere ( Coo - per and Pollard , 1982 ) . DNAse I ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) was freshly made at 0 . 1 mg / mi in 50 mM Tris , 100 mM CaC12 , 10 p + M PMSF , 20 IxM phallaci - din ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , pH 7 . 5 . Calf thymus DNA ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) was stored in 100 mM Tris , 4 mM MgSO + , 100 mM KCI , 1 . 8 mM CaCI2 , 0 . 02 % NAN3 , pH 7 . 5 , at 40 p + g / mi . Aliquots from spontane - ously polymerizing samples were mixed with DNAse I and the increase in OD ~ 0 over time was used to indicate DNAse activity . The amount of G - actin was determined by extrapolation on a standard curve . The stan - dard curve was performed on the same day by incubating serial dilutions of a 2 : 1 molar ratio of G - actin to EFlct ( the same ratio as the assay ) in G buffer ( 2 mM Tris , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 5 mM DTr , 0 . 2 mM CaCI2 , NaN 3 , pH 8 . 0 ) . In control experiments , it was found that DNAse activity was equivalent when mixed with either G buffer or PME buffer . Negative Staining Polymerizing samples identical to those of Fig . 5 a were placed on 300 mesh parlodian grids and immediately stained with 1 % uranyl acetate that had been passed through a 0 . 2 p . M Millipore filter and stored on ice . De - polymerizing samples were treated in the same manner ; however , to in - crease the number of filaments , a 10 - fold dilution was used to produce a final concentration of 0 . 8 p + M in the presence of 1 . 5 p . M EFla . Grids were placed under vacuum for at least 20 rain before visualization under a transmission electron microscope ( model JEM 100 CX If ; JEOL USA , Inc . , Peabody , MA ) . Results EF1 ~ Inhibits the Rate of Actin Polymerization at Molar Ratios Present in the Cytosol EFla constitutes 1 - 7 % of the total cell protein of mitoti - cally active cells ( Slobin , 1980 ; Demma et al . , 1990 ) . As EFla is an actin - binding protein , this abundance suggests that EFlet could influence the assembly properties of actin within cells . Fig . 1 shows that EFlot significantly inhibits actin polymerization at a molar ratio of EFla / actin ( 1 : 2 ) , which was chosen to approximate the ratio of EFla / G - actin in Dictyostelium cytosol ( 75 : 180 Ixm ; Hall et al . , 1988 ; Dharmawardhane et al . , 1991 ) . Fig . 1 , b and c , shows the effect of EFla on actin polymerization using high - speed sedimentation and DNAse inhibition . These assays con - firm that the fluorescence data presented in Fig . 1 a is not an artifact of an interaction between EFlet and the pyrene fluorophore . The small differences between the data of Fig . 1 arise for technical reasons ; actin sediments differ - ently when bound to EFla , whereas DNAse activity had a standard deviation in the time component estimated at 1 - 2 min . Therefore the differences between the pyrene and DNAse data are not significant . To confirm that our activity was not due to a contami - a 100 , ~ " 0 . . , . 0 _ 0 _ 0 . . 0 _ 0 _ 0 _ 0 _ 0 _ 0 80 ? , . / 0 - 0 - 0 60 to " - ° ~ ° - ° - ' ° * o ~ _ 40 ~ o / O O ° , 7 " 0 1 ' 0 2 ' 0 3 ' 0 4 ' 0 5 ' 0 b ( D 13 . . = t , - , m < 90 . 80 . 70 . 60 . 50 . 40 . 0 I 0 ~ . . . . - - o 2 ' 0 4 ' 0 6 ' 0 8 ' 0 C 2 . 0 . 1 . 5 . : t . r - - - i • = - 1 . 0 . ? Li . . ' - ' 0 . 5 . 0 . 0 0 • o 0 0 0 ¢ ~ O0 0 °cp 0 1 ' 0 2 ' 0 3 ' 0 4 ' 0 5 ' 0 Time ( min ) Figure 1 . Three different methods demonstrate that EFlet alters the actin polymerization reaction . Actin polymerization was initi - ated by the addition of 2 I ~ M G - actin ( from Dictyostelium ) into PME in the presence ( open circles ) or absence ( filled circles ) of 1 p , M EFltx . Polymerization was monitored with : ( a ) pyrene fluo - rescence , ( b ) sedimentation , and ( c ) DNAse inhibition . nant , we assayed the activity of Dictyostelium EFlet ex - pressed and purified from Escherichia coli as a GST fusion protein ( see Liu et al . , 1996b ) . This recombinant protein also inhibited actin polymerization , whereas the GST pro - tein alone did not ( data not shown ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 1312 These experiments demonstrate that EFlet can inhibit actin assembly . Furthermore , they demonstrate that the pyrene fluorescence assay provides an accurate measure of actin polymer formation in the presence of EFlot . Fig . 2 shows the effect of increasing concentrations of native Dictyostelium EFI ~ t on actin polymerization . Spon - taneous polymerization of actin is characterized by a sig - moidal curve ( Fig . 2 ; 0 . 0 ~ M EFlet ) where an initial lag is present due to the slow rate of formation of actin nuclei . As seen in Fig . 1 , EFlot inhibits actin assembly . However , the presence of high molar ratios of EFla to actin elimi - nates the lag phase of polymerization , causing the sigrnoi - dal curve of actin polymerization to become hyperbolic . This suggests that there is an increase in the amount of nu - clei at the onset of polymerization in the presence of EFlet . The nucleating effect is concentration dependent in that higher concentrations of EFlet cause greater initial rates of actin polymerization . However , the inhibitory effect of EFla on actin polymerization still appears to be present at these higher concentrations as seen at time points be - yond 450 s when all of the samples containing EFlot have less F - actin compared to the actin alone sample . EFl a Blocks Polymerization at Both the Barbed and Pointed Ends of Actin Filaments About 90 % of polymer growth occurs at the fast growing , barbed end of actin filaments ( Pollard and Cooper , 1986 ) . Because of the dramatic decrease in polymerization rate seen in Fig . 2 , it is evident that EFlet can reduce the rate of polymerization from the barbed end . To look at the effect of EFlet at the slow - growing pointed ends of actin fila - ments , bacterially expressed human gelsolin was used to cap the barbed ends of actin filaments , and these filaments were then used to initiate actin polymerization reactions . Several experiments of this kind are presented in Fig . 3 , and these indicate that EFlot also reduces the polymeriza - tion rate at the pointed ends of actin filaments . Control ex - periments showed that inclusion of additional gelsolin had 350 . 0 . 0 300 5 . 0 ~ _ 250 3 . 0 i 1 . 0 150 0 . 5 150 6 160 26o 36o 46o ~ o c ~ o Time ( sec ) Figure 2 . The effect of various concentrations of EFl0¢ on actin polymerization . At time zero , 3 I ~ M actin ( 10 % pyrene labeled ) was added to a cuvette containing PME buffer and 0 - 5 . 0 p , M EFlc¢ as indicated at the right of the plots . 7O 60 30 . . f 1 0 ~ , ~ " " 0 = I = I = I = I 0 20 40 60 80 100 Time ( sec ) Figure 3 . The effect of EFI ~ on gelsolin - capped actin filaments . Gelsolin - capped filaments containing 0 . 5 p , M actin and 0 . 02 p ~ M gelsolin were used to initiate the polymerization of 1 . 5 p , M G - actin in PME buffer and various concentrations of EFlct . Po - lymerization curves axe shown for six different concentrations of EFla : ( e ) 0 . 0 p , M , ( © ) 0 . 1 p , M , ( 1 ) 0 . 2 p , M , ( D ) 0 . 5 , ( O ) 1 . 0 p , M , ( A ) 2 . 0 p , M . no effect on actin polymerization , indicating that free barbed ends were not generated during the experiment ( not shown ) . Unlike the effects of EFlot on actin polymer - ization in the absence of gelsolin , the inhibition of the rate of actin polymerization from gelsolin - capped filaments is apparent only after the reaction has proceeded for 20 - 30 s . This delay was not dependent on the concentration of EFI ( x and therefore does not appear to be a binding step of EFlot . As for polymerization in the absence of gelsolin , the degree of polymerization inhibition is concentration dependent . Maximal divergence from the control curve occurs at 0 . 5 IxM EFI ~ t , the same concentration responsi - ble for maximal inhibition of polymerization in the ab - sence of gelsolin ( see Fig . 5 a ) . We also observed a greater divergence in the curves when the gelsolin / actin ratio was increased , that is , when the filaments were shorter and the overall reaction rate ( in the control ) was faster ( data not shown ) . Monomer Binding Binding of EFlot to actin monomer has been observed previously ( Dharmawardhane et al . , 1991 ) ; however , we needed to know if EFlot was binding to actin monomer under conditions where it inhibits actin polymerization . We used the method of Lee and Pollard ( 1988 ) to measure binding to G - actin in solution ( Fig . 4 ) . EFlet causes an in - crease in G - actin pyrene fluorescence as measured at exci - tation 344 nm and emission 386 nm , and this increase in fluorescence conforms to a parabolic curve when the con - centration of EFlet is varied and corresponds to monomer binding . The experiment was repeated using EFI ~ t bound to GTP and GDP , and these data were fit to bimolecular binding isotherms resulting in the following equilibrium dissociation constants : 1 . 4 , 0 . 7 , and 3 . 9 p , M for EFlet Murray et al . Elongation Factor 1 a Inhibits Actin Polymerization 1313 1 . 0 . 0 . 8 . E 0 ~ 0 . 6 . m 0 . 4 . ¢ - . o _ ~ 0 . 2 . U . 0 . 0 - O " • . Ill ' " , - . " • • ~ - . ~ e / " . . . . o I1 ~ . " . " 0 : 0 . 0 ~ . S . ' 0 " . . . . - . " . . - " EFI , rGDP . , - . . O EFla • . - , ' " . . m - EFla - GTP . 1 ~ " . . . . . . 0 . . . , . . , " " 0 . . . , . ' . . U ' " 0 0 EFla uM Figure 4 . Binding of actin monomer by EFla . The fluorescence of actin monomer was recorded in the presence of various con - centrations of EFla . This data was plotted as the fraction of actin monomer bound using a bimolecular binding isotherm resulting in KdS of 0 . 7 , 3 . 9 , and 1 . 4 I ~ M for EFlot in three different states : EFlet bound to GDP , GTP , and EFlot as freshly isolated , respec - tively . ( freshly isolated ) , EFlot - GDP , and EFlot - GTP , respec - tively . These results suggest that freshly isolated EFlot is a mixture of GTP and GDP forms . To rule out the possibility that the fluorescence increase is due to polymerization of G - actin , we used a concentra - tion of G - actin ( 0 . 05 p , M ) well below the critical concen - tration for polymerization . Additionally , the fluorescent signal was calibrated in terms of actin polymer fluores - cence , and finally the binding experiment was repeated in the presence of DNAse . The fluorescence calibration demonstrated that the maximal fluorescence signal in - crease was equivalent to about 3 nM F - actin , much less than expected if the actin were polymerizing . Further - more , DNAse did not prevent the increase in fluorescence seen in the presence of EFlot , demonstrating that changes in fluorescence were not due to actin polymerization . Al - though we did not pursue these competition experiments further , this result suggests that EFlot and DNAse are binding to different surfaces of the actin monomer . Quantitative Analysis of the Inhibition of Actin Polymerization by EF1 a To quantitate the effect of EFlot on rapidly polymerizing actin , we initiated actin polymerization from preformed , sheared actin filaments . Fig . 5 a shows a plot of the percent inhibition of the initial rate of actin polymerization versus the concentration of EFlot . EFlot significantly inhibits the initial rate of actin polymerization at substoichiometric lev - els to G - actin . Using the I ~ derived from Fig . 4 , we plot - ted the expected amount of inhibition if EFla were se - questering actin monomers ( open squares ) . Furthermore we plotted the result expected if EFlot were sequestering two actin monomers for every one EFlot molecule ( crossed squares ) . Neither of these mechanisms could ac - count for the extent of inhibition seen at low concentra - tions of EFla . We also plotted the best fit to the observed data if EFlot were inhibiting actin polymerization by cap - ping both ends of the actin filament ( Fig . 5 a , solid line ) . This curve is very similar to what would be observed for a barbed - end capping protein except that the maximal per - cent inhibition of a barbed - end capping protein would be , - . , 90 % and that of a double - end capping protein would be 100 % . Note that the double - end capping model shows bet - ter agreement with the observed data than the monomer sequestering models . However , the double - end capping model cannot account for the 80 % inhibition seen at 0 . 5 p , M EFIot and still account for the 20 - 30 % inhibition seen at 0 . 25 p ~ M EFlot , no matter what the affinity of the capping protein for the ends of the filament ( the curve shown here is the best fit , which gave a Kd of 0 . 34 I ~ M ) . That is , the shape of the curve of this model is distinctly different from that of the observed data . In addition , the capping model plateaus at 100 % inhibition , whereas the observed data plateaus at 78 % inhibition . Attempts to model the ob - served data with a capping protein that has different affin - ities for the barbed and pointed ends showed little im - provement over the capping model in Fig . 5 as these models saturate at 100 % inhibition of actin polymeriza - tion . In several sets of experiments performed with a lower number concentration of actin filament ends compared to Fig . 5 a , the extent of the inhibition of the initial rate of po - lymerization reached a maximum at 60 % or less ( see Fig . 8 ) . Therefore , this quantitative analysis suggests that EFlot does not inhibit actin polymerization through capping of the filament ends . However , because EFlot can alter the rates of actin polymerization at substoichiometric molar ratios to G - actin ( for example in Fig . 5 a , 0 . 44 FtM EFlot inhibited the rate of 1 . 5 ~ M G - actin by 75 % ) , the actual mechanism likely involves the blockage or loss of filament ends rather than some effect on actin monomer . We generated a curve for the inhibition of actin poly - merization by EFlot according to a bundling mechanism ( Fig . 5 a , open circles ) . This mechanism assumes that as fil - aments are cross - linked and enter a bundle their ends be - come annealed and / or sterically buried from solution . Intuitively , the mechanism explains the data in Fig . 5 a as the maximal percent inhibition of actin polymerization ( Fig . 5 a ) is determined by the rate at which the filament ends are annealed / buried from solution , i . e . , it is deter - mined by the loss - of - filament - end rate constant and the concentration of filament ends ( see Materials and Meth - ods ) . Therefore , the percent inhibition is expected to satu - rate at a value that is below 100 % and dependent on the initial concentration of filament ends . On the other hand , the cooperative appearance of Fig . 5 a is explained because a " critical fraction " of bound EFlot is required for actin bun - dling . This minimal ratio was measured at 13 F - actin sub - units per 4 EFlot - bound F - actin subunits ( Fig . 5 b ) and is therefore comparable to a hill coefficient of cooperativity of 13 / 4 = 3 . 25 . A value of 250 p , M - 1 s - 1 for the rate constant for the loss of filament ends was found by fitting the model to the observed data , whereas the amount of F - actin that has at - tained the critical fraction of bound EFlot was found by measuring the critical molar ratio required for bundling ( Fig . 5 b ) and using the Kd for the binding of EFlot to F - actin The Jour ' lla of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 1314 a 100 _ . o ® 80 E @ Q . • t = 60 40 i ° ~ r - i = 20 " 6 . _ ~ . ~ - o , 1 = • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . . * . o • . I " - " " i . D ' " P if ' " ~ . " II . 0 " II . CI _ n 0 : ~ n . . . . . . . . . . . . . ' ' ' ' n " ' ' n 5 i , 0 . 0 015 1 , 0 1 . ' 2 . 0 215 [ EF1 - ] pM b . . - , , 160 - " 10 r " 8 140 if ) ¢ ~ 120 t - , i , i , _ ~ 100 ~ 80 . _ ~ . _ 1 , - 60 E 40 L - @ ~ 20 i r - m 0 o ~ - 2o v - - - I ' i 0 " 15 / ' 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 1 . 2 . 0 [ EF 1 ct ] . M ~ ; ~ i ; ~ ~ - ~ ( , - - . . . . • : . . . . i " - ' " L . . ' " - - [ , . ~ . i ~ . t " . , , . • . . . - . . . . i . , . : . . . . . . : , _ : ~ : ; i ~ ; : ~ ~ v ~ ± ~ _ ~ ~ ~ " ' : ~ ? ~ Figure 5 . Quantitative analysis of the inhibition of actin polymerization by EFlet . ( a ) The filled circles show the observed inhibition of actin polymerization of 1 . 5 I ~ M G - actin by EFlct in the presence of 0 . 5 I ~ M F - actin seeds . Also shown are four possible mechanisms for this inhibition : monomer binding ( open squares ) , dimer binding ( crossed squares ) , capping ( solid line ) , and bundling ( open circles ) . The affinity constant for the monomer - binding mechanism ( 1 . 4 I ~ M ) comes from Fig . 4 , the capping mechanism is a chi - square best fit to the data ( resulting Kd = 0 . 34 I ~ M ) , and the affinity constant for the bundling mechanism ( 0 . 2 I ~ M ) comes from Edmonds et al . ( 1995 ) . ( b ) The effect of EFlet on the rate of bundle formation ; the minimal concentration of EFla required for bundle formation was used in gen - erating the bundling mechanism ( see Materials and Methods ) . ( c and d ) Electron micrographs of polymerizing samples containing 0 . 5 ixM EFlot 20 s ( c ) and 60 s ( d ) after addition of seeds . Note the presence of bundles that become more ordered by 60 s . Bar , 0 . 25 I ~ m . ( Edmonds et al . , 1995 ) . A statistical distribution of the F - actin population was also incorporated into this model ( see Materials and Methods ) . The large value of the rate constant for the loss of filament ends arises mathematically because the rate constant is second order to the number of filament ends , which are at low concentration ( 0 . 6 nM ) . However , bundling of actin filaments by EFlet causes the filaments to cross - link and align , and therefore the interac - tion of the filament ends is not dependent on their diffu - sion through solution . Samples identical to those of Fig . 5 a were negatively stained and viewed by electron microscopy and photo - graphs of these results are shown in Fig . 5 , c and d . By 20 s after the addition of filament seeds to samples containing G - actin and EFlet , the samples already contained numer - ous bundles with 2 - - 6 actin filaments . In addition , filaments that are not yet bundled often appear ordered into parallel arrays , indicating that EFla was affecting their organiza - tion . In contrast , the control experiments showed a ran - dom ordering of single actin filaments . This demonstrates that EFlct is cross - linking F - actin at early times during these polymerization experiments and suggests that ilia - Murray et al . Elongation Factor 1 t ~ Inhibits Actin Polymerization 1315 ments within the bundles contribute to polymerization at these early times . The Effect of EFl a on F - Actin at Steady State When actin is polymerized to apparent equilibrium ( steady state ) , a small portion of the actin will remain unpolymer - ized ( the critical concentration ) . Monomer - sequestering proteins will increase the apparent critical concentration by binding actin monomer in a way that is competitive with polymerization . Barbed end capping proteins will also increase the apparent critical concentration by shift - ing the critical concentration from that of the barbed end ( ~ 43 . 2 IxM ) to that of the pointed end ( ~ 4 ) . 6 p , M ) . To de - termine if EFI ~ t behaves like either of these classes of pro - teins , actin was polymerized to steady state in the presence or absence of EFI ~ t , and the actin critical concentration was measured by pyrene fluorescence and high - speed sed - imentation . The results shown in Fig . 6 indicate that EFla decreases the actincritical concentration in a manner that is dependent on the concentration of EFlot . For compari - son , gelsolin was included in these assays ( open circles ) , and as expected , gelsolin caused the actin critical concen - tration to increase to a value near 0 . 6 p ~ M . The effect of EFlet on actin critical concentration was also measured on getsolin - capped filaments ( Fig . 6 c ) . Again , EFla was seen to decrease the apparent critical concentration ( indicated by an increase in fluorescence ) . This indicates that EFlct behaves neither like a monomer - sequestering protein nor a barbed end capping protein . Curves were fit to the data of Fig . 6 ( dotted lines ) and resulted in Kas for EFla of 0 . 14 ( a ) , 0 . 4 ( b ) , and 0 . 92 IxM ( c ) . Kas for gelsolin were 0 . 3 ( a ) arid 0 . 5 nM ( b ) . These curve fits are considered approxi - mations due to the level of noise in the assay and their un - specified ( free floating ) maxima and minima but are con - sistent with the Kd measured for the binding of EFlet to - F - actin under similar buffer conditions ( Edmonds et al . , 1995 ) . The Effect of EFt a on Actin Depolymerization - Since EFI ~ t inhibits actin polymerization but also decreases the actin critical : concentration ( i . e . , drives monomer into filament ) , we expected that EFla would also inhibit actin depolymerization . A representative depolymerization curve ( Fig . 7 a , inset ) demonstrates that EFla inhibits the rate of depolymerization . The data were plotted as the percent in - hibition of initial actin depolymerization rate versus the concentration of EF10t ( Fig . 7 a , filled circles ) . The elec - trma micrographs shown in Fig . 7 b demonstrate that actin - EFlot bundles are formed during the 3 - min incubation period before depolymerization and that these bundles persist during depolymerization and are presumably the species that is resistant to depolymerization . The Effect of pH on the Interaction between EF1 ~ and Actin Measurements of the pH of Dictyostelium cytoplasm indi - cate a broad range of values between 6 . 0 and 8 . 2 with a median between 6 . 8 and 7 . 2 ( Satre et al . , 1986 ; Furukawa et al . , 1988 , 1990 ) . Resting pH increases 0 . 2 - - 0 . 4 U by 90 s after stimulation with cyclic AMP ( Aerts et al . , 1987 ; Van a 0 . 8 - " ~ " 0 . 6 . 0 . 4 . o . 21 E o . oi : : ) ~ 8 ~ ' O o O = b 0 . 7 - : 0 . 6 . ¢ - 0 . 5 . < - o 0 . 4 . N 3 ' " E 0 ID • o . 21 o l - : ~ 0 . 1 . . ' O . " " O . . . - ' O O . ' % " ' - . . . . O . . " " " ' ' " ' " O ' - - t . C 180 - 200 220 o = 240 8 260 . 280 m 300 ! 320 ~ ' " ' . • ' " - . . . . . " " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 : 0 015 1 : 0 1 ' . 5 210 EFI¢ ~ M or Gelsolin nM Figure 6 . The effect of EFla on the F - actin critical concentra - tion . Actin was polymerized to steady state ( > 18 h ) in the pres - ence of 0 . 0 - 2 p ~ M EFlct ( O ) , or 0 . 0 - 2 . 0 nM Gelsolin ( O ) , or 20 nM gelsolin and 0 . 0 - 2 IxM EFla ( O , c ) . The remaining unpolymer - ized actin ( the critical concentration ) from uncapped actin fila - ments was measured using calibrated pyrene fluorescence ( a ) , sedimentation ( b ) , or uncalibrated pyrene fluorescence ( c ) . The Journal of CeU Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 1316 a c 100 - 0 & . N 60 ~ 411 . ! - 20 ID . C O , , o O • . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . O 0 . , . = Ix . 120 Time ( sec ) , , , , , , , , : olo o12 o14 = ' ' " 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 [ EFla ] ~ 1 . . . . . . . . . . . : ii : i : ~ : , ~ i / ii ! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . . . . . . i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . • : : . ~ . . . . . , , : ' : ~ i : : ~ i . . ' ~ . • ~ . ! ~ ~ ~ i ~ ~ : i ; ' ~ 2 ; " , i ~ : ~ . . . . o i ~ i : • . . . . : . . , . . . . . . , . . • . . , . . . . . : . , : . . : ~ i " ~ i ' . . : . . . . = . . . . ~ . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . - . . . . : : : ~ . . . . : . , . ~ . . ~ _ ; . • . ~ . ~ . : . . . ? , - . , • : . : . ~ . . _ . . . . Duijn and Inouye , 1991 ) , and cyclic AMP causes a redistri - bution of F - actin and EFhx within this time frame ( Dhar - mawardhane et al . , 1991 ; Okazaki and Yumura , 1995 ) . These observations and the observation that protein syn - thesis can be regulated by pH ( Aerts et al . , 1985 ; Liu et al . , 1996a ) have led us to investigate the effects of pH on the inhibition of actin polymerization by EFlct . It was deter - mined that high pH inhibits cross - linking of actin filaments with a transition from cross - linking to single filament bind - ing occurring at pH 7 . 0 ( Edmonds et aI . , 1995 ) . To determine if pH affects the inhibition of actin poly - merization by EFlct , actin was polymerized in the pres - ence or absence of EFlct over the range of pH values present in Dictyostelium cytoplasm . The data presented in Fig . 8 show that the inhibition of actin polymerization by EFla is affected by pH in the same manner as the bun - dling of F - actin by EFlct . At low pH , the inhibitory activity is on while at high pH this activity is off . Accordingly , the data has been fit to sigmoidal curves to indicate the transi - tion from the on to off state , which occurs around pH 7 . 0 . The Effect of Ami ~ l - tRNA During protein translation , EFla binds aminoacyl - tRNA and this complex interacts with the active ribosome . In vitro when EFlct binds to GTP , the GTP - EFla complex will bind to aminoacyl - tRNA to form a stable EFlc ~ - GTP - aminoacyl - tRNA ternary complex . Liu et al . ( 1996b ) have shown that ternary complex formation inhibits EFlc ~ ' s F - actin - bundling activity , suggesting that the aminoacyl - tRNA - binding site overlaps with at least one of the F - actin - binding sites on EFla . Therefore , we measured the effect of aminoacyl - tRNA bound EFlct on actin polymerization . The results ( Fig . 9 ) show that both EFlc ~ and EFlc ~ - GTP reduce the rate of actin polymerization as compared to ac - tin alone . However , when phe - tRNA is allowed to bind Figure Z The inhibition of the initial rate of actin depolymeriza - tion by EFlct . ( a ) Actin was depolymerized to a final concentra - tion of 0 . 03 I ~ M in the presence and absence of EFlot and the ob - served percent inhibition of the initial rate of depolymerization was plotted versus the EFlct concentration ( filled circles ) in the same manner as for Fig . 5 . ( Inset ) Examples of F - actin depoly - merization . The lower curves show two examples of actin alone while the upper curve shows actin plus 0 . 07 I ~ M EFlct . ( Bottom ) Electron micrographs of actin depolymerizing alone ( b ) , and in the presence of EFlct ( c ) . Bar , 0 . 25 Ixm . (cid:127) 70 - C 6O O - . ~ _ . 50 - E 40 ~ , - 0 Q " 30 - ( 11 o , . . , . c 20 - tl . - o c 10 - o . Q 0 - o ~ e . . O . 9 . m . • , , , , , , , , , , , . . . . . . . . . . , , , , , . , , o • • • • ; i i s | I• i i i ~ t . . . 0 . . . . . . ° . . . . . . . . . . • " u . . . . . . . . I 610 6 ' . 2 6 ' . 4 616 618 710 7 ~ 2 7 . 4 716 718 8 . 0 pH Figure 8 , The effect of pH on the inhibition of actin polymeriza - tion by EFlct . Actin ( 1 . 5 l ~ M G - actin , 0 . 5 ixM F - actin sgeds ) was polymerized in the presence and absence of 0 . 5 p ~ M ' EFlct , and the inhibition of actin polymerization was calculated as in Fig . 5 a . The data were curve fit to illustrate the transitfonat effect of EFlct on actin as the pH is raised . Murray et al . Elongation Factor 1 ct Inhibits Actin Polymerization 1317 3OO 250 200 150 100 50 I I I • I I I / 1 ~ 2 ~ 300 4 ~ ~ 0 ~ 0 8 ¢ . . 8 , = o _ = LL No EFla EFI = - GTP . - aatRNA EFI ~ + aatRNA EFI = - GTP EFI = Time ( sec ) Figure 9 . The effect of aminoacyl - tRNA binding on the ability of EFla to alter aetin polymerization . At time zero , G - actin was added to PME in the presence of no EFlet , freshly isolated EFla , EFla and aminoacyl - tRNA , EFla - GTP , and EFla - GTP - ami - noacyl tRNA , as indicated . The concentrations were 3 ixM actin , 1 p . M EFlc ~ , and 0 . 8 p ~ M aminoacyl - tRNA . GTP - EFla and this complex is added to the actin poly - merization assay , a restoration of normal rate of actin po - lymerization is observed . When phe - tRNA was included with EFla in the absence of GTP , a small reduction of the inhibition of actin polymerization was still observed , sug - gesting that some of the EFla as purified is a mixture of GTP and GDP forms and that the GTP form is aminoacyl - tRNA binding - - competent in the absence of exogenous GTP . Discussion The Many Roles of EFla Although EFla has been described as a translation factor for many years , increasing evidence suggests that EFIot may have other roles within the cell . EFlot binds and sev - ers microtubules ( Durso et al . , 1994 ; Shiina et al . , 1994 ) . Other reports indicate that EFlet can activate phosphati - dylinositol 4 - kinase ( Yang et al . , 1993 ) and bind calmodu - lin ( Kaur and Ruben , 1994 ) . The association of EFla with actin has been demonstrated by several labs both in vivo and in vitro ( Dharmawardhane et al . , 1991 ; Bassell et al . , 1994a ; Bektas et al . , 1994 ; Collings et al . , 1994 ; Edmonds et al . , 1995 , 1996 ) ; however , the activities of EFlot with re - spect to actin have not been fully documented . Perhaps it should not be surprising that EFla possesses these other activities as it has been estimated that EFla is 14 times more abundant than the amount of specific ami - noacyl - tRNA and up to 35 times more abundant than ri - bosomes within eukaryotic cells ( Slobin , 1980 ) . We pre - sume that the abundance of EFlet means that binding of even a fraction of EFla to F - actin would have significant consequences for cytoskeletal function within a cell . The role of actin and microtubules in the transport , anchorage , and regulation of the protein synthetic machinery has be - come an area of vigorous research , and it appears that the compartmentalization of this nondiffusible machinery may be key for its proper functioning ( Bassell et al . , 1994b ) . The ability of EFla to sever microtubules and , as pre - sented in this report , the ability of EFla to alter the rates of actin polymerization suggests that EFla may have an important role in establishing a cytoskeletal topography which is required for the spatial control of protein synthe - sis ( Shiina et al . , 1994 ; Condeelis , 1995 ) . EFl a ' s Effects on Actin Dynamics Cannot Be Explained by Monomer Binding or Filament Capping As demonstrated here , purified EFla decreases the rates of actin polymerization and depolymerization in a concen - tration - dependent fashion . EFla is an actin filament - binding and - bundling protein . However , it is also re - ported to bind actin monomer cross - linked to Sepharose beads ( Dharmawardhane et al . , 1991 ) . None of our data indicates that the binding of EFlot to G - actin is inhibitory towards actin polymerization . Inhibition of actin polymer - ization occurs at EFla concentrations that are substoichi - ometric to G - actin ( Figs . 2 and 5 a ) . Using the Kd derived from monomer binding experiments ( 1 . 4 pLM , Fig . 4 ) , we could not account for the extent of inhibition of actin poly - merization even when we assumed each EFIot bound two actin monomers , and especially if the amount of EFlet that is expected to be bound to F - actin is accounted for ( not shown ) . Experiments conducted using native gel electro - phoresis also failed to show significant EFla - actin mono - mer interaction at concentrations below 1 IxM ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , the observed data of Fig . 5 a ap - pears cooperative , comparable to a binding curve with a hill coefficient of > 3 . This means that as a monomer - sequestering protein , EFla would have to bind > 3 actin monomers to explain the appearance of the data of Fig . 5 a . In addition , EFla caused the actin critical concentration to decrease rather than increase , indicating that EFla is not involved in sequestering of actin monomers . The inhibition of actin polymerization and depolymer - ization by EFla appears qualitatively similar to that of barbed end capping proteins ( compare our Fig . 2 to Fig . 1 of Cooper and Pollard , 1985 ) . However , the affinity of EFlot for actin filaments is much weaker than the affinity of well - known capping proteins such as gelsolin ( Kd < 0 . 1 nM ; Lo et al . , 1994 ; 0 . 3 - 0 . 5 nM in this report , Fig . 7 ) and capZ ( Kd ~ 0 . 5 riM ; Caldwell et al . , 1989 ) , Furthermore , Fig . 3 demonstrates that EFloL can inhibit actin polymer - ization from gelsolin - capped actin filaments . This inhibi - tion is concentration dependent showing a maximal inhibi - tion at 0 . 5 IxM EFla , the same concentration for maximal inhibition as seen in the absence of gelsolin . Since poly - merization rates from uncapped filaments can be inhibited by 78 % ( Fig . 5 a ) , the fast - growing ends must also be in - hibited , and hence EFloL can block polymerization from both ends of an actin filament . Therefore , EFla does not inhibit actin polymerization by selectively capping either end of the actin filament . Additionally , modeling the data of Fig . 5 a using a capping mechanism did not generate curves that fit the observed data regardless of whether we took into account the amount of EFla that would be bound to the sides of actin filaments ( not shown ) . EFlot also decreases the actin critical concentration ( Fig . 6 ) , a result inconsistent with filament end capping . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 1318 For comparison , gelsolin was included in these experi - ments , which caused the actin critical concentration to in - crease towards that of the pointed end as previously re - ported ( Selve and Wegner , 1986 ) . The effect of EFla on the critical concentration was furthermore not dependent on free barbed ends since gelsolin - capped filaments also had a lower critical concentration in the presence of EFlet ( Fig . 6 c ) . Inhibition of Actin Polymerization by EFl a Requires Filament Bundling Addition of EFla to a solution of actin monomers or fila - ments results in rapid bundle formation . At the earliest times assayed , filaments were gathered into bundles under the polymerization and depolymerization conditions used in this study . Bundling of filaments would lead to steric blockade of monomer addition to filament ends as the ends become buried in the growing bundle and / or become annealed because of their juxtapositioning in the bundle . In Fig . 5 a , we demonstrate that a mechanism based on the bundling activity of EFla can account for the observed effect of EFlot on actin polymerization . Consistent with this model is the observation that agents that inhibit bun - dling by EFlot release the EFlot - mediated inhibition of ac - tin polymerization . For example , increases in pH over the physiological range have been shown to convert the actin - binding activity of EFlct from cross - linking to single fila - ment binding ( Edmonds et al . , 1996 ) . This is consistent with the identification of two actin - binding sites in EFlt ~ with different pH sensitivities for actin binding ( Liu et al . , 1996b ) and explains the association of EFltx with single actin filaments , filament branch points , and filament bun - dles in situ ( Bassell et al . , 1994 ; Liu et al . , 1996a ) . Transi - tion of EFlot from cross - linking to monovalent filament binding occurs at the same pH as the loss of EFlot - medi - ated inhibition of actin polymerization ( Fig . 8 and Edmonds et al . , 1995 ) , suggesting a causative relationship between bundling and inhibition of polymerization . Furthermore , the binding of EFlot to aminoacyl - tRNA has been shown to inhibit the bundling activity of EFlot ( Liu et al . , 1996b ) . As seen in Fig . 9 , the addition of aminoacyl - tRNA to GTP - EFlot dramatically reduced the inhibition of actin polymerization by EFI ~ , again suggesting a causative rela - tionship between EFlct - mediated bundling and the inhibi - tion of actin polymerization . The cross - linking of actin filaments by EFI ~ is expected to slow actin depolymerization because more molecular bonds must be broken to release an actin subunit from a filament , and this was observed ( Fig . 7 ) . The reduction in the rate of actin depolymerization is also expected to in - crease the amount of F - actin observed at steady state ( i . e . , reduce the actin critical concentration ) , and this was ob - served ( Fig . 6 ) . In addition , since filament ends within a bundle are not solution accessible and / or are annealed , it is also expected to take longer for the actin polymerization reaction to reach equilibrium , which we have also ob - served ( Fig . 2 , and data not shown ) . The ability of EFloL to bind actin monomer and short growing filaments also accounts for the nucleation activity of EFlot since the EFlct • F - actin complex is resistant to depolymerization . At low concentrations , EFlot binds and stabilizes F - actin ( Fig . 7 ) and , as the monomer binding ex - periment of Fig . 4 shows , above 1 p , M EFlot binds a signif - icant amount of actin monomer . This binding of actin monomer may cause the stabilization of actin oligomers that would act as actin nuclei and stimulate the initial actin polymerization rate as seen in Fig . 2 . Although the actin nuclei are initially capable of actin polymerization , they are also susceptible to end - burying / annealing as filaments elongate and F - actin bundles form . Therefore , the bun - dling mechanism is consistent with and explains all of the kinetic and steady - state effects of EFlot on actin polymer - ization and depolymerization . Bundling Proteins and Actin Polymerization There are many examples of proteins that bundle actin fil - aments as well as affect actin polymerization . There is not room here for a full discussion of this topic . However , we will mention a couple of relevant examples . Talin , an actin - binding protein present in focal contacts , is a pH - sensitive actin - bundling protein that can also nucleate actin poly - merization ( Goldman et al . , 1994 ; Zhang et al . , 1996 ) . Goldman et al . ( 1994 ) demonstrate , as we have shown here for EFla , that the nucleating effect of talin is only ap - parent at the onset of a polymerization experiment and that at later times in the experiment the polymerization rate may be slower in the presence of talin than in its ab - sence . For an explanation of this behavior , these authors site the ability of talin to rapidly reduce the length distri - bution of actin filaments , which corresponds to actin fila - ment nucleation , and subsequently anneal the actin fila - ment / talin protein polymer network ( Ruddies et al . , 1993 ) , which corresponds to a reduction in the actin polymeriza - tion rate . Another group of proteins , the synapsins , are neuronal phosphoproteins localized to the cytoplasmic surfaces of synaptic vesicles . Synapsins are believed to regulate neu - rotransmitter release by cross - linking vesicles into the actin cytoskeleton ( Greengard et al . , 1993 ) . Synapsins can bun - dle actin filaments and nucleate actin polymerization . Fur - thermore , unphosphorylated synapsin I inhibits actin de - polymerization , increases the steady - state levels of F - actin relative to G - actin , decreases the apparent rate constant of actin polymerization , and causes actin to polymerize under nonpolymerizing salt concentrations ( a property also ob - served with EFlot ; data not shown ) . In other words , quali - tatively , synapsin I displays nearly all of the properties toward actin polymerization that we have here demon - strated for EFlot . Fesce et al . ( 1992 ) have analyzed the effects of synapsin I on actin polymerization by fitting mathematical models to curves of actin polymerization versus time as well as to curves of the derivative of these curves ( the rate of loss of actin monomer ) . This approach led Fesce et al . to con - clude that synapsin I nucleates actin polymerization by binding 4 actin monomers and that polymerization from these nuclei occurs at a slow rate compared to actin alone . Assuming that synapsin I and EFlot affect actin polymer - ization by a similar mechanism , we propose that the reduc - tion in polymerization rate by these proteins is due to burying / anneahng of filament ends as opposed to an effect on actin monomer . As noted , we have found that the dif - Murray ¢t al . Elongation Factor I a Inhibits Actin Polymerization 1319 ference between the rate of actin polymerization in the pres - ence and absence of EFlct is greater when the initial con - centration of ends ( the number concentration ) is greater , indicating that the effect is dependent ( in a non - first - order manner ) on the concentration of preexisting filament ends . It is interesting that both groups came up with a mecha - nism that requires that three to four actin subunits are af - fected by one subunit of the protein of interest . Shiina et al . ( 1994 ) have detected a microtubule - sever - ing activity of EFIot . We did not detect severing of actin filaments by EFla ; instead , EFIot stabilized actin filaments from depolymerization . It is possible that conditions may be discovered that activate an actin - severing activity of EFIot . In addition , it is also possible that the nucleating ac - tivity of EFla could effectively decrease the filament length distribution , as has been postulated in the case of talin , which lowers actin filament length distribution ( Kauf - mann et al . , 1991 ; Goldmann et al . , 1994 ) , giving the impres - sion of severing by redistributing actin monomer onto nu - merous nuclei stabilized by EFlo ~ . EFl a , Actin Binding , and Translation EFlct binds to G - and F - actin and inhibits actin polymer - ization in both the GTP - bound and freshly isolated forms ( Dharmawhardhane et al . , 1991 ; Figs . 4 and 9 , this report ) . In the GTP - bound form , EFloL also binds to aminoacyl tRNA at sites that overlap with the F - actin - binding sites ( Liu et al . , 1996b ) . In the absence of aminoacyl - tRNA , EFlct will interact with F - actin to form cross - linked fila - ments that polymerize and depolymerize slowly and that exhibit a decreased critical concentration at steady state . These results predict that in vivo , filaments that are ob - served to interact with EFlct ( Edmonds et al . , 1995 , 1996 ; Liu et al . , 1996b ) represent a less dynamic subset of fila - ments with polymerization properties different from those filaments not bound to EFlct . Upon binding of aminoacyl - tRNA to the GTP - bound form of EFIot to make the ter - nary complex , a reaction that appears to involve the direct interaction between EF1ot and aminoacyl tRNA - syn - thetase in vivo ( Stapulionis and Deutscher , 1995 ) , EFlct would be released from its cross - linking interaction with actin filaments , thereby supplying a high local concentra - tion of ternary complex for polypeptide elongation . Small increases in pH around 7 . 0 bias the binding of EFIot to aminoacyl - tRNA over F - actin ( Liu et al . , 1996b ) and in vivo would regulate the availability of EFlct for transla - tion and its binding to the actin cytoskeleton . This is con - sistent with the observation that small increases in pH are correlated with increases in protein synthesis in a variety of cell types ( Liu et al . , 1996a ) . Coincidentally , filaments released from binding to EFlct by aminoacyl - tRNA would return to a more dynamic state , undergoing more rapid polymerization , depolymer - ization , and / or physical rearrangements . This is consistent with several observations that small increases in pH are correlated with changes in vivo in the localization of EFlct with F - actin , reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , and increases in cell locomotion ( Aerts et al . , 1987 ; Dhar - mawardhane et al . , 1991 ; Van Duijn and Inouye , 1991 ; Ed - monds et al . , 1995 ) . Therefore , the ability of EFIot to influ - ence the assembly and structure of the actin cytoskeleton in vivo could be a key step regulating the transport , an - chorage , and translation of mRNA on actin filaments . We acknowledge the Analytical Imaging Facility for help with electron microscopy . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM25813 and training grant 5T32 CA09475 - 10 . Received for publication 17 June 1996 and in revised form 10 September 1996 . Refe / ' e ~ Aerts , R . J . , A . J . Durston , and W . H . Moolenaar . 1985 . Cytoplasmic pH and the regulation of the Dictyostelium cell cycle . Cell . 43 : 853 - 857 . Aerts , R . J . , RJ . W . De Wit , and M . M . Van Lookeren Campague . 1987 . Cyclic AMP induces a transient alkalinization in Dictyostelium . FEBS Lett . 220 : 366 - 370 . Bagshaw , C . R . , and D . A . Harris . 1987 . Measurement of ligand binding to pro - teins . In Spectrophotometry & Spectrofluorimetry . A Practical Approach Series . D . A . Harris and C . C . Bashford , editors . IRS Press , Oxford . 91 - 113 . Bassell , G . J . , C . M . Powers , K . L . Taneja , and R . H . Singer . 1994a . Single mR _ NAs visualized by ultrastructural in situ hybridization are principally localized at actin filament intersections in fibroblasts . J . Cell BioL 126 : 863 - 876 . Bassell , G . J . , K . L . Taneja , E . H . Kislauslds , C . L Sundell , C . M . Powers , A . Ross , and R . H . Singer . 1994b . Actin filaments and the spatial positioning of mRNAs . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 358 : 183 - 189 . Bektas , M . , R . Nurten , Z . Gm ' el , Z . Sayers , and E . Bermek . 1994 . Interactions of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 with actin : a possible link between protein synthetic machinery and the cytoskeleton . FEBS Lett . 356 : 89 - 93 . Bresnick , A . R . , and J . Condeelis . 1991 . Isolation of actin - binding proteins from Dictyostelium discoideum ~ Methods EnzymoL 85 : 70 - 83 . Caldwell , J . E . , S . G . Heiss , V . Mermall , and J . A . Cooper . 1989 . Effects of capz , an actin capping protein of muscle , on the polymerization of actin . Biochem - / stry . 28 : 8506 - 8514 . Collings , D . A . , G . O . Wasteneys , M . Miyazaki , and R . E . Williamson . 1994 . Elongation Factor 1 ct is a component of the subcortical actin bundles of characean algae . Cell Biol . Int . 18 : 1019 - 1024 . Condeelis , J . 1995 . Elongation factor 1 ct and the regulation of cytoskeletal dy - namics , mRNA sorting and growth control . Trends BiocherrL ScL 233 : 169 - 215 . Condeelis , J . , and N . Vahey . 1982 . A calcium and pH regulated protein from Dictyostelium discoideum that crosslin ~ actin filaments . Z Cell Biol . 94 : 466 - 471 . Cooper , J . A . , and T . D . Pollard . 1982 . Methods to measure actin polymeriza - tion . Methods Enzymol . 85 : 181 - 211 . Cooper J . A . , and T . D . Pollard . 1985 . Effect of capping protein on the kinetics of actin polymerization . Biochemistry . 24 : 793 - 799 . Crechet , J . B . , and A . Parmeggiani . 1986 . Characterization of the elongation fac - tors from calf brain 3 . Properties of the GTPase activity of EF - la and mode of action of kirromycin . Eur . Z Biochem . 161 : 655 - - 660 . Demma , M . , V . W . Warren , R . Hock , S . Dharmawardhane , and J . Condeelis . 1990 . Isolation of an abundant 50 , 000 - dalton actin filament bundling protein from Dictyostelium amoebae . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 2286 - 2291 . Dharmawardhane , S . , M . Demma , F . Yang , and J . Condeelis . 1991 . Compart - mentalization and actin binding properties of ABP - 50 : the elongation factor - 1 ct of Dictyostelium . Cell MotiL CytoskeL 20 : 279 - 288 . Durso N . A . , and R . J . Cyr . 1994 . A calmodulin - sensitive interaction between microtubules and a higher plant homolog of elongation factor - 1 t ~ . Plant Cell 6 : 893 - 905 . Edmonds B . T . , J . Murray , and J . Condeelis . 1995 . pH regulation of the F - actin binding properties of Dictyostelium elongation factor 1 ct . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 15222 - 15230 . Edmonds , B . T . , J . Wyckoff , Y . - G . Yeung , Y . Wang , E . R . Stanley , J . Jones , J . Segall , and J . Condeelis . 1996 . Elongation factor - la is an overexpressed ac - tin binding protein in metastatic rat mammary adenocarcinoma . Z Cell Sci . 109 : 2705 - 2714 . Fesce , R . , F . Benfanati , P . Greengard , and F . Valtorta . 1992 . Effects of the neu - ronal phosphoprotein synapsin I on actin polymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 11289 - 11299 . Feynman , R . P . , R . B . Leighton , and M . Sands . 1963 . The Feynman Lectures on Physics . Vol . 1 . Addison - Wesley Publishing Company , Reading , MA . 6 - 2 - 6 - 5 . Furukawa , R . , J . E . Wampler , and M . Fechbeimer . 1988 . Measurement of the cytoplasmic pH of Dictyostelium discouteum using a low light level micro - spectrofluorometer . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 2541 - 2549 . Furukawa , R . , J . E . Wampler , and M . Fechheimer . 1990 . Cytoplasmic pH of Dictyostelium discoideum amebae during early development : identification of two cell subpopulations before the aggregation stage . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 1947 - 1954 . Goldmann , W . H . , A . Bremer , M . Haner , U . Aebi , and G . Isengberg . 1994 . Na - tive talin is a dumbbell - shaped homodimer when it interacts with actin . Z Struct . Biol . 112 : 3 - 10 . Greengard , P . , F . Valtorta , A . J . Czeraik , and F . Benfenati . 1993 . Synaptic vesi - cle phosphoproteios and regualtion of synaptic function . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 259 : 780 - 785 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 1320 Hall , A . L . , A . Schlein , and J . C . Condeelis . 1988 . Relationship of pseudopod ex - tension to chemotactic hormone - induced actin polymerization in amoeboid cells . J . Cell Biochem . 37 : 285 - 299 . Hall , A . L . , V . Warren , S . Dharmawardhane , and J . Condeelis . 1989 . Identifica - tion of actin nucleation activity and polymerization inhibitor in ameboid cells : their regulation by chemotactic stimulation . Z Cell Biol . 109 : 2207 - 2213 . Kaufmann , S , T . H . Piekenbrock , W . H . Goldman , M . Barmann , and G . Isen - berg . 1991 . Talin binds to actin and promotes filament nucleation . FEBS LeSt . 284 : 187 - 191 . Kaur , K . J . , and L . Ruben . 1994 . Protein translation elongation factor - 1 a from Trypanosoma brucei binds catmodulin . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 23045 - 23050 . Kinosian , H . J . , L . A . Selden , J . E . Estes , and L . C . Gershman . 1993 . Actin fila - ment annealing in the presence of ATP and phalloidin . Biochemistry . 32 : 12353 - 12357 . Kislauskis , E . H . , X . Zhu , and R . H . Singer . 1994 . Sequences responsible for in - tracellular localization of 13 - actin messenger RNA also affect cell phenotype . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 441 - 451 . Lee , S . , and T . D . Pollard . 1988 . Evaluation of the binding of Acanthamoeba profilin to pyreae - labeled actin by fluorescence enhancement . Anal . Bio - chem . 168 : 148 - - 155 . Liu , G . , B . T . Edmonds , and J . Condeelis . 1996a . pH , EFla and the cytoskele - ton . Trends Cell Biol . 6 : 168 - 171 . Liu , G . , J . Tang , B . T . Edmonds , J . Murray , S . Levin , and J . Condeelis . 1996b . F - actin sequesters EF - la from interaction with aminoacyl - tRNA in a pH - dependent reaction . Z Cell Biol . 135 : 953 - 963 . Lo , S . H . , P . A . Janmey , J . H . Hartwig , and L . B . Chen . 1994 . Interactions of tensin with actin and identification of its three distinct actin - binding do - mains . Z Cell Biol . 125 : 1067 - 1075 . Matin , F . T . , and F . G . Rothman . 1980 . Regulation of development in Dictyostel - ium discoideum . IV . Effects of ions on the rate of differentiation and cellular response to cyclic AMP . Z Cell Biol . 87 : 823 - 827 . Nagata , S . , K . Iwasaki , and Y . Kaziro . 1976 . Interaction of the low molecular weight form of elongation factor 1 with guanine nucleotides and aminoacyl - tRNA . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 172 : 168 - 177 . Okazaki , K . , and S . Yumura . 1995 . Differential association of three actin - bun - dling proteins with microfilaments in Dictyostelium amoebae . Ear . Y . Cell Biol . 66 : 75 - 81 . Pollard , T . D . 1983 . Measurement of rate constants for actin filament elongation in solution . Anal . Biochem . 134 : 406 - - 412 . Pollard , T . D . , and J . A . Cooper . 1986 . Actin and actin - binding proteins . A criti - cal evaluation of mechanisms and functions . Anna . Rev . Biochem . 55 : 987 - 1035 . Ruddies , R . , W . H . Goldmann , G . Isenberg , E . Saclunann . 1993 . The viscoelas - ticity of entangled actin networks : the influence of defects and modulation by talin and vinculin . Fur . Biophys . J . 22 : 309 - 321 Satre , M . , J . B . Martin , and G . Klein . 1986 . Methyl phosphonate as a 31P - NMR probe for intracellular pH measurements in Dictyostelium amoebae . B / o - chimie ( Paris ) . 71 : 941 - 948 . Schreier , M . H . , B . Erni , and T . Staehelin . 1977 . Initiation of mammalian pro - tein synthesis . I . Purification and characterization of sovea initiation factors . J . MoL Biol . 116 : 727 - 753 . Selve , N . , and A . Weguer . 1986 . Rate constants and equilibrium constants for binding of the gelsolin - actin complex to the barbed ends of actin filaments in the presence and absence of calcium . Fur . J . Biochem . I60 : 379 - 387 . Sbestakova , E . A . , L . P . Motuz , A . A . Minin , and L . P . Gavrilova . 1993 . Study of localization of the protein - synthesizing machinery along actin filament bun - dles . Cell Biol . Int . 17 : 409 - 416 . Shiina , N . , Y . Gotoh , N . Kubomura , A . Iwamatsu , and E . Nishida . 1994 . Micro - tubule severing by elongation factor I c ~ . Science ( Wash , DC ) . 266 : 282 - 285 . Slobin , L . I . 1980 . The role of eucaryotic elongation factor tu in protein synthe - sis . Eur . Z BiochertL 110 : 555 - 563 . Slobin , L . I . , and W . Moiler . 1976 . Characterization of developmentally regu - lated forms of elongation factor 1 in Artemia satina . Eur . J . Biochem . 69 : 367 - 375 . Stapulionis , R . , and M . P . Deatseher . 1995 . A channeled tRNA cycle during mammalian protein synthesis . Prec . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 7158 - 7161 . Van Duijn , B . , and K . Inouye . 1991 . Regulation of move , meat speed by intracel - lular pH during Dictyostelium discoideum chemotaxis . Prec . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 4951 - 4955 . Yang , F . , M . Demma , V . Warren , S . Dharmawardhane , and J . Condeelis . 1990 . Identification of an actin - binding protein from Dictyostelium as elongation factor lcc Nature ( Lend . ) . 347 : 494 - 496 . Yang , W . , W . Burkhart , J . Cavailins , W . C . Merrick , and W . F . Boss . 1993 . Purifi - cation and characterization of a phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase activator in carrot cells . J . BioL Chem . 268 : 392 - 398 . Zambetti , G . , L . Wilming , E . G . Fey , S . Penman , J . Stein , and G . Stein . 1990a . Differential association of membrane - bound and non - membrane - bound poly - seines with the cytoskeleton . Exp . Cell Res . 191 : 246 - 255 . Zambetti , G . , E . G . Fey , S . Penman , J . Stein , and G . Stein . 1990b . Multiple types of mRNA - cytoskeleton interactions . Z Cell Biochem . 44 : 177 - 187 . Zhang , J . , R . M . Robson , J . M . Schmidt , and M . H . Stromer . 1996 . Talin can crosslink actin filaments into both networks and bundles . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 218 : 530 - 537 . Murray et al . Elongation Factor 1 c ~ Inhibits Actin Polymerization 1321