Are Informal Tools Better ? Comparing DEMAIS , Pencil and Paper , and Authorware for Early Multimedia Design Brian P . Bailey Department of Computer Science University of Illinois Urbana , IL 61801 bpbailey @ uiuc . edu Joseph A . Konstan Department of Computer Science and Engineering University of Minnesota Minneapolis , MN 55455 konstan @ cs . umn . edu ABSTRACT DEMAIS is an informal design tool that we claim helps a multimedia designer explore and communicate temporal and interactive ( behavioral ) design ideas better than existing tools . This paper seeks to empirically validate our claim . We report on an evaluation comparing DEMAIS to pencil and paper and Authorware for the exploration and communication of behavior in early multimedia design . The main results are that ( i ) DEMAIS was better than Authorware for both exploring and communicating behavior , ( ii ) DEMAIS was better than pencil and paper for communicating behavior , and ( iii ) DEMAIS was able to capture most of a designer’s behavioral design ideas . Our results show that DEMAIS bridges the early investment / communication gap that exists among current multimedia design tools . Keywords Design , Multimedia , Prototyping , Sketching , Storyboards , Visual Language INTRODUCTION A multimedia designer struggles to explore and communicate behavioral design ideas early in the design process [ 3 ] . We use the term behavior to refer to both the temporal and interactive dimensions of a multimedia application . Although an interactive system designer often struggles to explore and communicate behavioral design ideas , a multimedia designer especially struggles as she must explore and communicate creative combinations of user interactions , temporal effects , and dynamic media to produce an effective and engaging end user experience [ 3 ] . To explore and communicate behavioral design ideas , a designer may build a low - fidelity prototype using paper sketches , translucent overlays , sticky notes , and other low - fidelity tools or build a functional prototype using a high - fidelity tool such as Macromedia’s Authorware [ 14 ] . Low - fidelity tools , however , are ineffective for helping a designer explore and communicate behavioral design ideas while high - fidelity tools require a designer to invest too much time and effort , impeding the early exploration of the design space [ 3 , 8 , 13 ] . We refer to this imbalance as the early investment / communication gap . To bridge this gap in multimedia design , we developed an informal design tool called DEMAIS [ 2 ] . DEMAIS enables a designer to quickly sketch temporal and interactive design ideas and then run the sketch to directly experience those ideas . In this paper , we seek to empirically validate the efficacy of our tool . We report on an evaluation comparing DEMAIS to pencil and paper and Authorware for the exploration and communication of behavior in early multimedia design . While others have evaluated the usability of informal tools [ 7 , 10 , 11 , 17 ] , our evaluation is the first to empirically compare an informal tool to traditional prototyping tools . If we want designers to adopt informal tools , then we must show that these tools are better than existing tools for at least some aspects of early design . In our evaluation , we simulated an early design scenario as realistically as possible . We recruited professional designers and developed challenging design tasks representative of what a designer faces in practice . Each designer created an initial design for each of three design tasks using pencil and paper , DEMAIS , or Authoware and then communicated that design to a “client . ” Through questionnaires , inspection of design artifacts , and analysis of communication sessions , we measured the impact of the tools on the exploration and communication of behavior . The main results are that ( i ) DEMAIS was better than Authorware for both exploring and communicating behavior , ( ii ) DEMAIS was better than pencil and paper for communicating behavior , but not for exploring behavior , and ( iii ) DEMAIS was able to capture about ninety percent of a designer’s behavioral design ideas . Our results show that DEMAIS bridges the early investment / communication gap that exists among current multimedia design tools . RELATED WORK Interactive system designers often discuss the early investment / communication gap that exists between low - and high - fidelity prototyping tools [ 15 ] . Although low - fidelity tools are quick and easy to use , keep design discussions Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2003 , April 5 – 10 , 2003 , Ft . Lauderdale , Florida , USA . Copyright 2003 ACM 1 - 58113 - 630 - 7 / 03 / 0004… $ 5 . 00 . Ft . Lauderdale , Florida , USA • April 5 - 10 , 2003 Paper / Short Talks : Issues in Software Development away from unnecessary details , and make people feel comfortable proposing ideas [ 16 ] , they are ineffective for exploring and communicating behavioral design ideas [ 3 , 8 , 15 ] . To better explore and communicate behavioral design ideas , a designer can use a high - fidelity tool to build a functional prototype enabling her to directly experience those behavioral ideas . Using a high - fidelity tool , however , requires a designer to invest too much time and effort , impeding the early exploration of the design space [ 3 , 8 ] . To combine the advantages of low - and high - fidelity tools , thus bridging the early investment / communication gap , an informal design tool attempts to transform a designer’s rough sketch into a functional prototype [ 8 ] . Although an informal tool can enable electronic editing [ 5 ] , capture design rationale [ 6 ] , and facilitate collaborative design [ 7 ] , our focus is on whether an informal tool , DEMAIS , actually bridges the early investment / communication gap better than traditional multimedia design tools . Although video - based prototyping [ 12 ] also seeks to bridge this gap , our focus is on comparing DEMAIS to traditional prototyping tools . Although usability studies of informal tools have been conducted [ 7 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 17 ] , an empirical comparison of an informal tool to traditional prototyping tools has not . For example , to evaluate SILK , Landay et al . [ 8 ] tested how effectively a designer could use the tool to design a user interface and then communicate that design to others . They did not compare SILK to other tools such as pencil and paper or Visual Basic . To evaluate DENIM , Lin et al . [ 10 , 11 ] tested how effectively a designer could use the tool to design a web site . The authors did not compare DENIM to other web design tools such as pencil and paper or Microsoft FrontPage . Similar usability studies have been conducted for Designer’s Outpost [ 7 ] and SKETCH [ 17 ] . While evaluating the usability of an informal design tool is important ( indeed , we evaluated the usability of DEMAIS [ 1 ] ) , our evaluation seeks to answer the broader question of whether an informal design tool is actually better than existing tools for exploring and communicating behavior in early multimedia design . Our results will help guide future work on DEMAIS and provide valuable lessons for others working on informal design tools . DEMAIS – OVERVIEW Because we have described the implementation and use of DEMAIS elsewhere [ 1 , 2 ] , here we give just a brief overview of the tool . Using DEMAIS , a designer can : • Sketch , annotate , and edit electronic storyboards • Develop voice scripts and import audio , video and image content into a storyboard • Sketch temporal and interactive behavior using an expressive visual sketching language • Run the sketched behavior DEMAIS was developed for a graphic display tablet that enables a designer to sketch directly on the display . To create a design , DEMAIS provides storyboard , voice script , and multi - view editors . The storyboard editor provides a multi - layered canvas on which a designer can sketch ink strokes , enter text , and import audio , video , and image content . The voice script editor enables a designer to develop voice scripts and synchronize the playback of those scripts with actions on the storyboards . The multi - view editor enables a designer to sketch behavior between two storyboards or between a voice script and a storyboard . When a designer sketches an ink stroke that connects rectangular strokes , text objects , or imported media objects , DEMAIS interprets that stroke as a behavioral stroke . For each behavioral stroke , DEMAIS assigns a source event and destination action to it , represented by icons near the ends of the stroke . DEMAIS has mouse click , rollover , drag and drop , media , and timer events as well as navigation , transition , ( un ) highlight , ( un ) display , and media control actions . By modifying the attached icons , a designer can modify the behavior that a behavioral stroke represents . Figure 1 . A DEMAIS storyboard and multi - view from the second design task in our evaluation . The storyboard has four behavioral strokes and the multi - view has three . When the design is run , DEMAIS transforms the sketch into a low - fidelity , functional prototype . A behavioral stroke specifies that when the sketch is run and the specified event occurs on the source object , then the corresponding action should be applied to the destination object . Once run , DEMAIS transforms the sketch into a low - fidelity , functional prototype enabling a designer to directly experience the sketched behavior and share that experience with clients , colleagues , and end users . At playback , DEMAIS hides behavioral strokes and initially removes content that depends on an event for its display . In Figure 1 , we show a DEMAIS storyboard and multi - view in edit mode for the interacting with Native American tribes design task from our evaluation . When the storyboard is displayed in run mode , the video begins playing , and when it ends , the rectangle enclosing the Teton Sioux text is displayed and highlighted and the click to lean more text is displayed just below it . As specified in the multi - view , a designer can select the Teton Sioux text to navigate to a storyboard providing more information about that tribe . COMPARING DEMAIS TO PENCIL AND PAPER AND AUTHORWARE FOR EARLY MULTIMEDIA DESIGN We designed our evaluation to answer four questions : • Does the design tool used affect the exploration of behavioral design ideas early in the design process ? • Does the design tool used affect the communication of behavioral design ideas early in the design process ? • Does the design tool used affect the creativity of behavioral design ideas early in the design process ? • How effective is DEMAIS at capturing behavioral design ideas early in the design process ? We included pencil and paper in the evaluation because a designer almost always uses it as an early design tool . We included Authorware because designers involved in our earlier design study indicated that it was the best and most often used prototyping tool for multimedia applications [ 3 ] , and because it typifies most high - fidelity tools . In the evaluation , we simulated an early design scenario as realistically as possible . We recruited professional designers and developed challenging design tasks representative of what a designer faces in practice . Each designer created an initial design for each of three design tasks using pencil and paper , DEMAIS , or Authoware and then communicated that design to a “client . ” In the next sections , we describe the setup of the evaluation . Participants Six participants ( two female ) participated in the evaluation and were reimbursed for parking expenses . Participants were between 24 and 45 years in age . We recruited the participants to fill either a designer or client role . Three ( one female ) of the six participants filled the designer role in the evaluation . For this role , we recruited people who had ( i ) at least three years experience in professional multimedia design and ( ii ) at least three years experience in Authorware programming . The three participants filling the designer role met these requirements , however , we found that recruiting people who had artistic skills for multimedia design and technical skills for Authorware programming was very challenging and limited the evaluation . The three remaining participants filled the client role . Although this role did not require an artistic or computer skill , two of the clients had between two and five years of professional multimedia design experience while the third had some web design experience . We used the term “client” for this role because it was familiar to the participants . Design Stations Each tool was part of a design station in our lab . The pencil and paper station had a desk , a desktop computer for viewing content , sketch paper , translucent paper , tape , and non - colored and colored pencils . The Authorware station had a desk and desktop computer running Authorware 5 . 2 . The DEMAIS station had a desk and WACOM PL400 pen tablet attached to a desktop computer . When a designer was to use DEMAIS in a design session , the experimenter operated the tool ( acted as a scribe ) . The designer expressed her design ideas aloud while the experimenter captured those ideas with the tool . The experimenter did not offer advice or critiques during the design session . Although we wanted the designers to use the tool themselves , they stated that volunteering an additional 2 - 3 hours to learn the tool ( in addition to the three hours they were already volunteering ) was not possible . Because we were not evaluating the tool’s learnability , we did not believe this would be a serious drawback . Because the designers were already experienced with the other design tools , we did not provide assistance for those tools . To balance our design , we considered having a scribe at each design station but rejected this idea for two reasons : • A designer would be better skilled with the other tools than any scribe we recruited • A designer’s impressions of a tool may result more from the scribe than the tool itself . With our design , we limited this last issue to just DEMAIS . Design Tasks We created three design tasks , each corresponding to a section of an interactive application regarding the famous U . S . expedition led by Lewis and Clark in the early 1800s [ 9 ] . We chose the Lewis and Clark domain due to the rich context it affords for designing creative behavior . For each design task , we provided a designer with an audience description , information structure , and supporting content . We provided this information because it typifies what a designer is provided with in practice . The three tasks were : • Learning about the expedition members . Each designer was asked to design a section of content enabling a user to explore and learn about members of the expedition . We provided the designers with an information structure and content for four members of the expedition . • Exploring interactions with Native American tribes . Each designer was asked to design a section of content enabling a user to explore and learn about the expedition’s interactions with Native American tribes . We provided the designers with an information structure and content for two of those tribes . • Playing a game involving the expedition members . Each designer was asked to design an interactive game that tests a user’s factual knowledge of the four expedition members from the first design task . We provided the designers with two facts for each expedition member . We provided content to the designers to help guide the design , but they were not required to use it . Designers could assume they had any other content desired . The intended audience for each design task was a middle school student . The description of each design task followed a similar outline and fit on a single side of paper . We asked the designers to be as creative as possible in designing the behavior of a design and to not worry about future cost or implementation hurdles related to the design . Table 1 : Assignment to Each Task / Tool Combination DEMAIS Pencil and Paper Authorware Task 1 Designer A Client A Designer B Client B Designer C Client C Task 2 Designer B Client C Designer C Client A Designer A Client B Task 3 Designer C Client B Designer A Client C Designer B Client A Experimental Design The evaluation was a 3 ( task ) x 3 ( tool ) full - factorial , within - subjects design . We assigned the designer and client pairings to the task and tool combinations using a Latin Square ordering , subject to the constraints that no client would meet with the same designer or see the same tool twice . Table 1 shows the assignment of designers and clients to each task and tool combination . Although we wanted to assign more than one designer and client pair to each task and tool combination , we had difficulty recruiting participants who had the combined artistic and technical skills required for the designer role . Procedure When the participants arrived at the lab’s conference room ( staging room ) , we welcomed them and went through an informed consent process . We gave a brief overview of the evaluation and a fifteen minute slide presentation about DEMAIS . Afterward , we gave each designer a packet that identified her as designer A , B , or C and that contained the descriptions of the design tasks and the questionnaires . We gave each client a packet that identified her as client A , B , or C and that contained the critique sheets and questionnaires . The participants reviewed the packets , and after questions were answered , we gave them a tour of the design stations . Afterward , the clients went back to the staging room and the designers went to their assigned design station and began working on the first design task . We gave each designer thirty minutes to explore design ideas for the design task . After the design session , a designer met with a client for three minutes to communicate the design using the artifacts created with the tool . After the communication session , each designer went to the staging room and began filling out a session questionnaire . Each client remained at the design station and was given three minutes to critique the design . Although we did not include the critiques in the evaluation metrics , we believe having a client critique the design helped her assess how well she understood it . After the critique , each client returned to the staging room and filled out a session questionnaire . The procedure for the second and third design tasks followed this same procedure . After the third design task , each participant completed the appropriate post evaluation questionnaire . At each design station , we set up a video camera to record the design and communication sessions . The evaluation lasted about 3 hours . Measurements For several measurements , we asked participants to complete session and post evaluation questionnaires . As we discuss the measurements in the next sections , note that ratings were performed after each design task in a session questionnaire and rankings were performed after the final design task in a post evaluation questionnaire . We structured each rating response using a seven point Likert scale with 1 being a highly negative rating , 7 being a highly positive rating , and 4 being a neutral rating . For example , when a designer was asked to rate the usefulness of a tool for exploring behavior , the scale ranged from Not Useful ( 1 ) to Very Useful ( 7 ) with 4 being Neutral . We structured each ranking response using a matrix where a participant marked an ‘X’ in the most appropriate cell . A participant ranked the items from worst ( 1 ) to best ( 3 ) and could rank items the same . Exploration of Behavior To measure exploration of behavior , we : • Asked each designer to rate the usefulness of the design tool used for exploring behavior ( session ) • Asked each designer to rank the usefulness of the design tools for exploring behavior ( post ) • Counted behavioral elements in the design artifacts For the latter , we counted the storyboards , layers , temporal behaviors , and user interactions a designer created in each design session . For pencil and paper , creating a layer meant that a designer used a piece of translucent paper and creating a behavior meant a designer sketched a graphical mark , wrote a descriptive statement , or created a sequence of storyboards depicting that behavior . For Authorware , creating a storyboard meant that a designer filled a target of a Framework icon ( see [ 4 ] for a tutorial on Authorware ) . Communication of Behavior To measure communication of behavior , we : • Asked each designer to rate the usefulness of the tool used for communicating behavior to the client ( session ) • Asked each client to rate the usefulness of the tool used by the designer for understanding the behavior ( session ) • Asked each designer to rank the usefulness of the design tools for communicating behavior to a client ( post ) • Asked each client to rank the usefulness of the design tools for understanding behavior ( post ) • Counted the behavioral and non - behavioral references in each communication session To analyze a communication session , we segmented the conversation into discrete chunks and counted the chunks referring to a behavioral or non - behavioral element of the design . For example , the statement , “when the user selects this button , this video plays” would count as a behavioral reference and the statement “a picture of Jefferson goes here” would count as a non - behavioral reference . Creativity of Behavior To measure creativity of behavior , we : • Asked each designer to rank the creativity of the designs she created ( post ) • Asked each client to rank the creativity of the designs that were communicated to her ( post ) Because we felt creativity was a relative judgment , we did not ask participants to rate creativity after each session . Effectiveness of DEMAIS For DEMAIS , we counted the number of distinct event and action operators used , multi - views created , and “runs” of a design . We also analyzed the design session recordings and counted the requests for a behavior that the experimenter could not capture with the tool . In the post evaluation questionnaire , we asked each participant to list what she felt would be the strengths and weaknesses of using a fully - supported tool similar to DEMAIS for early design . Characterization of Design Artifacts For each tool , we show a sample of the artifacts created for the interacting with Native American tribes design task . Because artifacts created with DEMAIS were shown in Figure 1 , here we only show artifacts created with pencil and paper ( Figure 2 ) and Authorware ( Figure 3 ) . The complete set of artifacts for all tasks can be seen in [ 1 ] . RESULTS Because we had only one designer and client pair for each task and tool combination , we collapsed the data across design tasks and analyzed it as a single factor design with design tool as the factor . Because of the small sample size , Figure 2 . Sample of artifacts created with pencil and paper for the interacting with Native American tribes design task . Figure 3 . Sample of artifacts created with Authorware for the interacting with Native American tribes design task . we did not expect statistically significant effects , however , we report appropriate values when such effects occurred . In Tables 2 - 3 , we summarize the ratings and rankings from the designer and client questionnaires , respectively . In the tables , the row headings with a dark shade represent ratings ( scale from 1 to 7 ) while the row headings with a light shade represent rankings ( retrospective , scale from 1 - 3 ) . Higher numbers represent more positive scores . Table 2 : Designer Ratings and Rankings DEMAIS Pencil / Paper Author - ware Exploring behavior 7 , 6 , 5 7 , 6 , 6 7 , 3 , 2 Communicating behavior 7 , 7 , 5 5 , 5 , 6 5 , 4 , 4 Exploring behavior 2 , 3 , 2 1 , 3 , 2 3 , 1 , 2 Communicating behavior 3 , 3 , 2 1 , 3 , 2 2 , 1 , 2 Creativity of behavior 3 , 2 , 2 2 , 3 , 3 1 , 1 , 1 Table 3 : Client Ratings and Rankings DEMAIS Pencil / Paper Author - ware Understanding behavior 7 , 6 , 2 5 , 2 , 4 3 , 5 , 2 Understanding behavior 3 , 3 , 2 2 , 2 , 2 1 , 1 , 2 Creativity of behavior 3 , 2 , 2 2 , 3 , 3 1 , 1 , 1 Exploration of Behavior Designers rated pencil and paper as the most useful ( µ = 6 . 3 ) and Authorware as the least useful ( µ = 4 . 0 ) tool for exploring behavior while DEMAIS was rated a close second ( µ = 6 . 0 ) . Because our earlier design study indicated that designers often struggle to explore behavior with pencil and paper , we were somewhat surprised that it received the highest rating . Because a designer performed only a single iteration on a design , we may not have stressed exploration of behavior enough . If we had each designer perform a second iteration on a design , using client feedback as input , the difference in ratings may have been more pronounced . Designers ranked DEMAIS as the most useful ( µ = 2 . 3 ) and pencil and paper and Authorware as the least useful ( µ = 2 . 0 ) tools for exploring behavior . This result slightly contradicts the previous ratings where pencil and paper was rated the highest . The contradiction may be because a designer ranked the tools after using each of them and was able to make a more informed comparison . In Table 4 , we summarize elements of the design artifacts ( a “ - - - “ indicates the tool does not support the element ) . The data is consistent with the designers’ ratings and rankings of the tools for exploring behavior . When DEMAIS was used , designers created more storyboards and interactions than when using Authorware and created the same number of storyboards and interactions as when using pencil and paper . Designers explored more temporal behaviors when using DEMAIS than when using pencil and paper or Authorware . In each session , a designer utilized DEMAIS’s ability to run a design between six and ten times . Table 4 : Elements of Design Artifacts Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Total D E M A I S P n P A u t ho r w a r e D E M A I S P n P A u t ho r w a r e D E M A I S P n P A u t ho r w a r e D E M A I S P n P A u t ho r w a r e Storyboards 3 1 2 5 8 2 6 5 1 14 14 5 Layers 4 8 2 3 1 1 2 1 1 3 3 1 Temporal behaviors 0 4 5 8 0 0 1 2 0 9 6 5 Interactions 5 9 6 8 7 5 6 3 1 19 19 12 Design runs 7 - - - 3 6 - - - 2 10 - - - 0 23 - - 5 Although the designers had experience programming in Authorware , each struggled to build a substantive prototype in thirty minutes . Designers spent too much time working with the tool and not enough time exploring design ideas . If we allowed more time for the design tasks , it would only exacerbate this problem as the time a designer invests relative to the complexity of the design would only increase . One client described Authorware as a “very expensive form of pencil and paper , ” meaning that the tool required a large effort to build what was effectively a single screen of low - functional content . Together , these results show that DEMAIS supports the exploration of behavior better than Authorware and about the same as pencil and paper for early multimedia design . Table 5 : References in Communication Sessions DEMAIS Pencil / Paper Author - ware Behavior references 7 , 8 , 9 4 , 6 , 7 6 , 3 , 3 Non - behavior references 7 , 8 , 8 9 , 7 , 11 7 , 7 , 4 Communication of Behavior Designers rated DEMAIS as the most useful ( µ = 6 . 3 ) and Authorware as the least useful ( µ = 4 . 3 ) tool for communicating behavior to a client and this difference was significant ( alpha = . 10 , F ( 2 , 4 ) = 4 . 26 , p < . 10 ) . Clients rated DEMAIS as the most useful ( µ = 5 . 0 ) and Authorware as the least useful ( µ = 3 . 3 ) tool for understanding that behavior . Designers ranked DEMAIS as the most useful ( µ = 2 . 7 ) and Authorware as the least useful ( µ = 1 . 7 ) tool for communicating behavior . Similarly , clients ranked DEMAIS as the most useful ( µ = 2 . 7 ) and Authorware as the least useful ( µ = 1 . 3 ) tool for understanding that behavior and this difference was significant ( F ( 2 , 6 ) = 6 . 0 , p < . 04 ) . In Table 5 , we summarize the behavioral and non - behavioral references in the communication sessions . The data is consistent with the designer and client ratings and rankings of the tools for communicating behavior . When a designer and client discussed a design created with DEMAIS , they discussed the behavior of that design ( µ = 8 . 0 ) more often than when using pencil and paper ( µ = 5 . 7 ) or Authorware ( µ = 4 . 0 ) . The difference between DEMAIS and Authorware was significant ( F ( 2 , 6 ) = 5 . 74 , p < . 04 ) . When a designer and client discussed a design created with pencil and paper , however , they discussed the non - behavioral aspects of that design ( µ = 9 . 0 ) more often than when using DEMAIS ( µ = 7 . 7 ) or Authorware ( µ = 6 . 0 ) . Thus , when a designer and another person discuss a design using a low - fidelity , functional prototype , the discussion gravitates towards the behavioral aspects of the design , and when they discuss a design using static artifacts , the discussion gravitates towards the non - behavioral aspects . Because designs created with Authorware typically had only a single screen of content with few interactions , the discussions of those designs had the fewest references to both the behavioral and non - behavioral aspects of a design . Together , these results show that DEMAIS supports the communication of behavior better than both Authorware and pencil and paper for early multimedia design . Perceived Creativity of Designs Designers ranked the designs created with pencil and paper as the most creative ( µ = 2 . 7 ) and unanimously ranked the designs created with Authorware as the least creative ( µ = 1 . 0 ) . Designers ranked the designs created with DEMAIS slightly lower than pencil and paper ( µ = 2 . 3 ) . The design tool used had a main effect on a designer’s ranking of creativity ( F ( 2 , 6 ) = 10 . 5 , p < . 01 ) and this effect was due to the differences between pencil and paper and Authorware and between DEMAIS and Authorware . Clients ranked the creativity of designs in the same pattern as designers . The design tool used had a main effect on a client’s ranking of creativity ( F ( 2 , 6 ) = 8 . 0 , p < . 02 ) and this effect was due to the differences between pencil and paper and Authorware and between DEMAIS and Authorware . This result may have occurred because either the difficulty of using Authorware inhibited a designer from representing her design ideas or because a designer simplified her ideas to ensure they could be represented using the tool in thirty minutes . Either way , designers and clients both viewed the designs created with Authorware as the least creative . Table 6 : Elements of DEMAIS Artifacts Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Total Distinct Source Events 2 3 3 5 Distinct Actions 2 5 3 5 Multi - views 1 2 1 4 Unfulfilled requests 2 2 1 5 Effectiveness of DEMAIS In Table 6 , we summarize the use of elements for DEMAIS . In the DEMAIS sessions , five of the nine source events and five of the eleven actions in DEMAIS were used at least once . The experimenter captured 28 of 31 behavioral design requests while five requests went unfilled ( two dealt with non - behavioral issues ) . The unfulfilled requests were : • Sketching ink strokes in different colors to depict background elements such as grass , trees , and rivers • Capturing an entire storyboard as an image , then resizing and placing it on another storyboard • Sketching an animation of a river flowing and an animation of footsteps being made across a landscape • Displaying the contents of a text variable We are exploring integrating these features into DEMAIS . Strengths and Weaknesses of DEMAIS Based on the results of the evaluation as well as discussions with the participants , the strengths of DEMAIS were : • The storyboard model and sketching interface . The storyboard model and sketching interface fit well with how a designer verbally described her design ideas in the design sessions . For example , designers used phrases such as “let’s create a new storyboard” and “let’s sketch an outline of a river on this storyboard . ” • The behavior sketching model . Specifying behavior by sketching ink strokes between recognized objects on a storyboard or multi - view fit well with how a designer expressed behavioral design ideas in the design sessions . For example , designers used phrases such as “when the video ends , I want this text to display” and “when this storyboard is displayed , I want the video to start . ” • The visual sketching language . Using DEMAIS , the experimenter captured about ninety percent of the designers’ behavioral design ideas . Because behavior is sketched along with content , the designers seemed to understand how the experimenter was “programming” the behavior with the tool . One designer stated that DEMAIS was “very intuitive and that a person could become quickly proficient in using the tool . ” • The ability to run a design . Towards the middle and latter stages of a design session , a designer began requesting to run the design in DEMAIS . In run mode , a designer assessed the behavior of the design and used that assessment to guide further exploration . The weaknesses of DEMAIS were : • The lack of a structural view of a design . DEMAIS does not enable a user to view structural relationships among storyboards in a design . Two of the clients mentioned that seeing only a single storyboard at a time made it difficult to understand the “big picture” of a design . Although a designer can view up to six storyboards in the multi - view editor , we designed this editor for specifying and viewing behavioral relationships , not structural relationships , among the storyboards . • The requirement to enter text via the keyboard . For DEMAIS to recognize text , a designer must enter the text using a keyboard , slowing the design process . In the future , we want to explore integrating real - time handwriting recognition software into the tool . LESSONS LEARNED AND FUTURE WORK From the evaluation , we learned that : • DEMAIS is better than Authorware for both exploring and communicating behavior . Designers rated and ranked DEMAIS better than Authorware for exploring and communicating behavior and clients rated and ranked DEMAIS better than Authorware for understanding that behavior . The designs created with DEMAIS were more substantive and ranked as more creative than the designs created with Authorware . • DEMAIS is better than pencil and paper for communicating behavior . Designers and clients rated and ranked DEMAIS better than pencil and paper for communicating and understanding behavior . One client stated “although pencil and paper gave me the feel of the big picture , I had no idea how a user was going to interact with the system . ” Another client stated “DEMAIS helped me understand the design because I could see the interaction working . ” Also , a designer and client discussed behavior more often when using DEMAIS than when using pencil and paper . For exploring behavior , designers rated and ranked DEMAIS about the same as pencil and paper . • Pencil and paper is the best tool for exploring and communicating the structure of a design . Several participants felt that pencil and paper was the best tool for exploring and communicating the “big picture” of a design as a designer could juxtapose artifacts in physical space . Providing a zooming canvas in DEMAIS may help address this issue , but it results more from a small display size than not having a zooming canvas . Even with a zooming canvas , a person can only see scaled sections of a design at a time , which is different from seeing design artifacts juxtaposed in physical space . • DEMAIS captures about ninety percent of a designer’s behavioral design ideas . This is not because DEMAIS enables a designer to sketch an inordinate amount of behavior , indeed , it cannot . We believe the reason for this result is that a designer explores only the gist of her behavioral design ideas early in the design process and that DEMAIS is effective at capturing that gist . • DEMAIS bridges the early investment / communication gap among traditional multimedia design tools . Our results show that DEMAIS is better than pencil and paper for communicating behavior while impeding the design process less than a high - fidelity prototyping tool . Based on our experience developing and evaluating DEMAIS , we see several opportunities for future work : • Enable a designer to sketch 2D animations and integrate those animations into the broader design • Explore the use of a large display enabling sections of a design to be viewed at once without zooming • Help a designer understand the boundary between behaviors that can and cannot be specified with our tool • Explore tangible interfaces that enable a designer to specify temporal and interactive behavior through the manipulation of physical artifacts ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the participants who volunteered their time to participate in the evaluation . REFERENCES 1 . Bailey , B . P . DEMAIS : A Behavior - Sketching Tool for Early Multimedia Design . PhD Thesis , Univ . of Minnesota , 2002 . 2 . Bailey , B . P . , J . A . Konstan and J . V . Carlis . DEMAIS : Designing Multimedia Applications with Interactive Storyboards . In Proc . ACM Multimedia , 2001 , pp . 241 - 250 . 3 . Bailey , B . P . , J . A . Konstan and J . V . Carlis . Supporting Multimedia Designers : Towards More Effective Design Tools . In Proceedings of Multimedia Modeling , 2001 , pp . 267 - 286 . 4 . Bailey , B . P . and J . A . Konstan . Authoring Interactive Media . Encyc . Elec . and Electronics Eng . , John Wiley & Sons , 2000 . 5 . Gross , M . D . and E . Y . Do . Ambiguous Intentions : A Paper - like Interface for Creative Design . In Proceedings User Interface and Software Technology , 1996 , pp . 183 - 192 . 6 . Herbsleb , J . D . and E . Kuwana . Preserving Knowledge in Design Projects : What Designers Need to Know . In Proceedings of CHI ' 93 , pp . 7 - 14 . 7 . Klemmer , S . , et al . The Designers’ Outpost : A Tangible Interface for Collaborative Web Site Design . In Proceedings of UIST , 2001 , pp . 1 - 10 . 8 . Landay , J . A . and B . Myers . Interactive Sketching for the Early Stages of User Interface Design . In Proc . CHI’95 , pp . 43 - 50 . 9 . Lewis , M . , W . Clark and B . Devoto ( Editor ) . The Journals of Lewis and Clark . Houghton Mifflin Co , 1997 . 10 . Lin , J . , M . Thomsen and J . A . Landay . A Visual Sketching Language for Sketching Large and Complex Interactive Designs . In Proc . CHI’02 , pp . 307 - 314 . 11 . Lin , J . , M . W . Newman , J . I . Hong and J . A . Landay . DENIM : Finding a Tighter Fit Between Tools and Practice for Web Site Design . In Proc . CHI’00 , pp . 510 - 517 . 12 . Mackay , W . E . , A . V . Ratzer and P . Janecek . Video artifacts for Design : Bridging the Gap Between Abstraction and Detail . Designing Interactive Systems , 2000 , pp . 72 - 82 . 13 . Newman , M . W . and J . A . Landay . Sitemaps , Storyboards , and Specifications : A Sketch of Web Site Design Practice . Designing Interactive Systems , 2000 , pp . 263 - 274 . 14 . Rieber , L . P . Getting Interactive with Authorware : Building Simulations and Games . http : / / www . nowhereroad . com / authorware / index . html . 15 . Rudd , J . , K . Stern and S . Isensee . The Low vs . High - Fidelity Prototyping Debate . Interactions , 3 ( 1 ) : 76 - 85 , 1996 . 16 . Strothotte , T . , B . Preim , A . Raab , J . Schumann and D . R . Forsey . How to Render Frames and Influence People . In Proc . Eurographics ' 94 , pp . 455 - 466 . 17 . Zeleznik , R . C . , et al . SKETCH : An Interface for Sketching 3D Scenes . In Proc . SIGGRAPH , 1996 , pp . 163 - 170 .