An Exploratory Study on Visual Exploration of Model Simulations by Multiple Types of Experts Nadia Boukhelifa 1 Anastasia Bezerianos 2 Ioan Cristian Trelea 1 Nathalie Mejean Perrot 1 Evelyne Lutton 1 1 UMR GMPA , AgroParisTech , INRA , Univ . Paris - Saclay 2 Univ . Paris - Sud & CNRS ( LRI ) , Inria , Univ . Paris - Saclay { firstname . lastname } 1 @ inra . fr 2 @ lri . fr Visualisation Optimisation Model Simulations Experimental System Real world Multiple Computational Stages Multiple Types of Experts Experts’ Feedback Interaction Results Figure 1 : The proposed model exploration framework : multiple experts interact with a visual representation of optimised simulation results . Experts’ feedback impacts the exploration at all stages of the computational pipeline . ABSTRACT Experts in different domains rely increasingly on simula - tion models of complex processes to reach insights , make decisions , and plan future projects . These models are often used to study possible trade - offs , as experts try to optimise multiple conflicting objectives in a single investigation . Un - derstanding all the model intricacies , however , is challenging for a single domain expert . We propose a simple approach to support multiple experts when exploring complex model results . First , we reduce the model exploration space , then present the results on a shared interactive surface , in the form of a scatterplot matrix and linked views . To explore how multiple experts analyse trade - offs using this setup , we carried out an observational study focusing on the link be - tween expertise and insight generation during the analysis process . Our results reveal the different exploration strategies and multi - storyline approaches that domain experts adopt during trade - off analysis , and inform our recommendations for collaborative model exploration systems . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Empirical studies in visualization ; CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland Uk © 2019 Association for Computing Machinery . This is the author’s version of the work . It is posted here for your personal use . Notforredistribution . ThedefinitiveVersionofRecordwillbepublished in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings ( CHI 2019 ) , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300874 . KEYWORDS model exploration ; collaboration ; trade - off analysis ; scat - terplot matrix ; visualization ; insight ; expertise ; common ground ; qualitative study 1 INTRODUCTION As our knowledge of complex processes increases , to conduct their work domain experts rely often on the use of models , i . e . , abstract representations of entities and relationships within a specific domain or process . They have to manipulate these sometimes complex models for their daily work to reach insights , make decisions , and plan future projects . For example , agronomic engineers who want to propose robust wheat fertilisation strategies to farmers , need to account for the wheat growth process and how it is affected by soil and weather conditions . To do this , they manipulate existing wheat growth models [ 6 , 26 ] that help them explore how , for example , a late fertilisation impacts wheat yield and quality , and whether the outcome changes depending on weather conditions . To effectively manipulate such models , domain experts currently face three key challenges pertaining to : the multiple competing objectives experts have to handle , the complex exploration space they need to navigate through , and the multiple expertise required for model understanding . First , domain experts have to deal with trade - offs . Their work often attempts to reconcile multiple competing ob - jectives in a single investigation [ 49 ] . For instance , agro - nomic engineers look for fertalisation strategies that on the one hand maximise yield , and on the other hand reduce the amount of supplied fertilisers , and the nitrogen loss [ 15 , 44 ] . Second , domain experts often resort to model simulations to explore trade - offs that can generate complex outcomes . The results of such simulations are huge numerical data a r X i v : 1902 . 01721v1 [ c s . H C ] 5 F e b 2019 files which are difficult to explore manually . Yet , finding ro - bust solutions cannot be done automatically , since resolving conflicts between multiple criteria necessitates subjective human judgement [ 49 ] . For example , agronomic engineers use their expertise to specify the acceptable threshold for wheat quality , and how much delay farmers would tolerate before they can supply fertilisers . Third , understanding the model intricacies is challenging , even for domain experts . Such models are often written by third parties ( modelling experts or other domain experts ) , and require extensive technical knowledge to understand . This challenge can be amplified when domain experts are only specialists in part of the underlying process . For exam - ple , one agronomic engineer may be an expert in fertilisation strategies for one environment , but does not fully understand the impact of climate on other geographical regions . Given the complexity of the modelled process , the model intrica - cies and the exploration space , it is rare for a single domain expert to fully comprehend all those aspects in depth . Previous work with domain experts from agronomy [ 5 ] , highlights the lack of accessible setups and visual support tools to manipulate complex models and trade - off spaces . This observation may well apply to other domains where complex data and model spaces are analysed [ 4 ] . Before building such support tools , we need to understand how do - main experts explore models , including their trade - off spaces . We propose a simple setup for model exploration , and a user study that adopts it , in order to better understand how multiple domain experts explore complex models . Our user study is based on two model use - cases [ 26 , 34 ] . Each use - case consists of two case studies of real scenarios explored by experts . Our method ( Figure 1 ) consists of first conducting a Multi - objective Optimisation ( MO ) to reduce the model exploration space . This results in a multi - dimensional Pareto Front , which is explored visually using a scatterplot matrix ( SPLOM ) and linked 2D views on a shared interactive surface ( Figure 2 ) . In each use - case , we recruited participants with different expertise , covering the study domain , the numeri - cal model , the simulation and optimisation , and the Pareto front visualization . Such a setup ensures that the various types of insights and expertise are aligned , and facilitates the validation of the findings from different perspectives [ 11 ] . We contribute : ( 1 ) A simple setup that facilitates the visual exploration and validation of complex models by synchronis - ing expertise from the study domain , modelling , optimisation and visualization . ( 2 ) An observational study using the setup , that inspects the role of expertise in insight generation dur - ing model - exploration and trade - off analysis . Our results revealed iterative analysis approaches with branching sce - narios . We identified analysis scenarios where multiple types of experts examine together new and refined research ques - tions and hypotheses ( new , refine , alternative , compare ) , and other scenarios where they learn to appropriate the tool and setup ( initial ) , and attempt to recap and establish common ground ( storytelling ) . And ( 3 ) design recommendations for collaborative model exploration systems . 2 RELATED WORK The nature of sensemaking activities and the cognitive pro - cesses involved have been the subject of established work [ 28 , 41 ] , with recent studies focusing on how groups establish common ground [ 12 , 13 , 21 , 56 ] , uncover hidden knowl - edge [ 14 , 22 ] , and engage with large analyses [ 20 , 27 , 37 , 38 , 40 ] . In terms of general sensemaking , the data - frame model [ 28 ] describes several key macrocogintive processes relevant to our own investigation , including connecting data to a frame ( an explanation reflecting person’s compiled expe - rience ) , reframing , elaborating , questioning and comparing frames . The more recent work detail additional behavioural and analytical processes observed in collaborative settings . Our work is orthogonal , focusing on the role of expertise . In terms of analysis methods , our work is similar to [ 23 ] who performed an insight - based user study to understand how analysts reach insight during visual exploration . Our focus , however , is on collaborative model exploration , in particular for trade - off analysis . Insight and Expertise Insight is considered the goal of visualization [ 7 ] . How - ever , there is no consensus on the exact meaning of the term . North [ 35 ] focuses on the key characteristics of insight , which are complexity , depth , quality , unexpectedness and rel - evance . In contrast , Chang et al . [ 9 ] distinguish spontaneous insight from the insight traditionally described in visualiza - tion , which they describe is about knowledge - building and model - confirmation , and where schematic structures , such as a mental model , are important to find patterns as well as to infer them . Furthermore , Pousman et al . [ 43 ] explore the notion of multiple types of insights for a broad range of user groups and describe analytic , awareness , social and reflective insights . Considering insight as a process rather than the end result , Yi et al . [ 58 ] describe four key processes of how people reach insight : provide overview , adjust , detect pattern , and match mental model . We follow Saraiya et al . ’s [ 48 ] definition of insight as “an individual observation about the data by the participant , a unit of discovery” . The insights discussed in this paper are the result of confronting single or multiple expertise with data and model artefacts . In terms of key characteristics , similar to Kounios et al . [ 29 ] , we consider insight any deep realisation , whether it happens suddenly or not . Another type of knowledge that we are interested in in this study is expertise . Expertise is broadly defined as highly - specialised domain - specific knowledge [ 10 ] . It can be in the form of tacit knowledge , defined as knowledge that cannot be explicitly stated or transferred to other people [ 42 ] ; or it can be more declarative or procedural . This type of expertise can be articulated linguistically [ 19 ] and , thus , may be captured using think - aloud protocols , interviews and questionnaires . Glaser and Chi [ 10 ] describe key characteristics of experts across domains . For instance , experts typically take a long time analysing a problem qualitatively before attempting to solve it . During this incubation period , they try to compre - hend the situation , build a mental presentation of its core elements , and review the problem from different angles be - fore attempting to implement a solution [ 36 , 51 ] . We are interested in insight generation during collabora - tive model exploration and the role of explicit expertise in this context . We consider expertise the background knowl - edge that allows domain experts to reach new and deeper insights from interacting with the model representation . Model Exploration Model exploration is an iterative process of discovery and refinement , which consists of examining the entities and relationships that underpin models . It can be carried out by the model builders themselves ( model producers ) , or by the problem owners who use such models to study a specific domain or process ( model consumers ) . The exploration can be manual , automatic or semi - automatic . Manual exploration consists of experimenting with different input parameters and any constraints to launch model simulations . Often this is a trial and error process [ 49 ] . Automatic exploration relies on algorithms , such as from genetic or evolutionary computa - tion , to systematically explore the model search space . Semi - automatic approaches take into account human feedback to steer the exploration . The outcome of model exploration is often insight that informs model design and implementation , or improves our understanding of the modelled phenomena . Our aim is to understand how experts explore model pa - rameter spaces in the presence of conflicting criteria . To the best of our knowledge , there are no user studies documenting how experts explore simulation model trade - off spaces using a collaborative setup that unites model consumers ( study domain experts ) and producers ( modelling experts ) . Trade - off Analysis and Pareto Optimality We call trade - off analysis the type of analysis users per - form to reach optimal decisions in the presence of multiple conflicting model objectives . Conflicting objectives , or crite - ria , are typical when exploring alternative options in many domains including agronomy . Cost is typically one of the main criteria ( e . g . , financial and environmental cost of sup - plying fertilisers ) , together with some measures of desired quantity or quality ( e . g . , wheat yield and protein content ) . An approach to identify “good” solutions to multiple objec - tive problems is Pareto optimality [ 30 , 31 ] . This technique produces a diverse set of compromise points between con - flicting objectives . Within these points , there exists a set of non - dominated points called the Pareto Front ( PF ) [ 30 ] , where no objective can be improved without sacrificing at least one other objective . During trade - off analysis , decision makers select which PF solutions work best according to their expertise and preferences . Visualizing and exploring the PF is an important step in multi - criteria decision making [ 54 ] . However , representing this set for more than three objectives is challenging [ 3 , 24 , 54 ] . Tušar and Filipič [ 54 ] provide a comprehensive review of visualization techniques for Pareto front approximations in evolutionary MO , including among others scatterplot ma - trices , parallel coordinates , principal component analysis , and their own technique called prosection . The scatterplot matrix technique shows all the bivariate projections of the solution space , presented in a table . This is considered to be an intuitive approach [ 54 ] , albeit not very scalable since decision makers cannot see all dominance relationships at once . In our study we consider small multi - objective problems , of up to eight objectives , and we use a large display to overcome the problem of screen space . 3 EXPLORATION APPROACH AND SETUP To support multiple experts explore complex models , we combine : data pre - processing , a visualization tool running on a physical setup , and a coverage of multiple expertise . Data Preprocessing . The types of complex models we are dealing with are often explored through simulations . Depend - ing on their research questions , experts may run hundreds or even thousands such simulations , by altering the input parameters , resulting in possibly thousands of alternative simulation results that they wish to explore . Visualising the relationships between input and output parameters could help experts make sense of their data , but visually exploring such large datasets can be daunting . In an attempt to make the problem more tractable and easier to visualise , we rely on the observation that experts are often interested in reconciling multiple competing objec - tives [ 49 ] . We adopt a pre - processing step of calculating the Pareto front [ 30 ] of the simulation results , i . e . , identify the list of non - dominated data points ( simulations ) that are pos - sible solutions to the MO problem . The criteria to optimise are specified a - priori by the domain experts . To generate the Pareto front data , we used the state - of - the - art algorithm in MO optimisation NSGA - II [ 16 ] when we had access to the model source code ( wine use - case ) . In the absence of the latter , we used a classical MO algorithm [ 57 ] as a simple filter applied to the simulation files data ( wheat use - case ) . Visualization Platform and Physical Setup . To visualise the Pareto front data points , we used a SPOLM - based tool [ 2 , 18 ] that has been successfully used to explore multi - dimensional data . Scatterplot visulizations are often used to show relation - ships between two dimensions or characterise distributions of data points [ 17 , 45 ] , and thus are appropriate for visual - ising relationships between objectives ( to show trade - offs ) . Our tool has a SPLOM , and allows multiple query selections ( differentiated by colour ) to help experts narrow their search space to important parameters [ 54 ] . The system also provides a bookmark history of past query selections and a means to store “favourite” views and queries . Finally , experts can enter new combined dimensions manually through a mathematical formula field , or to evolve them automatically . Previous work has shown that allowing experts to test new dimensions is important to the exploration of model trade - offs [ 2 ] . Given that we are targeting a joint exploration between multiple experts , we provide a physical setup that could foster collab - oration [ 25 ] . As such , we instrument a room with a shared touch - enabled display that host the main visualization . Expertise Diversity and Stages . From our experience in the domains of agronomy and food process engineering , there are three types of expertise that appear at multiple stages in research related to complex processes [ 39 ] . Domain expertise usually comes first and informs the next stage , the modelling process . Modelling expertise comes next , and communication between experts of these two stages can be tight , especially when models are first developed . It is also common for optimisation expertise to follow , for example , for parameter estimation and tunning [ 33 ] . Optimisation experts often have to work closely with model builders and domain experts to understand model input and output , and to specify pertinent optimisation criteria and constraints . This three - way collaboration is iterative , and currently appears to be carried out in an ad - hoc asynchronous manner . Importantly , a single expert rarely understands all stages ( Table 1 ) . Our approach interjects another stage of expertise , that of interactive visualization . By bringing the four expertise together in a synchronous fashion , we hope that our experts will not only gain insights that can generate new research on the biological processes , but also help form hypotheses about the modelling , optimisation and visualization processes . 4 STUDY DESIGN We conducted an observational study to understand how multiple types of experts explore models using the SPLOM - based visualization tool described in section 3 , when they are considering multi - criteria trade - offs . The goal of the study was to investigate the following research questions : [ Q1 ] what strategies domain experts adopt to explore trade - offs during model exploration . Figure 2 : Study setup . ( Top ) Screenshot of the SPLOM tool with the matrix on the left and the main scatterplot on the right . ( Bottom ) : broad view of the room , showing individual laptops and flipchart . Figure relates to case study CS1a . [ Q2 ] how insight is reached during trade - off analysis . [ Q3 ] how domain experts interpret findings from the visu - alization through model abstraction and optimisation . [ Q4 ] what role the different expertise play in this context . Participants Expertise . We had 12 participants ( five female ) including four co - authors of this paper ( optimisation and visualiza - tion experts ) . The mean age was 44 . 5 years . In terms of expertise overlap , most participants had double expertise ( 8 participants ) , in particular domain - model expertise ( 5 partic - ipants ) due to long term usage of the model ( mean 4 . 6 years ) . One participant had three types of expertise domain - model - optimisation ( Table 1 ) . Domain expertise ranged from 3 – 30 years ( mean 14 . 4 ) , 1 – 14 years for the models ( mean 4 . 2 ) , and 2 – 10 years for optimisation ( mean 5 . 4 ) . Apart from the visual - ization and optimisation experts ( co - authors of this paper ) , only one domain expert had prior experience with the tool used in the study . All were researchers with titles such as lec - turer , professor , permanent researcher or research engineer . One participant was a final year PhD student . Recruitment . Participants were recruited from an agron - omy research centre in INRA and collaborating institutions . The recruitment procedure drew on previous collaborations between the authors and the different participants , or be - tween participants . However , these collaborations had not previously united all of the expertise covered in this study . P # Field UC Domain Model Opti Vis 1 Microbiological engineering 1 2 Bioprocess engineering 1 3 Physicochemistry 1 4 Microbiological engineering 1 5 Bioprocess engineering 1 6 Oenology 1 7 Process engineering 1 8 Agronomy 2 9 Food engineering 2 10 Optimisation 1 , 2 11 Optimisation 1 , 2 12 Visualization 1 , 2 Table 1 : Study participants for the wine use - case UC1 and wheat use - case UC2 , their field of work , and exper - tise in the study domain , the model , the optimisation procedure and the visualization tool used in the study . Study Procedure and Apparatus Prior to the study , an optimisation expert held a brief inter - view with domain and model experts to discuss the objectives they want to optimise and the parameters they would like to explore . They then calculated the Pareto fronts . The actual study was carried out in two sessions , that we call use - cases based on the research area of the domain and model experts . In the first use - case , a wine fermentation model was explored , and in the second a wheat - crop model . Each use - case was run in two parts ( a and b ) , on two different days , that we refer to as case studies . Each part lasted on average 123 minutes , and a different Pareto front for the same model was explored . We made sure all types of expertise were present . There was no overlap of participants between the two use - cases , other than the visualization and optimisation expertise . Participants were seated around a touch - enabled surface , and a flip - chart was available in case they wanted to take any notes outside the tool . Participants were asked to bring their own laptops , where we installed the same exploration software in order for them to perform a training task ( Fig - ure 2 ) . The study took place in one research institute hosting a 3M Multi - Touch , 65 " UHD - 4K display . At the beginning of each use - case we introduced the tool , then we asked participants to perform a training task [ 2 ] . The next part of the study consisted of an open exploration task using a Pareto front dataset that was prepared before - hand . Participants were encouraged to re - discover what they knew about their data before searching for new insights [ 2 ] . We asked participants to think aloud and verbalise their thoughts . A study facilitator was present to answer experts’ questions and discuss their findings . In some occasions , the facilitator asked participants to explain the insights they found and to clarify whether these were new or confirma - tions of known findings . The sessions were video recorded and user interactions with the visualization tool were logged . After the study , participants filled in a short questionnaire Case Study Model # Objectives # Parameters # Points CS1a Wine ( red ) [ 34 ] 8 6 1000 CS1b Wine ( white ) [ 34 ] 8 6 1000 CS2a Wheat [ 26 ] 3 15 64 CS2b Wheat [ 26 ] 3 19 13601 Table 2 : Models and Pareto fronts datasets . to collect demographic information , and to self - assess their own expertise ( using a 5 - point Likert scale , and number of years in practice ) . We considered participants experts if they selected “3” or above as their expertise score . Models and Pareto Fronts Datasets In both use - cases , we used an optimisation algorithm to cre - ate a Pareto front that combines objectives ( dimensions to optimise ) and other parameters 11 ( Table 2 ) . Domain experts in the first use - case sought to maximise wine aroma ( three esters ) , and minimise undesired compounds ( higher alco - hols ) and the energy required to control the fermentation in red ( CS1a ) and white ( CS1b ) wine . In the first case study of the wheat use - case ( CS2a ) , domain experts searched for interesting wheat crop fertilisation strategies that maximise yield , protein content and minimise nitrogen loss to the en - vironment . A second Pareto front was generated in the last case study ( CS2b ) as domain experts wanted this time to find fertilisation strategies that maximise yield and minimise ni - trogen dose and loss . We note that the results of CS2a helped create the new Pareto front for the subsequent case study ( CS2b ) , as domain experts identified new research questions that take into account a new set of objectives . Data Collection and Video Coding Events Identified The data we collected consists of 494 minutes of video record - ings , log files , and observational notes . Video annotation was carried out using an annotation software ( chronoviz . com ) in two main iterative passes . In the first pass , two authors in - dependently watched one hour of CS1a , and using an initial coding scheme , coded the video as a sequence of discrete events . The two evaluators then met to compare codes and resolve conflicts and inconsistencies . In the second phase , two evaluator used this scheme to annotate the rest of the videos . After coding each video , the two evaluators met to discuss annotation codes and resolve any new conflicts . The inter - rater reliability scores for the four case studies video coding were : 77 . 19 % , 88 . 63 % , 86 . 36 % , and 87 . 09 % . Events . A coded event is characterised by a start time , type , actor , and object . The type of the event was assigned from an initial annotation scheme related to our research questions , and agreed upon prior to coding . It had three coarse cate - gories : Human - Human Interaction , Insight , and Expertise . 1 1 . In the visualization tool both objectives and parameters are simple data dimensions . An event is further characterised by an actor , referring to the type of expertise used by the participant who triggered the event : i . e . domain , model , optimisation or visualization expertise ( Table 1 ) . By event object , we mean the point of focus of the event . Each event is assigned to a single category type , and is associated with a single actor and object . The final annotation scheme contains six main categories : • Human - Human Interaction ( HHI ) , 31 . 59 % : discussions between participants about the event objects listed below . • Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , 41 . 32 % : user inter - actions with the tool . We also coded whether a dimension is aggregated and whether it was an optimisation objective . • Human - Paper Interaction ( HPI ) , 2 . 56 % : events where participants wrote down notes during the exploration . • Insight , 13 . 84 % : a surprising or unexpected finding about the objects below , including new research questions and hy - pothesis ( 11 . 35 % of all insights ) . We also distinguish between new ( 80 . 78 % ) and update ( 19 . 22 % ) insights . • Expertise , 9 . 76 % : explicitly expressed knowledge related to the domain , model , optimisation or visualization . • Action , 0 . 9 % : plans that go beyond the current exploration , e . g . , plans to carry out a new biological experiments . Three of the main categories ( Human - Human Interaction , Insight and Expertise ) , operate on the following seven objects : • Alignment , 6 . 23 % : how well or not the observed patterns or findings relate to , or align with , existing knowledge in the domain , the model , the optimisation and visualization . • Correlation , 11 . 44 % : relationships or dependencies between data dimensions . • Criteria , 21 . 09 % : specification of data dimensions or com - bination of dimensions to use as a search criteria , to better answer a research question . Search criteria were created in the visualization tool using coloured lasso selections . • Dimension , 6 . 45 % : events related to data dimensions , e . g . , weights of combined dimensions and threshold values . • Exploration Method , 19 . 57 % : strategy used to explore the data or the model expressed in a non - technical way . • Tool , 17 . 35 % : technical details related to the tool . • Trajectory , 17 . 84 % : exploration of the trajectory of one or more parameters / objectives , and their temporal evolution . Scenarios . While coding , we noticed that the exploration was structured in what appears to be linked mini - stories , often with logical transitions . In a follow - up coding pass , we marked the beginning of new scenarios , and their transi - tion objects ( inter - rater reliability = 94 . 44 % ) . We categorised the 70 identified scenarios into six types : • Initial , 4 / 70 : preliminary exploration , often with the aim to explain or verify the dimensions of the Pareto front data set , and to try out the tool functionalities . • New , 17 / 70 : exploration that attempts to answer a new re - search question or hypothesis that is different from the pre - vious scenario . • Refine , 30 / 70 : refinement from a previous research question or hypothesis , e . g . , modifying existing search criteria . • Compare , 7 / 70 : contrasting current and previous scenarios , e . g . , in terms of generated insights . • Alternative , 3 / 70 : branching out from a previous research question or hypothesis to explore an alternative exploration path , e . g . , focusing on different exploration objects . • Storytelling , 9 / 70 : re - cap scenarios to share findings , inter - pret results and summarise the exploration steps . In total , we generated 3307 events , 1686 for the first use - case and 1621 for the second use - case . We identified 70 sce - narios , 39 in the first use - case and 31 in the second . The mean duration of a scenario is ≈ 7 minutes ( min = 1m , max = 25m ) , and contains on average 47 events ( min = 5 , max = 133 ) . 5 ANALYSIS OF VIDEO SEGMENTS Our analysis is based on 70 trade - off exploration scenarios we identified during data collection . We carried out three types of analysis to answer our research questions , focusing on patterns and strategies of trade - off exploration [ Q1 ] , insight generation [ Q2 ] , and the role of expertise in this context , in particular for the alignment of findings [ Q3 , Q4 ] . We also provide a qualitative overview of participants’ subjective feedback on the exploration pipeline and the visualization tool . Scenarios and Trade - off exploration [ Q1 ] Method . To analyse our results we took a top down approach . We first looked at scenarios and how they relate to the ex - ploration . We created a visualization of scenario sequences per case study session ( Figure 4 ) , where each coloured chip corresponds to one identified scenario . The duration of the scenario is not encoded . To analyse the details of the sce - narios themselves , we created two interactive visualizations of event sequences . In the first visualization , coloured chips correspond to an event category type ( Figure 3 - left ) , and in the second , to an exploration object type ( Figure 3 - right ) . Each chip line ( annotation line ) , corresponds to one scenario . Scenarios are ordered chronologically , from top to bottom . Overall Exploration and Collaboration Patterns . The visual analysis of scenarios in Figure 4 allowed us to make three main observations on the exploration patterns : 1 . All study sessions start with an initial scenario where experts appropriate the visualization tool to explore their own datasets . Here , they spend time analysing the problem qualitatively , building a mental map of the situation [ 10 ] , before selecting an optimal solution from a set of alternatives . Figure 3 : [ left ] Scenarios of case study CS1a per category type . Chips with " · " indicate views with combined dimensions , " _ " for views with objectives , " ? " for hypothesis & research question insights . Branching is indicated with a vertical line , e . g . between S5 and S11 . [ right ] Scenarios of case study CS1a per object type . Complete scenarios can be found in supplementary material . Figure 4 : Trade - off analysis scenarios by case study : CS1a , b for the wine use - case , and CS2a , b for the wheat use - case . 2 . We looked at frequency and order of scenario types . Refine and New are the most common types of scenarios ( 43 % and 24 % scenarios respectively ) , and they occur at any time during the exploration . They both can follow as well as precede any other scenario type , except for the initial scenarios . This probably implies that the iterative nature of trade - off exploration is primarily due to the interleaving of new and refined hypotheses and research questions . It is interesting to note the difference between the two use - cases at the early stages of exploration ( between S 1 − S 5 ) . There appears to be more exploration for the first use - case illustrated by the contiguous blocks of new scenarios ( CS1a and CS1b ) , in contrast to the juxtaposed refine scenarios in the second use - case ( CS2a and CS2b ) , denoting more exploita - tion behaviour . These two facets of exploration were also observed in previous exploratory visualization studies [ 2 ] , and may correspond to how many research questions and directions participants had at the outset of the exploration . Additionally , the number of participants in the first use - case was higher , which might have led to the generation of many , perhaps diverging , hypotheses regarding the exploration ob - jects . In the second use - case , there were less participants which may explain the more focused exploration . 3 . The longer the exploration session , the more story - telling scenarios there are . Storytelling helps experts recap their findings before they continue their exploration . With more experts participating in the exploration ( CS1a , CS1b ) , recaps are done periodically , presumably to build common ground [ 8 ] and ensure that everyone is on the same page . In smaller groups ( CS2a , CS2b ) , recaps are concentrated at the end of the session . We noticed that some scenarios reference earlier parts of the exploration , in a branch - out fashion . As a result , we augmented the category and object annotation visualizations with jump - lines linking the two scenarios in question . Back referencing scenarios exist in our dataset but they are hard to extract . We show in Figure 3 one instance where this occurs , to illustrate the iterative and non - linear nature of trade - off exploration and sense - making [ 41 ] . When it comes to the setup , although we used a multi - touch interactive surface throughout the study , predomi - nantly a single domain expert led most of the interaction in each case study session . The rest of the participants dis - cussed seated or standing , but refrained from interacting . This finding is supported by other studies on collaboration around interactive displays [ 47 , 53 ] . We note that although most participants did not interact directly with the display , they were however actively involved in the exploration . For example , they proposed new research questions , requested to see particular views or to refine existing criteria . We also observed at least two instances in UC1 where domain experts explored the Pareto front in their own laptops . Complexity of Analysis Scenarios . The exploration scenarios identified vary in complexity , which we characterise with two measures : number of events and scenario duration . In terms of average number of events per scenario type , Compare scenarios had the most number of events ( M : 74 , SD : 51 ) , followed by Alternative ( M : 68 , SD : 59 ) , Initial ( M : 59 , SD : 22 ) , New ( M : 47 , SD : 28 ) , Refine ( M : 44 , SD : 26 ) , and finally Storytelling ( M : 26 , SD : 32 ) . With the exception of Initial and Storytelling scenarios , overall the average time spent on each scenario type ( in minutes ) appears to be related to the average number of events in that scenario type : Compare ( M : 10 . 28m , SD : 6 . 75 ) , Alternative ( M : 9m , SD : 8 . 1 ) , Storytelling ( M : 7 . 33m , SD : 8 . 15 ) , New ( M : 6 . 58m , SD : 5 ) , Initial ( M : 6 . 25m , SD : 3 . 59 ) , and Refine ( M : 5 . 9m , SD : 3 . 74 ) . Indeed we found that scenario duration and event count were strongly correlated ( Pearson’s r ( 68 ) = 0 . 77 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Thus , in the next sections , to facilitate comparison between scenarios , we use scenario duration to normalise our results when reporting findings per and across scenario type ( i . e . , report frequency of events per minute ) . We note that Compare and Alternative scenarios ( 10 / 70 scenarios ) , although rare , appear to be more demanding than the rest , based on our two complexity measures with on average more events and longer durations . Search - Space Exploration Strategies . Another way to charac - terise trade - off exploration strategies is to look at the types of scatterplots experts viewed . We delineate these strategies based on two orthogonal dimension properties : the granular - ity of the projection axis for the viewed dimensions ( single or aggregated ) , and dimension importance . 1 . Dimension Granularity : Although the SPLOM - based ap - proach used in this study favours 2 - by - 2 viewing of dimen - sions , experts consulted views having single dimension axes as much as they did for views having combined dimensions ( 50 % of views ) . However , the use of combined dimensions varied across the four case studies ( CS1a = 11 . 62 % , CS1b = 73 . 51 % , session CS2a = 8 . 37 % , CS2b = 6 . 48 % ) . This is probably related to experts’ research questions , and how far they reached in exploring the initial 2 - by - 2 search space . In the first use - case , domain experts made extensive use of combined dimensions ( in 34 / 39 scenarios ) , in particular in CS1b . Indeed , a wine fermentation recipe can be described as a linear combination of ratios of the various constituent aromas . In the second use - case , experts preferred to explore fertalisation trajectories two steps at a time before aggregating . We note that experts rarely consulted views where both axes show combined dimensions ( 2 . 97 % of viewed plots ) . This finding confirms results from a previous study [ 2 ] , where do - main experts prefer plotting aggregated dimensions against the original ones , to ground new insights . Moreover , experts never created nor consulted views with combined dimen - sions in the initial exploration stages , rather , they explored the original search space before attempting to aggregate . 2 . Dimension Importance : Most of the time , experts viewed scatterplots with at least one axis having one or more ob - jectives ( 63 . 10 % of viewed plots ) . Overall , this indicates the importance of objectives in trade - off exploration , to make sure that subsequent data selections and filtering are opti - mal . However , this viewing rate varied per case study ses - sion ( CS1a = 80 . 86 % , CS1b = 99 . 31 % , CS2a = 40 . 81 % , CS2b = 12 . 36 % ) . The choice of consulted dimension type ( objective or parameter ) likely varies depending on the research questions experts want to explore , and the chosen exploration strategy . From our study notes and the storytelling scenarios , we observed that in the first use - case , experts predominantly used the objective space to drive the exploration . This strat - egy consists of first aggregating important objectives and then exploring the remaining dimensions in relation to that . An inverse strategy , used in the second use - case , consists of first finding ideal values for some parameters , and occa - sionally checking where this selection lies in the objectives space , resulting in adjustments to the parameter values . In the presence of multiple objectives and parameters , ex - perts created numerous criteria that they appear to prioritise . For instance , in the wine model use - case : “ you start with the most important [ aroma criteria ] , you select large , and then using your secondary criteria [ cost criteria ] you refine the selec - tions ” ) ( P5 ) . Regardless of whether the exploration is guided by the objectives or by the parameters of the model , experts reached insights ( CS1a = 56 , CS1b = 159 , CS2a = 87 , CS2b = 156 times ) and aligned findings ( CS1a = 37 , CS1b = 23 , CS2a = 23 , CS2b = 32 times ) , indicating that both exploration strategies are valid . How Insight is Reached and Validated [ Q2 ] We analysed how insight is reached during trade - off analysis , by looking at the scenarios and the objects of those insights , as well as the sequence of events that led to the insight . Insights by Scenario and Object Types : Insights reached during the exploration sessions were mostly related to tra - jectories ( 42 . 57 % ) and correlations ( 25 . 32 % ) . This can be ex - plained by the nature of the datasets explored in this study and the types of research questions our experts were inter - ested in . Initial scenarios generated more insights ( M : 2 . 45 , SD : 1 . 92 ) ( re - discovery of known findings ) , followed by Re - fine ( M : 1 . 59 , SD : 1 . 06 ) and Compare ( M : 1 . 56 , SD : 1 . 08 ) , then New ( M : 1 . 11 , SD : 0 . 53 ) , Alternative ( M : 1 , SD : 0 . 28 ) and finally Story - telling ( M : 0 . 34 , SD : 0 . 16 ) . The few insights reached in the Storytelling scenarios are mostly about the exploration method ( 43 . 75 % ) . This type of insight came from comparing methods experts previously used to analyse model simulation results ( e . g . , statistical analysis , experts decision rules ) , and the visual exploration proposed in this study . Not surprisingly , more than any other scenario type , a third of storytelling insights were in the form of a research question or a hypothesis . These types of insights were overall less common , and varied between 9 . 09 % and 13 . 59 % of insights per scenario type . Insights and Event Sequences : To extract event sequence patterns , we removed repeated consecutive event categories from the annotation data . For instance , an event sequence HCI - HHI - HHI - HPI becomes HCI - HHI - HPI . We then counted the occurrences of each two subsequent events , and nor - malised each count by the maximum frequency value . The results are shown in the transition matrix in Figure 5 . We found that the most frequent event sequences were HCI - HHI and HHI - HCI . Indeed , participants discussed their intentions , thoughts and findings as they interacted with our tool . Surprisingly , the least frequent sequences related to the insight category ( excluding Action and HPI ) were Figure 5 : A transition matrix of event sequences per explo - ration categories . Events in rows precede events in columns , numbers and colour indicate frequency of transition . Here the most frequent sequence is HCI - HHI . Expertise - Insight ( and vice versa ) . Rarely insight came just from articulating expertise . Rather , insight was most fre - quently reached after HCI or HHI events , whereas expertise was most frequently followed by HCI or HHI ( equally ) . Expertise [ Q3 , Q4 ] We illustrate through participants’ quotes 2 how expertise plays an important role during model exploration , particu - larly in : ( i ) identifying outliers and discrepancies , ( ii ) inform - ing various types of decisions , and ( iii ) validating insights . ( P8 ) , for instance , was able to quickly identify and explain an outlier , where wheat yield was unusually high : “ I think it is a point for one year where there was a very favourable climate at the end of the cycle ” . On the other hand , she expressed uncertainty with respect to model predictions of a certain variable : “ I do not trust the protein content level , wheat at 27 % of protein content , it is not something we see everyday ! ” . Domain expertise helped inform various types of decisions such as which dimensions to aggregate in a search criteria and which to exclude : “ then there is EAOH , and the famous higher alcohol which are precursors , which we need to have the least possible amount of , because it serves nothing from an aromatic point of view . ” ( P5 ) . Similarly for ( P8 ) : “ in fact TP [ protein content ] does not need to be here [ as objective ] , I just don’t want it to be less than 11 . 5 . . . for me personally losses [ one objective ] is more important than the other objectives ” . A deeper validation of insights is reached when multiple expertise are synchronised . Typically , observations in one part of the exploration framework , often the visualization , are aligned with existing expertise about the remaining steps of the exploration pipeline . For example , a correlation insight was found in the first use - case where two objectives ( EH and EO ) appear to be highly correlated . One optimisation expert raised a warning about this finding : “ from the optimisation point of view they are correlated , but afterwards , we do not know ” ( P7 ) . A modelling expert then confirmed that the ob - served correlation between the two objectives also exists in the model , and thus adding to the validity of this finding : “ because these are the combinations I have found in order to reduce the model ” ( P1 ) . Finally , a domain expert adds that this 2 All participants’ quotes are translated from French . correlation also exists in the physical sense : “ besides being correlated in the Pareto front and the model , EH and EO are also correlated in the metabolic sense ” ( P5 ) . The same expert expressed the added value of the visualization in realising the nature of this correlation : “ This [ the correlation ] we al - ready have in the model , we see it experimentally , but here in the Pareto front it is a disaster . . . You do not have a simple correlation between an alcohol and its ester ” ( P5 ) . Subjective User Feedback 1 . Reasoning about the world through multiple abstractions : Our participants liked the visual style of model exploration and how the framework helped generate complex new in - sights : “ we made a first exploration filter that made it possible to arrive at this decision tree , it’s not negligible ” ( P9 ) . Partici - pants appreciated the ability to explore alternatives within an already optimised space . For example , the wine experts found two distinct fermentation strategies that led to the same aromatic composition through different temperature management strategies : “ this is very interesting . . . , my aim is not necessarily to reach the max of aromas , either I use 0 . 4 which is my max , or use 0 . 2 - 0 . 25 . The result product is the same even though the nitrogen quantity is different ” ( P5 ) . However , there were some issues related to the interpre - tation of the visualizations : “ it is strange that I do not have other points [ for that year ] , ah no , because it is already opti - mised ” ( P8 ) . Another domain expert added : “ what is not clear from me is . . . we reason in relation to what we know in terms of what is correlated to what , but here in the Pareto front , there could be things that are very correlated , which may not be correlated [ in reality or in the model ] . This could be disturbing in terms of reasoning ” ( P4 ) . This participant suggested over - laying the Pareto front points on the simulation data as a reminder that these are optimised points . 2 . Using SPLOM - based tools to explore model trade - offs : We identified four main areas where the exploration tool may be improved based on participants comments and interactions . ( 1 ) our tool lacked ways to import search criteria to other exploration sessions . ( 2 ) The text based dimension editor and detailed lasso selection were difficult to operate on the tactile surface . ( 3 ) Although a history of past selections and current queries are provided in our tool , participants often felt lost during the exploration : “ what was the basis of the reflection here ? In fact , we seem to go faster than we have time to note down ” ( P6 ) . Our participants resorted to note - taking and storytelling to overcome this issue , but this was not sufficient . ( 4 ) The different components of our exploration framework are currently not linked dynamically . Adding new objectives requires the optimisation procedure to be launched off - line , the results are then uploaded to the visualization tool . 6 DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY OF FINDINGS To the best of our knowledge , there are no other studies that looked at collaborative model exploration in real - world settings . In terms of results , we found similar processes to those described in general sensemaking literature [ 28 , 41 ] . Our contribution here , however , is in identifying why these processes tend to occur ( e . g . , storytelling to recap ) , and when they occur ( e . g . , storytelling periodically for large groups , or at the end of big chunks of exploration for smaller groups ) . Alignment is a particular process to model exploration , also described in [ 11 ] . However , our work considers more com - plex models , multiple computational stages and co - located expertise . We discuss next seven key findings from our study , relating them to our initial research questions , and comment on the applicability of our methods to other domains : 1 . Exploration as Multiple Linked Analysis Scenarios [ Q1 ] We observed that exploration is split into mini - exploration scenarios . Trade - off analysis starts with a preliminary ex - ploration often leading to a focused research question . The remainder of the exploration is characterised by the non - linear interleaving of new and refined hypotheses and re - search questions [ 41 ] , operating on a variety of exploration objects . Those scenarios denote a shift in the research ques - tions and hypotheses set out by experts , which often result in change of focus in the model or data space . A parallel can be drawn between our approach and the data - frame model described in [ 28 ] . For instance , their “reframing” maps to our new scenario , and “elaborating the frame” to our refine scenario . In our case , however , re - framing revealed itself to happen specifically when participants shift their research questions and hypotheses . Furthermore , we provide a more fine grained analysis of the exploration , by crossing high level categories of interest ( e . g . , insight , expertise ) , with ex - ploration objects ( correlation , exploration method ) . 2 . Heterogeneous Analysis Scenarios [ Q1 ] Analysis scenar - ios vary in length and complexity . Most of the exploration relates to refining research questions . Scenarios where ex - perts actively compared or followed alternative exploration paths were rare , tended to be longer and had more interac - tion events . While the absolute length of scenarios differs , their duration and event count were strongly correlated . 3 . Storytelling as a Grounding Process [ Q1 , Q3 ] Participants engaged in the storytelling of their past exploration [ 46 , 52 ] , both in terms of gained knowledge , and the processes used to reveal the various insights [ 12 , 13 ] . This grounding phenomena helps groups with multiple expertise to establish a basis for working together across differences , and makes the sensemaking process through model and algorithmic abstractions more transparent [ 22 , 37 ] . In our study , story - telling scenarios are mostly discussion - based , but happen likely for different purposes . Large groups re - cap periodi - cally to bring everyone up to speed . For smaller groups , sto - rytelling tends to occur towards the end of the exploration , to summarise and prepare for the next session . 4 . Two Key Strategies for Trade - off Analysis [ Q1 ] Domain ex - perts create multiple search criteria that they then prioritise . Objective dimensions are important to guide the exploration when used in the initial search criteria , or to validate pa - rameter criteria choices and selections a posteriori . The first strategy seems more appropriate for model exploration sce - narios where there are known or hypothesised connections between primary and secondary dimensions , or when ana - lysts are very familiar with the space , and so they are more likely to experiment . The second case seems more appropri - ate for under - explored models when experts are still trying to understand the model behaviour . In both cases , however , insight is reached , making both exploration strategies valid . 5 . The Importance of Aggregating Dimensions [ Q1 ] Our analysis of the search space exploration strategies showed the importance of aggregating dimensions . SPLOM - based tools project data two dimensions at a time , whereas our participants were examining trade - offs between at least five objectives . The degree to which experts used dimension ag - gregation varied between sessions depending on their knowl - edge about the non - aggregated search space . 6 . Multiple Pathways to Insight [ Q2 ] Our interactive model exploration framework allowed the generation of new in - sights and the confirmation of old findings . Similar to the tasks described by Yi et al . [ 58 ] , our participants provided re - caps of their exploration ( provide overview ) , continuously refined their exploration ( adjust ) , discovered interesting re - lationships between data dimensions ( detect pattern ) , and aligned different types of findings ( mental model ) . We found that insight is reached in all scenario types including initial ones , and is often in the form of new surprising findings . In the context of our study , those insights were mostly about trajectories and correlations . An unexpected finding was that insights can also be reached during storytelling , mostly about expanding previous discussions and forming hypotheses and actions for future biological experiments . This highlights the importance of supporting storytelling in model exploration . 7 . The Indirect Link Between Expertise and Insight [ Q2 , 4 ] Expertise appears to lead to insight and also to follow from it ( e . g . , to explain and validate findings ) , although in both cases not directly but with interleaving discussions and human - computer interaction events . Expertise was important in identifying outliers and discrepancies , informing various types of decisions ( related to both analysis findings and exploration method ) , and validating insights . In our study , synchronising multiple expertise seems to provide deeper insights and validation of findings , and increase model un - derstanding and confidence in the results , although more studies are needed to confirm our intuitions . 8 . Broader Applicability . Our hypothesis - centred approach to characterise our exploration scenarios is well suited to how our domain experts conduct their research in agron - omy . However , the approach can generalise to any domain with large input and output simulation spaces that consid - ers trade - offs ( e . g . , finance , urban planning ) , and where the human investigation relies on what - if scenarios ( e . g . , intelli - gence analysis ) . Furthermore , our coded exploration objects ( with the exception of “tool” that is SPLOM specific ) apply to general data exploration with multiple expertise and can be a basis for future analysis . Finally , our model exploration framework can use any multi - dimensional visualization tool . 7 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DESIGN Collaborative frameworks such as ours resembles partici - patory design approaches , where the presence of multiple expertise may improve the collective understanding of the modelled processes [ 4 ] . The importance of involving differ - ent types of expertise during model - based exploration for decision making , and having people who can speak the lan - guage of multiple experts , has also been documented [ 50 ] . Improving model understanding may have societal implica - tions such as encouraging model - driven debate and discus - sions [ 55 ] . Our study findings , and participants’ subjective feedback ( indicated below by † ) , suggest several ways that collaborative model exploration may be enhanced to better support sensemaking during trade - off analysis : Methodology : The think - aloud protocol used in this study allowed us to observe knowledge articulated by our partici - pants , either as new findings ( insight ) , or existing knowledge ( expertise ) . Other methods for externalising or articulating hidden knowledge needs to be investigated [ 32 ] , particularly for collaborative settings . The externalised knowledge may then be exploited to augment the underlying data and mod - els [ 1 ] . More generally , however , the distinction between expertise and insight may inform the design of knowledge - assisted visual analytics tools , and can help refine insight - based evaluation of visualization systems . Making Sense of the Exploration Process : During the story - telling scenarios we identified , participants relied mostly on their own memory , the notes they took and the bookmark fa - cility of our SPLOM tool , to reflect and share their own under - standing of the main insights found ( section 6 . 3 ) . However , they reported that this was not sufficient to make accurate reflections about their exploration processes ( section 5 † ) . Better support for sensemaking of the exploration process itself is needed , in particular , to reveal the hypothesis - driven approach experts took during their analyses ( section 6 . 1 ) . This can be achieved by providing ways to visualise the ex - ploration history and to mark scenario stops and transitions , particularly for scenario comparison or alternatives ( section 6 . 2 ) , and by allowing experts to record exploration values and the different types of insights reached ( section 6 . 6 ) . Trade - off Exploration Tools & Setups : We recommend that trade - off analysis tools should : ( a ) Support the creation of multiple search criteria , and help users keep track of their provenance and priority over time ( section 6 . 4 ) ; ( b ) Allow dimension aggregation , and default combined dimensions , such as the results of principal component analysis ( section 6 . 5 ) ; ( c ) Allow the dynamic regeneration of Pareto fronts † ; and ( d ) Allow multiple linked exploration setups , where peo - ple can create private instances and explore alternatives indi - vidually , before sharing results with others ( section 5 . Q1 ) . 8 STUDY LIMITATIONS Our study focuses on biological applications , although we believe many of our findings generalise to other domains . We acknowledge four main limitations of our study . First , it is hard to realise a collaborative setup that unites multiple types of expertise , or to repeat the process in a distributed fashion . The two use - cases happened at eight - months inter - val because we needed to prepare the different stages of the pipeline . Second , although experts reached insights during their exploration , it is hard to validate those findings from the biological sense . Those insights , however , allowed them to prepare new research questions and future experiments . Third , given that we are working with real experts and their problems , we did not control for expertise . Our method does not rely on expertise overlap . However , we noticed that our experts had gained new types of expertise over time , e . g . , a domain expert became model expert after working with the model over a number of years . In the absence of exper - tise overlap and previous collaborations , we expect longer exploration sessions to introduce the various expertise and establish common ground . Fourth , in terms of screen size , the large screen facilitates the display of high - dimensional datasets for groups of experts . If a smaller size screen is used , the visualization tool would need to allow for workspace awareness , and may lead to different results . 9 CONCLUSIONS We presented a multi - stage model exploration framework that unites multiple expertise , and a user study that adopts it . The focus of the study was on model - trade - off exploration , and on the link between insight and expertise during trade - off analysis . Our findings highlight a rich multi - storyline approach experts adopt during exploration , where they con - structively combine diverse expertise to resolve conflicts between competing objectives , and reach new insights . More work is needed to better understand collective as well as individual experts’ role in generating insight in the differ - ent analysis sub - scenarios identified in our work ( such as compare or storytelling ) , and how the different experts in - teract with the tool . These studies can help improve our understanding of the role of human expertise and its inter - play with visual analytics in building common ground and externalising hidden knowledge . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Cédric Baudrit , Mariette Sicard , Pierre - Henri Wuillemin , and Nathalie Perrot . 2010 . Towards a global modelling of the Camembert - type cheese ripening process by coupling heterogeneous knowledge with dynamic Bayesian networks . Journal of Food Engineering 98 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 283 – 293 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jfoodeng . 2009 . 12 . 012 [ 2 ] Nadia Boukhelifa , Waldo Cancino , Anastasia Bezerianos , and Evelyne Lutton . 2013 . Evolutionary Visual Exploration : Evaluation with Expert Users . In Proceedings of the Eurographics Conference on Visualization . The Eurographs Association , 31 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cgf . 12090 [ 3 ] Nadia Boukhelifa and Evelyne Lutton . 2018 . Guest editorial : Special issue on genetic programming , evolutionary computation and visu - alization . Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 19 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 313 – 315 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10710 - 018 - 9333 - 4 [ 4 ] Nadia Boukhelifa , Marc - Emmanuel Perrin , Samuel Huron , and James Eagan . 2017 . How Data Workers Cope with Uncertainty : A Task Characterisation Study . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3645 – 3656 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025738 [ 5 ] Nadia Boukhelifa , Alberto Tonda , Ioan - Cristian Trelea , Nathalie Per - rot , and Evelyne Lutton . 2017 . Interactive knowledge integration in modelling for food sustainability : challenges and prospects . In ACM CHI Workshop on Designing Sustainable Food Systems . [ 6 ] Nadine Brisson , Bruno Mary , Dominique Ripoche , Marie Hélène Jeuf - froy , Françoise Ruget , Bernard Nicoullaud , Philippe Gate , Florence Devienne - Barret , Rodrigo Antonioletti , Carolyne Durr , Guy Richard , Nicolas Beaudoin , Sylvie Recous , Xavier Tayot , Daniel Plenet , Pierre Cellier , Jean - Marie Machet , Jean Marc Meynard , and Richard Delé - colle . 1998 . STICS : a generic model for the simulation of crops and their water and nitrogen balances . I . Theory and parameteriza - tion applied to wheat and corn . Agronomie 18 , 5 - 6 ( 1998 ) , 311 – 346 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1051 / agro : 19980501 [ 7 ] Mackinlay Card . 1999 . Readings in information visualization : using vision to think . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 8 ] John M . Carroll , Mary Beth Rosson , Gregorio Convertino , and Craig H . Ganoe . 2006 . Awareness and teamwork in computer - supported col - laborations . Interacting with Computers 18 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 21 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2005 . 05 . 005 [ 9 ] Remco Chang , Caroline Ziemkiewicz , Tera Marie Green , and William Ribarsky . 2009 . Defining insight for visual analytics . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 29 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 14 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2009 . 22 [ 10 ] Michelene TH Chi , Robert Glaser , and Marshall J Farr . 2014 . The nature of expertise . Psychology Press . [ 11 ] Jason Chuang , Daniel Ramage , Christopher Manning , and Jeffrey Heer . 2012 . Interpretation and trust : Designing model - driven visualizations for text analysis . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 443 – 452 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207738 [ 12 ] Herbert H . Clark and Susan E . Brennan . 1991 . Grounding in Com - munication . In Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition . American Psychological Association , 127 – 149 . [ 13 ] Gregorio Convertino , Helena M Mentis , Mary Beth Rosson , John M Carroll , Aleksandra Slavkovic , and Craig H Ganoe . 2008 . Articulating common ground in cooperative work : content and process . In Proceed - ings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1637 – 1646 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357310 [ 14 ] Gregorio Convertino , Helena M . Mentis , Mary Beth Rosson , Alek - sandra Slavkovic , and John M . Carroll . 2009 . Supporting Content and Process Common Ground in Computer - supported Teamwork . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2339 – 2348 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1519059 [ 15 ] Zhenling Cui , Fusuo Zhang , Xinping Chen , Zhengxia Dou , and Jun - liang Li . 2010 . In - season nitrogen management strategy for winter wheat : Maximizing yields , minimizing environmental impact in an over - fertilizationcontext . FieldCropsResearch 116 , 1 - 2 ( 2010 ) , 140 – 146 . [ 16 ] KalyanmoyDeb , AmritPratap , SameerAgarwal , andTAMTMeyarivan . 2002 . A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm : NSGA - II . IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 6 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 182 – 197 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / 4235 . 996017 [ 17 ] Evanthia Dimara , Anastasia Bezerianos , and Pierre Dragicevic . 2018 . Conceptual and Methodological Issues in Evaluating Multidimensional Visualizations for Decision Support . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 24 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 749 – 759 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2017 . 2745138 [ 18 ] Niklas Elmqvist , Pierre Dragicevic , and Jean - Daniel Fekete . 2008 . Rolling the dice : Multidimensional visual exploration using scatterplot matrix navigation . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14 , 6 ( 2008 ) , 1539 – 1148 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2008 . 153 [ 19 ] Trudi Farrington - Darby and John R Wilson . 2006 . The nature of expertise : A review . Applied ergonomics 37 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 17 – 32 . [ 20 ] Melanie Feinberg . 2017 . A Design Perspective on Data . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2952 – 2963 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025837 [ 21 ] Darren Gergle , Robert E Kraut , and Susan R Fussell . 2013 . Using visual information for grounding and awareness in collaborative tasks . Human – Computer Interaction 28 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 1 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2012 . 678246 [ 22 ] Nitesh Goyal and Susan R Fussell . 2016 . Effects of sensemaking translu - cence on distributed collaborative analysis . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Comput - ing . ACM , 288 – 302 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820071 [ 23 ] Hua Guo , Steven R Gomez , Caroline Ziemkiewicz , and David H Laid - law . 2016 . A case study using visualization interaction logs and insight metrics to understand how analysts arrive at insights . IEEE Trans - actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 22 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 51 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2015 . 2467613 [ 24 ] Amin Ibrahim , Shahryar Rahnamayan , Miguel Vargas Martin , and Kalyanmoy Deb . 2016 . 3D - RadVis : visualization of pareto front in many - objective optimization . In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Com - putation . IEEE , 736 – 745 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CEC . 2016 . 7743865 [ 25 ] Petra Isenberg , Tobias Isenberg , Tobias Hesselmann , Bongshin Lee , Ulrich Von Zadow , and Anthony Tang . 2013 . Data visualization on interactive surfaces : A research agenda . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 33 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 16 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2013 . 24 [ 26 ] Marie - Hélène Jeuffroy and Sylvie Recous . 1999 . Azodyn : a simple model simulating the date of nitrogen deficiency for decision support in wheat fertilization . European Journal of Agronomy 10 , 2 ( 1999 ) , 129 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1161 - 0301 ( 98 ) 00059 - 8 [ 27 ] Mary Beth Kery , Marissa Radensky , Mahima Arya , Bonnie E . John , and Brad A . Myers . 2018 . The Story in the Notebook : Exploratory Data Science Using a Literate Programming Tool . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 174 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173748 [ 28 ] Gary Klein , Jennifer K Phillips , Erica L Rall , and Deborah A Peluso . 2007 . A data - frame theory of sensemaking . In Expertise out of context : Proceedings of the International Conference on Naturalistic Decision Making . New York , NY , USA : Lawrence Erlbaum , 113 – 155 . [ 29 ] John Kounios and Mark Beeman . 2014 . The cognitive neuroscience of insight . Annual Review of Psychology 65 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 71 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 010213 - 115154 [ 30 ] Hsiang - Tsung Kung , Fabrizio Luccio , and Franco P Preparata . 1975 . On finding the maxima of a set of vectors . J . ACM 22 , 4 ( 1975 ) , 469 – 476 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 321906 . 321910 [ 31 ] Antonio López Jaimes and Carlos A . Coello Coello . 2009 . Some Tech - niques to Deal with Many - objective Problems . In Proceedings of the GeneticandEvolutionaryComputationConference : LateBreakingPapers . ACM , 2693 – 2696 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1570256 . 1570386 [ 32 ] Nina McCurdy , Julie Gerdes , and Miriah Meyer . 2018 . A Framework for Externalizing Implicit Error Using Visualization . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 25 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 925 – 935 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2018 . 2864913 [ 33 ] Santo Motta and Francesco Pappalardo . 2013 . Mathematical modeling of biological systems . Briefings in Bioinformatics 14 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 411 – 422 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bib / bbs061 [ 34 ] Jean - Roch Mouret , Vincent Farines , Jean - Marie Sablayrolles , and Ioan - Cristian Trelea . 2015 . Prediction of the production kinetics of the main fermentative aromas in winemaking fermentations . Biochemical Engineering Journal 103 ( 2015 ) , 211 – 218 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bej . 2015 . 07 . 017 [ 35 ] Chris North . 2006 . Toward measuring visualization insight . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 26 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 6 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2006 . 70 [ 36 ] Jeffery M Paige . 1966 . Cognitive processes in solving algebra word problems . Problem Solving ( 1966 ) . [ 37 ] Samir Passi and Steven Jackson . 2017 . Data Vision : Learning to See Through Algorithmic Abstraction . In Proceedings of the ACM Confer - ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , 2436 – 2447 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998331 [ 38 ] Samir Passi and Steven J . Jackson . 2018 . Trust in Data Science : Col - laboration , Translation , and Accountability in Corporate Data Science Projects . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Int . 2 , CSCW , Article 136 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 28 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274405 [ 39 ] Nathalie Perrot , Hugo De Vries , Evelyne Lutton , Harald GJ Van Mil , Mechthild Donner , Alberto Tonda , Sophie Martin , Isabelle Alvarez , Paul Bourgine , Erik Van Der Linden , et al . 2016 . Some remarks on computational approaches towards sustainable complex agri - food systems . Trends in Food Science & Technology 48 ( 2016 ) , 88 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tifs . 2015 . 10 . 003 [ 40 ] Kathleen H . Pine and Max Liboiron . 2015 . The Politics of Measurement and Action . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3147 – 3156 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702298 [ 41 ] Peter Pirolli and Stuart Card . 2005 . The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive task analysis . In Proceedings of International Conference on Intelligence Analysis , Vol . 5 . 2 – 4 . [ 42 ] Michael Polanyi . 2009 . The tacit dimension . University of Chicago press . [ 43 ] Zachary Pousman , John Stasko , and Michael Mateas . 2007 . Casual Information Visualization : Depictions of Data in Everyday Life . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13 , 6 ( Nov . 2007 ) , 1145 – 1152 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2007 . 70541 [ 44 ] Clémence Ravier , Marie - Hélène Jeuffroy , Philippe Gate , Jean - Pierre Cohan , and Jean - Marc Meynard . 2018 . Combining user involvement with innovative design to develop a radical new method for managing N fertilization . Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems 110 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 117 – 134 . [ 45 ] Ronald A Rensink and Gideon Baldridge . 2010 . The perception of correlation in scatterplots . In Computer Graphics Forum , Vol . 29 . Wiley Online Library , 1203 – 1210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8659 . 2009 . 01694 . x [ 46 ] Nathalie Henry Riche , Christophe Hurter , Nicholas Diakopoulos , and Sheelagh Carpendale . 2018 . Data - driven Storytelling . CRC Press . [ 47 ] Yvonne Rogers and Siân Lindley . 2004 . Collaborating Around Vertical and Horizontal Large Interactive Displays : Which Way Is Best ? 16 , 6 ( 2004 ) , 1133 – 1152 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2004 . 07 . 008 [ 48 ] Purvi Saraiya , Chris North , and Karen Duca . 2005 . An insight - based methodology for evaluating bioinformatics visualizations . IEEE Trans - actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 443 – 456 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2005 . 53 [ 49 ] Michael Sedlmair , Christoph Heinzl , Stefan Bruckner , Harald Piringer , and Torsten Möller . 2014 . Visual parameter space analysis : A con - ceptual framework . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 20 , 12 ( 2014 ) , 2161 – 2170 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2014 . 2346321 [ 50 ] Svenja Simon , Sebastian Mittelstädt , Daniel A Keim , and Michael Sedl - mair . 2015 . Bridging the gap of domain and visualization experts with a Liaison . In Eurographics Conference on Visualization , Vol . 2015 . The Eu - rographics Association . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2312 / eurovisshort . 20151137 [ 51 ] T Skovholt , Matthew Hanson , Len Jennings , and Tabitha Grier . 2004 . A brief history of expertise . Master therapists : Exploring expertise in therapy and counseling ( 2004 ) , 1 – 15 . [ 52 ] Chao Tong , Richard Roberts , Rita Borgo , Sean Walton , Robert S Laramee , Kodzo Wegba , Aidong Lu , Yun Wang , Huamin Qu , Qiong Luo , et al . 2018 . Storytelling and Visualization : An Extended Survey . Information 9 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / info9030065 [ 53 ] Lili Tong , Aurélien Tabard , Sébastien George , and Audrey Serna . 2017 . Horizontal vs . Vertical : How the Orientation of a Large Interactive Surface Impacts Collaboration in Multi - Surface Environments . In IFIP Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 202 – 222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 67687 - 6 _ 14 [ 54 ] Tea Tušar and Bogdan Filipič . 2015 . Visualization of Pareto front approximations in evolutionary multiobjective optimization : A critical review and the prosection method . IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 19 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 225 – 245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TEVC . 2014 . 2313407 [ 55 ] Yorck Von Korff , Patrick d’Aquino , Katherine A Daniell , and Rianne Bi - jlsma . 2010 . Designing participation processes for water management and beyond . Ecology and society 15 , 3 ( 2010 ) . [ 56 ] Wesley Willett , Jeffrey Heer , Joseph Hellerstein , and Maneesh Agrawala . 2011 . CommentSpace : structured support for collabora - tive visual analysis . In Proceedings of the ACM conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3131 – 3140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979407 [ 57 ] Matthew Woodruff and Jon Herman . 2013 . pareto . py : a varepsilon − nondomination sorting routine . https : / / github . com / matthewjwoodruff / pareto . py . [ 58 ] Ji Soo Yi , Youn - ah Kang , John T Stasko , and Julie A Jacko . 2008 . Un - derstanding and characterizing insights : how do people gain insights using information visualization ? . In Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on BEyond Time and Errors . ACM , ACM , 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1377966 . 1377971