Trust - based Classification in Community Policing : A Systematic Review Otuu Obinna Ogbonnia Computer Science Department Swansea University Swansea , United Kingdom 2145854 @ swansea . ac . uk Deepak Sahoo Computer Science Department Swansea University Swansea , United Kingdom d . r . sahoo @ swansea . ac . uk Joseph Henry Anajemba Information Security Eng . Technology Abu Dhabi Polytechnic Abu Dhabi , UAE 0000 - 0002 - 1199 - 7446 Aguboshim Felix Chkwuma Computer Science Department Federal Polytechnic Oko , Nigeria aguboshimfelix @ gmail . com Abstract —In recent times , many studies have identified trust as a propeller of community policing for enhancing security and safety . However , this essential aspect of community policing has not been properly classified . This has resulted in ambiguity and misunderstanding of the trust being referred to in commu - nity policing context . To cover this gap , this research carried out a systematic review of three scientific journal databases using PRISMA protocol which produced 16 document results after excluding 20 , 270 studies that didn’t meet our criteria . Consequently , community policing trusts were identified and categorized in terms of technology - based trust ( TbT ) , Human - to - Human Trust ( HtHT ) and Trust for both humans and technology ( TbHT ) . Also , the research further established three themes for improving trust in community policing . In the end , this study has established the significant effect of different categories of trust as it supports community policing . More so , while this research informs on work that has been done on trust and community policing overtime , it provides distinct and comparable terms for future Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) research . Index Terms —Community Policing , Trust , Crime , Technology , Classification , PRISMA I . I NTRODUCTION The practice of Community Policing ( CP ) which is based on the idea that people are eager to participate and interact with law enforcement agents [ 1 ] has attracted scholarly debates on its effectiveness , especially in developing countries [ 2 ] . The philosophy of this practice is based on the idea that law enforcement officers and community members should work together [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] to identify and solve problems related to crime and disorder suffer setbacks hitherto [ 5 ] . One major reason for these debates and setbacks is lack of trust between different aspects and participants in community policing activities [ 6 ] – [ 7 ] . According to Zhang et al . [ 8 ] , community policing is the collaboration between police and community members , to solve community challenges using technological solutions . In the other hand , trust is the eagerness of an individual to become vulnerable to another individual [ 9 ] or technology . The collaboration in community policing , which is the working together of all stakeholders ( citizens , community workers , non - governmental organization , police [ 8 ] , [ 10 ] ) with the objective of reducing or ending crime , is a worthwhile adventure for both citizens and the police [ 11 ] . Hence , trust among these stakeholders will play an important role for community polic - ing to thrive [ 1 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] . When there is trust , information is more likely to be shares crime and suspicious activities [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] . This information can help officers prevent crime before it occurs or apprehend suspects after a crime has been committed [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] . To build trust , law enforcement officers must be visible and approachable in the community [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] . However , this trust building has been very challenging [ 1 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 7 ] as the concept appears directionless . Evidently , studies that discussed trust in community policing context use the term without any scientific classifications and definitions , and as such , there is ambiguity on the trust scholars refer to in community policing . To shade lights on this indistinctness , this study examines the several studies conducted on trust in community policing perspective . The research carried out a systematic review of the different publication between 1982 ( which is the year of first conference of Special Interest Group on Computer - Human Interaction ( SIGCHI ) ) and 2022 using ACM Digital Library , GoogleScholar , and Scopus scientific journal databases . The major contributions of this research are outlined as follows : • For better understanding of the concept , this research classifies trust into three clear terms . • Generates three major themes for improving trust in community policing . • Reveals trends in research methods used by HCI scholars for 40 years ( 1982 - 2022 ) . • Contributes historically and informs on the amount of works that have been done on trust in community policing overtime . 979 - 8 - 3503 - 2486 - 0 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 IEEE 2023 I EEE I n t e r n a t i o n a l S y m p o s i u m o n T e c hn o l o g y a nd S o c i e t y ( I S T A S ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 2486 - 0 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I S T A S 57930 . 2023 . 10306181 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . • Identifies unique terms for future HCI research . On the overall , this study highlights community policing research trend between global south and global north . Over the years , studies covering Community Policing has dominantly concentrated on the global north regions . The implication of this is that there has been a very limited number of studies regarding this context in the global south . Therefore , researchers are encouraged to venture more and study the global south based on the research context to create a balance A . Organization of Work The remaining part of this study is organized as follows : Section 2 discussed studies related to this systematic review , while the method used in achieving the results are discussed in Section 3 . The results of the review are stated in Section 4 and these results are further analyzed and discussed in Section 5 . Other limitations are identified in Section 6 , while Section 7 concludes the study . II . R ELATED WORKS Trust is relevant for community policing strategies to thrive [ 6 ] . Hence , without trust , the stakeholders in community policing won’t work to achieve its purpose . However , trust is very hard to detect by the human mind [ 18 ] , and this is why many scholars have conducted reviews to understand trust in different perspective . In the perspective of community policing , Schilke et al . [ 9 ] defined trust as “the willingness of an entity ( i . e . , the trustor ) to become vulnerable to another entity ( i . e . , the trustee ) ” . Meanwhile , trust has three theoretical elements ; vulnerability , positive prospects , and attitude [ 19 ] which must be integrated for it to be actualized . According to Aston et al . [ 20 ] , established accessibility and communication between the police and the public are vital tools to achieving confidence for the police . People who have trust are more likely to report crimes and work with the police to uphold social norms and values [ 21 ] . In the present architecture of community policing , the police - citizen partnership faces numerous challenges because there is lack of trust [ 22 ] . Public safety can easily be addressed if there is trust [ 23 ] . Nagel et al . [ 24 ] systematically reviewed 12 papers on trust in police and concluded that transparency contributes to an improvement of trust for the police . To identify areas lacking research in social network trust , Sherchan et al . [ 25 ] conducted a comprehensive review through the field of social and computer science which led to the discovery of three aspects of trust that could help in policing . Fleet and Hine [ 26 ] conducted a sentiment analysis on 203 YouTube clips to identify the level of trust and the positivism of discourse on the use of facial recognition technology by the police . Their finding showed the acceptance of surveillance in community policing . To identify the effects of community - oriented policing on crime , Gill et al . [ 27 ] systematically reviewed 25 studies . They found that though citizens were satisfied with community - oriented policing , fear of crime in them were not reduced by the practice . Ike et al . [ 28 ] systematically reviewed 11 studies to enhance public trust for the Nigerian police . They noted that one of the major community policing setbacks in Nigeria was lack of trust , and recommended a randomized trial intervention which must include citizen - policing relationship . To understand how force variables affect citizen’s trust for the police , Akinlabi [ 29 ] conducted an analytic assessment through cross - sectional survey . They concluded that abuse of power and use of force on citizens contributes to the failures of community policing approach . Higginson et al . [ 30 ] systematically reviewed 37 studies to identify the evidence of effective policing interventions in developing countries . The most important out of the 7 identified themes was that citizens’ participation will enhance policing interventions . From the foregoing , it is obvious that trust is a vital tool for community policing to thrive . A . Research Design The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic review and Meta - Analysis ( PRISMA ) guideline [ 31 ] , was followed in this study . The sample of the study are SIGCHI sponsored or co - sponsored conference papers and journal articles , which mentioned trust and community policing . B . Criteria for selection The study systematically reviewed scholarly works pub - lished in ACM Digital Library ( dl . acm . org ) , Google Scholar ( scholar . google . com ) and Scopus ( scopus . com ) databases be - tween January 1 , 1982 , and August 31 , 2022 . The choices of these three databases were informed by their wide scientific coverage [ 32 ] , [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] of HCI conference papers and journal article publications . C . Search Strategy & Data Extraction To get all conference papers and articles where community policing and trust were mentioned , an advanced search was conducted in each of the three databases with keywords ‘community policing’ , ‘community - policing’ and ‘trust’ , using the combinatorial and filtering operators ‘AND’ and ‘OR’ ( more information can be found in table I ) . There were no limitations by title , abstracts and keywords , rather , ‘ALL’ option coding was used in the advanced search textboxes of the three databases . This was done to get all articles that mentioned community policing and trust in all parts of the documents , including references which could link to a missing document , thereby serving as first means of result validation and risk of bias assessment . If we had limited the search following some existing norms of limiting search by Title , Abstracts and Keywords ( TAK ) , articles that mentioned community policing and trust in their title , abstracts and keywords only , would have been harvested ; and we would have lost some valuable papers which discussed these two concepts in the introduction or other parts of the document . For instance , the paper ‘Chasing Lions : Co - Designing Human - Drone Interaction in Sub - Saharan Africa’ , discussed trust for technology in community policing in their data analysis section , and would have missed out if we used TAK method . The only limitation to the inclusion of all parts of an article in Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . \ \ an advanced search is that some words in its reference section can pull up the article as relevant among document results , even when it is not . For instance , the article ‘Civic Technology for Social Innovation’ , also resulted in our searches . Trust was mentioned in parts of the document , but community policing only appeared in the reference section . Though , this article was removed during our quality assessment , it directed us to three other documents that mentioned ‘community policing’ in its reference section , which we examined to reaffirm that our exclusions were accurate . The selected citations in Scopus and Google Scholar were directly exported to excel in bits of 20 studies per file , while citations in ACM digital libraries were exported into BibTeX files and converted to excel using www . bibtex . com . The resultant excel files were merged into a single excel sheet . This resulted into many duplicates , which were sorted and deleted accordingly . To assess the risk of bias , two scholars with doctoral preparations carefully evaluated the articles for inclusion . Included studies were those that needed to meet the below criteria : 1 ) Sponsored or co - sponsored by SIGCHI . 2 ) Mentioned trust and community policing or community - policing . Excluded studies were those that : 1 ) Mentioned trust or community policing only in the reference section . 2 ) Did not relate trust within the scope of community policing . D . Database Search Query An advanced search of the three databases resulted in 20 , 286 documents . After filtering and sorting , a total of 74 articles were extracted and merged into an excel file for further quality assessment and criteria analysis which resulted in 16 studies . The advanced search procedures carried out in the three databases are detailed in the next section . 1 ) ACM Digital Library : A search in the ACM digital library for all the papers that mentioned community policing or community - policing and trust from 1st January 1982 till 31st August 2022 was done using the search query as shown in Table I . This was done in ‘search items from : ACM full text collection’ module , and the items entered into the ‘Any - where’ textbox was ‘”community policing” OR ”community - policing” AND Trust’ , with date set from January 1982 to August 2022 ( Note : the ‘OR’ and ‘AND’ operators are case sensitive , and the quotation marks were used to generate exact phrases ) . The community - policing keyword was added to take care of some papers that spelt the concept with a hyphen between community and policing , as in ‘community - policing’ . It was coded with ‘communitypolicing’ because the backslash ( ) is a special character in ACM digital library , which combines two words with a hyphen ( - ) without taking it as a minus sign ( - ) . The above query resulted into 80 search results . Papers were screened to select those sponsored or co - sponsored by SIGCHI conference , and 29 papers were extracted including the 3 books of proceedings which were removed , leaving us with 26 papers . 2 ) Google Scholar : A search in Google Scholar for all the papers that mentioned community policing or community - policing and trust from 1st January 1982 till 31st of August , 2022 was done using the search keywords as shown in Table I . This gave 17 , 900 search results . These results were filtered for ACM published papers . We had used SIGCHI filter but found out that the resulting documents were all published in ACM . Therefore , to broaden the search as not to miss any paper , we used ACM as a filter option , and that resulted into 30 documents . 3 ) Scopus Database : A search in Scopus database for all the papers that mentioned community policing or community - policing and trust from 1st January 1982 till 31st of August , 2022 was done using the advanced search query shown in Table I . This resulted into 2305 articles . These articles were screened to get papers from conference on Human factors in computing systems proceedings and ACM international conference proceeding series , and this resulted to 18 articles . We had to screen based on these two because of the peculiarity of Scopus database classifications . E . Risk of Bias Assessment To examine the correctness and comprehensiveness of the study results , two independent reviewers used Rayyan In - telligent Systematic Review Platform ( RISRP ) [ 35 ] , which empowered the research team members to assess the quality of the studies . Two stages of the screening procedure were iteratively completed . The first stage was the screening of all abstracts , and the second stage involved additional screening by examining the entire articles , to assess the relevance of each , to the research objective . All these were done with the ‘Blind On’ collaborators’ settings in RISRP , to eliminate risk of bias . The two independent reviewers disagreed at some points , as regards the exclusion or inclusion of some papers . These disagreements were resolved accordingly by unanimity . For instance , the article ‘Empowered participation : Exploring how citizens use technology in local governance’ , by Erete et al . [ 36 ] , caused a disagreement in the RISRP report . The bone of contention was that the article mentioned community - police and trust in the body of the text , five and three places re - spectively , but only had ‘community policing’ in its reference section . Since the paper was very close to the concepts being studied , the first reviewer opted for its inclusion , but the second reviewer insisted it should be kept aside . Clarity of purpose of search terms later informed a choice , as “community - police” was different from “community - policing” , and a consensus was reached for the article to be excluded as for all biases to be removed . F . Data Collection and analysis Details of author ( s ) , year of publication , place of study , pub - lisher , research type , methods used , duration , participants , and emphases related to the research objective were extracted from each of the included studies , which helped in classification of Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Research method 6 . 25 18 . 75 25 75 Study ( % ) Alternative Mixed Quantitative Qualitative TABLE I S EARCH QUERY Databases Advanced Search Query Preliminary out - put First screening process ( a ) Second Screening Process ( b ) ACM Digital Library [ All : ”community policing” ] OR [ [ All : ”community \ - policing” ] AND [ All : trust ] ] AND [ E - Publication Date : ( 01 / 01 / 1982 TO 31 / 08 / 2022 ) ] 80 26 10 Google Scholar ”community policing” OR ”community - policing” AND ”trust” 17 , 900 30 2 Scopus Database ALL ( ”community policing” OR ”community - policing” AND trust ) 2 , 305 18 4 This table shows the search queries used in the three databases . ( a ) Exclusion based on duplicate and CHI sponsorship . ( b ) Exclusion based on study relevance and defined criteria Fig . 1 . The PRISMA diagram for the selection process . trust in this study . Furthermore , two experienced researchers developed and coded the data from the reviewed studies . Cohen Kappa ( k ) was used to ascertain the inter - rater reliability ( IRR ) [ 37 ] , [ 38 ] . This resulted to the value of k = 0 . 60 , which can be interpreted as a moderate agreement in the IRR check [ 39 ] , [ 40 ] . Additionally , the codes were reviewed by two researchers whose critical discussions identified three themes that will improve trust in community policing perspective [ 37 ] . III . R ESULTS AND F INDINGS As illustrated in Table II , the sample size in the 16 selected studies ranged from 11 to 865 participants . However , only two of the studies [ 8 ] , [ 41 ] gave details of the age range of participants which are between 18 and 60 years , 27 and 60 years respectively . The studies reviewed were published between 1982 and 2022 . As seen in Figure 2 , twelve of the studies ( 75 % ) used qualitative method ( Participatory Design , Field Study , Interview , Dataset Generation and Qualitative Analysis ) , while four studies ( 25 % ) used mixed and alterna - tive methods ( Dataset generation and Quantitative Analysis ( 18 . 75 % ) ; Survey and Interview ( 6 . 25 % ) ) . In other words , qualitative method cut across all the studies . Furthermore , these studies were conducted in Global North : United States of America [ 1 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 42 ] – [ 43 ] , the United Kingdom [ 8 ] , Fig . 2 . Percentage distribution of different research method . [ 44 ] , [ 45 ] , and Global South : South Korea [ 46 ] , India [ 47 ] and Africa [ 41 ] and their study duration was between 1 day and 7 years . According to the analysis presented in Figure 3 , two studies ( 12 . 5 % ) developed artifacts that can aid community policing , while 14 studies ( 87 . 5 % ) drew conclusions with design implications for future works . Also , while 68 . 75 % of the studies mentioned how trust can be built for technology , for the police , and among community policing stakeholders ; 18 . 75 % studies identified the role of trust as challenging though imperative , and 12 . 5 % studies used trust to explain other related concepts in their works . Thematic analysis was performed using inductive method [ 48 ] . IV . D ISCUSSION This study shows that community policing is still in its developing stage across the globe . In line with Corbett et al . [ 1 ] , this study reveals that trust is a propelling factor to this developmental process . Also , there is significant growth in the study of trust in community policing , through which three classes of trust and three themes that can improve trust have been generated as presented in the next section . A . Classification of Trust Based on our systematic review , we found that the term TRUST is used as a vague synonym which might confuse readers of HCI publications about the exact targeted group . Consequently , we compared the use of the term in all selected N u m b e r o f r e s eae r c h ( % ) Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . TABLE II T HEMATIC L AYOUT Theme Relevant Researches Emphases Evidence - based community policing [ 1 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] , [ 49 ] – [ 43 ] , [ 46 ] , [ 47 ] Digital evidence will improve trust in com - munity policing . Frequent communication and relationship building [ 1 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 49 ] – [ 50 ] , [ 43 ] , [ 46 ] , [ 47 ] Communication between police and citizens will improve trust in community policing . Privacy considerations in the design of technology [ 1 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 42 ] – [ 50 ] , [ 43 ] , [ 46 ] , [ 47 ] Technology with privacy protection will en - hance availability of evidence , thereby im - proving trust in community policing . This table shows the three themes that can improve trust , with emphasis on categories of trust in community policing . 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Result of research among themselves and with the police . In the other hand , the smart cameras are used to record most of the information ( crime scenes / evidence ) shared through the communication mechanisms . When discussing about trust , which is guaranteed by technology to protect the privacy of stakeholders who gather and share information for community policing , TbT can be referred . 2 ) Human - to - Human Trust ( HtHT ) : Half ( 50 % ) of the studies [ 1 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 42 ] , [ 49 ] , [ 52 ] – [ 44 ] , [ 47 ] identified trust between humans , which is also at the layer 2 . This trust develops through engagements and communications between two or more stakeholders exchanging services for a common community policing goal . These stakeholders are the citizens , Fig . 3 . Research results as derived from other studies . Fig . 4 . Four layered Classification of Trust in Community policing . publications to classify it into three . The proposed classi - fication ( see Figure 4 ) has four layers , showing precisions as it proceeds from the ambiguous term ( Trust ) to clearer terms ( Technology - based Trust , Technology - to - Human Trust , Human - to - Human Trust ) , with their roots in layers 3 and 4 , respectively . 1 ) Technology - based Trust ( TbT ) : About 18 . 75 % of the studies [ 41 ] , [ 51 ] , [ 46 ] identified trust in the context of technology as shown in layer 2 of Figure 4 . Technology - based Trust is the eagerness of a stakeholder to be vulnerable to technologies used in community policing , believing that his usage objectives shall be met without his privacy com - promised through surveillance or communication mechanisms . While the surveillance systems are technologies that capture static and moving objects , the communication mechanisms are technologies that enable communication and the sharing of information among stakeholders . At layer 4 in Figure 4 , stakeholders use social media and community policing websites to communicate by sharing multimedia elements NGO , police , and community workers detailed at layer 4 . From our findings , the trust among them is the foundation of other trusts since the humans are the actors in community policing and the users of technologies . For example , if a citizen trusts a police officer , he will as well trust the smart camera or any other technology in the disposal of the trusted officer [ 53 ] , [ 54 ] , [ 55 ] and [ 56 ] . In contrast , a citizen can believe he is being recorded if the police officer is not trusted , even when the smart camera or recorder of the police officer is off [ 54 ] . HtHT can be referred when trust among or between two or more stakeholders is discussed . 3 ) Trust for both human and technology ( TbHT ) : Less than half ( 31 . 25 % ) of the studies [ 8 ] , [ 57 ] - [ 43 ] , [ 45 ] identified trust in the context of both humans and technology . From our review , it is believed that man is behind technology , and as such , the two entities must function , having the concerns of the stakeholders in mind . Layer 4 depicts clarity with examples , which shows that citizens , police , NGOs , and community workers use social media , community policing websites and smart cameras . Consequently , trust for both humans and tech - nology can be referred when any or all the technologies and any or all the stakeholders are referred . B . Themes for Improving Trust From the systematic review carried out in this study , three themes emerged that can improve trust . These themes are discussed below . 1 ) Evidence - based community policing : More than two - third ( 81 . 25 % ) of the studies were positive about evidence - based and data - driven community policing . The emphases were mostly on surveillance technologies like CCTV camera , TABLE III R ESEARCH C ATEGORIZATION Usage of Term ‘Trust’ Number of Publications References Technology - based 3 [ 41 ] , [ 51 ] , [ 46 ] Human - to - Human 8 [ 1 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 42 ] , [ 49 ] [ 52 ] , [ 44 ] , [ 47 ] For Humans and Technology only 5 [ 8 ] , [ 57 ] , [ 50 ] , [ 45 ] Total 16 This table shows the categorization of papers based on usage of the term ’trust’ in community policing . smart phone camera and drone , which generate evidence for the police to use in crime prosecutions . For instance , one of the studies [ 46 ] posited that “video evidence is critical in dealing with local issues” . This shows that when there is evidence to back up claims in community policing activities , setting disagreements on actions or in - actions would not arise , thereby fostering trust among stakeholders . Also , surveillance technologies contribute to evidence - based strategies , which can lead to understanding crime problem , improving trans - parency , and building trust through police data initiative ( PDI ) [ 10 ] . For Corbett et al . [ 1 ] , evidence is very vital in the primary stage of trust development . Providing digital evidence is beneficial , as discussed by Brush et al . [ 42 ] that “all our participant households except H8 were interested in having cameras that recorded videos outside their home” . This shows the acceptability of evidence - based policing , through which trust can be improved . Significantly , there is total acceptance of the use of amazon ring , body - worn cameras , and mobile sensing technologies which are adopted to provide evidence for community policing [ 8 ] . 2 ) Frequent communication and relationship building : Majority of the studies ( 75 % ) were confident that frequently engaging and establishing a relationship with the citizens can improve and strengthen trust . An example is the study of Ming et al . [ 50 ] that mentioned “creating more opportunities for engagement between community members and safety organi - zations may allow for more trust and improved risk prevention and response” . This relationship and communication can be physically established by stakeholders meeting from time to time to discuss needs , concerns , and challenges of community policing , or can be formed using information communications technologies ( social media and communication platforms ) [ 8 ] , [ 58 ] . Police officers can choose to advise offenders , in a case where fines should be issued . Such advisory role improves relationships between the police and citizens , thereby improv - ing trust [ 10 ] . Meanwhile , lack of active social media presence can reduce trust for the police [ 47 ] . This is because frequent communication improves trust , which can continually develop into a robust relationship if responsive [ 1 ] . To validate the above assertion , Erete et al . [ 49 ] added that communication is very important as it creates connections which establishes trust among stakeholders . This has led to the establishment of third - party reporting centers and victim - centered policing , which have improved trust drastically for pervasive community policing [ 44 ] . 3 ) Privacy considerations in technological design : More than half of the studies ( 62 . 5 % ) while presenting privacy as concerns in the use of technologies for community policing , were optimistic that privacy protection will improve trust . Participants in the studies , who were positive about sharing data to the police and among community policing stakeholders , are concerned that their privacy may be compromised in the process . For example , Deeb - Swihart et al [ 43 ] posit that “best practices should be taken to ensure any solutions are privacy preserving and that the rights of the individuals are not infringed upon” [ 51 ] . For Isranf et al . [ 45 ] , “these technologies can be designed to support an aggregate of anonymous view of data” [ 57 ] . For Ming et al . [ 34 ] , privacy concerns are obvious in nearby environments as victims are afraid to report incidences using technological means , to avoid a repeat of such incidences [ 50 ] . This demonstrates lack of trust for technology , which can only be improved when privacy is considered during the design of community policing technologies . From our review , data shared through online media ( Facebook , Twitter , WhatsApp etc ) and surveillance data generated through smart cameras are the most sensitive in community policing [ 42 ] . When these shared data are not properly managed , privacy of individuals who are actors in community policing or are passive in the crime , may not be protected , thereby putting the individuals at risks . For instance , a social media user who willingly shares a footage of crime scene to the police or public , should be protected by technology . Such protec - tion builds trust for the community policing activities [ 57 ] . Also , signing confidentiality agreement by stakeholders [ 48 ] provides security for sensitive evidence and builds trust for human and technology . Furthermore , if a camera field of view ( FoV ) in crime monitoring captures a scene not relative to the crime being covered , there is bound to be privacy concerns , and technology should be designed to take care of this to protect the users in community policing context . V . L IMITATIONS The major limitation of this systematic review arises from using only three databases and stringent keywords “community policing” OR community - policing which could exclude other related papers in other databases and papers that didn’t use these exact phrases to refer to community policing respec - tively . Though , our search processes were comprehensive to accommodate all studies with the phrases within the three databases , there is possibility that a study which discussed community policing and trust missed out either because of Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . typo or character errors . Also , the generated themes were based on deductive coding , instead of the hybrid approach that would have given thoroughness in the thematic analysis . Furthermore , the classification is phrase - based , and as such , could cause potential bias . VI . C ONCLUSION Through this systematic review , this study has been able to classify trust according to its different level of implication and further defined each in - line with community policing context . Also , the research has shown the characteristics of studies that discussed trust and community policing in the last 40 years . Three themes have been generated and discussed with emphasis on how trust can be improved . The most fundamental among the themes discussed is that technology - driven evidence gotten through surveillance systems ( smart phone cameras , CCTV , drone etc . ) , can improve trust in com - munity policing . Hence , the need for research to investigate the application of these technologies in community policing arises . While the identified themes can improve trust in community policing , classifying trust has created unique terms , which could be referred or compared in future by HCI researchers . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] E . Corbett and C . A . Le Dantec , “Going the distance : Trust work for citizen participation , ” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pp . 1 – 13 , 2018 . [ 2 ] M . Zhang , A . K . Bandara , B . Price , and B . Nuseibeh , “Finding & reviewing community policing apps in asia , ” in Proceedings of the 2020 Symposium on Emerging Research from Asia and on Asian Contexts and Cultures , pp . 45 – 48 , 2020 . [ 3 ] A . E . Carter , M . Hoy , and B . B . DeSimone , “Social media engagement tactics in us community policing : Potential privacy and security con - cerns , ” The Police Journal , vol . 94 , no . 4 , pp . 556 – 571 , 2021 . [ 4 ] J . G . Carter and B . Fox , “Community policing and intelligence - led polic - ing : An examination of convergent or discriminant validity , ” Policing : An International Journal , vol . 42 , no . 1 , pp . 43 – 58 , 2019 . [ 5 ] A . Adolphe , L . Khatib , C . van Golde , S . M . Gainsbury , and A . Blaszczynski , “Crime and gambling disorders : A systematic review , ” Journal of Gambling Studies , vol . 35 , no . 2 , pp . 395 – 414 , 2019 . [ 6 ] S . L . Erete , “Crime prevention technologies in low - income communi - ties , ” XRDS : Crossroads , The ACM Magazine for Students , vol . 19 , no . 2 , pp . 24 – 26 , 2012 . [ 7 ] J . C . Chew and J . Whiteside , Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1990 . [ 8 ] M . Zhang , A . K . Bandara , B . Price , G . Pike , Z . Walkington , C . Elphick , L . Frumkin , R . Philpot , M . Levine , A . Stuart , et al . , “Designing technologies for community policing , ” in Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 9 , 2020 . [ 9 ] O . Schilke , M . Reimann , and K . S . Cook , “Trust in social relations , ” Annual Review of Sociology , vol . 47 , pp . 239 – 259 , 2021 . [ 10 ] J . H . Anajemba , Y . Tang , C . Iwendi , A . Ohwoekevwo , G . Srivastava , and O . Jo , “Realizing efficient security and privacy in iot networks , ” Sensors , vol . 20 , no . 9 , p . 2609 , 2020 . [ 11 ] C . Elphick , R . Philpot , M . Zhang , A . Stuart , Z . Walkington , L . A . Frumkin , G . Pike , K . Gardner , M . Lacey , M . Levine , et al . , “Building trust in digital policing : a scoping review of community policing apps , ” Police Practice and Research , vol . 22 , no . 5 , pp . 1469 – 1491 , 2021 . [ 12 ] L . Schmidthuber , A . Ingrams , and D . Hilgers , “Government openness and public trust : The mediating role of democratic capacity , ” Public Administration Review , vol . 81 , no . 1 , pp . 91 – 109 , 2021 . [ 13 ] M . J . Nanes , “Policing in divided societies : Officer inclusion , citizen cooperation , and crime prevention , ” Conflict Management and Peace Science , vol . 37 , no . 5 , pp . 580 – 604 , 2020 . [ 14 ] J . Dickinson , J . Arthur , M . Shiparski , A . Bianca , A . Gonzalez , and S . Erete , “Amplifying community - led violence prevention as a counter to structural oppression , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 5 , no . CSCW1 , pp . 1 – 28 , 2021 . [ 15 ] A . Morshed , A . R . M . Forkan , P . - W . Tsai , P . P . Jayaraman , T . Sellis , D . Georgakopoulos , I . Moser , and R . Ranjan , “Viscrimepredict : a system for crime trajectory prediction and visualisation from heterogeneous data sources , ” in Proceedings of the 34th ACM / SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing , pp . 1099 – 1106 , 2019 . [ 16 ] C . Harrington , S . Erete , and A . M . Piper , “Deconstructing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory design engagements , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interac - tion , vol . 3 , no . CSCW , pp . 1 – 25 , 2019 . [ 17 ] A . Farrell , M . Dank , I . de Vries , M . Kafafian , A . Hughes , and S . Lock - wood , “Failing victims ? challenges of the police response to human trafficking , ” Criminology & Public Policy , vol . 18 , no . 3 , pp . 649 – 673 , 2019 . [ 18 ] P . Beatty , I . Reay , S . Dick , and J . Miller , “Consumer trust in e - commerce web sites : A meta - study , ” ACM Computing Surveys ( CSUR ) , vol . 43 , no . 3 , pp . 1 – 46 , 2011 . [ 19 ] O . Vereschak , G . Bailly , and B . Caramiaux , “How to evaluate trust in ai - assisted decision making ? a survey of empirical methodologies , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 5 , no . CSCW2 , pp . 1 – 39 , 2021 . [ 20 ] E . V . Aston , M . O’Neill , Y . Hail , and A . Wooff , “Information sharing in community policing in europe : Building public confidence , ” European Journal of Criminology , p . 14773708211037902 , 2021 . [ 21 ] D . S . Abubakar , Z . Othman , and J . Mustaffa , “Selected demographic variables and community policing participation among citizens in nige - ria : a pilot study , ” Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies , vol . 5 , no . 4 , pp . 99 – 105 , 2017 . [ 22 ] D . H . Schanzer , C . Kurzman , J . Toliver , and E . Miller , The challenge and promise of using community policing strategies to prevent violent extremism : A call for community partnerships with law enforcement to enhance public safety . Triangle Center on Terrorism and Homeland Security Durham , 2016 . [ 23 ] C . Chouhan , C . M . LaPerriere , Z . Aljallad , J . Kropczynski , H . Lipford , and P . J . Wisniewski , “Co - designing for community oversight : Helping people make privacy and security decisions together , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 3 , no . CSCW , pp . 1 – 31 , 2019 . [ 24 ] C . N a¨gel and A . E . Nivette , “Unexpected events during survey design and trust in the police : A systematic review , ” Journal of experimental criminology , pp . 1 – 27 , 2022 . [ 25 ] W . Sherchan , S . Nepal , and C . Paris , “A survey of trust in social networks , ” ACM Computing Surveys ( CSUR ) , vol . 45 , no . 4 , pp . 1 – 33 , 2013 . [ 26 ] R . W . Fleet and K . A . Hine , “Surprise , anticipation , sadness , and fear : A sentiment analysis of social media’s portrayal of police use of facial recognition technology , ” Policing : A Journal of Policy and Practice , 2022 . [ 27 ] C . Gill , D . Weisburd , C . W . Telep , Z . Vitter , and T . Bennett , “Community - oriented policing to reduce crime , disorder and fear and in - crease satisfaction and legitimacy among citizens : A systematic review , ” Journal of experimental criminology , vol . 10 , pp . 399 – 428 , 2014 . [ 28 ] T . J . Ike , D . Singh , D . E . Jidong , L . M . Ike , and E . E . Ayobi , “Public perspectives of interventions aimed at building confidence in the nigerian police : a systematic review , ” Journal of Policing , Intelligence and Counter Terrorism , vol . 17 , no . 1 , pp . 95 – 116 , 2022 . [ 29 ] O . M . Akinlabi , “Citizens’ accounts of police use of force and its implication for trust in the police , ” Journal of crime and justice , vol . 43 , no . 2 , pp . 145 – 160 , 2020 . [ 30 ] H . Tao , J . M . Zain , S . B . Band , B . Sundaravadivazhagan , A . Mohamed , H . A . Marhoon , O . O . Ogbonnia , and P . Young , “Sdn - assisted tech - nique for traffic control and information execution in vehicular adhoc networks , ” Computers and Electrical Engineering , vol . 102 , p . 108108 , 2022 . [ 31 ] N . Panic , E . Leoncini , G . De Belvis , W . Ricciardi , and S . Boccia , “Evaluation of the endorsement of the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta - analysis ( prisma ) statement on the quality of published systematic review and meta - analyses , ” PloS one , vol . 8 , no . 12 , p . e83138 , 2013 . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . [ 32 ] A . - W . Harzing and S . Alakangas , “Google scholar , scopus and the web of science : a longitudinal and cross - disciplinary comparison , ” Scientometrics , vol . 106 , pp . 787 – 804 , 2016 . [ 33 ] A . Mart ´ın - Mart´ın , E . Orduna - Malea , M . Thelwall , and E . D . Lo´pez - Co´zar , “Google scholar , web of science , and scopus : A systematic com - parison of citations in 252 subject categories , ” Journal of informetrics , vol . 12 , no . 4 , pp . 1160 – 1177 , 2018 . [ 34 ] G . Halevi , H . Moed , and J . Bar - Ilan , “Suitability of google scholar as a source of scientific information and as a source of data for scientific evaluation—review of the literature , ” Journal of informetrics , vol . 11 , no . 3 , pp . 823 – 834 , 2017 . [ 35 ] M . Ouzzani , H . Hammady , Z . Fedorowicz , and A . Elmagarmid , “Rayyan—a web and mobile app for systematic reviews , ” Systematic reviews , vol . 5 , pp . 1 – 10 , 2016 . [ 36 ] S . Erete and J . O . Burrell , “Empowered participation : How citizens use technology in local governance , ” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2307 – 2319 , 2017 . [ 37 ] N . McDonald , S . Schoenebeck , and A . Forte , “Reliability and inter - rater reliability in qualitative research : Norms and guidelines for cscw and hci practice , ” Proceedings of the ACM on human - computer interaction , vol . 3 , no . CSCW , pp . 1 – 23 , 2019 . [ 38 ] J . Paavilainen , H . Korhonen , K . Alha , J . Stenros , E . Koskinen , and F . Mayra , “The poke´mon go experience : A location - based augmented reality mobile game goes mainstream , ” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pp . 2493 – 2498 , 2017 . [ 39 ] J . Wang , Y . Yang , and B . Xia , “A simplified cohen’s kappa for use in binary classification data annotation tasks , ” IEEE Access , vol . 7 , pp . 164386 – 164397 , 2019 . [ 40 ] G . Rau and Y . - S . Shih , “Evaluation of cohen’s kappa and other measures of inter - rater agreement for genre analysis and other nominal data , ” Journal of english for academic purposes , vol . 53 , p . 101026 , 2021 . [ 41 ] A . Wojciechowska , F . Hamidi , A . Lucero , and J . R . Cauchard , “Chasing lions : Co - designing human - drone interaction in sub - saharan africa , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 2005 . 02022 , 2020 . [ 42 ] A . B . Brush , J . Jung , R . Mahajan , and F . Martinez , “Digital neighbor - hood watch : Investigating the sharing of camera data amongst neigh - bors , ” in Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pp . 693 – 700 , 2013 . [ 43 ] Q . Wu , L . K . Williams , E . Simpson , and B . Semaan , “Conversations about crime : Re - enforcing and fighting against platformed racism on reddit , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 6 , no . CSCW1 , pp . 1 – 38 , 2022 . [ 44 ] C . Gatehouse , M . Wood , J . Briggs , J . Pickles , and S . Lawson , “Troubling vulnerability : Designing with lgbt young people’s ambivalence towards hate crime reporting , ” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 13 , 2018 . [ 45 ] J . H . Anajemba , T . Yue , C . Iwendi , P . Chatterjee , D . Ngabo , and W . S . Alnumay , “A secure multiuser privacy technique for wireless iot networks using stochastic privacy optimization , ” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol . 9 , no . 4 , pp . 2566 – 2577 , 2021 . [ 46 ] S . Park , S . Kwon , and U . Lee , “Campuswatch : Exploring communi - tysourced patrolling with pervasive mobile technology , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 2 , no . CSCW , pp . 1 – 25 , 2018 . [ 47 ] N . Sachdeva and P . Kumaraguru , “Call for service : Characterizing and modeling police response to serviceable requests on facebook , ” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , pp . 336 – 352 , 2017 . [ 48 ] J . Fereday and E . Muir - Cochrane , “Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis : A hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme development , ” International journal of qualitative methods , vol . 5 , no . 1 , pp . 80 – 92 , 2006 . [ 49 ] J . Deeb - Swihart , A . Endert , and A . Bruckman , “Understanding law enforcement strategies and needs for combating human trafficking , ” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 14 , 2019 . [ 50 ] S . Ming , R . D . Mayfield , H . Cheng , K . - R . Wang , and Y . Huang , “Ex - amining interactions between community members and university safety organizations through community - sourced risk systems , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 5 , no . CSCW1 , pp . 1 – 23 , 2021 . [ 51 ] J . Deeb - Swihart , A . Endert , and A . Bruckman , “Understanding law enforcement strategies and needs for combating human trafficking , ” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 14 , 2019 . [ 52 ] S . Venkatagiri , A . Gautam , and K . Luther , “Crowdsolve : Managing tensions in an expert - led crowdsourced investigation , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 5 , no . CSCW1 , pp . 1 – 30 , 2021 . [ 53 ] B . Bradford , J . A . Yesberg , J . Jackson , and P . Dawson , “Live facial recognition : Trust and legitimacy as predictors of public support for police use of new technology , ” The British Journal of Criminology , vol . 60 , no . 6 , pp . 1502 – 1522 , 2020 . [ 54 ] N . Todak , L . Leban , and L . James , “Citizen attitudes towards the public release of police body - worn camera video footage , ” Police practice and research , vol . 22 , no . 7 , pp . 1760 – 1776 , 2021 . [ 55 ] E . A . Mantey , C . Zhou , J . H . Anajemba , I . M . Okpalaoguchi , and O . D . - M . Chiadika , “Blockchain - secured recommender system for special need patients using deep learning , ” Frontiers in Public Health , vol . 9 , p . 737269 , 2021 . [ 56 ] E . A . Mantey , C . Zhou , J . H . Anajemba , Y . Hamid , and J . Kingsley , “Blockchain - enabled technique for privacy - preserved medical recom - mender system , ” IEEE Access , 2023 . [ 57 ] A . Israni , S . Erete , and C . L . Smith , “Snitches , trolls , and social norms : Unpacking perceptions of social media use for crime prevention , ” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work and social computing , pp . 1193 – 1209 , 2017 . [ 58 ] S . Lewis and D . A . Lewis , “Examining technology that supports com - munity policing , ” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1371 – 1380 , 2012 . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .